THE TWO GREAT MYSTERIES OF Christian Religion, The Ineffable Trinity, The
Wonderful Incarnation, EXPLICATED, To the Satisfaction of Man's own Natural
Reason, and according to the Grounds of PHILOSOPHY.

By G: G: G

Sancta Trinitas unus Deus miserere nobis.
O bone Jesu esto nobis Jesus.
LONDON, Printed by J. Flesher. 1653.

TO HIS EXCELLENCY, MY LORD OLIV: CROMWELL, LORD GENERAL.
MY LORD,
FIfty years since, or thereabouts, the name of Socinus and Socinians in Italy
first began to be known: They are a Sect so carried away with their own
fancies, under pretense and color of adhering to their own Natural Reason,
that they deny the Mysteries of our Christian Faith and Religion; which are
indeed above Reason, beyond the reach of Reason, but no way contrary to Reason.
This Sect of all others I have ever most hated and detested; the rather,
because they pretend Philosophy and humane learning to back and to second them:
which I know to be otherwise, and so I hope I have made it appear, and by Gods
grace I will yet make it more manifest: for about 45 years since I had a
public disputation against them, and not resting there, I did resolve to
examine every Mystery of Faith, and every Miracle wrought in confirmation of
those Mysteries (for so it pleases God that works above natural power should
witness the truth of words above natural knowledge) according to the Rules of
Philosophy; and I began with the first, proving the fall of Adam from Paradise
by Natural Reason. Not that I was able to prove the manner of the fall, as that
it should be by tasting the forbidden fruit, by the tempting of a Serpent; but
I showed the truth and certainty of his fall, by those many punishments of sin,
which are yet extant, and may be seen in Nature. And about 40 years since I set
forth a book to that purpose; and although I say it, I had then the approbation
and encouragement of those whom we did esteem to be the most learned men, as
Bishop Andrews, Bishop Overall, Bishop Mountain, and others. Then I proceeded
to examine the rest of the Mysteries and Miracles, but especially the Wonders
which Moses wrought in Egypt, whether they were sufficient assurances to the
Natural man, for admitting and introducing the Mosaical Law. I did likewise
examine the Resurrection of the dead, and the general Judgment; and truly with
these King James of blessed Memory was acquainted, and did not dislike them. I
did then proceed to other Mysteries, and I did examine the several Visions of
Scripture in Daniel, Ezekiel, the Apocalypse, how far they did agree together,
and how necessary it was that there should be such Visions, to withdraw the
Jews from their carnal conceits, and their expectation of Temporals. And after
Scripture, I did then further proceed what had continually happened in the
Church, and in succession of times did serve for the proof of Christianity.
This I could not conveniently do, unless together I should write an History of
the Church, how God had planted and preserved it. And here I reduced it as much
as possibly I could, to this Island, wherein we live: but when once I came to
the year 1517. being the eighth year of Hen. 8. then I made Annals, and set
down every year constantly and particularly, what was done in the Church of
England: First, I set down the then present state thereof, what liberties they
had in respect of our common Laws, what Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and what
great Revenues; then what alteration did yearly befall the Church, and so I had
composed a great volume, which I did forbear to print in this regard; I thank
God for it, I did never flatter any man, and I made a conscience to relate the
truth; and doing it, I should have cast very foul aspersions upon some great
Families, which would have drawn much envy and hatred upon me whereupon I did
resolve, that it should not be published, till after my death, and then it
should serve as a Memorial of my Studies and Labors, and as a Testimonial of my
Faith and Religion*

Thus far I proceeded before the late Wars began. I hac then five several
houses in my hand, and a little household stuff in each house, (and now I have
not one in all England* I thank God for it:) but in every house, what with fire
and plundring together with other losses, my Notes and Writings miscarried (a
just punishment of God upon me for my sins:) And in regard of my great age, I
had thought never to have stirred any further, but to have prepared my self for
my grave, and to desire God to be so merciful unto me, that I might die in
quietness and peace, for my wants and troubles were great. And while I was thus
resolved, it did plainly appear unto me, that the Socinians did increase; for I
take no notice of any particular persons, but of public acts: Some have been
questioned before the Parliament for denying the Trinity, and blaspheming
Christ, yet I never heard that any were put to death, or greatly punished. I
find that the Fonts where we are baptized, and make profession of the Trinity,
and the Incarnation, they are generally pulled down. I find that the solemnity
and joy at Christ's Nativity, was forbidden; that Fasting in Lent, and sorrow at
Christ's Passion, were by public Order neglected; I found that all the
Memorials of Christ's Passion, the harmless Crosses* were demolished; I found no
honor was given to the Name of Jesus, no settled form of Prayer, but every one
left to his own inventions; nor was there any time appointed for prayers, but
only a little preparation for preaching; I found that in very many Parishes
the Church-doors were locked up, and there was not so much as any public
Meeting, the Churches generally decaying, and never repaired; that many men
would not have their children Baptized, and that many were Dipped, it should
seem into some other Church; for if they were Christians, it is impossible they
should deny the virtue and efficacy of their first baptism, no more then they
can deny the Original sin, derived unto them from their first Parents. And I
will insist in one particular, the White-thorn at Glastenbury, which did
usually blossom on Christmas day, was cut down, yet I did not hear that the
party was punished; certainly the Thorn was very extraordinary, for at my being
there, I did consider the place, how it was sheltred, I did consider the soil,
and all other circumstances, yet I could find no Natural cause; this I know,
that God first appeared to Moses in a bramble bush; and that Aarons Rod being
dried and withered did budde; and these were Gods actions, and his first
actions; and truly Glastenbury was a place noted for holiness, and the first
Religious Foundation in England, and in effect it was the first dissolved, and
therein was such a Barbarous inhumanity, as Egypt never heard of the like; it
may well be that this White thorn did then spring, and began to blossom upon
Christmas day, to give a Testimony to Religion, that it might flourish in
persecution, as the Thorn did blossom in the coldest time of Winter (though the
Sun in so great a distance might seem to want heat to bring forth the sap) so
Religion should stand, or rather rise up, though Religious houses were pulled
down. I never heard nor read, that any Ancient Author did mention this Thorn,
which certainly they had not omitted, if there had been any such thing; and by
the growth of the Thorn, truly I did judge the age thereof to be much about the
time of the dissolution of that Abbey.

I do accuse no man, but if I may judge of the inward faith, by the outward
tokens and signs; then I must needs say, that it is high time (the Church
being now undermined,) to set up props, and to raise up Buttresses, for the
support of Christian Religion; and I bethought my self to whose office this did
properly belong, Christ being the head-corner-stone, laid the foundation of his
Church, the Apostles did finish the building; they were very careful in the
choice of their successors, the first thing they did after the Ascension of
Christ, was the Election and choice of Saint Matthias; and generally they had
the Authority, Posuit vos regere Ecclesiam Dei. So then I did conceive, that
the general care of the Church did belong unto them; and where things were not
settled, and that there was no superior amongst them, that then it did belong
to every one of them in particular, but especially to the Eldest; for so in the
state of Nature, the primogenitus had ever the care of Gods service; and in the
Law Aaron was the eldest brother to Moses, and the High Priest hood was settled
on him, and his Sons; and here I bethought my self, that having been these ten
years, the ancientest Bishop in the Province, I was bound in conscience to do
my uttermost endeavor, to strengthen and support Religion; or at least to
enter a Protestation, and to make a Public confession of mine own Faith, that
such as would might follow my example; this I took as part of my duty, and
office, to which I was bound, and obliged in conscience, and to have neglected
this, I thought I should have greatly sinned; then I did think my self bound,
to do the uttermost of my endeavors; and when I considered, that the custom of
the Church in such like cases, has ever been to implore Brachium seculare, to
whom should I address my self, but to your Lordship, and humbly crave your
assistance, and furtherance herein; and whereas formerly there was a course of
Law, for the punishment of open and scandalous blasphemers, and that there were
several writs, de Excommunicato capiendi de haretico comburendo, etc. There
being now no Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, that your Lordship would be pleased
to be a means to the Honorable, and Reverend Judges, to supply those wants;
and to settle a course, whereby there may be a legal proceeding against these
public and scandalous blasphemers, according to the true intent of the Law.
Thus both in composing this Treatise, and for the Dedication thereof to your
Lordship, I have done no more, then what I thought my self bound in conscience
to perform, and the rather to express my joy in some things, which have lately
happened; for living here in the Churchyard of Saint Margarets in Westminster,
which was the Church proper to the Parliament, for here they kept their
thanksgivings, their humiliations, and all other their solemnities; when as in
their time the Font was pulled down, and so continued demolished and in ruins,
it is now set up again in a most decent and comely manner* and I hope it will
be an example for other Churches to follow: so likewise they had a very solemn
perambulation in Rogation week, according to the old manner; which had been
omitted during the sitting of Parliament: and Holidays begin to be kept; thus
with joy and alacrity, not without hopes of good times to suceed, I thought fit
to publish this Treatise, as containing the grounds of Christian Religion; for
these are the two great and principal Mysteries, which all others presuppose;
and herein if we should waver, in the least kind, then Christian Religion
would fail and come to nothing; and by the publishing of these, it will appear
what satisfaction I gave in all the rest of the mysteries; for these are the
hardest and most difficult, and as I have performed in these, so let men judge
of the rest; and if God shall enable me, and that I may have any competency of
means to subsist, together with the use of a library; I shall then proceed in
the rest God willing.

Thus much in general, though I am a stranger, utterly unknown, and never
deserving the least favor from your Lordship, yet I make bold to become a
Petitioner. When I undertook to write the History of the Church of England,
especially in the time of Henry the eight, wherein there was the greatest
Alteration and Change; knowing that the Lord Cromwell (your Lordships great
Uncle) was then in great favor; for I have seen the Archbishops, and the Lord
Chancellor Audley, their Letters unto him, to desire his help in furthering
their suits to the King; and that he was then the only man employed, especially
in spiritual causes; for he did exercise the whole Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction under the King; and by virtue thereof, he took place of the Arch
bishop of Canterbury, which never any subject did, and sat on the Bishops side
in Parliament; I thought it very necessary and fit to hearken after his
writings; and by the means of Sir Robert Cotton the great Antiquary (now with
God) I had the perusal of his study, where I read all his Letters, Notes, and
Papers; and where I found that it was the Lord Cromwell, who made that Order in
the Church, that every one should learn in the English Tongue the Apostles
Creed: which may be some example and encouragement to your Lordship, to defend
these mysteries of our Faith and Religion; which has hitherto been my whole
suit.

Amongst other Letters to the then Lord Cromwell, I found one from John Fisher
Bishop of Rochester, a man famous for his devotion, learning and courage, when
he was in far greater distress then ever I was (I thank God for it;) the effect
of the Letter was, To desire his help for his relief: the Letter is yet extant,
and may be produced. What effect it took, I cannot say; but I do not find that
it was ever seconded with any other Letter, which is usual in cases of
distress, nor did the Bishop complain at the time of his execution, when he was
beheaded; and therefore I conceive he found some relief. This has encouraged
me to become a Suitor to Your Lordship. I shall not here acquaint you with any
particulars, (for this were to be over-troublesome) but I call God to witness,
that I know no man, nor have I heard of any man, that has suffered so much, in
such several kinds, so unjustly, in proportion, as my self have done (though
things are only known to God and my self) and I have as fair Testimonials for
my innocence, as any man has, or can have in this world. I have been now five
years petitioning for a hearing, if at length by your Lordships good favor, I
might prevail, you should for ever oblige me, that either I might know my
offense, or otherwise that I might have some means (out of mine own) to
subsist: The hearing cannot possibly take up half an hour, and I hope to
dispatch it in less then half a quarter: for I will demand nothing for what is
past, but do as heartily forgive all men, as I desire God to forgive me. And I
will likewise make this motion, in behalf of my Brethren the Clergy, that what
has been violently taken from them, their cause never heard, or what a
Committee has done, being no Court of Record, being not upon Oath, and their
power lasting only during the Parliament, that men upon slight pretenses might
not lose their Freeholds, to the great prejudice of the Liberties and Laws of
this Nation; and Sequestrations, which are but for a time, might not be
continued for ever, contrary to their own nature, but that men, upon submission
and satisfaction, might be restored to their own possession, until some just
cause be showed to the contrary in a legal way. Hereby your Lordship shall do
God good service, discharge your own conscience, you shall for ever engage
them, and give an earnest of your Justice and compassion. So humbly craving
pardon for my boldness, with my prayers to God for your health and happiness,

MY LORD, I am Your most humble Servant, Godfree Goodman Bishop late of
Gloucester.
June the 4. 1653. being the Eve of Trinity Sunday.
To the Reverend Master, the Fellows, Scholars, Students; and all the Members
of Trinity College in Cambridge.
My good Brethren,
I Do give God most humble thanks, that I had the happiness to have my
education and breeding in your College, where I found the seeds of Religion,
and learning, the good example of others, and truly many favors in mine own
particular; I did ever resolve (in token of my thankfulness) to give you some
memorial, not of any great value or price, but only out of a desire that I
had, (wherewith I did acquaint some of your Fellows) that you would conform
your Studies to the present occasion and necessity of these Times; for whereas
before your Studying of Philosophy, did only serve for your Disputations, and
your keeping of Acts for your degrees; now I could wish, that they might tend
to some practice, whereby they might be more useful, and serviceable unto you
in the course of your lives; and therefore I had thought to have given you all
the Mathematical Instruments, and some things which belong to Chymistrie,
together with Optic Glasses, and Herballs, and whatsoever else did tend to the
Practice of Philosophy; for seeing Man is not wholly spiritual; therefore I
would not have him to content himself only with the Theorie: the charge I
confess had not been great, but whatsoever it was, I am now so utterly
plundered, that as yet I am able to perform nothing.

In stead of giving, I am now become a suitor unto you, while I was in your
College I began a quarrel, and it was against the Socinians, and the
Antitrinitarians; and truly the rather for namesake, because our College is
dedicated to the honor of the Blessed Trinity, and therefore we are bound both
to the adoration, and to the defense of that high Mystery; now in my old age
upon some occasion, this quarrel is again renewed; and as it is usual in all
duels, to have a second, so I do desire your College to second me; and being
very old, I cannot live long; for I have now been these nine and twenty years
together the Ancientest Bishop of your College I do therefore leave you this
Legacy, to be the Heirs and Successors in this my quarrel, and to continue a
deadly fewd with the Socinians and Antitrinitariants; and not only to spend
your Ink, but to adventure your blood in the cause. Thus I have done my
uttermost endeavor, I have desired the secular power to asssist me by way of
punishment; and your selves in point of Learning, and Religion, to stand in
defense of our Faith, and cause* for it concerns, as your souls health, so in
effect no less then the foundation of your College.

This is all my business, and here I should take my leave of you; but in truth
out of my love and affection, I cannot so soon and so easily part with you; but
I must claim the privilege of old men, to speak of things which are past; and
by calling them to mind to renew them, and so to continue them, [ ad perpetuam
rei memoriam,] It is now much about 54 years since I came to your University:
and even then both the Church and Learning had many enemies, and they raised up
many malitions and false reports, yet during all my time, I may truly say, (for
though I was a young Scholar, yet I might fee and know the actions and
carriages of my governors) there was not an University in Christendom, nor any
City or Corporation better governed; neither can I conceive, how it could be
better governed, without Religious Vows: And for our College in particular, I
may truly say, that as the Members were not inferior to any others, for their
Learning, and Studies; so for their discreet carriage, and behavior, for their
wisdom, and Prudence, in worldly and temporal affairs, I did verily believe,
that no society in England, whether of Churchmen, Lawyers, or Citizens, did
exceed them: I was then in the hardest times, when the College in effect was
new built; when we could not get chambers or lodgings, and the debts were great
in regard of the building, yet then did they flourish exceedingly, and had much
credit and reputation.

And because I was a Member of several Cathedral and Collegiate Churches (which
are now dissolved) lest posterity may hereafter blame them, and think their
offense to be great, I shall therefore give them this Testimony, that I take
God to witness, I did never see any thing amongst them, but what did proceed
from Piety, Charity* and Goodness. I was a very diligent observer, and truly in
their Chapters things past with as much wisdom and discretion, as ever I did
see business pass in the Lords House of Parliament. What charity did we show to
our Tenants, in accepting such small Fines? by our counsel we sometimes made
them good husbands; very often we prevented the sale, and preserved the Lease
for the true Heirs, especially if Orphans: And in a word, they lived better
under us, as Tenants, then ever they will do as they are Landlords; and I do
verily believe, that if the Parliament had been pleased to employ the Members
of the Church, in stead of their Committees, Surveyors, and other Officers,
(who were the very worst of men) that with renewing Leases, and putting years
into lives; they would have raised as great sums of money, (yet reserving the
Rents and Inheritance to the State) as now they have done by selling the
Inheritance; and truly we were very provident, in improving the Church
revenews; I am at this time in wants, I would desire of God no more to live
upon then what I have raised, and improved in Church Rents; and what I have
done together with others, that I might have but according to my proportion; so
that in a manner pro tanto, we were in effect Founders of the Church; for we
might have converted our improvement to our own private uses.

And that posterity might judge of the Clergy, at this time, that we were not
so faulty, or wanted courage, which might occasion our Ruin, there are two
Common Lawyers who have done very ill offices to the Church, Mr. Seldom and Mr.
Pryn; and truly I did once think to have answered them both: but when I
considered that we did differ in the course of our Studies, in our Method, in
our Style, so that we should not have the same or the like weapons to encounter
each other, I did therefore forbear; yet some of my intimate friends did it.
For Mr. Pryn, he is pleased to write as bitterly as he could against Bishops,
yet could he not charge any one of them with Corruption or Bribery, or any
great sin; no man is accused for ignorance, or unworthiness: yet it cannot be
denied, but the Gentlemen who were employed for the buying of Impropriations
(whereof I conceive Mr. Pryn was a principal man) did tempt Bishops with
bribes, with no other intent, but to accuse them; and to me in particular they
sent twenty Angels, in the business of Cicester, but I thank God for it, I had
the grace to refuse it. If a man were to write against other Professions,
suppose the Lawyers (as God forbid any man should) he might have found a
hundred times more, and worse faults, then Mr. Pryn has done against Bishops.
And on the contrary I dare boldly say, that many Bishops in their own
particular persons, have done so many acts of Piety, of Charity, of Goodness,
as all the enemies of the Church, taken together, have not done the like. They
that did impeach us of high Treason, only for entering a Protestation, they
would never have spared us, if they could have ^ound any just cause of
complaint against us.

Yet I confess that God would never have permitted us to have suffered in such
a manner, as we have done, had we not provoked him with our sins; and that I
may be our own accuser, I think our greatest offense did consist in these two
things: First, that many of us did not spend our Church-means in a Church-like
manner, but converted them to our own private uses, or otherwise misimployed
them, therefore God justly takes them away, and permits Sacrilege; we our
selves having first offended in the same kind: for certainly Church-means
should have relation as well to the uses, as to the Persons; and a Churchman
in mis-spending them, commits Sacrilege. And whereas many excuse it in regard
of their Wives and Children; God forbid, but regard should be had of them, ye^
still with moderation: I cannot excuse the excess of Apparel, and some other
courses of expense. Yet this I must testisie ^or a truth, that speaking
privately with some Bishops, they told me (and I believed them) that they laid
not up one farthing of their Bishoprics: and this may appear, ^or many of them
died very poor, as Worcester, Hereford, Peterborough, Bristol, and not unlike
but others will do ^o.

Another great fault in the Church was, the intolerable abuse of Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction; therefore God has made us now incapable of any Jurisdiction, so
just and wonderful is God in all his Judgments. I confess in mine own
particular, I did as much desire and labor to reform it, as any man could do,
yet I could never prevail. Herein a little to excuse the Church, I have it, and
can produce it at this time, under the Kings own Hand and Seal, wherein he
forbids that any Churchman or Priest in holy Orders, should be a Chancellor;
and this was the occasion of all the corruption of the Spiritual Court: for the
Judges at the Common Law have their Pensions and Allowances, but Chancellors
have none at all, they live only upon the Fees of the Court, and for them to
dismiss a cause, it was to lose so much blood: Now if they be naugh^ in
themselves, then they must for their own advantage and prosit* have Instruments
and Agents accordingly; so the Registers, Proctors, Apparators, they were
pessimum genus hominum. While the Spiritual Court was only governed by Church
men and Priests, as it ought to be, (and has ever been so heretofore) they ha^
their Spiritual Benefices and Dignities to live upon, and did scorn the Fees of
the Court: besides, the holiness of the Profession kept them from bribing and
corruption. Little do men think how much they suffer by this one position, That
Churchmen should not interpose in Civil and Moral affairs: Whereas formerly
Bishops and Churchmen were only trusted with Last Wills and Testa ments, and
granting out Administrations: and certainly, if ther^ be any honesty amongst
men, it must be supposed to be rather in them then in others; but there having
been such an abuse, it must be acknowledged that God is most just in all his
ways, and what hat^ befaln us, it is according to the deserts of our sin.

And now at length, my good Brethren, I will be no further troublesome unto
you, but only make this small motion, which proceeds out of my love: Your
Statutes do allow the Fellows to travel beyond Seas, to see the state of the
Christian world, to better their experience, whereby they may be fitter to do
the Church and the State service at home. Now I would fain add some
encouragement i^ this kind, and persuade you to be forward, thereby to learn
Languages, and to enable your selves to do the State service; and while you are
in your Travel, though you are not publicly employed, yet to do your Country
what good office you can, by way of information. This is my suit to the Fellows
in general: but I do earnestly entreat the Master and the Seniors, that they
would be so far from abating any part of their allowance, as that they would
rather give them some addition toward their charge, besides all brotherly
assistance and furtherance. This is the only motion which I make: but if any
of your Members should offer me his help in my Study, now that mine own sight
and memory do fail me (for I would very fain finish my intended course, to give
satisfaction to Natural Reason, in all the Mysteries of Christian Religion)
truly, if ever God should enable me, I would reward him. So GOD BLESS YOU ALL.
I rest,

Your loving Friend and Brother, Godfree Goodman, Bishop late of Gloucester.
June 4. 1653. being the Eve of Trinity Sunday, which we were wont to keep very
solemnly, and I hope you do so continue still.
THE INTRODUCTION.
St JOH: 1. 14. And the Word was made flesh.
I Should be much afraid to speak of this word, and to multiply Man's excuse in
trea^ing of mysteries.
my words in the exposition of this one word, were it not that my Text does
inform me, that thi^ word was made flesh, and therefore I may well presume on
Gods mercy, that as it was his humility, to descend down from heaven, to take
up our flesh; so without disparagement to his honor, ^lesh and blood may
presume to speak of this word, to clothe him with our mortal words, as some
time* he was clothed with our mortal nature; Again to imbase him, and (as i^
were) to give him a new birth, conceived in the womb of the heart, brought
forth by the tongue, that so future ages and succeeding generations might
testify of this word, for this word was made flesh.

The written word of God proceeding from the wisdom of God, may The written
wo^d and the begotten word.
seem to have been a stream derived from the fountain of this eternal word, as
large Commentaries and Expositions serve to unfold a little text, wherein there
is much more matter employed, then can be expressed* now this written word,
though otherwise Gods own word (in whom there is no blemish or imperfection)
yet certainly it was imperfect, before such time as this eternal word was made
flesh. I speak not only that it consisted of types, shadows and figures,
without the spirit of grace and o^ truth, not only that it did ^arre surmount
the state and condition of man, until this word was made flesh, sanctifying
our corrupted nature, and descending to our capacity: but whereas the written
word was a precept, a Law, and a Rule to square out our actions, necessary it
was that after the Rule given, there should be some pattern to exemplify the
rule. Praecepta docent, Exempla excitant; the Rule is imperfect without an
Example.

But before the time, the fullness of time, wherein God appeared in our The
word of God is imperfect without Christ.
flesh, there could be no example of true holiness and obedience to Gods Law,
and therefore for the upshot and conclusion of the Law, in the Eclipse of the
Prophets, Cum silentium contineret omnia, and nox in suo cursu medium iter
haberet, omnipotens sermo tuus, Domine, exiliens de coelo a regalibus sedibus
durus Debellator in mediam exterminii terram prosiluit: Sap: 18. here is the
example annexed to the rule, an example in whom dwells the fullness of the
deity, all the treasures of Gods wisdom, from whom as from a fountain the
written law is derived, to whom as to an Ocean, the whole scope of the law is
directed, thus is the Rule perfected by the example; the written word serves
for a precept, the begotten word serves for a president; the yoke is made
easy, the burden is light: for wherein the law might seem obscure and
difficult, that shall now easily appear by the practice, example and imitation
of this word, for this word was made flesh.

Saint Austin has well observed, that before such time as the word Man
expostulates with God.
was made flesh, man in the pride and presumption of his own heart, might have
used some excuse unto God; Lord, why have thou commanded such strict laws,
such as are opposite to the inclination of nature, the forgiving of wrongs, the
chastising of the flesh, the mortifying of passions, continual repentance and
sorrow; whatsoever thou did unto man, thou did it with the greatest
facility and ease, verbo virtutis tuae, thou spakest the word, and all things
were created; but whatsoever thou requirest of man, it is done with the
greatest difficulty and labor: Thus (in effect) especially considering the
manner, thou seem to require more of man, then thou have done unto man; here
then there is no proportion.

But behold, to stop the mouths of Blasphemers, that sin might be inexcusable,
Blasphemers suppressed.
behold the word is made flesh, God has entered the Lists of our misery, and
has run thorough the whole course of our Pilgrimage, in sudore vultus, in the
sweat of his brows, with watchings, and fastings, with labor, and passions,
he has fulfilled the law, and having performed it in his own person, it is no
wrong or injustice to impose the same law upon his vassals and creatures, for
the word was made flesh.

Man as he totally proceeds from God, so is he totally directed to God, Whole
man is made capable of God.
but before such time as the word was made flesh, it should seem only the
better part of man, the soul and the understanding, were capable of Gods word;
Alas what becomes of the sensible part? shall the body and the flesh be
excluded? if it looks for a portion in glory, needs it must have some earnest
in grace; body and soul* they are both creatures alike, they are both parts of
man alike. See then the wonderful work of Gods mercy, the word is made flesh,
a word speaking to the understanding, and possessing the soul, flesh subject to
the sense, visible to the outward appearance, that so the whole man might be
sanctified, for the word was mad* flesh.

But leaving all preambles, I will tie my self more strictly to the words of
The division of the Text. The method.
my text, wherein I will consider these three parts: The word in it self; The
word in our flesh; The manner, and circumstances, answerable to the three
terms of of my text: Et verbum caro factum est, And the word was made flesh:
wherein are employed the ineffable mysteries of the Trinity, and the
Incarnation; and both these great mysteries. I will first set them down as the
Church receives them; then I will illustrate them by natural reason, and the
grounds of Philosophy; and lastly I will give sufficient assurance for the
truth of them: for I will produce miracles above natural power, for
confirmation of mysteries above natural knowledge, which is an abundant
satisfaction.

This first Chapter of Saint John, in my poor judgment, has some relation
Saint John ex ceeds Moses.
to the first Chapter of Genesis; and though Saint John be the last Evangelist,
prophet, and penman of Scripture, yet he seems to enclose and incompass on
every side, Moses, the first lawgiver, prophet, and penman of Scripture;
whereby it may appear that Christ was Agnus occisus ab origin, a Lamb slain
from the beginning, and by the eternal decree of God, long before the
foundations of the world were laid.

You shall then observe, that both Saint John and Moses, they use The
comparison between both.
the same first word in both their writings, in principio, in the beginning;
only with this difference, that Moses intended the beginning of time, where
first God began the Creation, and set the first wheel on going; but our Apostle
and Evangelist, like an Eagle, makes a higher flight, and looking upon the Sun,
and fastening his eyes thereon, is no way daunted (though the Sun be the master
piece of the creation, which other creatures cannot behold) but aims at a
higher beginning, In aeterno principio aeternitatis, in the eternal beginning
of eternity; (you must give me leave, is sometimes I speak in unusual terms,
when neither the words, nor apprehension of man, can otherwise serve to
express, or conceive the mystery.)

And to what can the regeneration or new birth of man, be better resembled They
both agree in particulars.
or compared, then to the creation? See then how they agree, and concur
together; After the creation of the heaven and the earth, and the confused
mass of the waters, the first thing created for ornament and beauty, was
light, Gen: 1. 3 Light, is but an accident, and must presuppose a substance,
and though it be light, yet in respect of the substance, it is in effect but a
shadow; Saint John therefore does better express this light together with the
fountain of this light, in the fourth verse of this Chapter, speaking of the
Word, In him was life, and the life was the light of men; and as in the
creation, before this light was created, the state of the world is described by
Moses Genesis 1. 2. And darkness was upon the face of the deep, which is most
truly explicated by Saint John in the 5th verse of this Chapter, The light
shines in darkness, and the darkness comprehends it not, this darkness
betokens the state of sin, the death of sin, as Adam soon after his creation
committed sin, whereupon followed the sentence of death.

And out of this death of sin, it was the great mercy of God, that man Moses.
should be awakened, and that by degrees, first, with the sound and noise of
the law, which came with Thunder and Lightning, to strike terror into man, as
the bellowing of beasts, designed for slaughter and sacrifice, might show them
their own condition, for death is the wages of sin; and thus far Moses proceeds.

Man being now rowsed and a little awakened with this great sound of the John
Baptist.
Law, trembling and fearing he listens, and finds that this sound becomes a
voice, Vox homine^ sonat, the voice betokens a man; and here after the great
terror and threatenings of the law, he begins to conceive hope, that he may find
bowels of compassion, and then expects mercy and pity: This was the office of
Saint John Baptist, whose time was an interregnum between the Law and the
Gospel; and who was Vox clamantis in deserto, the voice of a crier in the
wilderness described by S. John in the 6th verse of this Chapter.

Hitherto we have heard the sound of the law, and the voice of a Crier; Christ.
but all this will not suffice to discover the secrets and mysteries of God; we
must then listen, and we shall find that this voice does tend and end in a
word; and that this word may be fitted to man's capacity, it is necessary that
this word be made flesh, Verbum caro, and in him should dwell all the treasures
of Gods wisdom; And as this word was of an extraordinary condition, so it is
necessary that there should be tongues of an extraordinary nature and form, fit
to express this word, Linguas attulit qui pro verbo venit, and this was the
holy Ghost, who came down in the form of fiery cloven tongues to testify of
this word; and here you have the full hight and perfection of the state of
grace; and this is the scope, and the object of Saint John, which is employed in
his name, for it signifies the grace of God; So that Moses comes as far short
of Saint John, as time does Saint John transcends Moses.
of eternity, and in other respects, especially for the object, Saint John as
far exceeds Moses as the fruit does the blossom, or the substance the type, or
the body the shadow; Moses by a prophetical spirit, and special illumination
describes the creation of the world, and the making of man; and so descends
downwards, and writes only the History of his own time; but our Apostle
transcends, and as he begins with the eternity of Christ, so in the
Revelations, he prophesies of the Church, even to the worlds ends, and after
the dissolution of this world, then to remain glorious for all The heavy
judgments accompanying the law.
eternity. And as they had several ends, so they proceeded several ways; Moses
according to the office of a Lawgiver sets down many judgments of God upon
the committing of the first sin, as the sentence of death, the expulsion out of
Paradise, the murder of Abel, the vengeance upon Cain, the deluge, the
confusion of tongues, the burning of Sodom, the captivity of Egypt, besides the
heavy yoke of Gods own law, that they should begin with circumcision, the
shedding of blood, that they should be so many in number, commanded with such
strict observances, with such severe punishment, and notwithstanding all this,
yet could he not so much prevail, as to bring the Israelites into the land of
promise.

But our Apostle Saint John, according to the nature of an Evangelist, in The
Gospel accompanied with works of mercy.
every page brings many tokens, signs, and assurances of Gods mercy, and
goodness; they are so many, that I will not reckon them: and as upon the
creation, man committed sin, so in our regeneration, he that knew no sin,
became a sacrifice for sin. Man's nakedness did then appear, but now he is
clothed with Christ's righteousness; Paradise was then lost, but now he recovers
a better inheritance; and that it might appear, how in every point and parcel
a full restitution should be made, as in Paradise there was the tree of life,
and pleasant fountains, and waters; so the like are described in the heavenly
Jerusalem; as Paradise was kept shut by an Angel, with a fiery sword, so on
the contrary the heavenly Jerusalem has many doors, all standing wide open,
there is free entrance, none are excluded, as you may read in the latter end of
the Apocalypse, besides those frequent and daily works of mercy practiced by
Christ, whose custom was deambulare benefaciendo, he had no other employment,
but only to do works of mercy curing all manner of diseases, feeding many
thousands raising the dead, blessing sanctifying, and teaching men in the ways
of salvation; and to reckon them up in particular were endless, only I
conclude with our Apostle, in the last words of his Gospel, where he
confesses that the world would not contain the books, that might be written
of Christ's Acts.

Thus our Apostle does every way enclose and incompass Moses, and so far does
the last Evangelist exceed the first Lawgiver, both in the object whereof they
treat, (for the world was created of nothing, but the word was begotten in the
understanding of God,) not six thousand years are yet past, since the world was
created; but the word was begotten from all eternity: so Moses ends with his
own time but our Apostle proceeds to the eternity of the Church, and by
comparing the first penman of Scripture The great difference between the
beginning and ending of Scripture.
with the last, it is memorable to consider the difference between the
beginning of Scripture, and the end of Scripture, between Genesis, and the
Apocalipse; for it points out the whole course and progress of Christianity,
that man was first created in happiness, then he commits sin, and is therefore
expelled Paradise, until justly for his sin passing through a vale of misery,
God takes mercy on him, becomes his Shepherd* guides him with his grace, dies
for his sin, and in the right and virtue of his own passion conducts him to the
heavenly Jerusalem, where you may see the tree of life, the water of life, and
no longer darkness, or the state of sin; and so man attaines a far better
condition, then what was lost in Paradise, as you may read in the last of the
Apocalypse; which I confess was figured out in the Mosaicall law, for upon the
death of the high Priest, the banished men returned, and were restored to their
own inheritance; so by the death and Passion of Christ our high Priest, there
was purchased a full restitution of Paradise, employed in that heavenly
Jerusalem.

Having thus compared the first penman of Scripture with the last, Of the name
of John how imposed upon Saint John Baptist.
let us now take our Apostle Saint John more particularly; and first for the
very name of John, which signifies the grace of God, it was given by a Miracle
to John Baptist; and he that imposed the name, old Zachary, immediately
received the benefit, for he was instantly restored to his speech, as an
argument of the cessation of the law, and an inchoation of the state of grace
to be suddenly put in execution, as it was already in part begun; for an
earnest thereof was given, when as John Baptist in the womb did express joy,
as it were in reverence saluting Christ in the virgins womb; and then he became
the immediate forerunner of Christ; and what the Prophets spoke a far off, and
somewhat obscurely, he pointed out Christ with his finger, Ecce Agnus Dei, and
had the honor to be Christ's ghostly Father, in Baptizing him, preparing the
way for Christ, by preaching repentance; and by his strict and austere life
gave a good example of mortification, sending his Disciples to Christ, and
himself suffering Martyrdom in the execution of his office, for reprehending
Herod; and then did Christ express sorrow, and mourn for his death, giving him
an honorable Testimony. --

Thus did the grace of God appear in John Baptist, according to his A
comparison of Saint John Baptist, with Saint John the Evangelist.
name, but much more in our Saint John the Evangelist; for though John Baptist
was greater then the old Prophets, yet he that is least in the kingdom of
heaven is greater then he, much more the beloved Disciple, who leaned on the
bosom, and pointed out the eternal generation of Christ, which is a work of
much more excellency, and difficulty, then to point him out in the womb. Our
Saint John had the honor to be the only Prophet of the New Testament, the
forerunner of Christ's second coming in glory, which is described in the
Apocalypse; and which is much more admirable, then to be a forerunner of
Christ's first coming in our flesh. Our Saint John was present at the
transfiguration of Christ, where he did see the glory of God; and as Moses and
Elias were there transfigured, no doubt but our Apostle might likewise be
transfigured, and have an earnest of his real and actual enjoying of Gods
glory, besides those many visions which he had in the Apocalypse, as a farther
and successive confirmation, for the assurance of his possession; and these are
the great favors and graces of God, which are ^tly employed in the name of
John. Thus far for our Saint John the Evangelist in comparison with Moses, and
Saint John Baptist, and such as went before him; now for such as did accompany
him in respect of the rest of the Apostles.

He was the youngest Brother of Saint James the Apostle, both sons of The
parents of Saint John, and how he was recommended to be an Apostle.
Zebedee, their Mother Mary Salome recommended them to Christ desiring him that
one might sit on the right hand, and the other on the left hand in his kingdom:
which requests did savor of much weakness, that she should presume so far to
make such a suit, considering their unworthiness, and how unfit it was that
they should encompass and monopolize Christ on every side; yet proceeding out
of the great love and affection of a Mother, Christ gave but a slight
reprehension, and in a sort yielded to her request; for these two brethren were
ever in special favor with Christ, and ever employed in the greatest actions,
suppose in Christ's transfiguration, which did betoken the kingdom of Christ, or
the Triumphant Church in heaven, and therefore it was in the Mount, but below
was S. Peter, or the Rock upon whom the Church should be built; and there being
none other then present but Saint James, and Saint John, surely they might be
said to be sup-porters or butresses on either side, both on the right hand, and
on the left hand, to uphold the building, while Christ does always reside in
his Church.

But because the transfiguration was not a kingdom, having but a short How his
mothers desire was accomplished.
time of continuance therefore it may be the more fitly understood in regard
Saint James was the first of all the Apostles who suffered martyrdom, some very
few years after the ascension of Christ, and so being first admitted into
heaven, in regard of precedencie he might be said to have the first place, or
to sit on the right hand of Christ; and Saint John as being the last Apostle
that dyed, for he lived almost 70 years after the ascension of Christ's, even to
the beginning of the second Century, because the reward of his glory was so
long deferred, therefore Christ admitted him as the beloved Apostle to lean on
his bosom, and no doubt nearest the heart, on the left side, and so was the
Mothers desire accomplished.

Of all the Apostles our Saint John had the prerogative to be called the Saint
John's prerogatives above other Apostles.
beloved Apostle, in so much that the great Apostle Saint Peter made him a
mediator and intercessor for him, what he himself durst not presume to ask, he
beckoned to him to know of Christ; and further above all the Apostles, he had
the happiness and courage to be present at the sacrifice of Christ, together
with the Blessed virgin mother, whilst Saint Peter denied Christ, and all the
rest of the Apostles fled for fear of the Jews, Saint John alone was the only
Apostle, there to assist, as a Deacon, or a Priest, or a servant to the high
Priest, in offering up himself a sacrifice upon the holy Altar of his Cross;
and as a token of the great love of Christ to him, and as a reward for his
observance and attendance, at the Cross, as the mother of Saint John
recommended him unto Christ, so Christ recommends him to his own blessed mother
the virgin, he adopts him, and makes him her son, and commits her to his
custody, which as it was a high honor unto him, so it argues a greater trust
reposed in him then in others.

His love and observance still continued after the death of Christ, for when it
was known that Christ was risen, then did both Saint Peter, and Saint John run
together to the Sepulcher, but Saint John came thither first S. Ioh. 20. 4. and
when they were in the ship together, Saint John was the first man that knew
Christ, S. Joh. 21. 7. After the ascension of Christ, After Christ he did
adhere to Saint Peter.
he did ever most entirely adhere to Saint Peter, and did accompany him to the
Temple, where the lame man was cured Act. 3. 1. Then they were joined in
Commission to go together to Samaria Act. 7 And that I may yet further add to
stir up our thankfulness; he was an Evangelist of the Saint John was the
Evangelist of the Gentiles.
Gentiles, as may appear by the manner of his speech, for he never names the
Passover, but he expresses it that it was a feast of the Jews, which if he
had written expressly to the Jews there needed no such explication, as being
sufficiently known unto them, thus in S. Joh. 2. 13. 6. 14. 55. Therefore by
all likelihood he wrote to them that might be ignorant of that feast; it
appears likewise by the translation of some words, whereof we have three
examples in this very first Chapter of Saint John; as verse the 34. Rabbi is
interpreted Master, verse 41. Messiah is interpreted Christ, v. 42. Cephas is
interpreted Peter, which interpretation had been needless, if S. John had
written to the Jews, for they spoke Syriack, and understood Hebrew, and
therefore needed not any such interpretation, but the Gentiles who were
strangers, and knew not the language, they needed the interpretation.

Next the manner of speech used by our Apostle, as the word was with The
occasion of writing his Gospel.
God, and God was the word, they seem to savor of Platonicall Philosophy,
which has much of Ideas, and certainly the Platonicks had it by tradition from
the Jews, Faciamus ad imaginem nostram: as Saint Paul was the Apostle of the
Gentiles, and therefore did use quotations out of heathenish Poets, so Saint
John being the Evangelist of the Gentiles, in the Apocalypse, he describes the
heavenly Jerusalem, with some rites and solemnities used by the heathens in
their triumphs, as the wearing of Laurel, etc. whereby may appear what use is
made of human learning in Theology; so much are we beholding to this
Evangelist above others, who living very long, and in his time there beginning
some heresies to arise, as Cerinthus and the Ebionites, who denied the Trinity,
(though the Church had ever believed the Trinity, as may appear by the
profession of our faith made in our Baptism,) the Bishops of Asia, where Saint
John lived, and was their superior, became earnest suitors unto him, to write
his Gospel, both for the confutation of the Heretics then being, and for the
prevention of the future; this Saint John did at their request, and being done
upon that occasion, therefore he was more exact, and more elaborate in that one
mystery, then the rest of the Evangelists were.

If you ask how Saint John above others should have such an exact knowledge of
their mysteries; surely in regard of the heresies then rising, How he might
come to the knowledge of this mystery.
and the necessity of those times, God did more enlighten him, as no doubt he
does his holy Catholic Church to this day. Some may conceive, that because our
Apostle was present at Christ's Transfiguration, where Moses and Elias, the Law
and the Prophets were transfigured, that such Apostles as were then present,
were a little transfigured and might see the glory of God, though Christ for
the present did forbid them to reveal those mysteries: yet our Apostle living
some 70 years after, might make them known, especially being the beloved
Apostle, and leaning on the bosom, he might suck out these mysteries, and might
know more secrets, then were opened to others.

And it is not unlike, but he might have a greater knowledge from the blessed
virgin mother, being appointed by Christ to be her son; to whom the Angel
Gabriel, was sent in a message of the Annunciation. And certainly other
mysteries were then imparted and revealed to her; especially the blessed
Trinity; as conducing much to the incarnation: for Persons being supposed in
the Deity, you may the more easily believe, that one of those Persons, (that
is) the Son of God, might become the Son of Man; and Persons thus supposed, it
seems the less strange, that one Person should satisfy, while the Godhead
receives satisfaction for sin; so that God himself in regard of Persons, might
both offer sacrifice, and receive the oblation.

And it is further observed in the blessed virgin, that of all others, she
Saint John might be instructed by the blessed virgin.
did most observe Christ, and laid up his sayings in her heart, as she did
conceive him in her heart, before she conceived him in her womb; and she never
forsook him, no not at the Cross; Now it is the office, and duty of a mother,
to instruct her son: especially such a son, as was so recommended unto her, as
our Evangelist was, and to Catechize him in private, though not in public; for
women must be no teachers in the Church, (in regard of their sex) and therefore
as soon as the blessed virgin, had received the holy Ghost, for her own private
sanctification, there is no further mention made of her in the Acts, nor in the
Epistles; but there the Apostles wholly intend the conversion of Nations.

But for this great mystery of the Trinity, in my poor judgment, it is At the
annuntiation there was employed the Trinity.
intimated at the Annunciation; for mark the message of the Angel, That she had
found favor with God, that she should bring forth a Son; and why may not this
Son imply as well the Son of God, as the Son of the woman? God is every way
truth, and nothing but truth; and if in the same word, there is involved a
double truth, this is most agreeable to Gods wisdom; and how far the Son of God
is here signified, that which follows may make it manifest, that his name
shall be Jesus or Emanuel, that he shall be great, and shall be called the Son
of the Highest, Luke 1. v. 31, 32. And then follows in the 35. verse, the holy
Ghost, and the power of the Highest shall over shadow thee; and here is the
third person in the Trinity; for is it credible, that the Angel coming upon
such a message, that he should be so sparing in his relation, as that he should
discover no other mystery, which might tend to strengthen and illuminate her
faith, to raise up her hope, to increase the measure of her love, and thereby
to make her a fitter Temple, wherein the Godhead might dwell bodily.

Thus having compared our Saint John with Moses, with Saint John Baptist, and
the rest of the Apostles; and from whence, and upon what occasion he might know
this mystery above others; that so being revealed to him, they might be
received with greater reverence, and work the deeper impression: now let us a
little consider him in himself. He is figured Saint John an Eagle.
unto us in the form of an Eagle. An Eagle has these properties, both to
behold, and to fasten her eyes on the Sun, thereby to betoken the high
mysteries discovered by our Saint John; and secondly, the Eagle renewes her age
to betoken the long life of Saint John, or rather the eternity of such things
as he prophesied, in so much, that it gave occasion to a false report; for
whereas Christ made only a supposition, they conceived it as really true, that
Saint John should not die; and thus far indeed it proved true, that he died not
of a violent death, as all the rest of the Apostles suffered Martyrdom, but his
Matyrdom it should seem was then, when he did assist at the Passion of Christ,
and none other Apostle attended there but himself; and no doubt, but his then
sorrow and grief might equal, or rather exceed in virtue and power, the
Martyrdom of others.

And secondly, that common fame and report of his not dying, might thus far
prove true, that he died not in that age, but lived to the beginning of the
second Century, being now very old, as S. Hierome relates in his commentaries
upon the Epistle to the Galatians; when he could not As he was the beloved
Apostle, for he did ever Preach love.
go of himself, but was carried by others, to the Church, or place of
meetings; he made no other Sermon but this, [ Filioli diligite alterutrum, quia
praeoeptum Domini est, and si solim fiat, sufficit] it should seem being the
beloved Disciple, the love of Christ was so fastened, and fixed in him, that it
made a repercussion, and became an Echo, and brake out into these terms of
love; Filioli my sons, whom I so dearly love, let not my love rest in you as
singulars, but impart it to each other, that so you may be united and linked
together in the Bonds, and Chains of love, that as this love proceeds from
Christ to me, and from me to you, so from you to each other among your selves;
that we may all lay hold on the Anchor of our hope, Christ the Son of God, who
has reconciled us to God, notwithstanding our sins and transgressions.

I will now come directly to the Text, which is the very ke^nell, the marrow,
the Elixi^ of all Christian Religion, and has ever been received with the
greatest admiration, and astonishment, and at the very naming of the words,
Christians were (...) to bow, and to express all possible honor and reverence.

The ineffable Trinity.
And the word was made flesh.
THe first word of my Text, standing in the forefront ( and and) being a
conjunction copulative, gives me occasion to look back, and mark the
dependence; wherein I dare boldly say, that neither the large volumes of the
Fathers, nor the subtle and curious invention of the Schools, nor the deep
and profoundest Divines, can better unfold the mystery of this word, then may
be well gathered by the precedent and express words of this Evangelist: only
here stands our weakness; That as Moses having talked with God, his countenance
received that light, that the Israelites could not behold the face of Moses: so
this our Apostle having leaned on the bosom, and sucked out these mysteries, he
is now become Boanerges, Saint John was Boanerges.
the son of Thunder, rather astonishing the ear with wonder and amazement,
then distinctly informing the heart in things which are too high for the weak
state, and condition of man; but I pray mark the first verse of this Chapter.

In principio erat verbum, in the beginning was the word; ^ere is the Christ's
eternal generation.
eternal generation of this word, not proceeding from Gods free will and
election, not supposing his determinate decree and purpose, but a natural and a
necessary generation equally existing with God in the moment of his eternity,
as the Sun and the light were together created, the Soul and the understanding
together infusect; so is the generation of ^his word equal in time and
continuance with the deity.

Et verbum erat apud deum, And the word was with God; here is the A distinct
Person.
distinction and relation of the Persons, apud deum with God, not as a property
or quality, not as an attribute or faculty, but as a person distinctly
existing; and that by a different manner of generation from the Father.

Et de^ erat verbum, And God was the Word; here is the mutual The same Godhead.
communication and participation of the deity; for it is a property of the
greatest good, that it should be most fruitful in his own kind; and
communicate it self in the largest, and greatest manner; now in the creatures,
we find some footsteps of the deity, as appears by their being, moving, order,
perfection, but necessary it is, that God should impart his own nature, which
nature though infinitely imparted, yet still continuing infinite, it can be but
one and the same nature equally communicated to the three Persons, three
persons and one God.

If a man communicate his nature to his son, this nature though still The
difference between God and man.
continuing the same in kind and condition, yet must it differ in number, in
regard of the finitenesse of our nature, the circumscription both of time and
of place: but it is otherwise with God; for out of the infinite extent of his
own nature, one and the same deity, the same in number, the same in virtue and
power, is equally and totally imparted to the three persons in one blessed, and
undivided Trinity.

Thus much ( ad intra) concerning the relation of Persons within The three
persons outwardly concur.
themselves, now ad extra in respect of the creatures, it follows in the third
verse of this Chapter, Et verbo facta sunt omnia, and without him nothing was
made: so that both inwardly and outwardly, the deity of this Word appears;
inwardly, in the coeternall existency, and infinite participation of the
Godhead; and outwardly, as together concurring in the creation, framing and
making of this world. And having thus discovered the second person, because we
acknowledge another person in the deity, take therefore the testimony of this
second person concerning the third, when the holy Ghost whom I shall send unto
you from the Father, the spirit of truth which proceeds from the Father, he
shall give testimony of me, John the 15. 16. 26. these are the mutual
testimonies of Persons in behalf of each other; and hereunto I shall add, what
the holy Catholic Church out of other texts of Scripture does undoubtedly,
demonstratively, and most necessarily conclude.

Verbum a word, must necessarily imply intellectum an understanding to The
manner of the generation of the Word.
conceive this word; this understanding being always active, the word must be
of like continuance and eternity; and being active, as there was an eternal,
so is there a daily and continual generation of this word, Hodie genui te.
This word being natural to the understanding, it proceeds not from any
voluntary, or free election of God, but from the necessity of his nature; and
according to his nature, so is it begotten in a spiritual, and most
unspeakable manner, being in the understanding, answerable to the
understanding, and of like extent. It can be no creature, seeing by it all
things were made and created; and being in the understanding, it must subsist
of the same nature, which nature being infinite, though infinitely imparted,
yet still it remains one and the fame infinite nature, and cannot admit a
plurality; and though the nature be the same both in kind and number, yet must
there be a difference of persons, in regard of the different act of generation,
Deus intelligendo seipsum, genuit verbum.

Here we have an Understanding and a Word, but can this Understanding subsist
without a Will? or what shall unite and knit together the understanding and the
word, as they are in themselves most inseparable, but only Amor the love of God;
or that conformity of the understanding to the word and of the word to the
understanding, which proceeding from both, serves to unite both? Here then we
have a third person, the holy Ghost; The mauner of the procession of the holy
Ghost.
and seeing the will of God, is no less active then the understanding, this
third person must therefore be necessary and eternal, with the word, and with
the understanding; proceeding from both, it must be of like extent, and nature
with both, the understanding infinite, the word infinite, the love must
likewise be infinite; this nature being infinite it can be but one, and the
same nature infinitely imparted to the three persons; and though the same
nature, yet this love proceeding, it must be a person; and in regard of the
different manner of procession from both, needs it must be a different person
from both, God comprehending and understanding himself to be infinite, begets
verbum infinitum, which is the action of the understanding; and by this word
knowing himself to be infinitum bonum, from the understanding, and from the
word proceeds amor infini^us, which is the action of the will.

Thus the understanding, and the will, as they are the most inward, active, A
prerogative of the understanding and will of God above his other attributes.
and eminent qualities in every spirit, so are they most wonderful in God, for
they are fruitful in their own kind; neither power, providence, justice,
mercy, nor any other divine attribute can produce the like unto themselves;
these look only ad extra, as if from the Castle of the Deity the windows were
opened, and they should look only upon the creatures, but the wisdom, and the
will of God look ad intra, re^lect upon the deity it self, God comprehending
and understanding himself to be infinite, begets verbum infinitum, which is the
action of the understanding; and by this word knowing himself to be infinitum
bonum, from the understanding, and from the word proceeds amor infinitus, which
is the action of the will.

These three persons though admitting a difference between themselves, How the
three persons agree in actions and attributes.
in regard of generation and procession, yet they agree in their nature, and
the whole nature is in every person, and there can be no more then the whole,
in the three persons, according to the nature of an infinite, which being
infinitely imparted, yet still it remains infinite; hence it is that all the
actions of God, are alike ascribed to every one of the Persons, and though the
different Persons revealed, may appear unto us by different actions, as the
Father by creation, the Son by redemption, the holy Ghost by ^anctification,
yet this difference, as the mystery it self, is likewise unsearchable.

As all the actions, so all the attributes of God are likewise ascribed to
every one of the Persons, yet in the Persons they are tied to the nature: thus
we say not three incorruptibles, but one incorruptible; not three
incomprehensibles, but one incomprehensible; three persons in unity, and one
God in Trinity; the father is God, the son is God, and the holy Ghost is (...)
other Gods, according to the very letter, and not the persons in one Godhead,
The Jews question answered.
for they are but one God: and if you would know what gods are excluded, surely
the verse following will direct you, Thou shall worship no Idols. But why this
mystery should not be revealed to the Jews, this is a question of such a
nature, as being answered, yet still the like question remains; as, Why should
not all other mysteries, and why should not the Incarnation be long before it
was? and therefore I will make bold to propose the same question to the Jews.

Why should God reveal himself to the later Prophets, more then he did to
Moses? or why should Moses institute Sacrifices, and such a number of
Ceremonies, which were never discovered to Abraham? or why should God by
Abraham institute Circumcision, which was unknown unto Noah? or why were not
all the mysteries together revealed unto Adam, the father of mankind, created
in Paradise, in a state of innocence, sanctified with Original grace, and
himself being the immediate workmanship of God?

Now to all these questions I will return this answer, God is not to be tied to
man's captious curiosity, he may do as he please, and reveal himself according
to such manner, as his own wisdom shall appoint.

It is certain, that in all natural things God observes degrees, and nothing
God is known by degrees.
comes all at once to his ripeness and perfection: Thus there is a blossom and
a bud, before you come to the fruit; thus a child begins first to learn his
letters, then to read, before he comes to any exact knowledge: So God did make
himself known by several Names, and each Name did import more mysteries then
other, as God speaks, By my Name of Sadai, quod sufficit, I did reveal my self
unto them, but not by my Name of four letters, which of all other Gods Names,
did involve the greatest mysteries: and God requires no more of man, then God
has given unto man, and that shall abundantly suffice, until it shall please
God further to reveal himself. Think you that God would not reserve some
mystery for his Son to reveal, more then ever was known to the Prophets? and
what greater then the Trinity, which neither men nor Angels can comprehend, and
both men and Angels must adore?

Neither do I think that all is yet revealed, but that we shall have a All man's
knowledge is gotten by degrees.
further knowledge of things in the state of Glory, when we our selves shall be
made more and more capable of his knowledge, and in the interim God does herein
deal with men but after the manner of men, as he does in all other things. Thus
we get knowledge by degrees, and first we begin with the easiest lessons, and
then come to that which is more difficult: and this stands well with the honor,
majesty, and magnificence of God, that we should come to him by degrees; thus
was there a Court, a Porch, a Temple, before we come to the Holiest of Holies.

Thus far I have answered their Objection, and requited them in the Moses had
some knowledge of this mystery.
same kind, by proposing another question of like nature, but I may not so far
wrong Moses and the Patriarchs, as to think they were utterly ignorant of this
mystery, though it may be they had not such an express knowledge, as God
revealed in succeeding times: and likewise for the manner, that it was not in
such express terms. We read then that Moses and Elias, the Law and the
Prophets, did attend Christ, when he was transfigured in the Mount; whereby is
intimated, that they had Christ in figures and types. So then, if I shall make
it appear, that either the three Persons, or any one of the Persons, are named
or appeared in Scripture, we may thence very well gather, that they had some
knowledge of the mystery.

First, let us view the Creation, Verbo Domini Coeli formati sunt, And The
Trinity appears in the creation of the world.
God said, Let there be light: Said, that is, spoke the word: To whom should
God speak, when as yet there was nothing but himself? So then, a Word is
begotten in his understanding, which reflects upon the understanding* and
proves a distinct Person, and the Word was God: then follows, And the Spirit of
the Lord moved on the waters: This Spirit could be no creature, for now began
the Creation, the Spirit of the Lord. Surely there is nothing in God but God;
God can admit of no mixture or composition, he is actus purus and
simplicissimus, nothing but pure form, therefore this Spirit must be God the
holy Ghost. Do we not here see how all the three Persons did concur as in one
nature, so in the same outward act of Creation?

From the creation of the World, where it is said* Dii creavit, let us come to
the creation of Man, for whom the world was created: and therefore being a work
of so great moment, God seems to deliberate, and to enter into consultation:
Certainly when we enter into counsel, it argues a diversity of persons, or at
least it must imply a greater caution, that neither in words or acts there
might be any mistake; the rather, because it is the first time that ever God
spoke of himself, wherein frail man is usually more cautionate and wary then in
any other discourse: and therefore this may much more be supposed in the most
wise God; let us then hear God with the greatest reverence, Faciamus hominem ad
imaginem nostram, Let us make man according to our own image, the plural
number, which argues Persons, is here twice implied, both in the act faciamus,
let us make, and in the type or sampler, ad imaginem nostram, according to our
own image. If here you shall tell me, that it is an Hebrew phrase, and an
ordinary and usual form of speech, I confess it, and acknowledge it: but
therein I do more magnify the providence of God, who did so ordain the speech
and language of men, as that it should be fit to express such a mystery: yet
withal consider, that it is otherwise with God then with men, for God is Truth
it is self, and therefore I believe that there is not a metaphor or figure
spoken of God, wherein there is not a stamp of truth involved. And whereas it
is now frequent, that great Princes do speak of themselves in the Plural
number, I conceive that it is therefore more justifiable, because they are
Politic Bodies, and in a sort Corporations, and so represent others; and that
it might imply, that whatsoever they do, it was with the grave advice of their
Council, and therefore for the greater honor and majesty they use the Plural
number.

Come we then after the fall of Adam, to that which the Fathers call Semen The
Messiah must needs be a Person in the Deity.
Evangelii, the beginning of our Redemption; Semen mulieris conteret serpentis
caput: is it possible that when as Adam being the immediate workmanship of God,
and therefore of the greatest perfection, created in Paradise, in a state of
innocence, sanctified with Original grace, that he should not be able to resist
the temptation, and yet the seed of the woman, of the weaker sex, should be
able to bruise the head of the serpent, (that is) utterly to destroy the
Kingdom of Sin and Satan? surely it must needs argue, that the Son of the
woman, could be no less then the Son of God, seeing such a Conquest far
exceeds the power of all Angels and Creatures.

After the sin, consider the punishment, and therein Gods Mercy and God does
sacrifice to himself; there are Persons in the Deity.
Compassion, how he clothes the nakedness of Adam with the skins of beasts.
Some Divines do ask, what became of the carkases of those beasts; and they
conceive it very credible, that God did offer them up in sacrifice, to himself,
to show Adam the manner of sacrificing; and withal to prefigure, that God
alone should offer up the only great, sufficient, propitiatory sacrifice, that
is, that he should offer up himself to himself; which must needs argue several
Persons in the Deity. Hence followed as an earnest or type thereof, the
sacrifice of Abel; and because his sacrifice was acceptable* he himself was
more acceptable then his sacrifice, therefore he must be offered up in
sacrifice, to prefigure him, whose blood speaks better things, then the blood
of Abel.

Hitherto Gods promises for the coming down of his Son were only tied The seed
of Abraham is more then man.
to mankind* but after the confusion of tongues, when men were dispersed, then
it pleased God to make choice of his nation, and to promise Abraham, That in
his seed all generations should be blessed; in token and memory hereof, God
instituted Circumcision, as it were for the honor of his issue, and for the
assurance of his faith, that Christ should succeed; and as a pledge thereof,
Abraham being to administer an oath to his servant, takes his hand, and lays
it upon his loins, and then makes him swear. Now in a corporal oath* we ever
lay our hands upon the most holy thing, suppose the Bible, or the Altar; and
therefore the servant lays his hands upon the loins, Genesis 23. 2. seeing that
Christ was then in the loins of Abraham. Another memorable thing in Abraham,
that he saw three Angels, and he worshipped one, Genesis 18. 3. Which may a little
set forth three Persons and one God.

In Isaacs sacrifice it is more manifestly employed, for God would never Isaac's
sacrifice.
require that of man, which he did not intend to perform unto man; and
therefore God requiring of Abraham to sacrifice his Son, what was then only
proposed, God would hereafter really perform on his part, in sacrificing his
only Son, for Abraham and his Sons. Isaac gives the blessing to Jacob; of whom
that I may say nothing of his life, the blessing which he gives unto his Sons
upon his deathbed, was very memorable, Genesis 49. Giving his blessing to Judah,
from whom Christ was to descend, he there prophesies of the time of his
coming, and expresses much joy and comfort therein; but after speaking of Dan,
that he was a serpent, certainly he had some relation to that cursed serpent,
which seduced our first Parents; for Judas Iscariot who betrayed Christ, was of
the tribe of Dan: and it is not unlike but the great Antichrist shall be of the
same Jacobs expectation
tribe, which Jacob foreseeing suddenly breaks out into these words, Expectabo
salutare tuum Domine, Lord I will expect thy salvation; though some of my
posterity shall betray thee, yet lay not the sin to my charge, hold me as
innocent; and therefore in the assured hope of Gods mercy he takes order, that
his body should be carried out of Egypt, as it were going to Jerusalem in
Pilgrimage; there to meet Christ at his coming.

And not to trouble my self with so many testimonies, all which do sufficiently
The faith of Moses.
prove the truth of Christ's coming; and that Christ must needs be the Son of
God, which presupposes the great mystery of the Trinity: take one instance
for all. When God did deliver his people out of Egypt, with so many wonders,
and miracles; and that he gave the Law, and used the ministry of Angels: yet
notwithstanding at that time, Moses out of the certainty of his hope, should
use these words, Mitte quem missurus es, Lord, use no such preparation, but
send him whom thou art about to send, (that is) send thine own son immediately:
for he must needs be the Son of God; for he must be greater then Moses, greater
then the Angels, who were then employed, greater then all the commands of God,
which were then to be delivered to his people; and his work and employment must
be greater then their deliverance from Egypt; and therefore it must be a
freedom, and liberty from the captivity of sin, hell, and damnation, and the
conducting of us to that heavenly Jerusalem, the true land of promise, which is
a work and employment only fit for the Deity.

Many other types might be produced; Suppose the three Children in the The
whole Law directed to Christ.
fire, all praising God with one voice, see how three do concur in one, and
that the fire did not hurt them (as the fire did not burn the bramble bush,
wherein God appeared to Moses) they saw one among them like the Son of God: so
here is not only an acknowledgement of the Son, but as if they had known him by
his face and countenance, that he was the Son of God. What shall we bring
further instances, when it is most certain, that the whole scope and intent of
the Law tends only to Christ, and therefore must undoubtedly assure us, that he
could be no less then God? for if we should think that God would rest satisfied
with the slaughter of unreasonable creatures, we must think it to be a very
unreasonable service; and we cannot imagine, that Gods service should be
directed to any other end, but himself, which must enforce the Deity of Christ.

But further you shall observe, that whereas the form of our Baptism The Jews
had a tradition of our Baptism.
is, That we are Baptized in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
holy Ghost; and that the matter of our Baptism is water, and therein we make a
profession of the Trinity; certainly the Jews had a tradition, that the Messiah
should institute Baptism in this manner: for whereas there is no such thing
written in Scripture, yet the Priests and the Levites did send to Saint John
Baptist, to know whether he were the M^ssias or not; and if he were not, then
why he did Baptize? In token and memory hereof, some there were, who kept
watering pots after the manner of the Jews, S. John 20. And this was done
likewise by tradition, for they had no warrant in Scripture, Joh. 5.

To the message of the Priests, and to the common custom of Jews, give And
several types of our Baptism.
me leave to add that miraculous pool of Bethesda, John the 5th where the
Angel came down at a certain season* and moved the waters; and such as took
the first opportunity to be let into the water, were cured, of all their
diseases; this first letting down, did only betoken their watchfulness, their
zeal, their strength of Faith; and how the endeavors of men must concur,
cooperate, and correspond with Gods goodness, and providence. Here then we have
the matter of Baptism, the element of water, several times intimated: shall
we then think, that the Jews were utterly ignorant of the form, which is no
less then the profession, or acknowledgement of the blessed Trinity? Certainly
as they had types and figures of the one, so they might have an obscure
knowledge of the other; and this I do rather believe, because at the Baptism of
Christ, when the three Persons did so manifestly discover themselves, for there
was vox Patris, This is my well beloved Son, there was the Person of the Son
and there was the holy Ghost, in the form of a Dove; yet we do not read, that
this seemed any way new or strange to Saint John Baptist, who certainly if he
had been utterly ignorant, would have been strangely stricken with astonishment
and admiration of this so great a mystery then revealed: They knew the form of
our Baptism, as well as the matter.
but Saint John not contenting himself with that present mystery, taking it as
granted; he points out a further mystery, when this Son of God should become
the Lamb of God, and be made a sacrifice to satisfy for the sins of the whole
world, Ecce agnus dei, qui tollit peccata mundi. Now it is not credible, that
the Jews should have so many tokens, and such use of the element of waters, as
the matter of Baptism; and should be utterly ignorant without any the least
intimation, or notice of the form of Baptism, which is the profession of the
Trinity: and to conclude, how often do we read in Scripture, Verbum Domini
venit ad prophetas, spiritus Domini replevit orbem terrarum, which very Phrases
seem to imply Pers^ns in the Deity?

I will yet further proceed; certainly at the time of their sacrifice, they
What Prayers were u^ed at their sacrifices.
did use prayers only to that effect, That God would send down his Son for the
redemption of the world: for in Scripture there is no mention made, what
prayers they used in the time of sacrifice, but it is hence gathered, Luke 1.
when Zachary was sacrificing, The Angel said unto him, Thy prayers are heard,
but what these prayers were, did not yet appear; m^rk then by the success, and
so you shall know the effect of his and their prayers, which was, that the
Angel Gabriel told him, that he should have a Son, who should be the forerunner
to the Messiah, who was the expectation of Nations; and the same Angel, a
little after, carried another message to the blessed Virgin for her conception
of Christ: so then here was the effect of their prayers, at the time of their
sacrifice, That God would has^en his own coming, and no longer feed them with
types.

But it does most especially appear in the cessation of the Law, which The
c^ssation of the Law.
falling out at the coming of Christ, it must needs argue that Christ could be
no less then the end of the Law, and therefore God; for you shall understand,
that about a full age before the birth of Christ, there was a cessation of
Prophets; and God sent no message to his people. As when the Sun arises, the
Stars are obscured. So lest the Jews might take any of Gods messengers for the
Messiah, the time now approaching for his coming, therefore God sent no
messengers, until at length Zachary at the time of his sacrifice was stricken
dumb, and so continued until the Birth of his Son, to whom he gave the name of
John, which signifies the grace of God, and points out the proper time of the
Gospel.

But if you look to the total abrogation of the Law, as it was intimated The
Temple destroyed.
in the dumbness of Zacharias, when he was sacrificing* so not the Priest
alone, but the Temple it self did suffer, in the passion of Christ; for the
veil of the Temple was rent, as if God were then dissolving, and pulling down
his own Temple, with an intent no longer to inhabit there; and so the Temple
was afterward destroyed by Titus.

As he forsook his Leviticall Priests by degrees, though formerly he had How
the Jews fell by degrees.
committed his Laws, and his doctrine to their custody; for upon the Birth of
Christ, they were able to direct Herod to the place of his birth, but they had
not the grace to go to adore him; so herein they were only defective, Mat* 2.
then in the next place* Know you not that it is expedi^nt, that one should die
for the people? S. John the 11^ here God gave them power to speak truth; but
God suffered them through their own malice to err, not understanding their own
truth; but in the last place, they sought false witness against Christ, Mat.
26. here was malice, ignorance, and perjury; and as there was renouncing of God
in words, so in deeds: because Christ made himself what indeed he was, the son
of God; therefore they cried Crucify him, crucify him; and here was Deicid^m,
the greatest of all the sins of the world; so far forth as it lay in their
power, they did murder God.

Thus they fell by degrees, together with their Law, and their Temple; yet no
doubt but God had many servants, who then were in the state of Salvation; for
here is the difference between the Synagogue, and the Church, many were saved
out of the Synagogue, as the Ninevites, but the Church is the mother of all the
faithful; and without the Church, there is no hope of Salvation: the reason
hereof I conceive to be, because the Synagogue was hedged in within the bounds
of Palestina, but the Church is Catholic over the face of the whole world: So
they are in excusable, who do not adhere to the Church.

All this I write to the Jews, that seeing the whole Law was referred to
Christ; all their sacrifices directed to Christ; all their prophets prophesiing
of Christ; many types and figures of Christ, and all due preparations for his
entertainment: surely this must needs argue the Godhead of Christ; for here was
a worship only proper to God. Or if we look not Gods judgment upon the Jews.
to the service of God, then take Gods Judgments upon the Jews, they are
become slaves and vass^ls to all Nations; I never heard that any of them had so
much as a Seigniory, though certain it is, that they are the most expert, and
skilful Merchants in the world, and the richest: a wonder it is but some of
them should intend a Plantation, and erect a Government. I do likewise conceive
them to be the best Physicians in the world, not only because their Ancestors
lived in the East* Countries, where the best drugges and simples are; and so
they were better acquainted with their virtues and operations, by the daily
experience of them: and certainly they did leave the knowledge of them by
tradition to their successors; which they keep secret among themselves, while
throughout the whole world, they are become slaves and vagabonds, ever since
the passion of Christ, even as Cain was upon the murder of Abel: that now in
the whole world, they have not one place for sacrifice; their tribes are
confounded, their Temple destroyed; and this has continued longer, then their
own Mosaicall Law continued in his vigor: which could never stand with the
goodness and providence of God to permit, had it not been that the Law was
accomplished; and therefore abrogated by God himself, that the Gospel might
succeed.

Thus I think now at length, I have satisfied the Jews, and made it appear, The
Jews no longer a Nation.
that their An^estors had some certain knowledge of the Trinity; and that the
Messiah was to be the Son of God* more then ordinary man, one of the Persons of
the Diety* and if this will not servo to give them satisfaction, then I have
paid them home at last, (that is) I have come to their own homes, I have
dispersed them, I have scattered them, and in effect dissolved them; so that as
a Nation, they shall no longer oppose, or continue obstinate; it must be now
held self-will, perverseness, and every man's particular contumacy. So from the
Jews I come to Gentilisme: which as it was accompanied with infidelity and
Atheism, so you shall give me leave to strike at the Root, that I may
eradicate both Root and Branch; and because the Gentiles had no other pretense,
but human reason;

I will now give satisfaction to human reason, in this high mystery of The
method how to deal with the heathen.
the Trinity; not that reason can comprehend the mystery; for neither
Scraphins, nor Cherubins, nor all the Angels in heaven, can fully understand
God: For to understand God, it is indeed to be God, and to make his
understanding equal to that eternal Word, in the understanding of God. But I
do undertake, to satisfy human reason in this mystery, notwithstanding our
own ignorance. First, I will make it appear that there is a God, and but one
God; then that this God is every way incompr^hensible, whereby it must follow,
that the blessed Trinity, exceeds man's reason no further, then all the rest of
his attributes do. Then I will bring some proofs for the blessed Trinity; and
lastly, I will seal and conclude all with miracles, works above natural power,
to confirm words above natural knowledge.

This world being the workmanship of God, serves as a book or a volume, whereby
every letter or punctilio points out the Maker: I shall not need to insist in
the motion of the heavens, the influence of Stars, the strange and wonderful
meteors; but take the least fly or worm, and it shall afford infinite
arguments, for the proof of the Deity; and I do here call heaven and earth to
witness; and I desire God, that my tongue may cleave to the roof of my mouth,
and that my right hand may forget her cunning, if ever I shall fail in any the
least creature, to produce infinite invincible demonstrative arguments, for the
proof of the Deity. And The Atheist is the greatest impostor.
therefore of all others, the cursed Atheist is the greatest impostor, denying,
a God, he makes himself God; for denying his Maker, he must needs make himself,
and consequently makes himself God, who cannot add one hair to his own
growth, nor a minute to his age. Yet some such there are, who continue thus in
their mad Blasphemy; and here I call all the creatures to witness against them,
and all Arts, and Sciences shall concur in the same Testimony, and utterly
condemn them.

Whatsoever is seen or unseen, whether it belongs to the visible, or invisible
world, every thing points out a Deity; and from the several perfection of
creatures, we thence infer several attributes in God, which although they may
seem several to us; yet being every way, and every one infinite, (for what
should limit or bound God, when as indeed there is no thing but God) it must
therefore necessarily follow, that there can be but one infinite; and the
attributes, though they appear several to us, yet are they all but one
infinite God: more particularly, because we receive our first information from
sense, we thence conclude,

Whatsoever is, is either God, or the work of God, Deus est quod vides The
infinite proofs of a Godhead.
totum, and quod non vides totum, whatsoever thou see, or see not, serves
as an argument, and proof of the Deity; as for example, in the creatures in
general, consider their proper and bounden nature, together with so great
variety and perfection in their own kind, in this nature such excellent
properties, affections, and accidences, which do so well agree with the nature;
from this nature such strange and wonderful operations and effects; by this
nature, such an excellent order and proportion, both in themselves, and to the
whole universe; through this nature, such a constancy and perseverance in
keeping their due course, in performing their duty, service, and Ministry to
man; and as all the creatures look to one end, so they must needs have but one
efficient cause, which made and directed all to the glory of himself, the
perfection of the universe, and the good of particulars, in their preservation,
that they might be more useful, and serviceable to man; who might therefore
return his praises, and thankfulness to God; that all may tend and end in Gods
glory, this was the end which was first in intention, and now is the last in
execution: that as the world is circular, where it begins, there it ends; so
beginning with God, it ends with God, thus every thing does testify a God,
and therefore you may fill up a Book greater then the whole world, with
arguments, and proofs of the Deity.

And now I come to the several Arts, and Sciences: the Metaphysics The
Metaphysics acknowledge God and Ang^ls.
have this prerogative, to treat of generals and universals, to prescribe every
art her own proper bounds; and to confirm the first grounds and principles of
every Art, wherein the Art it self is defective, and in particular to take the
heavenly bodies, separated Souls; and what belongs to the spiritual world, as
their own proper objects; and they do not only conclude one omnipotent Maker;
but they proceed further, and considering the motion of the heavens, which are
bodies; how they move in their own proper places, which no other bodies do the
like, but always rest when they are at home; and their motion serves them
abroad, only to recover their own homes: considering that the heavens do not
move for their own private ends, that they receive no benefit, or advantage by
their own motion; but that it is wholly directed for the good of others, for
the preservation of the universe (when as no other natural, or senseless bodies
do the like) considering that simple bodies can have but one simple motion; yet
are there great varieties, and divers^ies of motions in the heavens; the
Metaphysics do hence infer, that needs the motions of ^he heavens, must
Influences.
proceed from intelligences, who are indeed Angels; and thereby proceed
influences, the operation whereof we find in our sublunary bodies, which cannot
be prevented by application of any elementary qualities.

Thus in the Bowels of the Earth, where neither Sunshine, nor motion The effect
of influences.
could penetrate, yet by virtue of these influences, we find metals, and
minerals, which are of that excellent nature, as that for their composition,
their long continuance, and special virtues, they are not inferior to the best
of bodies; and therefore they serve for coin, to carry the price of all our
other commodities; thus do the Metaphysics, by the speculation of the heavens,
not only conclude a first maker, but likewise a necessity of Angels, to
continue that motion which the Creator began, by setting the first wheel on
going.

Thus far by the heavens alone, now by a view of the creatures, the The
transcendentia discover God
Metaphysics find that there are certain Transcendentia, general and
universal qualities which are incident, and must necessarily be fastened on all
creatures; whereupon they infer, that they are but the Rays and Foo^steps of
one unversall Maker; as when they see that every thing is, Ens ^num, verum,
bonum, they instantly conceive that these are immediately borrowed, and proceed
from the first Maker; and therefore do necessarily conclude, that he must be
Ens entium, prima veritas, simplicissima ^nitas, infinita bonitas, who is causa
eausarum, the author of his own being; the efficient cause from whom all the
rest do proceed; the final cause Every thing points out both an efficient and
a final cause.
to whom all the rest are directed; Thus every thing must have as inward causes
matter and form, whereof it subsists; so outward causes efficient and final,
from whom, and to whom it is directed, for of nothing comes nothing; add
nothing to nothing, and there remains nothing.

In the Metaphysics this is a Rule, that in things which exceed the ordinary
The lea^ inconveni^nce must ev^r be admitted.
rank and condition, such as least exceed, must ever be admitted, for that they
are most facile and easy; whereby man's understanding may be better guided in
knowledge, sooner satisfied, and find less opposition. E: G: If I should
ask, whether every thing should be eternal, or that there should be but only
one eternall^? which should give a being to all inferior creatures, which as
they are bounded in all their dimensions and qualities, so likewise in their
continuance, whereas that only one eternal must be infinite, and unlimited in
all other attributes as well as eternity; surely right reason would instantly
conclude rather for one, then for all; and thence infer a necessity of the
Godhead; and seeing the whole universe is so well compacted, and that every
part has such a mutual co^respondencie, and relation each to other, that it
makes one body, one Corporation, right reason concludes there can be but one
Maker, one efficient cause, from whom all do proceed; and one final end to
which all do tend, The glory and service of that Maker.

Thus having found out that unum principium, that only one efficient cause of
the universe, I must then recommend unto you another Axiom of the Metaphysics,
Semper excipiendum est primum in unoquoque genere, By virtue hereof, infinite
are the prerogatives, which are to be ascribed to the Deity, while all
blemishes and imperfections do vanish and come to nothing; thus the knowledge
which we have of God by a natural light, The first is ever excepted from the
ordinary rank.
it is either by way of eminency, transcending and surpassing the Sphere of all
creatures, for that God is not to be ranked within the compass of their limited
measure; or otherwise by way of negation, in scattering and dispersing those
cloudy mists, which may any way obscure, or cast the least aspersion upon the
Deity; so zealous are the Philosophers of Gods honor, and to preserve the
Truth, Unity, and Majesty of the Godhead.

The Metaphysics do further use Arguments taken from Analogies, as The Sun is
a kind of corpo^eall God.
that one spiritual God should appoint one Vicegerent under himself, as it
were one corporeal God, to govern this material world, viz. One Sun in the
firmament, from* whom all the Stars borrow their light; and from whom the
Corporeal World receives all her perfection; and as God is only known by the
revealing of himself, so this Sun is discerned only by his own light, yet the
eye must not presume to penetrate, or fasten on the Sun, lest wasting the
spirits, it fall into blindness and darkness; yea, when the Sun is eclipsed,
when by the interposition of the Moon, the brightness thereof is obscured; yet
then it is not safe to behold it; nothing is so hurtful to the sight: which
serves by way of comparison or Analog^e, to deter us from prying into the
secrets of the Deity.

From the Metaphysics, I come to the Mathematics, which have the The
Mathematics show the wonders of God.
commendations that of all other Sciences, they are the most demonstrative: I
will therefore borrow some examples from them; and I will only instance in
Astrology; and when it plainly shows so many great, and such strange wonders
in the heavens, such as a man of ordinary capacity cannot easily conceive, it
must needs argue that God himself must be much more admirable, and
incomprehensible: suppose that the Sun which appears unto the eye, to be but of
a little compass and quantity, yet should be so much greater then the whole
Earth, which certainly it must be, or else it could not enlighten so great a
part of the World; secondly, the motion of a Bullet may seem very swift, for
the eye cannot follow it, nor avoid it; The wonders in Astrology.
yet certain it is, that the Stars near the Equinoctial, do move a hundred
times swifter then a Bullet, which must needs be, considering the great circuit
which they make within the compass of a natural day; and yet notwithstanding
they seem unto us, as if they stood still; thirdly, the spacious Earth,
together with all her huge Mountains and Rocks; alas, they carry no proportion
of any sensible quantity in respect of the heavens, when we are at Sea, we see
the whole medietie of the heavens, as if there were no earth at all to hinder
our sight; fourthly, one mother earth affording the same nourishment, a little
durty Pap to the several plants, yet by virtue of the heavens, it should prove
sweetness in one, bitterness in another; and so of all several tastes and
savours fitted and proportioned to all particular natures; this I write to
assure man, both in his sense and in his understanding, that there is such a
difference, and disproportion between the two Worlds, that man might see his
own infirmity, acknowledge his weakness; and himself to be so much inferior, as
to be ignorant in the particulars of the spiritual World; and therefore not
rashly to oppose, but humbly to submit his own Judgment.

But fearing lest these Metaphysicall Mathematical contemplations In Lo^ick
all the pre^icaments predicate the Deity.
might be obscure; I will therefore descend lower, and instance in such
particulars, which may be more perspicuous; and whereof we may take morenotice
as being more sensible, and therefore better known unto us; and seeing the
Logicians have reduced all things into predicaments, I will insist in them, as
they are in order. First for, Substance, which consists of matter Substance.
and form, who fashioned these each to other, that the matter should afford
Organs and Instruments, and a fit habitation for the form, that the form should
add perfection, beauty, and ornament to the matter? surely they could not thus
severally dispose themselves, therefore there must be some efficient cause to
order them accordingly.

From the matter proceeds quantity, which has several dimensions, (...).
longitude, latitude, and profundity; but who squared out these with his Rule
and his Compass, according to measure and proportion, but some omnipotent
power, for nothing will bound and limit it self?

From the form proceeds quality, which admits degrees of comparison, Qualit^.
good, better, best, but needs there must be some infinite power to prescribe
and appoint the degrees.

Thus far how things are constituted in themselves, now in relation to Relation.
others, to see how the heavens are sitted for the Earth; how the E^ements are
proportioned each to other, and agree in their Symbolizing qualities; how the
Male and the Female are fitted to each other; how every thing is fitted with
food, with harbor, with raiment: surely some infinite omnipotent wisdom made
our provision; for if we were left to our selves, we should starve in our own
wants. For Action, if unreasonable Action.
creatures do work according to the Rules of reason, as the dumb creatures do
in every thing naturally, which concerns them, and their condition: Surely this
must proceed from some infinite intellective power, which infuseth such a
knowledge into them, with this limitation, that it should only extend to such
things as are necessary to their beei^g, and no further. For Passion, it is a
wonderful thing to consider what Passion.
Birds and Beasts will do for their own defense; the Hares which are near the
Sea side, do watch their time, that when the Hounds are in pursuit, they may
go close by the Sea side, that the tide coming in, might take away the sent,
they shall observe where the sharpest stones are, that themselves being light
may pass over, while the dogs being heavy, may cut themselves, and cannot
follow the pursuit: if Gunpowder be a late invention of ours, surely the wild
Foul in discovering it, it is a late invention of theirs; there is not a
fencer so cuning as they are in defending themselves. The Serpent will so wind
her body, that she will make it a Buckler for defense of her head, where she
knows the least blow proves deadly; neither are they wanting in Stratagems.
Quando, in respect of time (...).
it is wonderful to consider how the poor Silkworm, and the Mulbery bud come
together. The Swallow, the Cuckoo, and other Summer Birds, if they come not at
their just time; it is an Argument that some Storms and Winter cold are behind.
Where these Birds should hide themselves; how they should continue without
food, and where they should Ubi.
provide food at their coming; for it is certain the Martins bring into their
Nest such worms, as no reasonable man scarce knows where to find the like.
For the building of their Nests, that they should be able on the highest Situ^.
Trees, to lay as sure a foundation, as if they did build upon a Rock, that no
man let him be never so skilful in Architecture, and use the best means and
instruments he has, his Rule, his Square, his Level, his Compass, yet he
shall not be able to make the like Nest. And to conclude, whatsoever does
habitually concern the creatures; you shall find it so grounded in Habitus.
wisdom, and so supported with all several circumstances, that we can do no
less then admire the goodness and power of their Maker; that such The infinite
proofs of a Godhead.
unreasonable creatures in themselves, should notwithstanding order themselves,
according to the rules of best reason. Thus every thing does testify a God;
and therefore you might fill up a book greater then the whole World with
arguments and proofs of the Deity.

Not to confound my self with generals, I will descend to particulars. A
particular instance, for proof of the Deity.:
When we look upon the heavens, and see the Suns continual motion for our
service, when we our selves are not the Authors thereof, nor yet those heavenly
bodies, as wanting understanding, cannot direct their course, and know not the
use of their own motions, doubtless we must conceive some higher agent, some
intellective power, who both giving and knowing the influence and operation of
the heavens; as likewise the use and necessities of this inferior World, did
accordingly dispose and order these Actions, and that is God himself. And
seeing that all things are carried, Certa lege, pulcherrimo ordine, by the Rule
and Square of his providence, seeing all things were Created verbo virtutis
suae, by the word of his mouth, for otherwise a world of ages would not have
sufficed for the framing of this world: doubtless we must conceive, that in God
there is an infinite wisdom, ^joyned with infinite power; and this the best
approved heathen God is iusiuite.
Philosophers did acknowledge nothing can be hid from his wisdom; for there is
nothing which his wisdom has not contrived; nothing can resist his power, for
there is nothing but only the effects of his power.

But here if, I shall further demand what is an infinite? then we begin to
discover our own weakness, Natura abhorret infinitum, we cannot We acknowledge
an Infinite, yet we cannot conceive a^ Infinite.
possibly conceive that any thing should be infinite, and the reason is,
because man's understanding is a kind of comprehension; and to comprehend that
which is infinite without limits and bounds; and therefore is in it self
incomprehensible, this implies a contradiction. And thus by the light of
reason, we are brought to acknowledge God; this God to be infinite, and by the
same light of reason we are taught, that we cannot possibly conceive an
infinite. Now every thing in God being of like extent, that is, infinite;
reason in the knowledge of God, must be taught in hurnility to prostrate her
self, and not with blear eyes to behold the Sunshine; with waxen wings, to draw
near a consuming fire, as it were again p^esumptuously to taste of the Tree of
knowledge.

For your further satisfaction, let us consider other attributes of God, God
must be Infinite.
every one of them has this property, to be infinite; and even natural reason
shall testify so much; for to be infinite, is to be without bounds, or
limitations; and what should bound or limit Gods nature, when as there is
nothing but God, and the Creatures the effects of Gods power?

Thus God has a most absolute freedom, and liberty of will; neither violence
can enforce him, nor any necessity can be imposed upon him, only he is tied
Without imperfection.
to the Laws of his own nature, which makes for his infinite excellency and
perfection, for thereby he is made incapable of any blemish or defect; thus
being infinitely good, or Goodness itself, he cannot commit sin; being Justice
it self, he can do no injury or wrong; being Truth it self, he cannot speak
falsehood, there can be no contradiction in his words; he is a light without
shadow, he neither has, nor can any imperfection befall him.

Since God is the Author of his own being, he must therefore have the God is
of himself
best and most incomparable being, to which there can be no addition made; for
his duration or continuance, both a part ante, and a part post, it is alike
infinite, for it is from all eternity, and to all eternity, for the Eternity.
extent of his being, it is infinite, he is every where, and has an unlimited
Ubiquity, the whole world, and the heavens cannot contain him, Ubiqui y.
and the least*punctilio cannot exclude him: for his Wisdom, he is Omniscient,
Omnis^iency.
he knows all things, past, future, present, what is, or what can possibly be,
without any discourse or reasoning, he sees them all in an instant, they are
all present unto him.

When his wisdom has once laid the ground and platform (give me leave to speak
of God after the manner of men, having the weakness of infirmity of man in my
self, and speaking to men, who cannot otherwise conceive me) then the power of
God puts all in execution, and this is infinite, and therefore Omnipotent, for
he creates all things of nothing, Omnipotency.
a non-ente ad ens, there is an infinite distance, which requires an infinite
power, and what can resist this power, when as there is nothing, but only the
effects of his power? Things being once constituted, then succeeds Gods
infinite providence, which implies his wisdom and power, Providence, Constancy.
together with the constancy of his will, for the preservation of that, which
being founded with such excellent wisdom and power, cannot possibly be
permitted to perish. And as there is such a constancy in his actions, so is
there an Immutability in his nature, for having the best condition,
Immutability.
if he should any way alter or change, it should be for the worse, and so to
his detriment and loss, which his infinite wisdom and power could not permit:
and upon all several occasions God is most abundantly provided, for having
given unto men a liberty and freedom of will, making man according to his own
image, and like unto himself, hereby man is enabled and made capable either to
conform himself to Gods law, or to transgress: and answerable thereunto, there
is in God an infinite Justice, Gods Justice.
to punish the offense of infinite malignity, being committed against an
infinite Majesty; or otherwise there is in God an infinite Mercy, to Mercy.
accept and reward the poor weak endeavors of man, which are of no value in
themselves: for alas, what can man do to deserve Gods favor? when as he is
nothing in himself, surely his works must needs be less then nothing, for if
the substance or body be wanting, there cannot be so much as a shadow: Gods
infinite mercy, and Christ's passion, as the means must make them acceptable,
and crown them with an infinite bliss, both in respect of the object, which is
God himself, as likewise in respect of continuance, which is for Eternity.

Neither can God make any thing which shall be wholly independent As every
thing was made, so it must depend upon God.
from himself, for this were to divest himself of his own power, and to resign
it to the Creatures, and so to deprive himself, which God cannot do: for as man
was created of nothing, so without a constant and continual support, he would
in every moment fall unto nothing. As God is the first and sole Cause, so he is
the continual and sole preserver of all; and though making man according to his
own image, he has given him a liberty of will, yet still God has reserved to
himself, not only the foresight and prescience, but when occasion serves, he
has a curb to bridle and order this liberty of will, as he shall see cause,
and Gods prescience imposes no necessity upon the action, for as the
Omnipotency of God creates all things out of nothing, so the Omnisciency of God
may foresee and foreknow all things out of nothing, Gods power and Gods
knowledge are of like extent and efficacy, and when no cause is determinated
and ordered, yet God who sees all things which are not, How causes may be
free, yet the effects necessary.
as if they were, so he may foresee things which shall be, though the causes be
free, and not determinated, for he sees things not only in their causes, but
in the infinite light of his own Intellectuals; so that in respect of the
causes (whereof alone we are to judge) the effects may be free and voluntary,
though in respect of Gods prescience (whereof we are not to judge) they may be
necessary, and infallibly succeed. This I will illustrate by an example; He
that stands on a high Mountain, and on either side sees passengers riding in
the same rode-way, some forward, some backward, some toward each other, the
passengers ride of themselves, and it lies in their power to go or not to go,
but he that stands on the hill may know where and when they shall meet, and yet
notwithstanding his foreknowledge, they meet very casually and voluntary: and
thus may Gods prescience stand with the freedom and liberty of man's actions.

Hitherto I have made a high flight, and now me thinks I am like a Man's
weakness.
man that is weary in holding up his head to look upon the Sun, and the
heavens, and finding that his spirits are a little wasted with too much light,
he retires home, and coming to his inner rooms, he finds them so dark, that he
can see nothing, yet rests himself there for a time to recover his strength,
whereby he might be the better enabled again to discern the Sun and the
heavens: So give me leave, in stead of making further search into the
Attributes of God, wherein I find my eyes dazzled, now to turn mine eyes
inward, and to make a diligent search, what knowledge man has of his own, in
such things as merely concern himself, and how far his natural knowledge may
transport him in the knowledge of God, and Religion, and how far we may presume
upon our natural light, to discern a supernatural object, and things of another
world, and of a higher condition.

Our own reason informs us, that there is nothing in man that has not Every
thing in man is bounded.
bounds of Circumscription: Thus in our stature, Datur maximum and minimum, we
cannot add to our own growth; thus in our senses, Excellens sensibile
^orrumpit sensum, we cannot fasten our eyes on the Sun; thus in the strength of
our limbs, we find in our selves a definite and determinate power, that we
cannot work beyond our ability; so is there a measure and stint of knowledge,
that we cannot conceive beyond our limited capacity.

This will better appear, if we consider the several degrees of understanding
The difference of men n their intellectuals.
in man himself, how one man does far exceed another in wit, capacity and
apprehension. Thus we find that all wits are not fit for all studies, and all
Sciences; he must have the light of great natural Intellectuals, who is fit to
wade through the midnight of the Metaphysics, or to spy out the curious
subtilties of School-learning; he must have engines in his brain who is fit for
Mathematical studies, or Architecture; he must have a quick and nimble fancy,
who aims to excel in Poetry or Rhetoric; he must have an exact memory, to
compute the Concordancy of Times, to be a perfect Historian: So then it
pleases God so to order the states of men, and the several gifts of nature,
that some should become Teachers, others prove Scholars, and Proficients, as
God shall give a blessing, and prosper their endeavors: And while they are
learning, necessary it is that they should believe their Teachers. And is there
such a difference of men between themselves, comparing one with another? then
much more is there a far greater difference between God and man. Suppose I
should compare God with man in other Attributes, and No comparison between God
and man.
see the infinite difference, what is the strength of man but weakness, in
respect of Gods Omnipotency? what is the length of man's age, but less then a
minute, in respect of Gods eternity? what is the wealth of man, but beggary, in
respect of Gods treasures? Then what is the wit and understanding of man, but
mere foolishness, in respect of Gods wisdom?

But that we may lay a deeper foundation, lest natural reason might Man's
natural Reason is bounded within the natural world.
presume too far, she must first be taught to humble her self; I would then
first ask, what is the object of natural reason? surely I will extend the
object as far as possibly I can, I will give her the uttermost due, and
therefore I do acknowledge the object of natural reason to be the natural
world; for upon the same grounds and principles whereof the world does subsist,
Reason does likewise guide her self by way of direction: but man sees the
bounds of the natural world, the material heavens, which incompass and hedge in
the world, as a Circumference to the Center or Circle: Then surely he must see
the bounds of his natural Reason, beyond which he cannot extend his natural
knowledge, which is very fitly set forth by the form and fashion of man's head
or scull, which is somewhat circular, and not unlike the Globe of the world,
all his brains are within the scull, and what is without, is no part of man: So
what is within the cavity of the Globe of the world, may be partly involved and
laid up in man's brain, as it were written in Characters; but what is without
the convexity of this Globe, it cannot enter into man's brain.

Thus every faculty has his object, and this must be adaequatum every The
object and faculty must be proportionable.
way answerable and proportionable to the faculty, and what exceeds this
object, comes not within the sphere of that faculty, as the eye cannot hear,
the ear cannot smell, the hand cannot taste; for every faculty has as her own
proper organs and instruments, so her own proper bounds.

And lest Reason should be presumptuous, and being only natural, should rashly
adventure to leap into the supernatural world, or out of infidelity should
utterly deny, what is above her reach and apprehension; I must lay open her
weakness, and see how far she is wounded even in her own naturals, that she may
be well ashamed of her self, if being so ignorant at home, and in things which
concern her, yet she must presume to comprehend mysteries of another world,
which so far exceed her reach and apprehension.

See then our defects in natural knowledge, not only in the motion Our natural
ignorance in natural things.
of the heavens, the insensible Influences, the miraculous Meteors, but come we
to the meanest Creatures, and to speak of them in general: The Philosophers
will tell you, that the forms of things are utterly unknown; whence the
Logicians conclude, That we cannot assign the proper differences, and
consequently both of them fail in their definitions, and content themselves
only with bare descriptions, and outward properties: And therein we are so far
from attaining any perfection, that every day new qualities are discovered. And
thus far I tax the greatest Philosophers in the world; Hippocrates who knew as
much as any man did living in his time, begins his book with excusing his
ignorance, Ars longa est, and vita brevis. Alas, what shall we say of the
ordinary sort of men, when great Clerks after much study, night-watchings, and
labors, think it a great perfection, if they can but discern their own
ignorance. I remember when I was a young Scholar in Cambridge, sometimes for
our own health and recreation, taking the fresh air in the fields, we would
look for Herbs and Simples, but for the virtues and operations of them, alas,
alas, ou^ Her alists were wonderfully defective: At the same time, to try
conclusions, we would find out a Birds nest, and when the Hen had laid her
full number of eggs, and began to sit, every third day we would open an egg,
to see the manner and degrees of Conception; it was the white of the egg which
made the skin, the bones, the feathers, the beak, while the yolk was reserved
for the more inward and vital parts; and truly, we could but admire Gods
workmanship and wonders in the course of nature, and thence we did conclude,
that if there were such ignorance in natural things, it could not seem strange
if we proved stark blind in supernaturals.

Thus far we have taught the natural man his ignorance in natural The same
method in naturals as in supernaturals.
things, and until he can acquit himself therein, it were a strange presumption
to trust to his own skill in supernaturals. Now God observes the same method
and rule for our learning and instruction, both in things natural and
supernatural; and that is, that first we must begin with belief: thus it is
necessary that the scholar should first believe his Schoolmaster, and he that
is simplest and weakest in apprehension, out of a trust reposed in others, does
naturally submit his own opinion to the better judgment of others. Thus the
poor silly child, who understands not the reason of his fathers counsel, yet
he believes him, and follows his counsel. Thus the poor Country Husbandman or
Plowman, though he knows not the reasons of State, nor the secret Counsels of
his governors, yet he believes them, and yields his obedience accordingly: and
if this course be taken in temporal things, why not much more in spiritual?
wherein first God requires faith, which by degrees is more and more enlightened,
until at length it comes to the beatifical vision, and then no longer faith of
things unseen, but an actual vision, and a real possession.

And herein see the goodness of God, that man finding the miseries of Man's
natural knowledge discerns a supernatural world.
this world, should at length by experience dislike his own estate, and
loathing the fond carnal pleasures, should be ambitious to attain a better
condition, and to this end God has added to his natural reason, some spark or
thirst of knowledge, more then natural: for seeing the heavens, which are the
bounds of nature, he conceives that above these heavens there must needs be
some more excellent and supernatural world, Regio superior incognita, a place
not yet discovered, wherein notwithstanding he desires to make a plantation,
for he concludes in Reason, and by the rule of Architecture, that the Roof is
the fairest and beautifullest thing in building, as being most in sight, the
pavement and groundsel is the meanest and basest, as being to be trodden on,
therefore the material heavens which are the roof of this inferior world, they
are the fairest thing in nature, beset and imbroydered with most rich and
costly Jewels, the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars, yet are these heavens nothing
but the pavement and groundsel of the superior world, where the inhabitants do
tread and trample them under their feet, and over our heads, and therefore are
the meanest things in that superior world. And as in dignity and worth, so
likewise in quantity, for the whole earth is in effect an indivisible point,
and carries no sensible quantity in respect of the heavens, A supernatural
light must fully discover a supernatural world.
which plainly appears by many Astronomical demonstrations: Then what
inconvenience is it, that there should be such a disproportion in the knowledge
of these two worlds? for the supernatural world must needs have a supernatural
light, for nothing can be known or acted without means, and the means must be
of like condition and nature with the end; as here below we see the Sun and the
Stars only by their own light, so is it much more necessary that we should
know nothing above the heavens, but by a revealed light, answerable and
agreeable, and of the same nature and condition with that superior world. Thus
natural Reason, by the force and strength of natural Reason, is brought to
acknowledge the use and necessity of grace to sanctisie and inlighten our
natural blindness and ignorance. And if the difference be such for the beauty
and quantity between the two worlds, natural and supernatural, then surely
there must be as great a disproportion in the knowledge of these two several
worlds: for to understand the supernatural world, needs there must be some
supernatural light, for nothing can be known without means, and the means must
ever be of like condition and nature with the end; as here below we see the Sun
and the Stars, not by Candlelight or Torch light, but by their own light; and
the natural eye is not capable of that supernatural light, neither yet can
reason, for want of means to discourse, come to any supernatural knowledge; yet
God, for the satisfaction of reason, has ingraffed in man wonder,
astonishment, admiration, whereby man may see his own blindness, and not oppose
the truth of things, which are above his reach and apprehension. Man (...)
naturally an ambition above n^e.


Thus for the knowledge and attaining of the supernatural world, there must be
a supernatural light, and in man there are some aspiring thoughts, some
ambitious desires, that naturally he aims at things higher then nature, wherein
appears the great mercy of God, that as the tasting of the T^ee of Knowledge,
was the first sin which proceeded from curiosity; so God in his mercy is
pleased to sanctisie man's curiosity, that being kept within due bounds and
limits, it proves to be the first step or degree to bring man unto God; for now
he is curious to know things of a better world, and takes this world but for a
transitory passage, tending and ending in death and destruction.

Thus far we have brought the natural man to believe, that seeing the
Admi^ation is a kind: of natural faith.
bounds of the natural world, he is apt to confess, that above the heavens
there is a supernatural world, for knowledge whereof there must be a
supernatural light; for procuring whereof, he finds naturally in himself
wonder, astonishment, and admiration, and needs there must be some proper
object answerable thereunto. And here God, like an excellent workman or
planter, does ingraff and inoculate a Sciens, giving man grace and faith to
believe, and together revealing a knowledge, which could not be collected by
any natural inquisition; and then God for his greater honor that it might
appear he had made an absolute conquest of man, according to the military
fashion, he sets up his Standard in the principal part of man, even in the
Understanding of man, that as in his Law he requires The understanding must
obey in believing, as the will in performing.
obedience contrary to the natural lusts of flesh and blood, and man's own
violent passions: So he requires submission of his understanding, to believe
what is above the reach and comprehension of reason; and therein together he
gives him this assurance, that as for the instant he gives him an earnest or
taste of things, so in due time, he shall impart the full and real possession.
And thus whereas I did compare the Circumference of the heavens to bounds and
limits, to hedge in this natural world, (...) thinks I have opened a gap, to
let down the mysteries of the superior world: And whereas I compared man's Head
or Skull to the Globe of the world, me thinks I have opened the futures or
seams, to let in the gracious influence of Gods spirit, to sanctify and
illuminate man's natural reason, to cleanse and defecate all his carnal
corruptions.

And now give me leave to return to my former subject, wherein I did A
repe^ition what has been proved.
use one argument to prove the Deity, and that was the whole Universe: and the
argument is yet of a larger extent, then the whole Universe, for that things
seen and unseen, do point out the Deity, things past, present, future, all join
in the same testimony. I did likewise prove, that this God can be but one,
because he is infinite, and there cannot be two Infinites, for then they would
bound and limit each other, and then neither of them should be infinite. I
showed likewise, that what is Infinite must be incomprehensible, because having
no limits or bounds, it is therefore incomprehensible as in it self, so to man's
knowledge. I did then make a digression, to view man's natural knowledge, how
mean it was in natural things, and wholly defective in supernaturals, and what
degrees were observed in his preparation to grace, and by a dislike of his
present state, what hopes and ambition he had to aspire to a better condition.
I did likewise insist in many Attributes of God, and I proved that they were
all incomprehensible. Now seeing those Attr^butes are somewhat better known
unto us, then the Persons in the Deity, I will therefore use those Attributes
as arguments and proofs to introduce the blessed Trinity.

I have formerly proved, that Reason does acknowledge in God many It is a
greater wonder that Accidences should become Substances in God, then that one
Substance should become Persons.
Attributes, as Providence, Power, Justice, Mercy, etc. for these do all
demonstratively appear in their several effects, and from these Attributes I
will draw some arguments to prove the Persons in the Deity. Though there are
Attributes which to us may seem Accidences, for so they are in man, as Power,
Justice, Mercy etc. yet Reason assures us, that there is no Accident in God,
there is nothing in God, but God; to admit a composition in God, were to
detract from his Integrity, and from his Eternity, for every thing must first
subsist in it self, before it can come to composition. Thus then the Attributes
of God are Substances, and what is more, they are God himself: and thus God is
not so properly Good and Just, as Goodness, and Justice it self; Goodness in
abstract, for God is the Fountain of his own being, and therefore must have
the best being, and cannot admit Accidences, which are inferior to Substances:
So that what is in God, must be a Substance; yet Reason cannot possibly
conceive, how that which is a quality in man, should be a Substance in God, and
I pray is there so great a difficulty in acknowledging persons in the Deity?
seems it not a far greater inconveniency, that Accidences contrary to their own
nature should be made Substances, then that a Substance agreeable to nature
should become Persons? In the first there is an opposition and difference of
nature, in the second there is only a difference of number. Now as is the
opposition and difference less, so is the inconvenience less, in being, and in
our understanding, give me leave to speak according to the weakness and
capacity of man.

Secondly, how the Attributes do agree in the Godhead, though many It is a
greater wonder that all Gods Attributes should be but one Attribute, then that
one Substance should be three Persons.
and several Attributes, which I have already proved, yet being all Infinite,
and there being but one Infinite, (for if we should admit two Infinites, they
would bound and limit each other, and so neither of them should be Infinite)
therefore all these several Attributes of God, can be and are indeed but one
and the same infinite Attribute. Thus the Wisdom of God is his Power, the Power
of God is his Eternity, the Eternity of God is his Ubiquity. These and all
other his Attributes, are indeed but one and the same Attribute, Deus est actus
purus, he consists of no Heterogeneal parts: This Reason acknowledges, and the
same Reason acknowledges this to be Incomprehensible; and I pray is there any
greater difficulty in believing the Three Persons in one Deity, and the Deity
to be equally competent to the Three Persons?

Thirdly, there are some Attributes in God, which seem to detract from That
Gods Justice should be his Me^cy, is as strange as the Godhead should be three
Persons.
each other, as the Justice and Mercy of God, for Justice implies rigor and
severity, Mercy abates the rigor of Justice, and adds compassion and pity: so
they seem to stand in opposition to each other, and not to be reconciled
without a contradiction, and surely the truth of Gods nature cannot admit a
contradiction; yet notwithstanding we must say and believe, there is in God an
infinite Justice, and an infinite Mercy, yea more, that they are but one and
the same faculty, for his Mercy is his Justice, and his Justice is his Mercy;
and I pray is there any greater d^fficulty in believing the Three Persons in
one Deity, between whom there is no seeming Contrariety (as there is between
Justice and Mercy) then to believe so many Attributes, and those to have
several objects, and to appear in their various and several forms, yet all
these Attributes to be but one and the same, this we must yield by necessary
demonstrations in Philosophy; and if those very Attributes of God, whereof the
light Gods Attributes as wonderful as the Persons.
of Reason informs us, we cannot apprehend: Can it seem strange if in those
mysteries which we only receive by revelation, such as are of like condition
with the Attributes of the Deity, and do equally, or rather more inwardly,
touch the nature and essence of the Deity, we be found alike purblinde, and
cannot discern them. In a word, I do here challenge the whole world, all the
Philosophers, and all the Socinians, let any man undertake to discover any one
Attribute of God, and I will with as great ease and facility discover the
Trinity.

Give me leave sometimes to recall my self, lest I might lose my self in A
brief of what has been proved.
these dark mists of Divine Mysteries: I have proved a God, and but one God,
and that this one God is every way Infinite, and therefore Incomprehensible: I
have proved all the several Attributes of God, as Wisdom, Power, etc. that they
are all Substances, which notwithstanding in the Creatures are but Accidences:
I have proved that all the several Attributes they are but one and the same,
for there cannot be several Infinites, for then they would bound and limit each
other: I have proved that some Attributes, according to man's apprehension, seem
to oppose each other, as Mercy detracts from Justice, yet that they are but one
and the same Attribute in God: And now I conclude, That all these being duly
considered, they do as far exceed man's natural Reason, as does the great and
ineffable Mystery of the most holy, blessed, and undivided Trinity.

I never name Gods Mercy, but my heart danceth for joy, and then I A digression
upon the Mercy of God.
begin to lay hold on it, and to fasten on it, and I cannot so cursorily pass
over it. I would here by way of objection ask, How can all the Attributes of
God be infinite, when as Scripture seems to enlarge Gods Mercy (...) for every
thing must do, and consequently has knowledge, according to his own nature,
whether spiritual, or corporeal: and certainly the inhabitants of one World,
cannot conceive the state and condition of another World, the Angels would be
as ignorant of this corporeal World, as we are of their spiritual, unless it
be revealed alike to both. Suppose then that I should elevate my reason above
the course of this our present nature; and that I had conference with an Angel
upon my relation, certainly the Angel not having any other knowledge of the
inferior World infused from God, but judging of things according to his own
spiritual A conference with an Angel.
condition, he would say it were more impossible, that one individuum or Person
should subsist of different natures, matter and form, then that one nature
should subsist of different Persons. The Angel would think it a far greater
inconvenience, that one nature not able to preserve it self, yet should be able
to communicate her nature to another: that is, to be generative in her own kind
(for so the Angels are not) as that one eternal nature should be alike, and
equally communicated to three Persons; or if I should inform the Angels, that
one grain of Corn, when it is dissolved, The Angels wonder at natural things.
and seems to be rotted in the Earth, yet then it should send down a Root, send
up a Blade, and so come with an increase; and happily bring twenty grains for
one, this would seem more strange to an Angel, then that one infinite nature
should be alike, and equally imparted to three Persons. This I write only by
way of supposition, for I doubt not, but the Angels by their spiritual
condition, and by their daily assistance, and Beatificall Vision, have a far
greater knowledge revealed unto them* both of the state of the natural world,
as likewise of the most blessed Trinity, then we have, being only in Statu
viae, having now but an earnest of what we shall hereafter receive in greater
measure.

From conferring with an Angel (which many others have done) I A conference
with an infant in the womb.
will now descend to a conference, which may seem much stranger then that of
the Angel; for it is with an infant in the womb, who has a reasonable Soul,
and wants only ^it Organs, and a right disposition for the practice and
exercise thereof, as Saint John Baptist did spring in the womb upon the
approach of our Savior, wherein he did express both reason and Religion; yet
this is not ordinary; but suppose an infant had the right use of understanding,
I would tell him, that he should no longer lie crouching, and sleeping in the
womb; but he should come abroad, and prove a day-labourer, and get his living
in the sweat of his brows; that there should be no further use of the Navill,
but his mouth should be his taster, and his Teeth should be grinders, that he
should be no longer silent, but should go to School, and learn a language,
these things would seem as strange, and as incredible to the infant, (for want
of experience and due information) as now they seem frequent, usual and
ordinary to us; for every thing has knowledge according to his present
condition; and therefore no marvel, if the natural man cannot understand the
things of the Spirit of God.

Thus it plainly appears by the Angels, by the Infant, that there is a The
wonders in nature.
great difficulty in conceiving things of an other nature, but to instance in
our own nature. Suppose I should ask of the greatest Doctors, and Philosophers
the reason and cause, why the Adamant should draw up Iron, and turn it self to
the North; or how should the Moon, which is not able to turn a little stick,
yet should be able to turn the whole Ocean; o^ take the late invention, The
unguentum Armarium, by ano^nting the weapon to cure the wound, who can imagine
the cause thereof? Thus how many things are we bound to believe, whereof we
cannot understand the manner and means? And therefore if in very natural
things it is very necessary* there should be a faith and belief, some reposing
trust in others, in regard that all are not of a like apprehension, much mo^e
in things, which are not within the compass of this natural world, and
therefore fall not within the compass of man's natural reason. But there is as
great a distance between them, as is between Heaven and Earth.

And all Creatures, even Angels themselves in respect of God, there The
creatures are nothing in comparison with God.
is as great a difference between them in knowledge as is in being; or if you
will have me to express it further, there is as much difference between them,
as is between finite and infinite, between the most excellent being, and no
being; between something and nothing; for so all creatures are both in
themselves, for what they have of themselves, and in comparison with God.

Here then at length, I come to the greatest difficulty, Why should Gods
understanding and will produce Persons.
there not be the like operations upon the Godhead from his other attributes,
as there is from the understanding, and from the will? for the understanding
begets verbum a word; and from both proceeds Amor, which is the action of the
Will; and here are three distinct Persons, which cannot be said of the rest of
Gods attributes. Surely the answer is very plain* because the understanding,
and the will of God, they look ad intra, they reflect upon the Deity it self;
for thus God is the object of his own understanding, he understanding himself,
does thereby enjoy most infinite happiness; he is likewise the object of his
own will, or his love, for knowing himself to be infinitely good, he must
therefore love himself infinitely, and is therefore necessarily, the final end
of all. So that all are referred unto God; but for the other attributes of God,
they look [ ad extra] upon the creatures; and therefore it is only proper to
the understanding, and the will of God that only from them there should be a
generation of the Son, and a procession of the Spirit; and so a difference of
Persons.

Some do here object against some terms, which as they say, are not to The
authors private op^nion.
be found in Scripture, but are only imposed by the Church; and that is the
word Trinity; and the word Persons; and that in a mystery of this infinite
high nature, there should be no addition of man's wit and invention, but we
should tie our selves most strictly to the terms of Scripture, seeing this
mystery so infinitely exceeds man's understanding. To whom I return this answer.
Do ye think that what the Church shall determine in this and other mysteries,
that it proceeds from the wit and invention of man? do you ascribe no more to
the cloven tongues, that fell upon the The determinations or traditions of the
Church, are more then human.
Apostles, whereby they were replenished with Gods Spirit? and which Spirit
they did confer upon others, by imposition of hands, by election, or
succession; and do you style all this, by the wit and invention of man? when I
consider the determinations of the Church, their form of divine Service, their
Canons, their Discipline, their religious Orders; God knows, I do verily
believe, that I do see more in them, then the wit and invention of man; and I
think them to be the immediate dictates, and directions of Gods Spirit.

But call them what you will, for these words of Persons and Trinity, The
Church in effect, does translate.
truly I conceive them to be nothing, but the translation of Scripture; and I
hope you will think translations very necessary; for the Evangelists, and the
Apostles use the translations of the Septuagints, in their quotations of the
old Testament; if then Christ shall prescribe the form of our Baptism to be, in
the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost; and that we know
there are no Accidences in God, but all are Substances [ and distinct
Substances] surely I know not by what other term I should call Substances, and
distinct Substances, but by the name of Persons; and if these three Persons be
one God, and so the Scripture styles them, The word was with God, and God was
the word; surely I know not with what other words to express it, but by the
name of Trinity or triunity. So likewise those words of Schoolmen, Deus
intelligendo seipsum genuit verbum, are not these words taken out of Scripture,
hodie genui te, and thence they infer, verbum in intellectu? Thus without the
determinations of the Church, and unless due respect and reverence be given to
the Church, no Religion can subsist, but will instantly fall to confusion.

Thus as our understanding begets a word; and there is a mutual love, The
personality in the Godhead.
and correspondency between this understanding and this word, so if God be said
to beget a Son, or a Word, in a spiritual manner in his understanding, and
that from both proceeds the holy Ghost, the Church must then necessarily
conclude, that they are several and distinct Persons, not that we should
conceive them to be like the Persons of men, with circumscription of time and
of place, in various and different forms; but to be divine Persons, all alike
partaking of one infinite nature; and what God has revealed, what the Church
has explicated, that we believe; desiring the same God, by the inlightning of
his Spirit, to engender faith in our hearts, to strengthen and increase it; and
what God has reserved only for his own knowledge, that not curiously to pry
into, but content our selves with such a measure and proportion of knowledge,
as he has been pleased to impart: remembering that the first Sin which gave
occasion to all the mischieves and miseries which have befallen us, it was the
tasting of the Tree of knowledge, whereby in stead of that great light, which
we aimed at, whereby we should have knowledge like God, indeed we had our eyes
opened, but it was to see and feel our own nakedness, to our own confusion.

Yet to give some little information, I will only make this instance, If I How
the Persons are d^stinct.
should take out of a River several Cups full of water; I would ask what
difference there were in these waters? Surely none would appear in the nature,
but as they are distinct in several Cups or Vessels, which give them several
forms, and several dimensions: and thus it is in all homogeneall bodies;
suppose I should insist in spiritual qualities, as in Light, certainly the
difference would be less; what then if I should insist in spiri's themselves?
which are not capable of dimensions, yet still in respect of the finitness of
their nature, there would be some difference: but if I should ascend to an
infinite nature, then there would be no difference in respect of the nature* ye^
a difference there would be in respect of their different manner of subsisting,
as by generation, procession, etc. Yet here we must take heed of curiosity, and
know the weakness of man's understanding, that we cannot speak of God, but after
the manner of men: and it is most probable, that God should commit his secrets
to the care and custody of his Church, which may put them into such form and
fashion of speech, as may best beseem them, rather then that particular
spirits, who are so apt to be misled with errors, even in things of least
moment, should be left to their own inventions and expressions in the highest
mysteries.

But how should the whole Deity be in every Person? is it not true in all The
Godhead being spiritual and infinite, is imparted without loss.
Homogeneall bodies? Suppose the elements that where they are, they are
totally, they carry their whole nature about them: but this truth more
especially appears in spirits; for there is nothing so common and trivial in
Schools, as this known principle, Anima ubi est tota est tota in toto and tota
in qualibet part totius. But if this Deity be wholly imparted, yet then how
should it still remain whole and entire? is it not proper to all spiritual
qualities, as Light, Knowledge, and the like, that they should be communicated,
without any loss, or diminution of themselves? Here then at length consists the
whole difficulty, that the nature being imparted, there should be no difference
in number, reason seeing the difficulty, sees likewise the reason of the
difficulty, for her own further satisfaction; for this in the creatures
proceeds from the bounded, finite, and limited nature of the creatures, which
must be circumscribed both with time, and with place, and so make a difference
in the number; but if you will suppose this nature to be infinite, as is the
Deity, then would it admit no difference, as not in nature, so not in number.

What I have hitherto written, has been according to the opinion of Proofs of
the Trinity in nature.
our best, and most ^earned Divines, together with the acknowledgement of the
whole Catholic Church, to which I do believe a man may very safely subscribe;
for whatsoever is there related, as it is grounded in Scripture, so it is
strengthened, and fortified with the Bulwark; of natural Reason and Philosophy;
and against which, the most wicked Socinian shall never be able to oppose.
Hereunto, as an addition give me leave to relate my own private opinion, which
I hope may be without offense, either to God or man, for that it proceeds not
out of any vain presumption; neither does it any way derogate from the truth:
but whether it arises from a strong apprehension, and from a mind, that is
totally possessed with the love of truth, and admiration of this great and
ineffable mystery, that I leave to better judgments.

The first is, that I do believe, and am confident, that this mystery of The
Authors private opinion.
the most blessed Trinity does together, and as well as all the rest of Gods
attributes, appear, and is plainly made manifest in the works of nature; and in
the framing of this created, visible, corporeal world. My reasons, and
arguments briefly are these. First, see in the framing of the creatures, what
footsteps there are of the Trinity; which may in some measure, point out a
Triun-efficient cause: take nature in her first ground and foundation, are
there not three distinct principles, the Matter, the Form, the sympathy, and
agreement between both? see how these principles are knit and united together;
the Matter, tamquam matrix and commune seminarium; the Form, edu^itur ex
materia; the sympathy, and agreement, indifferently arising from both. Or if
you take the Elixir of bodies, have not the Chemists found out that all bodies
consist of Sal, Sulphur, Mercury? Thus far it is in the constitution of things,
take then the propagation of the kind; do not the Male and Female agreeing in
nature, but differing in sex, number, and person, bring forth an issue?

I will leave curious subtilties in Philosophy, and descend to the gross,
Footsteps' of the Trinity.
and terrestrial substances; wherein you shall likewise observe some obscure
shadow of a Trinity; Do not all bodies consist of three dimensions, Longitude,
Latitude, and Profundity? and these necessarily, and inseparably knit and
united together? do not all qualities admit of three degrees of Comparison? is
not the most perfect number the number of Three? which I think was the
occasion, that Aristotle could say, In numero ternario perfecto colitur Deus. A
strange speech for a Heathen man! whether he spoke it casually, or blindely of
himself, or whether by an elevated understanding, he was carried in an ecstasy
or trance; or rather, as I suppose guided by a divine providence, being the
King of Philosophers, among the Heathen; like Caiaphas at the Death and Passion
of Christ, God put into his mouth words, which he himself understood not, as it
were to give a true testimony to succeeding ages, for the conversion of the
Heathen.

No perfection ought to be denied to the Deity, suppose that all things Reasons
in nature to prove the Trinity.
were good in their own kind, in the root and foundation of nature, according
to Gods own approbation, Et vidit deus and erant omnia valde bona, yet are
there several and different perfections: as first, in respect of quantity,
there is one perfection of an unity, an other of a number; let the number
appear in the Persons, the unity in the Godhead: so secondly, in qualities they
are good in themselves, good in diffusion, Bonum est maxim diffusivum sui
ipsius, what is finitely good, does finitely communicate it self, therefore
that which is infinitely good, must infinitely communicate it self, within it
self, to the Persons in the Deity. Thirdly, in relations there is a paternal,
there is a filial relation, both perfections must appear in the Deity. Fourthly
in Actions it is the highest perfection of the Creature, Generare sibi simile,
and therefore not to be denied to the Deity; yet being impossible to produce
many several infinite natures; therefore different Persons do appear in one
and the same infinite nature; for it is as proper for God to be perfect, as it
is to the Creatures to be imperfect; let all perfection be elevated to the
Deity, while the imperfection like dross falls upon the Creatures: man himself
though fruitful in his own kind, yet corruptible in his own kind; the Angels
though beautiful and incorruptible, yet fruitless, and barren like Rachel; but
with God in respect of himself there is a generation, without any corruption or
diminution; as in respect of his works, there is a creation without any change
in his nature. Fifthly, God made man according to his own Image, and likeness,
and then God spoke of Adam, Non est bonum hominem esse solum, it is not good
for man to be alone, let us make him a helper like unto himself. If then man be
like unto God, why may not he reflect upon God? and say unto God, Non est bonum
Deum esse solum, it is not good for God to be alone: we will therefore in all
humility prostrate our selves; and with boldness and confidence adore three
Persons in one Deity; for the greatest comfort which a man has in this world,
it is in a sweet society, therefore God enjoying infinite happiness, he must
have Consortium aequalium, a sweet society; there must be several persons in
one Deity.

I come now to my second position, which God knows as it proceeds Gods
prerogative may be examined.
from no ill intention, so I hope through his Mercy, I may deliver my poor
opinion without offense: I confess that Supreme Magistrates are very tender of
their prerogative, as without which they cannot support their government; and
therefore they seldom name it, but with this addition and Parenthesis, Quam
argui nolumus, so jealous they are of themselves, and of their own power: but
surely with God it is otherwise, for he is able, as he made the world of
nothing, so with the least word of his mouth, to reduce it again to nothing,
and thereby upon every occasion to vindicate his own Authority.

Here then I will first inform you, That it is necessary that every act which
God does, it should partake of God, and what is contrary to Gods nature, it is
without the compass of Gods power; God can do no injustice, being Justice it
self; God cannot speak an untruth, being Truth it self; or commit any sin,
being Goodness it self. 2dly, God can do nothing to the prejudice or
disparagement of himself, as to make any thing independent from himself, but
it is necessary, as it was made of nothing, so it must be continually supported
from falling to nothing, to which of it self, being left to it self, it would
instantly fall. 3dly, God can do nothing according to the uttermost extent of
his Power; the Reason is, because his Power has no uttermost extent, but is
every way Infinite: So when he has made the most excellent Creature, (in
respect of such as are now in being,) yet still he is able to create a more
excellent: and as in every creature God does imprint a Character of himself,
whereby it speaks the A resemblance of the blessed Trinity must appear in every
creature.
praise of the Maker: so my second position is this, That as there is not any
creature, wherein at this time the footstep and impression of the blessed
Trinity does not appear, as I have already proved; so I doubt whether God can
make any creature, wherein the stamp or mark of the blessed Trinity shall not
be imprinted. My reason is, that God alone is Actus purus and simplicissimus,
nothing but pure form, a light without shadow, or an absolute perfection,
without blemish or spot; but whatsoever is besides God, is was created by God
of nothing, and therefore in respect of this nothing from whence it arose, it
must have in it self quiddam potentiale, something defective and imperfect,
that being made of nothing, it is apt of it self, being left to it self, to
return again to nothing: So then it must consist ex actu and potentia, and
there must be vinculum or ligamen to knit or unite together this Actum and
Potentiam. So here is some resemblance of the blessed Trinity, in effect, those
three first Principles, whereof every thing does subsist, and which are so much
insisted upon in Philosophy. And here you see that the blessed Trinity does
necessarily appear in the works of God, as well as the rest of his Attributes.

More particularly if it be lawful to make comparison between small things and
great, wherein I do the rather presume, because I know my intention to be
harmless and innocent, and I serve a merciful God, who is apt to forgive sins,
especially such as proceed out of ignorance, I would The knowledge and love of
man, what events it works.
take notice how far forth this Mystery of the Trinity is shadowed forth in
the knowledge and affections of man himself. It is the counsel of the wisest
Philosopher, Nosce teipsum, Know thy self; thou may make better use of the
knowledge of thy self, for the direction of thy self, to thine own happiness,
then of any other forain or outward knowledge: so for the love of thy self, it
is imprinted in thy heart, that man should love himself above all others,
Proximus ipse mihi, and all his actions tend, and are directed accordingly:
which may a little, if not point out, yet resemble the operations, which the
knowledge, and love of God do cause in the blessed Deity; and therefore if we
were to prefer some of Gods Attributes above others, natural Reason would say,
that his Understanding and his Will did excel all the rest of his Attributes
(as they the most active and eminent qualities in every spirit) for first, our
Understanding must direct us, and then our Will must execute; so in God they
are the most eminent of all his Attributes, for God himself is the object of
his own Understanding, and his own Will, and so he is not of the rest of his
Attributes, for he is not the object of his own Power, nor of his Justice, nor
of his Mercy, but only of his Understanding, and of his Will, and these being
operative, and producing some fruits (as all the rest of Gods Attributes have
their proper effects) needs they must produce wonders in the Godhead, to the
astonishment and admiration of Reason.

Consider how the strong apprehension and longing of a woman in the The longing
of women.
time of her childe-bearing, makes an impression sometimes in the mother, but
most commonly in the infant, to the astonishment of Philosophy, when the
Physicians with their Dissections and Anatomies, can neither show the means*
nor the manner, but profess their own ignorance.

And as the Understanding works such effects, so in the next place consider the
nature of our humane love, which of all other passions is the strongest, and
does most firmly and inseparably unite, and therefore Two persons become one.
makes two persons, man and wife, in the eye of the Law, to be reputed but as
one person: and this is much more strange, that two persons having two natures,
and differing in Sex, should be but one person* then that one nature should be
in several persons; yet so the wisdom of the Law esteems them, and it were high
presumption in any man, to question their wisdom. Man's understanding and man's
love, have such operations in mankind (and no other faculties in man have the
like.) Thus in the Schools it is said, Intellectus fit quod intelligit, The
understanding does work upon it self; and for our love, Amor unionem, Love has
ever that property and appetite, as to desire an union: how the poor mother
hugs the child in her arms, takes it into her bosom, and with all her might
and power would fain incorporate the child into her self! and if such be the
effects of our understanding and our love, then what may we conceive of the
understanding and love of God?

But contraries do sometimes best appear by contraries, and therefore to The
understanding and love are causes as of union so of distraction.
know the strength and efficacy of the understanding and love in man, consider
them in their defects and abuse, and in the heavy judgments which sometimes
befall them; for all fits of Madness, when men are distracted and out of their
wits, most commonly they arise either from the understanding, when with
night-watchings and studies they distemper themselves, and so with strong
impressions of melancholy, have not the right use of their wits; or otherwise
when with outrageous lusts, in the strength and vehemence of their
love-passions they do impart themselves, and then rest in their rage and their
fury besides themselves.

God grant that I do not offend in making any Comparison to that which is
incomparable, the Mystery of all mysteries, the Secret of all secrets, and is
ineffable, not to be understood by Men or Angels; yet seeing God has in part
revealed it, I thought fit, with all humility and submission, prostrating my
self at the footstool of Gods Throne, to express it, according to the Tenants
of Gods Catholic Church, for the inlightning, strengthening, and confirmation
of our faith.

I will now at length give this admonition to the Socinian, who professes to
believe no more of God, then his own Reason shall teach him; and Reason, we
know, depends upon the information of sense; How (...) the (...) of the (...)
extends.
and he might as well say, that what he has not seen, he will not believe, so
that his infidelity might as well extend it self to the sensible world. Thus he
should not believe all those delicious and beautiful fruits which the Eastern
Country affords, nor should he believe those great Whales and Monsters of the
Sea, whereof he has not been an eyewitness; nor should he believe the former
Ages of the world, nor take any thing upon the relation of others, much less
should he believe a spiritual world, which is of another nature and condition;
nor should he believe the Influences of the heavens, which exceed his Reason,
for they are not sensible; nor should he believe the working of Gods Spirit,
and that his prayers should be of any efficacy or power. And thus he utterly
overthrows all Faith and Religion, and so in effect is a professed Atheist, only
he would cover it with a cloak and pretense of natural Reason, pretending some
great skill and knowledge in Philosophy, which I know to be very little, very
little indeed: and were my age fit for an encounter, I would question their
skill in Philosophy, as here I will give you a little taste thereof.

And first, see and consider the great difference and opposition between The
an^pathy between the Author and the Socinians.
us; The Socinian professes, that he does not believe the Mysteries in
Religion, because he cannot understand them in Reason; and I profess the
contrary, that I do believe the Mysteries in Religion revealed, and much the
rather, because the Socinian cannot understand them in Reason, Nollem ego in
Deum quem tu comprehenderes, That God whom thou art able to comprehend, shall
never be my God; I will not vouchsafe to serve such a God, I scorn to worship
such a God, I renounce such a God, for he is too like thy self to be the true
God. This I am taught in Philosophy, and even by the strength of Reason, that
God is Infinite, and every way Incomprehensible. And this I have learned of the
Heathen, who did erect an Altar ignoto Deo, to the unknown God, or to the
incomprehensible God. Surely there is a greater difference between the true God
and man, then that we should make God of like nature and condition with our
selves, as that we should think our selves to be able to comprehend him.

Before I proclaim war, I have ever thought it a necessary point of Charity,
first to try how far forth the difference may be reconciled, and so to go hand
in hand as far as Honesty and Truth will permit us; and when as once we become
irreconcilable, then to make an utter separation, and every man to stand on
his own guard. That I may then deliver my opinion concerning natural Reason,
how far she is to be admitted in Religion; I do not commend credulity, nor
would I have a man apt to believe, but upon good grounds: Memento diffidere is
the first Rule in Policy, though I confess, as Mysteries are above Reason, and
that I would have Reason to know her distance, and not to incroach too far, yet
would I have Reason to have full satisfaction, for it is the guide which God
has given to man for his direction, not only in Humane and Civil things, but
even a little to prepare and direct him in his way to salvation, and to make
him capable of Religion (whereof the brute beasts are not:) and though Religion
be as far above Reason, as the Heavens are above the Earth, yet is she no way
contrary to Reason, but serves to inlighten, and to sanctify The excellent use
of reason in Religion.
Reason, and to confirm Reason in her own Principles and grounds, as the
Heavens add beauty and perfection to the Earth: for neither Jewels nor
beautiful flowers, can be discerned, or appear glorious, without the light of
the heavens. Thus for all the Moral Law, which is a great part of Religion,
Reason serves as an excellent Gloss, or a Commentary, for the Exposition. Thus
Reason being sanctified, having a tincture of grace, serves to draw excellent
Conclusions, and Theological Precepts, out of the premises of Scripture: but if
we should know no more of God then Reason informs us, surely we should be then
very unreasonable, for we should know nothing of the state of that other world,
since natural Reaon can make no discovery of a supernatural world.

If then we should know no more of God, but only so far forth as may be
gathered by the works of Nature, it would much shorten our knowledge of God*
and a little detract from Gods glory, besides a preposterous course: for
whereas we are to govern and teach the dumb creatures, who are only made for
our use, and therein attain their own ends; now on the contrary, they should be
our only teachers, to direct us to Dumb creatures catechize the Socinians.
our last end and perfection, if all our knowledge of God should be only by
their information, and that we should know no more of God, but only so far
forth as they should instruct us, or catechize us: and seeing that every day we
learn more and more in the creatures (for new qualities and secrets of nature
are daily discovered) it must hence follow, that as yet we have not learnt so
much of God, as the creatures can teach us, they are our very learned
Schoolmasters, and we are ill Proficients, and thus contrary to all good order
and form, our Reason must be subject to their sense, even for the knowledge of
such things, as do infinitely exceed all sense and all reason.

Nor is it possible that God should be so forgetful of man, as to supply him
with all the provisions of this world, for his back and belly, for God is man's
Schoolmaster.
his kitchen, his wardrobe, and yet should neglect his breeding and education,
to teach him at School, and there to instruct him in his necessary ways and
means to attain his last end and salvation. Surely God is more merciful to the
dumb creatures, for they have a natural instinct in themselves, sufficient and
necessary for their preservation, to conduct them to their own last natural
end; and what is wanting in them, God has commanded man to take the care and
charge over them: yea further, God has given them some privileges, as that
they should take the benefit of a rest on the Sabbath, that they should have
some refreshing in their labors, Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox
that treads out the corn, that they should be privileged from slaughter when
they are breeding; and God has given them an ingenuity, to be taught what is
fit for their condition. Thus the horse learns his pace, remembers his way, as
knowing that his last end is to be a Traveller: Thus is there a natural
inclination in every thing, to conduct and direct it self in attaining its own
last natural end.

And surely God will be no less merciful to man in supplying him with such
means as shall be necessary for his last supernatural end: The world was
created for man; the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars, have their continual motion,
for the fruitfulness of the earth, and the preservation of this sublunary
world; and all nature tends to the use, service and ministry of Man is the end
of nature, and therefore cannot end in nature.
man: Man is the end of nature, and therefore man cannot end in nature, or have
a natural end, by the course of this world, and the continual succession, he
knows it can be but a passage, he sees the bounds of this natural world, the
material heavens; and then he concludes, that needs above this natural world,
there must be a supernatural world; thus over and above his natural knowledge,
which consists in a rational discourse, he finds in himself wonder and
admiration, which may serve him for his knowledge of that supernatural world:
Thus he still looks up to heaven, and by his aspiring thoughts, his hopes, and
expectation, he seems to cast up an Anchor to heaven, and wants only wings to
fly up, or a ladder to climb, and that blessed Spirit which came down in the
form of a Dove, supplies him with wings of grace and the Cross of Christ serves
for his ladder, or for Mathematical Jacobs staff, to take ^he height, or to
fathom the depth and breadth of Gods most hidden secrets, while his own reason
does a little direct or prepare him for hi^ Christian faith; for it serves as a
ground or foundation upon which the beautiful building of Grace may be erected,
and therefore there was first a state of Nature, which continued until Moses,
then succeeded the Law, and the Gospel.

I will further add by the actions and carriage of man, it appears, that God
has placed in him some Majesty and magnificence, that he justly claims more
then a natural descent; for if you take the elements, they are moved by their
own natural qualities, and their highest aim and intent, is only to preserve
their natural being; so the dumb creatures (consisting only of elements) they
run the same course, and have no higher ambition, for they have no choice,
freedom, or liberty, in their actions, but are carried How man stands naturally
affecte^ in religion.
according to the strength of their own natural inclinations; only man by a
prerogative of his condition has a freedom of will, and is no way ty^d to the
temper or inclination of Elements, but bids defiance to Nature in her own
den, professing Sanctity and Holiness, renouncing Lusts, Luxury, Pride,
Sloth, and other carnal corruptions, and uncleanness, to which nature wholly
inclines; and being Lord of the Creatures, he will not be ranked with them; he
scorns to die like a Beast, and seems to claim and challenge a more excellent
condition, then to lie in the grave, or to be dissolved into dust; though his
body may for a time pay the wages of sin, yet his Soul which is the better part
of man, neither sees nor feels corruption: and in Gods due time, both body and
soul shall be again reunited together, in a glorious resurrection.

Man having once made choice of his actions, and performed them, he Faith
presupposing, nature.
then reflects upon them, reviews, and begins to examine them; when the check of
his own conscience upon the committing of sin (be it ever so secret) gives him
assurance, that he must be accomptable for his actions, the joy and comfort
that he receives in doing good, makes him confident that he shall not lose his
reward; the rare and admirable operations of the soul, which exceed all
natural perfections, do plainly demonstrate, that they cannot proceed from
nature, for then they should not ascend higher then nature; as the water will
not rise higher then the Springhead: and finding these effects in ourselves, we
are confident that God who ordained man to a supernatural end, the same God,
in his own goodness and providence, will not fail to supply man with
supernatural means, to conduct him to that supernatural end; for the means
must ever be answerable, and of like condition with the end; otherwise they
will not serve to conduct him. As the Sun is discerned by his own light; so God
must only be known by the revelation of himself.

Thus in nature, there may be some preparatives to a true Christian A
supernatural knowledge must conduct us to a supe^naturall end*
faith, or we may be some way predisposed, and thereby made more capable to
receive the infusion of grace; and this I have proved both by our natural
knowledge, and by our moral actions: yet this will not suffice; but it is
necessary that God himself should reveal himself, and add his (...) by the
act and exercise of the understanding, from the will proceeds Amor, as the
heart is the fountain of all affection; and thus is there some resemblance of
the blessed Trinity, in the manner and form of man's apprehension.

Come we then to look into Gods Attributes, which some distinguish Gods
perfection, consists not in variety, as the Creatures does.
in this manner, that most of the Attributes are operative, some are not
operative, yet make for the perfection of the Deity, but there are none
passive: such as they conceive are not operative, are the eternity of God, in
respect of his continuance, the ubiquity of God in respect of extention, the
immutabillity of God in respect of duration, the constancy of his will, as ever
making choice of the best, and so makes for the certainty of his resolution,
etc. And these men are thus misled, because they conceive the greatest
perfection to consist in variety; and because amongst the creatures, such
accidences as proceed from the Matter, suppose all quantities, they are not
operative; but truly I am otherwise persuaded; for I think that there is but
one best, and that one best must be Gods nature, for better it is to be
operative, then not to be operative; God is actus purus, nothing but pure form,
and it best befits and resembles the nature of spirits, which are always in
action; for to be not operative, it comes nearer the condition of Stocks and
Blocks; which in doing nothing, seem to incline to idleness and sloth; and if
once it be acknowledged, that* all Gods attributes are operative, then better
it is to be fruitful then barren, rather to produce some fruits, then none at
all; and these fruits to be rather permanent then transient; and these
attributes concern the Godhead it self; for as God is the first efficient
cause, so is he the last final, to whom all is directed.

Now of all the attributes of God, to speak according to the manner of The
effects of Gods power etc. do not always appear.
men, the Understanding and the Will are the most excellent, and have the most
wonderful operations; they are likewise the most inward, and intimate such as
cannot be discerned, but by Gods own relation of himself; and thus it falls out
with man, who was created according to Gods Image, we can easily judge of man's
strength, of his age, and other ab^lities; but for his understanding and his
will, they are most private and secret to himself; and I pray here note, that
Philosophers do seldom reckon the understanding, and the will of God amongst
his other attributes, but they do usually supersede them, as if they were
eminencies, and excellencies in God above the ordinary attributes, for though
they were all eternal, and equally perfect in God; yet did they not always
appear in their effects* and therein God did moderate them, and qualify them,
as seemed best to his wisdom; for before the Creation, Gods Power did not
appear in the effects; Gods providence in governing the world did not appear,
when as yet there was no world to be governed; the justice of God could not
appear in any outward act, when as yet no sin was committed; the mercies of God
could not appear in relieving miseries, when as yet there was nothing but God
himself; all these attributes of God, though they were eternally in God, and
every way alike perfect in regard of virtue and efficacy; yet in the outward
act, in respect of the effects, God appointed his time, when first to manifest
them, and that according to measure and proportion; for God did not work
according to the uttermost of his Power, he could have created many infinite
worlds, with the same ease and facility; so then these attributes, which
concern the Creatures, there was a space when they had not their act, and
exercise.

But above all others, there are two principal the understanding and the The
excellency of Gods understanding and will.
will; from the understanding proceeds knowledge, from the will proceeds love;
God knowing himself to be infinitely good, the love of himself must likewise be
infinite; and these have this peculiar property, to reflect upon God himself;
so that God is the object of his own knowledge, and the object of his own love.
Here then we may expect admirable operations, more then of his other
attributes, for they look outwardly upon the Creatures, but these look
inwardly, and reflect upon God himself, and are operative, and produce wonders;
his other attributes do not so nearly and inwardly concern him, as his
understanding and his will do, (as for example) God cannot be the object of his
own Justice to punish himself, God cannot be the object of his own Mercy; for
to be in case and condition of relief, it implies imperfection; God is not the
object of his own omnipotency, for he cannot work upon himself, to add any new
perfection to himself, or to make any change, or al^eration in his own nature;
so for Gods providence, though he governs the world yet he does not thereby
regulate himself. Thus the attributes which concern the Creatures, though they
were eternal, and equally perfect in God, yet they did not appear in their
objects, before God began his Creation.

But it is necessary that God should ever know himself, and his own perfection;
and thus knowing himself by the act, and exercise of his own understanding,
which is always operative, and not barren but fruitful; needs he must beget
in a spiritual, and most excellent manner, verbum in intellectu, a word in his
understanding, every way answerable to his understanding, for here God imparts
himself quoad ultimum posse, and so he does not in the Creatures; and by this
word, knowing himself to be infinitely good, needs there must proceed from the
word, and from the understanding, amor infinitus, an infinite love, answerable
to the measure and proportion of the goodness; and these are the proper fruits
of Gods understanding, and his will from all eternity, and what is from all
eternity, is every way infinite; and can be no less then God himself? That is a
Person in the Deity, which Persons have no difference between themselves, but
only in respect of the act of generation and procession; so that God without
the act of knowing himself, and loving himself, he could not subsist one
minute, but he subsisted many infinite Ages, and was alike perfect in himself,
before the Creatures were made. So then here is the difference, other
attributes of God, produce the Creatures of God; but his understanding* and his
will, being inward and reflecting upon himself, What kind of Persons there are
in the Deity.
they produce Persons in the Godhead; which notwithstanding we must imagine not
in a carnal, and in an humane, or sensual manner; as if Persons should be
circumscribed with time, place, circumstances, and other differences, but in a
most spiritual, and a most excellent manner, as all things in God, are
incomprehensible, so is the generation of this Word, and the procession of this
Spirit, and the personality in the Deity; thus as God is his own beginning,
subsists of himself, preserves and continues himself; so he must be his own
end, and his attributes must tend to himself. God only must reveal the Trinity.


These are those inward and secret jewels, which are locked up, and enclosed
within the Cabinet of the Deity, such as are not always visible; for they are
not kept, or to be seen in the outward Shop, or Magazin of the Creatures, as
other attributes of God are; but the understanding and the will of God, they
are most inward and secret, such as God himself must reveal, as amongst our
selves, the thoughts and intentions of man, must only be discovered by man
himself. Yet we are confident in this, that the fruit of Gods understanding,
and his will being in God himself, they can be no less, then God himself, (i.
e.) several Persons in the Deity, which God himself has been pleased to
reveal.

So then there is a difference between the attributes of God, and the act What
God did before the Creation.
and exercise of those attributes; for Gods omnipotency is not always
creating, Gods Justice is not always punishing; and many infinite Ages past,
before there was a Creation; and this was necessary, that the Creatures might
know their distance, and how inconsiderable they were in respect of God, who
was alike perfect and absolute without them; and God himself making choice of
his own instant for their Creation, did thereby manifest, that he was a most
free agent; and the Creatures wholly depended upon him, both for their
beginning and all other circumstances accompanying; while before their
Creation, God wanted not a greater and a more excellent employment, in the
eternal and spiritual generation of his Son, and the procession of his
Spirit, for these were from all eternity. God in his own understanding must
ever know himself; and knowing himself to be infinitely good, he must therefore
infinitely love himself; and these must ever work ad ultimum posse, and because
they look inwardly; therefore they produce Persons, and not Creatures, which
Creatures are the works of his free will; and may subsist or not subsist at his
pleasure; and are qualified as he shall dispose; and have their beginning, as
he shall appoint: So then here is the difference betwixt his understanding and
his will, from his other attributes, for these look ad intra, and therefore
produce Persons in the Deity; whereas his other attributes look ad extra, and
therefore produce only Creatures of the Deity.

I will yet give an other instance, whatsoever man receives in this world, Man's
salva ion has more reference to the Persons, then to his other attributes.
whether in respect of soul and body, whether for food or raiment, as there is
nothing in man, which he has not by the free gift of God; all these are the
fruits of Gods attributes; but when I come to the last end, and perfection of
man, which consists in a beatificall vision, or in a large measure and extent
of Gods knowledge, together with a most perfect union, love, and conformity
with God, these seem to have reference to the Persons in the Deity; for the
vision has reference to the word in Gods understanding and man's conformity to
God, has reference to that love of God, which proceeds from the understanding;
therefore these last perfections of man, coming nearer the Persons in the
Deity, and more representing them, are therefore of a more excellent condition,
then the fruits of his other attributes; so that which makes man's supreme and
eternal happiness, it is a compliance, as with the attributes of God in
general; so more immediately with the several Persons in particular, by a
beatificall vision, and a wonderful love and union with the Deity.

And thus it is in all spiritual Substances, the Understanding and the The
exce^lency of Gods understanding and will.
Will are the chief and principal faculties* and have the most powerful
operations: which truly may a little signify and intimate how eminent and
wonderful they are in God. And wherein natural reason shall object any thing
against this Mystery, still I will appeal from natural reason in particular, to
natural reason in general; which, acknowledging God to be Infinite, does
together acknowledge him to be Incomprehensible: for Nature in general has
naturally placed in man wonder and admiration, that so Nature in particular
might be assured, that there is something which exceeds her power, and is above
the reach and apprehension of man, yet no way contrary to reason, but far
transcending and exceeding reason, and not to be hedged and bounded within the
compass of man's brain, or the circumference of a natural world, for hitherto
man's natural reason extends, and no further.

This is not mine own private opinion, though from the Creation* whole Not
Philosophers, but Poets were the Priests of the Heathen.
mankind has ever had the same light of natural Reason, together with the
Socinians; yet was there never any Nation or Religion in the World, which did
content themselves only with natural Reason; but some things they had in
Religion, as the objects of wonder and admiration and therefore not the
Philosophers (who were the curious inspectors of Nature, and did in effect
distill nature, as in a Limbeck, and reduce her to her first principles) these
men were not the Divines or Priests to intend matters of Religion, and the
service of God, but Poets who had their fictions, and their strange Historical
narrations; these were employed in their Sacrifices; wherein you shall observe,
that their fictions and falsehoods, many of them, did arise from a mistake, and
a misreport of the Jews; for the offering Beasts in Sacrifice, according to
Gods command; and finding happy success therein, this gave occasion to the
Heathen, to worship Beasts, and so commit Idolatry; whereunto the Father of
lies the Devil (who was not then tied, nor bound in Chains, as since he has
been by the Conquest of Christ) being then permitted by God, gave h^s best (or
rather worst) help and furtherance, with lying Oracles, and strong Del^sions*
seduce the Hea^hen.

Thus we shall find that many miraculous History; in Scripture, are The (...)
borrowed from the Jews.
a little resembled in the Fictions of Poets, Enoch in the state of Nature;
Elias in the state of the Law being translated, might give occasion, that the
Heathen did make their Gods to ^e Planets and Stars in the Heavens, as Jupiter,
Mars, Venus, (...) c So for those miraculous Actions, which befell the Jews in
their passage out of Egypt* in the time of their Judges, and their Law; the
Gentiles hearing a confused fame thereof, being strangers, they might mistake
in circumstances; yet thereby take occasion to fasten the like upon their own
fictious Gods.

And whereas some use this as an argument, that natural Reason is a Reason
may* serve to direct Moral actions but no^ our faith.
sufficient guide to direct us in our moral actions; and therefore might serve
the like for the whole knowledge of Religion; this is an utter mistake, and
overthrowes it self, because natural Reason might suffice to direct our
actions between man and man, and is only fitted thereunto, therefore it cannot
reach to the Mysteries between God and man, which are of a higher condition;
neither yet to conduct us to a supernatural end, which is of a higher degree;
then the Spring or Fountain of Nature, can reach unto; so that if Moral
Actions must have the tincture of grace, they must be (as I may so say)
Christened before they come within compass of a Religious worship, and service
of God; for the Moral actions of the Heathen, they were but splendida peccata.

And thus far, through the great mercy of God, I have waded into the This
mystery has nothing contrary to Philosophy.
secret of this great Mystery; and I hope without any offense, either to God,
or Gods people; wherein, if I have sinned, God knows it is out of ignorance;
and I do humbly beg pardon: and I may here truly profess, that unless my
memory, and the whole course of my studies do utterly fail me, I have not
written a word, which is not comformable, and agreeable to the true grounds,
and rules of Philosophy, and most consonant to natural Reason; whereas on the
other side, if I should examine the Socinians infidelity, I would make it
plainly appear, that they denying our mystery; they stand like men amazed; and
cannot pitch upon any certain truth, but run headlong to their own confusion;
so that they may oppose, contradict* and pull down what others have built, but
they shall never be able to lay any sure ground, for their own new Foundation;
and I am very confident that more absurdities, incongruities, impossibilities
in Philosophy, must be admitted in their new frame of opinions, and Phansies,
then ever they shall be able to allege against the old foundation of Catholic
Doctrine, and Religion.

Thus having spoken of the mystery in it self, I will now come to outward The
great assurance or security, which we have for our ^aith.
Testimonies, and produce sufficient warrants for our faith, as in the course
of Justice, the security that a man gives for the payment of a debt, or the
performance of an action, should always be of greater worth, then the thing it
self; thus if I were to borrow money, I would bring a pledge of a greater value
then the money, that so it might serve as an abundant assurance for my
repayment; or if I had not a pledge, then I would enter into a double bond, to
be bound in forty pounds, for the payment of twenty: yet sometimes it falls out
so, that we have not a pledge, or being bound in a double Bond; yet our wants
may be such, as we may fail in the payment of a single; and therefore I
conclude, that it is easier to enter into a double bond, then to pay the
single: but now in respect of God, all things are of like ease, in regard of
his omnipotency; yet if we speak of God according to the weakness of man's
apprehension; we may Actions confirm words.
say without offense, that it is easier for God to speak, then to do, for
actions are of greater difficulty then words; if then God shall bring actions
for the confirmation of words, this is Abundans Cautela, there can be no
exceptions against it; or that ever we should require any greater assurance.

Speaking of the warrant of our faith, I will not here allege the proof The
miracles and manner of working them confirm mysteries.
of Scripture, or the inward Testimony of the Spirit; for my intention is to
deal with the carnal and natural man* if we discern in him who first taught,
and revealed these mysteries, such extraordinary wisdom, in discerning men's
thoughts, in fortelling future, voluntary and contingent events, it must argue
a supernatural knowledge in things natural; if we discern in him such
extraordinary power in working miracles; miracles of all sorts, upon all
several subjects, the heavens, the elements, the dumb Creatures, the blind,
the lame, the dead, the Devils themselves; and these at all several times,
before his birth, in his birth, in his infancy, in his youth, at the time of
his passion, and after his last resurrection; and these not done in secret, but
in the sight of multitudes and thousands, all testifying the truth of things
done, the Jews acknowledge, the Gentiles confess, the Apostles proclaim, the
Evangelists record, many Millions of Martyrs seal with their blood; and all the
world with joint consent and harmony bears witness, seen by our forefathers,
and left unto us together with their memory, for the salvation of our own
souls; then these Works above nature confirm words above nature.
undoubted miracles, must argue a supernatural power in things natural; which
if Reason confess (as herein she is convinced) that the wisdom and power of the
teacher, was supernatural; then must there be some supernatural object,
though not appearing in nature, yet answerable and ag^eeable to this
supernatural knowledge and power; here then at length, we have opened a gap,
to let in all the mysteries of our Christian faith and Religion; yet l^st we
should be left to our own conjectures, and presumptions, lest the hardness of
our heart should not easily condescend to things above our reach and capacity;
therefore truth bears evidence to truth, the wonders of nature to the
mysteries of grace; as his deeds and actions were much above nature, so it
cannot seem strange, if his Doctrine and Precepts far exceed our natural
understanding, for his Words, as well as his Actions, were much above nature;
and therefore did a^gue a power above nature, which is God himself; Christ
Jesus God and man, the second Person in Trinity, who came down and took our
nature upon him, to satis^ie for our sins; he it is, that has revealed these
mysteries; that so by Faith and Belief, as our first Fathers fell from God by
unbelief and presumption, we might come unto him, and through his mercy obtain
our everlasting salvation.

Here I did examine all the miracles, and the most remarkable things in In the
notes which are plundered and lost.
the old Testament; and first I did reduce all the Ages of the world to the
Deluge, where I did infer by many probabilities, what past before the deluge;
for that it could not stand with the Mercies of God who created all things to
begin with such an heavy Judgment, as an universal deluge; and because we
have no other Records of those times, but the Testimony of Scripture* I did
therefore produce necessary and demonstrative arguments for the proof of the
Deluge, and of Scripture, together with some remarkable Tokens, I did insist
upon, which must needs point out some former times before the deluge: here I
made good proof, that the Eastern parts of the world, must needs be the first
parts inhabited; I showed the greatness of their Monarchies, their continuance
and dissolution; I showed how all other Nations issued from them; and how they
borrowed their Customs and Manners: I showed how the Hebrew was the original
Tongue of all the Eastern Languages, by the roots, and by the proprieties of
that Tongue. I did instance in all the Ancient Monuments; and made it appear,
that the world could not be elder then the time related by Moses for the
Creation.

For the Histories before Christ, I did use Torniellus, Pererius, Salianus,
Forain Authors recommended.
and all the rest; for the time since Christ, I had such Authors, as were
extant: but especially, I did rely most upon Baronius, and Bibliotheca patrum;
and I do heartily wish, that some younger man would undertake that task, for I
am aged, and my short time which remains, cannot suffice for such a work;
besides I have the infirmities of old age, my memory fails me; and I am past
all employments, neither can I so put off all natural passions, but I confess
it does grieve me* to think that heretofore having always lived in great
plenty (God reward my founders for it) that now I should be reduced to such
poverty, and wants, but I hope God will raise up some other to compose such a
History; And leaving that task for them,

I will now only instance in the miracles of Scripture, for confirmation No
writings extant which contradict Scripture.
of mysteries; and first for the truth of Scripture, it is a demonstrative
proof to me, that it should be the most Ancient of all writings; and many ages
exceeding the heathen Authors, or Poets; and this is an undoubted argument of
truth, for truth is the most Ancient, and that which does accompany truth, that
others should give Testimony to truth, and none to oppose it; for in these
Ancient Poets, we find somethings borrowed from the Jews, which makes for the
confirmation thereof, and none (in effect) did ever oppose them; for had they
so done, surely we should have heard of their Writings, as we do of their
Wars, and their Histories; and no doubt there were many enemies, which would
not have omitted such an opportunity; at this day the Jews, the Christians,
the Mahumetans, all do acknowledge Scriptures, without any manner of
contradiction; for in effect the heathen are utterly vanished, and not to be
seen, or to stand in opposition. It is true, that at this day heathen there
are, but they no way partake with the Ancient Heathen, neither in the same
gods, nor in the number of their gods, nor in the manner of their worship; only
like upstarts, because they must have a Religion, (for they cannot ^ook upon
heaven, without some kind of adoration) therefore every one frames a Religion
to himself, and according to his own fancy, either agrees or differs from
others.

But because the blessed Trinity has been only expressly revealed in the The
Law ordained to Christ.
new Testament, I will therefore insist only in the miracles of the New
Testament; and reserve other proofs and evidences for confirmation of other
mysteries, that we may take all by degrees, and not spend our whole stock and
store at once; so then to instance only in the miracles of the New Testament;
if these had fallen out only in the Person of Christ, there might have been
cause of suspicion; but the whole Law was only a preparation to his coming such
Types, Figures, and Prophesies; and in a word, the scope and intent of the Law
had no other relation; and this will appear, for that it seems scarce
reasona^le, that God should be served with the slaughter and offering up of
unreasonable Beasts, had they not relation to the sacrifice of his only Son;
and such infinite variety of strange ceremonies, would never have been
admitted, had they not pointed out some extraordinary holiness to succeed; this
did likewise appear in the cessation of the Law; for about a full age before
the coming of Christ, there was a cessation of Prophets; and neither did God
appear, either by special messengers, or by miraculous victories: That the
minds of men not being withdrawn, nor having any other solace or comfort, might
wholly intend the expectation of the Messiah whose immediate forerunner was
Saint John Baptist; and therefore whatsoever is ascribed unto him tends unto
Christ, as being his forerunner, for he gives testimony to Christ, and that
three several times in this one first Chapter of Saint John verse Saint John*
Baptist his Testimonies of Christ.
the 27. When the Priests and Levits sent unto him, to know whether he were the
Messiah? he answered no, but pointed out Christ, the latchet of whose shoe he
was not worthy to unloose. Secondly, when he saw Christ verse 29. presently he
confesses, Behold the Lamb of God, behold him, who takes away the sins of
the world. Thirdly, he gives the like Testimony to his Disciples concerning
Christ verse 34. that so they might take occasion to leave him and to follow
Christ: Now these are the prerogatives of Saint John Baptist.

That his birth was foretold by an Angel, in a miraculous manner, by The
prerogatives of Saint John Baptist.
a vision at the time of Sacrifice; at whose conception a heavy judgment
be^ell his Father Zachary the Priest, then offering the Sacrifice; for he was
stricken with dumbness, until the imposition of his name John, signifying the
grace of God, which was a most remarkable sign and token of the cessation of
the Law, and the inchoation of the Gospel; he was conceived in a barren womb;
and in that womb did honor and salute Christ in a Virgin womb; so in the
womb being a forerunner of Christ, he began to do his office and duty, as
after in the course of his life, he did truly perform it: for his Baptism was
a preparation to the Baptism of Christ; and though he was most innocent,
strict, austere, mortified, and devout, yet God made him the Preacher of
repentance, thereby to show the necessity of repentance, even to the most
righteous; and though he wrought no miracles, lest he should be taken for
Christ, yet his sanctity and holiness was such, that no less then the Levites
doubted whether he were the Messiah or not; and therefore sent Messengers unto
him from Jerusalem to be rightly informed; he had the honor to Baptize Christ,
and in that Baptism the three Persons in the Deity, did openly and manifestly
discover themselves; after this Baptism, he sent his own Disciples to Christ;
that by him they might be Cathechised, and instructed in the ways of
salvation, while he himself had the honor to suffer Martyrdom: and as in his
life time, the Priests and Levites took him for the Messiah; so after his
death, his cursed Murderer Herod, took the Messiah for Saint John Baptist,
saying upon the fame of Christ's miracles, This is John Baptist whom I beheaded,
and works such wonders amongst the People.

Though the Annunciation might seem strange, and only known to the Blessed
Virgin; and strange it did seem unto her, which occasioned that demand, Quomodo
fiet istud? and therefore the Angel adds as a motive, that the barren womb of
Elizabeth had already conceived; and then it must seem the less strange, if the
Virgin womb should likewise conceive, and further to strengthen the Faith of
the Parents, it was expedient and so ordered by Gods providence, that the
Child in the barren womb, should express some joy at the approach of the
Child in the Virgin Womb, and there exhibit the first fruits of honor, and
reverence to Christ, now God in our flesh, that as he was prophesied to be a
forerunner of Christ; so in the womb he should begin to exercise his office,
as hereafter he should point him out with his finger, Ecce Agnus Dei, yet be
the Anunciation never so strange; when in the Birth of Christ, the Shepards
shall be taught by Angels, the wise men allured by a Star, St. Matthew. 2 And the
cursed enemy manifesting his malice and fury, by the murder of innocents;
these give sufficient Testimony to his admirable Birth and Nativity.

Though the infancy and childhood of Christ might pass according to Several
miraculous acts of Christ.
the usual course of nature, thereby to show the truth of his manhood, and the
infirmity of our flesh; yet at the age of 12 years disputing with the Doctors
S. Lu. 2. herein the power and wisdom of his Godhead appears; though we have
only his own word for his 40 days Fast in the wilderness, Mat. 4. Mar. 1. Luke
3. Yet when we find that he feeds 5000 with five Loaves, and 4000 with seven
Loaves, Mat. 14. Mar. 6. Luke 9. Joh. 6. Mat. 15. Mar. 8. And that it was not a
fancy, or thing imaginary; so many Baskets of broken meat to be taken up: we
conclude that his fasting was not for want, nor could he want delicates; for ^e
turned Water into Wine, Joh. 2. And as he had thus the command of the
Creatures; so by his fasting and abstinence, it appears he had the command of
himself, and of his own appetite. If any shall doubt of his dispossessing of
Devils, yet when it shall appear that the Devils entered into the Swine, and the
Swi^e run into the Sea, Mat. 8. Mar. 5. Luke 8. this makes it a truth
undeniable; so likewise that he cured one possessed of a Devil, in the
Synagogue, Mark. 1. and Luke 4. This was in the sight of all, who undoubtedly
did examine the miracle; so likewise that he cured all diseases; and the Rulers
daughter among others, Mat. 9. Mar. 5. Luke 8. whose Father was, Vir fide
dignus; and therefore his Testimony not to be refused.

That he appeased a tempest on the Sea, Matt. 8. Mark* 4. Luk* 8. Mir^cles of
all sever^ll kinds.
this might be ascribed to some natural causes, but that Joh. 6. he should
walk upon the Seas, and cause Saint Peter to do the like, by their trampling on
the Seas, it appears that the Seas were under his command; and in token
thereof, the Fish brought him a piece of Silver in his mouth, to pay tribute,
in acknowledgement of his Sovereignty. Luke 9. So likewise Joh. 9. He gives
sight to him that was born blind, as an undoubted token, that he was a second
Adam, and did work in us a regeneration, So Mat. 12. Mark. 3. Luke 6. He cured
the withered hand on the ^abbath, to signify that charitable works for the
observation of that day, are as necessary as preaching; thus Lepers Palsies,
Agues, Fluxes of Blood* Blind, Lame, and all manner of diseases are cured; and
how the people were generally persuaded of him, appears by their pressing upon
him to touch the hem of his garment; how they let down the sick of the ^alsie
through the Tiles, Mat. 9. Mar. 2. Luke 5. How they spread their garments by
the way, singing Hosanna, Mat. 21. Mar. 11. Lu. 19. Jo. 12. with such like
exclamations. But what shall I need to insist in diseases, Raising the dead,
the greatest of mirac^es.
when it appears, that he raised up the dead, where all remedies and means did
fail, and nature could no way concur in the act? Matt. 9. Mark. 5. Luke 8.
There he raised the Archisynagogues daughter. Luke 7. There he raises the
wi^owes son at Naim; then Saint John the 11 he raises up Lazarus; for the
first of these, his very office gives credit to the Testimony; for the second
he was then carrying to his grave; look how many attended the Corpse, or did
inhabit in the way, so many were witnesses of his raising again; for the third
which was Lazarus, he was laid some days and some nights in the grave; surely
the Sun and the Moon, which cause the day and night, must needs testify the
truth of his death; and himself for many years after, might assure us of his
rising again.

Hereunto you may add the manner of his own death, what speed The rashness and
haste, used in Christ's condemnation.
was made; how was the course of Justice precipitated, that in one morning he
should be Apprehended, Accused, Examined, Whipped, Scourged, Condemned, Exposed
to all Contempts, with his Crown of Thorns, carry his own Cross, and at noone
be crucified, that there he should be nailed for the space of three hours; and
though his enemies had no power to break his bones, according to the prophecy,
as they did the malefactors, yet what was more (for that life did not consist
in the breaking of bones) they gave him a wound through the side into the
heart; as may appear* because there issued forth Blood and Water, which are not
so usually found in the body, but only in the parts nearest the heart; for that
the excessive heat there dissolves the blood into the first elements; and
thence you have water, and this water makes recompense, by cooling, and
refreshing the heat; so by a providence they mutually help each other; and this
blood and water, did serve for the institution of our Sacraments.

Being dead he was buried in a new Sepulcher, as he was conceived in a The
wonders in Christ's resurrection.
Virgins womb, lest they might say that some other dead body had risen; a
great Stone was rolled over the Sepulcher, because himself had prophesied, that
he would rise again the third day; watch and ward was kept about the Sepulcher,
as to prevent his Disciples from coming thither to steal away his body; so if
it had been p^ssible to hinder his resurrection, but being risen again, he did
converse with his D^sciples for forty days; and then by his own power he
ascended up in o heaven, in the sight of many thousands; and because the eyes
of men might fail, and that some might (...), that his ascension was only out
of sight and no further; therefore ^he A^gels came down to testify the truth
of his ascension into heaven; and according to Christ's command, the Apostles
continued at Jerusalem, there to receive the Holy Ghost, who at the day and
appointed time came down in a miraculous manner, in fiery cloven Tongues, and
wrought wonderful effects upon the Apostles, not only in their inward
sanctifying their gift of Tongues, and power of working Miracles, all foretold,
that as before his birth there were many preparatives for his coming, so after
his death the subsequent signs and wonders might give testimony to the
forerunning Miracles, and the truth of the Doctrine confirmed by them.

Now at length to draw to a period, as S. John begins his Gospel with the
eternal generation of Christ, wherein is implied the great mystery of the
Trinity* so my self having showed the doctrine of the Church, and having a
little expressed the mystery* and thereby giving satisfaction to man's natural
reason, though reason could not comprehend it; and having in the last place
produced many miracles above natural power, to confirm mystery, above natural
knowledge, As I began with the beginning of S. John, so I will end with the
conclusion of S. John's Gospel as you shall find in his last Chapter, the last
verse; the words are these, And there are also many other things which Jesus
did, the which if they should be written every one, I suppose that even the
world it self could not contai^ the books that should be written. Some may
conceive this speech to be a figure or metaphor of an high transcendent
quality; but I suppose it How the Text of S John may be understood.
may be exactly and literally understood in this sense, that seeing the narural
world is but a book, and that in every creature, or rather in every punctilio
of the creature, as in every letter, word and syllable we read Gods Wisdom,
Mercy, Power, Providence, etc. If hereunto you will add Christ's Miracles,
which were above Nature, and did presuppose Nature, as being done in natural
bodies, and though not offering violence to Nature, yet being far above the
reach and power of Nature, and therefore therein Nature did seem to suffer.
Seeing this supernatural power is much above Nature, surely it may be truly
said, That the natural world cannot contain those books which might be written
of Christ's supernatural power, for they include Nature, they exceed Nature,
they are over and above Nature; and therefore something must remain, which the
natural world cannot contain. And this shall serve to have spoken of the great
mystery of the most holy, blessed, and undivided Trinity.

Thus I hope in God I have given satisfaction to man's Reason^ in this great
Mystery of the Trinity, that God never did nor could subsist one minute without
the knowledge of himself, and love of himself, which being the acts and
exercise of his Understanding and his Will, being inward and in the Deity, and
from all eternity, they can ^e no less then God himself, for there is no
accident in God, there is nothing in God but God. Yet these being produced by
the Understanding and the Will, needs they must have such a difference between
themselves, as to make several persons in the Deity, which is not so with the
rest of Gods Attributes, for they look outwardly upon his works, and therefore
only produce the creatures: And though the blessed Trinity do infinitely
exceed man's capacity, yet does it no more exceed, then all the rest of Gods
Attributes do; for they are all above reason, beyond reason, and infinitely
transcending reason, but no way contrary to reason, and therefore they are the
objects of our faith, in respect of Gods knowledge revealed, and they are the
objects of our admiration, in respect of our own natural ignorance. And so to
conclude, Persons being supposed in the Deity, here is one step and degree
toward the Incarnation, for now we may with more confidence lay hold on a
Person in the Deity, and cloth him with our nature and our flesh.

Sanctae and individuae Trinitati sit omnis honor and gloria. Amen.
The Wonderful Incarnation.
AFter the blessed Trinity, I now come to the wonderful Incarnation; where I
shall likewise speak some things by way of Introduction. And here I must first
enter a caveat, or a solemn protestation. Though The great use of Reason in
Religion.
I do examine these mysteries by natural Reason. I confess they are far
transcending Reason, above Reason, beyond the reach of Reason; yet are they no
way contrary to Reason, nor opposite to Gods Attributes or Actions, whereby
they might seem improbable, much less impossible: for I confess that Reason is
so powerful in man, that it serves him for his guide and conductor* as in his
natural and civil actions, so partly in his Religion; for all the Moral Law,
which is a great part of Religion, is much squared out by natural Reason: and
it serves as a groundwork or foundation whereupon Religion is built, and which
makes a man capable of Religion: for if he had only sense, the^ he should be
altogether senseless, and without any feeling of Religion. It serves likewise as
a ladder or stairs to ascend by degrees, from the Creatures to the Creator; for
whatsoever is good or commendable in them, add an Infinity thereunto, and then
you may safely fasten it on their Maker. Suppose the beauty or power of the
Creatures, if to their small measure, you will add an infinity, then you make
them the Prerogatives of God, who is most beautiful, most powerful etc. and
even the small measure in the Creatures tends chiefly, and principally redounds
to the honor and Reason an handmaid to Religion.
praise of the Maker. Thus several waye^ Reason plays the handmaid to Religion,
and though the mysteries of Religion far transcend, yet they offer no violence,
nor any way contradict the grounds and principles of Reason, but both may
together consist; yea they further each other, and give mutual Testimonies to
each other: for natural Reason seeing the bounds of the Natural world, it
acknowledges a supernatural world to which it can conduce nothing, but wonder,
astonishment, and admiration* and in defect of our knowledge, Reason gives way
unto faith, and thence insers a necessity of grace, to sow the seeds of this
supernatural faith in our natural hearts. If man's condition were wholly above
Reason, suppose Angelical, then he should have his Religion altogether by
infusion, without any rational discourse, but being such as it is, surely both
his Reason and his Senses must concur in his Religion, his Reason to strengthen
Reason and sense must join in Gods service.
his Faith (having first received satisfaction in her self) then his senses
must join in the service of Religion, as memorials to his Reason, to stir up
and increase his devotion, and for the honor of Gods worship and service, that
God might be served like a God, with all decent Ceremonies, with all rich and
costly Ornaments, while our Sectaries, out of their sacrilegious ends, though
otherwise under the color of Idolatry) abandoning these, they do indeed rob
God of a great part of his honor, though with the Jews they do not murder
Christ, yet they can be content to share in his garments, to make him poor and
naked, and both his servants and service contemptible.

Thus is my intent to give satisfaction to Reason in the mysteries, only
Mysteries are to be adored, not curiously to be searched into.
I love to distrust my self, and therefore on my bare knees I do humbly desire
God in his mercy, to grant, that I may not offend in prying too far into the
secrets of God, they are above my reach, capacity and apprehension, only so
far forth as God has revealed them, for his honor, and for the strengthening of
our faith, I hope I may explain them, and therefore here I fall down in
humility, prostrate my self, and humbly adore those great blessed Mysteries,
The ineffable Trinity, The wonderful Incarnation, which God has revealed, the
Church has received, whereof in our Baptism we make our profession; and God
grant that we may all live and die in the true faith of Gods holy Catholic and
Apostolic Church, without which there neither is, nor can be any salvation.

See how credible things are in Religion, as God created all things of What God
requires of the Creatures.
nothing, and is the first Efficient Cause; so undoubtedly he must be the final
Cause, to whom all things are directed: for being the most excellent good, he
cannot so deprive himself, but he must be the end of all. Thus all things tend
to his glory. And as God has done so much for the Creatures, to make them of
nothing, to preserve them from falling to nothing, to give them whatsoever is
necessary or convenient for their being, no doubt but God will expect
something from the Creatures, that according to their abilities they should in
some sort express their thankfulness. Thus the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars, do
move as God first appointed them, they do not alter their course, they neither
hasten nor slacken their motion: so it is with the Elements and dumb Creatures,
they follow the course of their nature, according to that path wherein they
were first put, they still keep their way, and do not offend; and as from God
they have their being and protection, so there is due from them unto God, a
thankfulness in the acknowledging, and an obedience for their submission.

This is the general case of all Creatures, such as are here regulated by God
gave some creatures liberty of will.
Nature, they cannot offend, nor do otherwise then they do, but it has pleased
God to make some spiritual Creatures, and to them he has given a Free Will, a
liberty in the choice of their own actions, and so has left it in their own
power, either to stand with the help and assistance of his grace, or otherwise
to fall and to transgress, being left to themselves, and God only permitting
them. This liberty of will was an excellent gif^, for thereby it lay in their
power, to confirm and settle what they had in being, and farther to improve
their condition, and to enlarge their happyness in a greater measure; but so it
fell out, that it was the occasion of their fall and ruin.

And first to insist in the Angels, who were Gods first Creatures, and The fall
of the Angels.
more spiritual then man, some of them stood, and became Angels of light, and
were confirmed in their happiness, and had some further and more honorable
employment in Gods service, which did add to the dignity of their condition,
but many of them, choosing the worser part, fell of themselves, and their sin
was Pride and Presumption, being made of nothing, yet they disliked their
condition, wherein they were created, and began to conceive aspiring thoughts
of exalting themselves above their condition, though they were the first
created, and had great honor and dignity, according to their Birthright. And
this they attempted even against God, in despite of God, who made them of
nothing, and from whom they held in courtesy what they had, and in whose power
it lay, every minute to destroy them; yet did they oppose God, and fain would
subsist of themselves without God* which was in effect to equal themselves to
God, and to enter upon Gods Throne: therefore were they justly cast down, and
became the most accursed, and had the most wicked employment, in tormenting
others, to be tormented themselves. All this Scripture relates; and by their
punishment, it is made most credible, the work of Creation, is a work of mercy,
for thereby God imparts himself, and if any punishment do befall the Creatures,
it argues their sin and transgression in deserving it. For in the creation of
the world, there is no mention made of Hell, or of Torments, these it should
seem are of a later edition, and came in with the ill husbandman, who after the
sowing of good corn, sows his own cockles and tares: and some conceive Hell to
be in the Center of the earth, as if God had found out a nook in the farthest
distance from himself, to make it a Prison, or a house of Correction, and a
place of torments for such as are damned.

Whether to supply the number of Gods Elect, in lieu of those Angels that fell,
or whether out of the goodness of God, to show the greatness and excellency of
the work of Creation, in the variety of his Creatures (which I rather conceive)
it pleased God to create man not altogether so spiritual as Angels; but to
consist alike, both of the corporeal, and incorporeall world, as a medium
between both, and therefore partakes of both; thus it is in the contiguous
Elements; the water partakes with the air, partakes with the earth; with the
air, in respect of moisture, and thinness; with the earth, in respect of
coldness and weight: so the Moon which is the lowest Star, and nearest the
earth, it partakes with the sublunary bodies, as it is always increasing or
decreasing, and Man is a middle Creature, between Angels and Beasts.
daily changing her countenance; but as she does still return the same, and
has brightness and light, and a wonderful operation upon these inferior
bodies; therein she partakes with the rest of the Stars, appearing glorious in
the firmament; and such I conceive to be the state of man, who is a middle
Creature, and partakes with the Beasts, in respect of his nourishment and
sense; and partakes with the Angels, in respect of his intellectuals and
freewill; there must be then in man, a knowledge answerable to his condition,
it must arise from sense, or at least proposed in a sensible way, then does his
understanding elevate it, and put it into a spiritual habit; and thus is the
knowledge of man, neither wholly plunged or drowned in sense, nor yet so
resined as that it becomes wholly spiritual; and this I take to be no little
hinderance, and impediment in our knowledge of heavenly things, wherein sense
should wholly be abandoned, and our intellectuals carry the sway, and overruled
sense; we must therefore as far as we can, lay aside sense, and wholly intend
intellectuals: so for the freedom of man's will, which is not to be enticed with
the pleasures, surfets, and riots of the flesh, or of sense; but rather to be
moderated by the rule of reason, and by divine precept, to be obedient to the
spirit.

Thus in respect of the liberty of will, it pleased God to take the same The
Angels sin, was greater then Man's.
course with man, as he did with the Angels, to make trial of his obedience;
and man followed the ill example of the Angels in transgressing Gods Laws;
only with this difference, that the sin of the Angels was greater then man's.
First, because the Angels had greater graces and intellectuals then man; and
therefore they might have better prevented, and consequently their offense was
greater in the transgression of Gods Law^ Secondly, their sins were spiritual,
as Pride and Presumption, which stand more in opposition to God; and are more
hateful unto him, then carnal sins of Gluttony. Thirdly, the Angels were
neither outwardly nor inwardly tempted, whereas m^n was both outwardly tempted
by the Angels that fell, and inwardly by the concupiscence, and appetite of his
own flesh, and that cunningly by degrees; first the weaker vessel the woman is
tempted; now God did not forbid the woman; and she mighr be ignorant of Gods
command; the woman whom God gave to man for his helper, she tempts her husband;
and, there being between them all the bonds of love, he could not but make a
conscience to suspect the wife of his own bosom, flesh of his own flesh, and
bone of his own bones; so he might conceive, that as God had given him all the
fruits of the earth (one Tree only excepted) so now as an addition, his wife
procured this T^ce of knowledge, as part of her Portion.

That God should put man to a trial, we must not call him to an account, The
flesh prevailed in man.
how shall the Vessel say to the Potter, Why made thou me thus? this seems
very reasonable and just, that as God has given all unto man, so God should
require something from man; namely, his thankfulness and obedience, and that it
should be in such a kind; alas, all is as nothing in respect of God; but the
trial in effect, was only an instance, whether man could adhere to the flesh,
or the spirit? especially God forbidding the fruit, and man making choice of
the flesh, he therefore became liable to the miseries of the flesh; which as it
is composed of earth, so in a natural course it is to be dissolved into earth;
and so man becomes liable to death.

That the forbidden fruit should be the Tree of knowledge; how God used means.
many fruits and plants are there, which upon an instant intoxicate the brain,
and bereave man of understanding? then why may not other fruits and plants,
refresh the understanding, and by generating good spirits inlighten it and
quicken the apprehension? is there not an Eyebright which serves in stead of
Spectacles to clear the sight? Hereunto you must add Gods special
appointment, and ordinance; who as he can do all things without means, so he
may do all things with means, according to his own good will and pleasure.

Thus all things are most rational, and stand with the grounds of wisdom, What
sins could not be in the infancy of the world
though they may seem otherwise to the Socinian, who may be here convinced by
his own reason; for as a memorial and a remarkable token, and relic thereof,
this sin of our first Parents has wrought upon their posterity, for whole
mankind in succession, runs in the same paths; there is not a man in the
world, but offends in carnal sins, either by abusing Gods Creatures to his
luxury and riot, not taking them in moderation; or in general* that the flesh
is not obedient to the spirit; so together with the sin, and our original
corruption, (which we derive from our Parents) the flesh holds on the same
course in opposing, and usually prevailing against the spirit, notwithstanding*
Gods Law to the contrary. If you think it strange, that the sin had not been
some greater sin, consider the infancy of the world; here were no houses to be
blown up with Gunpowder; here could be no public M^ssacres, nor private
assasines; here was no place for oppression, or injustice; here were no
Infants; or Orphans to be plundered; no Churches to be demolished, or
sacrilege to be practiced; here could be no adultery or incest; here could be
no poisoning, no treachery, no perjury; there could be no Atheism, or
infidelity; God had newly created them, and as yet the world was unpeopled;
only there was the breach of Gods command, in taking the pleasure of a
delicious fruit; and thereby the flesh prevailing against the spirit.

In this trial of man's obedience the same cursed Angel, who was his The Devil
tempts man.
own destruction, being now forsaken of God he became desperate; and whether
out of his hatred to God* or his envy to man, he begins to tempt and seduce
man; and not appearing in his own shape, for then he might have easily been
discovered; he takes upon him the shape of a serpent; and inticeth the weaker
vessel, the woman to break that only commandment, which God had prescribed;
this was done in the infancy of the Creation, when Adam and Eve might happily
be ignorant, whether the rest of the Creatures were rational or irrational?
whether they were dumb, or spoke a language? they might see that their works,
and all their natural actions were very agreeable to reason; and the Creatures
having all the instruments of speech, why might they not be supposed to have
the free use, and exercise of speech, as well as man? and for other things,
they could speak nothing by their own experience; we have heard of Monsters of
men, whom by their shape and form, you could hardly know to be men; yet had
they the use of reason. There was a Fish taken in the time of Hen. 2. so like a
man, that Fishermen were mistaken, and did conceive him to be a man indeed;
certainly without trial and experience, which our first Parents could not have
so immediately upon the Creation, it was easy for them to mistake: I should
never believe that Parots and Pyes should speak so distinctly, were it not that
I find it by proof.

But not to trouble you with every circumstance, the Angels did sin spiritually
The punishment of man's sin was small.
in their pride and presumption (sins spiritual answerable to their condition)
as they are wholly spirits; Man subsisting of flesh, sinned carnally in tasting
the forbidden fruit; and therein his flesh prevailed over his reason in
breaking Gods command: only some of the Angels sinned, and they were punished
accordingly; but the first Parents of Mankind sinned, and in them according to
the course of our own ordinary justice, their whole race and posterity was to
suffer; but the punishment was small, for they had the benefit of repentance,
whereby they might not only have remission; but likewise through the Mercies of
God, and the Merits of Christ, they might attain a greater degree of happiness,
then was at first allotted unto them: And for that punishment of death, which
God enacted by a Statute Law, Statutum est hominibus semel mori, alas it is but
the transition to a better world, whereby we take the possession of that,
whereof we are not now so capable; and therefore it should be a great part of
our desires, Cupio dissolvi and esse cum Christo.

Thus after the fall of Angels, God having given the like freedom of will unto
man, in pleased God likewise to make trial of his obedience in giving him the
free use of all the rest of his Creatures, only forbidding one fruit, the Tree
of knowledge, which might be seen, but not tasted; whereby might appear,
whether Gods command, or man's inordinate appetite, were the more powerful in
man? or whether man subsisting of flesh, and spirit, which of these should be
predominant? whether man being placed between the blessed Angels, and dumb
Beasts, should by his abstinency and conformity to God, draw nearer to the
Angelical state, and become more spiritual? or by his carnal uncleanness,
giving way to his appetite, and gluttony, he should fall down to the sensuality
of Beasts? that whatsoever he lusted after, he should not deny himself, what
his own eyes, and his carnal concupiscence should offer unto him, he should
greedily embrace it; and thus by the tasting of the forbidden fruit, which the
Socinians conceive to be but a small offense, there is employed the great
opposition between the flesh and the spirit.

Now for the truth and demonstration, that man did offend, it shall appear My
book of he fall of man.
by the punishment; for I have already proved by undeniable arguments, that man
is fallen from his first integrity, and perfection; and that the state of the
world is much changed and altered, since the Creation; that many things have,
and do daily befall man, which can be no less, then the punishments of sin, and
the just effects of Gods vengeance; that man himself by his fearfulness and
natural uncleanness, seems to acknowledge a guilty conscience, and himself to
be justly condemned. This I have already proved; and I set forth a Book to that
purpose about 40 years since: the Title of the Book is, The fall of man, or the
fall of Adam from Paradise, proved by natural reason, wherein I do not only
give satisfaction to reason; but I do plainly evince it by many natural
proofs; I consess I cannot do the like for other mysteries, but only for that
alone, because it comes nearer our natural state and condition, while other
mysteries are far above our reach, and concern the state of another world; but
the fall and corruption of Nature must manifestly, and demonstratively appear
in the effects and punishment of sin; and therein the ground and foundation of
Socinianism, is utterly dissolved; and though since that time, many of their
Books have been vented, and published; yet I never heard that the scope and
intent of that Book, was ever so much as questioned; which I am ready still to
make good, and to justify now in my old age, though my strength, memory, and
intellectuals do a little fail me, I thank God for it.

Man being fallen from his first integrity, as God would not utterly destroy
him, so neither would he suffer him to continue in a sinful state and
condition: look what distance there is between heaven and earth, between life
and death; such and so great is the distance and opposition between corrupted
nature and grace, therefore needs there must be a regeneration, and a
redemption of man; but whether this should be done without means, only by Gods
omnipotency, as was the act of Creation, therein we doubt; it is true, that in
the Creation no means could be used, (for then there was nothing but God) yet
notwithstanding in the Creation it self as soon as God had created the confused
mass of the heavens and the earth out of nothing; then immediately he uses
this general mass, as a means for producing particulars, Producat terra herbam
virentem, pro ducant aquae reptile, and that light which was created the first
day, did serve to make the Sun and the Stars the fourth day; and in the
constituted course of nature, there is nothing done without means, the sap and
fatness of the earth, together with the Sunshine, and influence of the heavens,
(God appointing, protecting, concurring, and blessing his own means) serve for
our fruitfulness, and to continue nature in her own kind: Thus in Religion, God
has instituted Sacraments and Rites; then certainly the God does ever use
means.
same God, who is ever so constant in the uniformity of his works (for that he
does ever make choice of the best; and therefore is not uncertain, or wavering
in the constancy of his own resolutions) he would use means in the work of man's
redemption, as well as in the preservation of the world; for God out of his
infinite love, desiring to impart himself, as he gives a being, whereby
Creatures made of nothing, may together subsist with himself; so they
subsisting to honor them the more, he refuses not their help, but uses them
as means, that they should together cooperate with himself. Thus in all
natural works God uses means, and why not in supernaturals? it is most
credible, that the same wise God observes the same wise course, for the
effecting of his own will; nor can this disparage God, for the means are none
other, but such as God himself does appoint; thus is God the beginning, the
end, and the means, that God may be all in all.

Thus it appears, that means must be used to purchase our redemption The
treasures of Nature.
(i. e.) that a price or ransom must be paid for our sin, but where should we
procure this ransom? if we have it not of our own, where shall we borrow it?
who will be bound for us, or become our surety? it is true that God has locked
up in the bowels of the earth (as it were in Natures coffers) great treasures
of Gold, Silver, precious Stones, Minerals; and these serve to make our Coin,
which carries the price of all things; whereby these worldly commodities are
bought, and sold in the Market; and these will serve to pay for the ransom of
Princes, or to corrupt Magistrates, and to buy their consciences; or for any
other worldly or finister employment: and answerable hereunto, God has his
coin in the material heavens; his Golden Sun, his Silver Moon; and as the
Chimists observe, there is not a Planet, which has not a special influence
upon some Metalls. Thus do Gods treasures in the heavens cause the generation
of ours in the bowels of the earth; but alas, all these are temporary, the rust
does consume them; and therefore they are not current money to purchase
eternity; neither yet do they serve in the exchange, and remission of sins.

After the Metals, we will consider the Vegetatives, the beauty, and sweetness
Vegetatives.
of fair and delicious flowers; the odoriferous, and aromaticall fruits, the
precious drugs, and all whatsoever else the earth does afford; these may very
well be Natures incense, or sacrifice to God; but alas, their odours do
vanish, like vapors; and cannot wash away the spots, and cleanse the
uncleanness of sin.

After the Vegetatives, we come to the Beasts, such as have motion and sense;
and in them by their slaughter and sacrifice in the Mosaicall Law, we find the
just deserts, and rewards of our sin, that death is the wages of sin; so that
God in the Law, did institute sacrifices to betoken the truth of things to
succeed; for it appears that the spots and stains of sin have so far defiled,
and made such a deep impression in man, that they cannot be washed away, but by
the effusion of blood, it is blood and blood only, that must serve to scour
them.

From beasts come we to Man, for whom the whole world was created, Man alone
not sufficient to satisfy for sin.
and in whom the whole world did transgress; and having now found out the
principal party, we must lay hold on him, he is our Prisoner; and until we
proceed first against him, we cannot touch upon the accessaries* death being
the wages of sin, therefore man must dye: but seeing the sin was of infinite
malignity, as being committed against an infinite Majesty, it requires either
an infinite price and ransom, or an infinite punishment and satisfaction:
therefore the death of poor silly man alone cannot suffice, though we must take
it in part of payment, yet it cannot discharge the whole debt.

We must then ascend higher, and if means be used in the redemption God and
man must join in satisfying for sin.
of man, as it is a work of the highest nature, so needs it must have the most
excellent means. This whole world is sublunary, and serves for our inferior
uses, to cloth the back, and to fill the belly; it cannot reach so high as the
heavens, or the work of our redemption; the Angels are only our gardians, they
attend and assist us; and being so meanly ministerial, it were high
presumption to make them our redeemers; for they cannot be sufficiently
thankful for their own being, much less are they able to satisfy for the sin
of others; which sin being infinite, requires an infinite satisfaction; and
therefore none but God alone can suffice, for in justice there must be a
proportion between the offense, and the punishment; but if the punishment
should be infinite, either in the torments, or in the continuance, then there
were no place for Mercy, but it should be wholly excluded, which being one of
Gods attributes, it must ever subsist; therefore it was necessary, that some
infinite Person should suffer; and seeing that the work of Redemption is far
greater then the work of Creation; and therefore we call the time, Hebdomada
major, for in the Creation there was no resistance of Gods Power (for there was
nothing) but in the work of redemption, our sins stand in opposition, and
thereby hinder Gods action; and therefore God is pleased not to use any of
those general attributes, which performed the work of the Creation, as the
omnipotency in making, the providence in preserving, the justice in punishing;
but a Person in the Deity must be engaged, and the more to interest him, in the
cause, and the more for the satisfaction of justice; there must be an
Hypostaticall union of the Godhead and Manhood in one Person, whereby the
weakness, and guiltiness of man supported by the power, and al-sufficiency of
the Godhead, might make a full satisfaction for sin; and though it be not
agreeable to justice, that an innocent should dye for the nocent, yet by the
free oblation of himself it seems very reasonable and just; and thereby he
becomes a true real propitiatory sacrifice for the sins of the whole world;
and as man using means under God, repentance and sorrow for sin, laying hold on
Gods Mercies in Christ, shall receive the full benefit, so I doubt not but the
cursed Angels, the very Devils themselves, may find some mitigation of
punishment, even by Christ's Passion; for God could infinitely increase their
Torments, as their sins have justly deserved; All Gods Mercies are by Christ.
and it is the mercy of God to bind them up in chains, that they might not be
permitted to do more mischief, whereby they might further provoke and incur
Gods heavy wrath and vengeance against them; and that they are capable of some
mercy, or at least of some mitigation of punishment; they are Gods creatures,
they partake of a spiritual nature; and are in the compass of Gods general
mercy, which may abundantly suffice all; and I do ascribe all the mercies of
God to Christ. A Person in the Deity redeems us.


Thus then for our redemption, no less then a Person in the Deity can suffice;
and as this is necessary in respect of justice, which requires a due
recompense; so in regard of the purchase, which is no less then the Kingdom of
heaven, and a Crown of Glory; and therefore could be of no less undertaking,
and performance, then of a Person in the Deity; and that it should be the
second Person, because he is the word, or the wisdom of God; and the sin was
committed against the wisdom of God, by tasting the Tree of knowledge; and
though God be life in himself, and imparts life to all others, yet hereby he
makes himself liable to death without which there could be no satisfaction.
Thus God becoming man, he is interessed in the cause; and so the Justice and
Mercies of God are fully reconciled in Christ.

Thus the Incarnation being presupposed, let us now consider what inconveniency
or disparagement it may be, or rather what advantage, or prerogative, may
thereby accrue to the Deity; and how all the creatures are thereby exalted and
honored, but man especially is infinitely tied to his thankfulness. For any
dishonor to the Deity, certainly there can be none at all; for the whole
universe, in respect of God, is as nothing; and therefore what aspersion may
arise from the Creatures, and be cast on the Deity, it does utterly vanish, and
come to nothing. Thus the mists, and ill vapors of the earth ascend no higher,
then the middle region No dishonor to God to be incarnate.
of the air; and there they are dissolved into Showers, Storms, and Tempests,
and so fall again to the earth: thus Blasphemies and sins done in contempt of
God, yet no way sasten on God, or any way obscute his honor, but thereby God
takes occasion in justice, to power down his wrath and vengeance upon the
transgressors. Thus God according to his own ubiquity is every where, and in
every Creature, yet without the least disparagement to himself: as the
Sunbeams or light, shining upon the most unclean and sordid places, yet are
thereby no way tainted, or infected; much less can the Godhead receive any
blemish or stain from his Creatures. So there being no inconvenience, let us
see what advantage, benefit and honor redounds to the Godhead by the
Incarnation. Gods infinite love.


First, we know, and our Fathers have told us, that the love of God toward man
is infinite, but how shall this appear really and actually, if all the fruits
of Gods love toward man, be finite, and so bounded? therefore it is requisite,
that some act of this infinite love might appear; this is done by an infinite
bond, by an hypostaticall union of God with our nature; and this is such a
bond, as that God himself can do no more, he cannot come nearer man, then by
uniting the two natures in one Person; and this we must truly confess to be the
fruit, and plainly to demonstrate Gods infinite love toward man.

Secondly, we confess Gods omnipotency; but how shall this appear, Gods
omnipotency.
unless there should be some infinite Creature? It is true, that making must
something of nothing, there being an infinite distance, a non ente adens, it
needs argue omnipotency; yet this is only in respect of the manner, but that
Gods omnipotency might every way appear, it is necessary there should be an
infinite Creature: and here behold God and Man are united, and become one
Christ, who is truly infinite, and omnipotent; and therefore does every way
confirm Gods omnipotency.

Thirdly, the Incarnation seems to add some perfection to God, and Gods
experience.
to improve Gods knowledge: it is true, God knows all the miseries and
sorrows of man, all his imperfections and weakness; but he knew them not in
that manner as now he does, for he knew them not by way of trial and
experience in himself. The sick patient, who feels the smart, and sorrow of
his disease, may seem to have better knowledge then the Physician, who has it
only by speculation; God himself had not that experimental knowledge of man's
condition, before he became man, and put on our nature, and in his own Person
became subject to passion. Gods Pa^lion.


Fourthly, to vindicate the Justice of God, for God requires no more of man,
then what God performed to man. The Creation was done by the word of his mouth,
verbo virtutis su^, with the greatest ease and facility, but what God requires
of man, it is accomplished with sorrow, labor and misery, therefore here is no
proportion. Now to stop the mouths of blasphemers, God himself has taken up
man's nature, thereby to make himself subject to passion, and so to perform more
in his own person to man, then he requires of man, or that man can perform unto
God, for that God died for man, but man dies for his own sins.

Fifthly, as God was the Creator of all things, the end and conclusion The
Mediator.
of all, so it was necessary, he should be the Mediator and Redeemer of man;
that so God might be all in all, the beginning, the means, and the end.

Sixthly, it was a great addition and increase of honor to God, which I A new
honor of God in his Title.
prove by the Title which God assumes to himself: for whereas before he was
called The God of heaven and earth, The Lord of the Universe, The Maker and
Creator of all things, The Lord God of Hosts: now he assumes another Title and
style of honor, to be called The God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, the God of
Jacob, which is a more honorable style, then to be called The God of heaven and
earth, seeing that he was then in their loins, who did infinitely exceed the
whole Universe. And as this was his Title in the Old Testament, so in the New
he is called more particularly The Father of our Lord Jesus Christ: and this is
Gods greatest honor.

Seventhly, and as these advantages and prerogatives accrue unto the Deity by
the incarnation of Christ; so there are great privileges which The dignity of
the creatures by the incarnation.
befall the Creatures, in having God to be one of their number and society, for
without this privilege, the Creatures might have expostulated with God, that
although they were made of nothing, yet still in respect of God they were
nothing. Now God is verity and truth, and therefore according to verity and
truth, they were yet still as nothing: See then how much God is disparaged in
the work of his Creation, that he should create nothing of nothing: See how man
and all the Creatures are become contemptible, for that in respect of God, that
is in verity and truth, they are nothing, this were to abate their thankfulness
to God, and to make them dislike their condition; and man himself, though he
may seem to boast of Gods love, that he was created according to Gods image,
yet still he discerns, that there is an infinite distance between God and man:
but when as once God became man, and the Creator was made a Creature, this did
not only shorten the distance between both, but did indeed incorporate them,
and made both Natures, God and Man, to be one Person, as if God should descend
from the Throne of his Majesty, and come nearer the Creature, and stretch a
hand out of the clouds, while poor man out of the dust, raised by Gods grace,
lifts up his hand of Faith and Hope, and while these two hands meet, and are
joined and coupled together, there becomes a perfect marriage, both are united
in one Person, the Deity puts on our weakness, and our manhood is clothed with
Gods (...): And thus is there a perfect union in the Person of Christ.

Eighthly, though the Creatures were made by God, yet still it lies in The
Incarnation is a settlement to the creatures.
Gods power to unmake them, and in every minute to reduce them to nothing, and
some wic^ed men might a little distrust God, but for the assurance of the
continuance of Gods favors, God is become man, the Creator made a Creature,
both Natures now fastened and riveted together by an indissoluble knot of
marriage, which can never be broken; and which serves as a great engagement and
assurance from God, to preserve and continue his graces and blessings upon the
works of his own hands, whereof we have a pledge or earnest in Christ, perfect
God and perfect Man, both Creator and Creature united in one Person, never to
be separated. So I hope it plainly appears, that as the Incarnation can be no
dishonor to God, so it tends to the great honor and settlement of the Creatures.

In speaking of the blessed Trinity, I began with the beginning of S. John's
Gospel. In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and God was
the Word. Then for proof and assurance of this great mystery, I ended with the
end of S. John's Gospel, wherein he affirms, that the world could not contain
the books which might be written of Christ's acts; thereby intimating, that the
works and miracles that Christ wrought above natural power, did most abundantly
serve to confirm and justify the works and mysteries which he taught above
natural Reason. And now that I come to the Incarnation of Christ, where the
invisible God becomes visible man, it is strange how this our Apostle S. John
alters his style: for in his first Epistle, Chap. 1. ver. 1. speaking of God in
our flesh, he says, That which was from the beginning, which we have heard,
which S. John's testimony of the incarnation.
we have seen, which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled of the
word of life: So that he who speaking of the Deity of Christ, like an Eagle
soared aloft, as it were out of sight, even beyond all humane reason and
understanding, speaking now of the Humanity of Christ, he descends so low, to
make it more manifest and palpable, as he seems to fall beneath sense, for that
he calls all the senses of man to witness, which we have heard, which we have
seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled: and
this in effect twice repeated, whereby we may be the more assured of the truth
of his Manhood.

As there was an eternal generation of this Word according to the Godhead, so
was there a Temporal birth of this Word in the fullness of time, according to
his Manhood: for these two Mysteries, though very different in themselves, yet
are they both very wonderful. In the first you shall observe three Persons in
one Nature; in the second you have three Natures in one Person; a Trinity of
Persons in a Unity of Nature, and a Trinity of Natures in a Unity of Person,
the Father, the Son, and the Spirit, three distinct, several, and real Persons,
yet all subsisting in one undivided Essence of the Deity; the Flesh, the Soul,
and the Godhead, three distinct and several Natures, yet all subsisting in one
undivided Person of Christ.

How wonderful is the mercy of God, that whereas our Savior the The
incarnation proceeds from Gods mercy.
second Person in Trinity was All-sufficient and happy in himself, yet in
commiseration of man, man that had sinned in the root, sinned in the bud; when
to our first-fathers guilt we had heaped up innumerable transgressions against
the day of wrath, he took up our nature and infirmities to satisfy for our
sins, to offer up himself as a propitiatory Sacrifice to reconcile us to God:
Men, Angels, and all other inferior created powers, cannot any way satisfy for
the least part of our guilt, as not being able to be sufficiently thankful for
their own being.

Sin is an infinite evil, as being committed against an Infinite Majesty; and
therefore in the exact balance of Gods Justice, requires no less then an
infinite Rans^m, or an infinite Punishment. Righteousness and Justice pleaded
against man, that our sins were such as could not stand with his integrity
freely to pardon; Mercy and Peace put him in mind of his ancient love, that as
he had freely created man, so now likewise in the bowels of compassion he
should freely intend the Redemption of man. And thus it was concluded in the
High Court of Parliament in the highest Gods Justice and Mercy reconciled in
Christ.
Heavens, that God himself, Christ Jesus the second Person in Trinity, should
take our Nature upon him, that as every act of his proceeding from his Deity,
the shedding of the least drop of his blood, the trickling of one tear, the
suffering of one stripe, the least temptation, was of infinite value, of
infinite estimation: so he alone was able to recompense for sin. And thus it
was fulfilled what was said by the Prophet. Mercy and Truth have met together,
Righteousness and Peace have kissed each other: Here is the agreement, and thus
is God and man reconciled, by the coming and Incarnation of our only dear Lord
and Savior Christ Jesus.

When I consider the first sin, the sin of the Angels, I cannot conceive The
occasion of the sin of Angels.
that such excellent Creatures in their own kind, understanding Natures,
intelligent Spirits, should attempt such a foul offense against God, as to
ascend up to his Throne, to take upon them Gods Majesty, were there not some
probability, or likelihood to effect it. I cannot say, whether they had it by
immediate infusion from God, or to speak after the manner of men, by some
common fame or report, that the Creator and Creature should be united in one
Person; or whether by the excellency of their own knowledge, they did fitly
gather, that as the Creation was a work of Gods infinite love, and as God was
existent in every creature, according to the infinite extent of his own nature;
so undoubtedly as an effect of that infinite love, God should tie unto himself
some creature by an infinite band, namely, by an hypostaticall union: And this
their Conceit gave some way and occasion to their pride and presumption, as
claiming and challenging that high prerogative, above other creatures, by
virtue of their birthright. But herein did appear the oversight and ignorance
of the Angels, for the creature was not to aspire to the height and dignity of
the Creator, but the Creator was to descend to the humility and baseness of the
creature; neither was God to be Christ was not to take the nature of Angels.
united to the Angelical nature (though otherwise highest in order and
condition) but to descend lower, to give a more undoubted token of that
infinite love, even to the humane Nature and Manhood, man's Nature being the
Center in the midst of the Circumference, a little Microcosin, in whom all the
creatures are united: things sensible partake in his Body, the intelligent
Spirits are combined in his Soul; and thus God taking the nature of man, sits
in the very midst of his creatures, imparting himself infinitely to all, so far
forth as it may well stand with the truth of his Godhead, and with the state
and condition of the creature.

But supposing the three Persons in one Deity, why should the Word be Why the
second Person, rather then any other, should be incarnate.
made flesh, the Father and the Spirit excluded? Certainly, if we were to make
choice of the Person, reason would inform us, that to be the natural son of man
is more agreeable to the natural Son of God, then to the unbegotten Father, or
to the proceeding Spirit: The manner of his double birth would testify the
same truth, begotten in the understanding of God from all eternity, conceived
in the womb of a Virgin in the fullness of time. The nature of that sin which
was the first motive of this descent, seems to fasten a necessity upon the
second Person of the Trinity, it was a sin against the wisdom of God, the
tasting of the Tree of Knowledge, Eritis sicut Dii scientes bonum and malum;
and therefore fit it was, to show the large treasures of Gods mercy, and the
strictness of Gods Justice, that the same wisdom offended, should satisfy for
the offense, Foelix culpa quae talem habuit Redemptorem; where is the wrong?
How Gods words are verified.
where is the injury, when the party offended shall satisfy? and therefore we
will with humility retort Gods own words upon himself, who upon the fall of man
could say, Ecce Adam quasi unus ex nobis; so now upon the fall of God, that is,
upon the descent of God, we will say, Ecce Deus quasi unus ex nobis. If man
lose the image of God, as concerning Holiness and Sanctity, wherein he was
first created, nothing can restore this image, but that which gave the first
impression. If man cannot conform himself unto God, then for an upshot and
agreement between both, necessary it is that God should consorm himself unto
man: Man lost Gods image, God takes up man's image; and this was most competent
to that Person in the holy Trinity, who as the Apostle describes him to the
Hebrews, was Splendour gloriae, and figura substantiae Patris.

Observe, I beseech you, the creation of man, being made of the earth, God
breathed into his nostrils the breath of life: Breath, if it were agreeable The
incarnation intimated in man's creation.
to Gods nature, yet certainly proceeding from an intelligent Spirit, it could
not be bare breath, but necessarily it must be accompanied with some word,
especially considering, that in all other Creatures you shall find the power
of this word; for God spoke the word, and they were created. But here this word
is concealed, and therefore we may well suppose, that there is some mystery
concealed.

Behold then the first earnest of his Incarnation, God intending a marriage
between the Deity and the Humane Nature, he takes the body of man, as it were
taking his wedding gloves, breathes in them, to extend them, to warm them, to
sit them for himself, at length puts them on. Here now at length the word
accompanies the breath, the breath made us living souls, the word shall make us
quickening spirits; breath gave us a natural life, the word shall regenerate,
and give a new birth: and thus by virtue of this breath, by virtue of this
word, man has a double root, The first Adam and the second Adam.
the first Adam, and the second Adam, taking sap from both; he is Arbor and
arbor inversa, he has a root downward, and a root upward, he treads upon the
earth, and looks up toward heaven. And thus God, if ever intending the
renewing of his Creatures, sit it was, that God should there begin, where he
did end: Man was the last work of the Creation, and therefore in man there must
be the first beginning of renovation, Incipiat ubi desitum est, it is a rule in
all works, and here you shall find it true by experience, the last work is
first perfected, For the Word was made flesh.

But I would gladly demand of the Jews, who do not acknowledge The great
mystery in Gods name.
these mysteries, either the Trinity, or the Incarnation, Why should God be so
careful and curious in giving himself a Name, a Name it is, therefore ordained
to make a difference in a multitude, as many men of one kind are distinguished
by their names: But the nature of God is one, as the Sun is but one, and
therefore wants no name, but the name of his own kind. Gods Name then, as it
imports no difference in his nature, so it implies a distinction and difference
of Persons in that one nature of the Deity. This will better appear, if you
please to consider that great and ineffable Name of God, the Name of four
letters: The first letter was Jod, quod significat principium, and does
undoubtedly betoken the Person of the Father; The second was He, quod vivere
significat, setting out the second Person, as being life in himself, though
life by participation, imparting life unto the Creatures, for in him we live,
we move, and have our being, he is the Way, the Truth, and the Life; The third
letter was Vau, quae vim apud Hebraeos habet Copulandi, intimating the love of
God proceeding from the Father and the Son, whereby the Father and the Son are
united; The last letter it was the same with the second letter, He twice
repeated, ut duas in filio fateamur naturas, and Dei and Hominis. And that you
may conceive that this observation of the Name, proceeds not from man's fancy,
and conjecture, I pray give me leave to bring another Example to this purpose.

When God had tied himself unto Abraham, as touching the promised The name of
Abraham changed.
seed, in token hereof it pleased God to change the name of Abraham, from Abram
to Abraham, by the addition of a letter; so likewise of his wife, from Sarai to
Sarah, by the substraction of a syllable, and the addition of a letter. Now you
shall observe that this letter, which was added to both their names, it was
indeed one and the same letter, and it was a letter of Gods own Name, the
second letter of his Name, that as the second Person was to be united to the
nature of Abraham and Sarah, so this letter given and received, might serve as
a pledge or an earnest to signify that union.

Observe the phrase and style of Scripture, Verbum Domini venit ad Several
presages of Christ's coming.
Isaiam, venit ad Prophetas, etc. which form of speech, to my understanding,
cannot be so well justified, were it not that this word were a Person, and that
some certain manner of coming were proper and peculiar to this Person. Why
should God speak of himself after the manner and fashion of men? I cannot
disallow the opinion of our Divines, that God speaking to man's understanding,
fit it was that he should descend to man's capacity; but desiring that truth in
Gods words might altogether appear, I had rather apply them to an intended
incarnation, then to admit a bare figure in Gods words, which happily to us
might be some occasion of error. Wherefore serve the groanings and cries of the
Fathers, Expectabo salutare tuum Domine, Mitte quem missurus es, Rorate Coeli
desuper, and nubes, pluan^ iustum, Utinam disrumperes Coelos and descenderes,
Elevate portas principes (...) introibi^ Rex gloriae, etc. were not this Son to
be born, this expected Messiah, above the state and condition of man? for by
nature children should rather boast of their Parents, showing their honorable
descent, pedigree and lineage; but if the decrepit Parents, for many precedent
ages, shall comfort themselves in hope of this child, as it is no natural
course, so undoubtedly this child must claim a higher birth then nature can
afford him.

Let their own Prophets witness against them, I will now content my self
Christ's God* head prophesied.
with two only quotations, Jer. 33. 16. In those days shall Judah be saved,
and Jerusalem shall dwell safely, and he that shall call her, is the Lord our
Righteousness. Isa. 7. 14. Behold, a Virgin shall conceive and bear a Son, and
she shall call his name Emmanuel, which is by interpretation, God with us.

For that Temporal Kingdom which the Jews expect, I would gladly A temporal
Messiah how improbable.
know, what contentment can the world yield, whereof their fathers were
destitute; a rich, glorious, and beautiful Temple, the Land of Protnise in
possession, a people multiplying above measure, made a terror to all Nations,
Peace and Plenty within their walls, a wise and a just Law, Politic and good
Governors, valiant and victorious Captains; and yet in those days there was a
continual expectation of the Messiah, not to add to their worldly pomp, but to
establish a higher Kingdom, the Kingdom of Grace and of Truth, which herein
exceeds all earthly Monarchs* that it wants no outward Thrones nor Ceremonies
to set forth his own greatness, but it appears glorious in baseness, powerful
in weakness, that so Gods immediate hand might better discover it self, who
pulls down the mighty from their seat, and exalts the humble and meek. Far be
it that the coming of the Messiah, the expectation of all Nations, should only
tend to worldly and transitory honors, which is but vanity of vanities, and
cannot quench the moderate thirst of the soul; neither is so befitting man's
present state and condition for this world, which we now inhabit, is but the
place of our exile, a vale of misery, a just punishment for our fathers
disobedience, and only serves as an earnest, or a passage to a farther
happiness. If Paradise were to be replanted on earth, God had never expelled
man Paradise; yet let the Jews apply those Promises of Christ's coming to
Judgment.
glory to the second coming of Christ, his coming to Judgment, and there shall
they find them truly verified according to the letter, that not one tittle of
the Law can miscarry.

Thus having incountred with the Jews, I will now come to the Hypostatical
Union of this Word with our flesh: for Explication whereof, I do much commend
the saying of a Father, Nec inferiorem consump sit Two several Natures.
glorificatio, nec superiorem minuit assumptio, two distinct and several
natures, the Godhead and Manhood, and yet the weakness and infirmities of man
not swallowed up in the Majesty of God, nor yet Gods Majesty imbased or
lessened by the assumption of the Manhood, but both continue whole and entire,
both make but one Person, Christ Jesus, our dear and blessed Messiah.

I will illustrate this with two similitudes: God first appearing to
Similitudes to set forth the hypostatical Union.
Moses, appeared in the form of fire in a bramble bush, the fire not consuming
the bush* nor the bush obscuring the fire, but both continuing whole and entire
in their own nature. 2. Our Savior is here styled by the name of a Word: and
in a word you shall observe these two parts; Sonus, a sound, the elision of the
air proceeding from the mouth, and possessing the ear; and likewise Verbum, a
significant word, carried by the Conduit-pipe of this sound, and informing the
understanding. The sound proceeds from motion, and only beats upon the
sensitive part; the word taking his descent from reason, does likewise speak to
the reasonable soul, neither sound nor word are confounded, neither sound nor
word can be separated. I will not only content my self with bare similitudes,
but it shall further appear by a type. Benjamin had two names, from his mother
he was called Henoni, that is, the son of sorrow, the son of affliction; and
from his father he took the name Benjamin, that is, the son of Strength, the
son of Portitude and Courage. Make the application to Christ.

Now, for the possibility of this union of the Godhead with our Nature, The
possibility of the Incarnation.
does not Reason inform us, That as Creatures have their condition from God, so
it cannot stand with the same goodness of God, without great, and just
occasion, to alter and change their state and propriety. See you not God in all
his works, and yet the works still continuing and subsisting in their own
kind? Can thou conceive how all the contrary Elements should be combined in
one compound subject? Can thou understand how the body and soul are united,
two distinct and several substances, of several kinds, the Spirit and the
Flesh, not necessarily depending upon each other, the soul having life, motion,
action, existency, without the help of the body, and the body likewise
subsisting in his own Elements, without the information of the soul? Then why
should it seem strange or incredible, that the Godhead and Manhood should be
linked in one Person* since nothing is impossible to God, but that which
implies a contradiction?

From this union of the word with our flesh, necessary it is that the The
consequences of the Incarnation.
manhood of Christ should receive all possible infusion of grace, all possible
perfection, which may be any way competent, or stand with the condition of a
creature; and that in the first moment of this union, Christ increased in
knowledge, but it was according to man's appearance and Judgment; for in his
first conception, the manhood in the right of the Deity, contained in it self
all the treasures of Gods wisdom, the fullness of knowledge; which
notwithstanding by degrees, according to man's state and condition, did manifest
and discover themselves.

This band between both being indissoluble, which did well appear in How the
natures were united.
the time of Christ's (passion hough the soul and the body were separated, yet
the soul and the Deity were never divorced) and two distinct natures being knit
together by this indissoluble bond, making but one person; hence it is, that
there is a mutual communication of attributes between both, and that without
the breach of truth; man's weakness fastened on the Deity, and Gods power
ascribed to man's infirmity, Deus natus est, and passus est, homo fecit
miracula, and captivam duxit captivitatem, in this union nothing was wanting to
Christ, which was necessary to man's nature, no imperfection redounding in
Christ, whereof the nature of man might be privileged, he was conceived
without sin, and therefore might well subsist without sin, yet the punishment
of sin, of that original sin, Morte morieris, being tied to our nature, by a
Statute Law, Statutum est hominibus semel mori, if God takes up man's nature, he
cannot be exempted from that penalty; though free from the sin yet liable to
the punishments as sustaining the person of whole mankind, and with his
undeserved punishment, satisfying for all; but for our actual transgressions,
as he was likewise free from these sins, so neither could the vengeance of God,
due No sickness* could befall Christ.
for those particular sins, seize upon Christ; no error in his understanding,
no perverseness in his will, no blemish in his body, nothing defective in his
members, no sickness could attach him, no leprosy infect him, and therefore
the price of his innocent blood, being of infinite value was made an infinite
ransom for sin; and takes away the guilt, both of original and of our actual
sins; for he dyed for our sins, and rose again for our justification, and thus
is the Word made flesh; God is manifested in the flesh, justified in the
spirit, seen of the Angels, preached to the Gentiles, believed on in the world,
and received up in glory.

And now I come to the manner and circumstances of Christ's Birth The
circumstances of Christ's Birth.
and Nativity; not intending to speak any more of the mystery it self. I will
only insist in some very few outward circumstances, not unlike our unskilful
Historians, who sometimes unacquainted with the secresies of State, the close
carriage of business, and the inward affairs of kingdoms, are able
notwithstanding to discover many several circumstances, and outward
occurrences, whereby the judicious reader better conceives then the Author
could happily inform: so here for want of due knowledge, I will only acquaint
you with the circumstances, reserving the mystery it self, to your godly and
serious meditations; these circumstances, I will divide according to the
Schools division, Antecedentia, concomitantia, subsequentia.

First in the preparatives to his coming, I might be infinite in relating The
preparatives to his coming.
the several promises of God, as touching the seed of the woman; the Stock,
Tribe, and Family, to which these promises were tied and intayled; the truth of
these promises, continued in many prophesies, acted out in Types, resembled in
figures, shadowed in parables, offered up in bloody sacrifices; and in a word
sealed and confirmed unto us, in the whole scope and intent of the Law; from
hence proceeds such a certain expectation of the Fathers, that in their
infallible hope and assurance, they went so The Gentiles.
far, as to make his nuptial Song, the Song of Songs, the Canticles, as if
they had been to bo sung, on the day of his marriage; and in their deaths, that
it might appear, that still their hopes did survive them. I will only instance
in Jacob, Expectabo salutare tuum Domine, in token hereof, as it were making
his last Will and Testament, bequeathing his soul unto God; he takes order for
his Christian burial, lays a charge on Jacobs expectation.
his Son, to carry his dead body out of Egypt, as it were then going to
Jerusalem in Pilgrimage; that so, Christ at his coming, might tread upon his
dead bones; and that he might for ever rest near the place of his rest, the
holy Sepulcher.

But I will here only make choice of prophesies, for that it is said that The
prophesies of Christ.
Christ before his coming, was Assimilatus in manibus prophetarum, framed out
in wax, in the hands of the prophets: not unlike a custom of Princes, who
intending to match with strangers, as it well beseemes their high condition,
and stands with the policy of government State; having no opportunity upon all
occasions, or suddenly to meet themselves; first they send their Ambassadors to
treat of a marriage; and together with them, their own pictures, to move love
and affection. So Christ intending to espouse himself to the Church* willing
not personally to appear before the fullness of time were accomplished; first
sends out his prophets, who so lively and accurately describe him to the world,
as that in his coming, we could not mistake either in his person, or in his
condition; but if I should give way to all several prophesies* I should prove
infinite; How am I plunged with varieties, and over-laded with plenty, in this
argument! I will only tie my self to some few prophesies, which point out the
very instant time of his coming.

Genesis 49. 10. The scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a l. a wgiver The
coming of of Eltah.
from between his feet, until Shiloh come, and the people shall be gathered
unto him; that this is meant by the Messiah all confess; and it is manifest by
the word Shiloh, which signifies the prince of peace; that the time is now
accomplished it is apparent in Herod, who first succeeded* and put down their
Sanedrim or council house; consisting especially of the chosen men of the
tribe of Judah, in so much that many of the Jews, well perceiving that the
time was now come; and knowing Gods promises to be certain and infallible, they
began to acknowledge Herod for their Herodians.
Messiah, as succeeding the tribe of Judah, in the government of that State;
and from thence they are called Herodians, as they are mentioned in the Acts of
the Apostles. Others seeing that all things were not accomplished in Herod,
began to acknowledge Vespasian the Emperor for their Messiah, as having the
government of the Roman Empire; and pretending that he was descended by his
Mothers side from the high Priest, and the tribe of Judah. A third sort seeing
that all things were not accomplished in Herod or Vespasian, began presently to
rebel, and stir up in Arms against their Prince and the Romans; as then
expecting upon this occasion, that their Messiah should manifest and discover
himself; and at length recover their weak, decayed, and ruinated Monarchy. The
best of them the high Priests, the Scribes, and the Levites sent to John
Baptist to know, whether he were that expected Messiah or not? as being privy
and guilty to themselves that the time was now come for the approach of the
Messiah; How Christ no temporal Messiah as he Jews expected.
were these men deluded, when through pride and hardness of heart, they went a
whoring after their own inventions, expecting a Lord ike, and a temporal
Messiah; and looking to the glory of this world, their eyes were dazelled; and
they could not discern Majesty clothed in humility, power shadowed in weakness;
our expected Shiloh, our deer and blessed Messiah Christ Jesus; even at that
time born of a Virgin, and laid in a Manger

The second Text of Scripture to prove the just time of his coming, is The time
of his coming.
taken out of the ninth of Daniels Prophecy, whereby the number of weeks the
time is described; so that by the exact computation of Chronology, it cannot
possibly betoken any other time, then the Birth and Nativity of our Savior.
The third Testimony is taken out of the second of Aggay 7, Yet a little while,
and I will shake the heavens, and the earth, and the Sea, and the dry Land; and
I will move all Nations, and the desire of all nations shall come; and I will
fill this house with glory, says the Lord of Hosts, this could not happen at
any other time, but in the days of our Savior; and many hundred years are now
past, wherein the Jews have continued an ignominious, and desolate people; a
reproach to all Nations, their Temple destroyed, their Priesthood abolished
their Tribes confounded, their kingdom ruinated, and themselves scattered, and
dispersed over the face of the whole earth; and therefore these things were
then accomplished, at the Birth of our Savior.

For the manner of his coming, see how all other Prophesies do concur The
manner of Christ's coming.
with our Savior, that he should be born of a Virgin, Esaias 7. Born at
Bethelem, Mich. 5. That then he should come into the world, when there should
be an universal peace, for the greater propagation of Christianity, Esaias 2.
Mich. 4. Zach. 9. That John Baptist should be his forerunner, and prepare the
hearts of men by preaching repentance, Mal: 3. Esaias 40. that the Gospel should
be preached to the poor, confirmed by Miracles, Esaias 35. and the 61. that poor,
and yet as a King, he should enter into Jerusalem, Zach. 9. that the Gentiles
should be called, the Jews rejected, Isa. 49. and the 66. Alas, I should be
infinite, if I should run over all several prophesies. Thus much in general,
there is not any one Action attributed to the Messiah by the prophets, which is
not most truly competent to Christ, all several Types are likewise
accomplished; the brazen Serpent lift up in the wilderness, the paschall Lamb
slain in remembrance of their delivery from the bondage of Egypt, all other
sacrifices offered by the Priests, for the sins of people: these and many other
infinite are all fulfilled, in our dear and crucified Savior. I shall not here
need to speak of their miracles, for they tending wholly to strengthen, and
confirm the truth of their Doctrine; their Doctrine being referred to
Christianity, their miracles do likewise testify our faith and belief; and so
I come to the Gentiles.

Not any prophecy to my understanding, more evident and effectual, Prophesies
and preparatives among the Gentiles, for the coming of Christ.
then was the prophecy of Balaam Numb. 24. wherein we may observe the
certainty of his hope, videbosed non modo, intuebor sed non prope, the double
nature of Christ, together with his descent and genealogy, stella orietur ex
Jacob, the kingdom of Christ, Virga consurget de Israel, the power of this
kingdom, together with the large extent, and happiness of this kingdom in the
words following, Percutiet duces Moab etc. that this prophecy must be
understood of Christ, all consent and agree; and I pray mark his own
preparation, twice repeated in the same Chapter, Balaam the Son of Beorhath
said, and the man whose eyes are open has said; he has said, who heard the
words of God, and knew the knowledge of the most high, which saw the vision of
the Almighty, falling into a trance, but having his eyes open; you would think
this man to be mad, werei^ not a prophecy of such excellency, wherein he
seems to glory, and boast that it was the only joy and comfort of his heart;
and therefore desires to prefix his own name, in great Capital Letters, to
leave a Testimony of his faith, to all succeeding ages.

For the truth and confirmation of this prophecy, lest the Jews might A
miracle to confirm the prophecy.
seem to distrust him, and wholly to neglect, and condemn all the Gentiles
(when as notwithstanding some of them had the knowledge of the true God) behold
a miracle, the Ass speaks; for I should as soon believe, that an Ass might
see an Angel, know an Angel, discern the secret intent, and thoughts of an
Angel, be able to speak, able to reprehend his master, though a prophet, as
that a heathen man of himself should be able to prophecy of the coming and
kingdom of Christ.

For the success and event of this prophecy, both figuratively and literally;
The ful^lling of the prophecy.
see how all things were fulfilled, when as the great Magi either descended
from Balaam, or having certain knowledge of his prophecy, did continually
watch; and attend the appearing of the Star in Judea, which conducted them to
the place of his birth; where they worshipped God in our flesh; and were
accepted of Christ; and were made the first fruits of the Gentiles: O the joy
and comfort of all our hearts, who were then the forlorn and desolate people,
but now in them, by them, and together with them, we are made the sheep of
Christ's fold, members of his Church; thus Balaam in his posterity, saw the
accomplishing of his own prophecy.

But I will not borrow my evidences from Scripture, I will deal with The
prophesies of the Sibylls.
the heathen in their own Records; it was not the simple and rude multitude, or
the ignorant and vulgar people, which so much admired, and extolled the
Sibylls; but the Sibylls were famous among the learned, much esteemed of the
wise, such as were the only Oracles in all the uncertainties of State; and here
see the wonderful works of Gods providence, whereas their writings had lien
moth-eaten for many years, wrapped ^p together with other old Records of the
Romans, whereas none might pe^use them under a certain penalty; see here a
little before the Birth of our Savior, by the Emperors command, they were
reviewed, and set to the open sight of the world, that all people might take
just notice of the truth; and accomplishing of these prophesies, see here a
thing which seems casual to the eyes of man: God has ordained even by the
means of bad instruments, the Heathen Emperors, the manifesting of his glory.

Now for the subject matter, contained in their prophesies. I can give The
Sibylls speak very punctually of Christ.
no other Testimony but only this; it is impossible for the best grounded
Divine, or the mo^ constant, and assured Christian, to comprize more several
mysteries, or greater variety of actions in so few vers^s, all verified in our
Savior; then are contained in their prophesies. The blessed Saint Austin has
well observed, that the first Letters of their verses, being joined together
will make up these words, Jesus Christus filius unigenitus Dei, Jesus Christ
the only begotten Son of God. It were needless to repeat any of their sayings,
seeing all of them tend, and bear witness of the Messiah; insomuch as the
Christians were ever after forbidden the use of their books, by the Heathen
Emperors, the persecutors of Christ, lest they should convert, or confound
them, by the Testimony of their own Prophets.

Now for the Religion of the Heathen, see how God did naturally ingraff The
Religion of the heathen a preparation to Christianity.
in them some small shadow of his Deity; or otherwise permitted their errors,
that so they might the sooner be brought to believe these mysteries of
Christianity, they acknowledged one God; and thus they were taught by the light
of reason, for there can be but only one infinite; and yet they worshipped many
God, as Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, and such like; which doubtless, has some small
resemblance, and is an obscure shadow of the Trinity; wherein we acknowledge
three Persons, and yet but one God. Secondly, in their Gods, they considered
one, as the Father of the rest, Divum pater, etc. All of them linked together
in the Chain of consanguinity and kindred, and this may in some sort, set forth
the eternal generation of Christ, that God the Father, did beget his Son; and
from both proceeds the holy Ghost. Thirdly, their Gods were men, which in
effect might intimate thus much, that God should prove man, Christ Jesus God
and man, two d^stinct Natures, and yet but one Person and substance; and thus
the Jews in regard of the Divine revelation, the Gentiles by the principles of
their own Religion, cannot suppose the mysteries of Christianity, to be strange
and incredible; but all might acknowledge the Star of Salvation; which God has
prepared before the face of all people, to be a light to enlighten the
Gentiles, and to be the glory of his people Israel: and so now I come to such
things as are concomitantia, such as did accompany his Birth.

God having decreed to take our Nature upon him, he prepared for The Mother of
Christ, an espoused Virgin.
himself a chosen vessel, the most pure, spotless, immaculate, and undefiled
Virgin, that ever did subsist of our corrupted flesh, the Blessed Virgin Mary.
Blessed be the womb that conceived my Savior; and happy are the Paps, that
gave him suck! Mary an espoused Virgin; and that for these five Reasons. First,
that no unjust imputation should be laid against her, through the infamy of
childbirth. Second^y, that she might have the comfort of a spouse, a
fellow-helper in such extremities. Thirdly, that the Birth of Christ, might be
concealed from the evil Spirit, who did undoubtedly foresee, that the Messiah
should be born of a Virgin; and therefore it was the providence of God, that
she should be an espoused Virgin; so to prevent his mischievous, and wicked
practices and designs. Fourthly, for the approbation of all the several
states of men; virginity which is recommended unto us in the Mother of Christ,
and yet an espoused Virgin; and there is the approbation of marriage. Fifthly,
and most especially as I conceive; because the genealogy of Males was only
enrolled, and public notice taken only of their Tribe; and they matching in
the same Tribe, there could be no further question, but both were of Judah;
whereof the promise was made for the descent of the Messiah.

I will not here speak of Saint John Baptist, the forerunner of Christ, The
general taxing at the Birth of Christ.
who was the voice of a crier in the wilderness, as was prophesied by Esaias. I
will tie my self more strictly to speak of his Birth; being conceived in
Galalee, it fell out so, that Augustus Caesar then Emperor, taxing the whole
world, every one was to repair to his own City; and therefore Joseph and Mary
went from Nazareth in Galilee unto Bethlehem a City of David, for they were of
the house and lineage of David, as it is Recorded by Saint Luke in his second
Chapter. Observe here I beseech you, a most wonderful and unspeakable
providence of God; it may be this genera^l meeting and assembly was called
against the coming of their true King, notwithstanding the edict came from
Augustus: It may be that it was Gods goodness, that through this general
concourse, and passage of people, there might be a greater manifestation of his
Birth; and therefore he was conceived in Galilee, born in Bethlehem, brought up
in Egypt, that all the world might take just notice of his coming. These
happily may be but man's conjectures; I will therefore acquaint you with four
things, which I think were most especially intended by the holy Ghost.

First, whereas the blessed Virgin having no Revelation, might happily The
effects which fo^lowed the Emperors Edict.
be ignorant of the place of Christ's Birth, and where she should be del^vered;
see here there comes forth an edict from an heathen Emperor, that so the
prophecy might be fulfilled, that the Messiah should be born at Bethlehem,
Mich: 5. Secondly, whereas there might be made some doubt of his Genealogy,
Joseph and Mary by virtue of this edict, were constrained to go to Bethlehem a
City of David, thereby to make it manifest, that they were descended from the
Tribe of Judah, whereof the Messiah was expected. Thirdly, whereas it was
prophesied, that the Scepter should not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from
between his feet until Shiloh come, by this one act of gathering together the
dispersed people, and that for the payment of Tribute to the Roman Empire to a
forain Prince, it is manifest that the people were now in thraldom and
captivity; and that the time now approached for the coming of the^r Messiah.
Fourthly, to manifest the truth of his Nature, no sooner born, but he was
instantly circumcised among the Jews, which did serve for the trial and
touchstone of his Manhood: so with the Gentiles he is here numbered and
accounted amongst men. And as his Nature, so his Condition did appear, that he
was not to be any Temporal King, for he traveled in his mothers womb, to pay
Tribute unto Caesar, and therefore Herod might be well secured of his own
Kingdom, Non eripit mortalia qui Regna dat coelestia. How many and how great
Mysteries are contained in this one action, Time, Place, Genealogy and
Descent, the truth of his nature and condition, all manifested by a Decree of
an Heathen Prince, little intending the good of Gods Church, God overrules the
hearts of Princes: And this is wholly to be referred to his All-disposing
Providence.

Coming to Bethlehem, Joseph and Mary were lodged in a common Inn: No marvel,
for here was the birth of a stranger and forainer, God of himself, yet now
become man, being Lord over all, yet for our sins taking upon himself the form
of a servant, etc. Thus the preparation Why Christ was born in a common Inn.
for his birth and nativity, was answerable to his state and condition: In a
common Inn, as being to extend equally his universal grace unto all, none are
excluded from a common Inn, none are rejected from the bosom of the Church, the
passage lies open to all, and all are admitted through Faith and Repentance: So
was his Passion. Extra portas Civitatis, without the walls of the City, as not
redounding to the particular benefit of City or People, but equally extended to
all. In a common Inn, where commonly the greatest excess, the greatest riot and
disorder is observed; and therefore it shows the end of his coming, which was
to satisfy for the sins of his people.

And yet there was no room in the Inn (it should seem it was taken up, Christ
was born in a stable.
with a multitude of guests in this great concourse of people) and therefore
she must be delivered in a Stable. See here a homely entertainment of the
Majesty of God, and man's unthankfulness for his mercy! and thus it befalls the
heart of man, which being wholly possessed and swallowed up with our worldly
thoughts, the lust of our eyes, the concupiscence of our flesh, cannot afford
the least entertainment or harbor for the working of Gods Spirit. Born in a
Stable? Here it was verified that the Ox and the Ass acknowledged their Lord
and Master, while sinful man stood wilful and obstinate, neglecting his Maker.
Born in a Stable? True it is, that from the first day of his birth, to the last
minute of his Passion, the foxes had holes, the birds had their nests, but the
Son of man had no place of habitation. Born in a Stable? Here is no
preparation, no solemnity, as if we were to expect not a man, but the worm of
men, and the outcast of the people. Alas dear Virgin, comfort thy self, thy
Babe is thy Comforter, thy Comforter thy Savior: for behold, from henceforth
all generations shall call thee blessed. Alas sweet Babe, pardon our unkindness
and discourtesie in thy entertainment, thou thy self have taken the nature of
man, and what is man but grass and hay, well befitting a Stable? and therefore
as thou thy self have infinitely abased thy self, so pardon our unthankfulness,
if in stead of Princely Palaces, rich Pavilions, Ivory Beds, tho^ were born in
a Stable, and laid in a Manger. And thus much for the Place now I come to the
Time.

It was in the sixth Age of the World: As man was created on the sixth Christ
was born in the sixth age.
day, so in the sixth Age God intended the renewing and redemption of man. We
are not to demand, why sooner or later he took not our flesh? for this was in
the free choice and election of God; only this probable reason may be given,
That as wise Physicians then labor to purge the disease, when it is grown to
his height and ripeness; so God expected the time when Charity was grown cold,
the Kings office decayed, the Priests duty neglected, the Synagogue divided
into Sects and Schisms: and this is in some sort resembled by the barrenness of
the earth, for he came in the winter season. And it is to be feared, lest our
Sects and Divisions, our sins, our crying sins, will hasten his second Coming
in Judgment. His coming was in Solstitio Brumali, when the days were at the
shortest, and then began to increase. And hence is gathered, though a common,
yet a witty observation of S. Ambrose, that as John the Baptist decreased, so
Christ should increase; John Baptist born at Midsummer, when the days shorten,
and Christ with the lengthning of days increasing in glory. See here an
admirable Providence in every the least circumstance; Christ was born at
midnight, as may appear by the Shepherds Christ was born at midnight.
watch, which argues the worlds universal darkness, and that his coming in the
flesh was to cover and conceal sin, that in the day of Gods wrath he might take
our iniquities upon himself, and impute his Righteousness to us: and therefore
it was an approved and laudable custom of the Fathers, to keep their watchings
the same night, and to offer up their prayers and thanksgivings, in memory of
the hour of his Nativity. And so I come to such things as are Consequentia,
such as followed his Nativity.

I will not speak of the Angels song to the Shepherds, which was the What
followed the birth of Christ.
Calling of the Jews. I will not speak of the Stars appearing, which guided the
Wisemen to the place of his birth, where they worshipped, and were the
first fruits of the Gentiles. I will only name one action, which is the
Murder of Infants, the Martyrdom of Innocents. It should seem then that the
birth of Christ was not a matter of small importance, or little moment in the
eyes of Princes, that Herod should slay all the children from two years old and
under, for the assurance of his State and Kingdom. But here observe the
Providence of God; Herod in revenge, and to satisfy his own ambition,
attempted such an horrible cruelty: God permitted the action, 1. For the
punishment of the Jews, who for not affording place for our Saviors birth,
they justly incurred his wrath and indignation, insomuch that their own eyes
beheld the slaughter of their own The martyrdom of the Innocents.
babes, flesh of their flesh, and bones of their bones, late conceived in the
womb, now committed to the grave, from the Cradle to the Coffin, late pampered
in the bosom, now putrefying in the dust. 2. That the prophecy might be
fulfilled, In Rama was a voice heard, mourning, and weeping, and great howling,
Rachel weeping for her children, and would not be comforted, because they were
not, Jer. 31. 15. 3. For the manifesting of his own glory, that upon his
entrance into the world, so many happy infants should be ordained from all
eternity to suffer Martyrdom for his Cause, the day of their death was much
more happy to them, then was the day of their Nativity; and therefore we
celebrate and keep solemn The keeping of the feast, an argument of the truth.
a certain Feast Day, in memory of those Innocents. 4. Since Moses was a type
of Christ (for both of them were Lawgivers) as the children of the Hebrews
were put to death at the birth of Moses; so the death of these infants might
give testimony to a second, to a new Lawgiver.

Thus as King Pharaoh did persecute Moses, so King Herod persecuted A
comparison between Christ and Moses.
Christ: Moses was laid in a Basket, Christ in a Manger. And as they thus
agreed in the circumstances of their Nativity, so in the manner and course of
their lives. Moses led the Israelites through the Red Sea; Christ led his
people through Baptism, and so through his own blood: Both of them fasted forty
days: Moses appointed Seventy Elders; Christ Seventy Disciples: Moses sent out
Twelve Spies to discover the promised Land; Christ sent out Twelve Apostles
into the world, to publish the Kingdom of Heaven: Moses wrought his Miracles by
a Rod; Christ by his Cross: and therefore as Moses Rod was laid up in the Ark;
so the Cross of Christ has ever been most precious in the Church: Moses
delivered his people from the bondage of Egypt; and Christ delivered his from
the thraldom and slavery of sin. Thus do the two Lawgivers agree, whereby it
appears, that Moses was but a type of Christ, and the Law only a preparation to
the Gospel.

But I will leave the Jews, and descend to the Gentiles, whose posterity Signs
amongst the Gentiles for the coming of Christ.
we are: and I will take a view, what happened amongst them upon the birth of our
Savior. Certain it is, that the Oracles then spoke, that Nature had brought
forth a King, and immediately the Images which were wont to be worshipped in
Churches, fell down, and were broken, which many referred to the greatness of
Augustus, though truly it was competent to Christ. Eusebius reports, that at
the same time there sprang out of the earth a River of Oil, which argues that
grace was now to be conferred to the Gentiles, and that he was now born, who
was anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows.

Orosius reports, that Augustus Caesar then Emperor, commanded on the same day,
that no man hereafter should call him Lord or Master; as* if God had secretly
inspired in his heart, that then was born the Lord of lords, the King of kings,
Christ Jesus, God and Man: and therefore it was impiety and sacrilege for any
vassal of his, during his presence, to accept the Title of Lord or Master.
Suidas reports, that when Augustus Caesar, having offered his Sacrifice,
demanded of Apollo who should The Oracles having first acknowledged Christ,
after became dumb.
reign after him, at first he stood mute; and after a second Sacrifice, he
returned this answer, Me puer Hebraeus, Divos Deus ipse gubernans, Cedere sede
jubet, tristomque redire sub orcum; Aris ergo dehinc tacitis abscedito nostris;
which in effect is thus much, That the Hebrew child, which is God Almighty,
had commanded him silence, and never after spoke the Oracles. Whereupon
Augustus returned, and built a stately and beautiful Altar, with this
Inscription, Ara primogeniti Dei, The Altar of the first begotten of God. One
of the Sibyls at that time living in Rome, showed Augustus a Circle near the
Sun, wherein there sat a Virgin with a child in her arms; and withal she
told him, that now was born a greater and mightier Prince then he. Templum
Pacis, the Temple of Peace, whereunto was annexed this Prophecy, That it
should so long continue, until a Virgin should conceive: at the birth of our
Savior suddenly it fell down; whereupon there was another Temple erected,
Virgini pariturae, To the Virgin that does or shall hereafter conceive. And to
conclude, some have observed, that at the same time when Christ took our nature
to honor man, and make him equal with Angels, such as had abused our nature,
such as were tainted with the most foul, unclean, and carnal sin, all suddenly
perished, and the execution of death overtook them unawares.

My method has been to confirm the Doctrine by Miracles: and as The Miracles
which have happened in the Church.
the blessed Trinity is the highest and greatest Mystery of all others, so for
Confirmation both of that and of the rest of the Mysteries, I did only produce
such Miracles as were done by Christ in the Gospel. Now seeing to that Mystery
I have added the Incarnation, I will then here produce such Miracles as were
done in the Church successively, for Confirmation of Christian Religion in
general: for I should as soon believe, that Christ never instituted a Church,
as that he should be wanting in the means to preserve that Church. You shall
then observe, that no Church or State can subsist without government; therefore
in the last of S. John, Christ appoints a governor in his Church: and the first
thing that is done by S. Peter, was the choice and election of Matthias, Act.
1. in stead of Judas Iscariot, that so the number of the Apostles might be made
up: and the last thing which he did a little before his death, was to appoint
his own successor, as it appears in his second Epistle. The first great Miracle
after Christ's own Ascension, was the coming down of the Holy Ghost in fiery
tongues; the effect of these tongues, that they spoke all languages; the power
and efficacy of these tongues, that in one Sermon he converted 3000, Act. 2.
But because men are most moved with things that are sensible, therefore S.
Peter's miracles.
S. Peter cures one that is born lame, and then 5000 believe, Acts 3. 4. And as
it falls out in Military affairs, and in all governments, some must be made
examples of Justice for the terror of others: so Ananias and Sapphira were
stricken to death with his bare word, Act. 5. And that it may appear that the
powers of Hell could not oppose him, Simon Magus can testify, Act. 8. And that
it might appear how beneficial his power was to Mankind, he heals the sick
at Lydda, and raises Tabitha from death at Joppa, Act. 9. And all this was
done the first year after the Ascension of Christ. And how much he prevailed in
Rome, may appear by a Heathen Author, Cornelius Tacitus, in the Life of
Claudius. I shall not need to prosecute this any further, when it may appear by
my Annals.

It is the practice of the Church, that seeing S. Peter and S. Paul suffered
Where Scripture leaves the Church.
both in one day, and that they were the great and the chief Apostles,
therefore the Church does never separate them. See then the miraculous
Conversion of S. Paul, that there should be such a light, and a voice to be
heard, and himself to be stricken blind, while he was in his heat of
persecuting the Christians, and that he should become such a Convert, which is
a far greater Miracle, then that he raised up Eutychus from death, Act. 20. or
his prediction of the shipwreck, or the casting away of the Viper, without any
hurt to himself, which the very Heathen did acknowledge to be wonderful. Thus
the Acts of the Apostles, as they begin with S. Peter, so they end with S.
Paul, and they leave him at Rome, that both S. Peter and S. Paul together might
suffer Martyrdom on the same day; and together with them the Church was there
left, God forsaking the Jews, came to the Gentiles: and as all the Religion of
the Gentiles had been formerly coined at Rome, so no doubt but the Roman Empire
was a special means to propagate the Church. As the Jews had their Types and
Figures, their Prophesies of Christ; so the Romans had their Moral Virtues, and
their humane Learning in great measure, only as a preparation to Christianity:
And seldom are the Romans mentioned A commendation of the ancient Romans.
in Scripture, but with some commendation; insomuch that Christ himself would
not come into the world, and descend of the Jews, until the Jews first became
subject to the Romans; and Christ himself traveled in the womb, only to pay
Tribute to Caesar; and in his Preaching he preached obedience to Caesar, and
thereby settled that Empire, then newly erected. And Pontius Pilate the Roman
Governor, did what he could to set Christ at liberty; and being enforced by the
importunity of Jews to Crucify him, yet he washed his hands in his own
innocence, being thereunto forewarned by his wife (that so she might make some
recompense for the Tempting of Eve) the Romans did likewise revenge the death
of Christ upon the Jews, destroying their Temple, scattering them, and making
them no Nation. S. Paul likewise thought it an honor to himself to be a Roman,
and claimed the Privilege, and did appeal unto Caesar. And certainly the
intercourse which the Romans had with other Nations, did serve as a great means
to propagate Christianity: and I doubt not but in the Apostles time, it was
here planted in this Island of Britany. Tertullian in the second Century, makes
mention of it, though for any solemn Message for our Conversion, or for any
general Profession, no public notice might be taken thereof, that might be
respited according to the occasion of State, and as it might stand with the
Civil government and peace.

And here I made a History of the Church, and examined all the several The
dignity of the Church.
Miracles as they fell out; and if whole Scripture in effect be but the History
of the Church, how God has preserved it, what wonders he has wrought in it,
either in protecting his own people, or for the punishment of sin; Thus the Old
Testament shows the manner of Creation, the first Ages of the world, Gods
Judgments, Gods Mercies, the giving of the Law, the instituting of Sacrifices,
their hopes and expectation of the Messiah, together with Gods frequent
Messages and Admonitions by Prophets. Thus the four Gospels of the New
Testament describe the Life and History of Christ; the acts of the Apostles
show how the Church was planted and continued; the Epistles were written upon
several occasions; the Apocalypse is a Prophecy of the Church to the end of
the world: And if Scripture has such reference to the Church, and that the
Penmen of Scripture were but particular members of the Church, surely the
Church cannot be vilified or neglected without great offense to Scripture, or
rather to God himself.

And therefore in my judgment there is yet one great daily continual The
dignity of Christian Religion.
Miracle in the Church, which exceeds all, and serves most abundantly for the
confirmation of Christian Catholic Religion; and it is this, To consider all
the Times and Ages of the world, and all the parts of the habitable world, and
therein the several Religions professed, and compare them with Christian
Catholic Religion, and they will all instantly vanish and come to nothing. God
has ever had the guiding, and a special providence in the protection of his
Church; it has ever been accompanied with all Moral Virtues, with paternal
Civil government, with fruits and blessings of Peace, attended on with all
humane Learning, with the profession of all Arts and Sciences; to consider how
this Religion has continued, and been preserved in all Ages, visibly,
successively, notwithstanding many Persecutions, and the cursed attempts of
Gods adversaries. To consider these things, uno intuitu, not to insist in
singulars and particulars, but take all things together in general, and then
they shall amount to as much as a Miracle, above Nature, in so much that a man
may plainly say, Hic digitus Dei est, These things could not fall out in a
natural course, but by Gods extraordinary Providence.

Here I did consider what Religion was every where professed, through All other
religions vanity.
the whole world: I found when those Religions began their progress, and what
Testimony they gave to Christianity, and what they borrowed from Jews, or
Christians; and this I did for the satisfaction of those which are learned; but
for such as were simple and ignorant, they cannot but hear of the Navigations
of this age, how we have compassed the whole earth; and find that a great part
of the world is not yet inhabited; so the world in effect is but newly created,
this morning, for it has not yet once seen a revolution of the Heavens; nay,
it has not yet seen the sixth part of one revolution, for it has not yet seen
6000 years; and take all the Monuments of the world, we know, and can point out
their beginnings; the most Ancient Monument in the world, is not above three
thousand years continuance; we have our Merchants, and Factors in all Nations,
under the Sun; we have the Fruits, the Spices, the Druggs, the Silk, and
commodities of all Nations: it is easy then to hearken out what Religion is
every where professed; alas, you shall find them all barbarous, and not worth
the naming, in respect of Christian Catholic Religion.

I cannot insist in particulars, only in generals for the distribution of A
distribution of times.
times, as Saint Matthew the first Evangelist divided the times by 14
generations; so I do distinguish the time of the Gospel by three hundred
years; and mark the degrees how Religion has been settled, and since has
declined from the first integrity: after our blessed Lord and Savior, Christ
Jesus had laid the first foundation of his own Church in his death and passion;
then for the raising of walls, and to finish the building, it was necessary,
that there should be some conformity; that the workmen and laborers, in laying
their Stones upon that head-corner-stone, should temper their Mortar with their
own blood, As then in the Birth of Christ there were miracles, a vision of
Angels, and a Star appearing in the heavens, together with the Massacre of
innocents, so in the Birth of his Church, there were miracles, his own
resurrection, a vision of Angels, the coming down of the holy Ghost in a
miraculous manner, the gift of Tongues, many miracles: so was there great
effusion of blood, for the The first ages after Christ.
first 300 years past, in ten great persecutions, and Martyrdom it self, is a
kind of miracle, to see such courage and resolution accompanied with all
moral virtues; and that man in the flesh, shall renounce the flesh, and The
age of miracles and Martyrs.
scorning the world, and the pomp thereof, shall offer up himself as a
sacrifice for the truth of his Religion, and the honor of God; and this to be
done deliberately, advisedly; not out of rashness, or any strong impression of
melancholy; surely this can be no natural act, for it is to renounce, and deny
nature in her own den; and therefore being a supernatural work, it can be no
less then a miracle; and this age lasted to Constantine the blessed Emperor.

After the Martyrs, the next 300 years was the age of Confessors, and The age
of Confessors.
excellent Writers, men that for their sanctity, holiness, and great learning
became lights in the Church; and by their mortified lives, by their preaching,
and writtings, though their Letters were not written in blood, yet did they
serve to convert the Nations, and this age lasted to the six hundred year after
Christ to the time of Saint Gregory the great.

After the Confessors, the next 300 years was the age of Virgins; here The age
of Monasteries.
were those brave magnificent foundations of Monasteries, the erection of
Cathedrals, where God might be served like a God, with the greatest
magnificence; and that fond expectation of a temporal Messiah might in some
sort, be verified by the great solemnity of Gods service; and in this age lived
many famous Founders here in England, King Ethelbert, King Osricus, Ulfrune,
with others whom I doubt not but God has rewarded.

In the next 300 years, was the flourishing time of Laics, where the The age
of Laics.
Kings were generally much given to devotion and piety, where so many great
Princes took upon them Religious habits; and so many excelled in all virtue and
piety, as here amongst us King Alfred, Edmund, Oswald, Canutus the Dane, Edward
the Confessor, my blessed Founder; and hereunto you may add the Christian
valor of Princes, in recovering the Holy Land, where Godfrey of Bullen was
their chief Captain; and this age lasted to the end of the twelve hundred year
after the Birth of Christ.

In the next 300 years, began the School Learning to flourish, then began Peter
Lumbart, and Saint Thomas Aquinas to be in request, together with all the rest
of the Schoolmen: and thus much I will say in the behalf and honor of
Schoole-Learning, that it is the very Touchstone of all truth; and it is
impossible for any falsehood to endure the trial thereof; And hereunto we may
add some military orders, as Champians to fight in defense of the Church, and
though military, yet were they Religious orders; as that of Saint George in
Windsor, where I had the honor to be a Chaplain, to that great Order,
instituted by my blessed Founder, King Edward; and I have been a servant to
that order near 40 years.

God having thus laid a sure and strong foundation of his Church, that besides
the operation of his Spirit, and his overruling providence, even natural
Reason, by demonstrative Proofs, might be sufficiently assured, and convinced
in the truth of Religion. Now for a further trial of our Faith* in the
beginning of the fifteenth hundred year after Christ, he exposes his Church to
a trial, by the encounter of enemies, and first the SchoolLearning, which
indeed did sharpen the wits of men; yet for our sins, some out of perverseness,
and others out of shallowness of brain, not able to fathom the depth and
grounds of that Learning, they made all the Articles of our Faith disputable;
and as in humane things there is variety of opinions, so in Religion, if man be
left to himself, there will be nothing but Sects, and Divisions. And here the
carnal man has found out two motives to encourage him in his cursed attempts:
first, he conceives that all the Laws of the Church, are like so many yokes
imposed upon him to infringe his Christian liberty; thus he would fain be a
lawless man, and wholly left to his own carnal will and profaneness. The
second motive is, that whereas he sees stately and great Cathedrals erected;
which as they were built with great charge, so they must be supported with
great means; and here a sacrilegious eye is cast upon them, yet must there be
some pretense of Religion, as if these had proceeded from superstition; and
that God needed not, nor required any such sumptuous charge in his service,
that it was superfluous, and that a spiritual service of the inward man might
suffice; and could we but look and search that inward man, it is not unlike but
we should find as much emptiness there, as outwardly we find ruins: but this
serves for the present, and so much I will say; let all the ages from the
Creation of the world be examined, and I am confident it will be found, that
God was never so much provoked to right himself, and in his own quarrel to
revenge himself, so much upon man, and to vindicate his own honor, as in these
times; And seeing he made the world of God will govern the world.
nothing, only with the word of his mouth, and that he daily supporteth this
world, and preserves it from falling to nothing, it is he that will govern this
world; and may in an instant, with the blast of his mouth, bring all the
endeavors and practices of men unto nothing, and this he may do in his own due
time, when we think all is secure.

And here I cannot sufficiently blame these times, and our unhappy The contempt
of the Church.
condition; it was the observation of Josephus the Jew, speaking of the worst
sort of men, and wondering much that there should be such Monsters amongst men,
Sunt qui ex contemptu Religioni^ and sacerdotum famam and opinionem sapientiae
and Nobilitatis sibi aucupantur; alas! this is now grown to be the common
condition of these times, a man for his credit sake, and that he might be
reputed a wise Statesman, does generally scorn and contemn Churchmen; and
therein he dishonours God, and makes his service contemptible; thus the devil
has long intended and attempted to blot out all Religion out of man's heart:
but this he could never do, for as long as man can look up to heaven, so long
he conceives hopes of Gods Mercy, and sees the skirts and bounds of an other
world, and if man looks down to the earth, he sees the place of his burial,
and the way of all flesh; and that he is in his passage, for every day he
loses a day of his age, and a great part of his life is already spent, and is
dead unto him, he shall never see it return; and that which remains, it is the
worst part of his age, the dregs of his age, the longer he lives he shall be
sure to have the more sorrow; and these very The devils policy.
thoughts must needs work some Religion in man: now the Devil seeing that he
could not herein prevail, to root all Religion out of man's heart, therefore he
has found out another stratagem, to reduce all Religion to some few acts or
heads; and then to make those acts of Religion contemptible; and so to bring
Religion to nothing: and this I fear he has effected.

For whereas Religion is lex Christiana, a Law to govern our actions, he has
made it dogma Christianum, a theme to be disputed on, or a text to be
^iscoursed on, as if the whole practice of Religion, did only consist in the
precept; and that men should be always learning, which is an argument of their
ignorance; and that they are not come to the knowledge of the truth: Sir Thomas
Moore (that wise Lord Chancellor) did foresee this, and therefore called it by
the name of pelpeting, wherein men would take occasion to broach all their new
and strange opinions, and wherein the State might likewise suffer, for sometimes
it might serve for sedition, Preaching should not exclude other acts of
Religion.
what a lamentable thing it is to consider, how all the exercises of Religion
are laid aside, as if Preaching alone would suffice, thus we have no Fasting,
Mortification, Confession, Charity, Devotion, Sacrifice, or frequent
Sacraments, no Religious Orders, or Magnificency in Gods service, and in a
word, whatsoever else may tend to the honor of God, and the furtherance of
Piety; we know not the practice thereof. Queen Elizabeth was wont to say, that
she had rather speak to God her self, then to hear an other speaking of God,
she seldom heard Sermons, but only in Lent, and then as it may be supposed,
she heard them with the greater devotion; there was a sufficient ground laid
for the whole year after to practice; it were to be wished that preaching
alone, might not swallow up all public prayer, and all other acts of Religion.

You will say likewise, that we have a strict observation of the Sabbath; The
keeping of the Sabbath.
I fear it is over strict, and not kept in the right way, for it ought to be
kept, with hospitality, relief of the poor, and whatsoever does tend to nourish
love and society between man and man; and certainly after Gods service, to
express our joyfulness, and to stir up a cheerfulness of mind, with honest
recreations; for a man may be so tired, and dulled in Gods service, as that he
may be unfit for his service, and sin more against God with his wandering
thoughts, and his sleepy heavyness, then if he should be absent from Gods
service; but under color of this strict observation of the Sabbath,
Chirurgians have been hindered from going to dress wounds, Physicians from
visiting their patients, Midwifes from doing their duties, and poor infants
cannot have a little new sweet milk on the Sundays; alas, they know not what
belongs to the Sabbath: Mundus vult decipi.

I will here make bold to desire my Brethren the Churchmen, that None should
preach without much study.
they would intend painful and profitable preaching, rather then frequent and
tedious preaching; which I speak out of the great honor and reverence which I
bear to preaching, Multiloquium parit contemptum. Some there are, I fear, who
spend their hours with vain repetitions, while their Auditors in stead of
taking things to heart, and working upon their affections, they labor and take
pains on the Sabbath, with their short writing of Notes (while others wonder
what they should write) but this gives them occasion to make their repetitions
at home and that breeds them up perfect Preachers, so that now you have
Preachers of all Trades and Professions; and ^am sure some have preach i who
can neither write nor read, and their Sermons are plundered of all learning and
elegancy, and they think themselve, such Preachers, that they are grown to have
a very mean esteem of all humane learning, which certainly in the end must
bring in Ba^barism. Some men there are who take a very preposterous course, for
they begin their Religion, and in effect their whole course and practice of
Religion consists, in the last book of Scripture the Apocalypse for all their
devotion is in pointing out Antichrist, and in pulling down Babylon: Thus they
are destroyers. But take heed of the Apocalyptical Doctors I think I should
have called Take heed of Apocalyptical Doctors.
them Apocalyptians, for they are very like our Gyptians, who are always
wandering up and down to tell Fortunes, and to cosen people: so in truth they
are very great impostors, they have raised up so many Controversies in
Religion, that now Religion it self is become a Controversy; and therefore I
desire every Layman, especially such as have had good b^eeding and education,
that seeing Churchmen themselves are parties, therefore they as more
indifferent, would be pleased to see with their own eye^, and to allot one hour
in the day to study the Controversies of Religion: for while men are wavering
and doubtful in the Doctrine, they take little thought of the Practice. But let
them consider, that our time is but short, and here we are to lay up for
Eternity. If we were but rightly persuaded of Religion, it were impossible that
such actions should proceed from Christian men. God grant we may so live in
this world, that we may not lose the end of our Creation.

What a lamentable thing it is, to see all the great Cathedral Churches, The
pulling down of Churches.
and all the ancient Foundations which were erected for Gods glory, and the
practice of our Piety, that they should serve as an occasion to our Sacrilege,
and that our devotion should be to pull them down, and to convert the Revenue
to profane uses, as if we did grudge and envy that God should be served, who
notwithstanding created the whole world for man, and created the world
especially for this end, that man might serve God: but we on the contrary, as
if we did desire utterly to abolish Gods service, we pull down the Monuments
and Relics of Devotion, erected by the Ancients our present Reformation
consists in demolishing; and it is to be feared, lest we give such an example
to posterity, that none of them hereafter will erect Churches, and God grant
they do not forget all devotion; and this not only for the present, but for
all times past, and future, from the beginning of the world to the end of the
world, if it lay in our power we should make Gods service void, and of none
effect.

I cannot speak of these Times with patience, and therefore I will here The
Author ends abruptly.
end abruptly; only this I will say, That when I began to speak of the blessed
Trinity, I began with the beginning of S. John's Gospel, and I ended with the
end of S. John's Gospel; and when I spoke of the Incarnation, I began with the
beginning of S. John's Epistles, and now I end with the end of S. John's
Apocalypse, Surely I come quickly, Amen, even so come Lord Jesus: the grace of
our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all, Amen. How long, how long, O Lord, will thou suffer thy Church to be thus afflicted? Lord, shorten our days, hasten
thy Kingdom, accomplish the number of thine Elect Even so, Lord Jesu, even so,
Lord Jesu, come quickly, come quickly, and give us all a joyful deliverance.

Usquequo Domine? Usquequo? Sancte and individuae Trinitati Crucifixi Domini
Nostri Jesu Christi Humanitati, Sit omnis Honor, and Gloria, Amen. FINIS.
To my worthy friend Mr. Charles Harcourt, Servant to the L. Bishop of
Gloucester.
SIR,
HEaring that the Book is now in the Press, and ready to be finished, I do
entreat you to cause these few verses to be printed in the later end of the
Book: it must be done without his knowledge, for I know him to be inexorable. I
do it only to show my special respects unto him, and that it might appear in
print.

Your true friend, Jeffery Moore.

G. G. G. Vir Trium Literarum Dominicalium.
Ecce fidem Godfreede Ecce fidem Goodmanne Ecce fidem Gloucestre
tuam, tres literae and una

Litera designant, Deus est tibi trinus, and unus.

Anacl. GODFREE GOODMAN, GOD is FREE and GOOD to MAN.

Goodness, Grace, Glory be thy portion,
God Giving, Grant thee full possession.
ORATION.
AGnoscimus, ultro agnoscimus (O clementissime Deus) ex hoc quod fecisti nos,
debemus tibi nos ipsos, and quia nos redemisti, and pro nobis homo factus es,
and pas^us es; deberemus tibi plusquam nos si habe^emus, quanto tu m^jor es
nobis, pro quibus dedisti teipsum?

Sed ecce nec plus habemus, nec quod habemus da^e tibi possumus sine te: Sancte
D^us nos ipsos nobis eripe, and totos nos tibi deed, aufer and toll a nobis,
quicquid nos avocat vel abstrahit a te, vilescant caecera propter te, and chara
sint tua and tu Deus plusquam omnia: de nullo gaudeamus vel doleamus, nisi quod
promoveat ad te, vel abducat a te, nulli placere appetamus vel displicere
timeamus, nisi tibi: sordescat omne gaudium quod est absque te, and suavis sit
omnis dolor qui provenit a te; delectet nos omnis labor qui est pro te, and
taediosa sit omnis quies, quae est sine te; nec aliquid velimus qu^d est extra
te.

F^cisti nos Domine propter te, and inquietum est cor nostrum donec veniat ad
te: via ergo ad te sis nobis Domine, mentes instrue sensus corrige, gressus
di^ige, sid^m adjuva, spem vivisica, charitatem excita, qui es Via, Veritas and
Vita; consige timore tuo cor nostrum, ut quae minaris metuendo evadamus; read
nobis laetitiam saluta^is tui, ut quae spondes, diligendo percipiamus; suggere
quid de te cogitemus, doce quibus te sermonibus invocemus, da quibus operibus
tibi placeamus, ut inter prospera and adversa non deficiamus, in illis non
extollamur, in istis non deprimamur: quod a nobis requiris tribue ut velimus
and possimus, and da exequi sicut oportet and expedit saluti animarum
nost^arum, and quod deerit nobis, suppleat pietas and benignitas tua. Da Domine
quod jubes, and jube quod vis.

Ecce misericors Pater, multa rogavimus qui nec pauca promeruimus, fatemur,
heul fatemur non solum quae postulamus, non debentur dona, sed and multa and
exquisita supplicia; habes quidem confitentes reos, peccavimus nimis,
peccavimus nimis, in iniquita^bus concepti, in peccatis consenuimus, malum
coram te fecimus, and modis omnibus peccavimus, quibus miseri peccare potuimus;
and quo plus potuimus plus peccavimus, nec hic desistendum, si data occasion
vires suppetiissent, and tu permisisses, and sic quidem just furorem irae tuae
provocavimus, Nostra culpa, nostra culpa, nostra maxima culpa, Eloi Eloi Lamma
sabacthani.

Ecce peccatorum merces, virga vindictae tuae, bellum, fames, pestis, egestas,
and rerum omnium inopia; maledicimur, persecutionem patimur, blasphemamur,
tanquam purgamenta mundi hujus facti sumus, and omnium peripsema: Quas plagas,
irrisiones, injurias, improperia, illusiones, dolores, damna, oppressiones,
orbitates, inique sustinuimus? quoties ludibria experti cogebamur fugere ante
faciem inimici, and in perpetuo pavore versari? in solltudinibus errantes, in
montibus, and speluncis, vix reliquerunt domum, habitaculum, aut vestimentum
nobis, inebriatae sunt sagittae eorum sanguine, and gladius eorum devoravit
carnes; Eloi Eloi Lamma sabacthani.

Nosque pastores gregis, Episcopi and Sacerdotes tui, omnium miserrimi, namque
insurrexerunt in nos viri iniqui, absque misericordia, quaesierunt nos
interficere falsis suis accusationibus, linguis suis quasi lanceis
vulneraverunt nos, captivos nos duxerunt, and de spoliis nostris sortem mittunt
inter se, vene^unt Gentes in haereditatem tuam, polluerunt Templum sanctum
tuum, posuerunt Jerusalem in ruinam, comederunt Jacob, and locum ejus
desolaverunt, Eloi Eloi Lamma sabacthani.

Si non nobis Domine, si non nobis, at saltem nomini tuo da gloriam, respice
templa tua infidelium manibus profanata, and tui dilecti gregis afflictionem,
reminiscere haereditatis tuae effusione preciosissimi sanguinis tui Unigeniti
acquisitae, vineamque tua plantatam dextera, quam ferus aper exterminare
conatur, ferventer visita; and illius cultores adversus devastantium rabiem tua
virtute corrobora, victores effice; impugnatores in te sperantium potentia tuae
defensionis expugna, auxiliare famulis tuis implotantibus misericordiam tuam,
ut omnium in^micorum nostrorum feritate dep^essa, incessabili te gratiarum
action laudemus.

Usquequo Domine irasceris? accendetur velut ignis furor tuus? tandem aliquando
miserere, aufer bella usque ad finem Terrae, arcum contere, arma confringe,
scuta combure igni, pacem restitue in dicbus nost^is, tempora sint tua
protectione tranquilla, ut (...) nostri qui in suo confidunt exercitu, dexterae
tuae potentia conterantur: morbos aufer, famem depelle, aperi carceres, vincula
dissolve; exulibus reditum, infirmantibus sanitatem, navigantibus portum
salutis indulge, Domine Deus noster, qui es moestorum consolatio, and
laboranti^m fortitudo.

Ne memine^is Domine peccata nostra nec parentum nostrorum, nec ultra vindictam
sumas de peccatis nostris; Parce nobis Domine; quos delictorum catena
constringit, miseratio tuae pietatis clementer absolvat; and flagella tuae
iracundiae quae pro peccatis nostris meremur, averte, ut sciamus and te
indignante talia supplicia prodire, and te miserante cessare.

Kyrie eleison, Christ eleison, Kyrie eleison: Propitius esto nobis Domine
miserrimis peccatoribus, Jesu fili David miserere nostri, Agne Dei qui tollis
peccata mundi miserere nostri, miserere nostri Deus secundum magnam
misericordiam tuam, and secundum multitudinem miserationum tuarum dele
iniquitates nostras, miserere nostri qui pater es misericordiarum, and Deus
totius consolationis;

Namque major est misericordia tua quam iniquitas nostra, major est pietas tua
quam impietas nostra; Plus potes dimittere, quam nos committere; plus parcere,
quam nos peccare: etiamsi commisimus unde nos damnare potes, and merito, tu
tamen non amisisti unde salvare potes, and soles pro tuo beneplacito: Noli sic
attendere malum nostrum, ut obliviscaris bonum tuum, ne perdat nos iniquitas
nostra, quos fecit Omnipotens bonitas tua: recognosce quod tuum est, absterge
quod alienum est.

Nec respicias multitudinem iniquitatum nostrarum, sed secundum multitudinem
miserationum tuarum miserere nostri: Memento Nominis, and Numinis, and Muneris
tui, Domine; O bone Jesu esto nobis Jesus; quem Judicem snstinere non possumns,
Salvatorem habere desideramus.

Quod si necessitas cogat, and Justitiae ratio postulet ut punlamur, tu Domine
supplicium sum, at non in furore tuo arguas nos, nec in ira tua corripias nos,
sed pro tuo paterno amore corrige, and c^stiga, virga tua and baculus tuus,
ipsa nos consolentur; and ne ultra disseras, sed hic dum tempus poenitendi est,
dum tempus miserendi est, hic ure, hic seca, ut in aeternum parcas, nec tradas
nos tortoribus and potestatibus tenebrarum igne inextinguibili cruciandos. Quae
utilitas in sanguine nostro dum descendimus in aeternam corruptionem? non
mort^i laudabunt te Domine, neque omnes qui descendunt in infernum, neque tu
vis mortem peccatoris, sed magis ut convertatur and vivat.

Et hoc scimus Domine, si poenitentia ducamur, parcis and ignoscis, si
revertamur suscipis, dum disserimus sustines and praestolaris, revocas
errantes, invitas repugnantes, expectas torpentes, amplexaris redeuntes, doces
ignorantes, lugentes consolaris, a ruina suscitas, post lapsum reparas,
petentibus largiris, quaerentibus inveniris, and pulsantibus aperis.

Age ergo sanctissime Deus, da nobis cor pervigil quod nulla abducat a te
curiosa cogitatio, da nobile quod nulla deorsum trahat indigna affectio, da
invictum quod nulla fatiget tribulatio, da liberum quod nulla sibi vendicet
violenta commotio, da rectum quod nulla seorsum obliquet sinistra intentio.

Largire nobis Domine Deus noster intellectum te cognoscentem, diligentiam te
quaerentem, sapientiam te invenientem, conversationem tibi placentem,
perseverantiam te fiducialiter expectantem, and fiduciam te fideliter
amplexantem: da tuis nos poenis affligi per poenitentiam, tuis beneficiis in
Via uti per gratiam, and tuis gaud^is in Patria ^rui per gloriam,

Amen.

