GOOD NEVVES FROM Milford-Haven: Certifyed by several Letters, how our Forces
took 5. Piece of Ordnance, almost 200. arms, Killed 40. and took many prisoners,
store of powder Shot and provisions: Also The Guarding of that Coast and parts
of Ireland, with a Squdron of Ships. Confirmed by a Letter from Captain
Richard Swanly, Admiral.

LONDON, Printed by JANE Coe. 1644.

GOOD NEVVES From MJLFORD-HAVEN.
UPon Friday October the 19, The Major General gave out Orders for the
several Regiments in the army, to move toward the place appointed for its
Randisuous, but by reason of the badnesse of the weather, it could not meet
before Monday the 28. of the same month. When the whole army of horse and
foot met, and were drawn up in a plain about two miles from Langhorne Castle,
the number of both horse and foot were about 2000. of Foot, viz. The Generals
Regiment, Colonel Kilmady his Regiment: Colonel Beales Regiment. And the
horse the Major Generals Troop, and a Troop of horse and a company of
Dragoones, of the Major of Pembrookes, and Colonel Shefields Regiment.

This night the army was quartered within a mile of the Castle, But before I
tell you of the action of the whole army, I will give you the success of a
party of horse commanded by the Major General himself who were drawn out on
Saturday the 26. of October to view the Castle, their number was but 60. they
were charged by the like number of Horse, of the enemies, from the castle, they
Were gallantly received by our horse, and soon repulsed, presently was taken a
Lieutenant, and a Cornet slain, 7 Troopers with 14 horse, a Lieutenant of
theirs was slain, we had only one wounded but not very dangerously, a
Gentleman of good worth and valor, Major Philips. Thus God gave us an earnest
of further success. Tuesday 29. of October, our army was drawn up on a plain
mountain in the face of Langhorne Castle, the Major General summond it, there
answer was peremptory, and resolute: presently he com nanded out a party of
200. Muskets under Captine Sloman to take possession of the town and Church,
in three or four hours, they had not only gained the town, but approachad
very nigh the Castle, possessing all the houses adjoining to it, about on of
the clock the Major General sent down another party of about 200 Muskets,
and with them his Guns, commanding the Gunners, to make battery against the
Gatehouse of the Castle, but it was at such a distance that the shot took
little effect, this night the rest of the army were commanded back to their
quarters, about a mile from the Castle. The next morning we marched to quarter
about the Castle, in our March we spied two bodies of horse, of the enemies
upon an high hill, in sight both of army, and the Castle; The Major General
sent out parties of Horse to Intercept any incursions upon us, and caused the
foot also to be drawn up in their full view, we heard no more of them, this
night we went into the town, every one receiving their quartes, we took the
town gate, which did much pleasure us for battery against the castles
gatehouse, our Major Gene-Generall drew out a good party of Horse, and this day
faced Carmarthen the chief hold of the Enemy in these parts, they returned
without any opposition, he did it the rather in regard of their threats to
raise our siege, our guns played hard this day, and night, the next day also:
this day we attempted to fire the gate house but could not. On satturday the
Major General called a council of War to consider what farther to do,
seeing all our past endeavors took such little effect upon the castle. It was
concluded that this night we should fall upon the gatehouse and a Forte^^ which
two places was the strength of the castle and was answerably maintained by the
Enemy, and for that end, orders was sent out, 200. chosen men under three
Captains being allotted to make the assault.

The Captains their names was captain Floyd, Captain Sloman, and Captain
Lieutenant Srindy, all the rest of the Army also was drawn out for their
seconds, every commander attending their several duties according to orders
received, about a 11. of the clock this night, which was a very light night,
they fell on, they soon gained their and our hopes, both the Forte, and the
gatehouse; but stayed not there, but went on to the very walls of the castle: I
dare say, seldom was there seen a greater readiness and stoutnesse either in
Officers, or soldiers; then amongst these after two or three hours very hot
and desperate service they in the castle beat for a parley, it was granted.

They sent out Major Alsworth to treat there, terms were, high to march away
with bag and baggadge, colors flying, The Major General soon dispatch him
back with his resolution, that they should only be free in their persons, and
should deliver up their Arms and what ever else was in the castle, and gave
them a peremptory time to return their answer, they did long debate the
business before they accepted of the Major Generals offer. About seven of the
clock the next morning being the sabbath, your General took possession of the
castle, he took 160. Arms, two guns, a Sacker and a minion, two or three
murdering pieces three barrels and an half of powder, and 500. weight of
small shot there was good store of batter, corn, cheese and bear, very littell
benefit to the soldier contrary to their hopes, who expected large plunder:
There was in the castle, Lieutenant Colonel Russell, the owner and governor
of it. Major, Alsworth a citizen captain Hinton, and captain Fits, and about
200. common soldiers, they marched to Carmarthen. Its very observable we had
very fair weather, all the while we lay before the castle, and the time we
fell on in, by the very Enemy themselves was coufessed to be the only time for
the gaining of the castle: They expecting the next day relief. And indeed the
very morning we took the castle, it was informed that the Enemy was upon his
march toward us, whereupon we presently marched out to meet them, they no
sooner sa^v us but ran away, this castle is a very strong castle, and was one
of the holds from whence our forces and the country received the greatest
annoyance the Enemy had another strong Garrison called Clogaveraine, above
four miles from Langhorne, the which the next day after we had taken the
castle they utterly demollish, burning the house down to the ground and
slieghting the works we lost in all about ten men and had wounded about thirty,
we took nigh twenty prisoners, how many we slew we know not, but sure I am
great execution was done in the castle, Captain Hinton, that was left behind
wounded reports, the Enemy will endeavor to meet us in the field about
Carmarthen, he confessed that they are not above 1200. Horse and foot, and if
once they are foiled, all must be given for lost.

A Concise Journall,
Or Diarie Relation of Passages, since the Order for the Advance of the Army,
raised in the Conntie of Pembroke under the Command of the Honorable, Major
General Langhorne, by the special assistance of the Right Worshipful,
Captain Richard Swanley, Admiral of the Jrish Seas, Ordered in a Squadron of
Ships; in service of King and Parliament for the Guard of that Coast, and parts
of Jreland, in due obedience to the State, viz.

Captain Richard Swanley, Admiral arived the ninth of September, being of the
Committee for the Ne-Negotiating the affairs of the County of Pembrokeshire:
In discharge of his duty, and great trust, importuned a present full meeting of
the Commitree to deliberate upon the state of the County, that the common
good, which unreserved, Impartial Indgemen, with candor might take place,
whereupon several meetings had, and obstructions not admitting action, As
advance money, Ordnance, Arms, Ammunition, with Clothes for the Soldiers, Sir
Thomas Middleton, and Colonel Massey, with two several parties, In places far
distante, having entered, and infested part of the Dominion of Wales with good
success, and that policy of state and War, Invited to Actition, and
gallantrie, to withdrawn the adjacent Forces from their engagements aganst
them, and to seize on all opportunities to complete the great work in
Agetation; pressed to consideration that if money were not raised, to give life
and action to the fouldiers, they deservedly contracted the sad resentments, of
the poor inhabitants daily prayed on, by the Enemy, and expressed in fact, his
forwardness, lending of his own Estate; 200. l. Upon the public Faith, to
invite them to open their hands, the which with continuate care, and toil of
him, further furnishing them with men, Ordnance, Arms, and Ammunition with
clothes for the soldiers of the States property.

IT was Ordered by the Major General (whose Innate genuin disposition moves to
Action and Honor,) the 19. of September that the several Regiments, in his
Army should march to the place of Randezuous, and foul weather and floods
prevented till the 25. At which time two miles from Langhorne Castle the Army
mustered consisted of about 2500. Horse and Foot, who were quartered within a
mile of the said Castle, 26. the General drew out a party of 60. Horse, and
went himself to view the Castle, who were charged by a like number from the
Enemy; and gallantly received, who were foone forced to a disorderly retreat
where a Lieutenant and Cornet of the adverse part, were taken prisoners with
four horses, and seven troopers slain, and but one of our men hurt, 29. the
Castle fommoned, and a peremtory return rendered, 200. Musketteers under
valliant and deserving commanders, were designed to take possession of the
town and Church, which was gained with prosperous success, and their
approaches made near to the gatehouse of the Castle, seizing on the houses not
fare distance that night, planted their Artillery; and began the Battery
against the gatehouse of the Castle, the next morning the Enemy showed
themselves in two Battallias on a hill, in view of the Army and Castle, the
G^nerall commanded a party of horse to ente^taine them, and justify the
place, till the Army might be drawn up, upon which the Enemy faced about, and
acquitted the ground, in the morning following our men took the town gate,
which much favored our Battery against the gatehouse, and that day a good
party of horse under the conduct of the General faced Carmarthen, who returned
without opposition, and the day following attempts were made to fire the
gatehouse, which took no place. On Saturday the General called a Council of
War, where was concluded that a party that night, should fall upon the
gatehouse, and the foot wherein the strength of the Castle consisted, which was
accordly performed, and after two or three hours of hot and desperate service,
where the Commanders, and soldiers, gallantly demeaned themselves, gained
both, with great execution on the Enemy, and advanced to the walls of the
Castle, upon which the party in opposition beat up a parley, whereon a quarter
was given only f^r their l^ves, to depart without arms, where two great guns,
three m^rtherers; 160. Foot, arms* three barrells and a half of powder, 500.
weight of small shot, with great store of provisions were taken; And in the
Castle was Lieu enant Colonel Russell; the Owner, and Governor; M^jor
Alsworth, Captain Hincon, who was dangerously hurt, and Captain Fittz, with
about 200. common soldiers, who all marched to Carmarthen) except Captain
Hincon whose wounds laid him by the Lee) the Enemy had another strong hold
called clogovarane about 4. miles distance, the which they presently
demollished, burning what was combustable, and sleighting their works. Our
party lost in the service ten men, and had about thirty hurt, and took twenty
prisoners and killed about forty, Captain Hincon wounded as aforesaid,
remaining in the Castle, reports that the Enemy will take the field, and about
Carmarthen give us Battle, and says they are not above 1200. horse and foot,
and it they be wasted, all must be rendered for lost: Our Army are now preparing
for their march to Carmarthen, and after the reducing of that place, with Gods
assistance will in short time be able to force a passage to Sir Thomas
Middleton. To God be ascribed the glory and praise of his mercies.

Richard Swanley.
This is entered into the Hall Book according to Order of Parliament.



FINIS.

