The English-American his Travail by Sea and Land! OR, A NEW SVRVEY OF THE
WEST-INDIA'S, CONTAINING A Journall of Three thousand and Three hundred Miles
within the main Land of AMERICA.

Wherein is set forth his Voyage from Spain to St. John de Ulhua; and from
thence to Xalappa, to Tlaxcalla, the City of Angeles, and forward to Mexico;
With the description of that great City, as it was in former times, and also at
this present.

Likewise his Journey from Mexico through the Provinces of Guaxaca, Chiapa,
Guatemala, Vera Paz, Truxillo, Comayagua; with his abode Twelve years about
Guatemala, and especially in the Indian-towns of Mixco, Pinola, Petapa,
Amatitlan.

As also his strange and wonderful Conversion, and Calling from those remote
Parts to his Native COUNTRY.

With his return through the Province of Nicaragua, and Costa Rica; to Nicoya,
Panama, Portobelo, Cartagena, and Havana, with diverse occurrents and dangers
that did befall in the said Journey.

ALSO, A New and exact Discovery of the Spanish Navigation to those Parts; And
of their Dominions, Government, Religion, Forts, Castles, Ports, Havens,
Commodities, fashions, behavior of Spaniards, Priests and Friars, Blackmores,
Mulatto's, Mestiso's, Indians; and of their Feasts and Solemnities.

With a Grammar, or some few Rudiments of the Indian Tongue, called, Poconchi,
or Pocoman.

By the true and painful endeavors of THOMAS GAGE, now Preacher of the Word of
God at Acris in the County of KENT, Anno Dom. 1648.

London, Printed by R. Cotes, and are to be sold by Humphrey Blunden at the
Castle in Cornhill, and Thomas Williams at the Bible in Little Britain, 1648.

To His Excellency Sr. THOMAS FAIRFAX Knight, Lord FAIRFAX OF CAMERON,
CAPTAIN-GENERALL of the Parliaments Army; And of all their Forces in ENGLAND,
and the Dominion of WALES.
May it please your EXCELLENCY,
THe Divine Providence has hitherto so ordered my life, that for the greatest
part thereof, I have lived (as it were) in exile from my native Country: which
happened, partly, by reason of my education in the Romish Religion, and that in
foreign Universities; and partly, by my entrance into Monastical orders. For
twelve years space of which time, I was wholly disposed of in that part of
America called New-Spain, and the parts adjacent. My difficult going thither,
being not permitted to any, but to those of the Spanish Nation; my long stay
there; and lastly my returning home, not only to my Country, but to the true
knowledge and free-profession of the Gospels purity, gave me reason to
conceive, That these great mercies were not appointed me by the heavenly
Powers, to the end I should bury my Talent in the earth, or hide my light under
a bushel, but that I should impart what I there saw and knew to the use and
benefit of my English Countrymen; And which the rather ^ held my self obliged
unto, because in a manner nothing has been written of these Parts for these
hundred years last past, which is almost ever since the first Conquest thereof
by the Spaniards, who are contented to lose the honor of that wealth and
felicity they have there since purchased by their great endeavors, so they may
enjoy the safety of retaining what they have formerly gotten in peace and
security. In doing whereof, I shall offer no Collections, but such as shall
arise from mine own observations, which will as much differ from what formerly
has been hereupon written, as the picture of a person grown to man's estate,
from that which was taken of him when he was but a Child; or the last hand of
the Painter, to the first or rough draught of the picture. I am told by others,
that this may prove a most acceptable work; but I do tell my self, that it
will prove both lame and imperfect, and therefore had need to shelter my self
under the shadow of some high protection, which I humbly pray your Excellency
to afford me; nothing doubting, but as God has lately made your Excellency the
happy instrument, not only of saving my self, but of many numbers of godly and
well affected people in this County of Kent, (where now I reside by the favor
of the Parliament) from the imminent ruin and destruction plotted against them
by their most implacable enemies; so the same God who ^ath led your Excellency
through so many difficulties toward the settlement of the peace of this
Kingdom, and reduction of Ireland, will, after the perfecting thereof (which
God of his mercy hasten) direct your Noble thoughts to employ the Soldiery of
this Kingdom upon such just and honorable designs in those parts of America,
as their want of action at home may neither be a burden to themselves nor the
Kingdom. To your Excellency therefore I offer a New-World, to be the subject
of your future pains, valor, and piety, beseeching your acceptance of this
plain but faithful relation of mine, wherein your Excellency, and by you the
English Nation shall see what wealth and honor they have lost by one of their
narrow hearted Princes, who living in peace and abounding in riches, did
notwithstanding reject the offer of being first discoverer of America* and left
it unto Ferdinando of Arragon, who at the same time was wholly taken up by the
Wars, in gaining of the City and Kingdom of Granada from the Moors; being so
impoverished thereby, that ^e was compelled to borrow with some difficulty a
few Crowns of a very mean man, to set forth Columbus upon ^ glorious an
expedition. And yet, if time were closely followed at the heels, we are not so
far behind, but we might yet take him by the fore-top. To which purpose, our
Plantations of the Barbados, St. Christophers, Mems, and the rest of the
Caribe-Islands, have not only advanced our journey the better part of the way;
but so inured our people to the Clime of the Indies, as they are the more
enabled thereby to undertake any enterprise upon the firm Land with greater
facility. Neither is the difficulty of the attempt so great, as some may
imagine; for I dare be bold to affirm it knowingly, That with the same pains
and charge which they have been at in planting one of those petty Islands,
they might have conquered so many great Cities, and large Territories on the
main Continent, as might very well merit the title of a Kingdom. Our Neighbors
the Hollanders may be our example in this case; who whilst we have been driving
a private Trade from Port to Port, of which we are likely now to be deprived,
have conquered so much Land in the East and West Indies, that it may be said of
them, as of the Spaniards, That the Sunn never sets upon their Dominions. And
to meet with that objection by the way, That the Spaniard being entitled to
those Countries, it were both unlawful and against all conscience to
dispossess him thereof. I answer, that (the Popes donation excepted) I know no
title he has but force, which by the same title, and by a greater force may be
repelled. And to bring in the title of First-discovery, to me it seems as
little reason, that the sailing of a Spanish Ship upon the coast of India,
should entitle the King of Spain to that Country, as the sailing of an Indian
or English Ship upon the coast of Spain, should entitle either the Indians or
English unto the Dominion thereof. No question but the just right or title to
those Countries appertains to the Natives themselves; who, if they shall
willingly and freely invite the English to their protection, what title soever
they have in them, no doubt but they may legally transferr it or communicate it
to others. And to say, That the inhumane butchery which the Indians did
formerly commit in sacrificing of so many reasonable Creatures to their wicked
Idols, was a sufficient warrant for the Spaniards to divest them of their
Country; The same argument may by much better reason be enforced against the
Spa^ (...) to the Idol of their barbarous cruelty, that many populous Islands
and large Territorities upon the main Continent, are thereby at this day
utterly uni^habited, as Bartholomeo de las Casas, the Spanish Bishop of Guaxaca
in New-Spain, has by his Writings in Print sufficiently testified. But to end
all disputes of this nature; since that God has given the earth to the sons of
Men to inhabit; and that there are many vast Countries in those parts, not yet
inhabited either by Spaniard or Indian, why should my Countrymen the English
be debarred from making use of that, which God from all beginning no question
did ordain for the benefit of mankind?

But I will not molest your Excellency with any further argument hereupon;
rather offering my self, and all my weak endeavors (such as they are) to be
employed herein for the good of my Country; I beseech Almighty God to prosper
your Excellency, Who am

The most devoted and humblest of your Excellencies servants, THO. GAGE.

UPON This WORTHY WORK, Of his most worthy Friend THE AVTHOR.
READER, behold presented to thine eye,
What us Columbus off* red long ago,
Of the New-World a new discovery,
Which here our Author does so clearly show;
That he the state which of these Parts would know,
Need not hereafter search the plenteous store
Of Hackluit, Purchase and Ramusio,
Or learned Acosta's writings to look over;
Or what Herera has us told before,
Which merit not the credit due from hence,
Those being but reck'nings of another score,
But these the fruits of self-experience:
Wherein our Author uses not the sense
Of those at home, who do their judgments leave,
And after wandering far with vast expense,
See many things, which they do never perceive;
Laborious are by study much at home
To know those Parts, which they came lately from.
Less does he use us as the late writ-Books
Of journeys made unto the Levant-States;
Wherein when we do pry with curious looks,
Of Greece and Troy to know the present fates;
They tell us what Thucidides relates,
What Strabo writes, what Homer crowned with bays,
What Authors more, who have out-worn their dates,
Besides what Plutarch and Polibius says:
So what they were, not what they are, they sing,
And show their reading, not their travailing.
But here our Author neither does us tell,
Or to us show one inch of Sea or Ground,
Unless such acts which in his time befell,
Or what his eyes ^aw the Horizon bound:
He utters naught at all he heard by sound,
He speaks not of a City or a Street,
But where ^mself has often gone the round,
And measured over with his industrious feet.
And yet it must acknowledged be for true,
Since worthy Hawkins, and the famous Drake
Did first pres^ unto the English view
This New-found-world, for great Eliza's sake;
Renowned Raw^eigh twice did undertake
With labors great, and dangers not a few,
A true discovery of these Parts to make,
And thereof writ both what he saw and knew.
But as the man who in a Ship does pass
Our narrow Seas, the flowings of each tide,
The Ships course, soundings, turnings of the glass,
What Land he makes on North or Southern side,
He may impart: But who they be abide,
Or what Religion, Language, or what Nation
Possess each Coast; ^ince he has never tried,
How can he make thereof a true Relation?
So those who have described these Parts before,
Of Trade, Winds, Currents, Hurican's do tell,
Of Headlands, Harbors, trendings of the shore,
Of Rocks and (...): wherein they might as well
Talk of a Nut, and only show the shell;
The kernel neither tasted, touched nor seen
Had yet remained; but that it so befell,
That these Relations to us made have been;
Differing as much from what before you have heard,
As does a Land-Map from a Seamans Card.
But how these truths revealed to us should be,
When none but Spa^iards to those Parts may go;
Which was established by severe Decree,
Lest Forain people should their fec^ets know;
This Order yet to be neglected so,
As that our Author had permission free,
Whose Nation too they count their greatest foe,
Seems almost a miracle to me.
Sure the prescience of that power Divine,
Which safely to those parts did him convey,
Did not for naught his constant heart incline
There twelve whole years so patiently to stay:
That he each thing exactly might furvay,
Then him returned, nay more did turn to us,
And to him showed of bliss the perfect way,
Which of the rest seems most miraculous.
For had the last of these not truly been,
These fair Relations we had never seen.
Nor can I think but this most useful Book
In time to come, may like some newborn Starr,
Direct such Wisemen as therein will look,
And show their way unto these Regions far.
And though we now lie sunk in Civil war,
Yet you the worthy Patriots of this Land,
Let not your hearts be drowned in despair,
And so your future happiness withstand*
For time will come you shall enjoy a Peace,
But then no longer you must joy in sin,
When they no more shall reign, these Wars shall cease,
And then your after bliss shall soon beginn.
The fiery trialls which you now are in,
In stead of foes shall prove your best of friends,
And you from servile base affection win,
To fit your hearts for high and Nobler ends:
Your Drums which used to beat their Martial dance
Upon the banks of Garone, Seine and Soane;
Whilst you trod measures through the Realm of France,
Do now at home (Oh grief!) on both sides groan,
As if they did your ill spilt blood bemoane;
Which long ago with Richard, England's King,
When he the holy War maintained alone,
Their dreadful notes did through Judea ring.
Now shall the tawnie Indians quake for fear,
Their direful march to beat when they do hear;
Your brave Red-Crosses on both sides displayed,
The noble Badges of your famous Nation,
Which you ye^ r^er with your (...),
And dy*d them deep in drops of detestation.
You shall again advance with reputation,
And on the bounds of utmost Western shore
Shall them transplant, and ^mly ^ix their station,
Where English Colors never did fly before.
Your well built Ships, companions of the Sunn,
As they were Chario^s to his ^ery beams,
Which often the Ea^ths circumference have runn,
And now lie moar'd in S^rn, Trent, and Tems,
Shall plough the Ocean with their gilded Stems,
And in their hollow bottoms you convay
To Lands enriched with gold, with pearls and gems,
But above all, where many thousands stay
Of wronged Indians, whom you shall set free
From Spanish yoke, and Romes Idolatry.
All this and more by you shall sure be done,
Yet I no Prophet, nor no Prophets son.
THOMAS CHALONER.

A NEW SVRVEY OF THE WEST INDIES.
CHAP. I. How Rome does yearly visit the American and Asian Kingdoms.
THE policy, which for many years has upheld the erring Church of Rome, has
clearly and manifestly been discovered by the many Errors which in several
times by sundry Synod^ or General Counsels, (which commonly are but Apes of
the Popes fancy, will, pleasure, and ambition) have been enacted into that
Church. And for such purposes does that man of Sin, and Antichristian tyrant,
keep constantly in Rome so many poor Penfionary Bishops as hounds at his table,
smelling out his ambitious thoughts, with whom he ^lls the Synod^, when he
call^ them, charging them never to leave off barking and wearying out the rest
of the Prelates, until they have them all as a prey unto his proud and
ambitious designs; from which if any of them dare to start, not only their
Pensions shall be surely forfeited, but their souls shall be cursed, and they
as Heretics Anathematized with a Censure of Excommunication la^ sententiae.
Hence sprung that Masterpiece of Policy, decreeing that the Pope alone should
be above the General Council, lest otherwise one Man's pride might be curbed
by many heads joined together; And secondly, that Synodicall definition, that
the Pope cannot (...), that though the Councels power, wisdom and learning
were all fi^ted into one man's brain, all points of faith straightened into one
head and channel; ye^ the People should not s^agger in any lawful doubts, nor
the learned sort follow any more the light of reason, or the ^unshine of the
Gospel, but all yielding to blind Obedience, and their most holy Fathers
infallibility, in the foggie and Cimmerian mist of ignorance, might secure
their souls from erring, or deviating to the Scylla or Charybd^ of Schism and
Here^. What judiciou^ eye, that will not be blinded with the napkin of
ignorance, does not easily see that Policy only has been the chief Actor of
those damnable Opinions of Purgatory, Transubstantiation, Sacrifice though
unbloody (as they term it) of the Mass, Invocation of Saints, their
Canonization or installing of Saints into the kingdom of heaven, Indulgences,
a^ricular Confession* ^ith satisfactory Penance, and many such like: All which
doubtless have been commanded as points of Faith, not so much to save thos^
wretched souls, as to advance that crackt-brain head in the conceits of his.
Europ^n wonderers, who long ago were espied out by the Spirit of John wondering
after the Beast, worshipping him for his power, and saying* Who is like unto
the Beast, who w^ble to make war with him? Rev^l. 13. 3, 4. Thus can Policy
invent a Purgatory, that a Pope may be so^ht from all parts of Europe, nay now
from East and West India's, to deliver soul from that imaginary Fire which
never God created, but he himself has fancyed, that so much glory may be
^scribed to him, and his power wondered at, who can plunge into (...), condemn
to burning, and when he li^t, deliver out of fire. Much more would (...), and
his goodness extolled, if he would deliver at once all those his Purgatory
Prisoners without that Simoniacall receipt of money. But policy can afford an
infinite price and value of a sacrifice of the Mass, to delude the ignorant
people, that though they leave their whole estates to enrich Cloisters, and fat
proud Prelates and Abbots; yet this is nothing, and comes far short (being
finite) to that infinite Sacrifice, which only can and must deliver their
scorching, nay broyling souls: And if this infinite Sacrifice be not enough,
(which will not be enough, whereas Christ's infinite satisfaction was not enough
in the opinion in that erroneous Church) Policy will give yet power to a Pope
si divitiae affluant, if money and rich bribes abound, to grant such plenary
Indulgences, which may upon one Saints day, or at such a Saints* Altar, work
that soul out, which lies lurking and frying in the deepest pit of Purgatory.
O who is like unto the Beast? But will those that wonder at him, be also
wondered at as workers of wonders and miracles? Policy will give power to a Pope
to canonize such, and and set them at Gods right hand, fit to be prayed unto,
and called upon as Judges of our necessities, and Auditors of our wants: But
this honor must be given, after that the whole College of Cardinals have been
clothed with new Purple Robes, and Loads of money brought to the Court of Rome;
Witness those many thousand pounds, which the City of Barcelona, and the whole
Country of Catalonia spent in the Canoni^ing of Raimundus de Pennafort, a
Dominican Friar: Witness at least ten Millions, which I have been credibly
informed, that the Jesuits spent for the canonization of their two Twins,
Ignatius Loiola, and Franciscus Xavier, whom they call the East India Apostle.
And it is not seven years ago yet that it was my chance to travail from
Frankford in Germany as far as Millan in company of one Friar John Baptist a
Franciscan, who told me, That was the fourth time of his going to Rome from
Valencia in the Kingdom of Arragon in Spain about the Canonization of one John
Capistrano of the same Order; and that besides the great Alms which he had
begged over many Countries, (and in that journey went purposely to Inspurg to
the Prince Leopoldo for his Alms and Letters of commendation to the Pope and
Cardinals) he had spent of the City of Valencia only five thousand Ducats,
and yet was not his Saint enthroned, as he desired, in heaven; But still money
was wanting, and more demanded for the dignifying with a Saints title him, who
had lived a Mendicant and begging Friar. Thus are those blinded Nations brought
by Policy to run to Rome with rich treasures, and thus do they strive who
shall have most Saints of their Country or Nation, though impoverishing
themselves; whilst at Rome ambition and Policy say not, It is enough, ^it mates
for the Horsleech his two daughters, crying, Give, give, Prove. 30. 15. Give,
say they, and the rigid Penance justly to be imposed upon thee for thy sins
most heinous, shall be extenuated and made easy for thee. Give, say they, and
thou shall be dispensed with to marry thy nearest Kinswoman or Kinsman. It
would be a long story to insert here how the Popes Policy sucks out of England
our gold and silver for the authorizing of our Papists private Chambers and
Altars for the gaining of Indulgences in them, and delivering of souls out of
Purgatory, when Masses are said and heard at them. Thus has Romes policy
blinded and deceived many of the European Kingdoms; and with the same
greediness gapes at Asia and America. Who would not admire to see that at this
day in America only, the Popes authority and usurped power is extended to as
many Countries as all Europe contains, wherein no Religion but mere blind
Obedience and subjection to that Man of Sin is known? And daily may it more and
more increase, whereas the King of Spain gloryeth to have received from the
Pope power over those Kingdoms far greater than any other Princes of Europe
have enjoyed from him. But the pity is, that what power these Princes have,
they must acknowledge it from Rome, having given their own power and strength
unto the Beast, Revel. 17. 13. suffering themselves to be divested of any
Ecclesiastical power over the Clergy, and unabled to tender any Oath of
Supremacy and Allegiance to their own and natural subjects, only so far as
his Holiness shall give them power. Which Policy since the first Conquest of
the West India's, and ambition to advance the Popes name, has granted to the
Kings of Spain, by a special title, naming those Kingdoms, E^ Patrimonio
Real, The Royal Patrimony; upon this Condition, that the King of Spain must
maintain there the preaching of the Gospel, Friars, Priests and Jesuits to
preach it with all the erroneous Popish doctrines, which tend to the
advancement of the Popes glory, power, and authority. So that what power he
has divested himself of, and invested the Pope with; what power other Princes
are divested of, and the King of Spain in his Kingdoms of Europe, from meddling
in Ecclesiastical affairs, or with Ecclesiastical men; Archbishops,
Bishops, Priests, Jesuits, Monks and Friars; that same power by way of Royal
Patrimony is conferred upon him in the India's only. And this only politickly
to maintain there Popery; else never would it have so much increased there; for
poor Priests and mendicant Friars would never have had means enough to be at
the charges of sending yearly Flocks and Sholes of Friars thither, neither to
keep and maintain them there; neither would the covetousness of the Popes
themselves have afforded out of their full and rich treasures, means sufficient
for the maintaning of so many thousand Preachers as at this day are preaching
there, more Rome and Antichrists name, then the name of Christ and the truth of
the Gospel. And policy having thus opened way to those American parts, the
charges thus being laid upon the Crown of Spain, and the honor of a Royal
Patrimony, with power over the Clergy thus conferred upon the Kings of Spain;
how does the Pope yearly charge the Catholic King with troops of Jesuits and
Friars to be conveyed thither? Now the Jesuits (the best scholars of Romes
policy) seeing this to be thus settled between the Pope and the King of Spain,
for the increasing of their Order, and to suppress the increase of other
Religions there, have thought first of a way of challenging all the India's to
themselves, alleging that Francis Xavierius companion of Ignatius Loiola was
the first Preacher that ever preached in the East India's, and so by right that
they being of his profession ought only to be sent thither. But this their way
being stopped by the opposition of all other Religious orders, especially by
the solicitation of one Friar Diego Colliado, a Dominican, as hereafter I will
show more largely: Now, secondly, their policy is to lean more to the Popes of
Rome, then any other of those Orders, by a special Vow which they make above
the three Vows of other orders, Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience to their
superiors; to wit, to be always ready to go to preach when or whither soever
the Pope shall send them, and to advance his name, defend his power in what
parts soever, ma^gre whatsoever danger, or opposition. Thus though the
remoteness of America may discourage other Orders from going thither to
preach, and their freewill which is left unto them to make choice of so long
and tedious a journey may retard their readiness, and the dangers of the
Barbarians unwillingnesse to submit to a Popes power, and admit of a new
Religion as superstitious as their own, may affright them from hazarding their
lives among a barbarous, rude, and idolatrous people; yet if all others fail,
the Pope, and the Jesuits being thus agreed, and the King of Spain bound by
the new Royal Patrimony, Preachers have not, nor shall ever be wanting in
those parts: And in stead of the old Jesuits and Preachers grown in age,
yearly are sent thither Missions (as they call them) either of Volunteers,
Friars mendicants, Priests or Monks, or else of forced Jesuits: All which
entering once into the List and Bond of Missionaries, must abide there, and be
maintained by the King of Spain ten years. And whosoever before the ten years
expired, shall desire to see Spain again, or runagate-like shall return, may be
constrained (if taken in Spain) to return again to the India's, as it happened
whilst I lived in those parts, to one Friar Peter de Bal^azar a Dominican, who
privily flying back to Spain, was the year after shipped, and restored again to
his forced service under the Pope of Rome. And thus does policy open the ways
to those remote and forain parts of America. Thus has policy wrought upon the
Kings of Spain; and Jesuiticall policy meeting with Antichrists policy and
Ambition, does Rome yearly visit her new nursed Children, greeting that
Infantile Church of Asia and America with troops of messengers one after
another, like Jobs messengers, bringing under pretense of salvation, damnation
and misery to their poor and wretched souls.

CHAP. II. Showing that the Indians wealth under a pretense of their Conversion
has corrupted the hearts of poor begging Friars, with strife, hatred, and
ambition.
IT is a most true and certain saying, Odia Religionum sunt acerbissima, hatred
grounded in points and differences of Religion (let me add, if ambition blow
the fire to that hatred) is the most bitter and incapable of reconciliation.
Nay, it is an observation worth noting of some (see Doctor Day upon the 1 Cor.
16. 9. Verse) that the nearer any are unto a conjunction in matters of
Religion, and yet some difference retained, the deeper is the hatred; As he
observes, a Jew hates a Christian far worse then he does a Pagan, or a
Turk; a Papist hates a Protestant worse then he does a Jew, and a Formalist
hates a Puritan worse then he does a Papist. No such hatred under heaven
(says he) as that between a Formalist, and a Puritan, whereof our now
Domestic and Civil Wars may be a sad and woeful experience. A truth which
made Paul burst out into a lamentable complaint, 1 Cor. 16. 9. saying, A great
door and effectual is opened unto me, and there are many adversaries.

And as when the door of true Faith once is opened, then Adversaries begin to
swarm and rage; so in all points of false and fained Religion where the
entrance to it is laid open, hatred and enmity will act their parts. But much
more if with such pretended Religion, Wealth and Ambition as counterfeit Mates
thrust hard to enter at the opened door, what strife, hatred, and envy do
they kindle even in the hearts of such who have vowed poverty and the contempt
of worldly wealth? I may add to what has been observed above, that no hatred
is comparable to that which is between a Jesuit and a Friar, or any other of
Romes Religious Orders; And above all yet between a Jesuit, and a Dominican.
The ambition and pride of Jesuits is inconsistent in a Kingdom or
Commonwealth with any such as may be equal to them in Preaching, Counsel or
Learning. Therefore strive they so much for the education of Gentlemen's
Children in their Colleges, that by teaching the sons, the love of the
fathers and mothers may be more easily gained: and their love and good will
thus gained, they may withal gain to themselves whatsoever praise, honor,
glory may be fit to be bestowed upon any other Ecclesiastical Person. Which
Policy and Ambition in them being so patent and known to all the World, has
stirred up in all other Religions a hatred to them incapable ever of
Reconciliation. This has made them all to conspire against them, and to
discover their unsatisfied covetousness in beguiling the rich widows of what
means ^ath been left them by their deceased husbands, to erect and build
those stately Colleges beyond the Seas, the sight whereof both outward and
inward does draw the ignorant people to resort more to their Churches and
preaching then to any other. Thus whilst in Venice, they got the favor of one
of the chief Senators of that Commonwealth, they politickly drew him to make
his will according to their will and pleasure, leaving to his son and heir no
more then what they should think fit to afford him. But they appropriating to
themselves the chiefest part of the young heirs means, and with so proud a
legacy thinking to overpower all other Orders, were by them opposed so, that
the Will was called for by the whole State and Senators of Venice, fully
examined, and they commanded to restore to the heir the whole Estate as
enjoyed by his Father. Well did that wise Senate conceive, that as one Noble
man had been cheated by them of his fortunes, so might they one by one, and so
at length the riches of Venice might become a treasure only for Jesuits to
maintain the pride and pomp of their glorious fabrics. And though those
vowed servants to the Pope obtained his Excommunication against the whole
Estate of Venice upon non-complying with the foresaid Will and Testament; yet
such was the preaching of all other Priests and Orders against them, that they
caused the State to slight the Excommunication, and in lieu of making them
heirs of the deceased Senators Estate, they shamefully banished them out of
Venice. Thus also have the Priests and Friars of Bis^ya in Spain prevailed
against the admitting of Jesuits into San-S^an, though by the favor of some
they have in several occasions obtained an house and erected a Bell to ring
and summon in the People to their pretended Church and College. Nay the very
house wherein their Patron Ignatius Loiola lived, have they often seriously
offered to buy for a College; yet such has been the opposition of the Priests
and Friars of that Country, that they have dashed to naught their often
i^rated endeavors to purchase that which they esteem their chiefest Relic.
But to come nearer to our own Country, what a combustion did this strife
between Jesuits and other Priests of England cause among our Papists ten
years ago, when the Pope sending into England Doctor Smith pretended Bishop
of Chalcedon to be the Metropolitan head over all the Clergy and other Orders,
how then was ^t to see the pride of the Jesuits as inconsistent with any one
that might oversway them, or gain more credit then themselves? who never left
persecuting the Bishop, till by the Popes Letters they had banished him out of
England. Which courtesy, the secular Priests gaining yet a head over them with
title of Archdeacon, Doctor Champney, have ever since sought to repay home, by
endeavoring always to cast them out of England, as pernicious to the State of
this Kingdom, more then Friars or any other sort of Priests; Which they have
sufficiently made known by discovering their covetousness in encroaching upon
many Houses and Farms, enriching themselves, as namely at Winifreds Well (so
termed by them) where they had bought an Inn, and speedily fell to building
there that they might make it a College for Jesuits to entertain there all
Papists comers and goers to that Well, and so might win to themselves the
hearts of most of the Papists of the Land, who do yearly resort thither to be
washed and healed upon any light occasion either of Headache, Stomack-ach,
Ague, want of children, where they blindly fancy a speedy remedy for all
maladies, or wants of this World. Thus have the Priests discovered further our
English Jesuits covetousness in the building of the Sope-houses at Lambeth
under the name of Mr. George Gage their purse-bearer, and since projecting the
Monopoly of Soap under Sir Richard W^on, Sir Basil Brook, and many others
names, who were but Agents and Traders with the Jesuits rich and mighty
Stock. Thus came out the discovery of the Levelling of Hills and Mountains,
cutting of rocks at Liege in the Low Countries at the College of the English
Jesuits, a work for Gardens and Orchards for their Novices recreation and
pastime, which (as I have heard from their own mouths) cost them thirty
thousand pound, which gift they squeezed out of one only Countess of this
Land. Like to this may prove their College at Gaunt, for which they have
obtained already a fair beginning of eight thousand pounds from the Old
Countess of Shrewsberry, and from the greatest part of the Estate of Mr.
Sackefield, whom whilst they had him in their Colleges, they cherished with
their best dainties, and with hopes that one day he should be a Canonized
Saint of their Religious Order. All these knaveries do even those Priests of
the same Popish Religion discover of them, and thereby endeavor to make them
odious. And though of all, the Jesuits be the most covetous, yet may I not
excuse the Secular Priests, Benedictine Monks, and the Friars from this
damnanable sin; who also strive for wealth and means for their Doway, Paris
and Li^ve Colleges, and lose no opportunities at the death of their Popish
favorites for the obtaining a Legacy of one or two hundred Pounds, assuring
them their souls shall be the better for their Masses. Thus do those
miserable wretches in the very heat of their zeal of souls seek to supp^sse
one another, and having vowed Poverty, yet make they the Conversion of England
the only object of their Ambition and unsatiable Covetousness. But above all
is this envy and hatred found between Dominicans and Jesuits, for these owe
unto them an old grudge, for that when Ignatius Loiola lived, his Doctrine de
Trinitate (which he pretended was revealed to him from heaven, for he was
certainly past the Age of studying at his Conversion) was questioned by the
Dominicans, and he by a Church Censure publicly and shamefully whipped about
their Cloisters for his erroneous principles. This affront done to their chief
Patron has stirred up in them an unreconciliable hatred toward the Order of
the Dominicans, and has made them even crack their brains to oppose Thomas
Aquinas his Doctrine. How shamefully do those two Orders endeavor the
destruction of each other, branding one another with calumnies of heresy in
the Opinions especially de Conceptione Mariae, de libero arbitrio, de Auxiliis?
And of the two, the Jesuits is more bold and obstinate in malice and hatred.
How did they some twenty years ago, all Spain over, about the Conception of
Mary stir up the people against the Dominicans, in so much that they were in
the very streets termed Heretics, stones cast at them, the King almost
persuaded to banish them out of all his Dominions, and they poor Friars forced
to stand upon their Guard in their Cloisters in many Cities, especially in
Sevill, Osuna, Antiquera and Cordova. to defend themselves from the rude and
furious multitude. Much like this was that public Conference and disputation
between Valentia the Jesuit and Master Lemos the Dominican, before the Pope,
concerning their alter^ation de Auxiliis; When the cunning Jesuit hoping to
brand with heresy the whole Order of Dominicans, had caused Augustmes Works
to be falsely printed at Lions, with such words which might directly oppose the
Thom^sts Opinion; and had prevailed, had not Lemos begged of ^e Pope that the
Original Books of ^ustin might be brought out of his Vatican Library, where
was found the quite contrary words, to what the false Jesuit had caused to be
printed; he was forced to contesse his knavery, was harshly reprehended, and
with the apprehension of that great affront, the next night gave up his ghost
to his father, the father of lies and falsehood.

An other reason of this mortal enmity between these two Orders, is for that
the Jesuits surpass all others in ambition of honor, credit, and estimation,
whence it is they cannot endure to behold the Dominicans to exceed them in any
preferment. Now it is that by the Laws of Arragon and the Kingdom of Valencia,
the Kings of Spain are tied to have a Dominican Friar for their Confessor or
ghostly father; which could but the Jesuits obtain, how would they then rule
and govern Spain and the Kings heart? But though they could never yet prevail
to alter this established law, yet have they prevailed now lately so that
Antonio de Sotomayor the King of Spains Confessor should lie at rest in the
Court of Madrid, with a pension and dry title only; and that Florencia that
grand Statist should be Confessor to the Count of Olivares, the Royal Issue,
the Queen, and should hear the Kings confessions oftener then his chosen and
elected Confessor Sotomayor. Secondly, the Dominicans as first Authors of the
Inquisition (which they prove from their Martyr Peter of Verona) still enjoy
the highest places of that Court, which is a woeful sight to the Jesuits to
see their Religion affairs handled, their Church kept pure from what they call
heresy by any but themselves. O had they (as they have often strived for it) in
their hands the judicature of that tribunal, how should all Dominicans, nay
all sorts of Priests but their own, presently by them be branded with heresy?
Thirdly, in Rome there is an other preferment successively due to Dominicans,
from the time of Dominicus de Guzman founder of that Religion, to wit, to be
magister Sacri Palatii, the Popes Palace master, instituted to this purpose
that about him there may be some learned Divine (for commonly the Popes are
more Statists, and Canonists, then Divines) to read a daily lecture of Divinity
to such as will be instructed therein, and to resolve the Pope himself of
whatsoever difficult points in Divinity may be questioned. This is the
Dominicans due with a pension to maintain Coach and servants within the Palace
of St* Peter. Which the Jesuits have often by favor and cunning Jesuiticall
tricks endeavored to bereave the Dominicans of; but proving labor in vain,
they continue still in their unplacable enmity and hatred against them. And
thus you see the fountains of their strife; which as here in Europe has been
well seen, so has this contentious fire overpowered the fire of their zeal of
souls in the East and West-India's; and the wealth and riches of those
Countries, the ambition of honor in their Gospel function has more powerfully
drawn them thither, then (what they pretend) the conversion of a barbarous and
idolatrous nation. This was well published to the view of the whole world by a
most infamous libel which in the year 1626 friar Diego de Colliado a missionary
Friar in Philippinas and Iapan set ou^ of the unheard of passages and
proceedings of the Jesuits in those Eastern parts. At that time the Jesuits
pretended that mission to themselves only, and petitioned the King of Spain,
that only they might go thither to preach, having been the first plantation of
Franciscus Xavier, and since continued successively by their Priests. To this
purpose they remembered the King of the great charges he was at in sending so
many Friars and maintaining them there; all which should be saved, might they
only have free ingresse into those Kingdoms. All which charges they offered
themselves to bear, and further to bring up the Indians in the true faith, to
instruct them and civilize them, to teach them all liberal sciences, and to
perfect them in music and all musical instruments, and in fencing, dancing,
vaulting, painting and whatsoever else might make them a complete, and civil
people. But against all this was objected by Diego Colliado, that not zeal only
and charity moved them to this offer, but their ambition and covetousness,
which would soon be seen in their encroaching upon the silly and simple Indians
wealth; bringing instances of many thousand pounds which they had sque^zed from
the poor Barbarians in the Islands of Philippinas; And that their entering into
Iapan was more to enrich themselves, then to convert the Iaponians to
Christianisme; that whenever they entered into the Kingdom they conveyed from
Manila whole ships laden with the richest commodities of those Islands; that
their trading was beyond all other Merchants trading, their Bench for exchange
money far more accustomed then any other whither for China, for Iapan, for
Peru and Mexico; and that the Viceroy himself made use of none other, but
theirs. That to keep out all other orders out of Iapan, they had ingratiated
themselves so far, under pretense of trading, into the Emperors favor by
gifts of Watches, Clocks, Dials, Locks, and Cabinets, and such like presents
of most curious and artificial Workmanship, that they had got free access to
his Court, and counseled him to beware of Friars, which cunningly crept into
his Kingodme to preach a new law, persuading him by rigorous search and
enquiries to root them out: thus politickly for their own ends hindering the
increase of Christianisme by any means or instruments save themselves; and
blinding the Emperors eyes with their cunning insinuations, that he might not
see in them, what they desired he might discover in others, that they might
appear in sheep skins, and others clothed with wolves skins; and so the Friars
might have little heart to trade, but enough to do to save themselves from the
stormy persecution, whilst they freely might enjoy the liberty of rich trading.
This brand upon these cunning foxes was commanded to be printed, thanks given
to Diego Colliado for discovering to the Estate their crafty proceedings, with
not a few tenants maintained by them in Iapan even against their own
Sovereign; a fat Bishopric was offered to the Friar, which he refusing,
commission was given unto him for the raising of forty Friars out of Spain, and
the conducting of them to the Islands of Philippinas, and that it should be
free for all Priests and Friars, as well as Jesuits, to pass to those parts
for the preaching of Christ and the extending of Christianisme among the
Heathens and Barbarians. O that this my discovery made to England of those
dissembling and false Priests, would make us wise to know and discover under
the ashes of their pretended Religion, the fire of strife and contention which
they kindle in Kingdoms, and to rake up that covetousness, which we may
easily find in them; tending to the ruin of many fair estates, and to the
temporal and spiritual danger of this our flourishing Kingdom!

CHAP. III. Showing the manner of the Missions of Friars and Jesuits to the
India's.
All the Kingdoms of America, that have been conquered by the Kings of Spain,
are divided as into several temporal governments, so into several spiritual
jurisdictions, under the name of Provinces, belonging unto several religious
Orders, and their Provincials. These though so far distant from Europe, yet
live with a dependency and subordination unto the Court of Rome, and are bound
to send thither a strict account and relation of what most remarkable passages
and successes happen there, as also what want of Preachers there is in every
several Province. Which is to be performed in this manner. Every religious
Order (except the Jesuits and Dominicans, whose General continues till
death, unless a Cardinals cap be bestowed upon him) makes election of one of
the same order to be the head Ruler, or (as they call him) General over all
those of the same profession every sixth year. The subjects unto this General
which are dispersed in Italy, Germany, Flanders, France, Spain, East and
West-India's are divided into sundry Provinces, as in Spain there is one
Province of Andaluzia, another of Castilia nu^va, new Castile, another of
Castilia vieia, old Castile, another of Valencia, another of Arragon, of
Murcia, of Catalonia; So likewise in America there is the Province of Mexico,
of Mechoacan, of Guaxaca, of Chiapa and Guatemala, of Comayagua, Nicaragua and
the like. Every Province of these has a head named the Provincial, chosen by
the chief of the Province every three years; which election is called a
Provincial Chapter, and the former a General Chapter, which also is allotted
to be in some chief City, commonly in Italy, France, or Spain. When the
Provincial Chapter is kept, then by the consent of all that meet in it is
there one named by name of Procurator or Diffinitor, who is to go in the name
of the whole Province to the next election of the General, and there to demand
such things as his Province shall think fit, and to give an account of the
state of the Province from whence he is sent. Thus from the West-India's are
sent Procurators, who commonly are the best prizes the Holland ships meet with,
for that they carry with them great wealth, and gifts to the Generals, to the
Popes and Cardinals and Nobles in Spain, as bribes to facilitate whatsoever
just or unjust, right or wrong they are to demand* Among other businesses their
charge is this, to make known the great want of laborers in the abundant and
plentiful harvest of the India's (though not all Provinces demand Preachers
from Spain, as I will show hereafter) and to desire a number of thirty or forty
young Priests, who may be fit for any Indian language and to succeed the old
standers.

The Order of the Province being read to the General, or his General Chapter*
then are Letters Patents granted unto this Procurator from the General, naming
him his Vicar General for such a Province, and declaring his sufficiency and
worthy parts, (though none at all in him, as I have been witness of some) the
great pains he has taken in the new planted Indian Church, and how fit he
has been judged to convey to those parts, a Mission of such as shall
voluntarily offer themselves for the propagation of Christianity amongst those
Barbarians. Then the tauny Indian Friar being well set out with high
Commendations, and fairly painted with flattering Elogies, presents these his
Patents (and with them peradventure a little wedge of Gold, a Box of Pearls,
some Rubies or Diamonds, a Chest of Cochinill, or Sugar, with some boxes of
curious Chocolatte, or some feather works of Mechoacan, some small fruits of
his great pains and labor) to the Pope; who for his first reward gives him
his Toe and Pantofle to kiss, seconding this honor with a joyful countenance
to behold an Apostle, judging him worthy of the best of the Indian wealth, and
his soul peradventure fit for the title of a Saint; This complacency in the
gift and the giver, breeds immediately a motus proprius in his Holiness to
grant a Bull with a degree of the Popes Commissary, wherein this poor
Mendicant Friar is enabled to run over all the Cloisters of his Profession in
Spain, to gather up his thirty or forty young Preachers. Who for their better
encouragement are at their first listing by the Popes Authority absolved a
culpa and apaena, from all sin, and from their Purgatory and Hell due unto
it, by a plenary Indulgence. And whosoever shall oppose, or any way discourage
this Popes Commissary, or those that are or would be listed by him, are ipso
facto excommunicated with an Anathem reserved only to this Commissary or his
Holiness himself. O what is it to see, when such a Commissaries coming is
known, how the young birds, that as in Cages are shut up within the walls of a
Cloister, leap and cherish themselves with hopes of liberty? What is it to see
disordered Friars, who for their misdemeanors, and leaping over their Cloister
walls in the night to find out their wanton harlots, have been imprisoned, now
rejoice at the coming of a Popes Commissary, and Plenary Indulgence, freeing
them from sins past, and sitting them for the Conversion of souls, though
there one be not averted from their Harlot, nor as yet truly and unfainedly
converted to the love of God? True it is, I have kowne some that have written
their names in the list of Indian Missionaries, men o^ sober life and
Conversation, moved only with a blind zeal of increasing the Popish Religion:
yet I dare say and confidently print this truth without wronging the Church of
Rome, that of thirty or forty which in such occasions are commonly transported
to the India's, the three parts of them are Friars of lewd lives, weary of
their retired Cloister lives, who have been punished often by their Superlour^
for their wilful backsliding from that obedience which they formerly vowed;
or for the breach of their poverty in closely retaining money by them to Card
and Dice, of which sort I could here namely insert a long and tedious
Catalogue; or lastly such, who have been imprisoned for violating their vow of
chastity with lewd and laseivious women, either by secret flight from their
Cloisters, or by public Apostatizing from their Order, and clothing
themselves in Laymens Apparel, to run about the safer with their wicked
Co^cubines. Of which sort it was my chance to be acquainted with one Friar
John Navarro a Franciscan in the City of Guatemala, who after he had in
secular apparel enjoyed the lewd company of one Amaryllis a famous Woman
player in Spain for the space of a year, fearing at last he might be
discovered, listed himself in a Mission to Guatemala, the year 1632, there
hoping to enjoy with more liberty and less fear of punishment any lustful or
carnfull object. Liberty, in a word, under the Cloak of Piety and Conversion of
Souls, it is, that draws so many Friars (and commonly the younger sort) to
those remote American parts; where after they have learned some Indian
language, they are licenced with a Parish Charge to live alone out of the sight
of a watching Prior or Superior, out of the bounds and compass of Cloister
walls, and authorized to keep house by themselves, and to finger as many
Spanish Patacones, as their wits device shall teach them to squee^ out of the
newly Converted Indians wealth. This liberty they could never enjoy in Spain,
and this liberty is the Midwife of so many soul falls of wicked Friars in
those parts. For the present only, I shall return again to my Friar John
Navarro, who at his coming to Guatemala, being made for his wit and learning,
Master and Reader of Divinity, and much esteemed of for his acute Preaching,
among many others got the estimation and love of a chief Gentlewoman, ( Quo
semel est imbuta recens servabit odorem, testa diu) who continued in Navarro
his heart the former sent of the unchaste love of Amaryllis, so far that the
Friar being blinded and wounded with Cupids Arrow sticking in his heart, ran
headlong to quench his lustful thirst upon St. James his day, 1635. for better
memory of the Tragical event (being the Spaniards common Advocate, and special
Patron of that City, named St. Iago de Guatemala) where cruel Mars oppressing
Venus in her wanton Acts, the injured husband acting Mars, and finding Navarro
Cupids page saluting his Venus upon her bed, drew his sword, cutting the Friar
first in the head and face; who struggling with death, and purchasing his life
with a swift and nimble flight to a Garden, where his own brother a Friar of
the same Order, and Pander to that foul act, entertained the Motherlesse
children; for the husband having missed his fatal blow (willingly as some
imagined, or unwillingly as others judged) in the Friars heart, wilfully laid
it in the throat of his unchaste Wife, scarce leaving way for breath to make a
speedy Confession of her sin to Navarro his Brother; who tendering her soul
as much as his Brother had tendered her body absolved her from her sin,
finding signs, though no uttering speech of Repentance, while the murderer
fled, and the murdered lay in the door of her house for a sad object to all,
that immediately flocked thither to see that bloody Tragedy. The Wife being the
same day buried, the Husband being retired to a close Sanctuary, Navarro was
carried to his Convent to be cured; and after his Cure was banished that
Country; whom two years after it was my chance to meet in Cartagena returning
to Spain with his scard face, bearing the mark of his lascivious life, and of
that liberty which he had enjoyed in America. Such are the fruits of the zeal
of those wretches, who upbraid our Church and Ministers for want of zeal to
labor in the Conversion of Infidels. Who when they arrive to those parts, are
entertained with ringing of Bells, with sounding of Trumpets most part of the
way as they travail, and as Apostles are received by the Indians, though soon
like Judas they fall from their calling, and for pleasure and covetousness
sell away Christ from their Souls. England may here learn to beware of such
Converters, who are daily by name of Missionaries sent hither by the Pope to
preach among us Popery; but like Navarro come to feed and cherish their wanton
lusts, as I could give many instances, might I not be censured for long
digressions in mingling English Histories with my American Travailes.

CHAP. IV. Showing to what* Provinces of the East and West India's belonging to
the Crown of Castilia are sent Missions of Friars and Jesuits. And specially
of the Mission sent in the year 1625.
IN all the Dominions of the King of Spain in America, there are two sorts of
Spaniards more opposite one to another then in Europe the Spaniard is opposite
to the French, or to the Hollander, or to the Portingall; To wit, they that are
born in any parts of Spain and go thither, and they that are borne there of
Spanish parents, whom the Spaniards, to distinguish them from themselves, term
Criolio's, signifying the Natives of that Country. This hatred is so great,
that I dare say, nothing might be more advantageous then this, to any other
Nation that would conquer America. And nothing more easily gained, then the
Wills and affections of the Natives of the Country, to join with any other
Nation to free and rescue themselves from that subjection, or kind of slavery,
which they suffer under the hard usage of the Spaniards, and their partial
Government and justice toward them, and those that come from Spain. This is so
grievous to the poor Criolio's or Natives, that my self have often heard them
say, They would rather be subject to any other Prince, nay to the Hollanders,
then to the Spaniards, if they thought they might enjoy their Religion; and
others wi^hing the Hollanders, when they took Truxillio in Honduras, had
stayed in it and entered further into the land, they should have been welcome to
them; and that the Religion they enjoyed with so much slavery, was nothing
sweet unto them. This mortal hatred betwixt these two sorts of Spaniards, made
the Criolio's so ready to join against the Marquess of Gelues Viceroy of
Mexico, in the tumult and mutiny of that City, wherein they cleaving to Don
Alonso de Zerna, the Archbishop caused the Viceroy to escape for his life by
flight, and would then have utterly rooted out the Spanish Government, had not
some Priests dissuaded them from it; but of this I shall speak more largely
hereafter. The cause of this deadly hatred has proceeded from a jealousy
which the Spaniards have ever had of the Criolio's, that they would feign
withdraw themselves first from the commerce with Spain, and secondly, from the
Government which is laid upon them; which is such, that the Criolio's must be
always under, and a subject, always governed, but scarce any a Governor.
Never yet was there seen any Criolio made Viceroy of Mexico, or Peru; or
President of Guatemala, or Santafe, or S. Domingo; or Governor of Yucatan,
Cartagena, Havana; or A^calde Mayor (as they call them) of Soconusco, Chiapa,
San Salvador, and such like places of credit. So likewise in the Courts of
Chancery, as Sto. Domingo, Mexico, Guatemala, Lima, and the rest; where
commonly there are Six, called Oydores and one Fiscal, scarce one of them to be
found a Criolio, or native of the Country; though there be among them those
that descended of the chief Conquerors; as in Lima and Peru the Pizarros, in
Mexico and Guaxaca the house of the Marquess Dell Valle, Ferdinando Cortes his
Successors, others of the house of Giron, others of the house of Aluarado,
others of the Gusmanes, finally many of the chiefest houses of Spain; yet none
of these ever preferred to any dignity. And not only thus are they kept from
offices, but daily affronted by the Spaniards as incapable of any Government,
and termed half Indians by them.

Which general contempt has also spread it self in the Church, where no
Criolio Priest is scarce ever preferred to be a Bishop, or Canon in a
Cathredall Church, but all such as come from Spain. So likewise in the
religious orders they have many years indeavored to keep under and suppress
such as have bin admitted to their orders of the natives of the Country, lest
the number of them should prevail against those that are brought from Spain;
they have been very nice in choosing of them, and though they have been forced
to admit of some, yet still the Provincials, the Priors, and all Superiors have
been Spaniards born in Spain. Till now lately some Provinces have got the upper
hand and prevailed against the Spaniards, and have so filled their cloisters
with Criolio's or natives, that they have utterly refused to admit the supplies
of Spanish Missions which formerly were sent unto them, and till this day are
sent to others. In the Province of Mexico there are Dominicans, Franciscans,
Augustines, Carmelites, Mercenarians, and Jesuits, whereof the Jesuits and
Carmelites only to this day prevail against Criolio's, bringing every two or
three years Missions from Spain. The last Mission that was sent to the
Mercenarians was the year 1625. and then was the opposition such between that
Mission and the Criolio's, that in the election of the next Provincial in
their Cloister of Mexico, the Friars drew knives one against another, and were
like to kill each other, had not the Viceroy gone to their Cloister to make
peace, and imprison some of them. Yet at last by the multitude of voices the
native partly prevailed, and till this day have exempted themselves from
Spanish Missions, alleging (as others have done) that they have Friars enough
in their Cloisters, and need none to be sent them from Spain; submitting
themselves to the Pope, and presenting to him as stately gifts as ever
Spaniards did before them. In the Province of Guaxaca none admit of
Missionaries from Spain; true it is the Dominicans are but newly subdued by the
Criolian party; and as yet are strongly pleading at Rome for Spanish Friars,
alleging that the glory and luster of their Religion has been much blurred
since the non-admittance of supplies of their zealous Compatriots. The Province
of Guatemala, (which is of a large extent) containing Guatemala, Chiapa, the
Zoques, part of Tabasco, the Zeldales, the Sacapulas, the Vera Paz, all the
coast lying to the South sea Suchu^epeques and Soconusco, Comayagua, Honduras,
S. Salvador, Nicaragua, has in it these orders chiefly, Dominicans,
Franciscans, Augustines, (who are subject to Mexico being one poor Cloister in
Guatemala) Jesuits also in Guatemala subject to the government of Mexico and
Mecenarians; whereof the three orders of Dominicans, Franciscans, and
Mercenarians, are the only Preachers and parish Priests throughout all the
forenamed Provinces. And these three Orders have still kept under the Criolian
party, never as yet suffering any of them to be Provincial, bringing every two
or three years some one year and some another, Missions of Friars from Spain to
maintain and keep up their faction against the Criolians. The Provinces of Peru
being more distant from Spain, and hard to come to by sea, have no Missions
sent unto them. There are of the most Romish religious orders, yet the chief
are Dominicans; and they all live above their vow of poverty, abounding in
wealth, riot, liberty and pleasures. In the Kingdom of Nuevo reino de Granada,
and Cartagena, Santa fee, Barinas, Popayan, and the government of St. Martha,
are Dominicans, Jesuits, Franciscans, Carmelites, Augustines and Mercenarians;
whereof the Dominicans, Jesuits and Franciscans till this day admit of
Missions from Spain. The Island of Cuba, Iamaica, la Margarita, Puerto rico,
all are subject to the head Provincial of Santo Domingo, being Dominicans,
Jesuits, and Franciscans, and have all now and then Missions from Spain.
Yucatan has in it only Franciscans, who live most richly and plentifully, and
strongly uphold the Spanish faction with European Missions: Mechoacan belongs
to the Mexican Friars, and is in the same condition as was said before of
Mexico. Thus have I briefly run over all America that pertains to the Crown of
Castilia: for the East-India's they belong to the Crown of Portingall and
Brasill, as first discovered and possessed by the Portingalls, and now
doubtless are subject to King John, the new King of Portingall. Yet the
Islands of Philippinas are subject to the King of Spain, and there are
Dominicans, Franciscans, Augustines, and Jesuits, all which lie still in wait
in Manila the Metropolitan City, for some sure shipping to Iapan, to convert
tha^ Kingd^e. And though they admit of some few Crioli'os among them,
especially some of their Converts of China and Iapan; yet their chief number
and strength is of Spanish Missionaries, who are more frequently conveyed
thither then to the parts aforementioned of America. First they are sent in
the ships that are bound for Nueva Espana and Mexico; and after they have
rested two or three months in Mexico, they are sent to Acapulco, lying on the
Mar del Zur, there they are shipped in two great Caracks which yearly go and
come richly laden with China, Iapan, and all East India ware from Manila to
Acapulco to enrich Mexico with far greater riches then any are sent by the
North sea from Spain. The voyage from Acapulco thither, is longer then from
Spain to Mexico, and easy and pleasant, though the return is far longer and
most dangerous. The year of our Lord 1625. there were four Missions sent; the
one of Franciscans to Yucatan, the other of Mercenarians to Mexico, the other
two of Dominicans and Jesuits to Philippinas. At which time it was my fortune
to reside among the Dominicans in Xerez in Andaluzia. The Popes Commissary for
that Mission was Friar Matheo de la Villa, who having a Commission for thirty
and having gathered some 24 of them about Castilia and Madrid, sent them by
degrees well stored with money to Cales, to take up a convenient lodging for
himself and the rest of his crew, till the time of the setting forth of the
Indian Fleet. This Commissary named one Friar Antonio Calvo to be his
substitute, and to visit the Cloisters of Andaluzia lying in his way; namely
Cordova, Sevill, St. Lucar, and Xerez, to try if out of them he could make up
his complete number of thirty, which was after fully completed. About the end
of May came this worthy Calvo to Xerez, and in his Company one Antonio Melendez
of the College of St. Gregory in Valladolid, with whom I had formerly near
acquaintance. This Melendez greatly rejoiced when he had found me; and being
well stocked with Indian Patacones, the first night of his coming invited me to
his chamber to a stately supper. The good Xerez Sack which was not spared, set
my friend in such a heat of zeal of converting Iaponians, that all his talk
was of those parts never yet seen, and at least six thousand leagues distant.
Bacehus metamorphosed him from a Divine into a Orator, and made him a Cicero in
parts of Rhetorical eloquence. Nothing was omitted that might exhort me to
join with him in that function, which he thought was Apostolical. Nemo
Propheta in patria sua, was a great argument with him; sometimes he propounded
Martyrdom for the Gospel sake, and the glory after it, to have his life and
death printed, and of poor Friar Antony a C^thiers son of Sequovia to be
styled St. Anthony by the Pope, and made collateral with the Apostles in
heaven; thus did Bacchus make him ambitious of honor upon the earth, and
preferrement in heaven. But when he thought this Rhetoric had not prevailed,
then would he act a Midas and Craesus, fancying the India's paved with tiles of
gold and silver, the stones to be Pearls, Rubies, and Diamonds, the trees to
be hung with clusters of nutmegs bigger then the clusters of grapes of Canaan,
the fields to be planted with Sugar Canes, which should so sweeten the
Chocolattae, that it should far exceed the milk and honey of the land of
promise; the silks of China he conceited so common, that the fails of the
ships were nothing else; finally he dreamed of Midas happiness, that
whatsoever he touched should be turned to gold: Thus did Xerez Nectar make my
friend and mortified Friar, a covetous worldling. And yet from a rich covetous
Merchant did it shape him to a Courtier in pleasures; fancying the Philippinas
to be the Eden, where was all joy without tears, mirth without sadness,
laughing without sorrow, comfort without grief, plenty without want, no not of
Eves for Adams, excepted only that in it should be no forbidden fruit, but all
lawful for the taste and sweetning of the palate; and as Adam would have been
as God, so conceited Melendez himself a God in that Eden; whom traveling,
Indian Waits and trumpets should accompany; and to whom, entering into any
Town, nosegaies should be presented, flowers and boughs should be strowed in
his way, Arches should be erected to ride under, B^ls for joy should be rung,
and Indian knees for duty and homage, as to a God, should be bowed to the very
ground. From this inducing argument, and representation of a Paradise, he fell
into a strong Rhetorical point of curiosity; finding out a tree of knowledge,
and a Philosophical maxim, Omnis homo naturaliter scire desiderat, man
naturally inclines to know more and more; which knowledge he fancied could be
no where more furnished with rare curiosities then in those parts; for there
should the Gold and Silver, which here are fingered, in their growth in the
bowels of the earth be known; there should the pepper be known in its season,
the nutmeg and Clove, the Cinnamon as a rine or bark on a tree; the fashioning
of the Sugar from a green growing Cane into a loaf; the strange shaping the
Cochinil from a worm to so rich a Scarlet die; the changing of the Tinta which
is but grass with stalk and leaves into an Indigo black dye, should be taught
and learned; and without much labor thus should our ignorance be instructed
with various and sundry curiosities of knowledge and understanding. Finally,
though Xerez liquor (grapes bewitching tears) had put this bewitching eloquence
into my Antonies brain) yet he doubted not to prefer before it his wine of
Philippinas, growing on tall and high trees of Coco, wherein he longed to
drink a Spanish Brindis in my company to all his friends remaining behind in
Spain. Who would not be moved by these his arguments to follow him, and his
Calvo, or ball pated Superior? Thus supper being ended my Melendez desired to
know how my heart stood affected to his journey; and breaking out into a Unto a
Dios with his converting zeal, he swore he should have no quiet nights rest
until he were fully satisfied of my resolution to accompany him. And having
learned the Poets expression, Quid non mortalia pectora cogi^, Auri sacra
fames? he offered unto me half a dozen of Spanish pistols, assuring me that I
should want nothing, and that the next morning Calvo should furnish me with
whatsoever moneys I needed, for to buy things necessary for the comfort of so
long and tedious a journey. To whom I answered, sudden resolutions might bring
future grief and sorrow, and that I should that night lie down and take
counsel with my pillow, assuring him that for his sake I would do much, and
that if I resolved to go, my resolution should draw on an other friend of
mine, an Irish Friar, named Thomas Delcon. Thus took I my leave of my
Melendez, and retired my self to my chamber and bed, which that night was no
place of repose and rest to me as formerly it had been. I must needs say
Melendez his arguments, though most of them moved me not; yet the opportunity
offered me to hide my self from all sight and knowledge of my dearest friends,
stirred up in me a serious thought of an angry and harsh letter, which not long
before I had received out of England from mine own father, signifying unto me
the displeasure of most of my friends and kindred, and his own grievous
indignation against me, for that having spent so much money in training me up
to learning, I had not only utrerly refused to be of the Jesuits Order (which
was his only hopes) but had proved in my affections a deadly foe and enemy unto
them. And that he would have thought his money better spent, if I had been a
Sc^llion in a College of Jesuits, then if I should prove a General of the
Over of Dominicans; that I should never think to be welcome to my Brothers nor
kindred in England, nor to him; that I should not expect ever more to hear
from him, nor dare to see him if ever I returned to England; but expect that he
would set upon me even Jesuits, whom I had deserted and opposed, to chase me
out of my Country; that Hailing house though he had lost it with much more
means for his Religion during his life; yet with the consent of my Eldest
Brother (now Governor of Oxford, and Masse-founder in that our Famous
University) he would sell it away; that neither from the Estate, or money made
of it, I might enjoy a child's part due unto me. These reasons stole that
nights rest from my body, and sleep from my eyes, tears keeping them unclosed
and open, lest Cynthia's black and mourning Mantle should offer to cover, close
and shut them. To this Letters consideration was joined a strong opposition,
which serious Studies and ripeness of Learning, with a careful discussion of
some Schoole-points and Controversies had bred in me against some chief of the
Popish Tenants. Well could I have wished to have come to England, there to
satisfy and ease my troubled Conscience; well considered I, that if I stayed
in Spain, when my Studies were completely finished, the Dominicans with a Popes
Mandamus would send me home for a Missionary to my Country. But then well
considered I the sight of a wrathful Father, the power of a furious Brother a
Colonel, who (as now landed in England to search me out, and do me mischief)
then, when Zephryus with a pleasant gale seconded his Popish zeal, might
violently assault me. Well considered I the increased rout and rabble of both
their great friends, the Jesuits, who what with Court friends power, what with
subtle plots and Policies would soon and easily hunt me out of England.
Lastly, well considered I my Melendez his last inducing Argument of the
increase of knowledge natural by the insight of rich America and flourishing
Asia, and of knowledge spiritual by a long contemplation of that new planted
Church, and of those Church Planters lives and Conversations. Wherefore after a
whole nights strife and inward debate, as the glorious Planet began to banish
nights dismal horror, rising with a bright and cheerful countenance, rose in
my mind a firm and settled resolution to visit America, and there to abide
till such time as Death should surprise my angry Father, Ignatius Loiola his
devoted Mecaenas, and till I might there gain out of Potosi or Sacatecas
treasure that might Counterpoise that Child's part, which for detesting the
four Cornered Cap, and black Coat of Jesuits, my Father had deprived me of.
So in recompense of the Supper which my friend Anthony had bestowed upon me, I
gave him a most pleasing breakfast by discovering unto him my purpose and
resolution to acompany him in his long and Navall journey. And at noon I
feasted him with a dinner of one dish more th^n his breakfast, to wit, the
company also of my Irish friend Thomas Deleon. After dinner we both were
presented to Calvo the bald pate Superior; who immediately embraced us,
promised to us many curtefies in the way, read unto us a Memorandum of what
dainties he had provided for us, what varieties of fish and flesh, how many
Sheep, how many Gammons of Bacon, how many fat Hens, how many Hogs, how many
barrels of white Biscuit, how many Jars of wine of Casalla, what store of Rice,
Figs, Olives, Capars, Raysins, Lemmons, sweet and sour Oranges, Pomegranates,
Comfits, Preserves, Conserves and all sorts of Portingall sweet meats; he
flattered us that he would make us Masters of Arts, and of Divinity in Manila;
then opened he his purse, and freely gave us to spend that day in Xerez, and
to buy what most we had a mind to, and to carry us to Cales; Lastly he opened
his hands to bestow upon us the holy Fathers Benediction, that no mischief
might befall us in our way; I expected some Relic or nail of his great toe,
or one of his velvet Pantofles to kiss; But peradventure with frequent kissing
through Italy and all Castilia it was even worn thredbare. Much were we
frowned at by the Dominicans our chiefest friends of Xerez, but the liberty
which with Melendez we enjoyed that day about the City of Xerez took from us
all sad thoughts, which so sudden a departure from our friends might have
caused in us. And Calvo much fearing that the love of some Nuns (too powerful
with Spanish Friars) might yet keep us back from pursuing our purposed journey,
with cunning policy persuaded us to depart from Xerez the next morning, Which
willingly we performed in company of Melendez and another Spanish Friar of
that City (leaving our Chests and Books to Calvo to send after us) and that
day we travailed like Spanish Dons upon our little Boricoes, or Asses toward
Puerto d^ Santa Maria, taking in our way that stately Convent of Cariusians,
and the River of Guadalethe, the former Poets River of oblivion, tasting of the
fruits of those Elysian fields and Gardens and drinking of Guadalethes Crystal
Streams, that so perpetual oblivion might blind and cover all those
Abstractive Species which the intuitive knowledge of Spains and Xerezes
pleasant objects had deeply stamped in our thoughts and hearts. At evening we
came to that Puerto so famous for harboring Spains chief Galleys, and at that
time Don Frederique de Toledo; who hearing of the arrival of four Indian
Apostles, would not loose that occasion of some Soule-Sanctification (which he
thought might be his purchase) by entertaining us that night at Supper. The
Town thought their Streets blessed with our walking in them, and wished they
might enjoy some Relics from us, whom they beheld as appointed to Martyrdom
for Christ and Antichrists sake together; the Galley slaves strived who should
sound their Waits and Trumpets most joyfully, Don Frederique spared no cost in
Fish and Flesh that night, doubting not but that receiving four Prophets, he
should receive a fourefold reward hereafter. Supper being ended, we were by
Don Frederique his Gentlemen conveyed to the Cloister of the Minims appointed
by Don Frederique to lodge us that night, who to show their brotherly love
washed our feet, and so recommended us to quiet and peaceable rest. The next
morning after a stately breakfast bestowed upon us by those poor Mendicant
Friars, a boat was prepared for us and Don Frederique his Gentlemen to wait on
us, and to convey us to Cales. Where we found out our fellow Apostles, and the
Popes Commissary Friar Matthew Dela Villa, who welcomed us with Romes
Indulgences, ^ culpa and a paena, and with a flourishing Table stored with Fish
and Flesh for dinner* There we continued in daily honor and estimation,
enjoying the fights most pleasant which Cales both by Sea and Land could afford
unto us, until the time of the Fleets departing. Which when it drew near, our
Grand Apostle Friar Matthew De la Villa, (whom we thought burned with zeal of
Martyrdom) took his leave of us; showing us the Popes Commission to nominate
in his place whom he list, and naming bald Calvo for Superior, returning
himself to Madrid with more desire to enjoy a Bishopric in Spain (as we
understood) then to sacrifice his life in Iapan. His departure caused a Mutiny
among us, and cooled the spirit of two of our Missionaries, who privily fled
from us. The rest were pleased with honest Calvo, for that he was a simple and
ignorant old man, (whom they could more jeere then any way respect) more
Scullion-like in daily greazing his white habit with handling his fat Gammons
of Bacon, then like a Popes Commissary; for his Masters Toe the proudest of our
Missioners then would willingly have kissed; yet Calvoes greazy fists the
humblest would loath to have kissed. Thus under a sloven was that Apostolical
Mission to be conveyed first to Mexico three thousand Spanish Leagues from
Spain, and afterward three thousand Leagues further from thence to Man^a the
Metropolitan and Court City of the Islands of Philippinas.

CHAP. V. Of the Indian Fleet that departed from Cales, Anno Dom. 1625. And of
some remarkable passages in that Voyage.
Upon the first of July in the afternoon, Don Carlos de Ybarra Admiral of the
Galeons that then lay in the Baye of Cales gave order that a warning Piece
should be shot off to warn all Passengers, Soldiers, and Mariners to betake
themselves the next morning to their Ship^. O what was it to see some of our
Apostolical company who had enjoyed much liberty for a month in Cales, who
had began to entangle their hearts with some young Nuns love, now hang down
their heads, and act with sad and demure looks loath to depart, and cry out,
Bonum est nos ^ic esse, It is good for us to be here? and amongst them one
Friar John De Pacbeco made the warning Piece to be a warning to him to hide
himself (who could no more be found amongst his fellow Missioners) thinking it
a part of hard cruelty to forsake a young Franciscan Nun to whom he had engaged
and wholly devoted his heart. What was it to see others with weeping eyes
piercing through the Iron grates the tender Virgins hearts, leaving and
bequeathing unto them some pledges of their wanton love, and receiving from
them some Cordialls against Sea-sicknesse, Caps, Shirts and Hand-kerchiefs, to
eye them or wear them when Aeolus or Neptune should most oppose them? The
second of July in the morning early notice was given unto us, that one Friar
Pabl^ de Londres, an old crab faced English Friar living in St. Lucar had got
the Duke of M^dina his letter and sent it to the Governor of Cales charging
him to search for me and to stay me, signifying the King of Spains will and
pleasure, that no English should pass to the India's, having a Country of
their own to convert; this did that old friar to stop my passage, having before
wrote unto me many letters to the same purpose, and got a letter from that
father Master that was in England before, with the Count of Gondomar, alias
Friar Diego de la Fluente, then Provincial of Castilia, and sent it unto me,
wherein that Superior offered me many kind offers of preferrement, if I would
desist from my journey, and return to him to Castilia; but none of these
letters could prevail with me; nor the Governors searching stop me; for
immediately I was conveyed alone to our ship, and there closely hid in a
barrel that was emptied of Bisquet to that purpose; so that when the Governor
came a shipboard to enquire for an English man, Friar Calvo having the father
of liers in my stead about him, resolutely denied me, who would not be found,
because not sought for in a barrells belly. This found our Apostles sport and
talk that first day. Then went out the ships one by one crying A dios, A dios,
and the Town replying Buen viaie, buen viaie; when all were out and no hopes
of enjoying more Cales pleasures and liberty, then began my young Friars to
wish themselves again a Land, some began presently to feed the fishes with
their Nuns sweet dainties; others to wonder at the number of stately ships,
which with eight Galeons that went to convey us beyond the Islands of Canaria
were forty one in all; some for one Port of the Indiaes, and some for another.
To Puerto Rico went that year two ships; to Santo Domingo three, to Iamaica
two, to Margarita one, to the Havana two, to Cartagena three, to Campe^he two,
to Honduras and Truxillo two, and to St. John Dilva, or Vera Crux sixteen; all
laden with Wines, Figs, Raisins, Olives, Oil, Cloth, Carsies, Linen, Iron,
and quick silver for the Mines, to fetch out the pure silver of Sacatecas from
the earthen dross from whence it is dug. The persons of most note that went
that year, was first the Marquess de Serralvo with his Lady, who went for
Viceroy of Mexico, in stead of the Conde de Gelves then retired to a Cloister
for fear of the common people, who the year before had mutinied against him;
this Marquess went in the ship called St. Andrew, and with him in the same
ship went Don Martin de Carill^ a Priest, and Inquisitor of the Inquisition of
Valladolid; who was sent for Visiter General to Mexico, to examine the strife
between the Conde de Gelves and the Archbishop, and the mutiny that for their
sakes had happened; with full Commission and Authority to imprison, banish,
hang and execute all Delinquents. In the ship called Santa Gertrudis went Don
John Nino de Toledo, who was sent to be President of Manila in Philippinas, and
in the same ship with him went the whole Mission of thirty Jesuits sent to
Philippinas; who had already got the favor of the President, and politickly
sought to be passengers in the same ship, that so they might the more
ingratiate themselves to him; for this cunning generation studies purposely how
to insinuate themselves with Kings, Princes, Great men, Rulers, and Commanders.
In the ship called St. Antony went my Dominican Mission of 27 Friars. In the
ship called Nostra Sennora de Regla went four and twenty Mercenarian Friars
bound for Mexico; part of those that afterward drew their knives to slash and
cut the Criolio's of their Profession. Thus with the Con^oy of eight Galeons
for fear of Turks and Hollanders (whom the Spanish Dons shake and tremble at)
set forward our fleet with a pleasant and prosperous gale, with a quiet and
milken sea, until we came to the Golfe, called Golfo de Yegu^, or of kicking
Mares, whose waves and swelling surges did so kick our ships, that we thought
they would have kicked our St. Anthonies gilded image out of our ship, and
bereaved my Antonio Melendez of his gilt and painted idol, (to whom he daily
bowed and prayed against the merciless element,) and that all our ships
galleries would have been torn from us with these spurnings and blows of that
outrageous Golfe. But at last having overcome the danger of this Golfe, the
eight Galeons took their leave of us, and left our Merchant ships now to shift
for themselves. The departure of these Galeons was most solemnly performed on
each side, saluting each other with their Ordnance, visiting each other with
their Cock-boates, the Admiral of the Fleet feasting with a stately dinner in
his ship, the Admiral of the Galeons; and the like performing most of the
other ships to the several Colonells and Captains and other their allied
friends that were of the Royal Fleet. Here it was worth noting to hear the
sighs of many of our Indian Apostles, wishing they might return again in any
of those Galeons to Spain; their zeal was now cold, and some endeavored many
ways for Calvo his license to return (which could not be granted) others
employed themselves most of that day in writing letters to their friends, and
Sisters in Cales. Thus dinner being ended, and the two Admiralls solemnly
taking their leaves, the warning piece being shot off for the Galeons to join
together, and turn their course to Spain, we bad mutual adieu, crying one to
another Buen Viaie, Buen passage; we kept our course toward America, sailing
before the wind constantly till we came to America; a thing worth noting in
that voyage from Spain to the Indies; that after the Islands of Canaria are
once left, there is one constant wind, continuing to America still the same
without any opposition or contrariety of other winds; and this so prosperous
and full on the sails, that did it blow constantly, and were it not
interrupted with many calmes, doubtless the voyage might be ended in a month
or less. But such were the calmes that many times we had, that we got not to
the sight of any land till the twentieth day of August: so that near six weeks
we sailed as on a river of fresh water, much delighting and sporting our selves
in fishing many sorts fishes, but especially one, which by the Spaniards is
called Dorado, the golden fish, for the skin and scales of it that glitter like
gold; of this sort we found such abundance, that no sooner was the hook with
any small bait cast into the sea, when presently the Dorado was caught, so that
we took them many times for pleasure, and cast them again into the sea, being
a fish fitter to be eaten fresh then salted. Many were the feasts and sports
used in the ships, till we discovered the first land, or Island called
Desseada. The last day of July (being according to the Jesuits Order, and
Romes appointment, the day of Ignatius their Patron and founder of their
Religion) the gallant ship called Sta. Gertrudis (wherein went 30 Jesuits) for
theirs and their Saints sake made to all the rest of the Fleet a most gallant
show, she being trimmed round about with white linen, her flags and top
gallants representing some the Jesuits arms, others the picture of Ignatius
himself, and this from the evening before, shooting off that night at least
fifty shot of Ordinance, besides four or five hundred squibs (the weather being
very calm) and all her masts and tacklings hung with paper Lanthornes having
burning lights within them; the waits ceased not from sounding, nor the
Spaniards from singing all night. The days solemn sport was likewise great,
the Jesuits increasing the Spaniards joy with an open procession in the ship;
singing their superstitions Hymns and Anthemes to their supposed Saint, and
all this seconded with roaring Ordnance, no powder being spared for the
completing of that days joy and triumph. The fourth of August following,
being the day which Rome does dedicate to Dominick, the first the founder of
the Dominicans or Preachers Order, the ship wherein I was, named St. Ambony,
strived to exceed Sta. Gertrudis, by the assistance of the 27 Dominicans that
were in her. All was performed both by night and day; as formerly in Sta.
Gertrudis, both with powder, squibs, lights, Waits and music. And further did
the Dominicans joy and triumph exced the Jesuits, in that they invited all the
Jesuits, with Don John Nino de Toledo the President of Manila, with the
Captain of the ship of Sta. Gertrudis, to a stately dinner both of Fish and
Flesh; which dinner being ended, for the afternoones sport they had prepared a
Comedy out of famous Lope de Vega, to be acted by some Soldiers, Passengers
and some of the younger sort of Friars; which I confess was as stately acted
and set forth both in shows and good apparel, in that narrow compass of our
ship, as might have been upon the best stage in the Court of Madrid. The Comedy
being ended, and a banquet of sweet meats prepared for the closing up of that
days mirth, both ours, and Sta. Gertrudis Cock-boat carried back our invited
friends, bidding each other adieu with our Waits and chiefest Ordnance. Thus
went we on our Sea Voyage without any storm, with pleasant gales, many calmes,
daily sports and pastimes till we discovered the first land called Desseada
upon the twentieth day of August.

CHAP. VI. Of our discovery of some Islands, and what trouble befell us in one
of them.
THe Admiral of our Fleet wondering much at our slow sailing, who from the
second of July to the 19 of August had seen nor discovered any land, save only
the Islands of Canaria; the same day in the morning called to Council all the
Pilots of the ships, to know their Opinions concerning our present being, and
the neernesse of Land. The Ships therefore drew near unto the Admiral one by
one, that every Pilot might deliver his opinion. Here was cause of laughter
enough, for the passengers to hear the wise Pilots skill; One saying, we were
three hundred miles, another two hundred, another one hundred, another fifty,
another more, another less, all erring much from the truth (as afterward
appeared) save only one old Pilot of the smallest Vesse^ of all, who affirmed
resolutely, that with that small gale wherewith we then sailed, we should
come to Guadalupe the next morning. All the rest laughed at him, but he might
well have laughed at them, for the next morning by Sunrising we plainly
discovered an Island called Desseada by the Spaniards, or the desired Land, for
that at the first discovery of the India's it was the first Land the Spaniards
found, being then as desirous to find some Land after many days sailing as we
were. After this Island presently we discovered another called Marigalante,
then another called Dominica, and lastly, another named Guadalupe, which was
that we aimed at to refesh our selves in, to wash our foul clothes, and to
take in fresh water, whereof we stood in great need. By two or three of the
clock in the afternoon we came to a safe Rode lying before the Island, where
we cast our Anchors, no ways fearful of the naked Barbarians of that and the
other Islands, who with great joy do yearly expect the Spanish Fleets coming,
and by the Moons do reckon the Months, and thereby make their guess at
their coming, and prepare some their sugar Canes, others the Plantin, other
the Tortois, some one Provision, some another to barter* with the Spaniards for
their small Haberdash, or Iron, Knives, or such things which may help them in
their Wars, which commonly they make against some other Islands. Before our
Anchors was cast, out came the Indians to meet us in their Canoa's, round like
Troughes, some whereof had been painted by our English, some by the
Hollanders, some by the French, at might appear by their several Arms, it
being a common Rode and harbor to all Nations that sail to America.

Before we reso^ to go to shore, we tasted of those Indian fruits, the
plantin above all pleasing our taste and Palate. We could not but much wonder
at that sight never yet seen by us of people naked, with their hair hanging
down to the middle of their backs, with their faces cut out in several
fashions, or flowers, with thin plates hanging at their Noses, like Hog-rings,
and fauning upon us like children, some speaking in their unknown tongue,
others using signs for such things as we imagined they desired. Their sign for
some of our Spanish Wine was easily perceived, and their request most willingly
granted to by our men, who with one reasonable Cup of Spanish Sack presently
tumbled up their heels, and left them like swine tumbling on the Deck of our
Ship. After a while that our people had sported with these rude and Savage
Indians, our two Cock-Boates were ready to carry to shore such as either had
clothes to wash, or a desire to bathe themselves in a River of fresh Water
which is within the Island, or a mind to set their feet again upon unmovable
Land, after so many days of uncertain footing in a floating and reeling Ship.
But that day being far spent, our Friars resolved to stay in the Ship, and
the next whole day to visit the Island; many of the Mariners and Passengers of
all the Ships went that evening to shore, some returning at night, and some
without fear continuing with the Indians all night on shore. The next morning
my self and most of our Friars went and having hired some Spaniards to wash
our clothes, we wandered sometimes all together sometimes two and two, and
sometimes one alone about the Island, meeting with many Indians, who did us no
hurt, but rather like children fauned upon us, offering us of their fruits, and
begging of us whatsoever toies of pins, points or gloves they espied about us.
We ventured to go to some of their houses which stood by a pleasant River,
and were by them kindly entertained, eating of their fish, and wild deeres
flesh. About noone we chanced to meet with some of the Jesuits of Santa
Gertrudis Ship in the midst of the Mountain, who were very earnest in talk
with a Mulatto, all naked like the rest of the Indians. This Mulatto was a
Christian, born in Sevill in Spain, and had been slave there formerly to a rich
Merchant, his name was Lewis, and spoke the Spanish Language very perfectly.
Some twelve years before, he had run away from his Master by reason of hard
and slavish usage, and having got to Cales, offering his service to a Gentleman
then bound for America, the Gentleman fearing not that his true Master should
ever have more notice of him from a new World, took him a Ship board with him
as his slave. The Mulatto remembering the many stripes which he had suffered
from his first cruel Master, and fearing that from America he might by some
intelligence or other be sentback again to Spain, and also jealous of his
second Master (whose blows he had begun to suffer in the Ship) that he would
prove as cruel as his first; when the Ships arrived at Guadalupe, resolved
rather to die among the Indians (which (...) knew might be his hardest fortune)
then evermore to live in slavery under Spaniards. So casting his life upon good
or bad fortune, he hid himself among the trees in the Mountain till the
Ships were departed; who after being found by the Indians, and giving them some
toys which he had got by stealth from his Master, he was entertained by
them, they liking him, and he them. Thu^ ^ontinued this poor Christian slave
among those Barbarians from year to year; w^o had care to hide himself at
the coming of the Spanish Fleet yearly. In twelve years that he had thus
continued amongst them, he had learned their language, was married to an
Indian, by whom he had three children living. The Jesuits by chance having
met with him, and perceiving more by the Wool upon his head, that he was a
Mulatto, then by his black and tauny skin (for those Indians paint themselves
all over with a red color) they presently imagined the truth that he could
not come thither but with some Spaniard, so entering into discourse with him,
and finding him to speak Spanish, they got the whole truth of him. Then we
joining with the Jesuits, began to persuade the poor Christian to forsake
that heathenish life, wherein his soul could never be saved, promising him if
he would go along with us, he should be free from slavery for ever. Poor
Soul, though he had lived twelve years without hearing a word of the true
God, worshipping stocks and stones with the other Heathens; yet when he heard
again of Christ, of eternal damnation in hells torments, and of everlasting
Salvation in Heavens joys, he began to weep, assuring us that he would go
with us, were it not for his Wife and Children, whom he tenderly loved, and
could not forsake them. To this we replied, that he might be a means of
saving likewise their Souls, if he would bring them with him; and further that
we would assure him that care should be taken that neither he, his Wife, nor
children should ever want means competent for the maintenance of their lives.
The Mulatto hearkened well to all this, though a sudden fear surprised him,
because certain Indians passed by, and noted his long conference with us. The
poor and timorous Mulatto then told us, that he was in danger, for having
been known by us, and that he feared the Indians would kill him, and suspect
that we would steal him away; which if they did, and it were noised about the
Island, we should soon see their love changed into cruel rage and Mutiny.
We persuaded him not to fear any thing they could do to us, who had
Soldiers, Gun^ and Ordnance to secure ours and his life also, wishing him to
resolve to bring his Wife and Children but to the Sea side, where our men were
drying their Clothes, and ^ould de^end him, and a Boat should be ready to
convey him with his Wife and Children a Ship board. The Mulatto promised to do
as we had counseled him, and that he would entice his Wife and Children to
the Sea side to barte^ with ^ their Wares for ours, desiring some of the
Jesuits (whom he said he should know by their black Coats) to be there
ready for him with a Cock-Boat. Lewis departed, as to us he seemed resolute in
what he had agreed; Our joy likewise was great with the hope of bringing to
the light of Christianity five Souls out of the darkness of (...) Idolatry.
The Jesuits who had begun with this Mulatto were desirous that the happy end
and conclusion might be their glory. So taking their leaves of us, they
hastened to the Sea to inform the Admiral of what they had done, and to
provide that the Cock-Boat of their Ship might be in readiness to receive
Lewis, and his family. We likewise returned to the shore to see if our Shirts,
and Clothes were dry. Most of us (among whom my self was one) finding our
Linen ready and our Boat on shore went aboard to our Ship, leaving two or
three of our company with many of other Ships on shore, especially the Jesuits
waiting for their prey. When we came to our Ship, most of our Friars with what
love they had found in the Barbarians, were inflamed with a new zeal of
staying in that Island, and converting those Heathens to Christianity,
apprehending it an easy business (they being a loving people) and no ways,
dangerous to us, by reason of the Fleet that yearly passes that way, and
might enquire after our usage. But by some it was objected, that it was a rash
and foolish zeal with great hazard of their lives, and many inconveniences
were objected against so blind and simple an attempt. But those that were most
zealous slighted all reasons, saying that the worst that could happen to them
could be but to be butchered, sacrificed and eaten up; and that for such a
purpose they had come out of Spain to be crowned with the Crown of Martyrdom
for confessing and preaching Jesus Christ. While we were hot in this solemn
consultation, behold an uproare on the shore; our people running to and fro to
save their lives, leaving their clothes, and hasting to the Cock-Boats, filling
them so fast and so full, that some sunk with all the people in them; Above
al,most pi^iful and lamentable were the cries of some of our women, many
casting themselves to the Sea, choosing rather to venture to be taken up by
some Boat, or at worst to be drowned, then to be taken and to be cruelly
butchered by the Indians. We wondering at this sudden alteration, not knowing
the cause of it, at last perceived the Arrows to come out thick from the Wood
from behind the Trees, and thereby guessed at the truth that the Barbarians
were mutinied. The uproare lasted not half an hour, for presently our
Admiral shot off two or three Pieces of Ordnance and sent a Company of
Soldiers to shore to guard it and our people with their Muskets; which was
well and suddenly performed, and all the Indians soon dispersed. Three of our
Friars who had remained on the land, our Cock-Boat brought them to us with more
of our Passengers, among whom one Friar John De la Cueva, was dangerously shot
and wounded in one of his Shoulders; this Friar had been earnest with me to
stay on shore with him, which I refused, and so escaped that cruel and fiery
onset of the Indians. Besides those that were drowned and taken up at shore
(which were fifteen persons) two Jesuits were found dead upon the Sand, three
more dangerously wounded, three passengers likewise slain, ten wounded,
besides three more of the Fleet which could never be found alive or dead, and
were thought to have been found in the Wood by the Indians, and to have been
murdered by them. Our Mulatto Lewis came not according to his word; but in his
stead a sudden Army of treacherous Indians, which gave us motive enough to
think, that either Lewis himself had discovered the Jesuits Plot to take him
away with his Wife and Children; or that the Indians suspecting it by his talk
with us had made him confess it. And certainly this was the ground of their
Mutiny; for whereas L^ before had said, that he would know the Jesuits by
their black Coats, it seems he had well described them above all the rest
unto the Indians, for (as it was after well observed) most of their Arrows was
directed to the black Marks, and so five of them in little above a quarter of
an hour slain and wounded. All that night our Soldiers guarded the Coast,
often shooting off their Muskets, to affright the Indians, who appeared no more
unto us. All that night we slept little, for we watched our Ship; lest the
Indians in their Oanoa^ should set upon us and take us asleep. Some lamented
the dead and drowned, others pitied our wounded Friar John De la Cueva, who all
that night lay in great torment and misery, others laughed and jeared at those
zealous Friars, who would have stayed in that Island to Convert the Barbarians,
saying they had had their full desire of Martyrdom, for had they been but
that night with the Indians, doubtless they had been shred for their Suppers.
But now we perceived their zeal was cool, and they defired no more to stay
with such a Barbarous kind of People; but rather wished the Admiral would
shoot off the warning Piece for us all to take up our Anchors, and depart from
so dangerous a place. In the morning all the Ships made have to take in such
fresh water as was necessary for their voyage yet to America, a strong watch
being kept along the Coast, and a Guard guarding our men to the River; and all
the morning while this was doing not one Indian could be found or seen, nor
our three men that were missing, appeared. Thus at noone with a pleasant and
prosperous Gale we hoisted up our Sails, leaving the Islands, and harbor of
Guadalupe.

CHAP. VII. Of our further Sailing to St. John de Vlhua, alias, Vera Crux; and
of our landing there.
Upon the 22 day of August, we sailed so pleasantly that we soon left the
sight of the Islands; The Indians uproare ^ad weaved for us a thread of long
discourse; It made some hate their calling to teach and convert Indians. But
Calvo he encouraged us, telling us many stories of the good and gentle nature
of the Indians of Philippin as, to whom we were going, and that most of them
were Christians already, who esteemed their Priests as Gods upon the earth; and
that those that were not as yet converted to Christianity, were kept in awe by
the power of the Spaniards. Our chief care the first two or three days was to
look to our plantins which we got from the Indians. This fruit pleased us all
exceedingly, judging it to be as good, or better then any fruit in Spain. It
is not gathered ripe from the tree; but being gathered green, it is hung up
some days, and so ripens and grows yellow and mellow, and every bit as sweet
as honey. Our Sugar Canes were no less pleasing unto us, whilst chewing the
pith, we refreshed and sweetened our mouths with the juice. We ^ed for the
first week almost upon nothing but Tortois; which seemed likewise to us that
had never before seen it, one of the Sea monsters, the shell being so hard as
to bear any Cart wheel, and in some above two yards broad; when first they
were opened, we were amazed to see the number of eggs that were in them, a
thousand being the least that we judged to be in some of them. Our Spaniards
made with them an excellent broth with all sorts of spices. The meat seemed
rather flesh then Sea fish, which being corned with salt, and hung up two or
three days in the air, tasted like Veal. Thus our Hens, our Sheep, our
powdered Beef, and gammons of Bacon, which we brought from Spain, were some
days slighted, while with greedy stomack^ we fell hard to our Sea Veale.

After four days sail, our Friar John de la Cueva, who had been shot by the
Indians, died; all his body being swelled, which gave us just occasion to
think, that the arrow which was shot into his shoulder was poisoned. His
burial was as solemnly performed as could be at Sea. His grave being the whole
Ocean, he had weighty stones hung to his feet, two more to his shoulders, and
one to his breast; and then the superstitious Romish Dirige and Requiem being
sung for his soul, his Corpse being held out to the Sea on the ship side, with
ropes ready to let him fall, all the ship crying out three times, buen Viaie
(that is, a good Voyage) to his soul chiefly, and also to his Corpse ready to
travail to the deep to feed the Whales: at the first cry all the Ordnance were
shot off, the ropes on a sudden loosed, and John de la Cueva with the weight
of heavy stones plunged deep into the Sea, whom no mortal eyes ever more
beheld. The like we saw performed in the ship of Santa Gertrudis, to another
Jesuit, one of the three who had been dangerously wounded by the Indians of
Guadalupe; who likewise died like our Friar, his body being swelled as with
poison. Now our sailing was more comfortable then before; for we passed in the
sight of the land of Puerto Rico, and then of the great Island of Sto. Domingo;
and here our company began to be lessened, some departing to Puerto Rico, and
Sto. Domingo, others to Cartagena, and Havana, and Honduras, Iamaica, and
Iucatan. We remained now alone the Fleet for Mexico; and so sailed till we came
to what the Spaniards call la Sonda, or the sound of Mexico; for here we often
sounded the Sea; which was so calm, that a whole week we were stayed for want
of wind, scarce stirring from the place where first we were caught by the
calm. Here likewise we had great sport in fishing, filling again our bellies
with Dorados, and saving that provision which we had brought from Spain. But
the heat was so extraordinary, that the day was no pleasure unto us; for the
repercussion of the suns heat upon the still water and pitch of our ships,
kindled a scorching fire, which all the day distempered our bodies with a
constant running sweat, forcing us to cast off most of our clothes* The
evenings and nights were somewhat more comfortable, yet the heat which the sun
had left in the pitched ribs and plankes of the ship was such, that under deck
and in our Cabins we were not able to sleep, but in our shirts were forced to
walk, or sit, or lie upon the deck. The Mariners fell to washing themselves
and to swimming, till the unfortunate death of one in the ship called St*
Francisco, made them suddenly leave off that sport. The nearer we come to the
main land, the sea abounds with a monstrous fish called by the Spaniards,
Tiburon. Some mistake this f^sh for the Caiman, or Crocodile, holding them both
for one; and thinking that it is only the Caiman or Crocodile (by abuse called
Tiburon) which devoures man's flesh, a whole joint at a bit in the water. But
the mistake is gross, for the Caiman is plated all over with shells, whereas
the Tiburon has no s^ells, but only like other great Sea fishes, has a thick
skin. The Caiman though the Indians eat of it, yet the Spaniards hate it; who
eat of the Tiburon; and in our ship catching one with a tridentall iron Fork,
and haling him with a Cable rope to the ship side, and then binding him with
it, (being as much as a dozen or fifteen men could do to hoise him up into the
ship) we found him to be a most monstrous creature, twelve else long at least,
which we salted, and found likewise to eat like flesh, as has been said of the
Tortois. This kind is as ravenous after man's flesh as the Crocodile, and many
of them were to be seen in this Sound of Mexico.

The Spaniards bathing themselves daily by the ships side, (where there is no
such danger of the Tiburon; who uses not to come too near the ships) one
Mariner of the ship called St. Francisco being more venturous then the rest,
and offering to swim from his ship, to see some friends in another not far
off, chanced to be a most unfortunate prey to one of them, who before any boat
could be set out to help him, was thrice seen to be pulled under water by the
Monster, who had devoured a leg, an arm, and part of his shoulder; the rest of
the body was after found and taken up, and carried to S. Francisco, and there
buried in the form and manner as has been said of our Friar John de la Cueva.
They that go down to the sea in ships, these see the works of the Lord, and
his wonders in the deep, Ps. 107. 23, 24. Here they shall see not only Whales,
but other Fishes like Monsters mastering strong and valiant men, with several
sets of sharp, strong and mighty teeth, devouring at one bit whole limbs with
flesh and bones together. This mischance sadded all our Fleet for three days
till it pleased God to refresh our burning heat with a cool and prosperous
wind, driving us out of that calm Sound, which (if we had continued in it with
that excessive heat) might have proved most unsound and unhealthy to our
bodies. Three days after we had sailed, being Monday in the morning about
seven of the clock, one of our Friars saying Mass, and all the people in the
ship kneeling to hear it, and to adore their bread God, one Mariner with a loud
and sudden voice cries out Tierra, Tierra, Tierra, Land, Land, Land, which
rejoiced the hearts of all that were in the ship, as it seemed, more then their
Mass, for leaving that, and their God upon the Altar with the Priest to eat
him alone, they arose from their knees, to behold the Continent of America.
Great was the joy of all the ships that day; and great was the slaughter which
our old Calvo made among his fowls, (which he had spared ^ormerly) to feast
that day his Friars. About ten of the clock the whole face of the land was
visibly apparent, and we with full sale running to embrace it. But our wise
Admiral knowing the danger of the Coast, and especially the dangerous entering
into the Haven, by reason of the many rocks that lie about it, and are known
only by marks aod flags set out to give all ships warning of them* perceiving
that with the wind wherewith we sailed then, we should not come till toward
evening to the Port: and lastly, fearing lest some North Wind (which is
dangerous upon that Coast, and ordinary in the month of September) should in
the night arise, and endanger all our ships upon the rocks; he therefore
called to Council all the Pilots, to know whether it were best to keep on our
sailing with full sail that day, with hopes to get that day in good time into
the Haven, or else with the middle sail only to draw near, that the next
morning with more security we might with the help of boats from land be guided
in. The result of the Council was not to venture that day too near unto the
Port, for fear of being benighted, but to pull down all, but the middle sail.
The wind began to calm, and our ships to move slowly toward land, and so we
continued till night. A double watch was kept that night in our ship, and the
Pilot was more watchful himself and more careful then a^ other times; But
our Friars betook themselves to their rest; which continued not long; for
before midnight the wind turned to the North, which caused a sudden and
general cry and uproar in ours, and all the other ships. Our Mariners came to
the Friars, using almost the same words of ^onah 1. 6. What meanest thou, O
sleeper? Arise call upon thy God, if so be that God will think upon us, that
we perish not. They changed the name of God into the blessed Virgin Mary, in
whom they seem to confide in such occasions more then in God himself. Their
fear was more for the apprehension of danger by that kind of wind, and of what
might happen, then for what as yet the wind threatened, which was not strong nor
boisterous; however hallowed wax candles were lighted by the Friars, knees
bowed to Mary, Letanies and other hymns and prayers sung aloud unto her, till
toward the dawning of the day; when behold the North wind ceased, our wonted
gale began to blow again, it being Gods will and pleasure, and no effect of the
howling Friars prayers to Mary, who yet superstitioufly to deceive the simple
people, cried out, Milagro, Milagro, Milagro, a miracle, a miracle, a miracle.
By eight a clock in the morning we came to the sight of the houses, and made
signs for boats to convey us into the Haven; which immediately with great joy
came out, and guided us one by one between those Rocks, which make that Port
as dangerous as any I have discovered in all my travailes both upon the North
and South sea. Our Waits played most pleasantly, our Ordnance saluted both
Town and Fort over against it, our hearts and countenances reciprocally
rejoiced; we cast our Anchors, which yet were not enough to secure our ships
in that most dangerous Haven, but further with Cable ropes we secured them to
Iron rings, which for that purpose are fastened into the Wall of the Fort, for
fear of the strong and boisterous Northern winds. And thus welcoming one
another to a new world, many boats waiting for us, we presently went with joy
to set footing in America.

CHAP. VIII. Of our Landing at Vera Crux, otherwise St. John de Ulhua, and of
our entertainment there.
Upon the 12 day of September, we happily arrived in America in that famous
Town, called St. John de Ulhua, otherwise Vera Crux; famous for that it was
the first beginning of the famous conquest of that valiant and ever renowned
Conquer or Hernando Cortez. Here first was that noble and generous reso'ution,
that never heard of policy, to sink the ships, which had brought the first
Spaniards to that Continent, greater then any of the other three parts of the
world, to the intent that they might think of nothing but such a conquest as
after followed, being destitute of the help of their ships, and without hopes
evermore to return to Cuba, Yucatan, or any of those parts from whence they
had come. Here it was, that the first five hundred Spaniards strengthened
themselves against millions of enemies, and against the biggest fourth part of
all the world. Here were the first Magistrates, Judges, Aldermen, Officers of
Justice named. The proper name of the Town is S. John de Ulhua, otherwise
called Vera Crux, from the old Harbor and Haven of Vera Crux, six leagues from
this, and so called for that upon good Friday It was first discovered. But the
old Vera Crux proving too dangerous an Harbor for ships, by reason of the
violence of the Northern winds; it was utterly forsaken by the Spaniards, who
removed to St. John De Ulhua, where their ships found the first safe road by
reason of a Rock, which is a strong defense against the winds. And because the
memory of the work of that good Friday should never be forgotten; to S. John
de Ulhua they have added the name also of Vera Crux, taken from that first
Haven which was discovered upon good Friday, Anno 1519.

As soon as we came to shore, we found very solemn preparations for
entertainment, all the Town being resorted to the Sea side, all the Priests
and Canons of the Cathedral Church, all the religious Orders of the several
Convents (which are there Dominicans, Franciscans, Mercenarians, and Jesuits)
being in a readiness with their Crosses borne before them, to guide the new
Viceroy of Mexico, in procession to the chief Cathedral Church. The Friars
and Jesuits were quicker in going to land then the great Don the Marquess de
Serralvo and his Lady. Some of them kissed the ground as holy in their opinion,
for the Conversion of those Indians to Christianity, who before had worshipped
Idols, and sacrificed to Devils; others kneeled upon their knees making short
prayers, some to the Virgin Mary others to such Saints as they best affected;
and so betook themselves to the places and stations of those of their
profession. In the mean time all the Cannon playing both from ships and Castle,
landed the Viceroy and his Lady and all his Train, accompanied with Don Martin
de Carrillo the Visiter general for the strife between the Count of Gelves the
last Viceroy, and the Archbishop of Mexico. The great Don and his Lady being
placed under a Canope of state, began the Te Deum to be sung with much variety
of musical instruments, all marching in procession to the Cathedral, where
with many lights of burning lamps, torches, and Wax candles, was to the view
of all, set upon the high Altar their God of bread; to whom all knees were
bowed, a prayer of thanksgiving sung, holy water by a Priest sprinkled upon
all the people, and lastly a Mass with three priests solemnly celebrated. This
being ended the Viceroy was attended on by the Chief High Justice, named
Alc^lde Major by the Officers of the Town, some Judges sent from Mexico to that
purpose, and all the Soldiers of the Ships and Town unto his lodging; The
Friars likewise in Procession with their Cross before them were conducted to
their several Cloisters. Friar Calvo presented his Dominicans to the Prior of
the Cloister of St. Dominicke, who entertained us very lovingly with some sweet
Meats, and every one with a Cup of the Indian drink called Chocolatte, whereof
I shall speak hereafter. This refreshment being ended, we proceeded to a
better, which was a most stately Dinner both of Fish and Flesh; no Fowls were
spared, many Capons, Turkey Cocks, and Hens were prodigally lavished, to show us
the abundance and plenty of Provision of that Country. The Prior of this
Cloister was no stayed, ancient, grey-headed man, such as usually are made
Superiors to govern young and wanton Friars; but he was Gallant and Amorous
young Spark, who (as we were there informed) had obtained from his Superior
the Provincial the Government of that Convent with a Bribe of a thousand
Ducats. After dinner he had some of us to his Chamber, where we observed his
lightness and little savor of Religion or Mortification in him; We thought to
have found in his Chamber some stately Library, which might tell us of Learning
and love of Study; but we found not above a dozen old Books, standing in a
corner covered with dust and Cobwebs, as if they were ashamed that the Treasure
that lay hid in them, should be so much forgotten, and undervalued, and the
Guitarra (the Spanish Lute) preferred and set above them. His Chamber was
richly dressed and hung with many pictures, and with hangings, some made with
Cotton Wool, others with various colored feathers of Mechoacan, his Tables
covered with Carpets of Silk; his Cubboards adorned with several sorts of
China Cups and Dishes, stored within with several dainties of sweet Meats and
Conserves.

This sight seemed to the zealous Friars of our Mission most vain, and
unbeseeming a poor and mendicant Friar; to the others, whose end in coming
from Spain to those parts was Liberty, and loosnesse, and covetousness of
riches, this sight was pleasing and gave them great encouragement to enter
further into that Country, where soon a Mendicant Lazarus might become a proud
and wealthy Dives. The discourse of the young and light headed Prior was
nothing but vain boasting of himself, of his birth, his parts, his favor with
the chief Superior or Provincial, the love which the best Ladies, the richest
Merchants Wives of the Town bare unto him, of his clear and excellent voice,
and great dexterity in Music, whereof he presently gave us a taste, tuning his
Guitarra and singing to us some verses (as he said, of his own composing)
some lovely Amaryllis, adding scandal to scandal, looseness to liberty,
which it grieved some of us to see in a Superior who should have taught with
words, and in his life and Conversation examples of Repentance and
Mortification. No sooner were our senses of hearing delighted well with Music,
our sight with the objects of Cotten-Wool, Silk and Feather works, but
presently our Prior caused to be brought forth of all his store of dainties,
such variety as might likewise relish well and delight our sense of tasting.
Thus as we were truly transported from Europe to America, so the World seemed
truly to be altered, our senses changed from what they were the night and day
before when we heard the hideous noise of the Mariners ^oifing up Sails, when
we saw the deep and monsters of it, when we tasted the stinking water, when we
smelt the Tar and Pitch; but here we heard a quivering and trembling voice
and instrument well tuned, we beheld wealth and riches, we tasted what was
sweet, and in the Sweet-meates smelt the Musk and Civit, wherewith that
Epicurean Prior had seasoned his Conserves. Here we broke up our discourse and
pastimes, desirous to walk abroad and take a view of the Town, having no more
time then that, and the next day to stay in it. We compassed it round about
that afternoon; and found the situation of it to be sandy, except on the
South-West side, where it is Moorish ground, and full of standing Bogs, which
with the great heates that are there, cause it to be a very unhealthy place;
The number of Inhabitants may be three thousand, and amongst them some very
rich Merchants, some worth two hundred, some three hundred, and some four
hundred thousand Ducats. Of the buildings little we observed, for they are
all, both Houses, Churches, and Cloisters built with Boards and Timber, the
Walls of the richest man's house being made but of boards, which with the
impetuous Winds from the North has bin cause that many times the town has bin
for the most part of it burnt down^o the ground. The great Trading from Mexico,
and by Mexico from the East-India's, from Spain, from Cuba, Sto. Domingo,
Iucatan, Portables, and by Portabello from Peru, from Cartagena, and all the
Islands lying upon the North Sea, and by the River Alvarado going up to
Zap^tecas, St. Ildefonso, and toward Guaxaca, and by the River Grijala,
running up to Tabasco, Los Zoques and Chiapa de Indios, makes this little Town
very rich, and to abound with all the Commodities of the Continent Land, and of
all the East and West-India's Treasures. The unhealthinesse of the place is the
reason of the paucity of Inhabitants, and the paucity of them, together with
the rich Trading and commerce, the reasons that the Merchants therein are
extraordinary rich; who yet might have been far richer, had not the Town been
so often fired, and they in the fire had great losses. All the strength of this
Town is first the hard and dangerous entrance into the Haven; and secondly, a
rock which lies before the Town less then a Musket shot off; upon which is
built a Castle, and in the Castle a slight Garrison of Soldiers. In the Town
there is neither Fort, nor Castle, nor scarce any people of warlike minds. The
Rock and Castle are as a Wall, defense, and enclosure to the Haven, which
otherwise lies wide open to the Ocean, and to the Northern Winds. No Ship
dares cast anchor within the Haven, but only under the Rock and Castle, and
yet not sure enough so with Anchors, except with Cables also they be bound and
fastened to Rings of Iron for that purpose to the side of the Rock; from whence
sometimes it has happened that Ships floating with the Stream too much on one
side the Rock have been driven off and cast upon the other Rocks or out to
the Ocean, the Cables of their Anchors, and those wherewith they have been
fastened to the Castle being broken with the force of the Winds. This happened
to one of our Ships the first night after we landed; who were happy that we
were not then at Sea; for there arose such a storm and Tempest from the North,
that it quite broke the Cables of one Ship and drove it out to the maine Sea,
and we thought it would have blown and droven us out of our beds after it,
for the slight boarded houses did so totter and shake, that we expected every
hour when they would fall upon our heads. We had that first night enough of St.
John de Ulhua, and little rest, though feasted as well at Supper as at Dinner
by our vain boasting Prior, who before we went to bed, had caused all our
feet to be washed, that now in easier beds then for above two months together
the strait and narrow Cabins of the Ship had allowed us, our sleep might be
more quiet, and more nourishing to our bodies; but the whistling Winds and
tottering Chambers, which made our Beds uneasy Cradles to us, caused us to
fly from our rest at midnight, and with our bare (though washed) feet to seek
the dirty Yard for safer shelter. In the morning the Friars of the Cloister who
were acquainted with those winds and storms, laughed at our fearfulness,
assuring us, that they never slept better then when their Beds were rocked with
such like blasts. But that nights affrightment made us weary already of our
good and kind entertainment; we desired to remo^e from the Sea side; which our
Superior Calvo yielded to, not for our fear sake so much, as for his fear,
lest with eating too much of the fruits of that Country, and drinking after
them too greedily of the water (which causes dangerous Fluxes, and hasteneth
death to those that newly come from Spain to those parts) we should fall sick,
and die there, as hundreds did after our departure for want of temperance in
the use of those fruits* which before they had never seen, or eaten. Thirty
Mules were ready for us, which had bin brought a purpose from Mexico, and had
waited for us in St. John de Ulhua six days before ever the Fleet arrived.
Calvo that day busied himself a Ship board in sending to shore our Chests, and
such Provision as had been left of Wines, and Biscuit, Gammons of Bacon* and
salted Beef, whereof there was some store, besides a dozen Hens and three
Sheep, which was much wondered at, that so much should be left after so long a
voyage. In the mean time we visited our friends and took our leaves of them in
the forenoone; and after Dinner seats were prepared for us in the Cathedral
Church to sit and see a Comedy acted, which had been on purpose studied and
prepared by the Town for the entertainment of the new Viceroy of Mexico. Thus
two days only we abode in St. John de Ulhua, and so departed.

CHAP. IX. Of our journey from St. John de Ulhua to Mexico; and of the most
remarkable Towns and Villages in the way.
Upon the 14. day of September we left the Town and Port of S. John de Ulhua,
entering into the rode to Mexico, which we found the first three or four leagues
to be very sandy, as wide and open as is our rode from London to S. Albans.
The first Indians we met with, was at the old Vera Crux, a Town seated by the
sea side, which the Spaniards that first conquered that country thought to
have made their chief Harbor; but afterward by reason of the small shelter
they found in it for their ships against the North winds, they left it, and
removed to S. John de Ulhua. Here we began to discover the power of the Priests
and Friars over the poor Indians, and their subjection and obedience unto
them. The Prior of S. John de Ulhua had writ a letter unto them the day before
of our passing that way, charging them to meet us in the way, and to welcome us
into those parts; which was by the poor Indians gallantly performed; for two
miles before we came to the Town, there met us on Horseback some twenty of the
chief of the Town, presenting unto every one of us a nosegay of flowers; who
rid before us a bow shot, till we met with more company on foot, to wit, the
Trumpeters, the Waits; (who sounded pleasantly all the way before us) the
Officers of the Church, such as here we call Churchwardens, though more in
number, according to the many sodalities or confraternities of Saints whom they
serve, these likewise presented to each of us a nosegay; next met us the
singing men and boys, all the Quiristers, who softly and leisurely walked
before us singing, Te Deum laudamus, till we came to the midst of the Town,
where were two great Elmetrees, the chief Market place; there was set up one
long arbor with green bows, and a table ready furnished with boxes of
conserves, and other sweat meats, and dietbread, to prepare our stomachs for a
cup of Chocolatte, which while it was seasoning with the hot water and Sugar,
the chief Indians and Officers of the Town made a speech unto us, having
first kneeled down and kissed our hands one by one; they welcomed us into
their Country, calling us the Apostles of Jesus Christ, thanked us for that we
had left our own Country, our friends, our fathers and mothers for to save
their souls; they told us they honored us as Gods upon earth; and many such
complements they used till our Chocolatte was brought. We refreshed ourselves
for the space of one hour, and gave hearty thanks to the Indians for their kind
respects unto us, assuring them that nothing was more dear unto us in this
world then their souls, which that we might save, we regarded not sea, nor
land dangers, nor the unhumane cruelties of barbarous and savage Indians, (who
as yet had no knowledge of the true God) no nor our own lives.

And thus we took our leaves, giving unto the chief of them some Beads, some
medals, some Crosses of brass, some Agnus Dei, some relics brought from
Spain, and to every one of the Town an Indulgence of forty years, (which the
Pope had granted unto us, to bestow where and upon whom, and as often as we
would) where with we began to blind that simple people with ignorant,
erroneous, and Popish principles. As we went out of arbor to take our Mules,
behold the Market place was full of Indian men and women; who as they saw us
ready to depart, kneeled upon the ground as adoring us for a blessing, which as
we rid along, we bestowed upon them with lifted up hands on high, making over
them the sign of the Cross. And this submission of the poor Indians unto the
Priests in those parts; this vainglory in admitting such ceremonious
entertainment and public worship from them, did so puff up some of our young
Friars hearts, that already they thought themselves better then the best
Bishops in Spain, who though proud enough, yet never travail there with such
public acclamations as we did. The Waits and Trumpets sounded again before
us, and the chief of the Town conducted us a mile forward, and so took their
leaves. The first two days we lodged but in poor small Indian Towns, among
whom we still found kind entertainment, and good store of provision, especially
of Hens, Capons, Turkeys, and several sorts of fruits. The third day at night
we came to a great Town consisting of near two thousand inhabitants, some
Spaniards, some Indians, called Xalappa de la Vera Crux. This Town in the
year 1634. was made a new Bishops Sea (the Bishopric of the City, called La
Puebla de los Angeles being divided into two) and this being not above the
third part of it, is thought to be worth ten thousand ducats a year. It stands
in a very fertile soil for Indian wheat called Maiz, and some Spanish wheat.
There are many Towns about it of Indians; but what makes it rich, are the many
farms of Sugar, and some which they call Estantia's, rich farms for breeding
of Mules, and cattle; and likewise some Farms of Cochinil. In this Town
there is but one great Church and an inferior Chapel, both belonging to a
Cloister of Franciscan Friars, wherein we were lodged that night and the next
day, being the Lords day. Though the revenues of this Cloister be great, yet it
maintains not above half a dozen Friars, where twenty might be plentifully
maintained, that so those few lubbers might be more abundantly, and like
Epicures fed and nourished. The Superior or Guardian of this Cloister was no
less vain then the Prior of S. John de Ulbua; and though he were not of our
profession, yet he welcomed us with stately entertainment. Here and wheresoever
further we travailed, we still found in the Priests and Friars looseness of
life, and their ways and proceedings contrary to the ways of their
profession, sworn to by a solemn Vow and Covenant. This Order especially of
the mendicant Franciscan Friars voweth (besides chastity and obedience) poverty
more strictly to be observed, then any other Order of the Romish Church; for
their Clothing ought to be corse sackcloth, their girdles made of hemp should
be no finer then strong halters, their shirts should be but woollen, their legs
should know no stockings, their feet no shoes, but at the most and best either
wooden clogs, or sandals of hemp, their hands and fingers should not so much as
touch any money, nor they have the use or possession or propriety of any, nor
their journeys be made easy with the help of Horses to carry them, but
painfully they ought to travail on foot; and the breach of any of these they
acknowledge to be a deadly and mortal sin, with the guilt of a high
soul-damning and soul-cursing excommunication. Yet for all these bonds and
obligations, those wretched Impes live in those parts as though they had never
vowed unto the Lord, showing in their lives that they have vowed what they are
not able to perform. It was to us a strange and scandalous sight to see here
in Xalappa a Friar of the Cloister riding in with his lackey boy by his side,
upon a goodly gelding, (having gone but to the Towns end, as we were informed,
to hear a dying man's confession) with his long habit tucked up to his girdle,
making show of a fine silk orange color stockin upon his legs, and a neat
Cordovan shoe upon his foot, with a fine Holland pair of drawers, with a lace
three inches broad at knee. This sight made us willing to pry further into this
and the other Friars carriages, under whose broad sleeves we could perceive
their dublets quilted with silk, and at their wrists the laces of their
Holland shirts. In their talk we could discern no mortification, but mere
vanity and wordlinesse. After supper some of them began to talk of carding and
dicing; they challenged us, that were but new comers to those parts, to a
Primera; which though most of ours refused, some for want of money, some for
ignorance of that game, yet at last with much ado they got two of our Friars to
join with two of theirs; so the cards were handsomely shuffled, the vies and
revies were doubled, loss made some hot and blind with passion, gain made
others eager and covetous; and thus was that religious Cloister made all night
a gaming house, and sworn religious poverty turned into profane and worldly
covetousness. We that beheld some part of the night the game, found enough to
observe, for the more the sport increased, scandalls to the sport were added,
both by drinking and swearing that common oath Voto a Christo, Voto a Dios, and
also by scoffing and jearing at the religious vows of poverty which they had
vowed; for one of the Franciscans though formerly he had touched money, and
with his fingers had laid it to the stake on the table; yet sometimes to make
the company laugh, if he had chanced to win a double vie (and sometimes the
vies and revies went round of twenty patacons) then would he take the end of
one sleeve of his habit, and open wide the other broad sleeve, and so with his
sleeve sweep the money into his other sleeve, saying, I have vowed not to touch
money, nor to keep any, I meaned then a natural contact of it; but my sleeve
may touch it, and my sleeve may keep it: showing with scoffs and jests of his
lips, what religion was in his heart. My ears tingled with hearing such
oaths, my tongue would have uttered some words of reproof, but that I
considered my self a guest and stranger in a strange house, and that if any
thing I should say, it would do no good; so silently I departed to my rest,
leaving the Gamesters, who continued til Sunrising, and in the morning I was
informed that the jesting Friar, that rather roaring Boy then religious
Franciscan, fitter for Sardanapalus or Epicurus his School, then to live in a
Cloister, had lost fourscore and odd Patacons, his sleeve (it seems)
refusing to keep for him what he had vowed never to possess. Here I began to
find out by experience of these Franciscans, that liberty and loosnesse of life
it was that brought yearly so many Friars and Jesuits from Spain to those
parts, rather then zeal of Preaching the Gospel and Converting Souls to
Christ, which indeed being an act of highest Charity, they make a special
badge of the truth of their Religion: But the loosnesse of their lives shows
evidently that the love of money, of vainglory, of Power and Authority over
the poor Indians, is their end and aim more then any love of God. From
Xalappa we went to a place called by the Spaniards, La Rinconada, which is no
Town nor Village, and therefore not worth mentioning in such a Rode as now I
am in; yet as famous in two things, it must not be omitted amongst greater
places. This place stands so far from any other Town, that Travelers can
scarce make their journeys without either baiting there at noone, or lying
there at night, or declining three or four miles out of the Rode to some
Indian Town. It is no more then one house, which the Spaniards call, Venta, or
as our English, Innes, seated in the corner of a low Valley, which is the
hottest place from St. John de Ulhua to M^xico; about it are the best Springs
and Fountains in all the Rode, and the water though warm with the heat of the
Sun, yet as sweet as any Milk. The Inne-keeper knowing well the Spaniards heat,
that it seeks cool and refreshing drink, have special care so to lay in water
in great earthen Vessels, which they set upon a moist and waterish Sand, that
it is so cold that it makes the teeth to chatter. This sweetness and this
coolness together of that water in so hot and scorching a Country, was to us
a wonder, who could find no other refreshment from that extraordinary heat.
Besides our Provision here of Beef, Mutton, Kid, Hens, Turkeys, Rabbets,
Fowls, and especially Quails, was so plentiful and cheap, that we were
astonished at it. The Valley and Country about it is very rich and fertile,
full of Spanish Farms of Sugar, and Cochinil, Spanish and Indian Wheat. But
what makes me more especially remember this Venta, or Inn, is, for that
though Art and experience of man have found a way to provide for Travelers in
so hot a place cool and refreshing water, and God have given it the sweetness
of Milk, and to the place such abundance of Provision; yet all this in the day
only is comfortable and pleasant; but in the night the Spaniards call it,
Cumfites en infierno, that is to say, Cumfits in hell, for not only the heat
is so extraordinary, that it is impossible to be feeding without wiping away
the continual sweat of the Face, whose drops from the Brows are always ready
to blind our eyes and to fill with sauce our dishes, but the swarms of Gnats
are such that waking and sleeping no device of man is able to keep them off.
True it is, most of us had our Pavilions which we carried (with us to hang
about and over our beds, but these could not defend us from that piercing and
stinging Vermin, which like Egypts Plague of Frogs would be sure to be in
every place, and through our Curtains to come upon our very Beds. Yet in the
day they are not; but just at Sun setting they begin to swarm about, and at
Sun rising away they go. After a most tedious and troublesome night, when we
found the rising of the Sun had dispersed and banished them away, we thought
it best for us to fly away from that place with them; and so from thence
early we departed to a Town as pleasant and fertile and abounding with
Provision as this Rinconada, and free from such busy guests and individual
Mates and Companions as the night before had intruded themselves upon us. The
next night we got to a Town called Segura, inhabited both by Indians and
Spaniards, consisting of about a thousand Inhabitants; here again without any
charges we were stately entertained by Franciscan Friars, as light and vain
glorious as those of Xalappa. This Town had its first beginning and foundation
from Hernando Cortez, and is called Segura de la Frontera, being built up by
him for a Frontier Town to secure the Spaniards that came from St. John de
Ulhu^ to Mexico, against the Culhuacans and people of Tepeacac, who were allied
to the Mexicant, and so much annoyed the Spaniards. But what most incensed
Cortez was, that after his first repulse from Mexico, the Indians insulting
over him and the rest of his Company, whom they heard had been dangerously
wounded, and were retired to Tlaxcallan to recover and strengthen themselves;
the two Towns, Culhua and Tepeacac, then in League with the Mexicans against
Cortez and the Town of Tlaxcallan, lying in wait for the Spaniards, took twelve
of them, and sacrificed them alive to their Idols and eat their flesh.
Whereupon Cortez desired Maxixca, a chief Captain of Tlaxcallan, and diverse
other Gentlemen of that Town to go with him and to help him to be avenged of
the people of Tepeacac for the cruelty used to twelve of his Spaniards, and for
the daily and great hurt they also did to the Inhabitants of Tlaxcallan with
the help of their allied friends the Culhuacant and Mexicans. Maxixca and the
chief of Tlaxcallan forthwith entered into counsel with the States and and
Communalty of the Town, and there determined with general consent to give unto
him forty Thousand fighting Men, besides many Tamemez, who are Foot Carriers,
to be^re the Baggage, Victual, and other things. With this number of
Tlaxcalteca's, his own men, and horses, Cortez went to Tepeacac, requiring
them in satisfaction of the death of the twelve Christians, that they should
now yield themselves to the obedience of the Emperor and King of Spain his
Master, and hereafter never more to receive any Mexican into their Town or
houses, neither yet any of the Province of Culhua. The Tepeacacs answered that
they had slain the Spaniards for good and just cause, which was that being time
of War, they presumed to pass through their Country by force without their
will and License. And also that the Mexicans and Culhuacans were their friends
and Lords, whom always they would friendly entertain within their Town and
houses, refusing utterly their offer and request, protesting to give no
obedience to whom they knew not, wishing them therefore to return incontinent
to Tlaxtallan, except they had desire to end their weary days, and to be
sacrificed and eaten up as their twelve friends had been. Cortez yet invited
them many times with peace; and seeing it prevailed not, he began his Wars in
earnest. The Tepeacacs with the favor of the Culhuacans were brave and lusty,
and began to stop and defend the Spaniards entrance into their Town. And being
many in number with diverse valiant men among them, began to skirmish sundry
times; but at the end they were overthrown and many slain without killing any
Spaniard, although many Tlaxcalteca's were killed that day. The Lords and
principal Persons of Tepeacac seeing their overthrow, and that their strength
could not prevail, yielded themselves unto Cortez for Vassals of the Emperor
with condition to banish for ever their allied friends of Culhua; and that he
should punish and correct at his will and pleasure all those which were
occasion of the death of the twelve Spaniards. For which causes and obstinacy,
at the first Cortez judged by his sentence that all the Towns which had been
privy to the murder, should for ever remain Captives and slaves; others affirm
that he overcame them without any condition, and corrected them for their
disobedience, being Sodomites, Idolaters and eaters of man's flesh, and chiefly
for example of all others. And in conclusion, they were condemned for slaves,
and within twenty days that these Wars lasted, he pacified all that Province,
which is very great, he drove from thence the Culhuacans, he threw down the
Idols, and the chiefest persons obeyed him. And for more assurance he built
there this Town, naming it Segura De la Frontera, appointing all Officers for
the purpose, whereby the Christians and strangers might pass without danger
from Vera Crux to Mexico. This Town likewise, as all the rest from St. John de
Ulhua to Mexico, is very plentiful of provision, and many sorts of fruits,
namely Plantins, Sapots, and Chicosapots, which have within a great black
kernel as big as our horse Pl^ms, the fruit it self is as red within as
Scarlet, as sweet as Honey; but the Chicosapotte, is less and some of them
red, some brown colored, and so juicy that at the eating the juice like drops
of Honey fall from them, and the smell is like unto a baked Pear. Here
likewise were presented unto us Clusters of Grapes as fa^e as any in Spain,
which were welcome unto us, for that we had seen no^ since we came from Spain,
and we saw by them that the Country thereabouts would be very fit for
Vineyards, if the King of Spain would grant the planting of Vines in those
parts; which often he has refused to do, lest the Vineyards there should
hinder the Trading and Trafique between Spain and those parts, which certainly
had they but Wine, needed not any commerce with Spain. This Town is of a more
temperate Climate then any other from Vera Crux to Mexico, and the people who
formerly had been eaters of Man's flesh, now as civil and politic, as loving
and courteous as any in the rode. From whence we declined a little out of our
way more Westward (the rode being North-Westward) only to see that famous Town
of Tlaxcallan, whose inhabitants joined with Cortez, and we may say were the
chief instruments of that great and unparalleld Conquest.

CHAP. X. Wherein is set down the estate and condition of the great Town of
Tlaxcallan, when the first Spaniards entered the Empire of Mexico; Cortez his
first encounter with the Tlaxcalteca's; their league with him, with a
description of the Town; and of the state and condition of it now.
TLaxcallan being worth all the rest of the Towns and Villages between S. John
de Ulhua and Mexico; I thought it not fit to parallel it with the others in
naming it briefly and passing by it as a Traveller; but rather I judged it
convenient, and beseeming my present History, to record to posterity with one
whole Chapter, the greatness of it, and the valor of its inhabitants, from
the conquest of America made by Hernando Cortez. Who being upon his march to
Mexico, and having arrived to Zaclotan, and being informed that the
Tlaxcalteca's were men of valor, and enemies to Montezuma the Emperor of
Meixco, thought it his best policy to join with them against the Mexicans.

Whereupon he dispatched unto them four Indians of a Town called Zempoallan,
as Ambassadors to acquaint them of his coming into those parts, and of his
desire to visit their Town, not for any harm he intended to them, but rather
for their good* The Tlaxcalteca's fearing Cortez, and judging him a friend of
Montezuma, because upon his way to visit him, and having heard of the many
costly presents which the Emperor had sent unto him; they resolved to resist
his coming, and to send him no answer to his embassage; but took the four
Messengers which he had sent, and imprisoned them, minding to sacrifice them
unto their Gods as Espies. Cortez seeing the long tarrying of the Messengers,
departed from Zaclotan, without any intelligence from Tlaxcallan. His camp had
not marched much after their departure from that place, but they came to a
great circuit of stone made without lime or mortar, being of a fadome and a
half high, and twenty foot broad, with loupe holes to shoot at; this wall
crossed over a whole valley, from one mountain to another, and but one only
entrance or gate, in the which the one wall doubled against the other, and the
way there was forty paces broad, in such sort that it was an evil and
perilous passage, if any had been there to defend it. Cortez demanded the
cause of that circuit, and who had built it; the Indians that went with him,
told him that it was but a division from their country and Tlaxcallan, and
that their Antecessors had made the same to disturb the entrance of the
Tlazcalteca's in time of war, who came to rob and murder them because of the
friendship betwixt them and Montezuma, whose vassals they were. That strange
and costly wall seemed a thing of great majesty to the Spaniards, and more
superfluous then profitable, yet they suspected that the Tlaxcalteca's were
valiant warriers, who had such defense made against them. But Cortez setting
all fear aside, with three hundred Soldiers on a rank, entered the way in the
wall, and proceeded in good order all the way forwards, carrying the Ordnance
ready charged, and he himself the Leader of all his Army, and sometimes he
would be half a league before them, to discover and make the way plain. And
having gone the space of three leagues from that circuit, he commanded his
Footmen to make haste, because it was somewhat late, and he with his Horsemen
went to descry the way forwards, who ascending up a hill, two of the foremost
Horsemen met with fifteen Indians armed with swords, and targets, and tuffes
of feathers, which they used to wear in the wars. These fifteen being Spies,
when they saw the Horsemen, began to fly with fear, or else to give advice.
But Cortez approaching with other three Horsemen called to them to stay; which
they by no means would hearken unto; till six more Horsemen ran after them,
and overtooke them. The Indians then joining all together with determination
rather to die then to yield, showed to the Spaniards signs to stand still. But
the Horsemen coming to lay hands on them; they prepared themselves to battle,
and fought, defending themselves for a while. In this fight the Indians slew
two of their Horses, and (as the Spaniards do witness) at two blows they cut
off a Horse head, bridle and all. Then came the rest of the Horsemen, the Army
also of the Indians approached, for there were in sight near five thousand of
them in good order, to succor their fifteen fighting men; but they came too
late for that purpose, for they were all slain by the Spanish fury, because
they would not render themselves in time, and had killed two of their Horses.
Yet notwithstanding their fellows fought, until they espied the Spanish Army
coming, and the Ordnance, then they returned leaving the field to the
Spaniards, whose Horsemen followed them, and slew about seventy of them,
without receiving any hurt. With this the Indians perceiving the great
advantage which the Spaniards had against them with their Horses, and meaning
to come upon them subtly with a more powerful Army, that they might the
better deceive and delude them, they sent unto Cortez two of the four
Messengers which had been sent unto them with other Indians, saying, that they
of Tlaxcallan knew nothing of the things that had happened, certifying likewise
that those with whom he had fought, were of other communities, and not of their
jurisdiction, being sorrowful for that which had passed; and for so much as it
happened in their country, they would willingly pay for the two Horses which
were slain, praying them to come in good time to their Town, who would gladly
receive them, and enter into their league of friendship, because they seemed to
be valiant men; But all this was a feigned and a false message. Yet Cortez
believed them, and gave them thanks for their courtesy and good will; and that
according to their request he would go unto their Town, and accept their
friendship. And touching the death of his Horses, he required nothing, for
that within short time he expected many more; yet sorrowful he was not so much
for the want of them, as that the Indians should think that Horses could die
or be slain. Cortez proceeded forwards about two leagues, where the Horses were
killed, although it was almost sun set, and his men wearied, having traveled
far that day. He planted his Army by a river side, remaining all that night
with good watch both of Footmen and Horsemen, fearing some assault; but there
was no attempt given that night. The next morning at sun rising, Cortez
departed with his Army in good order, and in the midst of them went the Fardage
and Artillery, and after a little marching they met with the other two
Messengers whom they had sent from Zaclotan; they came with pitiful cries
exclaiming of the Captains of the power of Tlaxoallan, who had bound them and
detained them from returning; but with good fortune that night they had broken
loose, and escaped, for otherwise in the morning following they had been
sacrificed to the God of Victory, and after the sacrifice they had been eaten
for a good beginning of the wars; the Tlaxcalteca's protesting to do the
like to the bearded men (for so they termed the Spaniards) and to as many as
came with them. They had no sooner told their tale, when there appeared behind
a little hill about a thousand Indians, very well appointed after their fashion,
and came with such a mavelous noise and cry, as though their voices should
have pierced the heavens; hurling at the Spaniards, stones, darts, and shot
with bows and arrows. Cortez made many tokens of peace unto them, and by his
Interpreters desired them to leave the battle. But so much the more as he
entreated for peace, the more hasty and earnest were they, thinking either to
overcome them, or else to hold them play, to the intent that the Spaniards
should follow them to a certain ambush that was prepared for them, of more
then fourscore thousand men* Here the Spaniards began to cease from words, and
to lay hand upon their weapons; for that company of a thousand were as many as
on the Spaniards side were fighting men; though they were well practiced in the
wars, very valiant, and also pitched in a better place for fight. This
battle endured certain hours, and at the end the Indians being either
wearied, or else meaning to take the Spaniards in the snare appointed, began to
fly toward the main battle, not as overcome, but to join with their own
side. The Spaniards being hot in the fight and slaughter, which was not little,
followed them with all their fardage, and unawares fell into the ambush, among
an infinite number of Indians armed; they stayed not, because they would not put
themselves out of order, and passed through their camp with great haste and
fear. The Indians began to set upon the Spanish Horsemen, thinking to have
taken their lances from them, their courage was so stout; many of the Spaniards
had there perished, had it not been for their Indian friends, who had come with
them from Zempoallan and Zaclotan. Likewise the courage of Cortez did much
animate them; for although he led his Army making way, yet diverse times he
turned him back to place his men in order, and to comfort them, and at length
came out of that dangerous way and ambush, where the Horses might help, and the
Ordnance stand in stead, which two things did greatly annoy the Indians to
their great wonder and marvel, and at the sight thereof began to fly. In both
incounters remained many Indians slain and wounded, and of the Spaniards some
were hurt, but none killed, who gave most hearty thanks unto God for their
delivery from so great a multitude as were four score thousand against one
thousand only of Indians and Spaniards joined together. The Indians of
Zempoallan and Zaclotan did play the valiant men that day, wherefore Cortez
honored them with hearty thanks. Then they went to pitch their Camp in a
village called Teoacazinco, where was a little Tower and a Temple, and there
fortified themselves. The night following the Spaniards slept notquietly with
fear of a third Invasion of the Tlaxcalteca's. As soon as it was day Cortez
sent to the Captains of Tlaxcallan to require them of Peace and Friendship,
willing them quietly to suffer them to pass through their Country to Mexico,
for that they meant them no hurt, but rather good will. The answer of the
captains of Tlaxcallan was, that the next day they would come and talk with
him and declare their minds. Cortez was well prepared that night, for the
answer liked him not, but rather seemed brave, and a matter determined to be
done, as some had told him (whom he took prisoners) who likewise certified
that the Tlaxcalteca's were joined together, to the number of a hundred and
fifty thousand men to give battle the next day following, and to swallow up
alive the Spaniards whom so mortally they did hate, thinking them to be
friends unto the Emperor Montezuma, unto whom they wished all evil and
mischief. Their intent was therefore with all their whole power to apprehend
the bearded men, and to make of them a more solemn Sacrifice unto their Gods
then at any time they had done, with a general banquet of their flesh, which
they called Celestial.

The Captains of Tlaxcallan divided their Soldiers into four Battles, the
one to Tepeticpac, another to Ocotelulco, the third to Tizatlan, and the fourth
to Quiahuiztlan, that is to say, the men of the Mountains, the men of the
Limepits, the men of the Pinetrees, and the Water men; all these four sorts of
men did make the Body of the Common-weelth of Tlaxcallan, and commanded both in
time of War and Peace. Every of these Captains had his just portion or number
of Warriers, but the General of all the whole Army was called Xicotencal, who
was of the Limepits; and he had the Standard of the Commonwealth, which is a
Crane of gold with his wings spread, adorned with Emeralds and silver work,
which Standard was according to their use either carried before the whole Host,
or else behind them all. The Lieutenant General of the Army was Maxixcazin;
and the number of the whole Army was a hundred and fifty Thousand men. Such a
great number they had ready against four hundred Spauiards, and seven hundred
Indians of Zempoallam and Zaclotan, and yet at length overcome; and after this
fight they were the greatest friends that Cortez had in those parts against
Montezuma. These Captains came with their Companies, that the fields where
they were seemed a Forest. They were gallant Fellows and well Armed according
to their use, although they were painted, so that their faces showed like
Devils, with great tuffes of Feathers, and they boasted gallantly. Their
Weapons and Armor were Slings, Staves, Spears, Swords, Bows and Arrows,
Sculles, Splintes, Gantlets, all of Wood, guilt or else covered with Feathers
or Leather; their Corselets were made of Cotton Wool, their Targets and
Bucklers gallant and strong, made of wood covered with leather and trimmed with
latten, and feathers, their Swords were staves with an edge of flint stone
cunningly joined into the staff, which would cut very well and make a sore
wound. Their instruments of War were hunters horns, and Drums called
Ataballs made like a Caldron and covered with Vellam. So that the Spaniards in
all their discovery of India did never see a better Army together, nor better
ordered; that which I could not omit to speak of here, having come in the
order of my history to Tlaxcallan, where this numerous and gallant Indian Army
was set forth against 400 Spaniards and 600 Indians their friends. These
Indians thus ordered in Battalia bragged very much against the Spaniards, and
said amongst themselves, What mad people are these bearded men that threaten us
and yet know us not? But if they will be so bold to invade our Country
without our license, let us not set upon them so soon, it is meet they have a
little rest, for we have time enough to take and bind them; let us also send
them meat, for they are come with empty stomachs, and so they shall not say
that we do apprehend them with weariness and hunger. Whereupon they sent unto
the Spaniards three hundred Turkey cocks and two hundred baskets of bread,
called Centli; the which present was a great succor and refreshment for the
need the Spaniards stood in. And soon after, Now (say they) let us go and set
upon them, for by this time they have eaten their meat, and now we will eat
them, and so shall they pay us the victuals that we sent. These and such like
brags they used, seeing so few Spaniards before them, and not knowing the
strength of their Ordnance against their so numerous an host. Then the four
Captains sent two thousand of their valiantest men of war, and old
Soldiers, to take the Spaniards quietly, with commandment that if they did
resist, either to bind them, or else to kill them, meaning not to set their
whole Army upon them, saying, that they should get but small honor for so
great a multitude to fight against so few. The two thousand Soldiers passed
the trench that was betwixt the two camps, and came boldly to the Tower where
the Spaniards were. Then came forth the Horsemen, and after them the Footmen,
and at the first encounter, they made the Indians feel how the iron swords
would cut; at the second, they showed of what force those few in number were,
of whom a little before they had so jested* but at the third brunt, they made
those lusty Soldiers fly, who were come to apprehend them, for none of them
escaped, but only a few such as knew the passage of the trenches or ditch. Then
the main battle and whole Army set forth with a terrible and mavelous noise,
and came so fierce upon the Spaniards, till they entered into their camp
without any resistance, and there were at handy strokes with the Spaniards, and
in a good space could not get them out, many of them being killed, which were
so bold to enter. In this sort they fought four hours, before they could make
way among their enemies. Then the Indians began to faint, seeing so many dead
on their side, and the great wounds they had, and that they could kill none of
the Christians; yet the battle ceased not, till it drew near night, and then
they retired. Whereof Cortez and his Soldiers were exceeding glad, for they
were fully wearied with killing of Indians. The next day in the morning Cortez
went forth to run the fields as he had done before, leaving half his men to
keep the camp; and because he should not be espied, he departed before day,
and burned about ten Towns, and sacked one Town, which was of three thousand
houses, in the which were found but few people, because the most of them were
gone to their camp. After the spoil he set fire on the Town, and came his way
to his camp with a great prey by no one time. The Indians pursued thinking to
take away their prey, and followed them into the camp, where they fought five
hours, and could not kill one Spaniard, although many of their side were
slain; for even as they were many, and stood on a throng together, the Ordnance
made a wonderful spoil among them, so that they left off fighting, and the
victory remained for the Spaniards, whom the Indians thought were enchanted,
because their arrows could not hurt them. The next day following, the four
Captains sent three several things in present to Cortez, and the messengers
that brought them said. Sir, behold here five slaves, and if thou be that
rigoroue God that eatest man's flesh and blood, eat these which we bring unto
thee, and we will bring thee more. And if thou be the gentle and meek God,
behold here frankincense and feathers. And if thou be a mortal man, take here
foul, bread and cherries. Cortez answered that both he and his were mortal
men even as they were. And because that always he had used to tell them truth,
wherefore did they use to tell him lies, and likewise to flatter him, for he
desired to be their friend, advising them not to be mad and stubborn in their
opinion, for if they so did, assuredly they should receive great hurt and
damage.

Notwithstanding this answer, there came again about thirty thousand of them
even to Certez his camp, to prove their corslets, as they had done the day
before, but they returned with broken pates. Here is to be noted that although
the first day the whole host of Indians came to combat with the Spaniards* yet
the next day they did not so, but every several Captain by himself, for to
divide the better the travail and pains equally among them; and because that
one should not disturb another through the multitude, considering that they
should fight but with a few, and in a narrow place; and for this consideration
their battails were more fresh and strong, for each Captain did contend who
should do most valiantly for to get honor, and especially in killing one
Spaniard, for they thought that all their hurts should be satisfied with the
death of one Spaniard, or taking one prisoner. Likewise is to be considered the
strangeness of their battle, for notwithstanding their controversy fifteen
days that they were there, whether they fought or no, they sent unto the
Spaniards cakes of bread, Turkey cocks and cherries. But this policy was not to
give them that meat for good will, but only to epsy and see what hurt was
done amongst them, and also to see what fear or stomach they had to proceed.
But finding by their many spies that the Spaniards were nothing daunted nor
diminished, they resolved to send unto Cortez Xicotencatl, who was chief and
general Captain in Tlaxcallan, and of all the wars; he brought in his
company fifty persons of authority to keep him company. They approached near
where Cortez was, and saluted each other according to the use of their
country. Their salutations ended, and the parties being set down; Xicotencatl
began the talk, saying. Sir, I am come on mine own behalf and also of my
fellow Captain and Lieutenant Maxixca, and in the name of many other noble
personages, and finally in the name of the whole State and Commonwealth of
Tlaxcallan, to beseech and pray you to admit us into your friendship, and to
yield our selves and country unto your King, craving also at your hand pardon
for our attempt in taking up arms against you, we not knowing what you were,
nor what you sought for in our country. And where we presumed to resist and
defend your entrance, we did it as against strangers whom we knew not, and
such men as we had never heretofore seen; and fearing also that you had been
friends to Montezuma, who is, and always has been our mortal enemy. And we
had rather all in general to end our lives, then to put our selves in
subjection to him; for we think our selves as valiant men in courage as our
forefathers were, who always have resisted against him and his grandfather,
who was as mighty as now is he. We would also have withstood you and your
force, but we could not, although we proved all our possibility by night and
day, and found your strength invincible, and we no luck against you. Therefore
since our fate is such, we had rather be subject unto you then unto any others;
for we have known and heard by the Zempoallanezes, that you do no evil, nor
came not to vex any, but were most valiant and happy, as they have seen in the
wars, being in your company. For which consideration, we trust that our
liberty shall not be diminished, but rather our own persons, wives and families
better preserved, and our houses and husbandry not destroyed. And in some of
his talk, the tears trickling down his cheeks, he besought Cortez to weigh
that Tlaxcallan did never at any time acknowledge any superior Lord or King,
nor at any time had come any person among them to command, but only he, whom
now they did voluntarily elect and choose as their Superior and Ruler. Cortez
much rejoiced with this embassage, and to see such a mighty Captain, who
commanded a hundred and fifty thousand Soldiers, come unto his camp to submit
himself; judging it also matter of great weight to have that Commonwealth in
subjection, for the enterprise which he had in hand, whereby he fully made an
account, that the wars were at an end, to the great contentation of him and his
company, and with great fame and reputation among the Indians. So with a merry
and loving countenance he answered, laying first to their charge, the hurt and
damage which he had received in their country, because they refused at the
first to hearken unto him, and quietly to suffer him to enter into their
country, as he had required and desired by his messengers sent unto them from
Zaclotan. Yet all this notwithstanding he did both pardon the killing of his
two Horses, the assaulting of him in the high way, and the lies which they had
most craftily used with him, (for whereas they themselves fought against him,
yet they laid the fault to others) likewise their pretense to murder him in
the ambush prepared for him (enticing him to come to their Town) without
making first defiance according to the law of Arms. Yet these injuries
notwithstanding, he did lovingly receive their offer made in subjection to the
Emperor, and that very shortly he would be with him in Tlaxcallan. At this
same time there were Ambassadors from Montezuma with Cortez, who grieved much
to see the League that was now beginning between the Tlaxcalteca's and the
Spaniards; they advised Cortez to give no credit unto them, saying, they meant
nothing but treason, and lies, and to lock them up in Tlaxcallan. Cortez
answered the Ambassadors, that although their advice were true, yet he did
determine to go thither, for that he feared them less in the Town then in
the field. They hearing this answer and determination, besought him to give
unto one of them license to return unto Mexico, to advertise Mont^zuma of all
that was past, with an answer to their embassage, promising within six days to
have news from Mexico, and till then prayed him not to depart with his camp.
Cortez granted their request, and abode there the time appointed, expecting
their answer, and within himself rejoicing to see how the Mexicans began to
fear, that his peace with the Tlaxealteca's would be their ruin and
destruction, as indeed afterward it proved. In this mean season came many of
Tlaxcallan to the camp, some brought Turkey cocks, other brought bread and
cherries, with merry countenances, desiring them to go home with them unto
their houses. The sixth day the Mexican Ambassador came according to promise,
and brought unto Cortez ten jewels of gold, both rich and well wrought, and
fifteen thousand garments of Cotton exceeding gallant, and most earnestly
besought him on the behalf of Montezuma, that he should not danger himself in
trusting to the words of the Tlaxcalteca's, who were so poor that with
necessity they would rob him of the things and presents which his Master had
sent him, yea and likewise murder him, knowing of the friendship between his
Master and him. At the very same time all the chiefest Lords of Tlaxcallan came
to entreat him to go with them to Tlaxcallan, where he should be cherished,
lodged and well provided: for it was a great dishonor and shame unto them to
permit such personages to abide in such vilecottages, as they were in. And if
(said they) you trust us not, then we are ready to give you for your security
whatsoever pledges or gages you shall demand. And they did both swear and
faithfully promise that they might safely go with them, saying also that the
Oath and Faith of their Commonwealth should never be broken for all the goods
in the world. Thus was Cortez on both sides earnestly solicited, and entreated;
the Mexicans fearing his League and friendship with the Tlaxcalteca's, and
these hoping that his friendship with them would be their chief protection
against the tyranny of Montezuma. But Cortez aiming chiefly at the Empire of
Mexico, which Montezuma his dissembled friendship would never help him to
enjoy; and seeing the good will of so many gentlemen his new friends of
Tlaxcallan, the most mortal enemies of Montezuma, and likewise the Indians of
Zempoallan, of whom he had good credit, did so importune him, and assure him of
his going, he commanded his Fardage to be laden, and also his Ordnance, and
departed toward Tlaxcallan, with as good order as it had been to a battle; and
at the Tower where he had pitched his camp, he left certain crosses for a
memory with a great heap of stones (which till this day remain in the place,
and my self have seen them) and entered into Tlaxcallan the eighteenth of
September. There came out such a multitude of people to see him and to meet him
in the way, that it was a wonder to see. He was lodged in the greatest Temple,
which had many great and fair lodgings sufficient for him and all his company,
except the Indians of Zempoallan and Zaclotan his friends, who were lodged in
other Temples. He set certain limits, out of the which he commanded straightly
that none of his company should pass upon pain of death, and also commanded
that they should take nothing, but what should be given them. His commandment
was well observed, for none presumed to go a stones cast without his license.
The Indian gentlemen showed great pleasure and courtesy to the strangers, and
provided them of all things necessary, and many of them gave their daughters
unto them in token of true friendship, and likewise to have fruit of their
bodies, to be brought up for the wars, being such valiant men. Cortez being
thoroughly satisfied of their hearty good wills, demanded of them the estate and
riches of Montezuma. They exalted him greatly as men that had proved his force.
And as they affirmed it was near a hundred years, that they maintained wars
with him and his father ^xaica, and others his uncles* and grandfathers; they
assured him also that the gold and treasure of Montezuma was without number,
and his power and dominion over all the land, and his people innumerable; for
(said they) he joyneth sometimes two hundred thousand men, yea and three
hundred thousand for one battle. And if it pleased him, he would make as many
men double, and thereof they were good witness, because they had many times
fought with them. Cortez told them he was nothing discouraged at all that his
power, but intended a journey to Mexico, not doubting to oppose Montezuma, if
he should encounter him in the way. He promised them likewise that he would
free them from his tyranny, and su^due in his way all those Towns which were
allied to the Mexicans, and did any way annoy them and their Commonwealth.
They gave him hearty thanks, assuring him to assist him and accompany him to
Mexico; and for the present offered him twenty thousand men, making a solemn
League and Covenant never to forsake him. Thus was Tlaxcallan subdued and
sworn to the power and command of the Spaniards, being in those times one of
the chiefest, though not richest, Towns in America; whose Inhabitans after
clave most faithfully to Cortez, and were chief instruments for the subduing of
Mexico; and therefore to this day are freed from tribute by the Kings of Spain,
paying not the money which as a tribute tax is laid upon every Indian to be
paid yearly, but only in acknowledgement of subjection they pay yearly one
corn of Maiz, which is their Indian Wheat. This great Town of Tlaxcallan is
properly in the Indian tongue as much as to say, as bread well backed, for
there is more Grain called Centli gathered, then in all the Province round
about. In times past the Town was called Texcallan, that is to say, a Valley
betwixt two hills. It is planted by a River side, which springs out of a hill
called Atlan^apetec, and waters the most part of the Province, and from
thence issues out into the South Sea, by Zacatullan. This Town has four
goodly streets, which are called Tepeticpac, Ocotelulco, Tizatlan,
Quiahuiztlan. The first street stands on high upon a hill, far from the
River which may be about half a League, and because it stands on a hill, it
is called Tepeticpac, that is to say, a hill, and was the first population,
which was founded there on high because of the Wars. An other street is
situated on the hill side toward the River; because at the building thereof,
there were many Pine trees, they named it Ocoteluleo, which is to say, A pine
apple plot. This street was beautiful, and most inhabited of all the Town, and
there was the chiefest Market place, where all the buying and selling was used,
and that place they called Tianquiztli; in that street was the dwelling house
of Maxixca. Along the River side in the plain stands another street called
Tizatlan, because there is much Lime and Chalk. In this street dwelled
Xicotencatl, Captain General of the whole Commonwealth. There is another
street named by reason of the brackish water, Quiahuiztlan; but since the
Spaniards came thither, all those buildings are almost altered, after a better
fashion, and built with stone. In the plain by the river side stands the Town
house, and other Offices, as in the City of Venice. This Tlaxcallan was
governed by Noble and rich men; they used not that one alone should rule, but
did rather fly from that Government as from tyranny, and therefore hated
Montezuma as a tyrant. In their Wars (as I have said before) they had four
Captains, which governed each one street, of the which four they did elect a
Captain General. Also there were other Gentlemen, that were Under-Captaines,
but a small number. In the Wars they used their Standard to be carried behind
the Army, but when the battle was to be fought, they placed the Standard,
where all the Host might see it, and he that came not in continent to his
Ancientt, paid a penalty. Their Standard had two Crosse-bow Arrows set
thereon, which they esteemed, as the Relics of their Ancestors. This
Standard two old Souldies and valiant men, being of the chiefest Captains, had
the charge to carry, in the which an abuse of soothsaying either of loss or
victory was noted. In this order they shot one of these Arrows against the
first enemies that they met, and if with that Arrow they did either kill or
hurt, it was a token that they should have the victory, and if it neither did
kill nor hurt, then they assuredly believed that they should lose the field.
This Province or Lordship of Tlaxcallan had 28. Villages and Towns, wherein
were contained 150000 householders. They are men well made, and were good
Warriers, the like were not among the Indians. They are very poor, and have no
other riches, but only the Grain and Corn called Centli, and with the gain
and profit thereof, they do both clothe themselves, and provide all other
necessaries. They have many Market places, but the greatest and most used
daily, stands in the street of Ocotelulco, which formerly was so famous, that
20000. persons came thither in one day to buy and sell, changing one thing for
another, for they knew not what money meaned. They have now and had formerly
all kind of good policy in the Town; there are Goldsmiths, Featherdressers,
Barbers, hot houses, and Potters, who make as good earthen Vessel, as is made
in Spain. The earth is fat and fruitful for Corn, fruit, and Pasture, for
among the Pinetrees grows so much grass, that the Spaniards feed their
Cattle there, which in Spain they cannot do. Within two Leagues of the Town
stands a round hill of six miles of height, and five and forty miles in
compass, and is now called St. Bartholoinewes hill, where the snow freezeth.
In times past they called that hill Matealcucie, who was their God for water.
They had also a God for Wine, who was named Ometochtli, for the great
drunkenesse which they used. Their chiefest God was called Camaxtlo; and by
another name Mixcovatl, whose Temple stood in the street of Ocotelulco, in the
which Temple there was sacriced some years above eight hundred persons. In the
Town they speak three languages, that is to say, Nabualh, which is the courtly
speech, and chiefest in all the land of Mexico; another is called Otomir, which
is most commonly used in the Villages; There is one only street that speaks
Pinomer, which is the grossest speech. There was also formerly in the Town a
common Jayle, where-Felons lay in Irons, and all things which they held for
^inne, were there corrected. At the time that Cortez was there it happened that
a townsman stole from a Spaniard a little gold; whereof Cortez complained to
Maxixca, who in continent made such enquiry, that the offender was found in
Chololla, which is another great Town five Leagues from thence; they brought
the prisoner with the gold, and delivered him to Cortez, to do with him his
pleasure. Cortez would not accept him, but gave him thanks for his diligence;
then was he carried with a crier before him, manifesting his offense, and in
the Market place upon a Scaffold they brake his joints with a cudgel: the
Spaniards marvelled to see such strange justice, and began to be more
confident that as in this point they had endeavored to pleasure and right
them, so likewise they should afterward find them very forward to do their
wills and pleasures for the better conquering of Mexico and Montezuma.
Ocotelulco and Tizatlan, are the two streets which now are most inhabited; In
Ocotelulco stands a Cloister of Franciscan Friars who are the Preachers of
that Town; they have there joining to their Cloister a very fair Church, to
which belong some fifty Indians singers, Organists, players on Musical
Instruments, Trumpeters and Waits, who set out the Mass with a very sweet and
harmonious Music, and delight the fancy and senses, while the spirit is sad
and dull as little acquainted with God, who will be worshipped in spirit and
in truth. In Tepetiepac and Quiahuiztlan are two Chapels only, to which on
the Lords Day, and upon other occasions the Friars of the Cloister resort to
say Mass. In this Cloister we were entertained a day and two nights with
great Provision of Flesh and Fish, which is very plentiful by reason of the
River; The Friars are allowed by the Town a dozen Indians who are free from
other services only to fish for the Friars. They change their turns by
Weeks, four one Week and four another, except they be called upon for some
special occasion, and then they leave all other work, and attend only with
fish upon the Friars. The Town now is inhabited by Spaniards and Indians
together; and is the seat of a chief Officer of Justice sent from Spain every
three years, called Alcalde Major, whose power reaches to all the Towns
within twenty Leagues about. Besides him the Indians have likewise among
themselves, Alcaldes, Regidores and Alguaziles, superior and inferior
Officers of Justice appointed yearly by the Alcalde Major, who keeps them all
in awe, and takes from them for his service as many as he pleases without
paying any thing for the service done unto him. The hard usage of this Alcalde
Major and other Spaniards has much decayed that populous Town, which should
rather have been cherished, then disheartened by the Spaniards, who by means of
it gained all the rest of the Country.

CHAP. XI. Concluding the rest of our journey fo^m Tlaxcallan to Mexico,
through the City of Angels, and Guacocingo.
THE next place most remarkable in the Rode wherein we traveled was the City
called by the Spaniards, La Puebla de los Angeles, the City of Angels. To the
which we were desirous to go, knowing that in it there was a Convent of
Dominicans of our profession, not having met with any such since the day we
departed from St. John de Ulhua. Here we refreshed our selves at leisure three
days, finding our selves very welcome to our own Brethren, who spared nothing
that was fit for our entertainment. We visited all the City, and took large
notice of it, judging of the wealth and riches of it not only by the great
Trading in it, but by the many Cloisters both of Nuns and Friars, which it
maintains, such being commonly very burdensome to the places where they
live, an idle kind of beggars who make the people believe the maintaining of
them is meritorious and saving to their Souls, and that their prayers for them
is more worth then the means and sustenance which they receive from them. Of
these there is in that City a very great Cloister of some fifty or threescore
Dominicans, another of more Franciseans, another of Augustins, another of
Mercinarians, another of discalced Carmelites, another of Jesu^its, besides
four of Nuns. This City is seated in a low and pleasant Valley, about ten
leagues from a very high Mountain, which is always covered with snow; It
stands twenty leagues from Mexico, it was first built and inhabited in the
year 1530. by the command of Don Antonio de Mendoza Vi^eroy of Mexico,
together with the consent of Sebastian Ramirez who was a Bishop, and had been
President in time past in Sto Domingo, and was that year in stead of Nunnio de
Guzman (who had behaved himself very evil both with the Indians and
Spaniards) sent to be President of the Chancery of Mexico with these other
four Judges the Licenciates John de Salmeron, Gasco Quiroga, Francisco Ceynos,
and Alonso Maldonado. These Judges governed the land far better then Nunnio
de Guzman before them had done; and among other remarkable things they did, was
to cause this City to be inhabited; and set at liberty the Indians who
inhabited there before, and were grievously suppressed and inslaved by the
Spaniards, and therefore many of them departed from thence, who had inhabited
there before, and went to seek their living at Xalixco, Hunduras, Guatemala
and other places, where War then was. This City was formerly called by the
Indians Cuetlaxc^apan, that is to say, a Snake in water; the reason was,
because there are two Fountains, the one of evil water, and the other of
good. This City is now a Bishops Sea, whose yearly Revenues since the cutting
off from it Xalappa De la Vera Crux, are yet worth above twenty thousand
Ducats; By reason of the good and wholesome air it daily increases with
Inhabitants, who resort from many other places to live there; but especially
the year 1634. when Mexico was like to be drowned with the inundation of the
lake, thousands left it, and came with all their goods and Families to this
City of the Angels, which now is thought to consist of ten thousand
Inhabitants. That which makes it most famous is the Cloth which is made in it,
and is sent far and near, and judged now to be as good as the Cloth of
Segovia, which is the best that is made in Spain, but now is not so much
esteemed of, nor sent so much from Spain to America by reason of the abundance
of fine Cloth which is made in this City of Angels. The Felts likewise that are
made, are the best of all that Country; there is likewise a glass house, which
is there a rarity, none other being as yet known in those parts. But the mint
house that is in it, where is coined half the Silver that comes from
Sacatecas, makes it the second to Mexico; and it is thought that in time it
will be as great and populous as Mexico: Without it there are many Gardens,
which store the Markets with provision of Salets; the soil abounds with Wheat,
and with Sugar Farms; among the which not far from this City there is one so
great and populous (belonging to the Dominican Friars of Mexico) that for the
work only belonging unto it, it maintained in my time above two hundred
blackmore slave^ men and women besides their little children. The chief Town
between this City of Angels, and Mexico, is called Guaeocingo consisting of
some five hundred Indians, and one hundred Spaniards Inhabitants. Here is
likewise a Cloister of Franciscans, who entertained us gallantly, and made show
unto us of the dexterity of their Indians in Music. Those fat Friars wanted
not like the rest all Provision necessary for the body. But their greatest
glory and boasting to us was the education which they had given to some
children of the Tow^, especially such as served them in their Cloister, whom
they had brought up to dancing after the Spanish fashion at the sound of the
Guitarra. And this a dozen of them (the biggest not being above fourteen
yeears of age) performed excellently for our better entertainment that night,
we were there till midnight, singing both Spanish and Indian ^unes, (...) and
dancing with their Castannettas, or knockers on their singers with such
dexterity; as not only did delight, but amaze and astonish us. True it is,
(...) those Fran^iscans might have been better employed at that time in their
(...) their midnight devotions according to their profession; but we still
found vowed religious duties more and more neglected, and worldliness too too
much embraced, by such as had renounced and forsaken the world and all its
pleasures, sports and pastimes.

This Town of Guacocingo is almost as much as Tlaxcallan privileged by the
Kings of Spain; for that it joined with Tlaxcallan against the Mexicans, in
defense of Hernando Cortez and the rest of the Spaniards that first conquered
that land. These of Guacocingo being confederated with the inhabitants of
Tlaxcallan, Chololla, and Huacacholla strongly defended the inhabitants of
Chalco, when they sent to Cortez for succor, declaring that the Mexicans made
great spolle among them. Which succor Cortez at that time not being able to
send them; being busied in sending for his Vergantines to besiege Mexico by
water as well as by land, he remitted them to the help of the Tlaxcalteoa's,
and unto these of Guacocingo, Chololla, and Huacacholla; who showed great
valor as yet never buried in oblivion, in relieving Chalco against the
strength, and power of Montezuma, which had issued out of Mexico, to keep the
Spaniards from drawing near unto that City. For that fact is this Town with
the others forementioned, until this day privileged and highly esteemed of
the Spaniards. From hence we made our last journey to the City of Mexico,
passing over the side of that high hill which we had discovered at the City of
Angels, some thirty miles off. There are no Alps like unto it for height,
cold, and constant snow that lies upon it. From Spain to that place we had not
felt any such extremity of cold, which made the Spaniards that had come out of
the ho^ climate of Spain, and endured excessive heat at sea, wonder and admire.
This last journey from Guacocingo to Mexico we reckoned to be thirty English
miles, and of the thirty miles we judged at least the fifteen to be up and
down the hill; and yet the top of it (whither we ascended not) was far higher.
From that highest part of it which we travailed over, we discovered the City of
Mexico, and the lake about it, which seemed to us to be near at hand, standing
some ten English miles in a plain from the bottom of this mountain. When
Hernando Cortez went the second time from Tlaxcallan to Mexico, to besiege it
by land and by water, with Vergantines which for that purpose he had caused to
be made, on the side of this mountain were his land Forces lodged, where many
had perished with cold, had it not been for the store of wood which they found
there. But in the morning he ascended upwards on this hill, and sent his scout
of four Footmen and four Horsemen to discover, who found the way stopped
with great trees newly cut down by the Mexicans, and placed crossewise in the
way. But they thinking that yet forwards it was not so, proceeded forth as well
as they might, till at length the let with great huge Cedars was such, that
they could pass no further, and with this news were forced to return,
certifying Cortez that the Horsemen could not pass that way in any wise.
Cortez demanded of them whether they had seen any people; they answered No.
Whereupon he proceeded forward, with all the Horsemen, and a thousand
Footmen, commanding all the residue of his Army to follow him with as much
speed as might be; so that with that company which he carried with him, he made
way, taking away the trees that were cut down to disturb his passage; and in
this order in short time passed his host without any hurt or danger, but with
great pain and travail; for certainly if the Mexicans had been there to defend
that passage, the Spaniards had not passed; for it was then a very evil way
(though now it be a reason^ble wide open rode, where Mules laden with wares
from St. John de Ulhua, and the Sugar farms daily pass) and the Mexicans also
thought the same to be sure with the trees which were crossed the way;
whereupon they were careless of that place, and attended their coming in plain
ground; for from Tlaxcallan to Mexico are three ways, of the which Cortez
chose the worst, imagining the thing that afterward fell out, or else some had
advised him how that way was clear from the enemies. At the descent of this
hill Cortez abode and rested himself, till all the whole Army were come
together, to descend down into the plain; for from hence they descried the
fires and beacons of their enemies in sundry places, and all those who had
attended their ^ing by the other two ways, were now gathered together,
thinking to set upon them betwixt certain bridges (which are in the plain made
for travelers by reason of the many dikes and currents of water which issue
from the lake) where a great company abode expecting their coming. But Cortez
sent twenty Horsemen who made way among them, and then followed the whole
Army, who ^lew many of them without receiving any hurt. Thus did the
remembrance of those antiquities newly refreshed by the object of the hill and
plain beneath, make that cold and hard passage more comfortable and easy unto
us. The first Town we came to below the hill, was Quabutipec, of the
jurisdiction of Tezcuco; where we also called to mind, that this was the place,
near unto which was pitched the Camp of the Indians of Culhua, which was near
a hundred thousand men of war, who were sent by the Seniors of Mexico and
Tezcuco to encounter Cortez; but all in vain; for his Horsemen broke through
them, and his Artillery made such havoc among them, that they were soon put
to flight.

Three leagues from hence on our right hand as we travailed, we discovered
Tezcuco by the side of the lake, and out of the Rode; yet it ministered unto us
matter of a large discourse, taken from the time of Cortez and the first
Conquerers, who found it a great City, and at that time even as big as Mexico;
though in it Cortez met with no resistance; for as he journeyed toward it,
four principal persons inhabitants of it met with his forces, bearing a rod
of gold with a little flag in token of peace, saying that Coacuacoyocin their
Lord had sent them to desire him not to make any spoil in his City, and Towns
about it; and likewise to offer his friendship, praying also that it might
please him with his whole Army to take his lodging in the Town of Tezcuco,
where he should be well received. Cortez rejoicing at this message, yet jealous
of some treachery, and mistrusting the people of Tezcuco (whose forces joined
with the Mexicans and Culhuacans he had met with a little before) went forward
on his way and came to Quahutichan and Huaxuta (which then were suburbs of the
great City Tezcuco, but now are petty Villages by themselves) where he and all
his host were plenteously provided of all things necessary, and threw down the
Idols. This done he entered into the City, where his lodging was prepared in a
great house, sufficient for him and all the Spaniards, with many other his
Indian friends. And because that at his first entry, he saw neither women nor
children, he suspect^d some treason, and forthwith proclaimed upon pain of
death that none of his men should go out. In the evening the Spaniards went up
into the Z^ties and galleries to behold the City, and there they saw the great
number of Citizens that fled from thence with their stuff, some toward the
mountains, and others to the water side to take boat, a thing strange to see
the great haste and stir to provide for themselves. There were at that time
at least twenty thousand little boats (called Canoas) occupied in carrying
household stuff and passengers; Cortez would feign have remedied it, but the
night was so nigh at hand, that he could not. He would gladly also have
apprehended the Lord, but he was one of the first that fled unto Mexico. This
Town of Tezcuco to this day is famous among the Spaniards; for that it was one
of the first, if not the first (which according to the Histories of those parts
is very probable) that received a Christian King to rule and govern. For
Cortez hearing that Coacuacoyocin then King of that City and Towns adjacent
was fled, caused many of the Citizens to be called before him, and having in
his company a young gentleman of a Noble house in that country, who had been
lately christened, and had to name Hernando (Cortez being his Godfather, who
loved him well) said unto the Citizens, that this new Christian Lord Don
Hernando was son unto Nez^valpincintli their loving Lord, wherefore he
required them to make him their King, confidering that Coacuacoyocin was fled
unto the enemies, laying also before them his wicked fact in killing of Cacuz^
his own brother, only to put him from his inheritance and Kingdom, through
the ^uticement of Quahutim^cin a mortal enemy to the Spaniards. In this sort
was that new Christian* Don Hernando elected King, and the fame thereof being
blown abroad, many Citizens repaired home again to visit their new Prince, so
that in short space the City was as well replenished with people, as it was
before, and being also well used at the Spanirds hands, they served them
diligently in all things that they were commanded. And Don Hornando abode ever
after a faithful friend unto the Spaniards in their wars against Mexico, and
in short time learned the Spanish tongue. And soon after came the inhabitants
of Quahutichan, Huaxuta, and (...) to submit themselves, craving pardon if in
any thing they had offended. Within two days after Don Hernando was made King
of this great City and Territory belonging to it (whose borders reach unto the
borders of Tlaxcallan) came certain gentlemen of Huaxuta and Quobutichan, to
certify unto him, how all the power of the Mexicans was coming toward them,
and to know if it were his pleasure; that they should carry their wives,
children and other goods into the mountains, or else to bring them where he
was, their fear was so great. Cortez for the King his God-child and favorite
made unto them this answer, saying, Be ye of good courage, and fear ye not.
Also I pray you to command your wives and families to make no alteration, but
rather quietly to abide in your houses. And concerning the enemies I am glad of
their coming, for ye shall see how I will deal with them. But the enemies
went not to Huaxuta, as it was thought; nevertheless Cortez having
intelligence where they were, went out to encounter them with two pieces of
Ordnance, twelve Horsemen and two hundred Spaniards, and with many Indians of
Tlaxcallan. He fought with the enemy, and slew but few, for they fled to the
water, and so escaped in their Canoa's. Thus did Cortez in Tezcuco defend
himself and friends from the great power of the Mexicans, who daily attempted
to be revenged on him, and the new Christian King whom he had made. But Cortez
thinking that place the most convenient to lanch his Vergantines to the water,
and hearing that they were finished at Tlaxcallan, sent Gonzalo de Sandoval to
bring them from Tlaxcallan; who at the border of that Province met with them
being brought in pieces, as tables, planks and nails, with all other
furniture, the which eight thousand men carried upon their backs. There came
also for their safe conduct twenty thousand men of war, and a thousand
Tamemez, who were the Carriers of victuals, and servants. Chichimecatetl, a
principal and valiant Indian and Captain of a thousand men had the Rere-gard.
And Tupitil and Te^tecatl, very principal gentlemen, had the Vant-gard with
ten thousand men. In the midst were placed the Tamemez, and those that carried
the Foyst, with all the apparel of the Vergantines. Before those two Captains
went a hundred Spaniards, and eight Horsemen, and behind and last came Gonzalo
de Sandoval with all the residue, and seven Horsemen. Thus they took their
way toward Tezcuco, with a mavelous noise, crying, Christians, Christians,
Tlaxcallan, Tlaxcallan, and Spain. When they came to Tezcuco, they entered i^
in very good order, with the sound of Drums, Snail shells, and other like
instruments of music* and against their entry into the City, they put on all
their bravery of clothes, and bushes of feathers, which was a gallant sight;
they were six hours in entering into the Town, keeping their array. At the
^ame of this many Provinces came to submit and offer their service unto Cortez,
some for fear of destruction, and others for the hatred which they bare to the
Mexicans; so that now Cortez was strong both with Spaniards and Indians; and
his Court at Tezcuco was at great, or greater then Montezuma's formerly had
been at Mexico. And here Cortez made his preparation for the ^iege of Mexico
with all have, and furnished himself with scaling ladders, and other
necessaries fit for such a purpose His Vergantines being nailed and thoroughly
ended, he made a (...), or ^rench of half a league of length, twelve foot
broad and more, and two fadome in depth. This work was fifty days a doing,
although there were four hundred thousand men daily working* truly a famous
work and worthy of memory, which has made Tezcuco gloriously mentioned,
though now almost decayed in the great number of inhabitants. The Dock or
Trench being thus finished, the Vergantines were ^ked with towe and cotton
wool, and for want of Tallow and oil, they were (as some Authors report)
driven to take man's grease, not that Cortez permitted them to slay men for that
effect, but of those which were slain in the wars, and of such as sallied
daily out of Mexico to hinder this work, and fighting were slain. The Indians,
who were cruel and bloody Butchers, using sacrifice of man's flesh, would in
this sort open the dead body and take out the grease. The Vergantines being
lanched, Cortez mustered his men, and found nine hundred Spaniards, of the
which were fourscore and six Horsemen, and a hundred and eighteen with
Crosse-bowes, and Hargabushes; and all the residue had sundry weapons, as
Swords, Daggers, Targets, Lances, and Halberts. Also they had for armor,
Corslets, coats of Mayle, and Jack^. They had moreover three great Pieces of
cast I^on, fifteen small pieces of brass, and ten hundred weight of powder,
with store of shot, besides a hundred thousand Indians, men of war. On
Whit^unday all the Spaniards come into the field, that great plai^e below the
high mountain spoken of before, where Cortez made three chief Captains,
among whom he divided his whole Army. Unto Pedro de Alvarado the first Captain
^e appointed thirty Horsemen, and a hundred and seventy Foote-men of the
Spaniards, two pieces of Ordnance, and thirty thousand Indians, commanding him
to camp in (...). Unto Christ^val de (...) the second Captain he gave three
and thirty horsemen, and a hundred and eighteen footmen of the Spanish Nation,
two Pieces of Ordnance and thirty thousand Indians, and appointed him to pitch
his camp in Culhuacan. To Gonzalo de Sandoval, who was the third Captain, he
gave three and twenty horsemen, and a hundred and threescore footmen, two
pieces of Ordnance, and forty thousand Indians, with Commission to choose a
place to pitch his camp. In every Vergantine he planted a pe^ce of Ordnance,
six Hargabushes, or Cross* bows, and three and twenty Spaniards, men most fit
for that purpose. He appointed also Captains for each, and himself for
General, whereof some of the chiefest of his Company began to murmur, that
went by land, thinking that they had been in greater danger; wherefore they
required him to go with the maine battle, and not by water. Cortez little
esteemed their words; for although there was more danger in the land then in
the water, yet it did more import to have greater care in the Wars by water,
then on the land, because his men had been in the one, and not in the other.
Besides the chiefest hopes that Cortez had to win Mexico, were these Vessels,
for with them he burned a great part of the Canoa's of Mexico, and the rest he
so locked up, that they were no help unto the Mexicans, and with twelve only
Vergantines he did annoy his enemy as much by water, as the rest of his Army
did by land. All this preparation for the siege of Mexico by land and water,
with above a hundred thousand Indians, besides the Spanirds above mentioned,
and the twelve Vergantines by water, was finished in this City of Tezcuco,
which is a sufficient argument of the greatness of it at that time,
maintaining with Provision fit and necessary so many thousands of people, and
it yielded matter enough unto us for a large discourse, whilst not far from
the sight of it we traveled in the open and direct plain Rode to Mexico. And
as we talked of the greatness of it in former times, so likewise we now
wondered to consider it to be but a small Government, where does constantly
reside a Spanish Governor sent from Spain, whose power reaches to those
borders of Tlaxcallan and Guacocingo, and to most of the petty Towns and
Villages of the plain, which were formerly under the command and power of a
King; but now are not able to make up above a thousand Ducats a year, which is
supposed to be the yearly revenues of the Governor; and Tezcuco it self this
day judged to consist only of a hundred Spaniards, and three hundred Indian
Inhabitants, whose chief riches come by gardening, and sending daily in their
Canoa's Herbs and Salets to Mexico. Some wealth likewise they get by their
Cedar trees which grow there, and are ready timber for the buildings of Mexico.
Yet now also are these Cedars much decayed by the Spaniards, who have wasted
and spoiled them in their too too sumptuous buildings. Cortez only was accused
by Pamfilo de Narva^z, for that he had spent seven thousand beams of Cedar
trees in the work of his own house. Gardens there were in Tezcuco formerly,
that had a thousand Cedar trees for walls and circuit, some of them of a
hundred and twenty foot long, and twelve foot in compass from end to end; but
now that Garden that has fifty Cedar trees about it, is much regarded. At the
end of this plain we passed through Mexicalcinc^, which formerly was a great
Town, but now not of above an hundred Inhabitants, and from thence to
Guetlavac, a petty Village, yet most pleasant for the shade of many fruit
trees, Gardens, and stately houses which for their recreation some Citizens of
Mexico have built there, being at the foot of the Cawsey which from this Town
through the Lake reaches about five English miles to Mexico. And thus upon the
third day of October, 1625. we entered into that famous and gallant City, yet
not abiding in it, but only passing through it, till we came to a house of
recreation, standing among the Gardens in the way to Chapultepec, named Saint
Iacintho, belonging to the Dominicans of Manila in the East-India's, (whither
our course was intended) where we were stately entertained, and abode till
after Candlemasse day, the time of our second shipping at Acoapuleo, (80.
leagues from Mexico) by the South Sea to Manila the chief City of the Islands
named Philippinas.

CHAP. XII. Showing some particulars of the great and famous City of Mexico in
former times, with a true description of it now; and of the State and condition
of it the year 1625.
IT has been no small piece of Policy in the Friars and Jesuits of Manila and
the Islands of Philippinas to purchase near about Mexico, some house and
Garden to carry thither such Missionary Priests as they yearly bring from Spain
for those parts. For were it not that they found some rest and place of
Recreation, but were presently closed up in the Cloisters of Mexico to follow
those Religious duties (which sore against their wills most of them are forced
to) they would soon after a tedious journey from Spain by Sea and land relent
of their purposes of going forward, and venturing upon a second voyage by the
South Sea; and would either resolve upon a return to Spain, or of staying in
some part of America; as my self and five more of my company did, though
secretly and hiddenly, and sore against the will of Friar Calvo and others, who
had the tutoring and conducting of us. Therefore that all such as come from
Spain to be shipped again at Acoapul^o for Philippinas, may have all manner
of encouragement, rest and recreations becoming their Professions, whilst they
do abide in America, and may not be disheartened by those that live about
Mexico, (who do truly envy all that pass that way to Asia) the Friars and
Jesuits have purchased for their Missions houses of Recreation among the
Gardens, which are exempted from the power and command of the Superiors of
Mexico, and are subordinate unto the Government of the Provincials of
Philippinas, who send from thence their substitute Vicars to rule, and to look
to the forementioned houses and Gardens. To the Dominicans belonged this house
called St. Iacintbo, whither we were carried, and where we did abide near
five months, having all things provided that were fit and necessary for our
Recreations, and for our better encouragement to a second voyage by Sea. The
Gardens belonging to this house might be of fifteen Acres of ground, divided
into shady walks under the Orange and Lemmon trees; there we had the
Pomegranates, Figs, and Grapes in abundance, with the Plantin, Sapotte,
Chicosapotte, Pine-fruit, and all other fruits that were to be found in
Mexico. The Herbs and Salets, and great number of Spanish Cardoes which were
sold out, brought in a great Rent yearly; for every day there was a Cart
attended to be filled and sent to the Market of Mexico; and this not at
seasons of the year, as herein England and other parts of Europe, but at all
times and seasons, both Winter and Summer, there being no difference of heat,
cold, frosts, and snow, as with us; but the same temper all the whole year, the
Winter differing only from the Summer by the rain that falls, and not by
excessive frosts that nip. This we enjoyed without doors; but within we had
all sorts and varieties both of fish and flesh. What most we wondered at, was
the abundance of Sweetmeats; and especially of Conserves that were provided
for us; for to everyone of us during the time of our abode there, was brought
on Monday morning half a dozen Boxes of Conserve of Quinces, and other fruits,
besides our Biskets, to stay our stomachs in the mornings and at other times
of the day; for in our stomachs we found a great difference between Spain and
that Country. For in Spain and other parts of Europe a man's stomach will hold
out from meal to meal, and one meal here of good cheer will nourish and
cherish the stomach four and twenty hours; But in Mexico and other parts of
America we found that two or three hours after a good meal of three or four
several dishes of Mutton, Veale or Beef, Kid, Turkies, or other Fowls, our
stomachs would be ready to faint, and so we were feign to support them with
either a cup of Chocolatte, or a bit of Conserve or Biscuit, which for that
purpose was allowed us in great abundance. This seemed to me so strange,
(whereas the meat seemed as fat and hearty, excepting the Beef, as ours in
Europe) that I for some satisfaction presently had recourse to a Doctor of
Physic; who cleared my doubt with this answer, That though the meat we fed on
was as fair to look on, as in Spain; yet the substance and nourishment in it
came far short of it, by reason of the pasture, which is dryer and has not
the change of springs which the pastures of Europe have, but is short and
withers soon away. But secondly, he told me that the Climate of those parts
had this effect, to produce a fair show, but little matter or substance. As in
the flesh we fed on; so likewise in all the fruits there, which are most fair
and beautiful to behold, most sweet and luscious to taste, but little inward
virtue or nourishment at all in them, not half that is in Spanish Camuesa, or
English Kentish Pippin. And as in Meat, and fruit there is this inward and
hidden deceit, so likewise the same is to be found in the people that are
borne and bred there, who make fair outward shows, but are inwardly false and
hollow hearted. Which I have heard reported much among the Spaniards to have
been the answer of our Queen Elizabeth of England to some that presented unto
her of the fruits of America, that surely where those fruits grew, the women
were light, and all the people hollow and false hearted. But further reasons I
omit to search into for this; of experience only I write, which taught me that
little substance and virtue is in the great abundance and variety of food which
there is enjoyed, our stomachs witnessing this truth, which ever and anon were
gaping and crying, Feed, feed. Our Conserves therefore and dainties were
plentifully allowed us; and all other encouragements and no occasion denied us
of going to visit Mexico, (which was not two full miles from us) all the while
we abode there. It was a pleasant walk for us to go out in the morning, and
to spend all the day in the City and come home at night; our way lying by
Arches made of stone, three miles long to convey the water from Chapultepec
unto the City. Take therefore, gentle Reader, from me what for the space of
five months I could learn concerning it in former and present times. The
situation of this City is much like that of Venice; but only differs in this,
that Venice is built upon the Seawater, and Mexico upon a lake, which seeming
one, indeed is two; one part whereof is standing water; the other ebbeth and
flows according to the wind that blows. That part which stands, is
wholesome, good, and sweet, and yields store of small fish. That part which
ebbeth and flows, is of saltish, bitter, and pestiferous water, yielding no
kind of fish, small or great. The sweet water stands higher then the other,
and falls into it, and reverteth not backward, as some conceive it does. The
salt Lake contains fifteen miles in breadth, and fifteen in length, and more
then five and forty in Circuit; and the Lake of sweet water contains even as
much; in such sort that the whole Lake contains much about a hundred miles.
The Spaniards are divided in opinions concerning this water and the springs of
it; some hold that all this water has but one spring out of a great and high
Mountain which stands Southwest within sight of Mexico, and that the cause
that the one part of the Lake is brackish or saltish, is that the bottom or
ground is all salt; But however this opinion be true or false, certain it is
and by experience I can witness that of that part of the salt water great
quantity of Salt is daily made, and is part of the great Trading of that City
into other parts of the Country, nay it is sent part of it to the Philippina
Islands. Others say that this Lake has two springs, and that the fresh water
springs out of that Mountain which stands Southwest from Mexico, and the
salt brakish water springs out of other high Mountains which stand more
Northwest; But these give no reason for the saltness of it, without it be the
agitation of it in the ebbing and flowing; which not being with tides like the
Sea, but with the winds only (which indeed make it as stormy sometimes as is
the Sea) why may not the winds produce the same effect in the fresh water Lake?
I think rather, if it spring from a different spring from that from whence
springs the fresh water, the brackishnesse and saltishnesse of it may proceed
from some brackish and sulphurous minerals through which it passes in those
Mountains. For by experience I know the like in the Province of Guatemala,
whereby a Town called Amatitan, there is a standing Lake of water not
altogether sweet and fresh, but a little brackish, which certainly has its
spring from a fiery Mountain called there a Vulcan, (whose burning proceeds
from the Mine^ of brimstone that are within it) from whence spring near the
same Town likewise two or three springs of exceeding hot water, which are
resorted to for wholesome bathes, as coming through a sulphurous mine, and yet
the standing Lake proceeding from the same Mountain is of that quality that
makes it the ground about it salt, and and especially in the mornings the
people go to gather up the salt which lies upon the ground by the water side
like unto a hoary frost. But thirdly, others concieve that that part of the
Lake of Mexico which is saltish and brackish comes through the earth from the
North Sea* and though springs of water which come from the Sea lose their
brackishnesse through the earth, yet this may keep some brackishnesse by
reason of the minerals, which are many in those parts; or by reason of the
great, wide and open concavities of those mountains, which being very hollow
within (as we find by experience of the Earthquakes which are more frequent
there then hereby reason of the wind that gets into those concavities, and
so shake the earth to get out) give no way to the water to sweeten through the
earth, or to lose all that saltness which it brought with it from the Sea. But
whatsoever the true reason be, there is not the like Lake known of sweet and
saltish water, one part breeding fish, the other breeding none at all. This
Lake had formerly some fourscore Towns, some say more, situated round about
it; many of them containing five thousand households, and some ten thousand, yea
and Tezcuco (as I have said before) was as big as Mexico. But when I was
there, there might be thirty Towns and Villages about it, and scarce any of
above five hundred housholdes between Spaniards and Indians; such has been
the hard usage of the Spaniards toward them, that they have even almost
consumed that poor Nation. Nay two years before I came from those parts, which
were the years of 1635. and 1636. I was credibly informed that a million of
Indians life's had been lost in an endeavor of the Spaniards to turn the water
of the Lake another way from the City, which was performed by cutting away
through the Mountains, for to avoid the great inundations that Mexico was
subject unto, and especially for that the year 1634. the waters grew so high
that they threatened destruction to all the City, ruinating a great part, and
coming into the Churches that stood in the highest part of it, in so much that
the people used commonly boats and Canoa's from house to house. And most of the
Indians that lived about the Lake were employed to strive against this strong
Element of water, which has been the undoing of many poor wretches, but
especially of these thirty Towns and Villages that bordered near upon the Lake;
which now by that great work is further from the houses of the City; and has a
passage made another way, though it was thought it would* not long continue,
but would find again its old course toward Mexico. This City when Cortez
first entered into it, (was as some say) of sixty, but more probably it is
reported to have been of fourscore thousand houses. Montezuma his palace was
very great, large and beautiful, which in the Indian language was named Tepac;
and that had twenty doors or gates, which had their outcoming into the common
streets. It had three Courts; and in the one stood a fair Fountain, many
hals, and a hundred chambers of three and twenty, and thirty foot long, an
hundred bathes, and hot houses; and all this without nails, yet very good
workmanship. The walls were made of Masons work, and wrought of Marble, Iaspe,
and other black stone, with veins of red, like unto Rubies and other stones
which glistered very fair; the roofs were wrought of timber, and curiously
carved, being of Cedar, Cypres, and Pine tree; the Chambers were painted and
hung with cloth of Cotton, and of Coneys hair and feathers. The beds only
were unseeming this great s^ate, very poor and of no value, such as to this
day the best and richest Indians use; for they wear nothing but mantles laid
upon mattes, or upon hey, or else mattes alone. Within this Palace lived a
thousand women, nay some affirm three thousand, reckoning gentlewomen,
servants and slaves, all together; But the most were principal Indians
daughters; of whom Montezuma took for himself those that liked him best, and
the others he gave in marriage to gentlemen his servants. It is credibly
reported among the Spaniards that he had at one time a hundred and fifty women
his wives with child, who commonly took medicines to cast their creatures,
because they knew that they should not inherit the State; and these had many
old women to guard them, for no man was permitted to look upon them. Besides
this Tepac, which signifies, Palace, Montezuma had yet in Mexico another house
with very curious lodgings and fair Galleries, built upon pillars of ^aspe,
which looked toward a goodly Garden, in the which there were at least a dozen
Ponds, some of salt water for Sea fowls, and others of fresh water for River
fowls and Lake fowls, which Ponds were devised with Sl^ to empty and to fill
at pleasure for the cleanness of the Fowls feathers; and these Fowls are
said to have been so many in number, that the Ponds could scarcely hold them,
and of such several sorts, and of such strange and various colored feathers,
that the most of them the Spaniards knew not, nor had at any time seen the
like. There did belong to that house above three hundred persons of service,
who had their several charge concerning these Fowls; some had care to cleanse
the Ponds; others were appointed to fish for bait; others served them with
meat; and to every kind of foul they gave such bait as they were wont to feed
of in the fields or rivers; others did trim their feathers; others had care to
look to their eggs; others to set them abrood; and the principallest office was
to pluck the feathers; for of them were made rich mantles, tapistry, targets,
tuffes of feathers, and many other things wrought with gold and silver.

Besides this house, Montezums had yet another house within Mexico, appointed
only for hawking fowls, and fowls of rapine. In which house there were many
high Halls, wherein were kept men, women, and children, such as were dwarfes,
crook*backs or any monstrous persons, and with them such as were born white of
color, which did very seldom happen; nay some would deform their children on
purpose to have them carried to the Kings house, to help to set forth his
greatness by their deformity. In the lower Halls of this house there were
Cages for fowl^ of rapine of all sorts, as Hawks, Kites, Boyters (which are
very many in those parts) and of the Hawks near a dozen sundry kinds of them.
This house had for daily allowance five hundred Turkey cocks, and three hundred
men of service, besides the Falconers and Hunters, which some say were above a
thousand men. The Hunters were maintained in that house, because of the
ravenous beasts which were also kept in the lower Halls in great cages made of
timber, wherein were kept in some Lions, in other Tygres, in other Ownzes, in
other Wolves; in conclusion, there was no fou^-footed beast that wanted there,
only to the effect, that the mighty Montezuma might say that he had such things
in his house; and all were fed daily with Turkey cocks, Dear, Dogs, and such
like. There were also in another Hall great earthen vessels, some with earth,
and some with water, wherein were Snakes, as gross as a man's thigh, Vipers,
Crocodiles which they call Cay^anes, of twenty foot long with scales and head
like a Dragon; besides many other smaller Lisarts and other venomous beasts and
Serpents, as well of the water as of the land. To these Snakes and the other
venomous beasts they usually gave the blood of men sacrificed to feed them.
Others say they gave unto them man's flesh, which the great Lisarts, or (...)
eat very well. But what was wonderful to behold, horrid to see, hideous to
hear in this house, was the Officers daily occupations about these beasts, the
floor with blood like a gelly, stinking like a slaughterhouse, and the roaring
of the lio^s* the fearful hissi^g of the Snakes and Adders, the doleful
howling and barking of the Wolves, the sorrowful yelling of the Ownzes and
Tigres, when they would have meat. And yet in this place, which in the night
season seemed a (...) of Hell, and a dwelling place of the Devil, could a
heathen Prince pray unto his Gods and idols* for n^r to this Hall was another
of a hundred and fifty foot long and thirty foot broad, where was a chapel
with the roof of silver and gold in lea^e wainscotted and de^ed with great
store of pearl and stone, as Aga^, Cornerines, Emeralds, Rubies, and diverse
other sorts, and this was the Oratory where Montezuma prayed in the night
season, and in that chapel the Devil did appear unto him, and gave him
answer according to his prayers, which as they were uttered among so many ^gly
and (...) beasts, and with the noise of them which represented Hell it self,
were fit^ed for a Devils answer. He had also his Armoury, wherein was great
^ore of all kind of such Ammunition which they used in their wars, a^ Bows,
Arrows, Slings, Lances, Darts, Club^, Swords and bucklers, and gallant
Targets more trim then strong, and all made of wood, gilt or covered with
leather. The wood whereof they made (...) and Targets was very hard and strong;
and at their arrows end^ they (...) little piece of flint-stone, or a piece of
a fish-bone called Libi^, which was so venomous, that if any were hurt with it,
and the head r^ined in the w^nd, it so (...) that it was almost incurable.
Their Swords were of wood, and the edge t^f was flint-stone, enclosed or joined
into a st^ffe* and with these swords they ^t spears, (...) and a Horses neck
at a blow, and could makedont^ into iron, which (...) ^ ^ing impossible and
incredible. These (...) were joined into the st^ffes (...) a certain kind of
glue, which was made of a root called (...), and (...), which is a ^ind (...)
strong sand, whereof they made a (...), and after k^ded i^ (...) blood of
(...), or Rear mice and other ^owle, which did glue so strong, that (...)
leaved again; and of these M^ had in (...) house of Armo^ great (...). (...)
besides these houses it is wonderful ^o relate, yet may others which that
(...) heathen Emperor had for his only (...) of medicinal herbs, sweet
flowers, and trees of delectable savor. But of one garden more especially it
is said, that in it there were a thousand personages made, and wrought
artificially of leaves and flowers. And Montezuma would not permit that in this
garden should be any kind of Pot Herbs, or things to be sold, saying that it
did not appertain to Kings to have things of profit among their delights and
pleasures, for that such did appertain to Merchants. Yet out of Mexico he had
Orchards with many and sundry fruits; and likewise pleasant houses in woods and
forests, of great compass, environed with water, in the which he had
fountains, rivers, ponds with fish, rocks and coverts where were Hearts,
Bucks, Hares, Foxes, Wolves and such like, whither he himself seldom went;
but the Lords of Mexico used to go to sport themselves in them. Such and so
many were the houses of Montezuma; wherein few Kings were equal with him. He
had daily attending upon him in his privy guard six hundred noblemen and
gentlemen, and each of them three or four servants, and some had twenty
servants or more according to their estate; and the most credible report goes,
that in this manner he had three thousand men attendants in his Court, all
which were fed in his house of the meat that came from his table. There were in
those times under the Mexicall empire three thousand Lords of Towns, who had
many vassals; but more especially there were thirty of high estate, who were
able to make each of them a hundred thousand men of war. And all these noble
men did abide in Mexico, certain time of the year in the Court of Montezuma,
and could not depart from thence without especial license of the Emperor,
leaving each of them a son or brother behind them for security of rebellion;
and for this cause they had generally houses in the City; such and so great was
the Court of Montezuma. Moreover he spent nothing in the buildings of all these
his houses, for he had certain Towns that paid no other tribute, but only to
work and repair continually his houses at their own proper cost, and paid all
kind of workmen, carrying upon their backs, or drawning in sleds stone, lyme,
timber, water, and all other necessaries for the work. Likewise they were
bound to provide all the wood that should be spent in the Court, which was five
hundred men's burdens, and some days in the winter much more. But especially
for the Emperors chimneys they brought the bark of Oak trees, which was
esteemed for the light. Thus was that great City formerly illustrated with a
mighty Monarch, his houses, and attendants. There were then also in Mexico
three sorts of streets, very broad and fair; the one sort was only of water,
with many bridges, another sort of only earth, and the third of earth and
water, the one half being firm ground to walk upon, and the other half for
boats to bring provision to the City; the most part of the houses had two
doors, the one toward the Cawsey, and the other toward the water, at the which
they took boat to go whither they list. But this water (though so near to the
houses) being not good to drink, there is other water fresh and sweet brought
by conduit to Mexico, from a place called Chapultepec three miles distant from
the City, which springs out of a little hill, at the foot whereof stood
formerly two statues, or images wrought in stone, with their Targets and
Lances, the one of Montezuma, the other of Axaiaca his father. The water is
brought from thence to this day in two pipes built upon Arches of brick and
stone like a fair bridge; and when the one pipe is foul, then all the water is
conveyed into the other, till the first be made clean. From this fountain all
the whole City is provided, and the Watermen go selling the same water from
street to street, some in little boats, others with earthen Tankards upon Mules
or Asses backs. The chief and principal division of this City when the
Spaniards first conquered it, was into two streets, the one was called
Tlatelulc^, that is to say, a little Island, and the other Mexico, where (...)
his dwelling and Court was, signifying in the language a spring. And because of
the Kings palace there, the whole City was named Mexico. But the old and first
name of the City according to some Histories was Tenuchtitlan, which signifies
fruit out of a stone, being a compounded name of T^tl, which in the language is
stone, and (...), which is a sweet fruit called generally in Cuba, and all
other parts of A^rica by the Spaniard^, Tun^; the name of the tree whereon this
fruit grows is called Nepal. And when this City begun to be founded it was
placed near unto a ^reat stone that stood in the midst of the lake, at the foot
whereof grew one of these Nepal trees; which is the reason why Mexico gives
for arms and device the foot of a Nepal tree springing from a stone according
to the first name of the City Tenuchtlitan. But others do affirm that this
City has the name of the first founder of it, called Tenuch, the second son
of Iztacmixc^atl, whose sons and descendents did first inhabit all that part
of America, which is now called new Spain. Mexico is as much as to say a spring
or fountain, according to the property of the vowell or speech, from whence
some judge that City to be so named. But others do affirm that Mexico has
its name from a more ancient time, whose first founders were called Mexiti, for
unto this day the Indian dwellers in one street of this City are called of
Mexica. And that these Mexiti took name of their principal idol called
Mexitli, who was in as great veneration as Vitzilopuchtli, God of the war.
But others affirm (and this opinion is most received among the Spaniards) that
the Mexicans first were the inhabitants of nova Galicia; from whence they made
a violent irruption Anno Domini 720. and lingered in diverse places till the
year 902. when under the leading of Mexi their chief Captain they built this
City, and called it after the name of their General. They were in all seven
Tribes, which ruled long in an Aristocraticall state; till the most puissant of
the Tribes called Navatalca^, elected a King to whom they submitted themselves.
The first King that was thus elected, was called Vitzilovitli; the second,
Acamopitzli; the third, Chimalpapoca; the fourth, Izchoalt; the fifth,
Montezuma the first; the sixth, Acacis; the seventh, Axaiaca; the eighth,
Antzlol; the ninth, Montezuma the second, who reigned when Cortez came first;
the tenth, was Quahutimoc, who lost Mexico, and in whom ended that Indian
Empire. The most fortunate of these Kings was Izchoalt, who by his cousin
Tlacacllec, subdued the other six Tribes, and brought them under the Mexican
Kings. And after the death of Izchoalt, Tlacacllec was by the first electours
(which were six in number) chosen King, as a man of whose virtue they had
formerly made try all. But he very nobly refused it, saying that it was more
convenient for the Commonwealth that another should be King, and that (...)
should execute that which was otherwise more fit for the necessity of the
State, then to lay the whole burden upon his back; and that without being
King, he would not leave to labor for the public as well as if he were King.
Upon this generous refusal they made choice of Montezuma the first. The most
unhappy Kings of that nation (at whose birth could not but ^e some dysastrous
aspect of the Planets) were the two last Montezuma the second, and Quahutimoc,
who were both vanquished by Ferdinando Cortez, who took Montezuma prisoner out
of his own palace, and with fair words and language carried him to his lodging
in Mexico; and kept him there, knocking a pair of gyves on his legs, until
the execution of Qualpopoca Lord of Nahutlan, now called Almeria (who was to be
burnt for killing nine Spaniards) was past. But this imprisonment of their
Emperor stirred up the hearts of all the Mexicans to conspire against Cortez
and the Spaniards, against whom they fought a most fierce and bloody battle
two or three days together, crying out for their Emperor, and threatening them
with the cruellest death that ever man suffered. Whereupon Cortez desired
Montezuma to go up into the Sotie of his house which they were battering with
stones, and to command his subjects to cease from their heat and fury; who at
Cortez his request went up and leaned over the wall to talk with them, and
beginning to speak unto them, they threw so many stones out of the street,
houses, and windows, that one happened to hit Montezuma on the temples of his
head, with which blow he fell down dead to the ground; and this was his end,
even at the hands of his own subjects and vassals against their wills, in the
City of his greatest glory, and in the power and custody of a forain and
strange nation. The Indians affirm that he was of the greatest blood of all his
lineage, and the greatest King in estate that ever was in Mexico. And from hence
it may very well be noted, that when Kingdoms do most flourish, then are they
nighest to a change, or else to change their Lord, as does appear in this
History of Montezuma, whose great glory and majesty presaged the downfall of
that City and people; who though after the death of Montezuma they made
Quahutimoc their Emperor, and persisting in their furious battery against
Cortez his palace, caused him and all his Spaniards to fly out of Mexico; yet
having strengthened themselves again in Tlaxcallan; and prepared sixteen, or
as others say, eighteen Vergantines for the lake, they soon after besieged
Mexico so by water and land, that the Citizens were in great necessity, and so
many dead with hunger and sickness, that there were heaps of dead bodies in
the houses, only to keep close their extreme misery; who would not yield even
when they saw their King Quahutimoc his fair houses burned, and the greatest
part of their City consumed with fire and beaten down plain with the ground,
so long as they could enjoy any one street, Tower, or Temple to defend
themselves and oppose the Spaniards; who after many fierce and bloody fights by
land and with their boats by water having won the chief Market place and
most of the City, as they went walking in the streets found heaps of dead
bodies in the houses, streets, and in the water, and the very barks of trees
and roots gnawne by the hungry creatures, and the men so lean and yellow that
it was a pitiful sight to behold. And with this Cortez yet required them to
yield; but they although they were so lean of body were strong in heart, and
answered that he should not speak of any friendship to them, nor yet hope of
their spoil, for when no fortune would favor them, then they would either
burn their treasure, or throw it into the Lake, where they should never profit
thereby, and that they would fight while one alone should remain alive.

Cortez desirous to see what remained of the City to win, went up into a high
Tower, and having well viewed the City, he judged that of eight parts one
remained yet to win. And assaulting the same, the sorrowful Citizens bewailing
their unfortunate fate and destiny, beseeching the Spaniards to make an end,
and to kill them all out of hand; others standing at the brim of the water
near unto a drawbridge cried out, Oh Captain Cortez, seeing that thou art the
Child of the Sun, why do thou not entreat the Sun thy Father to make an end
of us? Oh thou Sun that can go round about the World in a day and a night,
we pray thee make an end of us and take us out of this miserable life, for we
desire death to go and rest with our God Quetcavatl^ who tarrieth for us.
Cortez seeing the great extremity that these poor wretched people were in,
thinking now that they would yield unto him, sent a message to Quahutimo^*
desiring him to consider his Subjects great extremity, which yet might be
greater if he yielded not to Peace. But when the stubborn King heard this
embassage, he was so moved with ire and choler, that forthwith he commanded
Cortez his Ambassador to be sacrificed, and gave the rest of the Spaniards
that went with him for answer blows with stones, staves and Arrows, saying
that they desired death and no Peace. Whereupon Cortez seeing the King so
stubborn and refractory after so much slaughter and misery of his subjects,
after so many Combats and skirmishes made with the loss of almost all the
City, sent forthwith Sandoval with his Vergantines one way, and went himself
another combating the houses and forts that yet remained, where he found small
resistance, so that he might do what he pleased. One would have thought
there had not been five thousand left in all the City seeing the heaps of dead
bodies that lay about the streets and in the houses, and yet such was this last
combat, that there were that day slain and taken prisoners forty thousand
persons. The lamentable cry and mourning of the women and children, would have
made a strong heart relent, the stench also of the dead bodies was wonderful
noisome. That night Cortez purposed to make an end the next day of the Wars;
and Quahutimoc pretended to fly, and for that purpose had enbarked himself in
a Canoa of twenty Oars. When the day appeared, Cortez with his men, and four
Pieces of Ordnance came to the corner where those that yet remained were shut
up as Cattle in a Pound. He gave order to Sandoval and Alvarado what they
should do, which was to be ready with their Vergantines, and to watch the
coming out of the Canoa's, which were hidden betwixt certain houses, and
especially to have regard unto the Kings person, and not to hurt him, but to
take him alive. He commanded the residue of his men to force the Mexican
boats to go out, and he himself went up into a Tower, inquiring for the
King, where he found Xihuacoa, Governor and Captain General of the City,
who would in no wise yield himself. Then came out of the City a great multitude
of old folks, men, women and children to take boat. The throng was so great
with have to enter the Canoa's, that many by that means were drowned (...) the
Lake. Cortez required his men not to kill those miserable creatures; But yet
(...) could not stay the Indians his friends of Tlaxcallan, and other places,
who slew and sacrificed above fifteen thousand. The men of War stood in the
house tops, and Zoties beholding their perdition. All the Nobility of Mexico
were enbarked with the King. Then Cortez gave sign with the shot of a
hand-Gunne, that his Captains should be in a readiness, so that in short
space they wan fully and wholly the great City of Mexico. The Vergantines
likewise brake in among the Fleet of boats without any resistance, and
presently beat down Quahutimoc his Royal Standard. Garcia Holguin who was a
Captain of one of the Vergantines, espied a great Canoa of twenty Oars deep
laden with men, who (being by one of his prisoners informed that the King was
in it) gave chase to it and presently overtooke it. When Quahutimoc, who stood
upon the Puppe of his Canoa ready to fight, saw the Spaniards Crossebowes bent
to shoot, and many drawn swords against him, he yielded himself, declaring
that he was King. Garcia Holguin being a glad man of such a prisoner took him
and carried him unto Cortez, who received him very respectfully. But when
Quahutimoc came near unto him, he laid his hand upon Cortez his dagger,
saying, I have done all my best and possible endeavor to defend my self and my
Vassals according to my duty, hoping not to have come to this estate and place
where now I stand; and considering that you may do with me what you please, I
beseech you to kill me, and that is my only request. Cortez comforted him
with fair words, giving him hope of life; and took him up into a Zotie,
requiring him to command his Subjects that yet held out, to yield and render
themselves. Which Quahutimoc presently performed; and at that time after so
many Prisoners taken, and so many thousands slain and starved, there were about
threescore and ten thousand persons, who seeing their Prince a Prisoner, threw
down their weapons and submitted themselves. Thus did Hernando Cortez win the
famous and stately City of Mexico, on the 13. day of August, Anno Dom. 1521. In
remembrance whereof every year on that day they make in Mexico a sumptuous
feast and solemn procession, wherein is carried the Standard Royal, with the
which the City was won. In the loss of it was as much to be observed as
Antiquity can produce of any Victory; wherein was one Emperor the greatest
that ever was in those parts slain; and another as great a Warrier as ever
America had known, taken Prisoner. The Siege endured from the time the
Vergantines came from Tlaxcallan three months, and therein were on Cortez his
side near 200000 Indians, who daily increased and came in to help him, 900
Spaniards; fourscore horses only, seventeen or eighteen Pieces of Ordnance;
sixteen or as some say eighteen Vergantines, and at least 6000 Canoa's. In this
Siege were slain fifty Spaniards only and six horses, and not above eight
thousand of the Indians Cortez his friends. And on the Mexicans side were
slain at least a hundred and twenty thousand Indians, besides those that died
with hunger and Pestilence. At the defense of the City were all the Nobility,
by reason whereof many of them were slain. The multitude of people in the City
was so great, that they were constrained to eat little, to drink salt water,
and to sleep among the dead bodies, where was a horrible stench; and for these
causes the disease of Pestilence fell among them, and thereof died an infinite
number. Whereupon is to be considered their valor, and steadfast
determination; for although they were afflicted with such hunger that they were
driven to eat boughs, rindes of trees, and to drink salt water, yet would they
not yield themselves. And here also is to be noted that although the Mexicans
did eat man's flesh, yet they did eat none but such as were their enemies; for
had they eaten one another and their own children, there would not so many
have died with hunger. The Mexican women were highly commended, not only
because they abode with their husbands and fathers, but also for the great
pains they took with the sick and wounded persons; yea and also they labored
in making slings, cutting stones fit for the same, and throwing stones from the
Zoties; for therein they did as much hurt as their men. The City was yielded to
the spoil, and the Spaniards took the gold, plate and feathers, the Indian
friends had all the rest of cloth and other stuff. Thus was that famous City
ruinated, and burnt by the Spaniards, and the power of that Nation brought
under the Spanish subjection. Cortez having found the air of that City very
temperate and pleasant for man's life, and the situation commodiou^, thought
presently of rebuilding it, and of making it the chief Seat of Justice and
Court for all that Country. But before I come to speak of it as rebuilded and
now flourishing, I must add unto what has been said of Montezuma his former
state and houses in it, the greatness of the Market place and Temple, which
was in it, when the Spaniards ruined and destroyed it. The convenience of the
Lake about this City gave encouragement to the Mexicans to set apart a most
spacious Market place, whither all the Country about might resort to buy,
exchange and sell; which was the more easy for them by reason of the abundance
of Boats which were made only for such Trafique. In this great lake there
were at that time above two hundred thousand of these little boats, which the
Indians call Aca^es, and the Spaniards call them Canoa's, wrought like a
kneading trough, some bigger then others according to the greatness of the
body of the tree, whereof they are made. And where I number two hundred
thousand of these boats, I speak of the least, for Mexico alone had above fifty
thousand ordinarily to carry and bring unto the City victual, provision, and
passengers, so that on the market-daies all the streets of water were full of
them. The Market is called in the Indian tongue Tlanquiz^li; every parish had
his Market place to buy and sell in; but Mexico and Tlatelul^o only, which are
the chiefest Cities, had great Fayres and places fit for the same; and
especially Mexico had one place, where most days in the year was buying and
selling; but every fourth day was the great Market ordinarily. This place was
wide and large compassed about with doors, and was so great that a hundred
thousand persons came thither to chop and change, as a City most principal in
all that region. Every occupation and kind of merchandise had his proper place
appointed, which no other might by any means occupy or disturb. Likewise
pesterous wares had their place accordingly, such as stone, timber, lyme,
brick and all such kind of stuff unwrought, being necessary to build withal.
Also mattes both fine and course, of sundry workmanship; also coals, wood, and
all sorts of earthen ve^sells, glazed and painted very curiously. Dear skins
both raw and tanned in hair and without hair, of many colors, for Shoemakers,
for bucklers, Targets, Jerkins, and lining of wooden corslets; also skins of
other beasts, and foul feathers ready dressed of all sorts. The colors and
strangeness thereof was a thing to behold. The richest merchandise was salt,
and mantles of Cotton wool of diverse colors, both great and small; some for
beds, other for garments and clothing, other for Tapistry to hang houses; other
Cotton-cloth was wont to be sold there for linen drawers (which to this day
the Indians use) for shirts, table cloths, towels, and such like things. There
were also mantles made of the leaves of a tree called M^l, and of the
Palm Tree and Conie-hair, which were well esteemed, being very warm, but the
coverlets made of feathers were the best. They ^old thread there made of
Conie-haire, and also skains of other thread of all colors. But the great store
of poultrey which was brought to that Market was strange to see, and the uses
they sold and bought them for; for although they did eat the flesh of the fowl,
yet the feathers served for clothing, mixing one sort with another. But the
chief bravery of that market was the place where gold and feathers jointly
wrought were sold; for any thing that was in request, was there lively wrought
in gold and feathers and gallant colors. The Indians were so expert and
perfect in this science, that they would work or make a butter-flie, any wild
beast, trees, roses, flowers, (...), roots, or any other thing so lively that
it was a thing mavelous to behold. It happened many times that one of these
workmen in a whole day would eat nothing, only to place one feather in his due
perfection, turning and tos^ing the feather to the light of the sun, into the
shade or dark place to see where was his most natural perfection, and till
his work were finished he would neither eat nor drink. There are few nations
of so much fleame or substance. The art, or science of Goldsmiths among them
was the most curious, and very good workmanship* engraven with tools (...) of
(...) or in mould. They will cast a platter in mould with eight corners, and
every corner of several metal, the one of gold, and the other of silver,
without any kind of solder. They will also ^ound or cast a little cauldron with
loose (...) hanging thereat, as we use to cast a bell; they will also cast in
mould a fish of metal, with one s^ale of silver on his back, and another of
gold; they will make a Parr^t or Popingay of metal, that his tongue shall
shake, and his head move, and his wing^ fl^* they will cast an Ape in mould,
that both hands and feet shall ^irre, and ^old a spindle in his hand seeming to
spin, yea and an apple in his hand as though he would eat it. They have skill
also of Am^ll work and to set any precious stone. But now (...) touching the
market, there was to sell gold, silver, Copper, Lead, Latten, and T^; although
there was but very little of the three last metals mentioned. There (...),
precious (...), diverse and sundry sorts of shelles, and bones, Sponges, and
(...) were. There were also many kind of herbs, roots, and seeds, as well to
b^, as for (...); (...) men, women and children had great knowledge in herb^,
for through poverty and necessity they did s^e them for their (...) help of
(...) and di^. They did spend little among Physicians, although there were some
of that art, and many Apothecaries, who did bring into the market, ointments,
syrups, waters, and other drugs fit for sick persons. They cure all diseases
almost with herbs; yea as much as for to kill lice they have a proper herb for
the purpose. The several kinds of meats to be sold was without number, as
Snakes without head and tail, little dogs gelt, Moules, Rats, Long-wormes,
Lyce, yea and a kind of earth; for at one season in the year they had Nets of
Mayle, with the which they raked up a certain dust that is bred upon the water
of the lake of Mexico, and that is kneaded together like unto oas of the sea.
They gathered much of this and kept it in heaps, and made thereof cakes like
unto brick-bats. And they did not only sell this ware in the Market, but also
sent it abroad to other Fayres and markets afar off; and they did eat this
meal with as good a stomach as we eat cheese; yea and they hold opinion, that
this skumme or fatness of the water is the cause that such great number of
fowl comes to the lake, which in the winter season is infinite. They sold
likewise in this market Venison by quarters or whole, as Does, Hares, Conies,
and Dogs, and many other beasts, which they brought up for the purpose and
took in hunting. The great store of sundry kinds of fruits was mavelous,
which were there sold, both green and ripe. There is a sort as big as an
Almond called Cacao (whereof is the drink called Chocolatte well known now in
Christendom) which is both meat and current money. In these times of the
bigger sort sixscore or sevenscore, and of the lesser sort two hundred are
worth a Spanish Riall, which is sixpence, and with these the Indians buy what
they list; for five, nay for two Cacao's which is a very small part of a Riall,
they do buy fruits and the like. There were diverse kinds of colors to be
sold, which they made of roses, flowers, fruits, barks of trees, and other
things very excellent. All the things recited, and many others which I speak
not of, were sold in this great market, and in every other Market of Mexico;
and all the sellers paid a certain sum for their shops of standings to the
King, as a custom, and they were to be preserved and defended from thieves and
robbers. And for that purpose there went Sergeants or Officers up and down the
market to epsy out malefactors. In the midst of this Market stood a house,
which was to be seen throughout the Fair, and there did sit commonly twelve
ancient men for Judges to dispatch law matters. Their buying and selling was to
change one ware for another, one gave a hen for a bundle of Maiz, others gave
mantles for salt or money which was Cacao. They had measure and strike for all
kind of corn, and other earthen measures for honey and oil, and such wines as
they made of Palme-trees, and other roots and trees. And if any measure were
falsified, they punished the offenders and brake their measures. This was the
civility they had when they were Heathens, for buying and selling. And although
they knew not the true God, but worshipped Idols; yet to their Idols and to the
Devil they dedicated Temples and places of worship, wherein they used those
sacrifice which David speaks of in the 106. Ps. 37. saying, They sacrificed
their sons, and their daughters unto Devils.

The Temple is called in the Mexican language Teucalli, which is a compound
word of Teutl, which signifies God, and Calli, which signifies a house. There
were in Mexico many parish Churches with towers, wherein were Chapels and
Altars where the Images and Idols did stand. All their Temples were of one
fashion* the like I believe was never seen nor heard of. And therefore it shall
be now sufficient to describe the chief and greatest Temple, which was as
their Cathedral Church. This Temple was square, and did contain every way as
much ground as a Crosse-bow can reach level. It was made of stone, with four
doors that abutted upon the three Cawseys, and upon another part of the City
that had no Cawsey, but a fair street. In the midst of this Quadern stood a
mount of earth and stone square likewise, and fifty fadome long every way,
built upward like unto a pyramide of Egypt, saving that the top was not
sharp, but plain and flat, and ten fadom square. Upon the West side were steps
up to the top, in number a hundred and fourteen, which being so many, high and
made of good stone, did seem a beautiful thing. It was a strange sight to
behold the Priests, some going up, and some down with ceremonies, or with men
to be sacrificed. Upon the top of this Temple were two great Altars, a good
space distant the one from the other, and so nigh the edge or brimme of the
wall, that scarcely a man might go behind them at pleasure. The one Altar stood
on the right hand, and the other on the left* they were but of five foot high;
each of them had the back part made of stone, painted with monstrous and foul
figures. The Chapel was fair and well wrought of Masons work and timber;
every Chapel had three lo^ one above another, sustained upon pillars, and
with the height thereof it showed like unto a fair tower, and beautified ^he
City a^arre off. From thence a man might see all the City and Towns round about
the lake, which was undoubtedly a goodly prospect. And because Cortez and his
company should see the beauty thereof, Montezuma himself (to ma^e the more
ostentation of his greatness and the Majesty of his Court) carried the first
Spaniards thither, and showed them all the order of the Temple, even from the
foot to the top. There was a certain plot or space for the Idol Priests to
celebrate their service without disturbance of any. Their general prayers were
made toward the rising of the sun; upon each Altar stood a great Idol.

Besides this tower which stood upon the Pyramide, there were forty towers
great and small belonging to other little Temples which stood in the same
circuit* the which although they were of the same making, yet their prospect
was not Westward, but other waie^, because there should be a difference
betwixt the great Temple and them. Some of these Temples were bigger then
others, and every one of a several God; among the which there was one round
Temple dedicated to the God of the air called Quecalcovatl; for even as the
air goes round about the heaven^, even for that consideration they made his
Temple round. The entrance of that Temple had a door made like unto the mouth
of a Serpent, and was painted with foul and divellish gestures, with great
teeth and gummes wroug^, which was a sight to fear those that should enter in
thereat, and especially the Christians unto whom it represented hell it self
with that ugly face and monstrous ^eeth. There were other Teucallies in the
City, that had the ascending up by steps in three places; and all these Temples
had houses by themselves with all service belonging to them, and Priests, and
particular Gods. And from this manner of these Heath^ Temples, and Altars made
with steps, we may observe how like unto them is now the Church of Rome, which
as it confesses that there never was a Church without a visible sacrifice, and
therefore teaches that Christ's body must be broken upon their Altars, and
distributed not only as a sacrament to the people, but as a sacrifice in the
Priests hands, differing only that the sacrifices of Sheep and Oxen in the old
law, and these of the Heathens were bloody sacrifices, but theirs of Christ's
body they call (...) Sacrifici^m, an unbloody sacrifice; so likewise in the
buildings of their Churches with several Towers and Altars and Chapels
dedicated to several Saints they seem to have taken from the very Heathens;
but especially in the many steps whereby they ascend up to their Altars, they
resemble these, forgetting Gods words in Exodus 20. 26. saying, Neither s^lt
thou go up by steps unto mine Altar, that thy nakedness be not discovered
thereon. And lastly in their houses and cloisters joining to their Churches for
the service of them, being full of idolatrous Priests and Friars consecrated
for their service, they seem likewise to have borrowed that fancy of Convents,
Abbeys, and Priories from the very Heathens, who (as presently I shall show)
had near joining to this great Temple, houses containing thousands of Priests,
with yearly rents and revenues, like those of Romes Abbeys, and Cloisters. At
every door of this great Temple of Mexico stood a large hall, and goodly
lodgings both high and low round about, which houses were common Armories for
the City. The Heathens it seems had so much understanding as to know that the
force and strength of a Town, City, or Country is the Temple, and therefore
they placed there their storehouse of munition.

They had other dark houses full of Idols great and small, wrought of sundry
metal^, which were all bathed and washed with blood, and did show very black
through their daily sprinkling and a^ing them with the same, when any man was
sacrificed* yea and the walls were an inch thick with blood, and the ground a
foot thick of it, so that there was a divellish stench. The Priests went daily
into those Oratories, and suffered none other but great personages to enter in.
And when any such went in, they were bound to offer some man to be sacrificed,
that those bloody hangmen and Ministers of the devil might wash their hands in
the blood of those so sacrificed, and might spri^kle their house therewith. For
their service in the Kitchen they had a pond of water, that was filled once a
year, which was brought by the Conduit pipes before mentioned, from the
principal fountain. All the resid^e of the foresaid circuit served for places
to breed fowls, with gardens of herbs and sweet trees, with roses and flowers
for the Altars; and this is also the Church of Romes custom and superstition,
to trim and deck their Saints and Altars with Garlands and Crowns of Roses and
other flowers. Such, so great and strange was this Temple of Mexico, for the
service of the devil, who had deceived those simple Indians. There did reside
(as I said before of Monks and Friars in their Cloisters joining to their
Churches) in this Temple and houses joining to it, continually five thousand
persons, and all these were lodged and had their living there; for that Temple
was mavelous rich, and had diverse Towns only for their maintenance, and
reparation, and were bound to sustain the same always on foot. These Towns
did sow corn, and maintain all those five thousand persons with bread, fruit,
flesh, fish, and firewood as much as they needed, for they spent more firewood
then was spent in the Kings Court. These persons did live like Romes
Abby-lubbers at their hearts ease, as servants and vassals unto the Gods, which
were many; and every God had several ranks and Orders of Priests to serve
him; as the several Saints canonized by the Popes of Rome have under them
distinct Religious Orders of Priests, Dominick has Dominicans, Francis
Franciscans, Benedict Benedictines, Basil Basilians, Bernard Bernardines,
Augustine Augustines, and the like.

The Gods of Mexico (as the Indians reported to the first Spaniards) were two
thousand in number; the chiefest were Vitzilopuchtli, and (...), whose Images
stood highest in the Temple upon the Altars. They were made of stone in full
proportion as big as a Giant. They were covered with a lawne called Nacar;
they were beset with pearls, precious stones, and pieces of gold, wrought like
birds, beasts, fishes, and flowers, adorned with Emeralds, Turquies, Chalcedo^,
and other little fine stones, so that when the lawne was taken away, the Images
seemed very beautiful and glorious to behold. But must I find out Rome still
among these heathens? and will the Papists be angry if I tell them plainly
that what I mislike in these Idolatrous Mexicans, I mislike in them? for do
not they deck and adorn their Idol Saints, as the heathens did Vitzilopuchtli
and Tezcatlipuca? Do not they cover their wooden and stony statues of Saints,
and of the Virgin Mary with fine lawne shirts, and hide them with curtains of
cloth of Gold, and crown them with Crowns of Silver and Gold, and enrich them
with costly and precious Jewels and Diamonds; not considering that they are the
works of their own hands? Ad quid perditio^aec? poterant enim venundari, and
dari pauperibus. These two Indian Idols had for a girdle great snakes of gold,
and for collars or chains about their necks ten hearts of men made of gold;
and each of them had a counterfeit Visor with eyes of glass, and in their
necks Death painted. These two Gods were brethren, for Tezcatlipuca was the God
of Providence, and Vitzip^luchtli, God of the Wars; who was worshipped and
feared more then all the rest. There was another God, who had a great Image
placed upon the top of the chapel of Idols, and he was esteemed for a
special and singular God above all the rest. This God was made of all kind of
seeds that grow in that Country, which being ground, they made a certain paste
tempered with childrens blood and Virgins sacrificed, who were opened with
rasors in their breasts, and their hearts taken out, to offer as first fruits
unto the Idol. The Priests consecrate this Idol with great pomp and many
Ceremonies. All the Comarcans and Citizens were present at the Consecration
with great triumph and incredible devotion. After the Consecration many devout
persons came and sticked in the dowy Image precious stones, wedges of gold, and
other Jewels. And after all this pomp ended, no secular man might touch that
holy Image; no nor yet come into his Chapel; nay scarcely religious persons,
except they were Tl^caztli, who were Priests of Order. They did ^ew this Image
many times with new dough, taking away the old. And then (like again^ unto the
Papists who think themselves happy with their Saints relics, though rags or
bones) blessed was he that could get one piece of the old rags* or a piece
of the old dough, for the which there was most earnest suites made by the
Soldiers, who thought themselves sure therewith in the Wars. Also at the
Consecration of this Idol, a certain vessel of water was blessed with many
words and ceremonies (peradventure from this heathenish Ceremony came the
superstitious holy water to Rome) and that water was preserved very religiously
at the foot of the Altar, for to consecrate the King when he should be
crowned, and also to bless any Captain General, when he should be elected
for the Wars, with only giving him a draught of that water. And as the Romish
Church makes much of their dead men's skulles and rotten bones, laying them up
in their Churchyards under some arches made for that purpose in the
Churchwalls, even so was it here in Mexico; for without this Temple, and over
against the principal door thereof, a stones cast distant stood a Charnell
house only of dead men's heads, prisoners in Wars and sacrificed with the
knife. This monument was made like unto a Theater, more large then broad,
wrought of lime and stone, with ascending steps; in the walls whereof was
graffed betwixt stone and stone a skull with the teeth outward. At the foot
and head of this Theater, were two towers made only of lime and skulles, the
teeth outward, which having no other stuff in the wall seemed a strange ^ight.
At and upon the top of the Theater were theres^ore and ten poles, standing the
one from the other four or five foot distant, and each of them was full of
s^aves from the foot to the top. Each of these staves had others made fast unto
them, and every one of them had five skulles broched through the temples. When
the Spaniards first entered into Mexico as friends before the death of Montezuma
they visited all these monuments; and in what they have written and transmitted
to posteriry of that City, it is recorded of one Andrew de Tapia, and Gonzalo
de Umbria that one day they did reckon these skulles, and found a hundred
thirty and six thousand skulles on the poles, staves and steps. The other
Towers were replenished out of number; and there were men appointed, that when
one skull fell, to set up another in his place, so that the number might never
want. But all these Towers and Idols were pulled down, and consumed with fire,
when the Spaniards wanne that City. And certainly they had been more renowned
in destroying those Altars of the devil and those Idol Gods, if in their
stead they had not set up new Idols and Saints of stocks and stones, and built
unto them as many more Churches as they found at their coming thither. All
therefore that has been mentioned hitherto of Montezuma his houses and
Gardens, of the spacious Market place, and Temples of that City was utterly
destroyed and brought down to the very ground. But Cortez reedified it again,
not only for the situation and majesty, but also for the name and great fame
thereof. He divided it among the Conquerours, having first taken out places
for Churches, Market places, Town house and other necessary plots to build
houses, profitable for the Commonwealth. He separated the dwellings of the
Spaniards from the Indians, so that now the water passes and makes division
betwixt them. He promised to them that were naturalls of the City of Mexico
p^otts to build upon, inheritance, freedom, and other liberties, and the like
unto all those that would come and inhabit there, which was a means to allure
many thither. He set also at liberty Xihuaco, the General Captain, and made
him chief over the Indians in the City, unto whom he gave a whole street. He
gave likewise another street to Don Pedro Montezuma who was son to Montezuma
the King. All this was done to win the favor of the people. He made other
Gentlemen Seniors of little (...), and streets to build upon, and to inhabit,
and in this order the whole situation was reparted, and the work began with
great joy and diligence. And when the fame was blown abroad that Mexico should
be built again, it was a won^ to ^et the people that resorted thither hearing
of liberty and freedom. The number was so great that in three miles compass
was nothing but people men and women. They labored ^ore and did eat little,
by reason whereof many sickned, and pestilence ensued, whereof died an infinite
number. Their pains was great, for they ^re on their backs, and drew after
them stones, earth, timber, lyme, brick, and all other things necessary in this
sort; And by little and little Mexico was built again with a hundred thousand
houses, more strong and better then the old building was. The Spaniards built
their houses after the Spanish fashion; and Cortez built his house upon the
plot where Montezuma his house ^ood, which renteth now yearly four thousand
ducats, and is called now the Palace of the Marquis Del Valle, the King of
Spain having conferred upon Cortez and his heirs this title from the great
Valley of Guaxaca. This Palace is so stately that (as I have observed before)
seven thousand beams of Cedar Trees were spent in it. They built fair Dockes
covered over with Arches for the Vergantines; which Dockes for a perpetual
memory do remain until this day. They dammed up the streets of water, where
now fair houses stand, so that Mexico is not as it was wont to be, and
especially since the year 1634. the water comes not by far so near the
City as it was wont to come, The Lake sometimes casts out a vapor of stench,
but otherwise it is a wholesome and temperate dwelling, by reason of the
Mountains that stand round about it, and well provided through the fertility
of the Country, and commodity of the Lake. So that now is Mexico one of the
greatest Cities in the World in extention of the situation for Spanish and
Indian houses. Not many years after the Conquest it was the Noblest City in
all India as well in Arms as Policy. There were formerly at the least two
thousand Citizens, that had each of them his horse in his stable with rich
furniture for them, and Arms in readiness. But now since all the Indians
far and near are subdued, and most of them especially about Mexico consumed,
and there is no fear of their rising up any more against the Spaniards, all
arms are forgotten, and the Spaniards live so secure from enemies, that there
is neither Gate, Wall, Bulwark, Platform, Tower, Armory, Ammunition, or
Ordnance to secure and defend the City from a Domestic or foreign enemy; from
the latter they think St. John de Ulhua sufficient and strong enough to secure
them. But for Contractation it is one of the richest Cities in in the World; to
the which by the North Sea comes every year from Spain a Fleet of near
twenty ships laden with the best Commodities not only of Spain but of the most
parts of Christendom. And by the South Sea it enjoys Traffic from all
parts of Peru; and above all it Trades with the East-India's, and from thence
receives the Commodities as well from those parts which are inhabited by
Portingals, as from the Countries of Iapan and China, sending every year two
great Caracas with two smaller Vessels to the Islands of Philippinas, and
having every year a return of such like ships. There is also in Mexico a Mint
house where Money is daily coined; and is brought thither in wedges upon Mules
from the Mines called St. Lewis de Sacatecas, standing fourscore Leagues from
Mexico Northward, and yet from Sacatecas forward have the Spaniards entered
above a hundred Leagues conquering daily Indians, where they discover store of
Mines; and there they have built a City, called Nova Mexico, new Mexico. The
Indians there are great Warriers, and hold the Spaniards hard to it. It is
thought the Spaniard will not be satisfied, until he subdue all the Country
that way, which doubtless reaches to our plantations of Virginia and the rest
being the same continued continent la^d. There is yet more in Mexico, a fair
school, which now is made an University, which the Viceroy Don Antonio De
Mendoza caused to be built. At the rebuilding of this City there was a great
difference betwixt an Inhabitant of Mexico, and a Conqueror; for a Conqueror
was a name of honor, and had lands and rents given him and to his posterity by
the King of Spain, and the Inhabitant or only dweller paid rent for his
house. And this has filled all those parts of America with proud Dons and
Gentlemen to this day; for every one will call himself a descendent from a
Conqueror, though he be as poor as Job; and ask him what is become of his
Estate and fortune, he will answer that fortune has taken it away, which
shall never take away a Don from him. Nay a poor Cobbler, or Carrier that r^ns
about the Country far and near getting his living with half a dozen Mules,
if he be called Mendoza, or Guzman, will swear that he descended from those
Dukes houses in Spain, and that his Grandfather came from thence to Conquer,
and subdued whole Countries to the Crown of Spain, though now fortune have
frowned upon him, and covered his rags with a thredbare Cloak. When Mexico
was rebuilt, and Judges, Aldermen, Attorneys, Town Clerks, Notaries,
Skavengers, and Sergeants with all other Officers necessary for the
Commonweal of a City were appointed, the fame of Cortez and majesty of the
City was blown abroad into far Provinces, by means whereof it was soon
replenished with Indians again, and with Spaniards from Spain, who soon
conquered above four hundred Leagues of Land, being all governed by the
Princely Seat of Mexico. But ^ince that first rebuilding, I may say it is now
rebuilt the second time by Spaniards, who have consumed most of the Indians; so
that now I will not dare to say there are a hundred thousand house^ which soon
after the Conquest were built up, for most of them were of Indians. Now the
Indians that live there, live in the suburb^ of the City, and that situation is
called Guadalupe. In the year 1625. when I went to those parts, this Suburb^
was judged to contain five thousand Inhabitans* But since most of them have
been consumed by the Spaniards hard usage and the work of the Lake. So that
now there may not be above two thousand Inhabitants of mee^e Indians, and a
thousand of such as they call there Mestizos, who are of a mixed nature of
Spaniards and Indians, for many poor Spaniards marry with Indian women, and
others that marry them not but hate their husbands, find many tricks to convey
away an innocent Uriah to enjoy his Bathsheba. The Spaniards daily cosen them
of the small plot of ground where their houses stand, and of three or four
houses of Indians build up one good and fair house after the Spanish fashion
with Gardens and Orchards. And so is almost all Mexico new built with very
fair and spacious houses with Gardens of recreation. Their buildings are with
stone, and brick very strong, but not high, by reason of the many Earthquakes,
which would endanger their houses if they were above three stories high. The
streets are very broad, in the narrowest of them three Coaches may go, and in
the broader six may go in the breadth of them, which makes the City seem a
great deal bigger then it is. In my time it was thought to be of between
thirty and forty thousand Inhabitants Spaniards, who are so proud and rich,
that half the City was judged to keep Coaches, for it was a most credible
report that in Mexico in my time there were above fifteen thousand Coaches. It
is a byword that at Mexico there are four things fair, that is to say, the
women, the apparel, the horses, and the streets. But to this I may add the
beauty of some of the Coaches of the gentry, which do exceed in cost the best
of the Court of Madrid and other parts of Christendom; for there they spare no
Silver, nor Gold, nor precious stones, nor Cloth of Gold, nor the best Silks
from China to enrich them. And to the gallantry of their horses the pride of
some does add the cost of bridles, and shoes of silver. The streets of
Christendom must not compare with those in breadth and cleanness, but
especially in the riches of the shops which do adorn them. Above all the
Goldsmiths shops and works are to be admired. The Indians, and the people of
China that have been made Christians and every year come thither, have
perfected the Spaniards in that Trade. The Viceroy that went thither the year
1625. caused a Popingay to be made of silver, gold, and precious stones with
the perfect colors of the Popingays feathers, (a bird bigger then a pheasant)
with such exquisite art and perfection, to present unto the King of Spain, that
it was prized to be worth in riches and workmanship half a Million of
Ducats. There is in the Cloister of the Dominicans a lamp hanging in the
Church with three hundred branches wrought in silver to hold so many Candles,
besides a hundred little lamps for oil set in it, every one being made with
several wormanship so exquisitely, that it is valued to be worth four hundred
thousand ducats; and with such like curious works are many streets made more
rich and beautiful from the shops of Goldsmiths. To the byword touching the
beauty of the women I must add the liberty they enjoy for gaming, which is
such that the day and night is to short for them to end a Primera when once it
is begun; nay gaming is so common to them that they invite gentlemen to their
houses for no other end. To my self it happened that passing along the streets
in company with a Friar that came with me that year from Spain, a gentlewoman
of great birth knowing us to be Chapetons (so they call the first year those
that come from Spain) from her window called unto us, and after two or three
slight questions concerning Spain asked us if we would come in and play with
her a Game at Primera. Both men and women are excessive in their apparel,
using more filkes then stuffes and cloth; precious Stones and Pearls further
much this their vain ostentation; a hat-band and rose made of Diamonds in a
Gentleman's hat is common, and a hat-band of Pearls is ordinary in a Tradesman;
nay a Blackmore or Tauny young maid and slave will make hard shift but she
will be in fashion with her Neckchaine and Bracelets of Pearls, and her
Eare-bobs of some considerable Jewels. The attire of this baser sort of people
of Blackmores and Mulatta^s (which are of a*mixt nature, of Spaniards and
Blackmores) is so light, and their carriage so enticing, that many Spaniards
even of the better sort (who are* too too pron^ to Venery) disdain their Wives
for them. Their clothing is a Petticoate, of Silk or Cloth, with many silver
or golden Laces, with a very broad double Ribband of some light color with
long silver or golden Tags hanging down before, the whole length of their
Peticoat to the ground, and the like behind; their Wa^coats made like bodies,
with ^kirts, laced likewise with gold or silver, without sleeves, and a girdle
about their body of great price s^uck with Pearls and knots of Gold, (if they
be any (...) well esteemed of) their sleeves are broad and open at the end, of
Holland or fine (...) (...), wrought some with colored ^ilkes, some with silk
and gold, some with silk and silver, hanging down almost unto the ground; the
looks of their heads are covered with some wrought quoi^e, and over it another
of net work of silk bound with a fair silk, or silver or golden ribband which
crosses the upper part of their forehead, and has commonly worked out in
letters some light and foolish love posie; their bare black and tauny breasts
are covered with bobs hanging from their chains of pearls. And when they go
abroad, they use a white mantle of lawne or cambr^cke rounded with a broad
lace, which some put over their heads, the breadth reaching only to their
middle behind, that their girdle and ribbands may be seen, and the two ends
before reaching to the ground almost; others cast their mantles only upon their
shoulders, and swaggerers like, cast the one and over the left shoulder, that
they may the better jog the right arm, and show their broad sleeve as they
walk along; others instead of this mantle use some rich silk petticoat, to
hang upon their left shoulder, while with their right arm they support the
lower part of it, more like roaring boys then honest civil maids. Their shoes
are high and of many soles, the outside whereof of the prophaner sort are
plated with a list of silver, which is fastened with small nails of broad
silver heads. Most of these are or have been slaves, though love have set them
loose at liberty, to inslave souls to sin and Satan. And there are so many of
this kind both men and women grown to a height of pride and vanity, that many
times the Spaniards have feared they would rise up and mutiny against them. And
for the loosnesse of their lives, and public scandals committed by them and
the better sort of the Spaniards, I have heard them say often who have
professed more religion and (...) of God, they verily thought God would destroy
that City, and give up the Country into the power of some other nation.

I will not relate particulars of their obscene and scandalous, yea and public
carriages, which would offend my Readers patience, and make his ears to
tingle; only I say, certainly God is offended with that second Sodom, whose
inhabitants though now they be like the green bay*tree flourishing with jewels,
pearls, gold, silver, and all worldly pleasures; They shall soon be cut down
like the grass and wither as the green herb, Ps. 37. 2. And though their
great Master and Cardinal (...) make outward happiness and flourishing a
mark and note of a true Church and Congregation of Gods people: and of my
self I could say which David in the 73. Ps. 2, 3. when I lived blindly amongst
them, My feet were almost g^ne, my steps had well-nigh slipped; for I was envious
at the foolish, when I saw the prosperity of the wicked; yet now being
enlightened in a more sure and certain truth, I will conclude of them, as David
of the flourishing wicked men of his time in the same Chapter the 16, 17, 18.
^. When I thought to know this, it was too painful for me, until I went into
the Sanctuary of God, then understood I their end. Surely thou did set them
in slippery pla^* thou call^st them down to destruction. And I doubt not but
the flourishing of Mexico in (...), horses, streets, women, and apparel is
very slippery, and will make those proud inhabitants slip and fall into the
power and dominion of some other Prince of this world, and hereafter in the
world to come, into the powerful hands of an angry Judge, who is the King of
Kings and Lord of Lords, which Paul says Heb. 10. 31. is a fearful thing. For
this City does not only flourish in the ways aforesaid, but also in their
superstitious worshipping of God and Saints, they exceed Rome it self, and all
other places of Christendom. And it is a thing which I have very much and
carefully observed in all my travailes both in Europe and in America, that in
those Cities wherein there is most ^wd licentiousness of life, there is also
most cost in the Temples, and most public superstitious worshipping of God and
of the Saints.

It seems that religion teaches that all wickedness is allowable, so the
Ch^ches and Clergy flourish; nay while the purse is open to lasc^viousnesse, if
it be likewise opened to enrich the temple wall^ and roofes, this is better t^
any their ^oly water to wash away the filth of the other. Rome is held to be
the head of superstition; and what stately Churches, Chapels, and Cloisters
are in it? what fastings, what processions, what appearances o^ devotion? and
on the other side, what liberty, what profaneness, what whoredoms, nay what
sins of (...) ar^ committed in it* In so much that it could be the saying of
a Friar to my self while I was in it, that he verily* thought there was no one
City in the world wherein were more Atheists then in Rome. I might show this
truth in Madrid, S^vill, Valladolid, and other famous Cities in Spain, and in
Italy, in Millan, G^ and Naples, rel^ing many (...) of (...) committed in those
places, and yet the Temples mightily enriched by such who have thought those
alms a sufficient warrant to free them from hell and Purgatory. But I must
return to Mexico which is mill testes of this truth, fin and wickedness
abounding in it; and yet no such people in the world toward the Church and
Clergy, who in their life time strive to exceed one another in their gifts to
the Cloisters of Nuns and Friars, some erecting Altars to their best devoted
Saints, worth many thousand thousand ducats, others presenting crowns of gold
to the pictures of Mary, others lamps, others golden chains, others building
Cloisters at their own charge, others repairing them, others at their death
leaving to them two or three thousand ducats for an annual stipend. Among
these great Benefactors to the Churches of that City I should wrong my History
if I should forget one that lived in my time, called Alonso Cuellar, who was
reported to have a Closet in his house laid with bars of gold in stead of
bricks; though indeed it was not so, but only reported for his abundant riches
and store of bars of gold which he had in one chest standing in a closet
distant from another, where he had a chest full of wedges of silver. This man
alone built a Nunery of Franciscan Nuns, which stood him in above thirty
thousand ducats, and left unto it for the maintenance of the Nuns two
thousand ducats yearly, with obligation of some masses to be said in the
Church every year for his soul after his decease. And yet this man's life was
so scandalous, that commonly in the night with two servants he would round the
City, visiting such scandalous persons whose attire before has been described,
carrying his beads in his hands, and at every house letting fall a beade and
tying a false knot, that when he came home in the morning toward break of the
day he might number by his beads the uncivil stations he had walked and
visited that night. But these his works of darkness came to light, and were
published far and near for what happened unto him whilst I was in Mexico; for
one night meeting at one of his stations with a gentleman that was jealous of
him, swords on both sides were drawn, the Concubine first was stabbed by the
Gentleman who was better manned and attended; and Cuellar (who was but a
Merchant) was mortally wounded and left for dead, though afterward he
recovered. Great Alms and liberality toward religious houses in that City
commonly are coupled with great and scandalous wickedness. They wallow in the
bed of riches and wealth, and make their Alms the Coverlet to cover their
loose and lascivious lives. From hence are the Churches so fairly built and
adorned. There are not above fifty Churches and Chapels, Cloisters and
Nunneries, and Parish Churches in that City; but those that are there are the
fairest that ever my eyes beheld, the roofes and beams being in many of them
all daubed with gold, and many Altars with sundry marble pillars, and others
with Brasil wood stays standing one above another with Tabernacles for several
Saints richly wrought with golden colors, so that twenty thousand ducats is a
common price of many of them. These cause admiration in the common sort of
people, and admiration brings on daily adoration in them to those glorious
spectacles and images of Saints; so Satan shows Christ all the glory of the
Kingdoms to entice him to admiration, and then All these things will I give
thee if thou will fall down and worship me, Mat. 4. 8, 9. The devil will
give all the world to be adored.

Besides these beautiful buildings, the inward riches belonging to the Altars
are infinite in price and value, such as Copes, Canopies, hangings, Altar
cloths, Candlestickes, Jewels belonging to the Saints, and crowns of gold and
silver, and Tabernacles of gold and Crystal to carry about their sacrament in
Procession, all which would mount to the worth of a reasonable mine of silver,
and would be a rich prey for any nation that could make better use of wealth
and riches. I will not speak much of the lives of the Friars and Nuns of that
City, but only that there they enjoy more liberty then in the parts of Europe
(^ere yet they have too much) and that surely the scandals committed by them
do cry up to heaven for vengeance, judgment, and destruction.

In my time in the Cloister of the Mercenarian Friars which is entitled for
the Redemption of Captives, there chanced to be an election of a Provincial to
rule over them, to the which all the Priors and heads of the Cloisters about
the country had resorted, and such was their various and factious difference,
that upon the sudden all the Convent was in an uproare, their canonical
election was turned to mutiny and strife, knives were drawn, many wounded, the
scandal and danger of murder so great, that the Viceroy was feign to
interpose his authority and to sit amongst them and guard the Cloister until
their Provincial was elected. It is ordinary for the Friars to visit their
devoted Nuns, and to spend whole days with them, hearing their music,
feeding on their sweet meats, and for this purpose they have many chambers
which they call Loquutorios, to talk in, with wooden bars between the Nuns and
them, and in these chambers are tables for the Friars to dine at; and while
they dine, the Nuns recreate them with their voices. Gentlemen and Citizens
give their daughters to be brought up in these Nunneries, where they are taught
to make all sorts of conserves and preserves, all sorts of needle work, all
sorts of music, which is so exquisite in that City, that I dare be bold to
say, that the people are drawn to their Churches more for the delight of the
music, then for any delight in the service of God. More, they teach these
young children to act like players, and to entice the people to their Churches
make these children to act short dialogues in their Quires, richly attiring
them with men's and women's apparel, especially upon Midsummer day, and the
eight days before their Christmas, which is so gallantly performed, that many
factious strifes, and single combats have been, and some were in my time, for
defending which of these Nunneries most excelled in music, and in the training
up of children. No delights are wanting in that City abroad in the world, nor
in their Churches, which should be the house of God, and the souls, not the
senses delight.

The chief place in the City is the Market place, which though it be not as
spacious as in Moutezuma his time, yet is at this day very fair and wide,
built all with Arches on the one side where people may walk dry in time of
rain, and there are shops of Merchants furnished with all sorts of stuffes and
silks, and before them sit women selling all manner of fruits and herbs; over
against these shops and Arches is the Viceroy his palace, which takes up
almost the whole length of the market with the walls of the house and of the
gardens belonging to it. At the end of the Viceroy his palace, is the chief
prison which is strong of stone work. Next to this is the beautiful street
called la plateria, or Goldsmiths street, where a man's eyes may behold in
less then an hour many millions worth of gold, silver, pearls and jewels.
The street of St. Austin is rich and comely, where live all that trade in
silks; but one of the longest and broadest streets is the street called
Tacuba, where almost all the shops are of Ironmongers, and of such as deal in
brass and steel, which is joining to those Arches whereon the water is
conveyed into the City; and is so called for that it is the way out of the City
to a Town called Tacuba; and this street is mentioned far and near, not so
much for the length and breadth of it, as for a small commodity of needles
which are made there, and for proof are the best of all those parts. For
stately buildings the street called del Aquila, the street of the eagle,
exceeds the rest, where live Gentlemen, and Courtiers, and Judges belonging to
the Chancery, and is the palace of the Marquess del Valle from the line of
Ferdinando Cortez; this street is so called from an old Idol an Eagle of stone
which from the conquest lies in a corner of that street, and is twice as big
as London stone. The gallants of this City show themselves daily some on
Horseback, and most in Coaches about four of the clock in the afternoon in a
pleasant shady field, called la Alameda, full of trees and walks, somewhat
like unto our More-fields, where do meet as constantly as the Merchants upon
our Exchange about two thousand Coaches, full of Gallants, Ladies, and
Citizens, to see and to be seen, to court and to be courted, the Gentlemen
having their train of blackmore slaves some a dozen, some half a dozen waiting
on them, in brave and gallant Liveries, heavy with gold and silver lace, with
silk stockins on their black legs, and roses on their feet, and ^words by
their sides; the Ladies also carry their train by their coaches side of such
jet-like Damosell^ as before have been mentioned for their light apparel, who
with their bravery and white mantles over them seem to be, as the Spaniard
faith, mosca en leche, a fly in milk. But the train of the Viceroy who often
goes to this place is wonderful stately, which some say is as great as the
train of his Master the King of Spain. At this meeting are carried about many
sorts of sweetmeats and papers of comfites to be sold, for to relish a cup of
cool water, which is cried about in curious glasses, to cool the blood of
these love hot gallants. But many times these their meetings sweetened with
conserves and (...) have sour fawce at the end, for jealousy will not suffer
a Lady to be co^reed, no nor sometimes to be spoken to, ^uts fury into the
violent hand to draw a sword or dagger and to stab or murder whom he was
jealous of, and when one sword is drawn thousands art presently drawn, some
to right the party wounded or murdered; others to defend the party murdering,
whose friends will not permit him to be apprehended, but will guard him with
drawn swords until they have conveyed him to the Sanctuary of some Church,
from whence the Viceroy his power is not able to take him for a legal trial.

Many of these sudden skirmishes happened whilst I lived about Mexico: of
which City a whole volume might be compiled, but that by other Authors much
has been written, and I desire not to fill my History with trifles, but only
with what is most remarkable in it. I may not omit yet from the situation of it
upon a lake to tell that certainly the water has its passage under all the
streets of it; for toward the street of St. Austin and the lower parts of the
City, I can confidently aver that in my time before the removing of the Lake
those that died were rather drowned then buried, for a grave could not be
dug with an ordinary graves depth, but they met with water, and I was
eyewitness of many thus buried, whose coffins was covered with water. And
this is so apparent that had not the Cloister of the Augustines often been
repaired and almost rebuilt, it had quite sunk by this. In my time it was a
repairing, and I saw the old pillars had sunk very low, upon the which they
were then laying new foundations, and I was credibly informed that that was the
third time that new pillars had been erected upon the old which were quite sunk
away. This City has but three ways to come unto it by Cawsey; the one is from
the West, and that Cawsey is a mile and a half long. Another from the North,
and contains three miles in length. Eastward the City has no entry; but
Southward the Cawsey is five miles long, which was the way that Cortez entered
into it, when he conquered it.

The fruit called Nuchtli (whereof I have spoken before, and some say this City
was called Tenuchtitlan from it) though it be in most parts of America, yea
and now in Spain, yet in no place there is more abundance of it then in Mexico,
and it is absolutely one of the best fruits in it. It is like unto the Fig,
and so has many little kernels or grains within, but they are somewhat larger,
and crowned like unto a Medler. There are of them of sundry colors, some are
green without, and carnation-like within, which have a good taste. Others are
yellow, and others white, and some speckled; the best sort are the white; It is
a fruit that will last long. Some of them taste of Pears, and other some of
Grapes; It is a cold and a fresh fruit and best esteemed in the heat of summer.
The Spaniards do more esteem them then the Indians. The more the ground is
labored where they grow, the fruit is so much the better. There is yet another
kind of this fruit red, and that is nothing so much esteemed, although his
taste is not evil; but because it does color and dye the eaters mouth, lips
and apparel, yea and makes the Urine look like pure blood. Many Spaniards at
their first coming into India, and eating this fruit, were amazed and at their
wits end, thinking that all the blood in their bodies came out in Urine; yea
and many Physicians at their first coming were of the same belief. And it has
happened when they have been sent for unto such as have eaten this fruit, they
not knowing the cause, and beholding the Urine, by and by they have administered
medicines to staunch blood; a thing to laugh at, to see Physicians so deceived.
The skin of the outside is thick and full of little small prickles, and when
it is cut downeright with one cut to the kernels, with one finger you may
uncleave the whole skin round about without breaking it, and take out the fruit
to eat. The Spaniards use to jest with it with strangers, taking half a dozen
of them, and rubbing them in a napkin, those small prickles which can scarce be
seen or perceived stick invisibly unto the napkin, wherewith a man wiping his
mouth to drink, those little prickles stick in his lips so that they seem to
sow them up together, and make him for a while faulter in his speech, till with
much rubbing and washing they come off. There is another fruit twice of the
bigness of a great warden, which they call the growing* Manjar Blanco, or
white meat, which is a dainty dish made by them with the white of a Capon,
Cream, and Rice, and sugar and sweet waters, much like unto the which tastes
this fruit. It is as sweet as any honey, and dissolves like meked snow in the
mouth into a juice most luscious; within, it is full of hard black kernels or
stones, which being cracked are bitter, and these not joined together, but by
division one from another, each one having a bag, or little skin discerning
them in their ranks and orders, so that when you cut this fruit in the middle
it represents a Cheque ^rd with black and white; the white is sucked or eaten
and the kernels thrown away. But I cannot forget that which they call Pinia, or
Pineapple; not the Pineapple of the high Pine tree, but a pineapple, that
grows upon a lower shrub with prickly leaves, and is bigger then our biggest
Muskmillians in England, when it is ripe; it is yellow without and within;
without it is full of little bunches, and within so juycy and cool that nothing
more dangerous then to eat much of it. Before they eat it, they cut it in round
slices, and lay it a while in salt and water, and so being scoured half an
hour in that salt and water which takes much of the rawnes and coldness from
it, and then putting into dishes with more fresh water they eat it thus. But
the better way of eating it, is preserved, which is absolutely the best
preserve in all that Country. There is also the Grape, (though they make not
wine of it) the Apple, the Pear, the Quince, the Peach, the Apricock, the
Pomegranate, the Muskmillian, the Plantin, the Fig, the Walnut, the Chestnut,
the Orange, the Lemmon both sour and sweet, the Citron in great abundance.
Most of the fruitts of Europe, and as many more which Europe never knew. About
Mexico more then in any other part grows that excellent tree called Metl,
which they plant and dress as they do their Vines in Europe. It has near
forty kinds of leaves, which serve for many uses; for when they be tender
they make of them Conserves, Paper, Flax, Mantles, Mats, Shoes, girdles, and
cordage. On these leaves grow certain prickles so strong and sharp that they
use them in stead of sawes: from the root of this tree comes a juice like unto
syrup, which being sodde will become Sugar. You may also make of it Wine and
Vinegar. The Indians often become drunk with it. The rind roasted heals hurts
and sores, and from the top boughs issues a gum, which is an excellent
antidote against poison. There is nothing in Mexico and about it wanting which
may make a City happy; and certainly had those that have so much extolled with
their pens the parts of Granada in Spain, Lombardy and Florence in Italy,
making them the earthly Paradise, had they been acquainted with the new World
and with Mexico, they would have recanted their untruths.

Oh that the Lord were truly worshipped where he has powered forth the
treasures of his goodness for the children of men! Oh that in that Eden the
tempting and entising Serpent were not so much obeyed in the use of the fair
seeming Apple of pleasures, and the Lord that has enriched it with such
varieties so much neglected! How long O Lord God, how long shall the line of
the wicked flourish, and the best portion be fallen to Idolaters and to the
workers of iniquity?

This City is the seat of an Archbishop, and of a Viceroy, who commonly is some
great Noble man of Spain, whose power is to make Laws and Ordinances, to give
directions, and determine controversies, unless it be in such great causes,
which are thought fit to be referred to the Council of Spain. And though
there be about the Country many governments with several Governors, yet they
are all subordinate to this Viceroy, and there are at least four hundred
leagues of land all governed by the Princely seat of Mexico. Most of the
Governors about the Country being the Viceroy his Creatures, placed by him,
do contribute great gifts and bribes for their preferment; so likewise do all
the rest whose right or wrong proceedings depend upon the Viceroy his clemency
and mercy in judging the daily appeals of Justice which come unto him. The
King of Spain allows him out of his Exchequer yearly a hundred thousand
Ducats whilst he governes; his time being but five years. But commonly with
their bribes to the Courtiers of Spain, and to the Counselors for the Estate
of the India's they get a prorogation of five years more, and sometimes of
ten. It is incredible to think what this Viceroy may get a year in that place
besides his hundred thousand ducats of rent, if he be a man covetous and
given to trading, (as most of them are) for then they will be Masters of what
commodities they please, and none else shall deal in them but themselves; as
did the Marquess of Serralvo in my time, who was the best Monopolist of salt
that ever those parts knew. This man was thought to get a Millian a year, what
with gifts and presents, what with his Trading to Spain and Philippinas. He
governed ten years, and in this time he sent to the King of Spain a Popingay
worth half a Million, and in one year more he sent the worth of a Million to
the Count of Olivares, and other (...) to obtain a prorogation for five years
more. Besides the Viceroy there are commonly six Judges and a Kings Attorney,
who are allowed out of the Kings Exchequer yearly twelve thousand ducats a
piece rent, besides two Alcaldes de Corts, or high Justices, who with the
Viceroy judge all Chancery and criminal causes. But (...)* though united
together they may oppose the Viceroy in any unlawful and unjustifiable action,
as some have done and have smarted for it, yet commonly they dare not. So that
he does what he lists, and it is enough for him to say, stat pro ratione
voluntas. This power joined with covetousness in the Viceroy, and therefore
thousand ducats yearly, joined with pride in the Archbishop, was like to be
the ruin of that City in the year 1624. Then was the Count of Gelves Viceroy,
and Don Alonso de Zerna Archbishop, whose two powers striving and striking at
one another like two flints, had almost brought to combustion that gallant
City, and did set on fire the Viceroy his palace, and the prison joining to it.

The story was thus, which may be profitable for other nations, to beware of
covetous governors, and proud Prelates; and therefore I thought fit to insert
it here. The Count of Gelves was in some things one of the best Viceroys and
Governors that ever the Court of Spain sent to America, for he was called by
the Spaniards, el terrible Iusticiero, y fuego de Ladiones, that is, terrible
for Justice, and fire to consume all thieves. For he cleared all the high ways
of thieves, hanging them as often as they were caught without mercy, and did
send out troops and officers to apprehend them, so that it was generally
reported that since the conquest unto those days of his there had never been
so many thieves and malefactors hanged up as in his time. So in all other
points of justice he was severe and upright. But yet covetousness did so blind
him to see his own injustice, that before he could see it, he had brought the
City of Mexico and the whole Kingdom to a danger of rebellion. What he would
not to be seen in himself, he acted by others his instruments. And one of them
was one Don Pedro Mexia, a mighty rich Gentleman of Mexico, whom he chose to
join with him in monopolizing all the Indian Maiz, and wheat about the
Country. Don Pedro Mexia of the Indians bought at the price he list their
Maiz, and the wheat of the Spaniards he bought it according to that price at
which it is taxed by the law of that land to be sold at in time of famine;
which is at fourteen Rials a bushel, (which is not much there considering the
abundance of gold and silver) at which price the Farmers and husbandmen knowing
it to be a plentiful year were glad and willing to sell unto him their wheat,
not knowing what the end would be, and others fearing to gainsay him, whom they
knew to be Viceroyes favorite. Thus Don Pedro Mexia filled all his barnes which
he had hired about the Country, and himself and the Viceroy became owners of
all the wheat. He had his officers appointed to bring it into the Markets upon
his warning, and that was when some smal^ remnants that had escaped his fingers
were sold, and the price raised. Then hoised he his price, and doubled it above
what it had cost him. The poor began to complain, the rich to murmr, the
tax of the law was moved in the Court of Chancery before the Viceroy. But he
being privy to the Monopoly expounded the law to be understood in time of
famine, and that he was informed, that it was as plentiful a year as ever had
been, and that to his knowledge there was as much brought into the Markets as
ever had been, and plenty enough for Mexico and all the Country. Thus was the
law slighted, the rich mocked, the poor oppressed, and none sold wheat but Don
Pedro Mexia his officers for himself and the Viceroy. When Justice would be no
father, the people go to their mother the Church; and having understood the
business better, and that it was Don Pedro Mexia, who did tyrannnize and
oppress them with the Viceroy his favor, they entreat the Archbishop to make
it a case of Conscience, and to reduce it to a Church censure. Don Alonfo de
Zerna the Archbishop, who had always stomacked Don Pedro Mexia and the
Viceroy, to please the people, granted to them to excommunicate Don Pedro
Mexia, and so sent out bills of excommunication to be fixed upon all the Church
doors against Don Pedro; who not regarding the excommunication, and keeping
close at home, and still selling his wheat, raising higher the price then it
was before; the Archbishop raised this censure higher against him, adding to
it a Bill of (...), that is, a cessation from all divine service. This Censure
is so great with them, that it is never used but for some great man's sake, who
is contumacious and stubborn in his ways contemning the power of the Church.
Then are all the Church doors shut up, (let the City be never so great) no
masses are said, no prayers used, no preaching permitted, no meetings allowed
for any public devotion or calling upon God. (...) Church mournes as it were,
and makes no show of spiritual joy and comfort, nor of any communion of
prayers one with another, so long as the party continues stubborn and
rebellious in his sin, and scandal; and in yielding to the Churches censure.
And further whereas by this cessation a divinis, many Churches and especially
Cloisters suffer in the means of their livelihood, who live upon what is daily
given them for the Masses they say, and in a Cloister where thirty or forty
Priests say Mass, so many pieces of Eight or crowns in Mexico do daily come
in; therefore this censure or cessatio a divinis is so inflicted upon the whole
Church (all suffering for it as they say in spiritual, and some in temporal
ways) that the party offending or scandalizing, for whose sake this curse is
laid upon all, is bound to satisfy all Priests and Cloisters which in the way
aforesaid suffer, and to allow them so much out of his means, as they might
have daily got by selling away their Masses for so many crowns for their daily
livelihood. To this would the Archbishop have brought Don Pedro Mexia, to have
emptied out of his purse near a thousand crowns daily, toward the maintenance
of about a thousand Priests (so many there may be in Mexico) who from the
Altar sell away their bread-God to satisfy with bread and food their hungry
stomachs. And secondly by the peoples suffering in their spiritual comfort,
and non-communion of prayers and idolatrous worship, he thought to make Don
Pedro Mexia odious to the people. Don Pedro perceiving the spightfull intents
of the Archbishop, and hearing the outcries of the people in the streets
against him, and their cries for the use and liberty of their Churches,
secretly retired himself to the Palace of the Viceroy, begging his favor and
protection, for whose sake he suffered. The Viceroy immediately sent out his
Orders, commanding the bills of excommunication and cessation a divinis to be
pulled from the Church doors, and to all the Superiors of the Cloisters to set
open their Churches, and to celebrate their service and masses as formerly they
had done. But they disobeying the Viceroy through blind obedience to their
Archbishop, the Viceroy commanded the Arch-prelate to revoke his censures. But
his answer was that what he had done, had been justly done against a public
offender and great oppressor of the poor, whose cries had moved him to
commiserate their suffering condition, and that the offenders contempt of his
first excommunication had deserved the rigor of the second censure; neither of
the which he would or could revoke until Don Pedro Mexia had submitted
himself to the Church and to a public absolution, and had satisfied the
Priests and Cloisters who suffered for him, and had disclaimed that unlawful
and unconscionable Monopoly, wherewith he wronged the whole commonwealth, and
especially the poorer sort therein.

Thus did that proud Prelate arrogantly in terms exalt himself against the
the authority of his Prince and Ruler, contemning his command with a flat
denial, thinking himself happy in imitating Ambrose his spirit against the
Emperor Theod^sius, trusting in the power of his keys, and in the strength of
his Church and Clergy, which with the rebellion of the meaner sort he resolved
to oppose against the power and strength of his Magistrate. The Viceroy not
brooking this saucy answer from a Priest, commanded him presently to be
apprehended and to be guarded to St. John d^ Ulhua, and there to be shipped foe
Spain. The Archbishop having notice of this the Viceroy his resolution,
retired himself out of Mexico to Guadalupe with many of his Priests and
Prebends, leaving a bill of excommunication upon the Church doors against the
Viceroy himself, and thinking privily to fly to Spain there to give an account
of his carriage and behavior. But he could not fly so fast, but the Viceroy
his care and vigilance still eyed him, and with his Sergeants and Officers
pursued him to Guadalupe, Which the Archbishop understanding, he betook himself
to the sanctuary of the church, and there caused the candles to be lighted upon
the Altar, the sacrament of his Bread-God to betaken out of the Tabernacle, and
attiring himself with his Pontifical vestiments, with his Mitre on his head,
his Crozier in one hand, in the other he took his God of bread, and thus with
his train of Priests about him at the Altar, he waited for the coming of the
Sergeants and Officers, whom he thought with his God in his hand, and with a
Here I am, to astonish and amaze, and to make them as Christ the Jews in the
garden, to fall backwards, and to disable them from laying hands upon him. The
Officers coming into the Church went toward the Altar where the Bishop stood,
and kneeling down first to worship their God made a short prayer; which being
ended, they propounded unto the Bishop with courteous and ^aire word^ the cause
of their coming to that place, requiring him to lay down the Sacrament; and to
come out of the Church, and to hear the notification of what orders they
brought unto him in the Kings nam^. To whom the Archbishop replied, that (...)
their Master the Viceroy was excommunicated he looked upon him as one out of
the pale of the Church, and one without any power, or authority to command him
in the house of God, and so required them as they tendered the good of their
souls to depart peaceably, and not to infringe the privileges and immunity of
the Church, by exercising in it any legal act of secular power and command;
and that he would not go out of the Chruch, unless they durst take him and
the Sacrament together. With this the head officer named Tiroll, stood up and
notified unto him an order in the Kings name to apprehend his person in what
place soever he should find him, and to guard him to the Port of St. John de
Ulhua, and there to deliver him to whom by further order he should be directed
there, to be shipped for Spain as a Traitor to the Kings crown, a troubler of
the common peace, an author and mover of sedition in the Commonwealth. The
Archbishop smiling upon Tiroll answered him, Thy Master uses too high terms;
and words which do better agree unto himself; for I know no mutiny or
sedition like to trouble the Commonwealth, unless it be by his and Don Pedro
Mexia his oppressing of the poor. And as for thy guarding me to St. John de
Ulhua, I conjure thee by Jesus Christ whom thou know I hold in my hands, not
to use here any violence in Gods house, from whose Altar I am resolved not to
depart; take heed God punish thee not as he did Jeroboam for stretching forth
his hand at the Altar against the Prophet; let his withered hand remind thee of
thy duty. But Tiroll suffered him not to squander away the time and ravell it
out with further preaching, but called to the Altar a Priest whom he had
brought for that purpose, and commanded him in the Kings name to take the
Sacrament out of the Archbishops hand; which the Priest doing, the Archbishop
unvested himself of his Pontificals, and (though with many repetitions of the
Churches immunity) yielded himself unto Tiroll, and taking his leave of all
his Prebends, requiring them to be witnesses of what had been done, he went
prisoner to St. John de Ulhua, where he was delivered to the custody of the
Governor of the Castle, and not many days after was sent in a ship prepared
for that purpose to Spain to the King and Council, with a full charge of all
his carriages and misdemeanors. Some of the City of Mexico in private began to
talk strangely against the Viceroy, and to stomach the banishment of their
Archbishop, because he had stood out against so high a power in defense of the
poor and oppressed, and these their private grudges they soon vented in
public with bold and arrogant speeches against D^n Pedro Mexia, and the
Viceroy, being set on and encouraged by the Priests and Prebends, who it seems
had sworn blind obedience to their Arch-Prelate; and therewith thought they
could dispense with their consciences in their obedience and duty to their
Magistrate. Thus did those Incendiaries for a fortnight together blow the fire
of sedition and rebellion, especially amongst the inferior sort of people and
the Criolians or native Spaniards, and the Indians and Mulatto's, whom they
knew brooked not the severe and rigorous justice and judgment of the Viceroy,
no nor any Government that was appointed over them from Spain; until at the
fortnights end, Tiroll returned from St. John de Ulhua; and then began the
spite and malice of all the (...) to break out, then began a fire of mutiny to
be kindled, which was thought would have consumed and buried in ashes that
great and famous City. Tiroll was not a little jealous of what mischief the
common rabble intended against him, and so kept close, not daring to walk the
streets; yet his occasions inviting him to the Viceroy his palace, ventured
himself in a Coach with drawn curtains, which yet could not blind the eyes
of the spightfull and malicious malcontents, who had notice that he was in
the Coach, and before he could get to the market place, three or four boys
began to cry out, Judas, Judas, a^a va Judas, there goes Judas that laid his
hands upon Christ's Vicar: others joined with them saying, ahorquemos a este
Judas, let us hangup this Judas; the number of boys yet increased, crying
aloud and boldly after the Coach, M^ra ^ (...) descomulgad^ la muerte de Judas,
muera el picaro, (...) ^l (...), let this excommunicated rogue and dog die the
death of Judas; the Coach-^an ^ashed the mules, the Coach posted, the boys
hasted after with stones and (...), the number increased so that before Tiroll
could get through two streets only, th^e were (...) above two hundred boys, of
Spaniards, Indians, Black-mores, and ^ulatto's. With much ^doe Tiroll got to
the Viceroy his Palace, posting for his (...), (...) his first (...) was ^o
wish the Porters to shut all the Palace gates: for he was (...) of wh^t (...)
happened, of a (...) general insurrection and ^proar. For no sooner was he
got into the Viceroy his house, and the gates shut up, but there were gathered
to the Market place (as I was credibly informed by those that saw and observed
diligently that days trouble) above two thousand people, all of inferior rank
and quality; and yet the number still increased till they were judged to be
about six or seven thousand. They all cried out for Tiroll the Judas, sparing
neither stones nor dirt which they did fling at the Palace windows.

The Viceroy sent a message to them desiring them to be quiet, and to betake
themselves to their houses, certifying them that Tiroll was not in his Palace,
but escaped out of a back door. The rude multitude would not be satisfied
with this, being now set on by two or three Priests who were joined with them,
and so they began more violently to batter the Palace gates and walls, having
brought pikes, and holbards, and long poles; others had got a few Pistols, and
birding Pieces, wherewith they shot, not caring whom they killed or wounded in
the Palace. It was wonderful to see that none of the better sort, none of the
Judges, no high Justice, no inferior Officers durst or would come out to
suppress the multitude, or to assist the Viceroy being in so great danger; nay
I was told by some shopkeepers who lived in the Market place, that they made a
laughing business of it, and the people that passed by went smiling and
saying, Let the boys and youngsters alone, they will wright our wrongs, they
will find out before they have done, both Tiroll and Mexia and him that
protects them, meaning the Viceroy; but amongst them was much noted one Priest,
named Salazar, who spent much shot and bullets, and more his spirits in running
about to spy some place of advantage, which he might soonest batter down.
They found it seems the prison doors easier to open, or else with help
within they opened them, and let out all the malefactors, who joined with them
to assault the Palace. The Viceroy seeing no help came to him from the City,
from his friends, from the Judges of the Chancery, from the Kings high
Justices, nor other Officers for the peace, went up to the Zoties of his Palace
with his Guard and Servants that attended on him, and set up the Royal
Standard, and caused a Trumpet to be sounded to call the City to aid and
assist their King. But this prevailed not, none stirred, all the chief of the
City kept within doors. And when the multitude saw the Royal Standard out,
and heard the Kings name from the Zoties, they cried out, and often repeated
it, Viva el Rex, muerael mal govierno, mueran los des comulgados, that is to
say, Our King live long, but let the evil government die, and perish, and let
them die that are excommunicated. These words saved many of them from hanging
afterward, when the business was tried and searched into by Don Martinde
Carrillo. And with these words in their mouths, they skirmished with them of
the Zoties at least three hours, they above hurling down stones, and they
beneath hurling up to them and some shooting with a few Pistols and birding
pieces at one another: and mark that in all this bitter skirmish there was not
a piece of Ordnance shot, for the Viceroy had none for the defense of his
Palace or Person, neither had or has that great City any for its strength and
security, the Spaniards living fearelesse of the Indians, and (as they think)
secure from being annoyed by any foreign Nation. There were slain in about six
hours in all that this tumult lasted, seven or eight beneath in the Market
place, and one of the Viceroy his Guard and a page in the Zoties above. The day
drawing to an end, the multitude brought pitch and fire, and first fired the
prison, then they set on fire part of the Palace, and burnt down the chief
gate. This made some of the City, of the Gentry, and of the Judges to come out,
lest the fire should prevail far upon the City, and to persuade the people
to desist, and to quench the fire. Whilst the fire was quenching, many got
into the Palace, some fell upon the Viceroyes stables, and there got part of
his mules and horses rich furnitures, others began to fall upon some chests,
others to tear down the hangings, but they were soon persuaded by the better
sort of the City, to desist from spoil or robbery, lest by that they should
be discovered; other searched about for Don Pedro Mexia, for Tiroll and the
Viceroy. None of them could be found, having disguised themselves and so
escaped. Whither Don Pedro Mexia and Tiroll went, it could not be known in
many days; but certain it was that the Viceroy disguised himself in a
Franciscan habit, and so in company of a Friar went through the multitude to
the Cloister of the Franciscans, where he abode all that year, (and there I
saw him the year after) not daring to come out, until he had informed the
King and Counsel of Spain, with what has happened, and of the danger himself
and the City was in, if not timely prevented. The King and Counsel of Spain
took the business to consideration, and looked upon it as a warning piece, to
a further mutiny and rebellion, and an example to other parts of America to
follow upon any such like occasion, if some punishment were not inflicted upon
the chief offenders. Wherefore the year following 1625. which was when I went
to those parts, the King sent a new Viceroy the Marquis of Serralvo to govern
in the place of the Conut of Gelues, and especially to aid and assist Don
Martin de Carrillo a Priest, and Inquisitor of the Inquisition of Valladolid,
who was sent with large Commission and authority to examine the foresaid tumult
and mutiny, and to judge all offenders that should be found in it, yea and to
hang up such as should deserve death. I was at Mexico in the best time of the
trial, and had intelligence from Don Martin de Carrillo his own Ghostly
father a Dominican Friar of the chief passages in the examination of the
business; and the result was, that if Justice should have been executed
rightly, most of the prime of Mexico would have suffered, for not coming in to
the Royal Standard, when called by the sound of the Trumpet; the Judges some
were put out of their places, though they answered that they durst not stir
out, for that they were informed that all the City would have risen against
them if they had appeared in public. The chief actors were found to be the
Criolians or Natives of the Country, who do hate the Spanish Government, and
all such as come from Spain; and reason they have for it, for by them they are
much oppressed, as I have before observed, and are and will be always
watching any opportunity to free themselves from the Spanish yoke. But the
chief fomenters of the mutiny were found to be the Bishops party the Priests;
and so had not Salazar and three more of them fled, they had certainly been
sent to the Galleys of Spain for Galley slaves; this judgment was published
against them. There were not above three or four hanged of so many thousands,
and their condemnation was for things which they had stolen out of the
Viceroys Palace. And because further inquiry into the rebellion would have
brought in atleast half the City either for actors, or counselors, or
fomentors, the King was well advised to grant a general pardon. The
Archbishops proceedings were more disliked in the Court of Spain, then the
Viceroyes, and was long without any preferment; though, at last that there
might be no exceptions taken by his party, nor cause given for a further
stirring the embers to a greater combustion, the Council thought fit to honor
him in those parts where he was born; and to make him Bishop of Zamora a small
Bishopric in Castile; so that his wings were clipped, and from Archbishop he
came to be but Bishop, and from threescore thousand Crowns yearly rent he
fell to four or five thousand only a year. The count of Gelues was also sent
to Spain, and well entertained in the Court, and therein made Master of the
Kings horse, which in Spain is a Noblemans preferment.

And this History showing the state and condition of Mexico, when I traveled
to those parts I have willingly set down, that the Reader may by it be
furnished with better observations then my self (who am but a Neophyte) am able
to deduct. Somewhat might be observed from the Viceroyes covetousness; which
doubtless in all is a great sin, for as Paul well advises, 1 Timothy 6. 10.
The love of money is the root of all evil; but much more to be condemned in a
Prince or Governor; whom it may blind in the exercise of Justice and Judgment,
and harden those tender bowels (which ought to be in him) of a father and
shepherd to his flock and children. We may yet from this Viceroyes practice
and example against a chief head of the Romish Church, discover that error of
the Priests and Jesuits of England, who persuade the people here that no
temporal Magistrate has power over them, and that to lay hands on them in
wrath and anger (being as they say Consecrated to God and his Altar) is ipso
facto a deep excommunication; whereas we see the contrary in this Viceroy a
member of the Church of Rome, and yet exercising his temporal power against an
Archbishop, and by Tiroll taking him from the Church, and as his prisoner
sending him with just wrath and anger to a foreign and remote place of
banishment. But lastly it is my desire that the High and Honorable Court of
Parliament which now is sitting for the good of this Kingdom, and for the good
of it has already pulled down the Hierarchy of such Prelates and
Archprelates, would look upon the trouble and uproare which the keys of the
Church in the hand of an undiscreet Priest brought upon that City of Mexico.
Certainly as the strength of the Church well settled, and governed with
subordination to the Magistrate, is likewise the strength of the Commonwealth;
so on the other side the power of the Keys in the Clergies hand to cast out
what incestuous Corinthian they please, without the rest of the Corinthians
consent, 1 Cor. 5. 4, 5. may prove dangerous and troublesome to the Commonweal
and good. For if the Clergy may use by itself, without the overseeing eye of
the Magistrates Commissioners, the power of the keys; who shall be free from
their censures, that any way will oppose them? The poor and ignorant will not
only be the object of their censures, but the rich and wise and noble, Ruler
and Magistrate will also come under their censures; wherein I find a Minister
may then as a Pope encroach upon the highest Crown of an Emperor. Nay
certainly in England the thoughts of some such aspiring Ministers have been
higher then the thoughts of this Archbishop of Mexico over a Viceroy, the
conceit of their power with the Keys have hoised them above their Prince, for
I have heard one of them say, he knew not but that by the power of the keys
he might as well excommunicate the King as any other private person. This
conceit has made the Pope of Rome fear no earthly Prince, Emperor, Ruler or
Magistrate; nay this has made him to be feared and respected and honored by
Kings and Princes; And why may not the same power in the hands of a Protestant
Clergy, make the meanest and the highest to fear and dread them? But some will
say, the Word of God being the Touchstone wherewith they are to try what points
may be the subjects of their censures, by such a light and guidance they are
not like to err. But they then being themselves the Judges of the sense and
meaning of the Word, who shall oppose their judgment, and their ensuing
censures? What if to their trial and judgment they shall bring any Law enacted
by a High Court of Parliament, and shall judge it not according to the Word of
God, and so press it to the peoples consciences; threatening with their
censures such as shall obey it? in such a case how may the power of the keys
unlock and open a door to the people of rebellion against their lawful
Magistrates? Oh what dangers may befall a Commonwealth, when thus the Clergy
shall stand over poor and rich, Subject and Magistrate, as Peter's statue at
Rome, with Crosse-keyes in his hand? What a rebellion did the Archbishop of
Mexico cause by excommunicating Don Pedro Mexia first, and then the Viceroy?
and how did the people fear his keys more then their Viceroys temporal power
and authority, siding with him against such as he had excommunicated? What
troubles did that Doctor Smith Bishop of Chalcedon bring among the Papists,
small and great ones, not long ago here in England, laying upon them by the
power of the Keys a censure of Excommunication, if they confessed to, or did
entertain and hear the Mass of any, that had not derived their authority
from him? Then were they in open rebellion one against another; the secular
Priests against the Monks, Friars, and Jesuits, and the Laity all troubled,
some siding with one, and some with another, until Doctor Smith having thus
kindled the fire, was feign to leave it burning, and to betake himself to
Paris, and from thence to foment the dissension which with power of the Keys
he had caused here.

Oh surely the Church so far is a good Mother, as it allows a Magistrate to be
a Father. And great comfort have those that live within the pale of the Church,
to know that they have the Magistrate a Father to fly unto in their pressures
and discomforts.

I must ingenuously confess that one maine point that brought me from the
Church of Rome, was the too too great power of the Keys in the Popes, Bishops,
and Priests hands, who studying more self Policy, then common Policy, look
upon the people, and with their power deal with them more as their subjects,
then as political Members in a Commonwealth, rending and tearing them daily
by their censures from that common and Political body to which they belong,
without any hopes of care to be had of them by their Magistrate and Political
head and Governor. And I hope I shall not have fled from Antichrist who
exalts himself as head of the Church, and from that power has his influence
over all State and Political Heads and Rulers* to find in a Protestant Church
any of his spirit, making a distinction of a spiritual and temporal head,
forgetting the only head Christ Jesus; which were it once granted, as the
spirit is more noble then the body, so would the inference soon be made, that
they that are over the spirit, are higher in power then they that are over the
body; which conclusion would soon bring Mexic^s troubles among Protestants.
Experience in all my travails by sea and land, in most parts of Europe and of
America, has ever taught me, that where the Clergy has been too much exalted
and enjoyed power over the people, there the Commonwealth has soon fallen
into heavy pressures and troubles. And let not this my observation seem strange
as coming from a Minister, for I have learned from Christ, Matthew. 20. 25, 26,
27. That the Princes of the Gentiles exercise Dominion, and they that are great
exercise authority. But it shall not be so among you, but whosoever will be
great among you, let him be your Minister; and whosoever will be chief among
you, let him be your Servant.

I hope the High Court of Parliament will so settle the Church and State here
that this shall not fear any further troubles from that; and that we who have
our portion from the one, may be Ministers and Servants under the
Commissioners of the other. And thus largely I have described the State and
condition of Mexico in the time of Montezuma, and since his death the manner
and proportion of it, with the troubled condition I found it in when I went
thither, by reason of a mutiny and rebellion caused by an Archbishop the year
before. I shall now come out of Mexico, and present unto you the places most
remarkable about it; and from thence the several parts and Countries of
America, before I betake my self to the journey which I made from Mexico to
Guatemala, lying nine hundred English miles Southward, and from thence yet to
Costarica, and Nicoya, being nine hundred miles further toward the South.

CHAP. XIII. Showing the several parts of this new World of America; and the
places of note about the famous City of Mexico.
ALthough my travailes by Sea and Land in America were not above three or four
thousand miles (which is not the fifth part of it, if exactly compassed) yet for
the better completing of this my work I thought fit to enlarge my self to a
full division of the many and sundry parts thereof, here first in general; and
hereafter more in particular of those parts wherein I lived twelve years, and
of those which I more exactly noted and observed as I travailed and passed
through them. The chief division therefore of this greatest part of the World,
is twofold only, to wit, the Mexicans, and the Peruan parts, which contain
many great and sundry Provinces and Countries, some as big as our whole Kingdom
of England. But Mexico giving name to half America, is now called Nova
Hispania, new Spain, from whence the Kings of Spain do style themselves,
Hispania^um Reges. The Mexican part contains chiefly the Northern Tract, and
comprehends these Provinces hitherto known and discovered, to wit, Mexico,
Quivira, Nicaragua, Iucatan, Florida, Virginia, Norumbega, Nova Francia,
Corterialis, and Estotilandia. The compass of this part of America is thirteen
thousand miles. The Peruan part contains all the Southern Tract, and is tied
to the Mexican by the Isthmus or strait of Darien, being no more then 17. or as
others say, in the narrowest place but 12. miles broad from the North to the
South Sea. And many have mentioned to the Council of Spain, the cutting of a
Navigable Channel through this small Isthmus, so to shorten the Voyage to
China, and the Moluccoes. But the Kings of Spain have not as yet attemped to
do it, some say lest in the work he should lose those few Indians that are
left (would to God it were so that they were and had been so careful and
^ender of the poor Indians lives, more populous would that vast and spacious
Country be at this day:) but others say he has not attempted that great
work, lest the passage by the Cape Bona Esperanza good hope, being left off,
those Seas might become a receptacle of Pirates. However this has not been
attempted by the Spaniards, they give not for reason any extraordinary great
charge, for that would soon be recompensed with the speedy and easy
conveying that way the Commodities from South to North Seas. This Peruan part
of America contains these Countries, or Kingdoms, to wit, Castella aurea,
Guiana, Peru, Brasil, Chille; and the compass of it is seventeen thousand
miles. I shall not speak distinctly of all these parts, which better writers,
and of more knowledge have before me discovered; and because some of them being
out of the Spaniards reach and dominion, from whom I have received my best
intelligence, I have from them had little notice of them, nor experience, which
indeed I intend to make my best guide in this my work. Therefore to return
again to the Mexican part, and the Northern Tract, I shall fall again upon the
first and chief member of that division, which I said was Mexico. This
abounds with golden sanded rivers, in which are many Crocodiles (though not
so big at those of Egypt) which the Indian people eat. It glories in the
mountains Popochampeche, and Popocatepec, which are of the same nature with
Aetna and Vesuvius. Nay all the way Southward as far as Leon in Nicaragua,
there are many of these fiery mountains. But Popocatepec is one of the chief
of them, which signifies a hill of smoke, for many times it casts out
smoke and fire; it stands eight leagues from Chololla; the ascending up unto
it is very troublesome, and full of craggie rocks. When Cortez passed that way
to Mexico, he sent ten Spaniards to view it, with many Indians to carry their
victuals, and to guide them in the way. They approached so nigh the top, that
they heard such a terrible noise which proceeded from thence, that they durst
not go unto it* for the ground did tremble and shake, and great quantity of
ashes did much disturb their way. But yet two of them who seemed to be most
hardy, and desirous to see strange things, went up to the top, because they
would not return with a sleevelesse answer, and that they might not be
accounted cowards, leaving their fellows behind them, proceeded forwards, and
passed through that desert of ashes, and at length came under a great smoke
very thick, and standing there a while, the darkness vanished partly away, and
then appeared the Vulcan and concavity, which is about half a league in
compass; out of the which the air came rebounding with a very great noise,
very shrill and whistling, so that the whole hill did tremble; it was like unto
an oven where glass is made. The smoke and heat was so great that they could
not abide it, and of force were constrained to return by the way that they had
ascended. But they were not gone far; when the Vulcan began to flash out
flames of fire, ashes and embers, yea and at the last stones of burning fire,
and if they had not chanced to find a rock, under which they shadowed
themselves, undoubtedly they had there been burned. It is like unto the Vulcan
of Sicilia, it is high and round, and never wants snow about some part of it.
Before the coming of Cortez for ten years space it had left off expelling
vapor or smoke; but in the year 1540. it began again to burn, and with the
horrible noise thereof, the people that dwelt four leagues from it were
terrified; the ashes that proceeded then from it reached to Tlaxcallan, which
stands ten leagues distant from it; yea some affirm that it extended fifteen
leagues distant, and burned the herbs in the gardens, the corn in the fields,
and clothes that lay a drying. And many such hills and mountains does this
Mexican part of America, or new Spain abound with. The limits of it are on the
East, Iucatan, and the gulf of Mexico, on the West Californio, on the South
the Peruan part. The Northern bounds are unknown, so that we cannot certainly
avow this America to be continent, nor certainly affirm it to be an Island,
distiugnished from the old world. It was very populous before the arrival of
the Spaniards, who in seventeen years slew six millions of them, roasting some,
plucking out the eyes, cutting off the arms of others, and casting them living
to be devoured of wild beasts. This chief Province of America named Mexico,
is further subdivided into four parts, that is to say, Themistitan, Nova
Galicia, Mechoacan, and Guastaehan. Themistitan is the greatest and noblest of
these four; for that it contains six Cities, and of them one is Mexico,
which gives name to the half part of America, and is the seat of an
Archbishop, and of the Spanish Viceroy, whose greatness within I have before
laid open; the second City is La Puebla de los Angeles, the City of Angels; the
third Villar^ca; the fourth Anti^bero; the fifth Meccioca; the sixth Oitopan.
But all these, excepting the two first* are but small places, named Cities
formerly, for that the Spaniards thought to have made them Bishops seats, which
they have not been able to perform, by reason that Mexico and the City of
Angels has drawn to them the chief trading, and most of the inhabitants of
the other four. Especially the resort to Mexico is so great, that all the
Towns about (which formerly were of Indians) are now inhabited by Spaniards
and Mestiz^es. I may not omit about Mexico that famous place of Chapultepec,
which in the Heathens times was the burying place of the Emperors; and now by
the Spaniards is the Escuriall of America, where the Viceroyes that die are
also interred. There is a sumptuous palace built with many fair gardens, and
devises of waters, and ponds of fish, whither the Viceroyes and the gentry of
Mexico do resort for their recreation. The riches here belonging to the
Viceroyes Chapel are thought to be worth above a million of crowns.

Taenba is also a pleasant Town full of orchards and gardens, in the very way
to Chapultepec. Southward is Toluco, rich also for trading, but above all much
mentioned for the Bacon, which is the best of all those parts, and is
transported far and near. Westward is the Town called, La Piedad at the end
of a Cawsey, whither the people much resort from Mexico, being drawn to the
superstitious worship of a picture of Mary, which has been enriched by the
chief of Mexico with many thousand pounds worth of gifts of chains, and
crowns of gold.

But more Northwest-ward three leagues from Mexico is the pleasantest place of
all that are about Mexico, called La Soledad, and by others el desierto, the
solitary or desert place and wilderness. Were all wildernesses like it, to
live in a wilderness would be better then to live in a City. This has been a
device of poor Friars named discalced, or barefooted Carmelites, who to make
show of their hypocritical and apparent godliness, and that whilst they would
be thought to live like Eremites, retired from the world, they may draw the
world unto them; they have built there a stately Cloister, which being upon a
hill and among rocks makes it to be more admired. About the Cloister they have
fashioned out many holes and Caves in, under, and among the rocks, like
Eremites lodgings, with a room to lie in, and an Oratory to pray in, with
pictures, and Images, and rare devices for mortification, as disciplines of
wyar, rods of iron, haire-cloths, girdles with sharp wyar points to girdle
about their bare flesh, and many such like toys which hang about their
Oratories, to make people admire their mortified and holy lives. All these
Eremeticall holes and caves (which are some ten in all) are within the bounds
and compass of the Cloister) and among orchards and gardens full of fruits and
flowers, which may take up two miles compass; and here among the rocks are
many springs of water, which with the shade of the plantins and other trees,
are most cool and pleasant to the Eremites; they have also the sweet smell of
the rose and jazmin, which is a little flower, but the sweetest of all others;
there is not any other flower to be found that is rare and exquisite in that
country, which is not in that wilderness to delight the senses of those
mortified Eremites. They are weekly changed from the Cloister, and when their
week is ended, others are sent, and they return unto their Cloister; they
carry with them their bottles of wine, sweetmeats, and other provision; as for
fruits the trees about do drop them into their mouths. It is wonderful to see
the strange devises of fountains of water which are about the gardens; but much
more strange and wonderful to see the resort of Coaches, and gallants, and
Ladies, and Citizens from Mexico thither, to walk and make merry in those
desert pleasures, and to see those hypocrites, whom they look upon as living
Saints, and so think nothing too good for them, to cherish them in their desert
conflicts with Satan. None goes to them but carries some sweetmeats, or some
other dainty dish to nourish and feed them withal; whose prayers they likewise
earnestly solicit, leaving them great alms of money for their masses; and
above all, offering to a picture in their Church, called our Lady of Carmel,
treasures of diamonds, pearls, golden chains and crowns, and gowns of cloth
of gold and silver. Before this picture did hang in my time twenty lamps of
silver; the worst of them being worth a hundred pound; truly Satan has given
unto them what he offered Christ in the desert, All these things will I give
thee if thou will fall down and worship me; all the dainties and of all the
riches of America has he given unto them in that their desert, for that they
daily fall down and worship him. In the way to this place there is another
Town yet called Tac^baya, where is a rich Cloister of Franciscans, and also
many gardens and orchards, but above all much resorted to for the music in
that Church, wherein the Friars have made the Indians so dexterous and
skillful, that they dare compare with the Cathedral Church of Mexico. These
were the chief places of mine and my friends resort, whilst I abode about
Mexico, which I found to be most worth a History, and so thought fit ^ere to
insert them, and so pass on to the other parts or Provinces of Mexico.

Next to this is the Province of Guastachan, which lies in the rode from St.
John de Ulbua to Mexico, which is not so poor as Heylin makes it, for that
now it does abound with many rich farms of Sugar, and of Cochinil, and
reaches as far as the Valley of Guaxaca which is a most rich place. The
chief City of this Province was wont to be Tlaxcallan, whereof I have formerly
spoken; but now the City of Guaxaca which is a Bishops seat, and Xalappa which
is also of late made a Bishops seat, makes it more famous. glories also in
Villa Rica a Port Town very wealthy, because all the traffic betwixt the Old
and New Spains do pass through it. The Spaniards have in it two rich Colonies,
called Pamico, and St. James in the valleys. The third Province of Mexico is
called Mechoacan, which contains in circuit fourscore leagues. It is also an
exceeding rich country, abounding in Mulberry trees, silk, honey, wax,
black-amber, works of diverse colored feathers, most rich, rare, and exquisite,
and such store of fish, that from thence it took its name, Mechuoucan, which
signifies a place of fishing.

The language of the Indians is most elegant and copious, and they tall,
strong, active, and of very good wits, as may be seen in all their works, but
especially in those of feathers, which are so curious, that they are presented
for rich presents to the King and Nobles of Spain. The chief City of this
Province is Valladolid a Bishopsseat; and the best Towns are Sinsonte, which
was the residence of the Kings of this country. There is also Pascuar and
Colima very great Towns inhabited by Indians and Spaniards. There are also two
good havens, called St. Anthony, and St. James, or Santiago. This country of
Mechoacan was almost as great as the Empire of Mexico, when Cortez conquered
those parts. The King that was then of Mechoacan was called Caconzin, who was a
great friend unto Cortez, and a servitor to the Spaniards, and willingly
yielded himself as vassal to the King of Spain; yet such was the cruelty of
Don Nunio de Guzman, the first Ruler and President of the Chancery of Mexico
after the conquest, that understanding he was put out of his office, he took
his journey against the Teuchichimecas, and carried in his company five hundred
Spaniards, with whom and six thousand Indians which by force he took out of
Mechoacan, he conquered Xalixco which is now called the new Galicia. And as for
this purpose he passed through Mechoacan, he took prisoner the King Caconzin,
(who was quiet and peaceable and stirred not against him) and took from him
ten thousand marks of plate, and much gold and other treasure, and afterward
burned him, and many other Indidian Gentlemen and principal persons of that
Kingdom, because they should not complain, saying that a dead dog biteth not.
They were in this Kingdom as superstitious and idolatrous as in the rest of
America. No divorcement was permitted amongst them, except the party made a
solemn oath, that they looked not the one on the other steadfastly and directly
at the time of their marriage. In the burying likewise of their Kings they were
superstitious, cruel, and Idolatrous. When any King of Mechoacan happened to
be brought to such extremity of sickness that hope of life was past; then did
he name and appoint which of his sons should inherit the state and Crown, and
being known the new King or heir presently sent for all the Governors,
Captains, and valiant soldiers, who had any office or charge, to come unto the
burial of his father, and he that came not, from thenceforth was held for a
Traitor, and so punished. When the death of the old King was certain, then
came all degrees of estates, and did bring their presents to the new King for
the approbation of his Kingdom: But if the King were not thoroughly dead, but
at the point of death, then the gates were shut in, and none permitted to
enter; and if he were thoroughly dead, then began a general cry and mourning,
and they were permitted to come where their dead King lay, and to touch him
with their hands. This being done the carcass was washed with sweet waters,
and then a fine shirt put upon him, and a pair of sho^ amde of Dear skin put
on his feet, and about his ankle^ were tied bell^ of gold, about the wrists of
his hands were put bracelet^ of Turkis^s and of gold likewise; about his neck
they did hang collars of precious stones and also of gold, and rings in his
ears, with a great Turkise in his neither lip. Then his body was laid upon a
large Beer whereon was placed a good bed under him; on his one side lay a bow
with a quiver of arrows, and on his other side lay an Image made of fine (...)
of his own stature or bigness, with a great ruff of fine feathers, shoes
upon his fee^, with bracelets and a collar of gold. While this was a doing,
others were bus^ ^n washing the men and women, which should be slain for to
accompany him into h^ll. These wretches that were to be slain, were first
banqueted and filled with drink^, (...) they should receive their death with
less pain. The new King did appoint those who should die for to serve the
King his father; and many of those s^ple souls esteemed that death so odious
for a thing of immortal glory. First six Gentlewomen of noble birth were
appointed to die; the one to have the office of keeper of his jewels, which he
was wont to wear; another for the office of cup bearer; another to give him
water with a basin and Ewer; another to give him always the Urinall; another
to be his Cook; and another to serve for Landress. They slew also many women,
slaves, and free-maidens for to attend upon the Gentlewomen, and moreover one
of every occupation within the City. When all these that were appointed to die
were washed, and their bellies full with meat and drink, then they painted
their faces yellow, and put garlands of sweet flowers upon each of their heads.
Then they went in order of procession before the Beer, whereon the dead King
was carried; some went playing on instruments made of Snail shells, and others
played upon bones and shells of Sea Tortois, others went whistling, and the
most part weeping. The sons of the dead King and other Noble men carried upon
their shoulders the Beer where the Corpse lay, and proceeded with an easy pace
toward the Temple of the God called Curicaveri; his kinsmen went round about
the Beer singing a sorrowful song. The officers and houshold-servants of the
Court, with other Magistrates and Rulers of justice bare the Standards and
diverse other Arms. And about midnight they departed in the order aforesaid out
of the Kings Palace with great light of firebrarnds, and with a heavy noise of
their trumpets and drums. The Citizens which dwelt where the Corse passed,
attended to make clean the street. And when they were come to the Temple, they
went four times round about a great fire which was prepared of Pine tree to
burn the dead body. Then the Beer was laid upon the fire, and in the mean
while that the body was burning, they mawled with a club those which had the
garlands, and afterward buried them four and four as they were apparelled
behind the Temple. The next day in the morning the ashes, bones and jewels were
gathered and laid upon a rich mantle, the which was carried to the Temple gate,
where the Priests attended to bless those divellish relics, whereof they
made a dow or paste, and thereof an Image, which was apparelled like a man,
with a visor on his face, and all other sorts of jewels that the dead King was
wont to wear, so that it seemed a gallant Idol. At the foot of the Temple
stairs they opened a grave ready made, which was square, large, two fadome
deep, it was also hanged with new mats round about, and a fair bed therein,
in the which one of the Priests placed the Idol made of ashes with his eyes
toward the East part, and did hang round about the walls Targets of gold and
silver, with bows and arrows, and many gallant tuffes of feathers with earthen
vessels, as pots, dishes, and platters, so that the grave was filled up with
household stuff, chests covered with leather, apparel, Jewels, meat drink
and armor. This done, the grave was shut up and made sure with beams,
boardes, and floored with earth on the top. All those Gentlemen who had served
or touched any thing in the burial, washed themselves and went to dinner in
the Court or yard of the Kings house without any table, and having dined they
wiped their hands upon certain locks of Cotton-wooll, hanging down their
heads, and not speaking any word, except it were to ask for drink. This
ceremony endured five days, and in all that time no fire was permitted to be
kindled in the City, except in the Kings house and Temples, nor yet any corn
was ground, or market kept, nor any durst go out of their houses, showing all
the sorrow that might be possible for the death of their King. And this was the
superstitious manner of burying the Kings of Mechoacan. This people did punish
adultery most rigorously; for to commit it was death as well for the man as the
wom^n. But if the adulterer were a Gentleman, his head was decked with
feathers, and after that he was hanged, and his body burned; and for this
offense was no pardon, either for man or woman. But for avoiding of adultery
they did permit other common wom^n, but no public and ordinary stews. Now the
Indians of Mechoacan are greatly taken with the popish devices, and are strong
in that religion, as any part of America.

The fourth and last Province of the Country or Empire of Mexico, is called
Galicia nova, and is watered with two very great rivers, the one named Piastle,
and the other San S^stian. This Province glories in many great Towns of
Indians; but especially in ^ix, inhabited both by Indians and Spaniards; the
first and chiefest is Xalisco, taken by Nunio d^ Guzman 1530. when he fled from
Mexico in a rage, and took prisoner and burned the King of Mecho^. The second
is Guadalaiara. The third Coanum. The fourth Compostel^. The fifth, St.
Espirit. The sixth, Copala, which now is called Nova Mexico, new Mexico. And
here it is that the Spaniards are daily warring against the Indians which live
Northward, and are not as yet reduced nor brought under the Spanish yoke and
government. They are valiant Indians, and hold the Spaniards hard to it; and
have great advantage against them in the rocks and mountains, where they abide
and cut off many Spaniards. Their chief weapons are but bows and arrows, and
yet with them from the thick Woods, hills and rocks they annoy and offend the
Spaniards exceedingly. I have heard some Spaniards say that they fly and
climb up the rocks like Goats; and when they draw nigh unto them, then they
cry out with a hideous noise shooting their arrows at them, and in an instant
are departed and fled unto another rock. The reason why the Spaniards are so
earnest to pursue and conquer these Indians, more then many others of America,
which as yet are not brought in subjection to the Spaniards, is for the many
Mines of silver and treasure of gold which they know to be there. They have
got already sure possession o^ part of those riches in the Mines, called St.
Lewis Sacatecas, from whence they send all the silver that is coined in the
Mint houses of Mexico and the City of Angels, and every year besides to Spain
in silver wedges at least six Millions. But the further the Spaniards go to
the North, still more riches they discover; and feign would they subdue all
those Northern parts (as I have heard them say) lest our English from Virginia,
and their other plantations, get in before them. I have heard them wonder that
our English enter no further into the maine land; surely say they, either they
fear the Indians, or else with a little paultry Tobacco they have as much as
will maintain them in laziness. Certainly they intend to conquer through
those heathenish Indians; until by land they come to Florida and Virginia,
(for so they boast) if they be not met with by some of our Northern Nations of
Europe, who may better keep them off then those poor Indians, and may do God
greater and better service with those rich Mines, then the Spaniards hitherto
have done.

Thus having spoken somewhat of the four Provinces of Mexico, which was the
first member of the division Mexican and Peruan; Now I shall briefly say
somewhat further of three more Countries belonging to the Mexican or Northern
Tract as opposite to the Peruan, omiting Florida, Virginia, Norumbega, Nova
Francia Corterialis, and Estotilandia, because I will not write as many do by
relation and hearsay, but by more sure intelligence, insight and experience. In
my first division next to Mexico, I placed Quivira, I^eatan, and Nicaragua; of
these three therefore I shall say a little, and then somewhat of the Peruan
part. Quivira is seated on the most Western part of America, just over against
Tartary, from whence being not much distant some suppose that the Inhabitants
first came into this new World. And indeed the Indians of America in many
things seem to be of the race and progeny of the Tartars, in that Quivira
and all the Westside of the Country toward Asia is far more populous then
the East toward Europe, which shows these parts to have been first
inhabited. Secondly, their uncivility, and barbarous properties tell us that
they are most like the Tartars of any. Thirdly, the West side of America if it
be not continent with Tartary, is yet disjoined by a small straight. Fourthly,
the people of Quivira nearest to Tartary, are said to follow the seasons and
pasturing of their cattle like the Tartarians. All this side of America is
full of herbage, and injoyeth a temperate air. The people are desirous of
glass more then of gold; and in some places to this day are Cannibals. The
chief riches of this Country are their Kine, which are to them as we say of our
Ale to drunkards, meat, drink and cloth, and more too. For the Hides yield them
houses, or at least the coverings of them; their bones bodkins, their hair
thread, their finews ropes; their horns, mawes and bladders, vessels; their
dung, fire; their Calve skins, budgets to draw and keep water; their blood,
drink; their flesh, meat.

There is thought to be some traffic from China, or Cathaya, hither to those
parts, where as yet the Spaniards have not entered. For when Uazquez de Coronado
conquered some part of it, he saw in the further Sea certain ships, not of
common making, which seemed to be well laden, and bare in their prowes,
Pelicans, which could not be conjectured to come from any Country, but one of
these two. In Quivira there are but two Provinces known unto us, which are
Cibola, and Nova Albion. Cibola lies on the Eastside, whose chief City is of
the same name, and denominates the whole Province. The chief Town next to
Cibola is called Totontaa, which is temperate and pleasant, being situated upon
a River so called. The third Town worth mentioning is called Tinguez, which was
burnt by the Spaniards; who under the conduct of Francisco Vasquez de Coronado
made this Province subject to the King of Spain, Anno Dom. 1540. And since this
Town of Tinguez has been rebuilt and inhabited by the Spaniards; There is a
goodly College of Jesuits, who only preach to the Indians of that country.
Nova Albion lies on the West side toward Tartary, and is very little
inhabited by the Spaniards, who have found no wealth or riches there. Our ever
Renowned and Noble Captain Sir Francis Drake discovered it, entered upon it, and
he named it Nova Albion, because the King that then was, did willingly submit
himself unto our Queen Elizabeth.

The Country abounds with fruits pleasing both the eye and the Palate. The
people are given to hospitality, but withal to witchcraft and adoration of
devils. The bounds between this Quivira and Mexico Empire is Mar Virmiglio, or
Californio. The third Kingdom belonging to the Mexican part and Northern Tract
is Iucatan; which was first discovered by Francisco Hernandez de Cordova, in
the year 1517. It is called Iucatan, not as some have conceited from Ioctan the
son of Heber, who they think came out of the East, where the Scripture places
him, Genesis 12. 23. to inhabit here, but from Iucatan which in the Indian
tongue, fignifieth, what say you? for when the Spaniards at their first
arriving in that Country did ask of the Indians the name of the place, the
Savages not understanding what they meaned, replied unto them Iucatan, which
is, what say you? whereupon the Spaniards named it, and ever since have called
it Iucatan. The whole Country is at least 900. miles in circuit, and is a
Peninsul^. It is situated over against the Isle of Cuba; and is divided into
three parts, first Iucatan it self, whose Cities of greatest worth, are
Campeche, Ualladolid, Merida, Simaricas, and one which for his greatness and
beauty, they call Caire. This Country among the Spaniards is held to be poor;
the chief Commodities in it are honey, wax, Hides, and some Sugar, but no
Indigo, Cochinil, nor Mines of silver; There are yet some drugs much esteemed
of by the Apothecaries, Cana fistula, Zarzaparilla especially; and great store
of Indian Maiz. There is also abundance of good Wood and Timber fit for
shipping, whereof the Spaniards do make very strong ships, which they use in
their voiages to Spain and back again. In the year 1632. the Indians of this
Country in many places of it were like to rebel against their Spanish
Governor, who vexed them sorely, making them bring in to him their Fowls and
Turkies (whereof there is also great abundance) and their honey and wax (wherein
he traded) at the rate and price which he pleased to set them for his better
advantage; which was such a disadvantage to them, that to enrich him they
impoverished themselves; and so resolved to betake themselves to the Woods and
Mountains; where in a rebellious way they continued some Months, until the
Franciscan Friars, who have there great power over them, reduced them back, and
the Governor (lest he should quite lose that Country by a further rebellion)
granted to them not only a general pardon in the Kings name, but for the
future promised to use them more mildly and gently.

The second part of it is called Guatemala, (wherein I lived for the space of
almost twelve years) whose Inhabitants have lost formerly half a million of
their kinsmen and friends by the unmercifull dealing of the Spaniards; and yet
for all the loss of so many thousands, there is no part of America more
flourishing then this with great and populous Indians Towns. They may thank
the Friars who defend them daily against the Spaniards cruelty, and this yet
for their own ends; for while the Indians flourish and increase, the Friars
purses flourish also and are filled. This Country is very fresh and plentiful.
The chief Cities are Guatemala, Cassuca, and Chiapa; whereof I shall speak more
largely hereafter. The third part of Iucatan is Acasamil, which is an Island
over against Guatemala, which is now commonly called by the Spaniards Sta.
Cruz, whose chief Town is Sta. Cruz.

The fourth and last Country of the division of the Mexican part and Northern
Tract of America, (which is under the Spanish Government, and my best knowledge
and e^perience) is Nicaragua, which stands South East from Mexico, and above
four hundred and fifty leagues from it. Yet it agrees somewhat with Mexico in
nature both of soil and Inhabitants. The people are of good stature, and of
color indifferent white. They had, before they received Christianity, a settled
and politic form of Government; Only, as S^n appointed no Law for a man's
killing of his father, so had this people none for the murderer of a King,
both of them conceiting, that men were not so unnatural, as to commit such
crimes. A thief they judged not to death, but adjudged him to be slave to that
man whom he had robbed; till by his service he had made satistaction: a
course truly more merciful and not less just, then the loss of life.

This Country is so pleasing to the eye, and abounding in all things
necessary, that the Spaniards call it Mahomets Paradise. Among other
flourishing trees, here grows one of that nature, that a man cannot touch any
of its branches, but it withers presently. It is as plentiful of Parrets, as
our Country of England is of Crows; Turkies, Fowls, Quails and Rabbets are
ordinary meat there. There are many populous Indian Towns (though not so many
as about Guatemala) in this Country; and especially two Cities of Spaniards;
the one Leon, a Bishops Seat, and the other Granada, which stands upon a Lake
of fresh water, which has above three hundred miles in compass, and having no
intercourse with the Ocean, does yet continually ebb and flow. But of this
Country, and of this City especially I shall say somewhat more, when I come to
speak of my travailing through it.

Thus I have briefly touched upon the Mexican part, and so much of the Northern
Tract as is under the King of Spain his Dominion, leaving more particulars,
until I come to show the order of my being in and journeying through some of
these Countries. I will now likewise give you a glimpse of the Southern Tract,
and Peruan part of America. Which contains chiefly five great Countries or
Kingdoms, some in whole, and others in part, subject to the Crown of Spain and
Portugal, which are, first Castella aurea; secondly, Gujana; thirdly, Peru;
fourthly, Brasile; fifthly, Chille. But I will not fill my History with what
others have written of the four last named Countries, wherein I was not much;
but what I could learn of Peru, I will briefly speak, and so come to the first
Castella aurea, through which I travailed. Peru is held to be yet more rich a
Country then is Mexico; for although it has not the convenience of trafique
by the North Sea, which Mexico has; but does send the Commodities in it to
Panama, and from thence transports them either over the straight Isthmus, or by
the River Chiagre to Partabel upon the North Sea; yet the Country is far
richer then Mexico, by reason of the more abundance of Mines of silver which
are in it. The mountains named Potosi are thought to be of no other metal,
which the King of Spain will not have to be opened until they have exhausted
those which are already discovered and dug, and have found the Spaniards
work enough, and yielded them treasure enough ever since they first conquered
those parts. The soil is very fruitful of all such fruits as are found in
Spain. The Olives are bigger then those of Spain, the oil sweeter and cleerer.
The Grapes yield also a wine far stronger then any of Spain, and there is
much made, by reason it cannot conveniently be brought from Spain. There is
likewise wheat in great store; and all this fruitful soil lies low under
high Mountains which divide betwixt Indians not as yet conquered and Brasile.
But those Mountains are a great help unto those pleasant Valleys with the
waters that fall from them; for in all those parts inhabited by Spaniards
toward the South Sea, it is most certain and most observable that it never
raineth, in so much that the houses are uncovered on the tops, and only matts
laid over them to keep off the dust, and yet is this Country what with the
waters that fall from the Mountains, what with the morning and evening dewes,
as fruitful and plentiful as any Country in the World. The chief City is
called Lima, where there is a Viceroy and a Court of Chancery, and an
Archbishop. It has a Port some two miles from it named Callau; where lie the
ships that convey yearly the treasure of that Kingdom to Panama. There lie
also other ships, which trafique to the East-India's, and to all the Coasts of
Guatemala, and to Acapulco the Southern Haven of Mexico. This Port of Callau is
not so strong as the great, nay inestimable wealth that is commonly in it and
in the City of Lim^ should require, for I have heard many Spaniards say, that
in the year 1620. a few ships of Hollanders (as some say) or of English (as
others affirm) appeared before the Haven-waiting for the ships that were to
convey the Kings revenews to Panama, and hearing that they were departed
(though by a false report) followed them, and so forsook the attempting to
take the Callau; which certainly had they manly attempted, they had taken it,
and in it the greatest treasure that in any one part of the world could have
been found. But the Spaniards seldom see thereabout foraine ships, and so
live more carelessly in securing or strengthening that Coast. Though Peru be
thus rich in fruits and Mines, yet Chille far exceeds it in gold; which
edgeth the Spaniards to a constant and continual War with the Inhabitants,
which are a strong, warlike, and most valiant people. They are grown as
skillful in the use of weapons, swords, Pistols and Muskets as the Spaniaods,
and have taken many Spaniards, men and women prisoners; and of the Spanish
women have had so many children, called Mestiz^es, that by them (who have
proved most valiant) they have much increased both their strength and skill.
They hold the Spaniards hard to it, and the War is become the most dangerous of
any the Spaniards have; in so much that the Counsel of Spain does pick out
from Flanders and Italy, the best soldiers to send them thither. And a
Captain that has served long, well and faithfully in Flanders, by way of
credit and promotion is sent to the Wars of Chille, to fight for that great
treasure of gold, which certainly is there. The Spaniards have it in three
fair Cities; the Conception (which is a Bishops Seat) and Santiago, and
Valdivia. This last is so named from one Valdivia, who was Governor of it, and
the first cause and author of those Wars.

This man was so extraordinarily covetous of the gold of that Country, that
he would not let the Indians possess or enjoy any of it themselves; but did
vex them, whip, and beat, yea and kill some of them, because they brought him
not enough, and employed them daily in seeking it out for him, charging them
with a tax and imposition of so much a day: which the Indians not being able to
perform, nor to satisfy an unsatiable mind and greedy covetousness,
resolved to rebel, but so that first they would fill and satiate his heart
with gold so that he should never more covet after that yellow and glittering
metal. Wherefore they joined and combined themselves together in a warlike
posture, and took some quantity of gold and melted it, and with it resolutely
came upon Valdivia the Governor, saying, O Valdivia we see thou have a greedy
and unsatiable mind and desire after our gold; we have not been able to
satisfy thee with it hitherto; but now we have devised away to satiate this
thy greedy covetousness; here is now enough, drink thy full of it; and with
these words they took him, and powered the melted gold down his throat,
wherewith he died, never more coveting after that bright and shining dross,
and naming with his name and death that City of Valdivia, and with his
covetousness leaving a rebellion which has continued to a cruel and bloody
War unto this day.

Guiana and Brasile I shall omit to speak of, not having been in any part of
them. Brasile is little talked of by the Spaniards, belonging to the Crown of
Portugal, and now part of it to the high and mighty States of the Netherlands,
who will better satisfy by their Histories, and acquaint Europe with the
riches that are in it.

I return unto the first part mentioned by me in the Southern and Peruan Tract,
which was said to be Castella aurea, golden Castile, so called for the
abundance of gold that is found in it. This contains the Northern part of
Peruana, and part of the Isthmus, which runs between the North and South
Sea. Besides the gold in it, yet it is admirably stored with silver, Spices,
Pearls, and medicinal Herbs. It is divided into four Provinces. The first is
called Castella deloro; the second, Nova Andaluzia; the third Nova Granada; the
fourth, Carthagena. Castella deloro is situated in the very Isthmus, and is not
very populous by reason of the unhealthfulnesse of the air, and noisome savor
of the standing pooles. The chief places belonging to the Spaniards, are first
Theonimay, or Nombre de Dios on the East; the second, which is six leagues from
Nombre de Dios is Portabel, now chiefly inhabited by the Spaniards and
Mulattoes, and Blackmores, and Nombre de Dios almostutterly forsaken by reason
of its unhealthfulnesse. The ships which were wont to anchor in Nombre de Dios,
and there to take in the Kings treasure, which is yearly brought from Peru to
Panama, and from thence to the North Sea, now harbor themselves in Portabel;
which signisyeth Porto bello, a fair and goodly Haven, for so indeed it is,
and well fortified at the entrance with three Castles, which can reach and
command one another. The third and chief place belonging to the Spaniards in
Castella del oro is Panama, which is on the Westside and upon the South Sea.
This City and Nombre de Dios were both built by Didacus de Niquesa. And Nombre
de Dios was so called, because Niquesa having been crossed with many mischances
and misadventures at Sea, when he came to this place greatly rejoiced, and bad
his men now go on shore in Nombre de Dios, in the name of God, in the name of
God. But as I have before observed, the air being here very unhealthy, the
King of Spain in the year 1584. commanded the houses of Nombre de Dios to be
pulled down, and to be rebuilt in a more healthy and convenient place: which
was performed by Peter A^ias in Portabel. But being now upon Nombre de Dios, I
should wrong my Country if I should not set out to the public view the worth
of her people showed upon this place, and to this day talked on and admired by
the Spaniards, who do not only remember Sir Francis Drake, and teach their
children to dread and fear even his name for his attempts upon Carthagena and
all the coast about, and especially upon Nombre de Dios, and from it marching
as far as the great mountain called St. Pablo toward Panama: but
furthermore keep alive amongst them (and in this my History it shall not die)
the name of one of Sir Francis Drake his followers and Captains named John
Oxenham, whose attempt on this Coast was resolute and wonderful.

This Noble and gallant Gentleman arriving with threescore and ten soldiers in
his company as resolute as himself, a little above this Town of Nombre de
Dios drew a land his ship, and covering it with boughs, marched over the land
with his Company guided by Black-mores, until he came to a river. Where he cut
down wood, made him a Pinnace, entered the South Sea, went to the Island of
Pearls, where he lay ten days waiting for a prize, which happily he got
(though not so happily after kept it) for from that Island he set upon two
Spanish ships, and finding them unable to fight, he speedily made them yield,
and intercepted in them threescore thousand pound weight of gold, and two
hundred thousand pound weight in bars or wedges of silver, and returned
safely again to the maine land. And though by reason of a mutiny made by his
own Company he neither returned to his country nor to his hidden ship; yet was
it such a strange adventure as is not to be forgotten, in that the like was
never by any other attempted, and by the Spaniards is to this day with much
admiration recorded.

Much part of this Castella aurea as yet is not subdued by the Spaniards, and
so doubtless a great treasure lies hi^ in it for that people and nation whose
thoughts shall aspire to find it out. In the year 1637. when I chanced to be in
Panama returning homewards to my Country, there came thither some twenty
Indians Barbarians by way of peace to treat with the President of the Chancery
concerning their yielding up themselves to the government of the King of
Spain. But as I was informed afterward at Carthagena, nothing was concluded
upon, for that the Spaniards dare not trust those Indians, whom they have found
to have rebelled often against them for their hard usage and carriage toward
them. These Indians which then I saw were very proper, tall and lusty men, and
well complexioned; and among them one of as red a hair as any our nation can
show; they had bobs of gold in their ears, and some of them little pieces of
gold made like a half moon hanging upon their neither lips, which argues
store of that treasure to be amongst them. Unto this country is joining Nova
Andaluzia, which has on the North side Castella del oro, and on the South
Peru: The best Cities in it are Tocoio, now by the Spaniards called St.
Margarets, and another called ^. Espiritu. Nova Granada is situated on the
South side of Carthagena, and from the abundance and fertility of Granada in
Spaino it has taken its name. The chief Towns and Cities in it are six.
First Tungia, which is supposed to be directly under the Aequat^r. The second
is Tochaimum. The third, Popaian, the richest of them all. The fourth, Sta.
Fee, or St. Faith, an Archbishops seat, and a Court of Justice and Chancery,
governed like Panama and Guatemala, by a President and six Judges, and a Kings
Attorney and two high Justices of Court; who have six thousand ducats a year
allowed them out of the Kings treasure. The fifth City is Palma; and the sixth
Merida. From Carthagena through this country of Granada lies the rode way to
Lima in Peru, all by land. This Country is very strong by reason of the
situation of it much amongst stony rocks, which compass and environ it, and
through which there are very narrow passages. Yet it is full of pleasant
valleys which do yield much fruit, Corn and Indian Maiz. There are also in it
some Mines of silver, and many golden sanded rivers. Carthagena, which is the
last Province of Castella aurea, has also a very fruitful soil, in the which
grows a tree, which if any one do touch, he will hardly escape a poisoning.

The chief Cities in it are, first Carthagena, which Sir Francis Drake in the
year 1585. surprised, and (as the Spaniards affirm) burned most part of it,
and besides inestimable sums of money, took with him from thence 230. pieces of
Ordnance. I dare say now it has not so many; yet it is reasonable well
fortified; though not so strong as Portabel. It is a fair and gallant City and
very rich, by reason of the pearls which are brought to it from Margarita, and
the Kings revenues, which from all Nova Granada are sent thither. It is a
Bishops seat, and has many rich Churches and Cloisters. It is not governed by
a Court of Justice and Chancery as Sta. Fee is, but only by one Governor. It
has been often moved to the Council of Spain to have some Galleys made to
run about those Seas, and that Carthagena be the chief harbor of them.
From this City received England the loss of that little Island named
Providence by us, and by the Spaniards Sta. Catalina, which though but little,
might have been of a great, nay greater advantage to our Kingdom, than any
other of our plantations in America; which the Spaniards well understood when
they set al their strength of Carthagena against it; but I hope the Lord has
his time appointed when we shall advantage our selves by it again. To this City
of Carthagena comes every year also in small Frigots most of the Indigo,
Cochinil and Sugar, which is made in the country of Guatemala; the Spaniards
thinking it safer to ship these their goods in little Frigots upon the lake of
Granada in Nicaragua, and from thence to send them to Carthagena to be shipped
with the Galeons that come from Portabel with the treasure of Peru, than to
send them by the ships of Honduras, which have often been a prey unto the
Hollanders. These frigots were thought by the Spaniards to come too near the
reach of Providence, and therefore it has been their care and providence to
remove us from this reach of their Frigots. The second great Town of this
Country of Carthagena is Abuida. The third Sta. Martha, which is a rich
government of Spaniards, and does much fear our English and Holland ships; it
is seated on the river de Abuida, otherwise called St. John and Rio di Grand.
There is also Venez^ela and New-Caliz, great, rich, and strong Towns. And
these three last regions, Andaluzia Nova, Nova Granada, and Carthagena are by
the Spaniards called Tierra firm, or firm land, for that they are the
strength of Peru from the North, and the basis of this reversed Pyramid.

Thus have I brought thee, Gentle Reader, round about America, and showed thee
the Continent of that biggest part of the world; from the which thou may
observe the power and greatness of the King of Spain, who has got under his
Scepter and Dominion so many thousand miles, which were they reckoned up, would
be found to be more then are about all Europe. But not only is America great
and spacious by land, but also by sea, glorying in more and some greater
Islands, then any other part of the world. It would but cause tediousness, and
seem prolixity to number them all up, which is a work hard and difficult, for
that many as yet are not known nor inhabited, and whose goodness and
greatness is not discovered; for the Islands called Luc^idas are thought to be
four hundred at least. Therefore I will omit to be over tedious and prolixe,
and will but briefly speak of the best and chief of them, taking them in
order from that part of the Continent, Carthagena, where even now I left thee.
But in the first place calls upon my pen the Jewel Island called Margarita,
which is situated in the sea nigh unto Castella aurea, and not far distant
from two other Islands, named Cubag^a and Trinidad^. True it is this Island of
Margarita is by some much slighted for want of corn, grass, trees and water;
in so much that it has been known sometime that an inhabitant of that Island
has willingly changed for a Tun of water a Tun of wine. But the great
abundance of precious stones in it makes amends for the former wants and
defects; for from them is the name of Margarita imposed on that Island. But
especially it yields store of pearls, those gemmes which the Latin writers
call Uniones, because nulli duo reperiuntur indiscreti, they always are found
to grow in couples. In this Island there are many rich Merchants, who have
thirty, forty, fifty Black-more slaves only to fish out of the sea about the
rocks these pearls. These Black-mores are much made of by their Masters, who
must needs trust them with a treasure hidden in the waters, and in whose will
it is to pass by of those they find, none, few, or many. They are let down in
baskets into the Sea, and so long continue under the water, until by pulling
the rope by which they are let down, they make their sign to be taken up. I
have heard some say that have thus dealt in pearls, that the chief meat they
feed their Black-mores with, is roast-meat, which makes them their wind and
breath longer in the water. From Margarita are all the pearls sent to be
refined and bored to Carthagena, where is a fair and goodly street of no other
shops then of these Pearledressers. Commonly in the month of Iidy there is a
ship or two at most ready in that Island to carry the Kings revenue, and the
Merchants pearls to Carthagena. One of these ships are valued commonly at
threescore thousand, or fourscore thousand ducats, and sometimes more; and
therefore are reasonable well manned; for that the Spaniards much fear our
English and the Holland ships. The year that I was in Carthagena, which was
1637. a ship of these laden with pearls was chased by one of our ships from
the Island of Providence (by some it was thought to be our ship called the
Neptune) which after a little fighting had almost brought the poor Spaniard to
yield his pearies, and had certainly carried away that great treasure (as I was
informed in Carthagena four days after the fight by a Spaniard who was in the
ship of Margarita) had not two other ships of Holland come between to challenge
from our English man that prize, alleging their privilege from the mighty
States united for all prizes upon those seas and coast. And whilst our English
and Hollander did thus strive for the Pearls, the Spanish ship ran on shore
upon a little Island, and speedily unladed and hid in the woods part of the
treasures, and perceiving the Hollander coming eagerly in pursuit of it, the
Spaniard set on fire the ship, and neither Spaniard, English, nor Hollander,
enjoyed what might have been a great and rich prize to England. From Carthagena
was sent presently a man of War to bring home the pearls hid in the wood,
which were not the third part of what was in the ship.

Iamaica is another Island under the power of the Spaniards, which is in length
280. miles, and 70. in breadth, which though it exceed Margarita in sweet and
pleasant streams and fountains of water, yet is far inferior to it in
riches. Some Hides, some Sugar, and some Tobacco are the chief commodities
from thence. There are only two Towns of note in it, Oristana and Sevilli;
here are built ships which have proved as well at sea, as those that are made
in Spain. This Island was once very poulous, but now is almost destitute of
Indians; for the Spaniards have s^ain in it more then 60000; in so much that
women as well here as on the Continent did kill their children before they had
given them life, that the issues of their bodies might not serve so cruel a
nation. But far beyond the two former is the Island of Cuba, which is three
hundred miles long, and seventy broad, which was first made known to Europe by
Columbus his second navigation. This Island is full of Forests, Lakes, and
mountains. The air is very temperate, the soil very fertile, producing
brass of exact perfection, and some gold though drossie has formerly been
found in it. It abounds also with Ginger, Cassia, Masticke, Aloes, some
Cinnamon, Cana fistula, Zarzaparilla, and Sugar, and has of flesh, fish, and
fowls great plenty; but especially such store of sea Tortois, and Hogs, that
the ships at their return to Spain make their chief provision of them. My
self chanced to take physic there, and whereas I thought that day I should
have a foul or rabbet after my physics working, they brought me a boiled
piece of fresh young Porke, which when I refused to eat, they assured me it was
the best dish the Doctors did use to prescribe upon such days.

The chief Cities of this Island are Santiago on the Northern shore, built by
James de Valaseo, a Bishops seat; and secondly, Havana, which is also on the
Northern shore, and is a safe Rode for ships, and the staple of merchandise,
and (as the Spaniards call it) the key of all the West-India's, to lock up or
unlock the door or entrance to all America. Here rides the King of Spaines
Navy, and here meet all the Merchant ships from several ports and Havens of
all those Countries aforementioned, whether from the Islands or from the
Continent: in a word here commonly in the month of September is joined all the
treasure as* I may say of America, all the King of Spains revenews, with as
much more of Merchant goods, which the year that I was there were thought to be
in all the worth of thirty millions. And the ships which that year there did
meet to strengthen one another were 53. sail, and set out sooner that year
then any other upon the 16. of September, having that day a fair wind to wafte
them homewards through the Gulf of Bahama. Havana therefore being the
storehouse of all Americaes treasure, it has been the Spaniards chief care
to fortify that; and truly it is so strong, that the Spaniards hold it
impossible to be taken, and do boast of four impregnable forts, to wit at
Antwerp, Millan, Pamplona, and Havana. This has two strong Castles, the one at
the point or entrance of the Haven toward the Sea; the other more within, on
the other side almost over against it; which two Castles (the passage in the
mouth of the haven being so narrow, that one only ship in breast may enter)
will keep and defend the Port from many hundred sail. I was my self in the
great and chief Castle, and truly found it very strong, though by land I
judged it might be as easily taken, as other strong Castles here in Europe have
been overpowerd by a great and powerful army. It has in it besides many
others, twelve pieces of Ordnance of brass exceeding great, which they call
The twelve Apostles. But for all this strength of the Havana, it could not once
defend six or seven millions (according to the Spaniards own account) which
the one part of the Kings Navy brought from St. John de Ulhua to the sight of
this impregnable fort, and protected with such twelve Apostles. It was as I
take it the year 1629. when that ever renowned Hollander (whom like unto our
Drake the Spaniards to this day fear and tremble at, calling him Pie de Palo,
that is, wooden leg) waited at the Cape of St. Anthrny for the Spanish fleet of
Nova Hispania; which according to his expectation coming, he manly set upon it,
saluting and welcoming the great treasure in it with a full side of roaring
Ordnance; the sound was more doleful then joyful and welcome to the
Spaniards, who thought it safer sleeping in a whole skin, then to be
unquieted by fighting, and with the sight of torn and mangled bodies, by Mars
his furious and fiery balls, and so called a Council of war to resolve what
they should do to save the Kings great treasure which was entrusted to them in
those ships. The result of the Council was to fly and with some discharging
of their Ordinance to defend themselves, until they could put into a river in
the Island of Cuba, not far from Havana called Matanzos. There were in that
fleet of Spain many gallants and Gentlemen, and two Judges of the Chancery of
Mexico, which were that year sent. to Madrid as guilty in the mutiny before
mentioned, there was in it of my acquaintance a Dominican Friar, named Friar
Iacintho de Hozes, who had been sent to those parts to visit all the Dominican
Cloisters of New-Spaine, and had got of bribes at least eight thousand ducats
(as I was informed the year after by a Friar his compainon, whom he sent from
Havana to Guatemala to make known to his friends his loss of all that he had
got, and to beg a new contribution to help him home) there was also in that
fleet Don Martin de Carillo; who was the Inquisitor and Commissioner to judge
the Delinquents in the forementioned mutiny of Mexico, who was thought to have
got twenty thousand ducats clear; besides these a Bishop, and many rich
Merchants, all under the command of Don Iuan de Guzman y Torres Admiral to all
the fleet. They all fled for their lives and goods; but the gallant Hollanders
chased them. The Spaniards thinking the Hollanders would not venture up the
river after them, put into Matanzos; but soon after they had entered, they
found the river too shallow for their heavy and great bellied Galeons, and so
run them up on ground; which done, the better and richer sort escaped to land,
endeavoring to escape with what wealth they could; some got out Cabinets, some
bags; which the Hollanders perceiving came upon them with bullet messengers,
which soon overtooke and stopped their flying treasures. Some few Cabinets were
hid, all the rest became that day the gallant Pie de Palo or the wooden legd
Captains prize for the mighty States of Holland. The Friar Hozes was got into
a boat with his Cabinet under his habit, which had in it nothing but chains of
gold, diamonds, Pearls and precious stones; and half a dozen Hollanders leapt
into the boat after him, and snatched it from him, as his own friend and
companion related after to us in Guatemala. Don Iuan de Guzman y Torres the
Admiral when he came to Spain was imprisoned, lost his wits for a while, and
after was beheaded. Thus in the sight of impregnable Havana and of those 12
brazen Apostles, was Holland glorious and made rich with a seven million prize.

But before I end this Chapter, I may not forget the chiefest of all the
Islands of this new world, which is called Hispaniola, and formerly by the
natives Hatie, which lamenteth the loss of at least three millions of Indians
murdered by her new Masters of Spain. This Island is the biggest that as yet
is discovered in all the world; it is in compass about 1500. miles, and
enjoyneth a temperate air, a fertile soil, rich mines; and trades much in
Ambar, Sugar, Ginger, Hides, and Wax. It is reported for certain that here in
twenty days herbs will ripen and roots also and be fit to be eaten, which is
a strong argument of the exact temperature of the air. It yields in nothing
to Cuba, but excels it in three things especially; first in the finenesse of
the gold, which is here more pure and unmixed; secondly, in the increase of the
Sugar, one Sugar Cane here silling twenty and sometimes thirty measures; and
thirdly, in the goodness of the soil for tillage, the corn here yielding an
hundred fold. This fertility is thought to be caused by four great rivers,
which water and enrich all the four quarters of the Island; all four do spring
from one only mountain, which stands in the very midst and center of the
Country, Iuna running to the East, Artihinnacus to the West, Iacchus to the
North, and Naihus to the South.

This Country is ^o replenished with Swine and Cattle, that they become wild
among the woods and Mountains, so that the ships that sail by this Island,
and want provision, go here a shore where it is little inhabited and kill of
Cattle, wild swine and bores, till they have made up a plentiful provision.
Much of this Country is not inhabited, by reason that the Indians are quite
consumed. The chief places in it are first St. Domingo, where there is a
Spanish President and Chancery with six Judges and the other officers belonging
to it, and it is the Seat of an Archbishop, who though he enjoy not so much
yearly rent and revenues as other Archbishops, especially they of Mexico and
Lima; yet he hat^ (...) honor above all the rest, for that he is the primate
of all the India's, this Island having been conquered before the other parts,
and so bearing antiquity above them all. There are also other rich Towns of
trading, as Sta. Isabella, S. Thome, S. John, Maragna, and Por^o. And thus has
my pen run over Sea and Land, Islands and most of the Continent that is subject
to the Spaniards to show thee, my Reader, the state of America at this time. It
is called America because Americus Vespusius first discovered it; though
afterward Columbus gave us the first light to discern these Countries both by
example and directions. Besides the factions spoken of before between the
Native Spaniards and those that come from Spain, there is yet further in most
parts of it, but especially in Peru a deadly faction and mortal hatred between
the Biscains and the Spaniards of Castile and Estremadura, which has much
shaken the quiet state of it, and threatened it with rebellion and destruction.

There are in all America four Archbishopricks, which are Sto. Domingo,
Mexico, Lima, and Sta. Fee, and above thirty inferior Bishops. The politic
Administration of Justice is chiefly committed to the two Viceroyes residing at
Lima and Mexico, and with subordination unto them unto other Presidents,
Governors, and high Justices, called Alcaldes Majores; except it be the
President of Guatemala, and of Santo Domingo, who are as absolute in power as
the Viceroyes, and have under them Governors, and high Justices, and are no
ways subordinate to the former Viceroyes, but only unto the Court and
Council of Spain.

CHAP. XIII. Showing my journey from Mexico to Chiapa Southward, and the most
remarkable places in the way.
HAving now gone round America with a brief and superficial description of it,
my desire is to show unto my Reader what parts of it I travailed through, and
did abide in, observing more particularly the state, condition, strength, and
Commodities of those Countries which lie Southward from Mexico. It is further
my desire, nay the chief ground of this my History, that whilst my Country does
here observe an English man, become American, travailing many thousand miles
there, as may be noted from St. John de Ulhua to Mexico, and from thence
Southward to Panama, and from thence Northward again to Carthagena, and to
Havana, Gods goodness may be admired, and his providence extolled who
suffered not the meanest and unworthiest of all his Creatures to perish in such
unknown Countries; to be swalled by North or South Sea, where shipwracks were
often feared; to be lost in Wildernesses where no tongue could give
directions; to be devoured by Wolves, Lions, Tigers, or Crocodiles, which
there so much abound; to fall from steepy rocks and mountains, which seem to
dwell in the aereall Region, and threaten with fearful spectacles of deep and
profound precipices, a horrid and inevitable death to those that climb up to
them; to be eaten up by the greedy Earth which there does often quake and
tremble, and has sometimes opened her mouth to draw in Towns and Cities; to
be stricken with those fiery darts of Heaven and thunderbolts which in winter
season threaten the Rocks and Cedars; to be enchanted by Satan's Instruments,
Witches and Sorcerers, who there as on their own ground play their prankes more
then in the parts of Christendom; to be quite blinded with Romish Errors and
Superstitions, which have double blinded the purblind heathenish Idolaters; to
be wedded to the pleasures* and licentiousness, which do there allure; to
be glutted with the plenty and dainties of fish, flesh, fowls, and fruits,
which do there entice; to be pufled up with the spirit of pride and powerful
command and authority over the poor Indians, which does there provoke; to be
tied with the Cords of vanity and ambition, which there are strong; and finally
to be glewed in heart, and affection to the dress of gold, silver, Pearls, and
Jewels, whose plenty there does bind, blind, captivate and enslave the soul.
Oh I say, let the Lords great goodness and wonderful providence be observed
who suffered not an English stranger in all these dangers to miscarry, but was
a guide unto him there in all his travailes, discovered unto him ^o the espies
in Canaan, and as to Joseph in Egypt the provision, wealth and riches of that
world, and safely guided him back to relate to England, the truth of what no
other English eye did ever yet behold. From the month of October until
February I did abide with my friends, and companions the Friars under the
command of Friar Calvo in that house of recreation called St. Iacintho, and
from thence enjoyed the sight of all the Towns and of what else was worth the
seeing about Mexico. But the time I was there, I was careful to inform my
self of the state of Philippinas, whither my first purposes had drawn me from
Spain. It was my fortune to light upon a Friar and an acquaintance of some of
my friends, who was that year newly come from Manila whither I was going; who
wished me and some other of my friends as we tendered our souls good never to
go to those parts, which were but snares and trap-dores to let down to hell,
where occasions and temptations to sin were daily, many in number, mighty in
strength, and to get out of them, labor and opus, hard and difficult. And that
himself, had not he by stealth gotten away (and that to save his soul)
certainly he had never come from thence; who had often upon his knees begged
leave of his superiors to return to Spain, and could not obtain it. Many
particulars we could not get from him, nor the reasons of his coming away;
Only he would often say that the Friars that live there are devils in private
and in those retired places where they live among the Indians to instruct and
teach them; and yet in public before their superiors and the rest of Friars
they must appear Saints, they must put on the cloak of hypocrisy to cover
their inward devilishnesse, they must be clothed with sheeps skins though
within they be lupi rapaces, ravenous Wolves, ravening after their neighbors
Wives, and ravening after their neighbors wealth; and yet with all this
unpreparednesse, with this outward, seeming and frothy sanctity, and inward
hellishnesse and deep rooted worldliness and covetousness, when the
Superiors command and please to send them, they must go in a disguised manner
to Iapan or China to convert to Christianity those people though with peril
and danger of their lives. Many such like discourses we got out of this Friar;
and that if we went to live there, we must be subject to the penalties of
many Excommunications for trivial toys and trifles, which the Superiors do
lay upon the Consciences of their poor Subjects, who may as soon strive
against the common course of nature not to see with their eyes, nor hear with
their ears, nor speak with their tongues, as to observe all those things
which against sense, reason and nature with grievous censures and
Excommunications are charged and fastened upon them. He told us further of
some Friars that had despaired under those rigorous courses, and hanged
themselves, not being able to bear the burden of an afflicted and tormented
Conscience; and of others that had been hanged, some for murdering of their
rigid and cruel Superiors; and some that had been found in the morning
hanging with their queanes at the Cloister gates, having been found together
in the night, and so murdered and hanged up either by the true Husband, or by
some other who bare affection to the woman. These things seemed to us very
strange, and we perceived that all was not gold that glistred, nor true zeal
of souls that carried so many from Spain to those parts; or if in some there
were at first a better and truer zeal then in others, when they came to
Philippinas, and among those strong temptataions, we found that their zeal
was soon quenched. This reason moved me and three more of my friends to
relent in our purposes of leaving of America, and going any further, for we
had learned that maxim, qui amat p^riculum, peribit in^o; and, qui tangit
picem, inquinabitur ab ea; He that loves the danger, shall fall and perish in
it; and he that touches pitch shall be smeared by it. Wherefore we communed
privately with our selves, what course we might take, how we might that year
return back to Spain, or where we might abide, if we returned not to Spain.
For we knew, if our Superior Calvo should understand of our purposes to go
no further, he would lay upon us an Excommunication to follow, nay and that he
would secure us in a Cloister prison until the day and time of our departure
from Mexico. Our resolutions we made a secret of our hearts; yet could not I
but impart it to one more special and intimate friend of mine, who was an
Irish Friar, named Thomas de Leon, whom I perceived a little troubled with so
long a journey as was at hand, and found often wishing he had never come from
Spain; and as soon as I had acquainted him with what I meant to do, he
rejoiced and promised to stay with me. The time was short which we had to
dispose of our selves; but in that time we addressed o^r selves to some
Mexican Friars and made known unto them, that if our Superior Calvo would
give us leave, we would willingly stay in Mexico or in any Cloister
thereabouts, until we could better fit our selves to return to Spain again.
But they being natives and borne in that Country discovered presently unto us
that inveterate spite and hatred which they bare to such as came from Spain;
they told us plainly that they and true Spaniards born did never agree, and
that they knew their Superiors would be unwilling to admit of us; yet
furthermore they informed us that they thought we might be entertained in the
Province of Guaxaca, where hal^ the Friars were of Spain and half Criolians and
Natives; but in case we should not speed there, they would warrant us we
should be welcome to the Province of Guatemala, where almost all the Friars
were of Spain, and did keep under such as were Natives born in that Country. It
did a little trouble us to consider that Guatemala was three hundred leagues
off, and that we were ignorant of the Mexican tongue, and unprovided of money
and horses for so long a journey. But yet we considered Philippinas to be
further, and no hopes there of returning ever again to Christendom; wherefore
we resolved to rely upon Gods providence only, and to venture upon a three
hundred leagues journey with what small means we had, and to sell what Books and
small trifles we had to make as much money as might buy each of us a horse. But
while we were thus preparing our selves secretly for Guatemala we were
affrighted and disheartened with what in the like case to ours happened. A Friar
of our company named Friar Peter Borrallo, without acquainting us or any other
of his friends with what he intended, made a secret escape from us, and (as
after we were informed) took his way alone to Guatemala. This so incensed our
Superior Calvo, that after great search and enquiry after him, he betook
himself to the Viceroy begging his assistance and Proclamation, in the public
Market place, for the better finding out his lost sheep, and alleging that
none ought to hide or privily to harbor any Friar that had been sent from
Spain to Philippinas to preach there the Gospel, for that the foresaid Friars
were sent by the King of Spain, whose bread they had eat, and at whose charges
they had been brought from Spain to Mexico, and at the same Kings charges ought
to be carried from Mexico to Philippinas; and therefore if any Friar now in
the half way should recant of his purpose of going to Philippinas, and should
by flight escape from his Superior and the rest of his company, the same ought
to be punished as guilty of defrauding the Kings charges. This reason of Calv^
being a politic and state reason prevailed so far with the Viceroy, that
immediately he commanded a Proclamation to be made against whosoever should
know of the said Peter Borrallo and should not produce him to his Highness, or
should harbor him or any other Friar belonging to Philippinas from that time
forward until the ships were departed from Acapulco; and that whosoever should
trespass against this Proclamation, should suffer imprisonment at his
Highness his will and and pleasure, and the penalty of five hundred Ducats to
be paid in at the Kings Exchequer. With this Proclamation Calvo began to
insult over us, and to tell us, we were the Kings slaves under his conduct,
and that if any of us durst to leave him (for he wa^ jealous of most of us)
he doubted not but with the Viceroy his assistance and Proclamation he should
find both us and Peter Borrallo out to our further shame and confusion. This
did very much trouble us, and made my Irish friend Thomas de Leon his heart to
faint, and his courage to relent, and utterly to renounce before me his former
purposes of staying and hiding himself; yet he protested to me, if I was
still of the same mind, he would not discover me; but seeing his weakness,
I durst not trust him, but made as if I were of his mind. Thus I betook my
self to the other three of my friends (of whom one was Antonio Melendez that
had been the first cause of my coming from Spain) whom I found much troubled,
doubtful and wavering what course to take.

They considered if we should fly, what a shame it would be to us to be taken
and brought back to Mexico as prisoners, and forcedly against our wills to be
shipped to Philippinas; they considered further if they went, what a slavish
and uncomfortable life they should live in Philippinas, without any hopes of
ever returning again to Christendom; yet further they looked upon the Viceroy
his Proclamation, and thought it hard to break through the opposition and
authority of so great a man; and lastly in the Proclamation they beheld the
estimation that Calvo had of them, as of slaves and ^ugitives to be cried in a
public Market place. But after all these serious thoughts our only comfort was
that Peter Borallo was safely escaped, and (as we were informed) had been met
far from Mexico travailing alone toward Guatemala. And we thought, why might
not we escape as well as he. Then I told them that my resolution was to stay,
though alone I returned either to Spain, or took my journey to Guatemala; the
rest were glad to see me resolute, and gave their hands that they would
venture as much as I should. Then we set upon the time when we should take our
flight, and agreed that every one should have a Horse in readiness in Mexico,
and that the night before the rest of our company should depart from Mexico
toward Acapulco to take shipping, we should by two and two in the evening
leave St. Iacint^o, and meet in Mexico where our Horses stood, and from thence
set out and travail all the night, continuing our journey so the first two or
three nights and resting in the day time, until we were some twenty or thirty
leagues from Mexico. For we thought the next morning Calvo awaking and missing
us would not stop the journey of the rest of his company for our sakes, to
search and inquire after us; or if he did, it would be but for one day or two
at the most, till he had inquired for us in Mexico, or a days journey in some
of the common or beaten rodes of Mexico, where we would be sure he should not
hear of us; for we also agreed to travail out of any common or known rode for
the first two or three nights. This resolution was by us as well performed and
carried on, as it had been agreed upon, though some had been fearful that a
counsel betwixt four could never be kept secret, nor such a long journey as
of nine hundred miles be compassed with such small means of money as was among
us, for the maintenance of our selves and Horses; for after our Horses were
bought, we made a common purse, and appointed one to be the purse-bearer, and
found that amongst us all there were but twenty ducats, which in that rich and
plentiful country was not much more then here twenty English shillings, which
seemed to us but as a morning dew, which would soon be spent in provender only
for our Horses; yet we resolved to go on, relying more upon the providence of
God, then upon any earthly means; and indeed this proved to us a far better
support then all the dross of gold and silver could have done; and we reckoned
that after we had travailed forty leagues from Mexico, and entered without
fear into the rode, we had for our twenty ducats near forty now in our
common purse. The reason was, for that most commonly we went either to Friars
Cloisters who knew us not, or to rich farms of Spaniards who thought nothing
too good for us, and would not only entertain us stately, but at our
departure would give us money for one or two days journey. All our fear was
to get safely out of Mexico, for we had been informed that Calvo had obtained
from the Viceroy officers to watch in the chiefest rodes both day and night
until he had departed with his Train of Friars to Acapulco.

And for all the Viceroy his Proclamation we got a true and trusty friend, who
offered to guide us out of Mexico by such a way as we needed not to fear any
would watch for us. So with our friend and a map about us to guide us after he
had left us in the morning, we cheerfully set out of Mexico about ten of the
clock at night, about the middle of February, and meeting no body about
Guadalupe which was the way we went out (though the contrary way to Guatemala,
which on purpose we followed for fear the true way should be beset) we
comfortably travailed all that night, till in the morning we came to a little
Town of Indians, where we began to spend of our small stock, calling upon the
Indians for a Turkey and Capon to break our fast with our friend and guide
before he returned to Mexico. Breakefast being ended we took our leaves of him,
and went to rest, that we might be more able to perform the next nights
journey, which was to Cross the Country toward Atlisco, which is in a valley
of twenty miles about at least, and does give it the name of the valley of
Atlixco and is a valley much mentioned in all those parts, for the exceeding
great plenty of wheat that is there reaped every year, and is the chief
sustenance and relief of Mexico and all the Towns about. In this Valley are
many rich Towns of Spaniards and Indians; but we shunned to enter into them,
and went from farm to farm out of the highways, where we found good
entertainment of those rich Farmers and Yeomen, who bare such respect unto the
Priests, that truly they thought themselves happy with our company. Here we
began to shake off all fear, and would no more like Bats and Owls fly in the
night, but that we might with more pleasure enjoy the prospect of that valley,
and of the rest of the Country we travailed by day; yet still crossing the
Country, we went from thence toward another valley called the valley of St.
Pablo, or Paul's valley, which though it be not as big as the valley of Atlisco,
yet is held to be a richer valley; for here they enjoy a double harvest of
wheat every year. The first seed they sow is watered, and grows with the
common season rain; and the second seed which they sow in summer as soon as
their first harvest is in, when the season of rain is past, they water with
many Springs which fall into that Valley from the mountains which round beset
it, and let in the water among their wheat at their pleasure, and take it away
when they see fit. Here live Yeomen upon nothing but their farms, who are
judged to be worth some twenty thousand, some thirty thousand, some forty
thousand ducats. In this valley we chanced to light upon one farm where the
Yeoman was countryman to my friend Antonio Melendez, borne in Segovia in
Spain, who for his sake kept us three days and nights with him. His table was
as well furnished as the table of a Knight might be, his side board full of
silver boules and cups, and plates instead of trenchers; lie spared no dainties
which might welcome us to his table, no perfumes which might us delight in our
chambers, no music (which his daughters were brought up to) which might with
more pleasure help to pass away the time. To him Antonio Melendez made known
our journey toward Guatemala; and from him we received directions which way to
steer our course until we might be thoroughly free from fear and danger; here
we began to see the great providence of God, who had brought us being strangers
to such a friends house, who not only welcomed us to him, but when we departed
gave us a guide for a whole day, and bestowed upon us twenty ducats to help
to bear our charges. From this valley we wheeled about to Tasco, a Town of
some five hundred Inhabitants which enjoys great commerce with the Country
about by reason of the great store of Cotton-wool which is there. And here we
were very well entertained by a Franciscan Friar, who being of Spain made the
more of us, knowing we came from thence. Here we got into the Rode of Guaxaca,
and went to Chautla, which also abounds with Cottonwool, but in it we found
no entertainment but what our own purses would afford us. Next to this place
is a great Town called Zumpango, which does consist of at least eight hundred
Inhabitants, many of them very rich both Indians and Spaniards. Their
commodities are chiefly Cotton-wooll, and Sugar, and Cochinil. But beyond this
Town are the mountains called la Misteca, which abound with many rich and
great Towns, and do trade with the best silk that is in all that Country.
Here is also great store of Wax and Honey; and Indians live there who traffic
to Mexico and about the Country with twenty or thirty mules of their own,
chopping and changing, buying and selling commodities, and some of them are
thought to be worth ten, or twelve, or fifteen thousand ducats, which is much
for an Indian to get among the Spaniards, who think all the riches of America
little enough for themselves. From these mountains of Misteca to Guaxaca we
saw little observable, only Towns of two or three hundred inhabitants; rich
Churches, well built, and better furnished within with lamps, candlesticks,
crowns of silver for the several statues of Saints; and all the way we did
observe a very fruitful soil for both Indian and Spanish wheat, much Sugar,
much Cotton-wool, Honey, and here and there some Cochinil, and of Plantins, and
other sweet and luscious fruit great store; but above all great abundance of
cattle, whose Hides are one of the greatest commodities that from those parts
are sent to Spain. Some reported that about Misteca formerly much gold had
been found, and the Indians were wont to use it much, though now they will not
be known of any, left the greediness of the Spaniards bring them to misery
and destruction, as it has their neighbors about them. Also it is reported
for certain that there are Mines of silver* though a^ yet the Spaniards have
not found them.

There are many Mines of Iron which the Spaniards will not busy themselves in
digging, because they have it cheaper from Spain; from hence we came to the
City of Guaxaca, whis is a Bishops Seat, though not very big, yet a fair and
beautiful City to behold. It stands fourscore leagues from Mexico in a
pleasant valley from whence Cortez was named Marquis del Valle, the Marquess
of the Valley. This City, as all the rest of America, (except the Sea Towns
lies open without walls, Bulwarks, Fors, Towers, or any Castle, Ordnance or
Ammunition to defend it. It may consist of at the most two thousand
Inhabitants, and are governed by a Spanish High Justice called Alcalde Major,
whose power reaches over all the Valley, and beyond it as far as Nixapa, and
almost to Tecoantepeque, a Sea Town upon Mar del Zur. The Valley is of at
least fifteen miles in length, and ten in breadth, where runs in the midst a
goodly River yielding great store of fish. The Valley is full of Sheep and
other Cattle, which yield much Wool to the Clothiers of the City of Angels,
store of Hides to the Merchants of Spain, and great provision of flesh to the
City of Guaxaca, and to all the Towns about, which are exceeding rich, and do
maintain many Cloisters of Friars, and Churches with stately furniture
belonging unto them. But what does make the Valley of Guaxaca to be mentioned
far and near, are the good horses which are bred in it, and esteemed to be
the best of all the Country. In this Valley also are some farms of Sugar, and
great store of fruits, which two sorts meeting together have cried up the City
of Guaxaca for the best Conserves and Preserves that are made in America. In
the City there are some six Cloisters of Nuns and Friars, all of them exceeding
rich; but above all is the Cloister of the Dominican Friars, whose Church
treasure is worth two or three Millions; and the building of it the fairest and
strongest in all those parts, the walls are of stone so broad, that a part of
them being upon finishing when I was there I saw Carts go upon them, with
stone and other materials. Here are also two Cloisters of Nuns, which are
talked of far and near not for their religious practices, but for their skill
in making two drinks which are used in those parts, the one called Chocolatte
(whereof I shall speak hereafter) and the other Atolle, which is like unto
our Almond Milk, but much thicker, and is made of the juice of the young Maiz or
Indian wheat, which they so confection with spices, musk, and sugar, that it is
not only admirable in the sweetness of the smell, but much more nourishing
and comforting the stomach. This is not a Commodity that can be transported
from thence, but is to be drunk there where it is made. But the other,
Chocolatte, is made up in Boxes, and sent not only to Mexico and the parts
thereabouts, but much of it is yearly transported into Spain. This City of
Guaxaca is the richer by reason of the safety they enjoy for the carriage of
their Commodities to and from the port of St. John de Ulhua by the great River
Alvarado which runs not far from it; and although the Barks come not to the
City of Guaxaca, yet they come up to the Zapotecas, and to St. Ildefonso, which
is not far from Guaxaca. And the carelessenesse of the Spaniards here is to
bewondred at, that all along this River which runs up into the heart of
their Country, they have built as yet no Castles, Towers, or watch-houses, or
planted any Ordinance, trusting only in this, that great ships cannot come up,
as if Frigots or smaller Barks, such as they themselves use, may not be made
to annoy them. But of Guaxaca I shall say no more, but conclude that it is of
so temperate an air, so abounding in fruits, and all provision requisite for
man's life, so commodiously situated between the North and South Sea, having on
the North side St. John de Ulbua, and on the South Tecoantepeque a small and
unfortified harbor, that no place I so much desired to live in whilst I was
in those patrs as in Guaxaca, which certainly I had attempted as I travailed by
it, had I not understood that the Criolian or Native Friars were many and as
deadly enemies unto those that came from Spain as were the Mexicans. And this
their spite and malice they showed whilst we were there, to an ancient and
grave old Friar Master in Divinity, who living had been for learning the Oracle
of those parts. This old man died when I was there, and because when he lived
they could pick no hole in his Coat, being dead they searched his chamber, and
finding in a Coffer some moneys which he had not made known to his Superior
when living (which they would reduce to a sin against his posessed poverty,
called Propriety, and subject to the censure of Excommunication) they reported
that he had died excommunicated, and might not enjoy their Christian burial
in the Church or Cloister, and so ignominiously buried their old Divine, and
with him his Crredit and reputation in a grave made in one of their Gardens. A
thing much talked on as scandalous to all the City and Country, which they
salved with saying he was excommunicated; but the truth was, he was of Spain,
and therefore at his death they would show their spite unto him. For certainly
they could not do it for the sin of Propriety which by him had been
committed in his life; and to them all may be well said what our Savior said
to the Jews bringing to him a woman found in adultery to be stoned, Whosoever
of you is without sin, let him cast the first stone; for all of them, yea
even the best Friars that live in America, are some way or other, much or less
guilty of the sin of Propriety which they profess and vow against. With this
which we saw with our eyes, besides what with our ears we had heard of
discords and factions amongst them, we thought Guaxaca was no place for us to
live in; so after three days we made haste out of it, and departed toward
Chiapa, which lies three hundred miles from thence. And for our comfort in our
further travailing we were informed in Guaxaca, that in most Towns of the Rode
through that country, the Indians had an order from the High Justice to give
unto Friars travailing that way either horse to ride on, or to carry their
carriages and provision of food freely without money, if they had none, so that
at their departure they should write it down in the town book what they had
spent, not abiding above four and twenty hours in the Town; which expenses of
travailers the Indians afterward at the years end of their ordinary Justice
and Officers were to give an account of with carrying their Town book unto the
Spanish Justice to whom they belonged, and by so doing these expenses were
allowed of to be discharged by the common Town Purse or Treasure, for the
which a common plot of ground was alloted to be yearly sown with wheat or
Maiz. With this charitable relief and help of the Towns we conceived better
of the rest of our long journey, and hoped to compass it with more ease. And
so joyfully we went on, and the first place where we made trial of this order
was at a great Town called Antequera, where we freely called for our fowls
and what other provision we saw in the Town, fed heartily on them, and the next
day when we were to pay and to depart, we called for the Town book, subscribed
our hands to what we had spent our selves and horses, and went our way,
praising the discretion of the Justices of that Country, who had settled a
course so easy and comfortable for us, especially who had but shallow purses
for our long journey. Yet we found in some small Towns that the Indians were
unwilling, and (as they alleged) unable to extend this Charity to us, being
four in company, and bringing with us the charge likewise of four horses,
which made us sometimes make the longer journey that we might reach unto some
great and rich Town. The next to Antiquera in that Rode is Nixapa, which is of
at the least eight hundred Inhabitans, Spaniards and Indians, standing upon the
side of a River, which we were informed was an arm of the great River
Alvarado. In this Town is a very rich Cloister of Dominican Friars, where we
were well entertained; and in it there is a picture of our Lady, which
superstitiously they fancy to have wrought miracles, and is made a pilgrimage
from far and near, and consequently has great riches and Lamps belonging
unto it. This is counted absolutely one of the wealthiest places of all the
Country of Guaxaca; for here is made much Indigo, Sugar, Cochinill; and here
grow many trees of Cacao, and Achiotte, whereof is made the Chocolatte, and is
a commodity of much trading in those parts, though our English and Hollanders
make little of it when they take a prize of it at Sea, as not knowing the
secret virtue and quallity of it for the good of the stomach. From hence we
went to Aguatulco and Capalita, also great Towns standing upon a plain Country
full of Sheep and Cattle, abounding with excellent fruits, especially Pines
and Sandia's, which are as big as Pumpions, and so waterish that they even melt
like snow in the mouth, and cool the heat which there is great, by reason it is
a low and Marsh kind of ground, lying near the South Sea. The next chief Town
and most considerable after Capalita is Tecoantequepete; this is a Sea Town
upon Mar del Zur, and a harbor for small vessels, such as Trade from those
parts to Acapulco and Mexico, and to Realejo and Guatemala, and sometimes to
Panama. Here upon some occasions Ships which come from Peru' to Acapulco do
call in. It is a port no farthet safe, then that no English or Holland Ships
do come thereabouts, which if they did, they would there find no resistance,
but from thence would find an open and easy Rode over all the Country. Upon
all this South Sea side from Acapulco to Panama, which is above two thousand
miles by land there is no open harbor, but this for Guaxaca, and La Trinidad
for Guatemala, and Realejo for Nicaragua, and Golfo de Salinas for small
vessels in Costa Rica, and all these unprovided of Ordnance and Ammunition, all
open doors to let in any Nation that would take the pains to surround the World
to get a treasure. This port of Tecoantepeque is the chief for fishing in all
that Country; we met him in the ways sometimes with fifty, sometimes with a
hundred mules together laden with nothing but salt fish for Guaxaca, City of
the Angels and Mexico. There are some very rich Merchants dwell in it, who
trade with Mexico, Peru and Philippinas, sending their small vessels out from
Port to Port, which come home richly laden with the Commodities of all the
Southern or Eastern parts. From hence to Guatemala there is a plain Rode
along the Coast of the South Sea, passing through the Provinces of Soconuzco
and Suchutepeques; but we aiming at Chiapa took our journey over the high
Rocks and Mountains called Quelenes, travailing first from Tecoantepeque to
Estepeque, and from thence through a desert of two days journey, where we
were feign to lodge one night by a spring of water upon the bare ground in open
wide fields, where neither Town nor house is to be seen, yet thatcht lodges
are purposely made for travailers. This plain lies so open to the Sea, that
the wind from thence blow so strongly and violently that travailers are scarce
able to ^it their horses and mules; which is the reason no people inhabit
there, because the winds tear their houses, and the least fire that there
breaks out, does a great deal of mischief. This plain yet is full of Cattle,
and Horses and Mares, some wild, some tame; and through this windy Champaigne
Country with much ado we travailed; though my self thought I should even there
end my days, for the second day being to reach to a Town, and my three
friends riding before, thinking that I followed them, evening now drawing on
they made more have to find the Town. But in the mean while my horse refused
to go any further, threatening to lie down if I put him to more then he was
able. I knew the town could not be far, and so I lighted, thinking to walk
and lead my horse, who also refused to be led, and so lay down. With this a
troop of thoughts beset me, and to none I could give a flat answer. I thought
if I should go on foot to find out the Town and my company and leave my
horse there sadled, I might both lose my self, and my horse and saddle; and if
I should find the Town and come in the morning for my horse, the plain was so
wide and spacious, that I might seek long enough, and neither find him, nor
know the place where I left him, for there was nothing near to mark the
place, nor where to hide the saddle, neither hedge, tree, shrub, within a mile
on any side. Wherefore I considered my best course would be to take up my
lodging in the wide and open wilderness with my horse, and to watch him lest
he should wander and stray away, until the morning or until my friends might
send from the town to see what was become of me; which they did not that
night, thinking I had taken my way to another Town not far from thence, whither
they sent in the morning to enquire for me. I looked about therefore for a
commodious place to rest in, but found no choice of lodgings, every where I
found a bed ready for me, which was the bare ground; a bolster only or pillow
I wanted for my head, and seeing no bank did kindly offer it self to ease a
lost stranger, and pilgrim, I unsadled my weary Jade, and with my saddle
fitted my head in stead of a pillow. Thus without a supper I went to bed in my
Mothers own bosom, not a little comforted to see my tired horse pluck up his
spirits, and make much of his supper, which there was ready for him, of short,
dry and withered grass, upon which he sed with a greedy and hungry stomach,
promising me by his feeding that the next day he would perform a journey of
at least thirty or forty miles. The poor beast fed apace, my careful eye
watched him for at least an hour, when upon a sudden I heard such an hideous
noise of howling, barking, and crying, as if a whole Army of dogs were come
into the wilderness, and howled for want of a prey of some dead horse or mule.
At first the noise seemed to be a pretty way off from me; but the more I
hearkened unto it, the nigher it came unto me, and I perceived it was not of
dogs by some intermixed shriekings as of Christians, which I observed in it. An
observation too sad for alone man without any help or comfort in a
wilderness, which made my hair to stand upright, my heart to pant, my body to
be covered with a fearful sweat as of death. I expected nothing else, not
knowing from whence the noise proceeded; sometimes I thought of Witches,
sometimes of devils, sometimes of Indians turned into the shape of beasts,
(which amongst some has been used) sometimes of wild and savage beasts, and
from all these thoughts I promised my self nothing but sure death, for the
which I prepared my self recommending my soul to the Lord, whilst I expected
my body should be a prey to cruel and mercilessesse beasts; or some
instruments of that roaring Lion who in the Apostle goes about seeking whom he
may devour. I thought I could not any ways prevail by flying or running
away, but rather might that way run my self into the jaws of death; to hide
there was no place, to lie still I thought was safest, for if they were wild
beasts, they might follow their course another way from me, and so I might
escape. Which truly proved my safest course, for while I lay sweating and
panting, judging every cry, every howling and shrieking an alarm to my death,
being in this agony and fearful conflict till about midnight, on a sudden the
noise ceased, sleep (though but the shadow of death) seized upon my wearied
body, and forsook me not, til the mornings glorious lamp shining before my
slumbering eyes and driving away deaths shadow greeted me with life and safety.
When I awaked, my soul did magnify the Lord for my deliverance from that
nights danger, I looked about and saw my horse also near the place where I had
left him, I sadled him presently with desire to leave that wilderness and to
find out my company, and to impart unto them what that night had happened unto
me; I had not rid above a mile, when I came to a brook of water, where were
two ways, the one straight forward along the desert, where I could discover no
Town, nor houses, nor trees in a prospect of five or six miles at least; the
other way was on the left hand, and that way some two or three miles off I saw
a wood of trees, I imagined there might be the Town; I followed that way, and
within a quarter of a mile my Horse began to complain of his poor provender
the night before, and to slight me for it; I was fain to light and lead him;
and thus again discouraged with my Horse, and discomforted for the uncertainty
of my way, looking about I spied a thatcht house on the one side of the way,
and one on Horseback, who came riding to me; it was an Indian belonging to
that house which was the farm of a rich Indian, and Governor of the next
Town, of whom I asked how far it was to the Town of Estepeque, he showed me
the trees, and told me that a little beyond them it stood, and that I should
not see it until I came unto it. With this I got up again and spurred my
sullen jade, until I reached unto the trees, where he was at a stand and would
go no further. Then I unsadled him, and hid my saddle under some low shrubs,
and leaving my horse (whom I feared not that any would steal him) I walked
unto the Town which was not above half a mile from thence, where I found my
three friends were waiting for me, and grieved for the loss of me, had sent to
another Town to enquire for me; it was the least thought they had that I had
been a lodger in the desert. When I related unto them and to the Indians the
noise and howling that I had heard, the Indians answered me that that was
common music to them almost every night, and that they were Wolves and Tigres
which they feared not, but did often meet them and with a stick or hollowing
did scare them away, and that they were only ravenous for their Fowls, Colts,
Calves or Kids. After a little discourse I returned with an Indian to seek my
Horse and saddle, and in that Town I sold my wearied Mexican beast, and hired
another to Ecatepeque whither we went all four friends again in company. Where
note that in this plain and champaigne country of Tecoantepeque are five rich
and pleasant Towns full of fruits and provision of victual, all ending in
Tepeque, to wit, Tecoantepeque, Estepeque, Ecatepeque, Sanatepeque, and
Tapanatepeque. Now from Ecatepeque we could discover the high mountains of
Quelenes, which were the subject of most of our discourse to Sanatepeque, and
from thence to Tapanatepeque. For we had been informed by Spaniards and
Travailers in the way, that they were the most dangerous mountains to travail
over that were in all those parts; and that there were on the top of them some
passages so narrow, and so high, and so open to the boisterous winds that came
from the Southsea, which seemed to lie at the very bottom of them; and on each
side of these narrow passages such deep precipices among rocks, that many times
it had happened, that the wind blowing furiously had cast down Mules laden
with heavy carriages down the rocks, and likewise Horsemen had been blown
down both Horse and man. The sight of the rocks and mountains did terrify
us, and the report of them did much affright us* so that in all this way we did
confer which way to take, whether the rode way to Guatemala which lies under
those mountains along the coast by the Country of Soconuzco, from whence
(though out of our way) we might have turned to Chiapa, or whether we should
steer our right course to Chiapa over those mountains, which we had been
informed, we might safely pass over if the winds did not blow two
boisterously. We resolved that when we came to Tapanatepeque we would choose
our way according as the winds did favor or threaten us, but however to Chiapa
we would go, because there we had understood was the Superior and Provincial
of all the Dominicans of those parts, (to whom we ought to address our selves)
and also because we would see that famous and much talked of Province of
Chiapa. In Sanatepeque we met with a Friar who gave us stately entertainment,
and from thence gave us Indians to guide us to Tapanatepeque, and a letter to
the chief of the Town (which also was at his command) to give us Mules to
carry us, and Indians to guide us up the mountains. Here the rest of our
Horses also failed us, but their weariness was no hinderance to us, for the
Indians were willing to give us as much or more then they had cost us, because
they were true Mexican breed, and all the way we went to Chiapa and through
that country to Guatemala the Towns were to provide us of Mules for nothing. We
came to Tapanatepeque (which stands at the bottom and foot of Quelenes) on
Saturday night, and with the letter we carried were very much welcomed and
entertained well by the Indians.

This Town is one of the sweetest and pleasantest of any we had seen from
Guaxaca thither, and it seems God has replenished it with all sorts of
comforts which Travailers may need to ascend up those dangerous and steepy
rocks. Here is great plenty of cattle for flesh, and rich Indians which have
farms, called there Estantia's, in some a thousand, in some three or four
thousand head of cattle; fowls here are in abundance, fish the best store and
choicest of any Town from Mexico thither; for the Sea is hard by it, and
besides there runs by it a small river which yields diverse sorts of fish.
From the mountains there fall so many springs of water, that with them the
Indians water at their pleasure their gardens which are stored with much
herbage and sallets. The shade which defends from the heat (which there is
great) is the daughter of most sweet and goodly fruit trees, and of Orange,
Lemmon, Citron and Fig leaves. The Sabbath morning was so calm that we desired
to make use of it, lest by longer delays the winds should stay us, or force us
to the coast of Soconusco. But the Indians entreated us to be their guess at
dinner, not doubting but the weather would hold, and promising us to provide us
strong and lusty Mules, and provision of fruits, and fried fish, or fowls, or
what our selves desired. We could not refuse this their kind offer, and so
stayed dinner with them. After dinner our Mules were brought, and two Indians
to guide us and carry our provision, which was some fried fish, and a cold
roasted Capon, with some fruit as much as might suffice us for a day, for the
chief ascent and danger is not above seven leagues, or one and twenty English
miles, and then beyond the top of the mountains three miles is one of the
richest farms for Horses, Mules, and Cattle, in all the Country of Chiapa,
where we knew we should be welcomed by one Don John de Toledo, who then lived
there. Though these mountains show themselves with several sharp pointed
heads, and are many joined together, yet one of them is only mentioned in that
Country by the Travailers, which is called Maquilapa, over the which lies the
way to Chiapa. To this high, steepy, and craggy Maquilapa we took our journey
after dinner, and were by the proud mountain that night well entertained, and
harbored in a green plot of ground resembling a meadow, which lay as a rib of
the one side of that huge and more then Pyrenian monster. The Indians comforted
us with the shows of fair weather, and told us that they doubted not but the
next day at noone we should be at Don John de Toledo his Estancia, or farm.
With this we spread our supper upon the green table-cloth, and at that first
meal eat up our Capon and most of the provision of our cold fried fish,
leaving only a bit for our mornings breakefast, the springs of water like
Conduit-pipes, trickling down the rocks, gave us melodious music to our
supper; the Indians fed merrily, and our Mules contentedly, and so the
fountain Nymphs sung us asleep till morning, which seemed to us as calm and
quiet as the day before, and encouraged us hastily to snatch that bit which we
had left and so up from breakefast, to say merrily, upto Maquilapa. We had not
winded the mountain upwards much above a mile, when the higher we mounted, the
more we heard the wind from above whistling unto us, and forbidding us to go
any further. We were now half way up, and doubtful what we should do,
whither go forward, or return to Tapanatepeque to eat more fish, or to stay
where we were a while until the weather were more calm, which we thought
might be at noone or toward evening. The Indians told us that about a mile
further there was a fountain of water, and a lodge made under trees on purpose
for Travailers that were either benighted or hindered by the winds to compass
their journey up the mountain. Thither we went with much ado, hoping the wind
would fall; but still the higher we climbed, the stronger we felt the breath of
Aeolus, and durst not like the people called Psilli (of whom Herodotus writes)
march against him, least as they in stead of a victory found a grave in the
sands where they met to oppose him, so we in stead of ascending should by a
furious blast be made to descend into those deep and horrid precipices, which
truly threatened death, and offered themselves to be a grave unto our torn and
mangled bodies. We liked the fountain very well, and the lodge better for the
harbor of trees which compassed it about. The wind kept on breathing, and we
stood still fearing, till the day was so far spent that we had no hopes of
going back, or forward. Of any supper we despaired that night, who would have
been glad now to have picked a bone of a Capons leg, or to have sucked a fishes
head, and saw there was nothing for us, but only to feed our hungry stomachs
with the remembrance of the plenty the night before. Thus gazing one upon
another, and sometimes looking down to the fountain, sometimes looking up to
the trees, we perceived amongst them a Lemmon tree, full of small and very
sour green Lemmons. It was not with us as with Tantalus who could neither
enjoy the fruit above him, nor the waters beneath him; we could and did most
greedily catch and snatch the Lemmons, which were sauce for no meat, but only
to fill an empty stomach; with them we supped and took our rest. The next
morning the wind was rather stronger then calmer, and we as strong the second
day as the first in our purpose of staying there, and not turning our backs
like Cowards. The Indians were also willing to stay yet one day longer; so we
fell to our breakefast of Lemmons which were somewhat cool to a fasting
stomach, and relished nothing the better with a draught from the clear
fountain. And of what we left on the tree we made our dinner and supper,
adding to our water what we saw the Indians did drink, who had their small
bags full of powder of their Maiz, of which first making cakes as dry as biscuit
they then grind them to powder, and when they travail, carry with them that
powder to drink with water. This we thought might be more nourishing to us,
then Lemmons and water only, and so for that day we bought of them half a
bagfull of powder giving for it in our want and necessity four rials, or two
English shillings, which out of Maquilapa and that our fear of starving might
not be worth above a penny; and yet this was but weak nourishment for our
feeble bodies. Thus we waited all Tuesday for the laying of the wind, resolving
the next morning either to go up the hill, or down again to Tapanatepeque.
But on wednesday morning the wind seeming to be somewhat laid, we purposed to
stay till noon hoping then it would be sure travailing; but it ceased not but
rather increased a little; whereupon one of our company resolved to go upwards
a mile or two on foot, and try the passages, and the danger of the wind and to
bring us word again; for we thought our fear might be greater then the
danger, who had heard much talk, but had not as yet seen any thing worth our
fear. Up therefore went our friend, who staid from us near two hours, and
then returning back he told us he thought we might get up leading our Mules by
the bridles. But what with further questions and debates the time passed away,
so that we thought it might be too late; and for that day we put off our
journey until the next morning, resolutely purposing to go forwards
altogether if the wind were not much increased. So that day we fell again to
our green crabby Lemmons, water and Maiz powder, all which we found had much
weakened our bodies and feared if we continued there any longer they might
hasten our death. Wherefore on Thursday morning (the wind being as the day
before) commending our selves first unto the protection of that Lord whom the
winds and sea obey, we mounted up upon our Mules (leaving our names written in
the bark of a great tree, and the days we stayed there without food) and so
went upward. We perceived no great danger in the wind a great while, but some
steps and passages upon stony rocks we feared for the narrowness of them, and
there we lighted, thinking our selves safer upon our own two feet, then upon
the four feet of a beast. But when we came up to the very top of Maquilapa
(which signifies in that tongue, A head without hair) we perceived truly the
danger so much talked of, and wished our selves again with our green Lemmons in
the way to Tapanatepeque, for we found it indeed a head without hair, a top
without a tree or branch to shelter a fearful Traveller* the passage that
lies open to the sea may be no more than a quarter of a mile, but the height
and narrownsse of it stupefieth, for if we look on the one side, there is the
wide and spacious South Sea lying so deep and low under it that it dazleth the
eyes to behold it; if we look on the other side, there are rocks of at least
six or seven miles depth; whose fight does make the stoutest and hardest heart
(though like themselves) to quake and quiver; so that here the sea expects to
swallow, there the rocks threaten to tear with a downfall, and in the midst of
those dangers in some places the passage is not above an ell broad. We needed
better cordialls for that quarter of a mile then feeding three days upon green
Lemmons and water, and durst not man our selves so much as to go through it
upon our Mules; we lighted, and gave the Indians our Mules to lead, and we
followed them one by one not daring to walk upright for fear of head giddiness
with looking on either fide, but bowing our bodies we crept upon our hands and
feet as near unto the trackes which beasts and Travailers had made as we could
without hindering our going. And when we had got to the end of that passage,
and where the mountain was broader, and the trees promised relief, we then
looked back boldly, and accused of folly both our selves and all other
Travailers that sought no other way though ten miles about, to avoid that
danger both for man and beast. From thence joyfully we made haste to Don John
de Toledo, who made us welcome and gave us some warm broth to comfort our
stomachs, which were so weak that no sooner had we eat any thing, but
pesently we cast it up again; till after many sups of broth and wine we
recovered strength toward night, and eat our suppers; there we stayed two
days; and thus thoroughly refreshed we went to Acapala a very great Town of
Indians in the Province of Chiapa, standing by the same river that passes by
Chiapa, which is called Chiapa de Indios, or Chiapa of the Indians, to
distinguish it from another Chiapa, called Chiapa Real the Roial Chiapa, or
Chiapa de Espanoles, Chiapa of the Spaniards. From Acapala we went first to
Chiapa of the Indians, which stands almost as low as Maquilapa is high,
seated upon a river as broad as is the Thames at London, which has its spring
from the mountains called Cuchumatlanes, in the rode from Chiapa Real to
Guatemala, and runs toward the Province of Zoques, where it enters into the
river of Tabasco. But of this Chiapa I will speak a little more in the next
Chapter, and now only say that here we were joyfully entertained by those
Friars, who looked upon us as members belonging to the Corporation of that
their Province, and assured us that the Provincial and chief Superior would
be very glad of our coming, who wanted Spanish Friars to oppose the Criolians
and Natives who strived to get a head as they had done in Mexico and Guaxaca.
Here we understood that the Provincial was not above one days journey from
thence. Here also we met with our friend Peter Borallo, who had come before us
alone, and made his escape from Mexico: he comforted us much with the good and
kind usage which he had found there; yet he told us how Calvo was gone with the
rest of his train from Mexico to Acapulco, and from thence was shipped with
them to Philippinas; but that at his departure he had writ a letter of bitter
complaints unto the Superior of Chiapa and Guatemala against him and us four,
desiring the Provincial not to entertain us, but to send us back to Mexico,
to be shipped from thence the next year unto Philippinas; which letter was not
regarded; but much slighted by the Provincial. After we had been a week
feasted in Chiapa, we thought it now fit to present our selves to the
Provincial (whose name was Friar Peter Alvarez) that from him we might receive
judgment, and know whether we should stay in that Province, or be forced to
return to Spain, for in no other part of America we could be entertained. We
found the Provincial in a little Town called St. Christopher, between Chiapa
of the Indians and the Royal Chiapa, recreating himself in the shady walks,
which are many sweet and pleasant in that small Town; where also there is
store of fish, and great abundance of rare, and exquisite fruits. He
entertained us very lovingly with fair and comfortable words, with a stately
dinner and supper, and before we went to bed, to show his humility he did unto
us what Christ to his Disciples, he washed our feet. The first day he said
little or nothing unto us concerning our continuing in that Country; but the
next day he discovered unto us his full resolutions, with many wise and cunning
sophismes. For first he read unto us the letter which Calvo had writ unto him
against us, glossing upon it how ill we had done in forsaking our first love
and calling to Philippinas, and the danger many Indian souls might be in by
reason of our not going thither to convert and instruct them, whose gifts and
abilities he supposed might have been more profitable and comfortable to those
souls, then those who in our stead and absence should be sent amongst them. And
secondly, he told us how we had frustrated the King of Spaines good hopes of
us who had allowed us means and maintenance from Spain to Mexico, hoping that
by us many souls of Indians in Philippinas might be saved. Thirdly, he told
us that he looked upon us as his prisoners, in whose power it was to imprison
us, and to send us prisoners to Mexico to the Viceroy, to be shipped from
thence to Manila, according to Calvo his demand. But for the present he would
not let us know what he meant to do with us; Only he bad us not to be
discouraged, but to be merry and recreate our selves, and that after dinner we
should know more from him, when he had received an answer to a Letter which he
had writ unto the City of Chiapa concerning the disposal of our persons. These
reasonings of the grave and old Provincial did not a little sad our hearts;
for the loss of souls, and King of Spain his intentions and charity charged
upon us, and imprisonment spoke of by the by, were words which seemed of a very
high strain, and so could hardly be digested by us; this mornings breakfast
had quite taken away from us our stomach to our dinner. And thus we departed
from the presence of the venerable Friar Peter Alvarez, and betook our selves
to a shady walk under Orange trees belonging to the house where this Superior
was. In this shade we conferred with our selves upon the words of Alvarez, and
finding them of so high a nature, as involving souls, a King, and
imprisonment, we thought verily we should be sent back to Mexico, and from
thence like fugitive slaves be forced to Philippinas. Here my hopes of ever
more seeing England were lost; Antonio Melendez his heart panted, wished
himself again upon the highest top of Maquilapa; another wished himself with
old Calvo at Sea sailing to Manila, though it were but to help him scrape his
rusty Gammons of Bacon.

The motion was made to make an escape from Alvarez, as we had done from
Calvo; but to this answer was made, that whither so ever we went, not knowing
the Country, we should be discovered; and that put case the worst, we should
be sent to Mexico, we might better escape in the way, then there where we
were. At last I told the rest, that I could conceive no hard nor harsh usage
from that smiling and loving countenance of the Provincial, nor after that his
low and humble act of washing our feet the night before; and that I thought
verily he wished us well for having come so far to offer our selves for
fellow laborers in that harvest of souls belonging to his charge, and whom we
knew wanted s^tch as we were newly come from Spain to oppose the Criolians or
Natives faction in that Province; alleging furthermore the example of our
friend and companion Peter Borallo, whom he had already incorporated into that
Province, and could do no less with us without partiality and acceptance of
persons. And lastly, my opinion was, that in case we ought not to be
entertained there, yet the Provincial would not send us back to Mexico, there
to be disgraced and affronted, but would give way unto us to return to Spain,
or whither else we would, with some relief and money in our purses. Whilst we
were thus troubled, and in this sad and serious discourse, old Alvarez it
seems had been eying of us from his window, and as Joseph could not long
suppress and keep in the expressions of a loving and tender heart unto his
brethren; so this good Superior perceiving that we were troubled with what he
had said unto us, sent his companion unto us to comfort us; which we easily
perceived by his discourse when he came unto us. For as soon as he came he
asked us why we were so sad and melancholy? he told us, the Provincial also
had observed that we were troubled. But, said he, be of good cheer; be
confident that the Provincial wishes you very well, and needs such as you
are, and having come into his Dominion to thrust your selves upon his mercy, by
harsh and unkind usage he will not do what Martial Law forbids a hard
hearted Soldier to do unto his enemy upon such terms. Many such comfortable
words did he speak unto us; and told us further that the Provincial had been
much censured by the Criolian party for entertaining of Peter Borallo; and that
now they would stir worse seeing four more come to weaken their faction; and
therefore he desired to be well advised concerning us, and to carry our
business with such discretion, as might give little offense to those who were
apt to judge and censure the best of all his actions. And finally he did
assure us, that we should never be sent back as prisoners to Mexico by the
Provincial, who in case he could not entertain us in Chiapa, or Guatemala,
would further us with all his favor, and friends, and money in our purses to
return again to Spain. These reasons were heart fainting Cordials unto us, and
stomach preparatives to a good dinner, to which by the sound of a bell we were
invited. When we came in, the loving, smiling, and fatherly countenance of the
good Provincial did cheer us more then all the cheer that waited for us upon
the table in several dishes, all which were seasoned to our palates with the
sauce of the comfort, which the Provincials messenger had brought unto us in
the shady Orange walk in the garden. The great provision of fish and flesh,
with fruits and sweet meats were yet to us a strong argument that we were very
welcome; for what we sed on that day, might well become a Noble man's Table;
Besides in many passages of our discourse we perceived that good old Alvarez
his heart was over joyed with our coming to him. Dinner being ended the
Provincial desired to play a game at Tables with us round about, saying he
would not win our money, because he judged us poor after so long a journey.
But thus he settled the game and sport; that if he did win, we should say for
him five Pater Nosters, and five Ave Mary's; but if we wun, we should win our
admittance, and Incorporation into that Province. This sport pleased us well,
for our winnings we judged would be to us more profitable at that time, then
to win pounds, and our loosings we valued not; besides we were confident all
went well with us, when from the favor of the Dice, we might challenge that
favor which with many weary journeys we had come to seek above four hundred
miles. The sport began, and we young blades taking one by one our turns were
too hard for the old man, who (as we perceived) would willingly be the loser,
that his very losses might speak unto us what through policy and discretion he
would not utter with words. Yet we boldly challenged our winnings, which as
soon as we had ended our game were now surely confirmed unto us by the
return of an Indian messenger, who that morning had been sent to the City of
Chiapa for advice and counsel from the Prior and the chief of the Cloister
concerning our disposal, and now was returned with an answer from the Prior,
who in his letter expressed great joy unto the Provincial for our coming, and
so from the rest of the Seniors of the Cloister, and did earnestly beg of the
Superior, that he would send us to him to be his guess, for that our case
had been his own some ten years before, for he had also at Mexico forsaken
his company to Philippinas, and fled to Guatemala, where for his learning and
good parts he had been as a stranger much envied by the Criolian faction; but
now he hoped he should have some to side with him against such as spighted
and maligned him. Old Alvarez was much taken with his letter, and told us he
must pay what he had lost, and that the next day he would send us to Chiapa,
there to abide until he took further care of us, to send us to other parts
of the Country, to learn the Indian languages, that we might preach unto
them. This discourse being ended we betook our selves again to the Garden
which smelled more of comfort then before dinner, and to our shady walks which
now offered us a safer protection then they had done in the forenoone,
countenancing that protection which we had gained from the Provincial.

Here we began to praise God, who had looked upon us in our low estate, not
forgetting the wise and politic Provincial, who though he had lost his games
for our comfort, we would not he should lose our prayers, which there we
offered up to God for his health and safety. And so till supper time we
continued our discourse in the Garden fuller of mirth and pleasant jests, then
we had done before dinner, snatching now and then at the Oranges and Lemmons,
which were there both sour and sweet, eating of some, and casting some one at
another, but especially at him who had wished himself with Calvo dressing his
rusty Bacon, whom we strived to beat out of the garden by force of Orange and
Lemmon bullets; which sport we continued the more willingly, because we
perceived the good Provincial stood behind a Lattice in a Balcony beholding
us, and rejoicing to see our hearts so light and merry. We had no sooner beat
Calvo his friend out of the garden, when the bell to supper founded a retreat
to us all, and called us again to meet our best friend Alvarez, who had
furnished us a Table again like that at noone. After supper he told us that
the next morning he would send us to Chiapa, for that the Prior had writ unto
him he would meet us in the way with a Breakfast at a Town called St. Philip;
wherewith we conceited very highly of our selves to see that Provincialls and
Priors were so forward to feast us. Yet before we went to bed, the Provincial
would try again a game at Tables with every one of us, to see if now he could
beat us that had been too hard for him at noon. The matter of our game was now
altered, and what we played for was this; if the Provincial wun, we were to
be his prisoners, (which mystery we understood not till the next day, for the
old man was crafty and Politic, and knew he could win of us when he listed,
for he was an excellent gamester at Tables) but if we wun of him, he was to
give us a box of Chocolatte, which was a drink we liked very well. The Game
went on, and we every one of us one by one were losers, yet understood not how
we should be his prisoners, but slighted our losses. Yet for all this the
merry Provincial told us, he was sorry we had lost, and wished we might
never be prisoners to a worse enemy then he; and that we should perceive
it, he would comfort us each one as a prisoner with a box of Chocolatte, to
drink for his sake, and to comfort our hearts, when most we should find them
discomforted for our losses. We understood not his meaning till the next day
at noone, but thought it was a jest and a word of sport and mirth, like many
such like which in his discourse had come from him.

With this we took our leaves, and went to bed with light and herry hearts.
In the morning two Mules of the Provincial and two of his Companion were
sadled for us, and at least a dozen Indians on horse back waited for us to
conduct us up a steepy hill and through woods to the Town of St. Philip. After
our breakfast the good Provincial embraced us, and bad us farewell, desiring
us to pray for him; and not to be discouraged by any thing that might befall
us, assuring us he wished us very well, and would do what lay in his power
for our good; yet so, that he must use policy and discretion to stop the
mouths of the Criolians, whom he knew hated both him and us. Thus we departed
with Waits and Trumpets sounding before us, which rebounded an Echo all the way
up the hill from us to old Alvarez whom we had left in a low bottom compassed
about with hills on every side. We had no sooner ascended up to the top of the
Mountain, when we discovered a little Valley, and in it the City of Chiapa of
the Spaniards; with two or three small Villages, of which one was St. Philip at
the bottom of the Mountain, which we were to descend. The Trumpets which still
went sounding before us were a sufficient and loud Alarm to St. Philips
Inhabitants of our coming, and a warning for the speedier hastening of our
second breakfast, for the which the cold morning air (which we found somewhat
piercing upon the Mountain) had whetted and through prepared our stomachs. We
had not got down the Mountain half a mile, when we met with a matter of
twenty gallant Indians on horseback with their trumpeters sounding before them,
and behind them came upon a stately Mule the Prior of Chiapa, (whose name was
Father John Baptist) a merry fat Friar, who calling us his brethren fugitives
from Philippinas, told us we were welcome to that country, and to him
especially, and that in the next St. Philip he would show us better sport, then
any St. Philip in all the Philippinas Islands could have showed us, if we had
gone thither. Thus with a pleasant discourse, and many merry conceits from the
good Prior we soon came down the hill, where the whole Village of St. Philip
waited for us both men and women, some presenting unto us nosegaies, others
burling Roses and other flowers in our faces, others dancing before us all
along the street, which was strowed with herbs and Orange leaves, and adorned
with many Arches made with flowers and hung with garlands for us to ride under
until we came to the Church, where for half an hour we were welcomed with
the best music from the City of Chiapa, which the Prior had hired to come with
him to entertain us. Our Music being ended, ^at Father John Baptist stood up
and made a short speech unto the Indians, giving them thanks for their kind
and pompous entertainment of us his special friends, and that their souls
might gain by it, he granted unto them a plenary indulgenee of all their
sinne^ past to be gained by as many of them as should visit that Church the
next Lords Day either before or afternoon. And that from the Altar we went
unto our breakfasting Table, which was furnished with many well seasoned dishes
of sale and well peppered and spiced meats, all ^it to make us (...) better a
cup of Spanish Pier Ximeny which the Prior had provided form. After our salt
meats, came such rare and exquisite sorts of sweet meats made by John Baptist
his be^ devoted Nuns of Chiapa, that the like we had not seen from St. (...)
to that place. These were to prepare our stomachs for a Cup of Chocolatte, with
the which we ended our breakfast. But whilst all this was gallantly performed
by the Prior, it was a hard Riddle unto us, what he often repeated unto u^
saying, Brethren break your fast well, for your dinner will be the meanest as
ever ye did eat in your lives, and now enjoy this sweet liberty which will
not last long unto you. We observed the words, but knew not what to make of
them, till we came unto the Cloister. After our breakfast the Indians showed
us a little sport in the Market place, running races on horseback, and playing
at Iuego de Canna's; which is to meet on horseback, with broad Targets to
defend their heads and shoulders while passing by they hurl Canes, or darts
one at another, which those Indians acted with great dexterity.

Thus the good Prior of Chiapa feasted us, and permitted us to enjoy our
liberty as long as it seems it had been agreed upon by letters between him
and the Provincial, which was till it might be dinner time in the Cloister of
Chiapa, where we were to be before noone. The time drew near, and we had
from St. Philip to the City of Chiapa some two English miles to ride; Wherefore
the Prior commanded our Mules to be brought; the waits and trumpets gave
warning to the Town of our departure; and so with many horsemen, with dances,
Music and ringing of Bells we were as stately and joyfully conducted out of
the Town, as we had been inducted into it. At the first half miles end the
Prior gave thanks unto the Indians, and desired them to return, the Cloister
being near where we expected another kind of entertainment, not using in the
City and Cloister that pomp and state, which in the Country might be allowed.
The Indians took their leaves of us; and on we went with only two as guides
before us. Within half a mile of the City, the Prior and a companion of his
stopped, and took out of his pocket an order from the Provincial, which he
read unto us, to this effect, That whereas we had forsaken our lawful Superior
Calvo in the way to Philippinas, and without his license had come unto the
Province of Chiapa, he could not in conscience but inflict some punishment
upon us before he did enable us to abide there as members under him; therefore
he did strictly command the Prior of Chiapa, that as soon as we should enter
into his Cloister, he should shut us up two by two in our chambers, as in
prisons, for three days, not suffering us to go out to any place, save only
to the public place of refection (called Refectory) where all the Friars met
together to dine and sup, where at noon time we were to present our selves
before all the Cloisters sitting upon the bare ground, and there to receive no
other dinner, but only bread and water; but at supper we might have in our
chambers, or Prisons, what the Prior would be pleased to allow us. This was the
Penance enjoined upon us by the wise and cunning Provincial. This news at the
first was but sour sawee, or a dry Postpast after a double sumptuous
breakfast; it was a doleful ditty to us after our Music, and dances, to hear
of a treble fast after our feast; to hear of imprisonment after so great
liberty. We now began to remember the Provincialls winnings at Tables the night
before, and the mystery thereof, and began to think how comfortable his boxes
of Chocolatte would be unto us after a meal of bread and water. Now we called
to mind the short dinner the Prior had told us at St. Philips we were like to
have that day, and of the liberty he bad us then make much of. But the good
Prior seeing us sad upon a sudden, and our countenances changed, smiled upon
us, wishing us not to think the worse of him, nor of the Provincial, who did
that out of Policy, and to stop the Criolians mouths, whom he knew would
murmur, if no punishment were inflicted upon us. He assured us, after our
imprisonment, of honors and preferments, and that as long as we were with
him, we should want no encouragement; and that after a bread and water dinner
he could send us to our chambers a Supper, that should strongly support our
empty stomachs, and furre and line them well for the next four and twenty
hours. With these encouragements on we went to the Cloister of Chiapa, where
we were welcomed by most of the Friars, but in some few we noted a frowning
and disaffected countenance. We were no sooner conducted to our chambers, when
the bell sounded to dinner for the rest, and cried aloud to us Penance with
bread and water. Down we went to the common dining place, and thanks being
given, the Friars sitting round the tables, we four Philippini^* Ionahs (so
some Criolians were pleased to term us) be took our selves to the middle of the
Refectory, where without cushions, stools, seats or forms, we sat upon the
bare ground cross legged like Tailors, acting humility now for our
disobedience unto slovenly Calvo. While the first dish was presented round the
tables, to each of us was presented a loaf of reasonable bigness, and a pot
of pure Crystal water, whereof w^fed and drank most heartily though with full
stomachs from a double breakfast before. Yet even here in this public Act of
shame and disgrace (which we knew (...) usual among Fryet^ for (...) faults
then ours) we had this comfort, that we had a Prior and Provincial for
friends, and that that punishment came from a friendly hand, whose Chocolatte
we had to comfort our fasting bodies; and secondly, we knew that we should
have that night in our prison chambers a better supp^r than any of those before
us, who fed upon their three or four dishes. But thirdly, it was our comfort
that at that very time a Criolian Friar also sat upon the ground with us (of
whose company we had been informed by some friends before we went into the
refectory) for some love letters which had been intercepted between him and a
Nun of that City, tending to much uncivility, and breaking their oath of
professed chastity. But when I perceived this Friar to look discontentedly
upon us, I chose my place as near unto him as I could, and hearing him mutter
within himself against us, calling us disobedient Philippinian Ionahs, I
softly and friendly spoke unto him with these two following Hexameters, which
suddenly came unto my mind about his misdemeanor.

Si Monialis Amor te ^urpia scribere fecit,
Ecce tibi frigidae praebent medicamina lymphae.
But my good neighbor snuffing and puffing at my sudden muse, seemed to be
more discontented then before, and would feign withdraw himself by degrees
from me, not rising up (for that was not lawful to do till dinner had been
ended) but wrigling his elbowes and shoulders scornefully from me, whom in like
manner I followed, cleaving friendly to him with this verse,

Solamen misero est socios retinere Panettes, He thought I followed him to
steal away his loaf from him. This new found word, Panettes, had almost
choked him, had not he made use of the medicinal water which stood before
him; of the which he drank a good draught, whereby I perceived his courage
against me and my friends was tamed, and I told him, I hoped his burning want
on love was cooled.

Thus with my Criolian neighbors company my bread and water went down
cheerfully; and dinner being ended, we were again conducted to our chambers,
where we drank a cup of old Alvarez his Chocolatte. The Castilian Friars
flocked unto our prisons, some to talk with us, some bringing us conserves and
sweetmeats, others other dainties, which they had prepared to help our
digestion of bread and cold water. My sudden verses to my Criolian neighbor
were presently noysed about the Cloister, and were the chief subject of our
talk that afternoon. Our supper was provided for us according to the promise
and generous spirit of the Prior, who also honored our prison that night with
his own and two other Friars company supping with us all in one chamber
together. And thus we passed our three days of imprisonment merrily and
contentedly, wishing we might never suffer harder usage in any prison then we
had done in this, which was not to us such a punishment as did bring with it
the privation of any liberty of enjoying the company of friends, of feasting
with them, but only the privation of the liberty of our legs to walk about
those three days; and this rather an ease then a punishment, for that we
wanted rather rest, then much stirring after so long and tedious a journey as
we had compassed from Mexico thither. We were no sooner set at liberty, but we
presently found the Provincial and Prior ready to dispose of us so, that in
lieu of our imprisonment we might receive honor and credit. Two were sent into
the Country to learn some Indian language, that so they might be beneficed and
preach unto the Indians. My self and another desired to go farther to
Guatemala, that there we might practice Philosophy and Divinity in the famous
Universitie of that City. Nothing that we desired was denied unto us, only the
time was thought not fit until Michaelm^, because then the schools were
renewed, and new Orders settled. In the mean time the Provincial having also
heard of my verses ex tempore to the Criolian Friar, and knowing that the Latin
tongue is better grounded in England then among the Spaniards (who abuse poor
Priscian and daily break his pate with foolish soloecismes) and considering
the want he had of a Master of the Latin tongue to supply a Lecture of
Grammar and Syntax to the you^hes of Chiapa in a school in that Cloister,
which brought a sufficient yearly stipend unto the Covent, desired me to accept
of that place until such time as he should take care to send me to Guatemala,
promising me all encouragements in the mean time fitting, and that I should
when I would go about to see the Country (which I much desired) and also that
out of the school annuity I should have my allowance for books, and other
necessaries. I could not but accept of this good offer; and so with this
employment I remained in that City from April to the end of September, where I
was much esteemed of by the Bishop and Governor, but especially by the Prior,
who would never ride about the Country for his recreation, but he would take me
with him, whereby I had occasion to note concerning the Province, riches,
commodities, and government of Chiapa, what in the ensuing Chapter I shall
faithfully commend unto the Press.

CHAP. XV. Describing the Country of Chiapa, with the chiefest Towns and
Commodities belonging unto it.
THough Chiapa in the opinion of the Spaniards be held to be one of the poorest
Countries of America; because in it as yet there have been no mines discovered,
nor golden sands found in the rivers, nor any haven upon the South Sea, whereby
commodities are brought in and carried out, as to Mexico, Guaxaca and
Guatemala; yet I may say it exceeds most Provinces in the greatness and
beauty of fair Towns, and yields to none except it be to Guatemala; nay it
surpasses all the rest of America in that one, and famous and most populous
Town of Chiapa of the Indians. And it ought not to be so much slighted by the
Spaniards as it is, if they would look upon it as standing between Mexico and
Guatemala, whose strength might be all Americaes strength, and whose weakness
may prove dangerous to all that flourishing Empire, for the easy entrance into
it by the river of Tabasco, or for its near joining and bordering unto Iucatan.
Besides, the commodities in it are such as do uphold a constant trading and
commerce amongst the inhabitants themselves, and with other neighboring
Countries, and from no one part of America does Spain get more Cochinil then
from one of the Provinces of Chiapa; the Towns also being great and populous,
by their yearly pole tribute do add much to the King of Spaines revenues.

This Country is divided into three Provinces, to wit, Chiapa, Zeldales, and
Zoques; whereof Chiapa it self is the poorest. This contains the great Town
of Chiapa of the Indians, and all the Towns and farms Northward toward
Maquilapa, and Westward the Priory of Comitlan, which has some ten Towns,
and many farms of Cattle, Horses, and Mules subject unto it; and neighboring
unto it lies the great valley of Capanabastla, which is another Priory
reaching toward Soconuzco. This valley glories in the great river, which has
its spring from the mountains called Cuchumatlanes, and runs to Chiapa of
the Indians, and from thence to Tabasco. It is also famous for the abundance of
fish, which the river yields, and the great store of Cattle which from
thence minister food and provision both to the City of Chiapa, and to all the
adjacent Towns. Though Chiapa the City, and Comitlan as standing upon the
hills, be exceeding cold, yet this valley lying low is extraordinary hot, and
from May to Michaelmas is subject to great storms and tempests of thunder and
lightning. The head Town where the Priory stands, is called Copanabastla,
consisting of above eight hundred Indian inhabitants. But greater than this is
Izquintenango at the end of the valley and at the foot of the mountains of
Cuchumatlanes Southward. And yet bigger then this is the Town of St.
Bartholomew Northward at the other end of the valley, which in length is about
forty miles, and ten or twelve only in breadth. All the rest of the Towns
lie toward Soconuzco* and are yet hotter and more subject to thunder and
lightning, as drawing nearer unto the South Sea coast. Besides the abundance of
cattle, the chief commodity of this valley consists in Cotton-wooll,
whereof are made such store of mantles for the Indians wearing, that the
Merchants far and near come for them. They exchange them to Soconuzco and
Xuchutepeques for Cacao, whereby they are well stored of that drink. So that
the inhabitants want neither fish which) they have from the river) nor flesh
(for that the valley abounds with Cattle) nor clothing (for of that they spare
to others) nor bread, though not of wheat, for there grows none; but Indian
Maiz they have plenty of; and besides they are exceedingly stored with fowls
and Turkeys, fruits, Honey, Tobacco and Sugarcanes. Neither is money here nor in
Chiapa so plentiful as in Mexico and Guaxaca; and whereas there they reckon by
Patacones, or pieces of Eight; here they reckon by Tostones which are but half
Patacones. Though the river be many ways profitable to that valley, yet it is
cause of many disasters to the inhabitants, who lose many times their children,
and their Calves and Colts drawing near to the waterside, where they are
devoured by Cayman^s, which are many and greedy of flesh, by reason of the many
prizes they have got. The City of Chiapa Real, is one of the meanest Cities in
all America, consisting of not above four hundred householders Spaniards, and
about an hundred houses of Indians joining to the City, and called el barrio de
los Indios, who have a Chapel by themselves. In this City there is no Parish
Church, but only the Cathedral, which is mother to all the inhabitants.
Besides, there are two Cloisters, one of Dominicans, and the other of
Franciscans, and a poor Cloister of Nuns, which are burdensome enough to that
City. But the Jesuits having got no footing there (who commonly live in the
richest and wealthiest places and Cities) is a sufficient argument of either
the poverty of that City, or of want of gallant parts, and prodigality in the
gentry, from whose free and generous spirits they like Horse-leeches are still
sucking extraordinary and great alms for the Colleges where they live; but
here the Merchants are close handed, and the Gentlemen hard, and sparing,
wanting of wit and Courtiers parts and bravery, and so poor Chiapa is held no
fit place for Jesuits. The Merchants chief trading there is in Cacao,
Cotton-wool from the adjacent parts of the Country, in Pedlers small wares, and
in some Sugar from about Chiapa of the Indians, in a little Cochinil; for
commonly the Governor (whose chief gain consists in this) will not suffer
them to be too free in this commodity, lest they hinder his greedy traffic.
These have their shops all together in a little Marketplace before the
Cathedral Church, built with walks and Porches, under which the poor Indian
wives meet at five a clock at evening to sell what slap and drugges they can
prepare most cheap for the empty Criolian stomachs. The richer sort of these
Merchants go and send yet further to Tabasco for wares from Spain, such as
wines, Linen cloth, Figs, Raisins, Olives, and Iron, though in these
commodities they dare not venture too much, by reason the Spaniards in that
Country are not very many, and those that are there, are such as are loath to
open their purses to more then what may suffice nature. So that what are
Spanish commodities are chiefly brought for the Friars who are the best and
joviallest blades of that Country. The Gentlemen of Chiapa are a by word all
about that Country, signifying great Dons ( dones, gifts or abilities I should
say) great birth, phantasticke pride, joined with simplicity, ignorance, misery
and penury. These Gentlemen will say they descend from some Dukes house in
Spain, and immediately from the first Conquerors; yet in carriage they are but
clownes, in wit, abilitics, parts and discourse as shallow brained, as a low
brook, whose waters are scarce able to leap over a pibble stone; any small
reason soon tries and tires their weak brain, which is easily at a stand when
sense is propounded, and slides on speedily when nonsense carries the
stream. The chief families in this City, are named, Cortez, Solis, Velasco,
Toledo, Zerna, and Mendoza. One of these, who was thought the chief in my
time, called Don Melchor de Velasco, one day fell into discourse with me
concerning England, and our English nation, and in the best, most serious and
judicious part of his Don-like conference, asked me whether the sun and moon
in England were of the same color as in Chiapa, and whether English men went
barefoot like the Indians, and sacrificed one another as formerly did the
Heathens of that Country? and whether all England could afford such a dainty
as a dish of Frixoles (which is the poorest Indians daily food there, being
black and dry Turkey or French beans boiled with a little biting Chille or
Indian pepper with garlic, till the broth become as black as any Ink) And
whether the women in England went as long with child, as did the Spanish women?
And lastly, whether the Spanish nation were not a far gallanter nation then
the English? When I perceived my Don ran farther and farther into his simple
and foolish questions, I cut him off suddenly, telling him, Sir, It is long
since I came out of England, if you give me leave to recollect my memory, I
will answer some of these your hard questions the next time we meet (thinking
hereby to try my Dons wit further, whether he could perceive I jeared him.) To
which my simple Don replied, I pray Sir do, and whenever you come, you shall
be welcome to a dish of Frixoles. With this I took my leave of him, and at our
farewell, he again desired me to study well his questions, and to return him
a speedy answer, whereby I was more confirmed in my conceit of my Don, that he
was either tonto or bobo, fool or simple. Yet thought I my best way to answer
is to answer a fool according to his folly, and so resolved within two or three
days to return unto him some simple answer according to his simple and foolish
questions. Therefore speedily I singled out a good occasion of meeting with him
at his own house, who welcomed me with much Spanish gravity, and sitting down
before Donna Angela, his painted wife and Angel; began to answer, or more to
jeer his Donship. I began with the Sun and Moon, telling him that they were
planets, and had their special influences upon several nations, as all
planets have upon man's body. And so they did show themselves according to the
inclination of the people of several Kingdoms. And therefore as the Spaniards
were much inclined to Venus and to beauty, and not contenting themselves with
the natural beauty of their fair Ladies, would yet have Art add to nature by
the skill and use of the best painting colors; so these glorious planets of
the Sun and Moon among the Spaniards, and especially in Chiapa, showed
themselves most comely, bright, glorious and beautiful, working the like
inclination to beauty upon, and in all Spaniards. My instance was in the land
of the Blackmores, where I told them that their bodies were black, and that
among them the Sun appeared with a dark and sad visage. Here my Don cried out;
An excellent example. I gave him yet a second instance from the Eclipse of the
Sun; which being eclipsed, made all the Earth, men's faces and bodies seem of a
dark, or yellow color, to show the proportion or sympathy of sublunary odies
to that high and overmastering plnet. To this that good Don replied; sennor no
se puede decirmas, sir, nothing can be answered or said more or better.
Vengamos agora a Ingalatierra, Let us draw now to England. To which I answered
him, that in England the Sun and Moon appeared half year of one color, and
half of another; for the women one half year it appeared as in Spain and
Chiapa, beautiful and glorious, for that naturally without painting they
yielded to none in beauty. But the other half year it appeared as red as blood,
or scarlet; and the reason might easily be guessed at, for that no Nation is
more warlik and high spirited then the English, whose very clothes were fiery,
wearing more scarlet then any nation in the World; a^ he might perceive by
their coming so much with their ships to the Indian Coasts to fight with the
Spaniurds; and that as they delighted to go in red, and to be like the Sun,
so naturally they were brought to those Sea^ to single out such ships as from
America carried the rich Commodity of Cochinill, whereof they make more use
then Spain it self to die their clothes and Coats withal. Here my Don jogged
his head, and replied; Sir, I thought no nation had been so like the Sun as the
Spaniards; for I have read that when our Ancestors came to conquer these parts,
the Indians called them, hijos del Sol, that is, sons of the Sun, being comely
and gallant, and more like the Sun then any other people. To this I answered
him. Sir, no doubt but you are like the Sun here, and none more glittering and
bright, your very hatbands shining with Pearls and Diamonds like the
brightness of the Sun; But as I said before the Blackmores are like their Sun,
so I say, the English is like their Sun, which is red, and so do and will
affect to wear Scarlet, as long as any Cochinill is to be found in the India's.

Now Don Melchor began to understand me, and told me, never man had satisfied
him with better reasons then my self. He thanked me heartily, and told me,
he thought no Gentleman in Chiapa could tell so well as himself now why the
English ships came so much upon their Coasts; and that my discourse had
satisfied him to the full. He desired me to go on to his other questions. To
his second demanding whether the English went barefoot like the Indians, I told
him I thought that the Count of Gondomar, (who had been many years Ambassador
from Spain in England) had satisfied all the Spaniards that doubt* who coming
from England to Madrid, and being there asked by some Courtiers, whether London
was as big as Madrid, and as well peopled, he made answer, that he thought
there was scarce a hundred left in London. He proved it from the use and
custom of his own Countrymen of Spain; who when they are to make a journey,
show themselves two or three days before in colors, walking with boots and
spurs, that their friends may take notice that they are departing out of the
Town or City. So said the Count of Gondomar, I think by this there are very
few People in London; for when I came from thence I left them all almost in
clothes of colors, bo^d and spurred as ready to depart and take some journey.
And truly my Don (quoth I) your own Count has answered for me; yet I say,
the English are so far from going barefoot, that they go booted, and are all
in a readiness to move out of England for any noble and generous design; but
above all they are still ready for America, where they know is store and
abundance of Hydes to make them Boots to cover the bareness of their legs,
that they may not be suspected to be like barefooted Indians. Here Don Melchor
replied, I pray sir, when they come by Sea to these parts do they come also
booted and spurred? For I should think, when they fight, their spurs should
hinder them. To this his doubt I answered first, as concerning spurs in the
ships, with the example of one of his own Nation, and of the best Divines in
Spain, living in my time in Valladolid, called Maestro Nunno, (Reader of
Divinity in the College of St. Gregory, but in his carriage and experience in
the World a simple noddy) who being invited by a Noble man to go with him in
his Coach out of the City a mile or two to a garden of recreation, went hastily
about the College to borrow boots and spurs; and when he had put them on,
being asked whither he went, and why he put on boots and spurs, answered that
he was to go in a Coach out of the City, and that he thought the Coach and
Mules would want spurs to go and come the sooner. Even so my Don (quoth I) the
English men come booted and spurred in their ships, to make their ships sail on
the swifter. And this is the reason why the English ships sail faster, and
when they are in fight turn about quicker then a Spanish Galeon, because they
are spurred and kicked within. O sir, I humbly thank you (said Don Melchor) for
that by your discourse now I know the truth of what indeed I have often heard
say, that the English ships are nimbler, and quicker at Sea then our heavy
Galeons. Now as for fighting the English men's spurs (said I) are no hinderance
to them, but rather a great advantage. For they fight with weapons, with their
hands and with their feet, wherein they exceed the Spaniards; for when they
have shot with their pieces, or cut down with their swords any enemy, or
knocked him with their holbards, then with their feet and spurs, they fall
upon him, and so soon rid him out of the way, that he may no more rise up
against them. All you have told me (said the wise Velazco) stands with so much
reason, that my judgment is convinced by you. As for eating and sacrificing one
another like the Indians (I told him) that the English filled their bellies so
well with fat Beef and Mutton, fowls, Rabbits, Partridges and Pheasants, that
they had no stomach at all to man's flesh. And that truly for frixoles dressed
with garlic, that only dainty dish was wanting in England; and that for
Garlic, three reasons moved the English not to be lavishing of that little
they had; first, for fear they should want it for their horses drenches;
secondly, for that they felt not themselves so much troubled with the wind, nor
puffed up with windy and vain conceits as other nations did; but thirdly and
chiefly they refrained from it among themselves, that they might not smell of
it, and that by the sent and smell of it a far off at Sea they might when
they came to the Coast of America, smell out a Spanish ship, and know it from a
Hollander. Here my Don Melchor fell into admiration, assuring me, he had
never heard more solid reasons from any man. Alas poor Criolian of Chiapa
(thought I) if I had spoken sense, thy shallow brain had not been able to
have leaped over it, but after nonsense thou art easily carried away. As for
his last question, I told him that was above my reach, for that poor Friars
ought not to meddle with women, neither had my mother ever told me how long
she went with me. But how ever if Donna Angella would tell me how long she
went with her children, I would by the constellations of the Heavens search out
against our next meeting, how long the English women went with their children.
To this my Don Melchor answered that he would not trouble me to study what he
thought was not belonging to my profession; but he knew that if I would study
that or any other hard and difficult point, I could give him more and better
satisfaction then any scholar in that City.

And thus (Reader) by this Don Melchors wit and ability would I have thee judge
of the Gentlemen Criolians or natives of Chiapa; and yet as presumptuous they
are and arrogant, as if the noblest blood in the Court of Madrid ran through
their veins. It is a common thing amongst them to make a dinner only with a
dish of Frixoles in black broth, boiled with pepper and garlic, saying it is
the most nourishing meat in all the India's; and after this so stately a dinner
they will be sure to comeout to the streetdore of their houses to see and to be
seen, and there for half an hour will they stand shaking off the crumbs of
bread from their clothes, bands (but especially from their ruffes when they
used them) and from their mustachoes. And with their tooth-pickers they will
stand picking their teeth, as if some small Partridge bone stuck in them; nay
if a friend pass by at that time, they will be sure to find out some crum or
other in their mustacho (as if on purpose the crumbs of the table had been
shaken upon their beards, that the loss of them might be a gaining of credit
for great house keeping) and they will be sure to vent out some non-truth, as
to say, A Senor que linda perdiz he comido oy, O Sir, what a dainty Partridge
have I eat to day, where as they pick out nothing from their teeth but a black
husk of a dry frixole or Turkey bean. Though great in blood and in birth they
say they are, yet in their employments they are but rich Grasiers, for most of
their* wealth consists in farms of Cattle and Mules. Some indeed have
Towns of Indians subject unto them, whereof they are called Encomendero's, and
receive yearly from every Indian a certain Pole tribute of fowls and money.
They have most cowardly spirits for war, and though they will say, they would
feign see Spain, yet they dare not venture their lives at sea; they judge
sleeping in a whole skin the best maxim for their Criolian spirits. One
hundred fighting soldiers would easily lay low those Chiapa Dons, and gain the
whole City, which lies so open to the fields, that the Mules and Asses come in
and grase, the streets being very commodious to entertain Asses from within,
and from without. Yet in this City lives commonly a Governor, or Alcalde
Major, and a Bishop. The Governors place is of no small esteem and interest,
for that his power reaches far, and he tradeth much in Cacao and Cochinil,
and domineers over both Spaniards and Indians at his will and pleasure. But ill
gotten goods never thrive, as was seen in Don Gabriel de Orellana (Governor of
this City and Country in my time) who having sent the worth of eight thousand
crowns in Cochinil, Cacao, Sugar, and Hydes by the river of Tabasco toward
the Havana lost it all into the hands of the Hollanders, who doubtless knew
how to make better use of it, then would have done that tyrannizing Governor.
The Bishops place of that City is worth at least eight thousand ducats a year,
which truly he had need of that comes so far from Spain to live in such a City
where are such able Dons, as Don Melchor de Velasco, and where Asses are so
freely fed and bred. Most of this Bishops revenues consists in great
offerings which he yearly receives from the great Indian Towns, going out to
them once a year to confirm their children, whose confirmation is such a means
to confirm and strengthen the Bishops revenues, that none must be confirmed by
him who offer not a fair white Wax-candle, with a ribban and at least four
Rials. I have seen the richer sort offer him a Candle of at least six pound
weight with two yards of twelve penny broad ribban, and the Candle stuck from
the top to the bottom with single Rials round about. Nay the poor Indians make
it the chief master piece of their vanity to offer proudly in such occasions.
Don Bernardi^ de Salazar was the Bishop of this City in my time, who desired my
company to ride with him his circuit but one month, about the Towns near to
Chiapa, and in this time I was appointed by him to hold the basin wherein the
Spaniards and Indians (whilst he confirmed their children) did cast their
offerings, which my self and another Chaplain did always tell and cast up by
good account before we carried the money up into his chamber, and I found that
at our return at the months end he had received one thousand and six hundred
ducats of only offerings, besides the fees due to him for visiting the
several companies, or sodalities and confraternities belonging to the Saints
or souls in their purgatory (which are extraordinary rich there) whereof he
and all other Bishops in their district take account yearly. This Bishop was
(a^ all the rest are there) somewhat covetous; but otherwise a man of a
temperate life* and conversation, very zealous to reform whatsoever abuses
committed in the Church, which cost him his life before I departed from Chiapa
to Guatemala. The woman of that City (...) seems pretend much weakness and
squeamishness of stomach, which they say is so great, that they are not able
to continue in the Church while a Mass is briefly hudled over, much less
while a solemn high Mass (as they call it) is sung, and a Sermon preached,
unless they drink a cup of hot Chocolatte, and eat a bit of (...) strengthen
their stomacke^. For this purpose it was much used by them to make their maids
^ing to them to Church in the middle of Mass or Sermon a cup of Chocolatte,
which could not be done to all, or most of them without a great confusion and
interrupting both Mass and Sermon. The Bishop perceiving this abuse and having
given fair warning for the omitting of it, but all without amendment, thought
fit to fix in writing upon the Churches doors an excommunication against all
such as should presume at the time of service to eat or drink within the
Church. This excommunication was taken by all, but especially by the
Gentlewomen much to heart, who protested if they might not eat or drink in the
Church, they could not continue in it to hear what otherwise they were bound
unto. The chief of them knowing what great friendship there was between the
Bishop and the Prior, and my self, came to the Prior and me desiring us to
use all means we could with the Bishop for the revoking that his
excommunication so heavily laid upon them, and threatening their souls with
damning judgment for the violation of it. The good Prior and my self labored
all we could, alleging the custom of the Country, the weakness of the sex
whom it most concerned, and also the weakness of their stomachs, the contempt
that might from them ensue unto his person, and many inconveniences which might
follow to the breeding of an uproar in the church and in the City, whereof we
had some probable conjecture from what already we had heard from some. But none
of these reasons would move the Bishop; to which he answered that he preferred
the honor of God, and of his house before his own life. The women seeing him
so hard to be entreated, began to stomach him the more and to slight him with
scornful and reproachful words; others slighted his excommunication,
drinking in iniquity in the Church, as the fish does water, which caused one
day such an uproare in the Cathedral, that many swords were drawn against the
Priests and Prebends, who attempted to take away from the maids the cups of
Chocolatte, which they brought unto their mistresses; who at last seeing that
neither fair nor soul means would prevail with the Bishop, resolved to
forsake the Cathedral, where the Bishops own and his Prebends eyes must needs
be watching over them; and so from that time most of the City betook
themselves to the Cloister Churches, where by the Nuns and Friars they were not
troubled nor resisted, though fairly counseled to obey the command of the
Bishop; whose name now they could not brook, and to whose Prebends they denied
now all such relief and stipend for Masses which formerly they had used to
bestow upon them, conferring them all upon the Friars who grew rich by the poor
impoverished Cathedral. This lasted not long, but the Bishop began to stomach
the Friars, and to set up another excommunication, binding all the City to
resort unto their own Cathedral Church; which the women would not obey, but
kept their houses for a whole month; in which time the Bishop fell dangerously
sick, and desired to retire himself to the Cloister of the Dominicans, for the
great confidence he had in the Prior that he would take care of him in his
sickness. Physicians were sent for far and near, who all with a joint
opinion agreed that the Bishop was poisoned; and he himself doubted not of it
at his death, praying unto God to forgive those that had been the cause of it,
and to accept of that sacrifice of his life, which he was willing to offer for
the zeal of Gods house and honor. He lay not above a week in the Cloister,
and as soon as he was dead, all his body, his head and face did so swell, that
the least touch upon any part of him caused the skin to break and cast out
white matter, which had corrupted and overflowne all his body. A Gentlewoman
with whom I was well acquainted in that City, who was noted to be somewhat too
familiar with one of the Bishops Pages, was commonly censured to have
prescribed such a cup of Chocolatte to be ministered by the Page which poisoned
him who so rigorously had forbidden Chocolatte to be drunk in the Church. My
self heard this Gentlewoman say of the deceased Bishop, that she thought few
grieved for his death, and that the women had no reason to grieve for him, and
that she judged, he being such an enemy to Chocolatte in the Church, that which
he had drunk at home in his house had not agreed with his body. And it became
afterward a Proverb in that Country, Beware of the Chocolatte of Chiapa;
which made me so cautious, that I would not drink afterward of it in any
house, where I had not very great satisfaction of the whole Family. The women
of this City are somewhat light in their carriage, and have learned from the
Devil many entising lessons and baits to draw poor souls to sin and
damnation; and if they cannot have their wills, they will surely work revenge
either by Chocolatte or Conserves, or some fair present, which shall surely
carry death along with it. The Gentlewoman that was suspected (nay was
questioned for the death of the Bishop) had often used to send me boxes of
Chocolatte or conserves; which I willingly received from her, judging it to be
a kind of gratuity for the pains I took in teaching her son Latin. She was of
a very merry and pleasant disposition, which I thought might consist without
sin; until one day she sent unto me a very fair plantin wrapped up in a
hankerchief* buried in sweet Jazmines and roses; when I untied the
handkerchief, I thought among the flowers I should find some rich token, or
some pieces of eight, but finding nothing but a plantin, I wondered; and looking
further upon it, I found worked upon it with a knife the fashion of a heart
with two of blind Cupids arrows sticking in it, discovering unto my heart the
poisoned heart and thoughts of the poisoner that sent it. I thought it a good
warning to be wary and cautious of receiving more presents or Chocolatte from
such hands, and so returned unto her again her plantin with this short rhyme
cut out with a knife upon the skin fruta tan fria, amor no cria, as much as
to say, fruit so cold, takes no hold. This answer and resolution of mine was
soon spread over that little City, which made my Gentlewoman outrageous, which
presently she showed by taking away her son from school, and in many
meetings threatening to play me a Chiapaneca trick. But I remembered the Bishops
Chocolatte and so was wa^y, and staid not long after in that poisoning and
wicked City, which truly deserves no better relation then what I have given of
the simple Dons, and the Chocolatte-confectioning Donna's.

There is yet twelve leagues from this City of Chiapa, another Chiapa which
deserves better commendations. This consists most of Indians, and is held to
be one of the biggest Indian Towns in all America, containing at least four
thousand families. This Town has many privileges from the King of Spain, and
is governed chiefly by Indians (yet with subordination unto the Spanish
government of the City of Chiapa) who do choose an Indian Governor with other
inferior officers to rule with him. This Governor may wear a rapier and
dagger, and enjoys many other liberties which to the rest of the Indians are
denied. No Town has so many Dons in it of Indian blood as this. Don Philip de
Guzman was Governor of it in my time, a very rich Indian, who kept up commonly
in his stable a dozen of as good Horses for public shows, and ostentation as
the best Spaniard in the Country. His courage was not inferior to any
Spaniard, and for defense of some privileges of his Town sued in the Chancery
of Guatemala the proud and high minded Governor of the City of Chiapa,
spending therein great sums of money till he had overcome him, whereupon he
caused a feast to be made in the Town, both by water and land, so stately,
that truly in the Court of Madrid it might have been acted.

This Town lies upon a great river, whereunto belong many boats and Canoas,
wherein those Indians have been taught to act sea fights, with great dexterity,
and to represent the Nymphs of Parnassus, Neptune, Aeolus, and the rest of the
heathenish Gods and Goddesses, so that they are a wonder of their whole nation.
They will arm with their boats a siege against the Town, fighting against it
with such courage til they make it yield, as if they had been trained up all
their life to sea fights. So likewise within the Town they are as dexterous at
baiting of bulls, at juego de Cannas, at Horseraces, at arming a Camp, at all
manner of Spanish dances, instruments, and music as the best Spaniards. They
will erect Towers and Castles made of wood and painted cloth, and from them
fight either with the boats or one against another, with squibs, darts, and
many strange fireworks, so manfully, that if in earnest they could perform it
as well as they do it in sport and pastime, the Spaniards and Friars might soon
repent to have taught them what they have. As for acting of plays, this is a
common part of their solemn pastimes; and they are so generous, that they
nothing think too much to spend* in banquets and sweetmeats upon their Friars,
and neighboring Towns, whenever they are minded to show themselves in a
public feast. The Town is very rich, and many Indians in it that trade about
the Country as the Spaniards do. They have learned most trades befitting a
Commonwealth, and practice and teach them within their Town. They want not any
provision of fish or flesh, having for the one that great river joining unto
their Town, and for the other many Estantia's (as they call them) or farms
abounding with cattle. In this Town the Dominican Friars bear all the sway,
who have a rich and stately Cloister with another Church or Chapel subordinate
unto it. The heat here is so great, that both Friars and Indians commonly wear
a linen towel about their necks to wipe off the constant swet from their
faces, which makes the Friars sit longer at their dinner then else the would
do, for that at every bit they eat, and draught they drink, they are feign to
make a stop to wipe their dropping brows. Yet the evenings are fresh and cool,
which are much made of there, and spent in the many walks and gardins which
join close unto the River side. Two or three leagues from the Town, there are
two Ingenio's or Farms of Sugar, the one belonging to the Cloister of the
Dominicans of the City of Chiapa; the other unto the Cloister of this Town,
which contain near two hundred Blackmores, besides many Indians, who are
employed in that constant work of making Sugar for all the Country. Hereabouts
are bread great store of Mules, and excellent horses for any service. The Town
of Chiapa of the Indians, and all the Towns about it want nothing but a more
temperate climate and cooler air, and Wheat, which there cannot be sown, yet
for Spaniards and such as cannot live without it, it is brought from Chiapa of
the Spaniards and from about Comitlan; yet this is not generally acknowledged a
want by reason of the great plenty of Maiz which all the Towns enjoy, and
which is now more used both by Spaniards and dainty toothed Friars then bread
of Wheat. Yet your poor Spaniards, and some Indians who have got the trick of
trading from them do gain not a little in bringing to these Towns bisquets
of wheaten bread, which though it be dry and hard, yet because they are
novelties to the Indians; they get by changing them for other commodities,
especially of Cotton wool, which here is more abounding then in the Valley of
Copanabastlau.

Upon this Country of Chiapa of the Indians bordereth the Province of Zoques,
which is absolutely the richest part of Chiapa. This reaches on the one side
to Tabasco, and by the River named Grijalva sends commonly the Commodities
which are in it with safety unto St. John de Ulhua, or Vera Cruz. It trafiqueth
also with the Country of Iucatan by the Haven called Puerto Real, which lies
between Grijalva and Iucatan. Yet these two, the River of Tabasco, alias
Grijalva, and Puerto Real, though they be commodious to this Province of
Zoques, yet they are causes of daily fears unto the Spaniards, who well know
the weakness of them, and that if a foreign Nation should manfully thrust
into that Country by any of these two ways, they might so conquer all Chiapa,
and from thence pass easily unto Guatemala. But the River of Tabasco lying
low, and being somewhat hot, and the Towns about it infested with many gnats,
and the chiefest commodity there being but Cacao, have often discouraged both
our English and Hollanders, who have come up some part of the River, and
minding more the foresaid reasons, then what was forward to be had, have
turned back, losing a rich Country and slighting an eternal name, for few and
frivolous present difficulties. In this Province of Zoques, the Towns are not
very big, yet they be very rich; the chief Commodities are Silk and
Cochinill; whereof the latter is held the best of America, and the store of it
so great that no one Province alone exceeds it. Few Indians there are who have
not their Orchards planted with the trees whereon the worms breed which yield
unto us that rich Commodity; not that the Indians themselves esteem otherwise
of it, then as they see the Spaniands greedy after it, offering them money for
it, and forcing them to the preservation of it in those parts, which have
proved most successeful for this kind. There is great store of silk in this
Country, in so much that the Indians make it their great Commodity to employ
their wives in working Towels with all colors of silk, which the Spaniards
buy, and send into Spain. It is rare to see what works those Indian women will
make in silk, such as might serve for Patterns and samplers to many
School-Mistresses in England. The people of this Country are witty, and
ingenious, and fair of complexion; the Country toward Tabasco is hot, but
within in some places very cold. There is also plenty of Maiz, but no wheat;
neither is there such plenty of Cattle as about Chiapa, but Fowls and Turkies
as many as in other parts. The Province called Zeldales lies behind this of
the Zoques, from the North Sea within the continent, running up toward Chiapa,
and reaches in some parts near to the borders of Comitlan north-westward.
South-eastward it joins to such Indians which as yet have not been conquered by
the Spaniards, who make many invasions upon the Christian Indians, and burn
their Towns, and carry away their Cattle. The chief and head Town in this
Province is called Ococingo, which is a Frontier against those Heathens. This
Province is esteemed rich for the Spaniards, who make much of Cacao, which
serves to make their drink of Chocolatte, and here is great store of it. There
is also another Commodity, great among the Spaniards, called Achiotte,
wherewith they make their Chocolattee look of the color of a brick. Here is
also plenty of Hogs and Bacon, Fowls, Turkies, Quails, Cattle, Sheep, Maiz,
Honey, and not far from Ococingo, in my time was setting up an Ingenio, or
Farm of Sugar, which was thought would prove as well as those about Chiapa of
the Indians. The Country in most parts is high and hilly; but Ococingo stands
in a pleasant Valley, enjoying many Brooks and streams of fresh water, and
therefore has been thought a fit place for Sugar. Here also in this Valley the
Friars have attempted to sow Wheat, which has proved very good. Thus Reader, I
have showed you the Country of Chiapa, which as it is compassed about on the
one side by Soconuzco, and from thence almost to Guatemala, by the Province of
Suchutepeques, on the other side by Tabasco, and on the other side by Zeldales
with excessive plenty of Cacao and Achiotte, which are the chief drugs for the
making of Chocolatte; I will yet before I depart from Chiapa to Guatemala, say
somewhat of that drink so much used by the Spaniards, and in my judgment not
to be slighted, but rather to be published and made known to all Nations,
whose use might remedy the great abuse of wines and strong drinks which too
much are esteemed amongst us here in Europe.

CHAP. XVI. Concerning two daily and common Drinks, or Potions much used in
the India's, called Chocolatte, and Atolle.
CHocolatte being this day used not only over all the West-India's, but also
in Spain, Italy, and Flanders, with approbation of many learned Doctors in
Physic, among whom Antonio Colmenero of Ledesma; (who lived once in the
India's) has composed a learned and curious Treatise concerning the nature and
quality of this drink; I thought fit to insert here also somewhat of it
concerning my own experience for the space of twelve years. This name
Chocolatte is an Indian name, and is compounded from At, as some say or as
others, Atle, which in the Mexican language signifies water, and from the
sound which the water (wherein is put the Chocolatte) makes, as Choco, Choco,
Choco, when it is stirred in a cup by an instrument called a Molinet, or
Molinillo, until it bubble and rise unto a froath. And as there it is a name
compounded, so in English we may well call it a compounded or a confectioned
drink wherein are found many and several Ingredients, according to the
different disposition of the body of them that use it. But the chief Ingredient
(without which it cannot be made) is called Cacao, a kind of nut or kernel
bigger then a great Almond, which grows upon a tree called the tree of Cacao,
and ripens in a great husk, wherein sometimes are found more, sometimes less
Cacao's, sometimes twenty, sometimes thirty, nay forty, and above. This Cacao,
though as every simple, it contains the quality of the four Elements, yet in
the common opinion of most Physicians, it is held to be cold and dry, a
praedominio; It is also in the substance that rules these two qualities,
restringent and obstructive, of the nature of the Element of the earth. And as
it is thus a mixed, and not a simple Element, it has parts correspondent to
the rest of the Elements; and particularly it partakes of those which
correspond with the Element of Air, that is, heat and moisture, which are
governed by unctious parts; there being drawn out of the Cacao much Butter,
which in the India's I have seen drawn out of it by the Criolian women for to
oint their faces. And let not this seem impossible to believe, that this
grain or nut of Cacao should be said to be first cold and dry, and then hot
and moist; for though experience be a thousand witnesses, yet instances will
further clear this truth; and first in the Rubarbe, which has in it hot and
soluble parts, and parts which are binding, cold and dry, which have a virtue
to strengthen, bind and stop the looseness of the belly. Secondly, we see
this clearly in the steel, which having so much of the nature of the earth, as
being heavy, thick, cold, and dry, should be thought unproper for the curing of
Oppilations, but rather to be apt to increase them; and yet it is given for a
proper remedy against them. The authority of Gal^n may further clear this in
the third book of the Qualities of simples, where he teaches that almost all
those medicines, which to our sense seem to be simple, are notwithstanding
naturally compounded, containing in themselves contrary qualities, that is to
say, a quality to expel, and to retain, to incrassate and to extenuate, to
rarifie and to condense. And in the fifteenth Chapter following in the same
book, he puts an example of the broth of a Cock, which moves the belly, and
the flesh has the virtue to bind. Yet further that this differing virtue and
quality is found in diverse substances, or parts of simple medicaments, he
shows in the first book of his simple medicines in the seventeenth Chapter,
bringing the example of milk, in which three substances are found and
separated, that is to say, the substance of cheese, which has the virtue to
stop the flux of the belly; and the substance of whay, which is purging, and
butter, as it is expressed Chap. 15. Also we find in wine which is in the Must,
three substances, that is to say, earth, which is the chief; and a thinner
substance, which is the flower, and may be called the scum, or froath; and a
third substance which we properly call wine; and every one of these substances
contains in it self diverse qualities and virtues, in the color, in the
smell, and in other accidents.

And this is very comformable to reason, if we consider that every aliment, be
it never sosimple, begets and produces in the liver four humors, not only
differing in temper, but also in substance; and begets more or less of that
humor, according as the aliment has more or fewer parts corresponding to the
substance of that humor, which is most engendered. From which examples we may
gather that when the Cacao is grinded and stirred, the diverse parts, which
nature has given it, do artificially and intimately mix themselves one with
another; and so the unctuous, warm, and moist parts, mingled with the earthy
represseth, and leaves them not so binding, as they were before; but rather
with a mediocrity, more inclining to the warm, and moist temper of the air,
then to the cold and dry of the earth; as it does appear, when it is made fit
to drink, that scarce two turns are given with the Molinet, when there arises
a fatty scum, by which is seen, how much it partaketh of the oily part. So that
from all that has been said, the error of those is well discovered, who
speaking of this drink of Chocolatte, say, that it causes oppilations, because
Cacao is astringent; as if that astriction were not corrected and modified by
the intimate mixing of one part with another, by means of the grinding, as is
said before. Besides it having so many ingredients, which are naturally hot, it
must of necessity have this effect, that is to say, to open, attenuate, and not
to bind. And leaving aside more reasons, this truth is evidently seen in the
Cacao it self; which if it be not stirred, grinded and compounded to make the
Chocolatte; but be eaten as it is in the fruit (as many Criolian and Indian
women eat it) it does notably obstruct and cause stoppings, and make them look
of a broken, pale and earthy color, as do those that eat ear then ware, as
pots, or pieces of lime-walls) which is much used among the Spanish women
thinking that pale and earthy color, though with obstructions and stoppings,
well becomes them) and for this certainly in the Cacao thus eaten there is no
other reason, but that the diverse substances which it contains, are not
perfectly mingled by the mastication only, but require the artificial
mixture, which we have spoken of before.

The tree which does bear this fruit, is so delicate, and the earth where it
grows so extreme hot, that to keep the tree from being consumed by the sun,
they first plant other trees, which they call, las Madres del Cacao, mothers of
the Cacao; and when these are grown up to a good height fit to shade the Cacao
trees, then they plant the Cacaotals, or the trees of Cacao; that when they
first show themselves above the ground, those trees, which are already grown
may shelter them, and as mothers nourish, defend, and shadow them from the
sun; and the fruit does not grow naked, but many of them (as I have said
before) are in one great husk or cod, and therein besides every grain is
closed up in a white juicy skin, which the women also love to suck off from the
Cacao, finding it cool, and in the mouth dissolving into water. There are two
sorts of Cacao; the one is common, which is of a dark color inclining toward
red, being round and peeked at the ends; the other is broader, and bigger, and
flatter, and not so round, which they call, Patlaxte, and this is white, and
more drying, and is sold a great deal cheaper then the former. And this
especially, more then the other, causes watchfullnesse, and drives away sleep,
and therefore is not so useful as the ordinary, and is chiefly spent by the
ordinary and meaner sort of people. As for the rest of the ingredients which
make this Chocolatticall confection, there is notable variety; for some put
into it black Pepper, which is not well approved of by the Physicians, because
it is so hot and dry, but only for one who has a very cold liver; but
commonly instead of this Pepper, they put into it long red Pepper, called
Chile, which though it be hot in the mouth, yet is cool and moist in the
operation. It is further compounded with white Sugar, Cinnamon, Clove,
Anniseed, Almonds, Hasellnuts, Orejuela, Bainilla, Sap^yoll, Orange flower
water, some Musk, and as much of Achiotte, as will make it look of the color
of a red brick. But how much of each of these may be applied to such a
quantity of Cacao, the several dispositions of men's bodies must be their rule.
The ordinary receipt of Antonio Colmenero was this; To every hundred Cacao's,
two cods of Chile, called long red Pepper, one handful of Anniseed and
Orejuela's, and two of the flowers called Mechasucbil, or Bainilla, or instead
of this six roses of Alexandria, beat to powder, two drams of Cinnamon, of
Almonds and Hasel-nuts, of each one dozen; of white Sugar half a pound, of
Achiotte, enough to give it the color. This Author thought neither Clove, nor
Musk, nor any sweet water fit, but in the India's they are much used. Others
use to put in Maiz, or Paniso, which is very windy; but such do it only for
their profit, by increasing the quantity of the Chocolatte; because every
fanega or measure of Maiz containing about a bushel and a half, is sold for
eight shillings, and they that sell Chocolatte, sell it for four shillings a
pound, which is the ordinary price. The Cinnamon is held one of the best
ingredients, and denied by none, for that it is hot and dry in the third
degree, it provokes urine, and helps the kidneys and reins of those who are
troubled with cold diseases, and it is good for the eyes, and in effect it is
cordial, as appears by the Author of these verses,

Commoda and urine Cinamomum and renibus affert,
Lumina clarificat, dira venena fugat.
The Achiotte has a piercing, attenuating quality, as appears by the common
practice of the Physicians in the India's, experienced daily in the effects of
it, who do give it to their Patients to cut and attenuate the gross humors,
which do cause shortness of breath, and stopping of urine: and so it is used
for any kind of oppilations, and is given for the stoppings which are in the
breast, or in the region of the belly, or any other part of the body. This
Achiotte also grows upon a tree in round husks, which are full of red
grains* from whence the Achiotte is taken, and first made into a paste, and
then being dried up is fashioned either into round balls or cakes, or into the
form of little brickes, and so is sold. As concerning the long red Pepper,
there are four sorts of it; one is called Chilchotes; the other is very
little, which they call Chilterpin, and these two kinds are very quick and
biting. The other two are called, Tonalchiles, and these are but moderately
hot, for they are eaten with bread by the Indians, as they eat other fruits.
But that which is usually put into Chocolatte, is called Chilpaclagua, which
has a broad husk, and is not so biting as the first, nor so gentle as the
last. The Mechasuchil, or Bainilla has a purgative quality. All these
ingredients are usually put into the Chocolatte, and by some more, according to
their fancies. But the meaner sort of people, as Blackmores and Indians,
commonly put nothing into it, but Cacao, Achiotte, Maiz, and a few Chiles with
a little Anniseed. And though the Cacao is mingled with all these ingredients,
which are hot; yet there is to be a greater quantity of Cacao, then of all the
rest of the ingredients, which serve to temper the coldness of the Cacao; from
whence it follows that this Chocolatticall confection is not so cold as the
Cacao, nor so hot as the rest of the ingredients, but there results from the
action and reaction of these ingredients, a moderate temper, which may be good,
both for the cold and hot stomachs, being taken moderately.

Now for the making or compounding of this drink, I shall set down here the
method. The Cacao, and the other ingredients must be beaten in a mortar of
stone, or (as the Indians use) ground upon a broad stone, which they call
Metate, and is only made for that use. But first the ingredients are all to be
dried, except the Achiotte, with care that they may be beaten to powder,
keeping them still in stirring, that they be not burnt, or become black; for if
they be overdried, they will be bitter, and lose their virtue. The Cinnamon and
the long red pepper are to be first beaten, with the Anniseed, and then the
Cacao, which must be beaten by little and little, till it be all powdered; and
in the beating it must be turned round, that it may mix the better. Every one
of these ingredients must be beaten by it self, and then all be put into the
vessel, where the Cacao is, which you must stir together with a spoon, and
then take out that paste, and put it into the mortar, under which there must be
a little fire, after the confection is made: but if m^re fire be put under then
will only warm it, then the unctuous part will dry away. The Achiotte also
must be put in in the beating, that it may the better take the color. All the
ingredients must be searsed, save only the Cacao, and if from the Cacao the
dry shell be taken, it will be the better. When it is well beaten, and
incorporated (which will be known by the shortness of it) then with a spoon
(so in the India's is used) is taken up some of the paste, which will be almost
liquid, and made into tablets, or else without a spoon put into boxes, and when
it is cold it will be hard. Those that make it into tablets, put a spoonefull
of the paste upon a piece of paper (the Indians put it upon the leaf of a
plantin tree)where, being put into the shade (for in the sun it melts and
dissolves) it grows hard; and then bowing the paper or leaf, the tablet falls
off, by reason of the fatness of the paste. But if it be put into any thing of
earth, or wood, it sticks fast, and will not come off, but with scraping or
breaking. The manner of drinking it, is diverse; the one (being the way most
used in Mexico) is to take it how with Atolle, dissolving a tablet in hot
water, and then stirring and beating it in the cup, where it is to be drunk,
with a Molinet, and when it is well stirred to a scumme or froath, then to fill
the cup with hot Atolle and so drink it sup by sup. Another way is, that the
Chocolatte, being dissolved with cold water and stirred with the Molinet, and
the scumme taken off and put into anovessel; the remainder be set upon the
fire, with as much sugar as will sweeten it, and when it is warm, then to
power it upon the scum which was taken off before, and so to drink it. But the
most ordinary way, is, to warm the water very hot, and then to power out half
the cup full that you mean to drink; and to put into it a tablet or two, or as
much as will thicken reasonably the water, and then grind it well with the
Molinet, and when it is well ground and risen to a scum, to fill the cup with
hot water, and so drink it by sups (having sweetened it with Sugar) and to eat
it with a little conserve, or maple bread, steeped into the Chocolatte. Besides
these ways there is another way (which is much used in the Island of Santo
Domingo) which is, to put the Chocolatte into a pipkin, with a little water,
and to let it boil well till it be dissolved, and then to put in sufficient
water and sugar according to the quantity of the Chocolatte, and then to boil
it again, until there comes an oily scumme upon it, and then to drink it.
There is another way yet to drink Chocolatte, which is cold, which the Indians
use at feasts, to refresh themselves, and it is made after this manner. The
Chocolatte (which is made with none or very few ingredients)being dissolved in
cold water with the Molinet, they take off the scumme or crassy part, which
rises in great quantity, especially when the Cacao is older and more
putrefied. The scumme they lay aside in a little dish by it self, and then put
sugar into that part from whence was taken the scum, and then power it from on
high into the scumme, and so drink it cold. And this drink is so cold, that
it agrees not with all men's stomachs; for by experience it has been found,
that it does hurt, by causing pains in the stomach, especially to women. The
third way of taking it is the most used, and thus certainly it does no hurt,
neither know I why it may not be used as well in England as in other parts
both hot and cold; for where it is so much used, the most, if not all, as well
in the India's, as in Spain, Italy, Flanders (which is a cold Country) find
that it agrees well with them. True it is, it is used more in the India's,
then in the European parts, because there the stomachs are more apt to faint
then here, and a cup of Chocolatte well confectioned comforts and strengthens
the stomach. For my self I must say, I used it twelve years constantly,
drinking one cup in the morning, another yet before dinner between nine or ten
of the clock; another within an hour or two after dinner, and another between
four and five in the afternoon; and when I was purposed to sit up late to
study, I would take another cup about seven or eight at night, which would keep
me waking till about midnight. And if by chance I did neglect any of these
accustomed hours, I presently found my stomach fainty. And with this custom
I lived twelve years in those parts healthy, without any obstructions, or
oppilations, not knowing what either ague, or fever was. Yet I will not dare
to regulate by mine own the bodies of others, nor take upon me the skill of a
Physician, to appoint and define at what time and by what persons this drink
may be used. Only I say, I have known some that have been the worse for it,
either for drinking it with too much sugar, which has relaxed their stomachs,
or for drinking it too often. For certainly if it be drunk beyond measure, not
only this Chocolatte but all other drinks, or meats, though of themselves they
are good and wholesome, they may be hurtful. And if some have found it
oppilative, it has come by the too too much use of it; as when one drinks
over much wine, instead of comforting and warming himself, he breeds and
nourishes cold diseases, because nature cannot overcome it, nor turn so great
a quantity into good nourishment. So he that drinks much Chocolatte, which
has fatparts, cannot make distribution of so great a quantity to all the
parts; and that part which remains in the slender veins of the liver must
needs cause oppilations and obstructions. But lastly, to conclude with this
Indian drink, I will add what I have heard Physicians of the India's say of
it, and have seen it by experience in others (though never I could find it in
my self) that those that use this Chocolatte much, grow fat and corpulent by
it: which indeed may seem hard to believe; for considering that all the
ingredients, except the Cacao, do rather extenuate, then make fat, because
they are hot and dry in the third degree. And we have already said, that the
qualities which do predominate in Cacao, are cold and dry, which are very
unfit to add any substance to the body. Nevertheless it may be answered that
the many unctuous parts, which have been proved to be in the Cacao, are those
which pinguifie and make fat; and the hotter ingredients of this composition
serve for a guide, or vehicall, to pass to the liver, and the other parts,
until they come to the fleshy parts; and there finding a like substance which
is hot and moist, as is the unctuous part, converting it self into the same
substance, it does augment and pinguifie. But how then might this Cacao with
the other Indian ingredients be had in England? even by trading in Spain for
it, as we do for other commodities; or not sleighting it so much as we and the
Hollanders have often done upon the Indians seas; of whom I have heard the
Spaniards say that when we have taken a good prize, a ship laden with Cacao, in
anger and wrath we have hurled over board this good commodity, not regarding
the worth and goodness of it, but calling it in bad Spanish, Cagaruta de
Carnero, or sheeps dung in good English. It is one of the necessariest
commodities in the India's, and nothing enricheth Chiapa in particular more
then it, whither are brought from Mexico and other parts, the rich bags of
Patacons only for this Cagaruta de Carnero, which we call sheeps dung. The
other drink which is much used in the India's is called Atolle, of which I
will say but a little, because I know it cannot be used here. This was the
drink of the ancient Indians, and is a thick pap made of the flower of Maiz,
taking off the husks from it, which is windy and melancholy. This is commonly
carried by the Indian women to the Markets hot in pots, and there is sold in
cups. The Criolian students, as we go to a Tavern to drink a cup of wine, so
they go in company to the public Markets, and as publicly buy and drink by
measure of this Atolle; which sometimes is seasoned with a little Chile, or long
Pepper, and then it pleases them best. But the Nuns and Gentlewomen have got a
trick of confectioning it with Cinnamon, Sweet-waters, Amber, or Musk, and
store of Sugar, and thus it is held to be a most strong and nourishing drink,
which the Physicians do prescribe unto a weak body, as we do here our
Almond-milke. But of what England never knew nor tasted, I will say no more,
but hasten my pen to Guatemala, which has been my second patria.

CHAP. XV. Showing my journey from the City of Chiapa, unto Guatemala, and the
chief places in the way.
THE time now being come that I was to leave the little City of Chiapa, I took
some occasion before hand to take my leave of my best friends, whose children I
had taught, and at my departure I must confess I found them kind and
bountiful, except it were Donna Magdalena de Morales, from whom I did not
expect, neither did I desire any farewell, or Adieu token. But among all, the
Governors wife was most liberal unto me, sending me many boxes of
Aromaticall Chocolatte, and one extraordinary great box with four several
divisions of different conserves gilt over, besides many Maplebreads, and
Biskets made with Eggs and Sugar, a present it was which might have been sent to
a greater man then to a poor worthless Mendicant Friar, and with this in a
handkerchief a dozen pieces of eight. Don Mel^hor del Velazco yet exceeded her,
in words and complements I mean, but in deeds, he and all the crew of the
Criolians must think to come short of them, who are borne in Spain. The first
Town I went unto, was T^eopixca, six leagues from Chiapa, a fair and great
Town of Indians, who are held to be next unto the Indians of the other Chiapa
in sitting and riding a horse. In this town is nothing so considerable as the
Church, which is great and strong, and the music belonging unto it sweet and
harmonious. The Vicar or Curate of this place was one Friar Peter Martyr a
Criolian, whom I knew could not endure the Prior nor me, yet he would
dissemble a love complementall exceeding well, and in outward shows raise it up
to gradus ut Octo. He knowing my prevalency with the Prior, durst not but give
me very good entertainment, which continued two days, until I was weary of
his complements.

The third day I took my leave of him, who would not yet leave me, but would
conduct me to Comitlan, whither I was invited by the Prior of that Cloister,
named Friar Thomas Rocolano, a French man, who being a stranger to the
Spaniards (for besides him and my self there was no other stranger in that
County) desired acquaintance with me, which he began to settle by meeting me
at the half way with many Indians on horse back, having provided an harbor
where we might more conveniently confer and rest while our Chocolatte and
other refreshments were provided. But the Criolian Peter Martyr was not a
little envious, (as I was afterward informed in the Cloister) to see me so
much made of and esteemed in the Country, yet his fair words and complements
far exceeded the sincerity and down-rightnesse of my French friend. At
Comitlan I stayed a whole week, riding about with the Prior unto the Indian
towns, and down the hill to the valley of Copanabastla, where I enjoyed much
pastime and recreation among the Friars and Indians and was feasted after the
manner of that Country, which knows more of an Epicurian diet then does
England, or any part of Europe; nay I am persuaded (and I have heard Spaniards
confess it) that Spain has taken from the India's since the conquest many
lessons for the dressing of several dishes and completing a feast or banquet.
After the week was ended my French friend the Prior conducted me to
Izquintenango, to see me well furnished up the Mountains of Cuchumatlanes.
This Town (as I have formerly observed) stands almost at the end of the
Valley of Copanabastla, and within two leagues of the Cuchumatlanes. It is one
of the finest Indian Towns of all the Province of Chiapa, and very rich, by
reason of the much Cotton wool in it, and especially by reason of its
situation, for standing in the Road way to Guatemala, all the Merchants of the
Country that trade with their mules that way, pass through this Town, and
there buy and sell, enriching it with money and far brought Commodities. It is
most plentifully stored with fruits, especially with what they call Pina's or
Pine fruit. It stands close by the great River, which runs to Chiapa of
the Indians, and has its spring not far off from the Cuchamatlanes, and yet
at this Town is very broad and deep. No man nor beast travlling to Guatemala
can go into it, or from Guatemala can go out of it, but by ^errying over. And
the Rode being much used and beaten by travelers, and by such as they call
Requas of mules (every Requa consisting of fifty or threescore mules) this
Ferry is day and night employed) and yields much treasure to the town at the
years end. The Indians of the Town besides the ferry boat, have made many other
little boats, or Canoa's to go up and down the River. Hither when the Prior of
Comitlan had brought me, we were waited for by the Vicar or Friar of that Town
with the chief and principal Indians, and most of the Canoa's. As we ferryed
over, the little Canoa's went before us with the Quiristers of the Church
singing before us, and with others sounding their Waits and Trumpets. The Friar
that lived in this Town, was called Friar Geronymo de Gueva^a, little in
stature, but great in state, pride and vanity, as he showed himself in what
he had provided for us both of fish and flesh. A brave professor or vower of
Mendicancy and poverty he was, who in twelve years that he had lived in that
Town, what by mumming of Masses for the dead and living, what by shearing and
fleecing the poor Indians, what by trading and traffiquing with the Merchants
that used that Rode, had got six thousand Ducats, which he had sent to Spain
to the Court of Madrid, to trade with them Simoniacally for the Bishopric of
Chiapa, which if he obtained not, (yet when I came out of that Country the
report went that he had obtained it) he would and was well able with a second
supply to obtain a better. After two days feasting with him, he and the
Prior of Comitlan both joined their power and authority to see me well manned
with Indians, to the first Town of the Cuchumatlanes. A mule was prepared to
carry my bedding, (which we commonly carried with us in chests of leather
called Petaca's) another Indian to carry my Petaquilla wherein was my
Chocolatte and all implements to make it; and three more Indians to ride before
and behind to guide me; but to all these nothing was to be paid, (lest a
custom of paying should be brought in, for so they doctrined me as a novice
in that Country) except it were to give them a cup of Chocolatte if I drank in
the way, or when I came to my journeys end. Here I took my leave of my good
French friend, (who yet continued friendship with me by frequent letters to
Guatemala) and of my low but high minded Guevara, who bad me expect no
friendly entertainment, until I were well passed over the Cuchumatlanes and
arrived at Sacapula, which was four days journey from thence. Yet he told
me I might demand what service I list from the Indians, and call for what I
had a mind to eat without paying any money, so that I did write down my
expenses in the common Town Book.

Thus I went away from my friends somewhat heavy having no other company but
unknown Indians, leaving a pleasant and delightsome valley behind me, and
seeing nothing before me but high and steepy hills and mountains, and
considering that in four or five days I should see no more gallant Dominicans
and of mine own profession. Now I wished I had the company of my Melendez and
other friends, who were a comfort one to another upon the hills and rocks of
Maquilapa* Yet at last I concluded, up English heart and courage, quondam haec
meminisse juvabit. Though the mountains seemed high afar off, yet as I
traveled on, I found the way lie between them very easy and passable, and met
now and then Requas of mules, which were no little comfort unto me to
consider, if they being heavily laden could go through those Mountains, my
mule that had in me but a light burden would easily overcome any danger; it
comforted me also to consider that there were Towns (though but little ones)
where I might rest every night. The further I went, the better and more open I
found the Rode; Only the rain and dirt troubled me, which I could not avoid,
it being the end of September, or as there they reckon, the end of winter. The
first Town I came to amongst those Mountains was called St. Martin, a little
place of some twenty houses; I went to the house that belonged to the
Franciscan Friars (who seldom in the year came to that poverty of house and
house room) where I lighted and caused the Indians to be called who were
appointed to give attendance to travelers and passengers. I found them very
tractable and dutiful, bidding me welcome, bringing me hot water for my
Chocolatte, which I drunk off heartily, and gave unto my Indians of
Izquintenango, who refreshed themselves and their mules well for nothing, this
being a custom among those Towns in the Rode to welcome one another
whenever they come with travelers. I might have had for my supper any thing
that place would afford, but I made choice of a pullet, which I thought would
be cheapest for the poor Indians. I was glad I had brought with me a good
big Frasco, as they call it, or bottle of wine, for I began already to find the
Cuchumatlanes cooler then the valley of Copanabastla. My bed was made in a
little thatched Cobe, and Indian boys appointed to sleep in the next room to
me, and to be at hand if in the night I should want any thing. Thus having
appointed what attendance I had need of in the morning to the next Town,
discharging the Indians that had brought me from Izquintenango, I went unto my
rest, which I took as quietly as if I had been in the company of my best
friends. The next day being accompanied by two Indians, having sent my carriage
by another, I took my journey to the next Town, which is called Cuchumatlan
grande, because it stands on the highest part of those Mountains, and in the
way the Indians showed me the head spring or fountain of the great River of
Chiapa of the Indians, which is the only remarkable thing in that Rode.
Cuchumatlan grande is a Town a little bigger then St. Martin, and of Indians
very courteous, who are used and beaten to daily travelers, and so make very
much of them. Here I was entertained as the night before; and found the poor
Indians willing to give me whatsoever I demanded for my better and safer
guiding and conducting the next day, and that night for my supper what I
pleased to call for, without any pay, but only writing down my name and
expenses with the day and month in their common book of accounts. This are
those poor wretches brought to by the Friars and commanding Justices, though
of themselves they have no more then a Milpa of Maiz as they term it, or a
little Indian Wheat Plantation, with as much Chile as will suffice them for the
year, and what the Merchants and Travelers give them voluntarily, which is
little enough. From this Town I would not follow the Rode to the next, which
was a long journey of seven or eight leagues without baiting by the way; and
also because I had been informed at Chiapa and at Copanabastla of a strange
picture of our Lady, which was amongst these Mountains in a little Town of
Indians called Chiantla, which in this days journey being not above a league
out of my way, I was resolved to see. The ways were bad, lying out of the
Rode, yet by noon I got to Chiantla, which is a Town belonging unto Mercenarian
Friars, who doubtless would not be able to subsist in so poor a place, had
they not invented that loadstone of their picture of Mary, and cried it up for
miraculous, to draw people far and near, and all travelers from the Rode to
pray unto it, and to leave their gifts and alms unto them for their prayers
and Masses. Such an income of treasure and riches has been from deluded and
ignorant souls to this beggarly Town, that the Friars have had wherewith to
build a Cloister able to maintain four or five of them. The Church is richly
furnished, but especially the high Altar where the picture stands in a
Tabernacle with half a dozen curtains of Silk, Satin, cloth of gold, with
borders of golden lace before it, wearing a rich Crown of gold, thickly beset
with Diamonds and other precious stones. There hang before it at least a dozen
rich lamps of silver; and in the vestry of the Church are many gowns,
Candlestickes of silver, Censers to burn Frankincense before it, besides rich
Copes, Vestments, Ornaments for the Altar, and hangings for all the Church.

To conclude, here is a treasure hid in the Mountains; Oh that it could be
found out to do the Lord service. I was welcomed to this place by those
Friars, who were strangers unto me; my head was filled that day by them with
relations of strange and many miracles or lies, which they told me of that
picture; but the heaviness of my head did me good in something, for it made
me more drowsy at night and apter to take good rest. The next day I got into
the Rode again, and went to the last Town of these Cuchumatlanes called
Chautlan, where I stayed all that day and night, and sent before a letter to
the Prior of Sacapula of my going thither the next day. In Chautlan I was very
kindly used by the Indi^s, and liked the Town the better for the excellent
grapes which there I found, not planted like vineyards, but growing up in
harbors, which show that if that land were planted, it would certainly yield
as good grapes for wine, as any are in Spain. They are carried from that place
to Guatemala, which stands from it near forty leagues, and are sold about the
streets for rarities and great dainties; and well may they, for from Mexico to
Guatemala there are none like them. The next morning I made haste to be gone,
that I might come sooner to Sacapula, where I was to find those of mine own
profession, with whom I knew I might stay and rest a whole week if I pleased.
I had not rid above three leagues, when I began to discover at a low and deep
bottom, a pleasant and goodly valley, laced with a River, whose waters
receiving the glorious brightness of P^aebus beams reverberated up to the top
of the Mountain, a delightsome prospect to the beholders; the more I hasted to
that seeming Paradise, the more did the twinkling and wanton stream invite me
down the hill; which I had no sooner descended, but I found in an harbor by
the water side the Prior of Sacapula himself with a good train of Indians
waiting for me with a cup of Chocolatte. At the first sight I was a little
daunted to behold the Prior, who looked most fearfully with a bladder from his
throat swelled almost round his neck, which hung over his shoulders and
breast, and stayed up his chin, and lifted up his head so, that he could
scarce look any whither but up to heaven. In our discourse he told me that
disease had been upon him at least ten years, and that the water of that River
had caused it in him, and in many others of that Town. This made me now as
much out of love with the River, as above the hill I had liked the goodly sight
of it, and therefore resolved not to stay so long in that place as I had
thought, lest the waters should mark me for all my life, as they had done this
Prior; whose name was Friar John De la Cruz, a Biscaine borne, and (like some
of that Nation) a little troubled with the simples, but a good hearted man,
humble, and well beloved over all the Country both by Spaniards and Indians.
When I came to the Town I discovered many men and women with bladders in their
throats like the poor Prior, which made me almost unwilling to drink there
any Chotolatte made with that water, or eat any thing dressed with it; until
the Prior did much encourage me and told me that it did not hurt all but
only some, and those who did drink it cold; wherewith I resolved to stay there
four or five days, because of the old Priors importunity, who would feign
have had me continue to live with him, promising to teach me the Indian
language in a very short time. But higher matters calling me to Guatemala, I
excused my self, and continued there five days with much recreation. The Town
though it be not in the general very rich, yet there are some Indian Merchants
who trade about the country and especially to Suchutepeques where is the chief
store of Cacao, and thereby some of this Town of Sacapula, have enriched
themselves; the rest of the people trade in pots and pans, which they make of
an earth there fit for that purpose. But the principal Merchandise of this
place is salt, which they gather in the morning from the ground that lies
near the River. The air is hot, by reason the Town stands low, and
compassed with high hills on every side. Besides many good fruits which are
here, there are Dates as good as those in that come from Barbary, and many
trees of them in the Garden belonging to the Cloister. After I had here wearied
out the weariness, which I brought in my bones from the Cuchumatlanes, I
departed taking my way to Guatemala, and from Sacapula I went to a Town called
St. Andres, or St. Andrews, which stands six or seven leagues from Sacapula,
a great Town, but nothing remarkable in it, save only Cotton wool and
Turkies, and about it some rich Estancia's or Farms of Cattle, which are
commodiously seated here, it being a plain Champaigne Country. Yet at further
end of this plain there is a Mountain which discourageth with the sight all
such as travel to Guatemala; from St. Andres I prepared my self for the next
days journey, which was of nine long leagues, to a very great Town called by
two names, by some Sacualpa, by others Sta. Maria Zojabah, to the which I could
not go^ without passing over that Mountain. I sent word of going to Zojabah
the day before (as is the custom there) that mules and hor^s might meet me
upon the Mountain; and the night before I went to a Rancho (which is a lodge
built for travelers to rest when the journey is long) which stood within a
league of the Mountain by a River, where with the waters murmur, and
refreshing gales I took good rest. In the morning having refreshed my self,
and my Indians with Chocolatte I set out to encounter with that proud
Mountain; and when I came unto it I found it not so hard to overcome, as I had
conceited, the way lying with windings and turnings; But the higher I mounted
the more my eyes were troubled with looking to the River below, whose rocks
were enough to astonish and make a stout heart tremble. About the middle of the
Mountain the Indians of Zojabah met with a mule for me, and another for my
carriage in a narrow passage where the way went wheeling. Here I lighted,
whilst the Indians helped one another to unload and load the mule that came of
refresh. Out of the narrow way the side of the Mountain was steepy, and a
fearful precipice of two or three miles to the bottom, almost bare of trees,
here and there one only growing. My heart was true unto me, wishing me to
walk up a foot until I came unto some broader passage; but the Indians
perceiving my fear told me there was no danger, assuring me further that the
Mule they had brought was sure, and had beeen well used to that mountain. With
their persuasions I got up, but no sooner was I mounted when the Mule began to
play her prankes and to kick, and to leap out of the way, casting me down and
herself, both rouling and tumbling a pace to the to ckes and death, had not a
shrub prevented me, and a tree stopped the Mules blind fury. The Indians cried
out, milagro, milagro, miracle, miracle, Santo, Santo, a Saint, a Saint, to me
so loud as if they would have had their cry reach to Rome to help forward my
canonization; for many such miracles have some been noised at Rome, and with
further contribution of money have been enrolled in the book and Catalogue of
Saints. Whilst the Indians helped me up and brought the Mule again into the
way, they did nothing but flatter me with this term Saint; which they needed
not have done, if as they considered my dangerous fall and stopping at a shrub
(which was by chance, and not by miracle) they had further considered my
passion and hasty wrath (not befitting a Saint) wherewith I threatened to bast
their ribs for deceiving me with a young Mule not well accustomed to the
saddle. But all my hasty words and anger could not discredit me with them, nor
lessen their conceit of my holiness and sanctity, who hold the anger and
wrath of a Priest to be the breath of Gods nostrils, and with this their
foolish conceit of me, they knecled before me kissing my hands. The business
being further examined, they confessed that they had been mistaken in the
Mules, having sadled for me that which should have carried my Petaca's, or
leatherne chests, which was a young Mule accustomed only to carriages, and not
to the saddle, and upon that which should have been sadled they put my
carriage. Whilst they unloaded and loaded again and sadled the right Mule, I
walked up the hill about a mile, and when they overtooke me I got up and rid
till I met with my refreshing harbor and Chocolatte, and many Indians that
came to receive me, among whom it was presently noised that I was a Saint and
had wrought a miracle in the way; with this the rest of the Indians kneeled to
me and kissed my hands, and in the way that we went to the Town, all their
talk was of my sanctity. I was much vexed at their simplicity, but the more
they saw me unwilling to accept of that honor, the more they pressed it upon
me. When I came to the Town I told the Friar what had happened, and what the
foolish Indians had conceited; at which he laughed, and told me that he would
warrant me if I stayed long in the Town, all the men and women would come to
kiss my hands and to offer their gifts unto me. He knew well their qualities,
or else had taught them this superstition with many others; for no sooner had
we dined, but many were gathered to the Church to see the Saint that was come
to their Town, and that had wrought a miracle in the mountain as he came.
With this I began to be more troubled then before at the folly of the simple
people, and desired the Friar to check and rebuke them, who by no means would,
but rather laughed at it, saying, that in policy we ought to accept of any
honor from the Indians, for as long as we had credit and an opinion of Saints
among them, so long we should prevail to do any with them, yea even to command
them and their fortunes at our pleasure. With this I went down with the Friar
to the Church, and sat down with him in a chair in the Quire, representing
the person of such a Saint as they imagined me to be, though in reality and
truth but a wretched sinner.

No sooner had we taken up our places, when the Indians, men, women, and
children came up by three and four, or whole families to the Quire, first
kneeling down for my blessing, and then kissing my hands, they began to speak
to me in their Indian complements to this purpose, that their Town was happy
and doubtless blessed from heaven by my coming into it, and that they hoped
their souls should be much the bettter if they might partake of my prayers to
God for them. And for this purpose some offered unto me money, some honey, some
^gs, some little mantles, some Plantins, and other fruits, some fowls, and
some Turkeys. The Friar that sat by me I perceived was overjoyed with this,
for he knew I was to be gone, and would leave unto him all those offerings. I
desired him to make answer unto the Indians in my behalf, excusing me as not
well versed in their language (yet the fools if they thought and judged me to
be a Saint, might have expected from me also the gift of tongues) which he did
telling them that I hadbeen but a while in that Country, and though I
understood part of their language, yet could not speak nor pronounce it
perfectly, and therefore from me he did give them hearty thanks for the great
love they had showed unto an Ambassador of God, witnessing it with so many
sorts of offerings, which assuredly should remind him and me of our offerings
for them, in our prayers and hearty recommendations of them and their children
unto God. Thus was that ceremony ended, the Indians dismissed, and the Friar
and I went up to a chamber, where he began to tell his eggs and fowls and to
dispose of some of them for our supper; he told me he would take them, but at
my departure would give me somewhat for them; he bad me keep what money they
had given me, and told me I was welcome unto him, and no burdensome guess, but
very profitable, who had brought with me store of provision for my self and
for him many days after. The money I received cane to forty Rials, besides
twenty which he gave me for the other offerings, which might be worth forty
more; all this I got for having a fall from a Mule, and for not breaking my
neck. I would feign have departed the next morning, but John Vidall (so was
the Friar named) would not permit me, for that the next journey was of at least
20 leagues, and therefore he would have me rest my self the next day.

This Town of Zojabah, or Sacualpa is the biggest and fairest of all the Towns
that belong unto the Priory of Sacapula; the Indians are rich, and make of
their Cottonwool many mantles, they have plenty of honey, and great flocks of
goats and kids; but here, nor in all the Towns behind there is no wheat, save
only Indian Maiz. The next day some small offerings fell unto me, but nothing
like the day before; and so I told the Friar, that now the peoples devotion was
decayed, I would be gone in the morning before day. That night the chief
Indians of the Town came to offer their service and attendance upon me to a
Rancho or lodge that stands in the middle way; but I would not accept of the
great ones, but desired that I might have three only of the meaner sort to
guide me till I met with company from the Town whither I was going, and
whither I had sent warning of my coming. The time appointed was three of the
clock in the morning; at which hour after a little sleep I was called, and
having drunk my Chocolatte, and eat a maple bread with a little conserve, I
prepared my self for my journey, and found the Indians ready waiting for me in
the yard, with pieces of pine-wood, which burn like torches, and with which
they use to travel in the night, and to show the way to him whom they guide. A
little from the Town we had some craggy ways, which indeed had need of
lights, but afterward we came into a plain champaigne Country, which
continued till within a league of the middle way lodge; to the which we were to
descend a steep hill. When we came thither (which was about seven in the
morning) we found our fresh supply waiting for us, who had set out from their
Town at midnight to meet us (note the Indians subjection to their Priests
command) and had made us a fire, and warmed water for our Chocolatte. Which
whilst I was drinking, the Indians of Zojabah, who had guided me thither, gave
notice to those that came to receive from St. Martin (so was the Town called
whither I was that day minded) of my miracle and sanctity, wishing them to
reverence and respect me in the way. But not for this their foolish report did
I make the Indians of Zoiabah drink every one a cup of Chocolatte, and so
dismissed them; and took forwards my journey to St. Martin. Most of the way was
hilly and craggy till we came within two miles of the Town; to the which we
arrived by noone. This Town is cold, standing high, yet pleasant for the
prospect almost to Guatemala; here, and in most of the Towns about it is most
excellent wheat. The honey of this Town is the best in the Country; but above
all it furnishes Guatemala with Quails, Partridges, and Rabbits. It is the
first Town we enter into belonging to the City and command of Guatemala;
which did not a little comfort me, that now I wanted but one good journey to
make an end of my long, tedious and wea^isome traveling. The Friar of this
Town named Thomas de la Cruz belonged unto the Dominican Cloister of
Guatemala; he was a Criolian, but yet he entertained me very lovingly. I stayed
with him but that night. And in the morning (though I might have gone to dinner
to Guatemala) I would needs go by the way to one of the biggest Towns in that
Country, called Chimaltenango, standing in an open valley three leagues from
the City, consisting of a thousand housekeepers, and rich Indians who trade
much about the Country. In this Town in my time there was one Indian, who
alone had bestowed upon the Church five thousand duckates. The Church yields to
none in the City of Guatemala, and in music it exceeds ^ost about the Country.
The chief feast of Chimaltenango is upon the 26. day of July, (which they call
St. Annes day) and then is the richest fair that ever my eyes beheld in those
parts of all sorts of Merchants and Merchandise; It is further set forth with
Bull-baiting, Horce-racing, Stage Plays, Maskes, dances, Music, and all this
gallantly performed by the Indians of the Town. The Friar of this Town was a
Dominican, belonging to the Cloister of the Dominicans of Guatemala, named
Alonso Hidalgo, a four eyed old man, for he always wore spectacles. He was
a Spaniard borne, but having been brought up in that Country from his youth,
and having taken his habit and vows in Guatemala amongst the Criolians, he
degenerated from his birth and Countrymen, hating all such as came from Spain.
He was deadly enemy to the Provincial (aiming indeed himself to be
Provincial with the favor of the Criolians) and so I perceived he would have
picked a quarrel with me) whilst I was with him; he told me I was welcome,
though he had little reason to bid any welcome that had come from Spain, who
he thought came but to supplant those that had been born and brought up there
in their own Country, and that for ought he knew, I learning the language of
those Indians might one day dispossess him of that Town, wherein he had
continued above ten years; he envied much against the Provincial and Friar
John Baptist the Prior of Guatemala, whom he knew to b^e my friend; But to all
this I answered not a word, respecting his grave and old age, and Crystal
spectacles. At last he told me that he had heard say, that the Indians of
Zojabah had cried me up for a Saint, which he could not believe of any that
came from Spain, much less of me that came from England a country of
heretics; but he feared rather that I might come as a spy, to view the
riches of that their Country, and betray them hereafter to England; and that in
Guatemala there were many rich pieces, especially a picture of our Lady, and a
lamp in the Cloister of the Dominicans, which he doubted not but I would be
careful to pry into. But all this I put up with a jest, saying, that I would
be sure to take notice first of the riches of his chamber in pictu^es,
hangings, and rich Cabinets, and that if the English came thither in my time, I
would surely conduct them to it; and if he himself would but cause a set of
teeth of silver to be set in his gums and jaws in stead of those leaden ones,
(for he was so old that he had lost all his teeh, and had got some of lead in
their stead) then surely I would also conduct the English to him as to a rich
prize for his teeth* and that I would warrant him he should be well used for
his outward and inward riches; and that this my counsel might be profitable
and of consequence to him, I told him; for if the English should come,
certainly they would try of what metal his teeth were made, thinking that they
might be of some rare and exquisite substance found only in that Country, and
so might cause him to drink such hot and scalding broth, (to try whether they
were lead) as might melt them in his mouth, and make the melted lead run
down his throat, which if they were of silver, they would not do. He
perceived I jeared him, and so he let me alone; I was glad I had put him out
of his former byas of railing; so dinner being ended, I told him I would not
stay supper, but go to Guatemala to a light supper in the Cloister, for that
he had given me such a dinner, as I feared I should not have digested it in
few days. I desired him to let me have Indians to guide me to Guatemala, which
he willingly performed, peradventure fearing that if I stayed supper with him,
I should melt the teeth in his mouth with some scalding cup of my Chocolatte
brought from Chiapa, or that in the night I should rifle or plunder his chamber
of his rich Idols and Ebony Cabinets. The Indians being come, I made have to be
gone from that four eyed beast, being now desirous of a constant rest in
Guatemala. Within a league from this Town of Chimaltenango, the Rode way
leaving that open, wide, and spacious valley, contracts and gathers in it
self between hills and mountains standing on each side, and so continues to
the City. From this Valley unto Guatemala, neither is there any ascent or
descent but a plain, broad and sandy way. The eye has much to view, though
compassed with Mountains, in these two last leagues; for yet it may behold a
Town of Indians which takes up most of the way, and is counted as big as
Chimaltenango, if not bigger, the houses lying scattered with a distance one
from another, mingled with many fair buildings of Spaniard^, who resort much
thither from the City for their recreation. This Town is called Xocotenango, of
a fruit named Xocotte, which is most plentiful there, and all about the
Country; it is fresh and cooling, of a yellow color when ripe, and of two
sorts, some sweet, and others sour, of the stones whereof the Indians make a
fire; they lie so thick in the way, dropping from the trees for want of
gathering and spending them all, that the Spaniards have begun to practice the
buying of Hogs on purpose to let them run about that high way, finding that
they fat as speedily and as well with those plummes, as our Hogs do in England
with Akorns. All this way are also many fair gardens, which supply the Markets
of Guatemala with herbs, roots, fruits, and flowers all the year. There are
further in this Rode three water mills for the corn of the City, whereof the
chief and the richest belongs to the Dominican Friars of Guatemala, who keep
there a Friar constantly with three or four Blackmores to do and oversee the
work; What will not those Friars do to satisfy their covetous minds? Even
dusty Millars they will become to get wealth. The Frontispice of the Church of
this Town is judged one of the best pieces of work thereabouts; the high Altar
within is also rich and stately, being all daubed with gold. I made no stay in
this place, because I knew I should have many occasions after my settling in the
City to come unto it. And thus keeping between the hills I continued on my
journey till I came to Guatemala, whose Dominions, riches and greatness the
following chapter shall largely show.

CHAP. XVIII. Describing the Dominions, Government, Riches, and greatness of
the City of Guatemala, and Country belonging unto it.
I Had not rid on above a mile from the Church of Xocotenango, when the hills
and Mountains seemed to depart one from another, leaving a more spacious
object for the eye to behold, and a wider Valley to wander in. The fame of that
City from Mexico and Chiapa had raised up my thoughts to conceit of some strong
walls, Towers, Forts or Bulwarks to keep out an aspiring or attempting enemy;
But when I came near and least thought of it, I found my self in it without
entering through walls, or gates, or passing over any bridge, or finding any
watch or guard to examine who I was; but passing by a new built Church,
standing near a place of dunghils, where were none but mean houses, some
thatched, and some tyled, and asking what Town that was, answer was made me
that it was the City of Guatemala, and that that, being called St. Sebastian,
was the only Parish Church of the City. With this my high conceiting thoughts
stooped down to think of some second Chiapa; till having continued on a while
by houses on my right hand and dunghils on my left, I came to (...) ^oader
street having houses on each side, which seemed to promise a City at hand. At
my first turning I discovered a proud and stately Cloister, which was the place
of rest to my wearied body. I surrounded it to find out the back gate, and
there lighted, and enquired for the Prior, who bad me very welcome, assuring me
that for the Provincials sake, I should want no encouragement, and that he
would do for me much more then what the Provincial had signified unto him by
Letters. He told me he had been brought up in Spain, in the Country of
Asturias, where many English ships did use to come, and having seen there many
of my Nation, he affected them very much, and to me as one of so good a
Nation, and as a stranger and Pilgrim out of my own Country, he would show
all the favor that the utmost of his power would afford. How glad was I, to
find in him so contrary an opinion to that of four eyed Hidalgo? And how did
he perform his words? He was the chief Master and Reader of Divinity in the
University, his name Master Iacinthode Cabannas, who finding me desirous to
follow the Schools, and especially to hear from him some lessons of Theology,
within the first quarter of year, that I had been his constant and attentive
Auditor, graced me with a public act of conclusions of Divinity, which I was
to defend under his direction and moderation in the face of the whole
University and Assembly of Doctors and Divines, against the Tenants of Scotus
and Suarez. But the principal and head conclusion was concerning the birth of
the Virgin Mary, whom both Jesuits, Suarez and Franciscans, and Scotists hold
to have been borne without Original sin, or any guilt or stain of it,
against whose fond, foolish and ungrounded fancies, I publicly defended with
Thomas Aquinas, and all Thomists, that she (as well as all Adams posterity)
was borne in Original. It was an act, the like whereof had not been so
controverted in that University with arguments in contra, and their answers and
solutions, and with reasons and arguments in pro many years before. The
Jesuits stamped with their feet, clapped with their hands, railed with their
tongues, and condemned it with their mouths for a heresy, saying, that in
England, where were heretics, such an opinion concerning Christ's mother might
be held, and defended by me who had my birth among heretics, but that Master
Cabannas borne among Spaniards, and brought up in their Universities, and being
the chief Reader in that famous Academy should maintain such an opinion, they
could not but much marvel and wonder at it. But with patience I told them,
that strong reasons, and the further authority of many learned Thomist Divines
should satisfy their vain and clamorous wondering. The Act was ended, and
though with Jesuits I could get no credit, yet with the Dominicans, and with
Master Cabannas, I got so much that I never after lost it for the space of
almost twelve years; but was still honored by the means of this Cabannas and
Friar John Baptist the Prior of Chiapa (who at Christmas ensuing was made Prior
of Guatemala) with honors and preferments as great as ever stranger was living
among Spaniards. These two above named being at Candlemas or beginning of
February that same year at Chiapa, at the election of a new Provincial, would
not forget me their poorest friend still abiding in Guatemala, but remembering
that the University (which belonged chiefly to the Cloister) at Michaelmas
would want a new Reader or Master of Arts to begin with Logic, continue
through the eight books of Physics, and to end with the Metaphysics,
propounded me to the new elected Provincialll (whose name was Friar John
Ximeno) and to the whole Chapter and Conventicle of the Province for Reader of
Arts in Guatemala the Michaelmas next ensuing. Their suit for me was so earnest
and their authority so great that nothing could be denied them, and so they
brought unto me from the Provincial Chapter these ensuing Letters Patents,
from Friar John Ximeno, whose form and manner I thought fit here to insert out
of the Original in Spanish (which to this day abides with me) for curiosity
and satisfaction of my Reader.

FRay Iuan Ximeno Predicador General y Prior Provincial desta Provincia de San
Vicente de Chiapa y Guatemala, Orden de Predicadores. Por quanto nuestro
Convento de Sancto Domingo de Guatemala carece de Lector de Arts. Por la
present Instituyo y doy por Lector Al Padre fray Thomas de Sancta Maria ( so
was my Name then, and by this name will some Spaniards know me, who may chance
hereafter to read this, and curse me) por la satisfaccion que tengo de su
sufficiencia. Y mando al Pe. Prior del dicho nuestro Convento, le ponga en
possession del tal Officio. Y para mayor merito de obediencia le mando in
virtute Spiritus sancti, et sanctae obedientiae, et sub praecepto formali; In
nomine Patris, et Filii et Spiritus sancti. Amen. Fecho en este nuestro
Convento de Chiapa la Real en nueve de Febrero de 1647. Y la mande sellar con
sello mayor de nuistro officio.

Fray Juan or Ximeno Plis
Por Mandado de Nostro Rdo. Padre, Fray Juan de Sto. Domingo Noto. Notifique
esta Patente a el Contenido, en 12 dias del mes de Abril de 1627. Fray Juan
Baptista Por.
This Form according to the Original in Spanish is thus in English, and to
this purpose.

Friar John Ximeno Preacher General, and Prior Provincial of this Province of
Saint Vincent of Chiapa and Guatemala, Order of Preachre* Whereas our Convent
of Saint Dominick of Guatemala wants and stands in need of a Reader of Arts:
By these presents I do institute, name and appoint for Reader Friar Thomas of
Saint Mary, for the great satisfaction which I have of his sufficiency. And I
command the Prior of the foresaid our Convent, that he put him into full
possession and enjoyment of the said Office. And for the greater merit of
obedience I command him (our forenamed Reader) by virtue of the Holy Ghost, and
of holy obedience, and under a formal precept, In the Name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Amen. Dated in thy our Convent of Chiapa the
Royal, the ninth of February, 1627. And I commanded these to be sealed with
the great Seal of our Office.

Friar John or Ximeno Pal.
By the command of our Reverend Father Friar John of St. Dominick. Notary. I
notified these Letters, Patents, unto the contained in them the 12. day of the
month of April. 1627. Friar John Baptist. Por.
This honor conferred upon me a stranger, and new commer to the Province,
made the Criolian party and some others (who had aimed at that place and
preferment in the University) to stomach me. But to me it was a spur to
stir and prick me on to a more eager pursuit of learning, to frequent the
Academy lessons with more care and diligence; and to spend my self and time,
day and night, more in studying, that so I might perform with like honor that
which was laid upon me, and answer the expectation of my best and forwardest
friends. Three years I continued in this Convent and City in obedience to the
forecited Patents; oftentimes I thought within my self that the honor of my
English Nation here lay upon me in Guatemala, in not suffering any Spaniard to
go beyond me, or to outbrave me with gallant, witty and well seeming
arguments; and so many times I would at nine of the clock at night, when others
were gone to bed, take in my chamber a cup of hot Chocolatte, that with it I
might banish sleep from mine eyes, and might the better continue in my study
till one or two in the morning, being bound to awake and be up again by six. I
was loath in these three years to take upon me any other of such charges which
are common in such Convents* but especially to preach much, and to hear the
Confessions of such both men and women as resorted to the Church of that
Cloister, lest hereby my studies might be hindered, and time spent in other
ways. Yet the Prior and Master Cabannas would often be very importunate with
me, to obtain the Bishops License for hearing of Confessions, and Preaching
abroad in the City and Country (for in the Church of that Cloister I might and
did sometimes, though seldom preach with Permission of the Provincial) but
this I strongly refused, until such time as the Provincial himself came to
Guatemala, who hearing me once Preach, would by all means have me further
licensed and authorized from the Bishop, that so I might not be straightened
within the Cloisters limits, but abroad in other Churches might freely Preach,
and thereby get some money for the better furnishing my self with Books. He
therefore commanded me to be examined by five examiners all able Divines, for
the space of three hours (a^ is the custom of that Order) and having three
hours stood under their hard and rigid questions and examination, having also
at the end obtained their approbation, then the Provincial presented me unto
the Bishop with these words following, being taken out of the Original yet
abiding with me.

FRay Iuan Ximeno Predicador General, y Provincial desta Provincia de San
vicente de Chiapa y Guatemala, Orden de Predicadores, Presento a Vuestra
Sennoria Illustrissima al Padre Fray Thomas de Sancta Maria, examinado y a
provado por cinco examinadores per vota Secreta, conform a nuestras
Constitutiones, Para que Vuestra Sennoria Illustrissima se sirva de darle
licencia para Confessar y Predicar a todo genero de Gente en su Obispado,
Conform a la Clementina, Dudum de Sepulturis.

A Vuestra Sennoria Illustrissima Suplico le aya por Presentado, y se sirva de
dalle la dicha licencia, que en ello recibire merced.

Fray Juan or Ximeno, Palis.

This form of Presentation, used among them, naming the party presenting, and
the party presented, is in English much to this purpose.

Friar John Ximeno, Preacher General, and Provincial of this Province of St.
Vincent, of Chiapa and Guatemala, Order of Preachers, do present unto your
Lorship the father Friar Thomas of St. Mary (already examined, and approved by
five Examiners by secret Votes, according to our Rule and Constitutions) that
your Lordship may be pleased to grant him license to hear Confessions, and to
preach to all sorts of people in your Bishopric, according to that Rule and
Canon of Pope Clement, beginning with these words, Dudum de Sepulturis.

I humbly beseech your Lordship, to have him for presented, and to grant him
your foresaid license, and therein I shall receive great favor.

Friar John or Ximeno. Palis.

The Bishop of Guatemala being my great friend, and a well-wisher to learning
and especially to that Universitie, needed not many words of entreaty, but
presently gave me this License written on the backside of the Presentation,
and that without any further examination by his Clergy and part of his Chapter,
which he may and does use when he pleases.

NOs el Maestro Don Fray Joan de Sandoval, y, Capata, de la Orden de San
Augustine por la Divina Gracia Obispo de Guatemala y la Vera Paz, del Consejo de
su Magistad etc. Por la Present damos licencia al Padre Fray Thomas de Santa
Maria de la Orden de Predicadores Contenido en la Presentacion de su Religion
atras Contenida, Para que en todo este nuestro Obispado pueda Predicar, y
Predique la Palabra de Dios, y para que pueda administrar, y administre el
Sacramento Santo de la Penitentia generalmente a todas las Personas que con el
tubieren Devocion de Confessare (excepto Monias) y a las Personas que
Confessare pueda absolver, y absuelva de todos sus pecados, Crimines y
excessos, excepto de los casos reservados a su santidad, y a Nos por Direcho.
Dada en la Ciudad de Santiago de Guatemala, en quarto de Diziembre de Mill, y
Seyscientos y veynte y nueve Annos.

Cl Obispo de Guatemala
Por Mandado del Illmo. mi Sennor Pedro Ramirez de Valdes, Secretario.
This form of license to preach and hear confessions, from the Bishop of
Guatemala, is worth Englishing for some things in it, which I shall observe
with enclosed Parentheses as I go along for the better reminding my Reader of
them.

We (Bishops in that Church scorn the name of a singular person, showing
they have the power of all persons joined together in them, of rich and poor,
of subject and Prince) Master and Lord Friar John de Sandoval y Capata of the
Order of St. Augustine (though brought up in a poor Mendicant Cloister, yet now
he takes upon him the Title of a Lord, and shows how Prelates in that Church
use to Lord it over the people) by the Divine Grace Bishop of Guatemala and the
Vera Paz (he styles himself a Bishop by Divine Grace, whereas he himself
acording to the common report of him, as also are most Bishops there made, was
made Bishop not by any Divine Grace, but by unwarranted Simony and favor from
Courtiers, having given many thousand Crowns for that his Bishopric) of his
Majesty's Council ( Bishops there must be Counselors to Kings, and meddle in
Court and Politic affairs) by these Present give license to Father Friar
Thomas of Saint Mary, of the Order of Preachers, contained in the Presentation
from his religious Order on the backside of this our license, that throughout
all our Bishopric he may and do preach the word of God ( yet I confess This
word of God is little used in Sermons in that Church, but rather the words of
Saints of theirs and Fathers, and lying words of miracles, wherewith they
stuff up a whole hours preaching) and that he may and do administer the holy
Sacrament of Penance (not only as it came from the mouth of him to whom the
Seraphims cry Holy, Holy, Holy, but as it came from the head of Rome, who
sacrilegiously styles himself Holiness and most Holy Father. Not a Sacrament
as so left and ordained by Christ, but one of Romes seven Sacraments, which as
it is a City known and distinguished by seven hills, so will that Church be
known and distinguished from the true Church by seven Sacraments) generally to
all persons, which shall have devotion to confess with him, excepting Nuns
(this Bishop had in that City one of the six Judges of the Chancery his
daughter a Nun called Donna Juana de Maldonado y Paz, whom he loved dearly, and
much conferred with her in private in the Cloister, whose private conferences
he was jealous they should be known in Confession, and therefore would suffer
none to hear Nuns Confessions, but such as were his most intimate friends, and
of whom he had great satisfaction, alleging this reason that such as heard
Nuns Confessions ought to be very skillful and experienced in such ways, and
men of age; for that greater cases of Conscience were to be met with in Nuns
Confessions, than in others. By which reason he unwisely brought an aspersion
upon those Virgins, who should live chaste by and holily as separated from the
world and enclosed, and yet it seems by this Bishops opinion, that within their
enclosed walls sins are committed more grievous then abroad in the wide world,
and such as may puzzle a Ghostly Father if not skillfull and ancient) and that
he may and do absolve all persons which shall confess with him (if only God
can pardon and absolve from sin, Oh how is Gods power arrogated and taken,
yea and abused by those sacrilegious Priests!) from all their sins, crimes, and
excesses, excepting such cases as are reserved to his Holiness, and to us by
Canon right. ( A wicked rule and Canon, a Government certainly most cruel and
tyrannical, that binds poor wretches in some cases to go from America to
Rome, at least eight thousand miles to clear their Consciences before the
Pope, or else they must die without pardon and absolution from sin, many
having not means to go thither, nor gifts to bestow upon their Pope, who must
be bribed to absolve them. O how more sweet, comfortable and safe is it for a
heinous sinner and offendour even at home or in the Church grievous within his
heart, and keeping within himself, to lift up a broken heart, and make that
post and fly with wings of Eagles to the high Throne of Gods grace and mercy,
with assured confidence that there only is pardon, remission and absolution
granted to all such as do truly and unfeignedly repent of their sins, crimes
and excesses!) Dated n the City of St. James of Guatemala, the fourth day of
December, in the year of our Lord 1629.

The Bishop of Guatemala
By the Command of my most Illustrious Lord, Peter Ramirez de Valdes. Secretary.
Thus with full and ample Commission from the Bishop and the Provincial was I
settled in Guatemala, to read and preach, where, (although I might have
continued many years and was offered to read Divinity, having in part begun it
one quarter of a year) I continued yet but three years and almost an half for
the reason I shall show hereafter. So what in that time I could observe of that
City, and of the Country round about, having had occasions to travail about
it both when I lived in Guatemala, and afterward when I lived for above seven
years in the Country Towns, I shall truly and faithfully recommend unto my
Reader. This City of Guatemala (called by the Spaniards Santiago, or St. James
of Guatemala is seated in a valley, which is not above two miles and a half
broad, for the high mountains do keep it close in; but in length toward the
South Sea it continues a wide and champaigne Country, opening it self broader
a little beyond that Town, which to this day is called la Ciudad Vieja, or the
old City, standing somewhat above three miles from Guatemala, Though the
mountains on each side do strongly environ it, and especially on the
East Side seem to hang over it, yet none of them are hinderers to Travelers,
who over them have opened ways easi^ for man and beasts though heavily laden
with wares of all sorts. The way from Mexico, if taken by the coast of
Socomezco, and Suchutepeques comes into the City North-west-ward, which is a
wide, open and sandy rode; if it be taken by Chiapa, it lies North*east, and
enters into the City between the mountains, as before has been noted.
Westward to the South Sea the way lies open through the valley and a
champaigne Country. But South or South-East, the entrance is over high and
steepy hills, which is the common Rode from Comayagua, Nicaragua, and the Golfo
dulce or sweet Gulf, where the ships come yearly and unlade all the
Commodities which are brought from Spain for Guatemala. This also is the way
followed by them who take a journey mere Eastward from this City. But the
chiefest mountains, which straighten in this City and valley are two, called
Vulcanes, the one being a Vulcan of water, and the other a Vulcan or mountain
of fire, termed so by the Spantards, though very improperly a Vulcan may be
said to contain water, it taking its name from the heathenish God Vulcan,
whose profession and employment chiefly was in fire. These two famous
mountains stand almost the one over against the other, on each side of the
valley; that of water hanging on the South Side almost perpendicularly over the
City, the other of fire standing lower from it, more opposite to the old City.
That of water is higher then the other, and yields a goodly prospect to the
sight, being almost all the year green, and full of Indian Milpa's, which are
plantations of Indian wheat, and in the small and petty Towns which lie some
half way up it, some at the foot of it, there are Roses, Lillies, and other
flowers all the year long in the gardens, besides Plantins, Apricockes, and
many sorts of sweet and delicate fruits. It is called by the Spaniards, el
Vulcan del agua, or the Vulcan of water, because on the other side of it from
Guatemala it springs with many brooks toward a Town called Saint
Christopher, and especially is thought to preserve and nourish on that side
also a great lake of fresh water, by the Towns called Amatitlan and Petapa.
But on the side of it toward Guatemala and the valley it yields also so many
springs of sweet and fresh water, as have caused and made a river which runs
along the valley close by the City, and is that which drives the water-mills
spoken of before in ^go. This river was not known when first the Spaniards
conquered that Country; but since, according to their constant Tradition) the
City of Guatemala standing higher and nearer to the Vulcan in that place and
Town which to this day is called la Ciudad Vieja, or the old City, there lived
in it then about the year 1534. a Gentlewoman called Donna Maria de Castilia,
who having l^st her husband in the wars, and that same year buried also all
her children, grew so impatient under these her crosses and afflictions, that
impiously she defied God, saying, What can God do more unto me now then he has
done? he has done his worst without it be to take away my life also, which I
now regard not. Upon these words there gushed out of this Vulcan such a flood
of water as carried away this woman with the stream, ruined many of the
houses, and caused the inhabitants to remove to the place where now stands
Guatemala. This is the Spaniards own Tradition, which if true, should be our
example to learn to fear and not to defy God, when his judgments show him
to us angry and a God that will overcome, when he judges. From that time, and
from this their Tradition is the Town now standing where first stood
Guatemala, called la Ciudad Vieja, or the old City, and has continued a river
which before was not known, having its head and spring from this high Vulcan,
whose pleasant springs, gardens, fruits, flowers and every green and
flourishing prospect might be a fair object to a Martials wit, who here would
fancy a new Parnassus, find out new steps of flying Pegasus, and greet the
Nymphs and nine Sisters with this their never yet discovered and American
habitation. This Vulcan or mountain is not so pleasing to the sight (whose
height is judged full nine miles unto the top) but the other which stands on
the other side of the valley opposite unto it, is unpleasing and more dreadful
to behold; for here are ashes for beauty, stones and flints for fruits and
flowers baldness for greenness, barrenness for fruitfulness, for water
whisperings and fountain murmurs, noise of thunders and roaring of consuming
metals, for running streams, flashings of fire, for tall and mighty trees and
Cedars, Castles of smoke rising in height to out-dare the sky and firmament,
for sweet and odoriserous and fragrant smells, a stink of fire and brimstone,
which are still in action striving within the bowels of that ever burning and
fiery Vulcan. Thus is Guatemala seated in the midst of a Paradise on the one
side and a hell on the other, yet never has this hell broke so loose as to
consume that flourishing City. True it is formerly many years ago it opened a
wide mouth on the top, and breathed out such fiery ashes as filled the houses
of Guatemala and the Country about, and parched all the plants and fruits, and
spued out such stones and rocks which had they fallen upon the City would have
crushed it to pieces, but they fell not far from it, but to this day lie
about the bottom and sides of it, causing wonder to those that behold them,
and taking away admiration from them that admire the force and strength of fire
and powder in carrying on a weighty bullet from the mouth of a cannon, whereas
here the fire of this mountain has cast up into the air and tumbled down to
the bottom of it such rocks as in bigness exceed a reasonable house, and
which not the strength of any twenty Mules (as has been tried) have been able
to remove. The fire which flasheth out of the top of this mountain is sometimes
more and sometimes less; yet while I lived in the City, on a certain time for
the space of three or four days and nights it did so burn that my friend Mr.
Cabamas confidently avouched to me and others, that standing one night in his
window he had with the light of that fire read a letter, the distance ^ing
above three English miles. The roaring also of this monstrous beast is not
constantly alike, but is greater in the summer time then in the winter, that
is, from October to the end of April, then all the rest of the year; for then
it seems, the winds entering into those concavities set the fire on work harder
then at other times, and cause the mountain to roar and the earth about to
quake: There was a time three years before my coming to that City, when the
inhabitants expected nothing but utter ruin and destruction, and durst not
abide within their houses for nine days (the earthquakes continuing and
increasing more and more) but made bowers and arbours in the Market place,
placing there their Idol Saints and Images, especially St. Sebastian, whom
they hoped would deliver them from that judgment, and for this purpose they
daily carried him through the streets in solemn and idolatrous procession and
adoration. But all the while I lived there the noise within the mountain, the
smoke and flashes of fire without, and the Summer earthquakes were such that
with the use and custom of them I never feared any thing, but thought that
City the healthiest and pleasantest place of dwelling that ever I came into in
all my travels. The climate is very temperate, far exceeding either Mexico or
Guaxaca. Neither are the two forenamed Cities better stored with fruits,
herbs for salets, provision of fish, and flesh, Beef, Mutton, Veale, Kid,
Fowls, Turkies, Rabbets, Quails, Partridges, Pheasants, and of Indian and
Spanish Wheat, then is this City: from the South Sea (which lies in some
places not above twelve leagues from it) and from the Rivers of the South Sea
Coast, and from the fresh Lake of Amatitlan and Petapa, and from another Lake
lying three or four leagues from Chimaltenango, it is well and plentifully
provided for of fish. But for Beef there is such plenty, that it exceeds all
parts of America, without exception, as may be known by the Hydes, which are
sent yearly to Spain from the country of Guatemala, where they commonly kill
their Cattle, more for the gain of their Hydes in Spain, then for the
goodness or fatness of the flesh, which though it be not to be compared to
our English Beef, yet it is good man's meat, and so cheap, that in my time it
was commonly sold at thirteen pound and a half for half a Riall, the least
coin there, and as much as three pence here. Though all about this Country
there are very great and spacious Estancia's, or Farms for breeding only,
even near to the Golfo Dulce's where the ships ride that come from Spain, yet
from Comayagua, St. Salvador and Nicaragua, is Guatemala stored; But above all
are the great Estancia's in the South Sea Coast or Marsh, wherein my time there
was a Grazier that reckoned up going in his own Estancia and ground, forty
thousand heads of Beasts, small and great, besides many which are called there
Simarrones, or wild Cattle, which were strayed among the Woods and Mountains,
and could not be gathered in with the rest, but were hunted by the Blackmores
like wild Bores, and daily shot to death, least they should too much increase
and do hurt. My self chanced to be present at the Fair of the Town of
Petapa, with a friend named Lope de Chaves, (who was as they call there,
Obligado, or charged to provide flesh for six or seven Towns thereabouts) who
at one bargain, and of one man, bought six thousand head of Cattle, great and
small, paying one with another eighteen Rials, or nine English shillings a head.

The manner and custom of Guatemala for the better providing both Beef and
Mutton for it, and the Country Towns about, is this. Nine days before
Michaelmas, every day Proclamation is made about the City for an Obligado, or
one that will be bound to the City and Country for competent provision of
Flesh meat upon forfeiture of such a sum of money to his Majesty, if he
fail, as shall be agreed upon between him and the Court, and to the
Inhabitants of the City; if he fail in beef, he is to allow in Mutton so many
pounds at the same rate as he should have allowed beef. If the Obligado fail
in Mutton, he is to allow in Foul flesh, so many pounds and at the same rate
as he was to allow the Mutton; and this with consideration of the family, what
competent allowance of flesh meat shall be judged for a day, or the days that
the Obligado shall fail. Besides this the Proclamation is made for whom offers
most to his Majesty for one years Obligation. So that sometimes it happens
that the eight days several men come into the Court, offering more and more,
till upon the ninth day and last Proclamation, the Office is settled for one
year upon him that has offered most unto his Majesty. Thus many Butchers are
not allowed but one only Obligado, who also is abridged to so many pound for
so much money, so that if any other besides him offer to kill or sell, he may
follow an action and the Court against him: Thus the Obligado (who commonly is
a monied man) buyeth by the hundred or by the thousand, as for the present he
finds the expense of the City, without he be himself such a Grazier, as
has Cattle enough of his own. Though Mutton be not so plentiful as is
Beef, yet there never wants from the Valley of Mixco, Pinola, Petapa, and
Amatitlan, and the Marsh and other places. In the Valley forenamed I lived, and
was well acquainted with one Alonso Capata, who had constantly going in the
Valley four thousand sheep. Guatemala therefore is so well stored with good
provision, plentiful and heap, that it is hard to find in it a beggar, for
with half a Riall the poorest may buy beef for a week, and with a few Cacao's
they may have bread of Indian Maiz, if not of Spanish Wheat. This City may
consist of about five thousand families, besides a Suburb of Indians called el
Barrio de Sto. Domingo, where may be two hundred families more. The best part
of the City is that which joyneth to this Suburb of Indians, and is called also
el Barrio Santo de Domingo, by reason of the Cloister of Saint Dominick which
stands in it. Here are the richest and best shops of the City, with the best
buildings, most of the houses being new, and ately. Here is also a daily
Tianguez (as they call it) or petty Market, where some Indians all the day sit
selling fruits, Herbs, and Cacao, but at the four in the afternoon, this
Market is filled for a matter of an hour, where the Indian women meet to sell
their Country slap, (which is dainties to the Criolians) as Atolle, Pinole,
scalded Plantins, butter of the Cacao, puddings made of Indian Maiz, with a bit
of Foul or fresh Porke in them seasoned with much red biting Chile, which they
call Anacatamales. The trading of the City is great, for by Mules it partakes
of the best commodities of Mexico, Guaxaca and Chiapa, and Southward of
Nicaragua, and Costarica. By Sea it has commerce with Peru, by two Sea Ports
and Havens, the one called la Villa de la Trinidad, the Village of the Trinity,
which lies Southward from it five and twenty leagues; and by another called el
Realejo, which lies five or six and forty leagues from it. It has traffic
with Spain by the North Sea from Golfo dulce, lying threescore leagues from it.
It is not so rich as other Cities, yet for the quantity of it, it yields to
none. There were in my time five (besides many other Merchants who were judged
worth twenty thousand Ducats, thirty thousand, fifty thousand, some few a
hundred thousand) who were judged of equal wealth, and generally reported to
be worth each of them five hundred thousand Ducats; the first was Thomas de
Siliezer, a Biscain born, and Alcalde de Corte, the Kings High Justice, or
chief Officer at Court; the second was Antonio Iustiniano, a Genovois born, and
one that bore often Offices in the City, and had many Tenements and houses,
especially a great and rich Farm for corn and Wheat in the Valley of Mexico.
The third was Pedro de Lira, born in Castilia, the fourth and fifth, Antonio
Fernandez, and Bartolome Nunnez, both Portingals, whereof the first in my time
departed from Guatemala for some reasons which here I must conceal. The other
four I left there, the three of them living at that end of the City called
Barrio de Santo Domingo, or the street of St. Dominick, whose houses and
presence makes that street excel all the rest of the City, and their wealth
and trading were enough to denominate Guatemala a very rich City. The
Government of all the Country about, and of all Honduras, Soconusco, Comayagua,
Nicaragua, Costa Rica, Vera Paz, Cuchutepeques, and Chiapa, is subordinate unto
the Chancery of Cuatemala; for although every Governor over these several
Provinces is appointed by the King and Council of Spain, yet when they come to
those parts to the enjoyment of their charge and execution office, then their
actions, if unjust, are weighed, judged, censured, and condemned by the Court
residing in the City. This Court of Chancery consists of a President, six
Judges, one Kings Attorney, and two chief Justices of Court. The President,
though he have not the name and title of Viceroy, as they of Mexico and Peru,
yet his power is as great and absolute as theirs. His Pension from the King is
but twelve thousands Ducats a year; but besides this, if he be covetous, he
makes by bribes and trading twice as much more, nay what she list, as was seen
in the Count de la Gomera, President of that City and Chancery for the space of
fourteen years, who departed in old age from Guatemala to Canaria (where was
his house and place of birth) worth Millions of Ducats. After him succeeded
Don Iuan de Guzman, formerly President of Santo Domingo, who losing his Wife
and Lady in the way, lost also his former spirit and courage, betaking himself
wholly to his devotions, contemning wealth and riches, governing with love and
mildness, which made the rest of the Judges, who were all for lucre, soon
weary him out of his office, continuing in it but five years. His successor
(whom I left there when I came away) was Don Gonsalo de Paz y Lorencana, who
was promoted from the Presidency of Panama to that place, and came into it with
such a spirit of covetousness as the like had not been seen in any former
President. He forbad all gaming in private houses in the City, which there is
much used (though by women not so much as in Mexico) not for that he hated it,
but because he envied others, what they got and gained by their Cards, drawing
to himself thereby all that gain, spending sometimes in one night four and
twenty pair of Cards, appointing a Page to assist at the Tables, and to see
the box well paid for every pair of Cards, which for his, and his Court
respect, was seldom less then a crown or two for every pair. Thus did he
lick up with his Cards most of the gamesters gains, and would grudge and pick
quarrels with such rich men whom he knew to affect gaming, if they frequented
not his Court at night time for that bewitching Recreation.

The Pension which the King allows to every Judge of Chancery is four
thousand ducats yearly, and three thousand to his Attorney, all which is paid
out of the Kings Exchequer abiding in that City. Yet what besides they get by
bribes, and trading is so much, that I have heard a Judge himself Don Luis de
las Infantas say, that though a Judges place at Mexico and Lima be more
honorable, yet none more profitable then Guatemala. In my time were such
causes at Chancery tried, as had never been, of murders, robberies, and
oppressions, and whereas it was expected the offendants some should be hanged,
some banished, some imprisoned, some by fines impoverished, bribes took all
off, so that I never knew one hanged in that City for the space of above eight
years. The Churches though they be not so fair and rich as those of Mexico, yet
they are for that place wealthy enough. There is but one Parish Church and a
Cathedral which stands in the chief Marketplace. All the other Churches
belong to Cloisters, which are of Dominicans, Franciscans, Mercenarians,
Augustines, and Jesuits, and two of Nuns, called the Conception and St.
Catharine. The Dominicans, Franciscans, and Mercenarians are stately Cloisters,
containing near a hundred Friars a piece; but above all is the Cloister where I
lived, of the Dominicans, to which is joined in a great Walk before the Church
the Universitie of the City. The yearly revenues which come into this Cloister,
what from the Indian Towns belonging to it, what from a water-mill, what from a
farm for corn, what from an Estancia, or farm for Horses and Mules, what
from an Ingenio, or farm of Sugar, what from a Mine of silver given unto it
the year 1633. are judged to be (excepting all charges) at least thirty
thousand ducats; wherewith those fat Friars feast themselves, and have to
spare to build, and enrich their Church and Altars. Besides much treasure
belonging to it, there are two things in it, which the Spaniards in merriment
would often tell me that the English nation did much inquire after, when they
took any ship of theirs at sea, and that they feared I was come to spy them,
which were a Lamp of silver hanging before the high Altar, so big as required
th strength of three men to hale it up with a rope; but the other is of more
value; which is a picture of the Virgin Mary of pure silver, and of the stature
of a reasonable tall woman, which stands in a Tabernacle made on purpose in a
Chapel of the Rosary with at least a dozen lamps of silver also burning
before it. A hundred thousand ducats might soon be made up of the treasure
belonging to that Church and cloister. Within the walls of the Cloister there
is nothing wanting which may further pleasure and recreation. In the lower
Cloister there is a spacious garden, in the midst whereof is a fountain
casting up the water, and spouting it out of at least a dozen pipes, which fill
two ponds full of fishes, and with this their constant running give music to
the whole Cloister, and encouragement to many water-fowles and Ducks to bath
and wash themselves therein. Yet further within the Cloister, there are other
two gardens for fruits and herbage, and in the one a pond of a quarter of a
mile long, all paved at the bottom, and a low stone wall about, where is a boat
for the Friars recreation, who often go thither to fish, and do sometimes
upon a sudden want or occasion take out from thence as much fish as will give
to the whole Cloister a dinner. The other Cloisters of the City are also rich;
but next to the Dominicans is the Cloister of Nuns, called the Conception* in
which at my time there were judged to live a thousand women, not all Nuns, but
Nuns, and their serving maids or slaves, and young children which were brought
up and taught to work by the Nuns. The Nuns that are professed bring with them
their portions, five hundred ducats the least, some six hundred, some seven,
and some a thousand, which portions after a few years (and continuing to the
Cloister after the Nuns decease) come to make up a great yearly rent. They that
will have maids within to wait on them may, bringing the bigger portion, or
allowing yearly for their servants diet. In this Cloister lived that Donna
Iuana de Maldonado Judge Iuan Maldonado de Paz his daughter, whom the Bishop so
much conversed withal. She was very fair and beautiful, and not much above
twenty years of age, and yet his love blinding him, he strove what he could in
my time against all the ancient Nuns and Sisters, to make her Superior and
Abbess, and caused such a mutiny and strife in that Cloister, which was very
scandalous to the whole City, and made many rich Merchants and Gentlemen run to
the Cloister with their swords drawn, threatening to break* in amongst the
Nuns to defend their daughters against the powerful faction which the Bishop
had wrought for Donna Iuana de Maldenado: which they had performed if the
President Don Iuan de Guzman had not sent Iuan Maldonado de Paz, the young Nuns
father, to entreat her to desist in regard of her young age from her ambitious
thoughts of being Abbess. With this the mutiny both within and without ceased,
the Bishop got but shame, and his young Sister continued as before under command
and obedience, to a more religious, grave, and aged Nun then her self. This
Donna Iuana de Maldonado y Paz was the wonder of all that Cloister, yea of all
the City for her excellent voice, and skill in music, and in carriage, and
education yielded to none abroad nor within; she was witty, well spoken and
above all a Calliope, or Muse for ingenious and sudden verses; which the
Bishop said, so much moved him to delight in her company and conversation. Her
father thought nothing too good, nor too much for her; and therefore having no
other children, he daily conferred upon her riches, as might best beseem a Nun,
as rich and costly Cabinets faced with gold and silver, pictures and Idols for
her chamber with crowns and jewels to adorn them; which with other presents
from the Bishop (who dying in my time left not wherewith to pay his debts, for
that as the report went, he had spent himself and given all unto this Nun)
made this Donna Iuana de Maldonado so rich and stately, that at her own
charges she built for herself a new quarter within the Cloister with rooms
and galleries, and a private garden-walke, and kept at work and to wait on her
half a dozen Black-more maids; but above all she placed her delight in a
private Chapel or Closet to pray in, being hung with rich hangings, and round
about it costly lamina's (as they call them) or pictures painted upon brass
set in black Ebony frames with corners of gold, some of silver brought to her
from Rome; her Altar was accordingly decked with Jewels, Candlesticks, Crowns,
Lamps, and covered with a Canopie embroidered with gold; in her Closet she had
her small organ, and many sorts of musical instruments, whereupon she played
sometimes by herself, sometimes with her best friends of the Nuns; and here
especially she entertained with music her beloved the Bishop. Her Chapel or
place of devotion was credibly reported about the City to be worth at least six
thousand, which was enough for a Nun that had vowed chastity, poverty, and
obedience. But all this after her decease she was to leave to the Cloister; and
doubtless with this State, and riches she would win more and more the hearts
of the common sort of Nuns, till she had made a strong party, which by this may
have made her Abbess. Thus is ambition and desire of command and power crept
into the walls of Nunneries, like the abominations in the wall of Ezekiel, and
has possessed the hearts of Nuns, which should be humble, poor, and mortified
Virgins.

But besides this one Nun, there are many more, and also Friars, who are very
rich, for if the City be rich (as is this) and great trading in it, they will
be sure to have a share. Great plenty and wealth has made the inhabitants as
proud and vicious, as are those of Mexico. Here is not only Idolatry, but
Fornication and uncleanness as public as in any place of the India's: The
Mulatta's, Black-mores, Mestica's, Indians, and all common sort of people are
much made on by the greater and richer sort, and go as gallantly apparrelled
as do those of Mexico, fearing neither a Vulcan or mountain of water on the
one side, which they confess has once powered out a flood and river executing
Gods wrath against sin there committed; neither a a Vulcan of fire, or mouth of
hell on the other side, roaring within and threatening to rain upon them Sodoms
ruin and destruction; neither the weakness of their habitation; lying wide
open on every side, without walls, or works, or bulwarks, to defend them, or
without guns* drakes, bullets, or any Ammunition to scare away an approaching
enemy, who may safely come and without resistance upon them who live as
professed enemies of Jesus Christ. This is the City of St. James or Santiago de
Guatemala, the head of a vaste and ample Dominion, which extends it self
nine hundred miles to Nicoya and Costa Rica Southward; three hundred miles to
Chiapa and Zoques Northward; a hundred and fourscore miles to the further
parts of Vera Paz, and the Golfo dulce Eastward; and to the South Sea twenty
or thirty, in some places forty miles Westward.

From Tecoantepeque (which is no harbor for any great ships) which stands
from Guatemala at least four hundred miles, there is landing place for ships
nearer to this City then is the village de la Trinidad, or of the Trinity. The
chief commodities which from along that coast are brought to Guatemala, are
from the Provinces of Soconuzco and Suchutepeques, which are extreme hot, and
subject to thunder and lightning, where grows scarce any remarkable
commodity, save only Cacao, Achiotte, Mechasuc^il, Bainillas and other drugs
for Chocolatte, except it be some Indigo and Cochinil about St. Antonio, which
is the chief and head Town of all the Suchutepeques. But all the coast near
joining to Guatemala, especialliy about a Town called Izquinta, or
Izquintepeque twelve leagues from Guatemala, is absolutely the richest part of
the Dominion of this City; for there is made the greatest part of the Indigo
which is sent from Honduras to Spain, besides the mighty farms of Cattle
which are all along that marsh. Though the living there be profitable and the
soil rich, yet it is uncomfortable by reason of the great heat, thundrings and
lightnings, especially from May to Michaelmas. If Guatemala be strong (though
not in weapons or Ammunition) in people, it is strong from hence from a
desperate sort of Black-mores, who are slaves in those Estancia's and farms of
Indigo. Though they have no weapons but a Machette, which is a short Tuck, or
lances to run at the wild Cattle, yet with these they are so desperate, that
the City of Guatemala has often been afraid of them, and the Masters of their
own slaves and servants. Some of them fear not to encounter a Bull though
wild and mad, and to graple in the rivers (which are many there) with
Crocodiles, or Lagarto's, as there they call them, till they have overmastered
them, and brought them out to land from the water.

This hot, but rich Country runs on by the Sea fide unto the Village of the
Trinity* which (though somewhat dangerous) yet is a haven for ships from
Panama, Peru, and Mexico; It serves to enrich Mexico, but not to strengthen it,
for it has neither Fort, nor Bulwark, nor Castle, nor any Ammunition to
defend it self. Between this Village and the other Haven called Realejo, there
is a great Creek from the Sea; where small vessels do use to come in for fresh
water and Victuals to St. Miguela Town of Spaniards and Indians, from whence
those that travail to Realejo pass over in less then a day to a Town of
Indians called LaV^eja, two miles from Realejo, whither the journey by land
from St. Miguel is of at least three days. But neither this Creek or Arm of
the Sea is fortified (which might be done with one or two pieces of Ordnance at
most placed at the mouth of the seas entrance) neither is the Realejo strong
with any Ammunition, no nor with people, for it consists not of above two
hundred families, and most of them are Indians and Mestico's, a people of no
courage, and very unfit to defend such an open passage to Guatemala and
Nicaragua, which here begins and continues in small and petty Indian Towns
unto Leon and Granada.

On the N^th side of Guatemala I shall not need to add to what has been said
of Suchutepeques a^ ^zco, and my journey that way from Mexico and Chiapa. The
chief side of Guate^ is that on the East, which points out the way to the
Golfe, or Golfo dulce, or as other^ all it St. Thomas de Castilia. This way is
more beaten by Mules and Travelers, then that on the North side, for that
Mexico stands three hundred leagues from this City, and the Golfe but
threescore, and no such passages as are in some places in the Rode to Mexico.
Besides the great trading, commerce, and traffic, which this City injoyeth by
that Golfe from Spain, has made that rode exceed all the rest. In July or at
furthest in the beginning of August come into that Golfe three ships, or two,
and frigate, and unlade what they have brought from Spain in Bodega's or great
Lodges, built on purpose to keep dry and from the weather the commodities. They
presently make have to lade again from Guatemala those Merchants commodities
of return, which peradventure have lien waiting for them in the Bodega's two
(...) three months before the ships arrival. So that these three months of
July, August and September, there is sure to be found a great treasure. And O
the simplicity or security of the Spaniards, who appoint no other watch over
these their riches, save only one or two Indians and as many Mulatio's, who
commonly are such as have for their misdeamours been condemned to live in that
old and ruinated Castle of S. Thomas de Castilia! True it is, above it there is
a little and ragged Town of Indians, called S. Pedro, consisting of some thirty
families, who by reason of the exceeding heat, and unhealthinesse of the air,
are always sickly and scarce able to stand upon their legs. But the weakness
of this Golfe within might well be remedied and supplied at the mouth of the
sea, or entrance into it by one or two at the most good pieces of Ordnance
placed there. For the entrance into this Golfe is but as one should come in at
the door of some great Palace, where although the door and entrance be narrow,
the house within is wide and capacious. Such is this Golfe, whose entrance is
straightened with two rocks or mountains on each side (which would well become
two great Pieces, and so scorn a whole fleet, and secure a Kingdom of
Guatemala, nay most of all America) but here being no watch nor defense, the
ships come freely and safely in (as have done some both English and Holland
ships) and being entered find a rode and harbor so wide and capacious as may
well secure a thousand ships there riding at anchor, without any thought of
fear from St. Pedro, or Santo Thomas de Castilia. I have often heard the
Spaniards jear and laugh at the English and Hollanders, for that they having
come into this Golfe, have gone away without attempting any thing further upon
the land. Nay while I lived there, the Hollanders set upon Truxillo the head
Port of Comayagua and Honduras, and took it (though there were some
resistance) the people for the most part flying to the woods, trusting more to
their feet then to their hands and weapons) such cowards is all that Country
full of) and whilst they might have fortified themselves there and gone into
the Country, or fortifying that have come on to the Golfe (all Guatemala
fearing it much and not being able to resist them) they left Truxillo
contenting themselves with a small pillage, and gave occasion to the Spaniards
to rejoice and to make processions of thanksgiving for their safe deliverance
out of their enemies hands.

The way from this Golfe to Guatemala is not so bad as some report and
conceive, especially after Michaelmas until May, when the winter and rain is
past and gone, and the winds begin to dry up the ways. For in the worst of the
year Mules laden with four hundred weight at least go easily through the
steepest, deepest, and most dangerous passages of the mountains that lie about
this Golfe. And though the ways are at that time of the year bad, yet they are
so beaten with the Mules, and so wide and open, that one bad step and passage
may be avoided for a better; and the worst of this way continues but fifteen
leagues, there being Rancho's, or Lodges in the way, Cattle and Mules also
among the woods and mountains, for relief and comfort to a weary Traveller.
What the Spaniards most fear until they come out of these mountains, are
some two or three hundred Black-mores, Simarrones, who for too much hard usage,
have fled away from Guatemala and other parts from their Masters unto these
woods, and there live and bring up their children and increase daily, so that
all the power of Guatemala, nay all the Country about (having often attempted
it) is not able to bring them under subjection. Th^se often come out to the
rode way, and set upon the Requa's of Mules, and take of Wine, Iron, clothing
and weapons from them as much as they need, without doing any harm unto the
people, or slaves that go with the Mules; but rather these rejoice with them,
being of one color, and subject to slavery and misery which the others have
shaken off; by whose example and encouragement many of these also shake off
their misery, and join with them to enjoy liberty, though it be but in the
woods and mountains. Their weapons are bows and arrows which they use and
carry about them, only to defend themselves, if the Spaniards set upon them;
else they use them not against the Spaniards, who travel quietly and give them
part of what provision they carry. These have often said that the chief cause
of their flying to those mountains is to be in a readiness to join with the
English or Hollanders, if ever they land in that Golfe; for they know, from
them they may enjoy that liberty which the Spaniards will never grant unto
them. After the first fifteen leagues the way is better, and there are little
Towns and villages of Indians, who relieve with provision both man and beast.
Fifteen leagues further is a great Town of Indians, called Acabastlan, standing
upon a river, which for fish is held the best all that Country. Though here are
many sorts, yet above all there is one which they call Bobo, a thick round fish
as long or longer then a man's arm, with only a middle bone, as white as
milk, at fat as butter, and good to boil, fry, stew or bake. There is also
from hence most of the way to Guatemala in brooks and shallow rivers, one of
the best sort of fishes in the world, which the Spaniards judge to be a kind of
Trout, it is called there Tepemechin, the fat whereof resembles veal more than
fish.

This Town of Acabastlan is governed by a Spaniard who is called Corrigidor;
his house extends no farther then to the Golfe, and to those Towns in the
way. This Governor has often attempted to bring in those Simarrones from the
mountains, but could never prevail against them. All the strength of this
place may (...) some twenty mu^ets (for so many Spanish houses there may be in
the Town) and some few Indians that use bows and arrows, for the defense of
the Town against the (...).

About Acacabastlan, there are many Estancia's of Cattle and Mules, much
Cacao, Achiotte, and drugs for Chocolatte; There is also Apothecary drugs, as
Zarzaparilla, and Cannafistula, and in the Town as much variety of fruits and
gardens, as in any one Indian Town in the Country; But above all Acacabastlan,
is far known, and much esteemed of in the City of Guatemala, for excellent
Muskmillians, some small, some bigger then a man's head, wherewith the Indians
load their mules and carry them to sell all over the Country. From hence to
Guatemala, there are but thirty short leagues, and though some hills there be,
ascents and descent, yet nothing troublesome to man or beast. Among these
Mountains there have been discovered some mines of metal, which the
Spaniards have begun to dig, and finding that they have been some of Copper,
and some of iron, they have let them alone, judgeing them more chargeable then
profitable. But greater profit have the Spaniards lost, then of iron and
copper, for using the poor Indians too hardly, and that in this way, from
Acacabastlan to Guatemala, especially about a place called, el Agua Caliente
the hot water, where is a River, out of which in some places formerly the
Indians found such store of gold, that they were charged by the Spaniards with
a yearly tribute of gold. But the Spaniards being like Valdivia in Chille, too
greedy after it, murdering the Indians for not discovering unto them
whereabout this treasure lay, have lost both treasure and Indians also. Yet
unto this day search is made about the Mountains, the River, and the sands for
the hidden treasure, which peradventure by Gods order and appointment, does and
shall lie hide, and kept for a people better knowing and honoring their God.
At this place called el Agua Caliente, or the hot water, lives a Blackmore in
an Estancia of his own, who is held to be very rich, and gives good
entertainment to the Travelers that pass that way; he is rich in Cattle,
Sheep, and Goats, and from his Farm stores Guatemala and the people thereabout
with the best Cheese of all that Country. But his riches are thought not so
much to increase from his Farm and cheeses, but from this hidden treasure,
which credibly is reported to be known unto him. He has been questioned about
it in the Chancery of Guatemala, but has denied often any such treasure to be
known unto him. The jealousy and suspicion of him, is, for that formerly
having been a slave, he bought his freedom with great sums of money, and
since he has been free, has bought that farm and much land lying to it, and
has exceedingly increased his stock; To which he answers, that when he was
young and a slave, he had a good Master, who let him get for himself what he
could, and that he playing the good husband, gathered as much as would buy his
liberty, and at first a little house to live in, to the which God has since
given a blessing with a greater increase of stock. From this hot water three or
four leagues, there is another River called, Rio de las Vaccas, or the River
of Cow^s, where are a company of poor and country people most of them
Mestizo's, and Mulatto's, who live in thatched houses, with some small stock of
Cattle, spending their time also in searching for sands of Gold, hoping that
one day by their diligent search they and their children, and all their Country
shall be enriched, and that Rio de las Vaccas, shall parallel Pactolus, and
stir up the wits of Poets to speak of it as much as ever they have spoke of
that. From this River is presently discovered the pleasantest valley in all
that Country, (where my self did live at least five years) called the Valley
of Mixco, and Pinola, lying six leagues from Guatemala, being fifteen miles in
length, and ten or twelve in breadth; Out of the enclosures this Valley is
stored with sheep; the ground enclosed is divided into many Farms, where
grows better wheat then any in the Country of Mexico. From this Valley the
city is well provided of wheat, and Biscuit is made for the ships that come
every year unto the Golf. It is called the Valley of Mixco, and Pinola from
two Towns of Indians, so called, standing opposite the one to the other on
each side of the Valley, Pinola, on the left side from Rio delas Vaccas, and
Mixco on the right. Here do live many rich Farmers, but yet Country and
clownish people, who know more of breaking clods of earth, then of managing
Arms offensive or defensive. But among them I must not forget one friend of
mine, called Iuan Palomeque, whom I should have more esteemed of then I did if
I could have prevailed with him to have made him live more like a man then a
beast, more like a free men then a bond slave to his gold and silver. This man
had in my time three hundred lusty mules trained up in the way of the Golf,
which he divided into six Requa's, or companies; and for them be kept above a
hundred Black-more slaves, men, women, and children, who lived near Mixco in
several thatched cottages. The house he lived in himself was but a poor
thatched house, wherein he took more delight to live then in other houses
which he had in Guatemala, for there he lived like a wild Simarron among his
slaves and Black-mores, whereas in the City he should have lived civilly; there
he lived with milk, curds, and black, hard and moldy biscuit, and with a dry
tassajo, which is dry salted beef cut out in thin slices, and dried in the
sun and wind, till there be little substance left in it, such as his slaves
were wont to carry to the Golfe for their provision by the way, whereas if he
had lived in the City, he must have eat for his credit what others of worth did
eat. But the miser knew well, which was the best way to save, and so chose a
field for a City, a cottage for a house, company of Simarrones and Black-mores
for Citizens, and yet he was thought to be worth six hundred thousand ducats.
He was the undoer of all others who dealed with Mules for bringing and carrying
commodities to the Golfe for the Merchants; for he having lusty Mules, lusty
slaves, would set the price or rate for the hundred weight so, as he might get,
but others at that rate hiring Indians and servants to go with their Mules,
might lose. He was so cruel to his Black-mores, that if any were untoward, he
would torment them almost to death; amongst whom he had one slave called Macaco
(for whom I have often interceded, but to little purpose) whom he would often
hang up by the arms, and whip him till the blood ran about his back, and then
his flesh being torn, mangled, and all in a goar blood, he would for last cure
power boiling grease upon it; he had marked him for a slave with burning irons
upon his face, his hands, his arms, his back, his belly, his thighs, his
legs, that the poor slave was weary of life, and I think would two or three
times have hanged himself, if I had not counseled him to the contrary. He was
so sensual and carnal that he would use his own slaves wives at his pleasure;
nay when he met in the City any of that kind handsome and to his liking, if she
would not yield to his desire, he would go to her master or mistress, and buy
her, offering far more then she was worth, boasting that he would pull down
her proud and haughty looks, with one years slavery under him. He killed in my
time two Indians in the way to the Golfe, and with his money came off, as if he
had killed but a dog. He would never marry, because his slaves supplied the bed
of a wife, and none of his neighbors durst say him nay; whereby he hasted to
fill that valley with bastards of all sorts and colors, by whom, when that
rich miser dies, all his wealth and treasure is like to be consumed.

Besides the two Towns which denominate this valley, there stands at the
East end of it close by the Rio de las Vaccas an Ermitage, called Nostra
Sennora del Carmel, or our Lady of Carmel, which is the Parish Church to all
those several farms of Spaniards living in the valley; though true it is,
most constantly they do resort unto the Indian Towns to Mass, and in Mixco
especially, the Spaniards have a rich sodality of our Lady of the Rosary, and
the Black-mores another. In all the valley there may be between forty and
fifty Spanish farms or houses belonging to the Ermitage, and in all these
houses, some three hundred slaves, men and women, Black-mores and Mulatto's.
Mixco is a town of three hundred families, but in it nothing considerable, but
the riches belonging unto the two forenamed Sodalities, and some rich Indians,
who have learned of the Spaniards to break clods of earth, and to sow wheat,
and to traffic with Mules unto the Golfe. Besides what fowls and great store
of Turkeys which in this Town are bred, there is a constant slaughter house,
where meat is sold to the Indians within, and to the farms without, and
provision is made for all the Requa's and slaves that go to the Golfe with
their masters Mules. Besides the six Requa's before named of Iuan Pal^meque,
there are in this valley four brothers, named Don Gaspar, Don Diego, Don
Thomas, Don Iuan de Colindres, who have each of them a Requa of threescore
Mules (though few slaves, and only hired Indians to go with them) to
traffic to the Golfe, and over all the Country as far as Mexico sometimes.
Yet besides these there are some six more Requa's belonging to other farms,
which with those of the Town of Mixco may makeup full twenty Requa's; and
those twenty Requa's contain above a thousand Mules, which only from this
valley are employed to all parts of the Country by the rich Merchants of
Guatemala. But to return again to the Town of Mixco, the constant passage
through it of these Requa's, of rich Merchants, of all passengers that go and
come from Spain, has made it very rich; whereas in the Town it self there is
no other commodity, except it be a kind of earth, whereof are made rare and
excellent pots for water, pans, pipkins, platters, dishes, chafing-dishes,
warming-pans, wherein those Indians show much wit, and paint them with red,
white, and several mingled colors, and sell them to Guatemala, and the Towns
about, which some Criolian women will eat by full mouth fulls, endangering
their health and lives, so that by this earthly ware they may look white and
pale. The Town of Pinola in bigness is much like unto Mixco, but a far
pleasanter Town, more healthy and better seated, standing upon a plain, whereas
Mixco stands on the side on a hill, which carries the Travelers quite out of
the sight of the valley. In Pinola there is also a slaughter house, whete beef
is daily sold, there is plenty of fowls, Fruits, Maiz, Wheat, (though not
altogether so bright as that of Mixco) honey, and the best water thereabouts; it
is called in the Indian tongue Panac, (some say) from a fruit of that name
which is very abundant there. On the North and South side of this valley are
hills, which are most sown with wheat, which proves better there then in the
low valley. At the West end of it, stand two greater Towns then Mixco and
Pinola, named Petapa, and Amatitlan, to the which there are in the midst of the
valley some descents and ascents, which they call Baranca's or bottomes, where
are pleasant streams and fountains, and good feeding for sheep, and Cattle.

Petapa is a Town of at least five hundred inhabitants very rich, who suffer
also some Spaniards to dwell amongst them, from whom also those Indians have
learned to live and thrive in the world. This Town is the passage from
Comayagua, St. Salvador, Nicaragua, and Costa Rica, and has got great wealth
by the constant goers and comers. It is esteemed one of the pleasantest Towns
belonging unto Guatemala, for a great Lake of fresh water near unto it, which
is full of fish, especially crabs, and a fish called, Mojarra, which is much
like unto a mullet (though not altogether so big) and eats like it. In this
Town there is a certain number of Indians appointed, who are to fish for the
City, and on Wednesdayes, Fridayes, and Saturdayes, are bound to carry such a
quantity to Guatemala, of Crabs and Mojarra's, as the Corregidor and Regidores,
Major and Aldermen (who are but eight) shall command weekly to be brought.

This Town Petapa is so called from two Indian words, Petap, which signifies
a Mat, and ha, which signifies water, and a Mat being the chief part of an
Indians bed, it is as much as to say a bed of water, from the smoothness,
plainness, and calmnesse of the water of the Lake. There lives in it a
principal family of Indians, who are said to descend from the ancient Kings of
those parts, and now by the Spaniards are graced with the noble name of Guzman;
out of this family is chosen one to be Governor of the Town with
subordination unto the City and Chancery of Guatemala. Don Bernabe de Guzman
was Governor in my time, and had been many years before, and governed very
wisely and discreetly, till with old age he came to loose his sight; and in his
place entered his son Don Pedro de Guzman, of whom the rest of the Indians stood
in great awe, as formerly they had to his father. Had not these Indians been
given to drunkenness (as most Indians are) they might have governed a Town of
Spaniards. This Governor has many privileges granted unto him (though none
to wear a sword, or rapier, as may the Governor of Chiapa of the Indians) and
appoints by turns some of the Town to wait and attend on him at dinner and
supper, others to look to his Horses, others to fish for him, others to bring
him wood for his house spending, others to bring him meat for his Horses; and
yet after all this his attendance, he attends and waits on the Friar that lives
in the Town, and does nothing concerning the governing of the Town and
executing of justice, but what the Friar allows and advises to be done.
There is also great service appointed for this Friar, of Fishermen, and other
attendants in his house, who lives as stately as any Bishop. Most trades
belonging to a well settled Commonwealth are here exercised by these Indians.
As for herbage, and garden-fruits, and requisites, it has whatsoever may be
found, or desired in the City of Guatemala. The Church treasure is very great,
there being many Sodalities of our Lady and other their Saints, which are
enriched with crowns, and chains, and bracelets, besides the lamps, censers,
and silver candlesticks belonging unto the Altars. Upon Michaelmas day is the
chief fair and feast of the Town, which is dedicated unto St. Michael, whither
many Merchants resort from Guatemala to buy and sell; in the afternoon, and the
next day following, Bul^iting is the common sport for that feast with some
Spaniards and Blackmores on Horseback, and other Indians on foot, who
commonly being drunk, some venture, some lose their lives in the sport.
Besides this general concourse of people every year at that time, there is
every day at five a clock in the afternoon a Tianguez or market, upheld by the
concourse of the Indians of the Town among themselves. Besides the lake, there
runs by this Town a river, which in places is easily waded over, and waters
the fruits, gardens, and other plantations, and drives a mill which serves most
of the valley to grind their wheat. Within a mile and a half of this Town
there is a rich Ingenio or farm of Sugar belonging to one Sebastian de
Savaletta, a Biscaine borne, who came at first very poor into that Country,
and served one of his Country men; but with his good industry and pains, he
began to get a Mule or two to traffic with about the Country, till at last he
increased his stock to a whole Requa of Mules, and from thence grew so rich
that he bought much land about Petapa, which he found to be very fit for Sugar,
and from thence was encouraged to build a princely house, whither the best of
Guatemala do resort for their recreation. This man makes a great deal of
Sugar for the Country, and sends every year much to Spain; he keeps at least
threescore slaves of his own for the work of his farm, is very generous in
house keeping, and is thought to be worth above five hundred thousand Ducats.
Within half a mile from him there is another farm of Sugar, which is called
but a Trapiche belonging unto the Augustine Friars of Guatemala, which keeps
some twenty slaves, and is called a Trapiche, for that it grinds not the Sugar
Cane with that device of the Ingenio, but grinds a less quantity, and so makes
not so much Sugar as does an Ingenio. From hence three miles is the Town of
Amatitlan, near unto which stands a greater Ingenio of Sugar, then is that of
Savaletta, and is called the Ingenio of one Anis, because he first founded it,
but now it belongs unto one Pedro Crespo the Postmaster of Guatemala; this
Ingenio seems to be a little Town by it self for the many cottages and
thatched houses of Blackmore slaves which belong unto it, who may be above a
hundred, men, women, and children. The chief dwelling house is strong and
capacious, and able to entertain a hundred lodgers. These three farms of Sugar
standing so near unto Guatemala, enrich the City much, and occasion great
trading from it to Spain. The Town of Amatitlan, though in it there live not
so many Spaniards as in Petapa, yet there are in it more Indian families then
in Petapa. The streets are more orderly made and framed like a Chequer board,
they are wide, broad, plain, and all upon dust and sand. This Town also
enjoys the commodity of the lake, and furnishes with fish the City of
Guatemala, upon those days before named of Petapa. And though it stands out
of the rode-way, yet it is almost as rich as Petapa. For the Indians of it get
much by the concourse of common people, and the Gentry of Guatemala, who resort
thither to certain bathes of hot waters, which are judged and approved very
wholesome for the body. This Town also gets much by the salt which here is
made, or rather gathered by the lake side, which every morning appears like a
hoary frost upon the ground, and is taken up and purified by the Indians, and
proves very white and good. Besides what they get by the salt, they get also by
the Requa's of Mules in the valley, and about the Country, which are brought to
feed upon that salt earth a day, or half a day, until they be ready to burst
(the owner paying six pence a day for every Mule) and it has been found by
experience, that this makes them thrive and grow lusty and purges them better
then any drench, or blood-letting. They have further great trading in
Cotton-wool, more abundance of fruits then Petapa, a fairer market place with
two extraordinary great Elm-trees, under which the Indians daily meet at
evening to buy and sell. The Church of this Town is as fair and beautiful as
any about Guatemala, the riches and state whereof has caused the Dominican
Friars since the year 1635, to make that place the head and Priory over the
other Towns of the valley, and to build there a goodly and sumptuous Cloister,
in which in my time there was (for I told then most of it, and doubtless since
it has much increased) eight thousand Ducats laid up in a chest, with three
locks for the common expenses of the Cloister. Thus my Reader, I have led thee
through the valley of Mixes, and Pinola, Petapa and Amititlan, which in riches
and wealth, what with the great trading in it, what with the sheep and cattle,
what with the abundance of mules, what with thres Farms of Sugar, what with
the great Farms of Corn and Wheat, what with the Churches treasures yields to
no other place belonging unto the dominions of Guatemala. I may not forget yet
a double wheat harvest (as I may well term it) in this Valley. The first being
of a little kind of Wheat, which they call Trigo Tremesino, a word compounded
in Spanish from these two words, tres meses, or from the Latin tresmenses)
which after three months sowing is ripe and ready to be cut down, and being
sowed about the end of August, is commonly harvested in about the end of
November and although in the smalnesse of it, it seems to have but a little
Flower, yet it yields as much as their other sorts of Wheat, and makes as white
bread, though it keep not so well as that which is made of other Wheat, but
soon grows stale and hard. The other harvest (which is of two sorts of
Wheat, one called Rubio, or red Wheat, the other called Blanquilleo, or white
like Candia Wheat) follows soon after this first of Tremesino, for presently
after Christmas every one begins to bring these sickles into the field, where
they do not only reap down their Wheat, but in stead of threshing it in
barnes, they cause it to be trod by Mares enclosed within floores made on
purpose in the fields; and when the Wheat is trod out of the Ears by the Mares
trampling, who are whipped round about the floores that they may not stand
still, but tread it constantly and thoroughly; then the Mares being let out of
the floores, the wheat is winnowed from the chafe, and put up clean into
sackes, and from the field carried to the Barnes; but the chafe and most of
the straw is left to rot in the fields, which they esteem as good as dunging;
and further set all the fields on fire, burning the stubble that is left a
little before the time of the first showers of rain, which with the ashes left
after the burning fatteth the ground, and by them is held the best way to
husband or dung their ground. Others that will sow a new and woody piece of
land, cause the trees, though timber trees to be cut down, and sell not a
stick of that wood, (which there is so plentiful, that they judge it would not
quit their cost to carry it to Guatemala, though in England it would yield
thousand pounds) but they let it lie and dry, and before the winter rain
begins, they set on fire all the field, and burn that rich timber, with the
ashes whereof that ground becomes so fat and fertile, that where upon an Aker
we sow here three bushels of Wheat, or upwards, they sow such ground so thin,
that they scarce dare venture a full bushel upon an Aker, lest with too much
spreading upon the ground it grow too thick, be lodged, and they loose their
crop. The like they do unto the pasture of the Valley; about the end of March,
it is short and withered and dry, and they also set it on fire, which being
burnt causes a dismal sight, and prospect of a black valley; but after the
first two or three showers, it puts on again its green and pleasant garment,
inviting the Cattle, Sheep, Lambs, Goats, and Kids, (which for a while were
driven away to other pasturing) to return and sport again, to feed and rest in
its new flourishing bosom. But now it is time, I return again back to the
other end of this valley, to the Rio de las Vacas (from whence I have viewed
the compass of it, and made my long digression from East to West, to the
farthest Town of Amatitlan) to show thee, my Reader, the little part of thy
way remaining unto Guatemala. True it is, from the Ermitage of our Lady, there
is a straight way through the middle of the valley leading almost to Amatitlan,
and then turning up a hill out of the valley on the right hand; But that has
many ascents and descents, bottomes, falls and risings, and therefore is not
the constant Rode, which from the Ermitage points on the right hand,
observing the Town of Mixco, standing but five miles from Guatemala, from
Mixco the way lies up a hill, and leads to a Town somewhat bigger then
Mixco, of Indians called San Lucas, or St. Luke, a cold Town, but exceeding
rich; the temper and coldness of it, has made it the storehouse, or Granary
for all the City; for whereas below in the Valley; the Wheat will not keep long
without musting, and breeding a worm called Gurgejo, such is the temper of this
Town of St. Luke, that in it, the Wheat will keep two or three years ready
threshed, with a little turning now and then; and as it lies will give and
yield, (as experience taught me there) so that he that has laid up in that
Town two hundred bushels of Wheat, at the years end shall find near upon two
hundred and twenty bushels. This Town therefore receives from the Valley most
of the harvest, and is full of what we call Barnes, but there are called
Trojas, without floores, but raised up with stackes and bords a foot or two
from the ground, and covered with mats, whereon is laid the Wheat, and by some
rich Monopolists from the City is kept and hoarded two and three years, until
they find their best opportunity to bring it out to sale, at the rate of their
own will and pleasure* From hence to Guatemala there is but three little
leagues, and one only Barranca, or bottom, and on every side of the way
little petty Towns, which they call Milpas, consisting of some twenty
Cottages. In the middle of the way is the top of a hill, which discovers all
the City, and stands as overmastring of it, as if with a piece or two of
Ordnance it would keep all Guatemala in awe; But besides this hill, which is
the wide and open Rode, there stand yet forwarder on the right and left hand
other mountains which draw nearer to the City, and what this top peradventure
with too much distance, is not able to do or reach, the others certainly would
reach with Cannon shot, and command that far commanding City. Down this hill
the way lies broad and wide, and as open as is the way down Barnet or Higggate
Hill; and at the bottom it is more straightened between the Mountains, for the
space of a bowshot, which passage also is craggy by reason of stones and some
small pieces of rocks which lie in a brook of water that descends from the
Mountains, and runs toward the City. But at a little Ermitage called St.
John, the way opens again it self, and shows Guatemala, welcoming the weary
travelers with a pleasant prospect, and easing theirs, or their mules or
horses feet, what with green walks, what with a sandy and gravelly Rode unto
the City, which never shut gate against any goer or comer, nor forbad their
entrance with any fenced walls, or watchmens jealous questions, but freely and
gladly entertaines them either by the back side of the Dominicans Cloister, or
by the Church and Nunnery called the Conception. And thus my Reader, and
country man I have brought and guided thee from the Golfe unto Guatemala,
showing what that way is most remarkable. I shall not now show thee any more of
this Cities Dominions toward Nicaragua and the South (having already showed
thee the way as far as Realejo) leaving that until I come to tell thee of my
journey homewards, which I made that way. There remains yet the Country of the
Vera Paz and the way unto it to discover, and so to close up this Chapter. The
Vera Paz is so called, for that the Indians of that Country hearing how the
Spaniards had conquered Guatemala, and did conquer the Country round about,
wheresoever they came, yielded themselves peaceably and without any resistance
unto the Government of Spain. This Country formerly had a Bishop to it self
distinct from Guatemala, but now is made one Bishopric with that. It is
governed by an Alcalde Mayor, or high Justice sent from Spain, with
subordination unto the Court of Guatemala. The head or shire Town of it, is
called Coban, where is a Cloister of Dominican Friars, and the common place of
Residence of the Alcalde Mayor. All this Country as yet is not subdued by the
Spaniards, who have now and then some strong encounters with the barbarous and
heathen people, which lie between this Country and Iucatan; and feign would the
Spaniards conquer them, that they might make way through them unto a Town
called Campin belonging to Iucatan, and settle commerce, and Traffic by land
with that Country, which is thought would be a great furtherance to the
Country and City of Guatemala, and a safer way to convey their good to the
Havana, then by the Golf, for oftentimes the ships that go from the Golf to
the Havana, are met with by the Hollanders and surprised. But as yet the
Spaniards have not been able to bring to pass this their design, by reason
they have found strong resistance from the heathenish people, and a hot service
to attempt the conquering of them. Yet there was a Friar a great acquaintance
of mine, called Friar Franciseo Moran, who ventured his life among those
barbarians, and with two or three Indians went on foot through that Country,
until he came unto Campin, where he found a few Spaniards, who wondered at his
courage and boldness in coming that way. This Friar came back again to Coban
and Vera Paz, relating how the barbarians hearing him speak their language,
and finding him kind, loving and courteous to them, used him also kindly,
fearing (as he said) that if they should kill him, the Spaniards would never
let them be at rest and quiet, until they had utterly destroyed them. He
related when he came back, that the Country which the Barbarians inhabit, is
better then any part of the Vera Paz, which is subject to the Spaniards, and
spoke much of a Valley, where is a great lake, and about it a Town of Indians,
which he judged to be of at least twelve thousand Inhabitants, the Cottages
lying in a distance one from another. This Friar has writ of this Country, and
has gone to Spain to the Court to motion the conquering of it, for the profit
and commodity that may ensue both to Guatemala and Iucatan, i^ a way were
opened thither. But though as yet on that side the Spaniards and the Country of
the Vera Pa, be straightned by that heathenish people, yet on the other side
it has free passage unto the Golf, and trade there when the ships do come,
carrying Fowls and what other Provision the Country will afford for the ships,
and bringing from thence wines, and other Spanish wares unto Coban. This
Country is very hilly and craggy, and though there be some big Towns in it,
they are not above three or four that are considerable. The chief commodities,
are Achiotte which is the best of all the Country belonging to Guatemala) and
Cacao, Cotton Wool, honey, Canna fistula, and Zarzaparilla, great store of
Maiz, but no Wheat, much wax, plenty of fowls and birds of all colored
feathers, wherewith the Indians make some curious works, but not like unto
those of Mechoacan; here are also abundance of Parrets, Apes and Monkies which
breed in the Mountains. The way from Guatemala to this Country is that which
hitherto has been spoken of from the Golf, as far as the Town of St. Luke;
and from thence the way keeps on the hills and mountains which lie on the side
of the Valley of Mixco. These hills are called Sacatepeques, (compounded of
Sacate and Tepec, the latter signifying a hill, and the former, herb or
grass, and thus joined, they signify mountains of grass) and among them are
these chief Towns, first Santiago or St. James, a Town of five hundred
Families, secondly, San Pedro or St. Peter, consisting of six hundred families,
thirdly, St. Iuan, or St. John consisting also of at least six hundred
Families, and fourthly, Sto Dominge Senano, or St. Dominic of Senaco, being of
three hundred Families. These four Towns are very rich, and the two last very
cold, the two first are warmer; there are about them many Farms of corn and
good Wheat, besides the Indian Maiz. These Indians are somewhat of more courage
then those of other Towns, and in my time were like to rise up against the
Spaniards for their unmercifull tyranny over them. The Churches are exceeding
rich; in the Town of Santiago, there was living in my time one Indian, who for
only vainglory had bestowed the worth of six thousand Duckates upon that
Church, and yet afterward this wretch was found to be a Wizard and Idolater.
These Indians get much money by letting out great tuffes of feathers, which the
Indians use in their dances upon the feasts of the Dedication of their towns.
For some of the great tuffes may have at least threescore long feathers of
diverse colors, for every feather hiring they have half a Riall, besides what
price they set to every feather, if any should chance to be lost. From the Town
of St. John, which is the furthest the way lies plain and pleasant unto a
little village of some twenty Cottages, called St. Raymundo or St. Raymond,
from whence there is a good days journey up and down Barrancas* or bottomes
unto a Rancho, or lodge standing by a River side, which is the same River, that
passes by the Town of Acacabastlan spoken of before. From this is an ascent or
a very craggy and rocky Mountain, called the Mountain of Rabinall, where are
steps cut out in the very Rocks for the mules feet, and slipping on one or the
other side, they fall surely down the rocks, breaking their necks, and
mangling all their limbs and joints; but this danger continues not long nor
extends above a league and a half, and in the top and worst of this danger,
there is the comfort of a goodly Valley, called El Valle de San Nicholas, St.
Nicholas his Valley, from an Estancia called St. Nicholas belonging to the
Dominicans Cloister of Coban. This Valley though it must not compare with that
of Mixco and Pinola; yet next after it, it may well take place for only three
things considerable in it. The first is an Ingenis of Sugar, called San
Geronymo, or St. Hierome, belonging unto the Dominicans Cloister of Guatemala,
which indeed goes beyond that spoken of of- Amatitlan, both for abundance of
Sugar made there, and sent by mules to Guatemala over that rocky Mountain, and
for multitude of slaves living in it under the command of two Friars, and for
the excellent horses bred there, which are incomparably the best of all the
Country of Guatemala for metle, and gallantry, and therefore (though mules are
commonly used for burdens) are much desired and looked after by the Gallants
and Gentry of the City, who make it a great part of their honor to prance
about the streets. The second thing in this Valley is the Estanci^ or Farm of
St* Nicolas which is as famous for breeding of mules, as is St. Hierome for
horses. The third ornament to it is a Town of Indians, called Rabinall, of at
least eight hundred Families, which has all that heart can wish for pleasure
and life of man. It inclines rather to heat then cold, but the heat is
moderate and much qualified with the many cool and shady walks. There is not
any Indian fruit, which is not there to be found, besides the fruits of Spain,
as Oranges, Lemmons, sweet and sour, Citrons, Pomegranates, Grapes, Figs,
Almonds, and Dates; the only want of wheat is not a want to them that mind
bread of wheat more then of Maiz, for in two days it is easily brought from
the Towns of Sacatepeques. For flesh, it has Beef, Mutton, Kid, Fowls,
Turkies, Quails, Partridges, Rabbets, Pheasants; and for fish, it has a River
running by the houses, which yields plenty both great and small. The Indians
of this Town are much like unto those of Chiapa of the Indians, for bravery,
for feasting, for riding of horses, and showing themselves in sports and
pastimes. This Town my friend Friar John Baptist, after he had been Prior of
many places, and especially of Chiapa and Guatemala, chose to live in to enjoy
quietness, pleasure and content; and in this Town was I feasted by him in such
a sumptuous, prodigal and lavishing way, as truly might make poor mendicant
Friars ashamed to come so near unto Princes in vanity of life and diet. From
this Valley unto the Vera Paz, or Coban, the head Town of it, there is nothing
considerable, save only one Town more called St. Christoval or St.
Christopher, which enjoys now a pleasant Lake, and bottomless, as is
reported. Formerly there being no Lake at all, in a great Earthquake, the earth
there opened, and swallowed up many houses, leaving this Lake which ever since
has continued. From hence to Coban the ways are bad and mountainous, yet such
as through the worst of them, those country mules with heavy burdens easily
go through. And thus with my pen, Reader, have I gone through most of the
bounds and limits of Guatemala, which is more furnished with gallant Towns of
Indians, then is any part of all America; and doubtless were the Indians
warlike, industrious, active for war or weapons, no part in all America might
be stronger in people then Guatemala. But they being kept under and oppressed
by the Spaniards, and no weapons allowed them, not so much as their natural
Bows and Arrows, much less Guns, Pistols, Muskets, Swords, or Pikes, their
courage is gone, their affections alienated from the Spaniards, and so the
Spaniards might very well fear, that if their country should be invaded, the
multitude of their Indian people, would prove to them a multitude of enemies,
either running away to another side; or forced to help, would be to them but
as the help of so many flies.

CHAP. XIX. Showing the condition, quality, fashion, and behavior of the
Indians of the Country of Guatemala since the Conquest, and especially of their
feasts, and yearly Solemnities.
THE condition of the Indians of this Country of Guatemala is a^ sad, and as
much to be pitied as of any Indians in America, for that I may say it is with
them in some sort, as it was with Israel in Egypt, of whom it is said, Exodus 1.
7. They were fruitful and increased abundantly, and multiplied, and waxed
exceeding mighty, and the land was filled with them, and therefore Pharaoh said
unto his people, Verse. 10. Let us deal wisely with them, lest they multiply,
and it come to (...), that when there falls out any War, they join also
unto our enemies, and fight against us. Therefore they did set over them
tas^emasters, to afflict them with their burdens, and they made their lives
bitter with bondage, in mortar and in brick, and in all manner of service in
the field* and all their service wherein they made them serve was with rigor.
Though it is true, there ought not to be any comparison made betwixt the
Israelites and the Indians, those being Gods people, these not as yet;
nevertheless the comparison may well hold in the oppression of the one and the
other, and in the manner and cause of the oppression, that being with
bitterness, rigor, and hard bondage, and lest they should multiply and
increase too much. Certain it is, these Indians suffer great oppession from the
Spaniards, live in great bitterness, are under hard bondage, and serve with
great rigor; and all this, because they are at least a thousand of them for one
Spaniard, they daily multiply and increase, (...) children and wealth, and
therefore are feared le^ they should be too mighty, and either rise up of
themselves, or join themselves to any enemy against their oppressors; for both
which (...) and jealou^, they are not allowed the use of any weapons or arms,
no not their bows and arrows, which their ancestors formerly used; so that ^s
hereby the Spaniards are secured from any hurt or annoyance from them as an
unarmed people; so may any other nation, that shall be encouraged to invade
that land, be secure also from the Indians, and consequently the Spaniards own
policy for themselves against the Indians may be their greatest ruin, and
destruction, being a great people and yet no people; for the abundance of their
Indians would be to them as no people; and they themselves, (who out of their
few Towns and Cities live but here and there, too thinly scattered upon so
great and capacious a land) would be but a handful for any reasonable Army;
and of that handful very few would be found able or fitting men; and those
able men would do little without the help of guns and ordnance; and if their
own oppressed people, Black-mores and Indians (which themselves have always
feared) should side against them, soon would they be swallowed up both from
within and from with out. And by this it may easily appear how ungrounded they
are, who say, it is harder to conquer America now then in Cortez his time, for
that there are now both Spaniards and Indians to fight against, and then there
were none but bare and naked Indians. This I say is a false ground; for then
there were Indians trained up in wars one against another, who knew well to use
their bows and arrows, and darts, and other weapons, and were desperate in
their fights and single combats, as may appear out of the histories of them;
but now they are cowardized, oppressed, unarmed, soon frighted with the noise
of a musket, nay with a sour and grim look of a Spaniard, so from them there
is no fear; neither can there be from the Spaniards, who from all the vast
dominions of Guatemala are not able to raise five thousand able fighting men,
nor to de^end so many passages as lie open in several parts of that Country,
which the wider and greater it is, might be advantageous to an enemy, and while
the Spaniard in one place might oppose his strength, in many other places might
his land be overrun by a foraine nation; nay by their own slaves the
Black-mores, who doubtless to be set at liberty would fide against them in any
such occasion; and lastly, the Criolians who also are sore oppressed by them,
would rejoice in such a day, and yield rather to live with freedom and liberty
under a forain people, then to be longer oppressed by those of their own blood.

The miserable condition of the Indians of that Country is such, that though
the Kings of Spain have never yielded to what some would have, that they should
be slaves, yet their lives are as full of bitterness as is the life of a
slave. For which I have known my self some of them that have come home from
toyling and moyling with Spaniards, after many blows, some wounds, and little
or no wages, who have sullenly and stubbornly lain down upon their beds,
resolving to die rather then to live any longer a life so slavish, and have
refused to take either meat or drink, or any thing else comfortable and
nourishing, which their wives have offered unto them, that so by pining and
starving they might consume themselves. Some I have by good persuasions
encouraged to life rather then to a voluntary and wilful death; others there
have been that would not be persuaded, but in that wilful way have died. The
Spaniards that live about that Country (especially the farmers of the valley of
Mixco, Pinola, Petapa, Amatitlan, and those of the Sacatepeques) allege that
all their trading* and farming, is for the good of the Commonwealth, and
therefore whereas there are not Spaniards enough for so ample and large a
Country to do all their work, and all are not able to buy slaves and
Blackmores, they stand in need of the Indians help to serve them for their pay
and hire; whereupon it has been considered, that a partition of Indian
laborers be made every Monday, or Sunday in the afternoon to the Spaniards,
according to the farms they occupy, or acording to their several
employments, calling, and trading with Mules, or any other way. So that for
such and such a district there is named an officer, who is called Juez
Repartidor, who according to a List made of every farm, house, and person, is
to give so many Indians by the week. And here is a door opened to the
president of Guatemala, and to the Judges to provide well for their (...)
servants, whom they commonly appoint for this office, which is thus performed
by them. They name the Town and place of their meeting upon Sunday or Monday,
to the which themselves and the Spaniards of that district do resort. The
Indians of the several Towns are to have in a readiness so many laborers as
the Court of Guatemala h^h appointed to be weekly taken out of such a Town,
who are conducted by an Indian officer to the Town of general meeting; and
when they come thither with their tools, their spade^, shovels, bills, or axes,
with their provision of victuals for a week (which are commonly so^e dry cakes
of Maiz, puddings of frixoles, or French beans, and a little Chile or biting
long pepper, or a bit of cold meat for the first day or two) and with beds on
their backs (which is only a course woollen mantle to wrap about them when
they lie on the bare ground) then are they shut up in the Towne-house, some
with blows, some with spurnings, some with boxes on the ear, if presently
they go not in. Now all being gathered together, and the house filled with
them, the Juez Repartidor or officer, calls by the order of the List such and
such a Spaniard, and also calls out of the house so many Indians as by the
Court are commanded to be given him (some are allowed three, some four, some
ten, some fifteen, some twenty, according to their employments) and delivers
unto the Spaniard his Indians, and so to all the rest, till they be all served;
who when they receive their Indians, take from them a tool, or their mantles;
to secure them that they run not away; and for every Indian delivered unto
them, they give unto the Juez Repartidor or officer, half a Riall, which is
three pence an Indian for his fees, which mounteth yearly to him to a great
deal of money; for some officers make a partition or distribution of four
hundred, some of two hundred, some of three hundred Indians, every week, and
carries home with him so many half hundred Rials for one, or half a days
work. If complaint be made by any Spaniard that such and such an Indian did
run away from him, and served him not the week past, the Indian must be
brought, and surely tied to a post by his hands in the Market place, and there
be whipped upon his bare back. But if the poor Indian complain that the
Spaniards cousened and cheated him of his shovell, axe, bill, mantle, or wages,
no justice shall be executed against the cheating Spaniard, neither shall the
Indian be righted, though it is true the order runs equally in favor of both
Indian and Spaniard. Thus are the poor Indians sold for three pence a piece
for a whole weeks slavery, not permitted to go home at nights unto their
wives, though their work lie not above a mile from the Town where they live;
nay some are carried ten or twelve miles from their home, who must not return
till Saturday night late, and must that week do whatsoever their Master
pleases to command them. The wages appointed them will scarce find them meat
and drink, for they are not allowed a Riall a day, which is but sixpence, and
with that they are to find themselves, but for six days work and diet they
are to have five Rials, which is half a crown. This same order is observed in
the City of Guatemala, and Towns of Spaniards, where to every family that
wants the service of an Indian or Indians, though it be but to fetch water and
wood on their backs, or to go of arrants, is allowed the like service from the
nearest Indian Towns. It would grieve a Christians heart to see how by some
cruel Spaniards in that weeks service, those poor wretches are wronged and
abused; some visiting their wives at home, whilst their poor husbands are
digging and delving; others whipping them for their slow working, others
wounding them with their swords, or breaking their heads for some reasonable
and well grounded answer in their own behalf, others stealing from them their
tools, others cheating them of half, others of all their wages, alleging
that their service cost them half a Riall, and yet their work not well
performed. I knew some who made a common practice of this, when their wheat was
sown, and they had little to do for the Indians; yet they would have home as
many as were due unto their farm, and on Monday and Tuesday would make them
cut and bring them on their backs as much wood as they needed all that week,
and then on Wednesday at noon (knowing the great desire of the Indians to go
home to their wives, for the which they would give any thing) would say unto
them, What will you give me now, if I let you go home to do your own work?
whereunto the Indians would joyfully reply and answer, some that they would
give a Riall, others two Rials, which they would take and send them home, and
so would have much work done, wood to serve their house a week, and money as
much as would buy them meat, and Cacao for Chocolatte two weeks together; and
thus from the poor Indians do those unconscionable Spaniards practice a cheap
and lazy way of living. Others will sell them away for that week unto a
neighbor that has present need of work, demanding Rials a piece for every
Indian, which he that buyeth them, will be sure to defray out of their wages.
So likewise are they in a slavish bondage and readiness for all passengers and
travelers, who in any Town may demand unto the next Town as many Indians do
go with his Mules, or to carry on their backs a heavy burden as he shall
need, who at the journeys end will pick some quarrel with them, and so send
them back with blows and stripes without any pay at all. A Petaca, or
leatherne Trunk, and chest of above a hundred weight, they will make those
wretches to carry on their backs a whole day, nay some two or three days
together, which they do by tying the chest on each side with ropes, having a
broad leather in the middle, which they cross over the forepart of their head,
or over their forehead, hanging thus the waitgh upon their heads and brows,
which at their journeys end has made the blood stick in the foreheads of some,
galling and pulling off the skin, and marking them in the fore-top of their
heads, who as they are called Tamemez* so are easily known in a Town by their
baldness, that leather girt having worn off all their hair. With these hard
usages, yet do those poor people make a shift to live amonst the Spaniards, but
so that with anguish of heart they are still crying out to God for justice, and
for liberty, whose only comfort is in their Priests and Friars, who many times
do quiet them when they would rise up in mutiny, and for their own ends do
often prevail over them with fair and cunning persuasions, to bear and suffer
for Gods sake, and for the good of the Commonwealth that hard task and service
which is laid upon them. And though in in all seasons, wet and dry, cold and
hot, and in all ways plain and mountainous, green and dirty, dusty and stony,
they must perform this hard service to their commanding Masters, their
apparel and clothing is but such as may cover the nakedness of their body,
nay in some it is such torn rags as will not cover half their nakedness.
Their ordinary clothing is a pair of linen or woollen drawers broad and open
at the knees, without shoes (though in their journeys some will put on
leatherne sandals to keep the soles of their feet) or stockins, without any
doublet, a short course shirt, which reaches a little below their waste, and
serves more for a doublet then for a shirt, and for a cloak a woollen or
linen mantle, (called Aiate) tied with a knot over one shoulder, hanging down
on the other side almost to the ground, with a twelve penny or two shilling
hat, with after one good shower of rain like paper falls about their necks and
eyes; their bed they carry sometimes about them, which is that woollen mantle
wherewith they wrap themselves about at night, taking off their shirt and
drawers, which they lay under their head for a pillow; some will carry with
them a short, slight, and light Mat to lie, but those that carry it not with
them, if they cannot borrow one of a neighbor, lie as willingly in their
mantle upon the bare ground, as a Gentleman in England upon a soft down-bed,
and thus do^ they soundly sleep, and lowdly snort after a days work, or after
a days journey with a hundred weight upon their backs. Those that are of the
better sort, and richer, and who are not employed as Tamemez to carry burdens,
or as Laborers to work for Spaniards, but keep at home following their own
farms, or following their own Mules about the Country, or following their
trades and callings in their shops, or governing the Towns, as Alcaldes, or
Alguaziles, officers of justice, may go a little better apparelled, but after
the same manner. For some will have their drawers with a lace at the bottom, or
wrought with some colored Silk or Crewel; so likewise the mantle about them,
shall have either a lace, or some work of birds on it, some will wear a cut
linen doublet, others shoes, but very few stockins or bands about their
necks; and for their beds, the best Indian Governor, or the richest, who may
be worth four or five thousand Ducats, will have little more then the poor
Tamemez; for they lie upon boards, or Canes b^ und together, and raised from
the ground, whereon they lay a broad and hand some Mat, and at their heads for
man and wi^e two little stumps of wood for bolsters, whereon they lay their
shirts and mantles and other clothes for pillowes, covering themselves with a
broader blanket then is their mantle, and thus hardly would Don Bernabe de
Guzman the Governor of Petapa lie, and so do all the best of them. The women's
attire is cheap and soon put on; for most of them also go barefoot, the richer
and better sort wear shoes, with broad ribbons for shooestrings, and for a
pettieote, they tie about their waste a woollen mantle, which in the better
sor^ is wrought with diverse colors, but not sowed at all* pleated or gathered
in, but as they tie it with a list about them; they wear no shift next their
body, but cover their nakedness with a kind of surplice (which they call
Guaipil) which hangs loose from their shoulders down a little below their
waste, with open short sleeves, which cover half their arms; this Guaipil is
curiously wrought, especially in the bosom, with Cotton, or feathers. The
richer sort of them wear bracelets and bobs about their wrists and necks; their
hair is gathered up with (...), without any quai^e or covering, except it be
the better sort. When they go to Church or abroad, they put upon their heads a
veil of linen, which hangs almost to the ground, and this is that which
costs them most of all their attire, for that commonly it is of Holland or some
good linen brought from Spain, or fine linen brought from China, which the
better sort wear with a lace about. When they are at home at work they commonly
take off their Guaipil, or surplice, discovering the nakedness of their
breasts and body. They lie also in their beds as do their husbands, wrapped up
only with a mantle, or with a blanket. Their houses are but poor thatched
cottages, without any upper rooms, but commonly one or two only rooms below,
in the one they dress their meat in the middle of it, making a compass for
fire, with two or three stones, without any other chimney to convey the smoke
away, which spreading it self about the the room fills the thatch and the
rafters so with sur, that all the room seems to be a chimney. The next unto
it, is not free from smoke and blackness, where sometimes are four or five
beds according to the family. The poorer sort have but one room, where they
eat, dress their meat, and sleep. Few there are that set any locks upon their
doors, for they fear no robbing nor stealing, neither have they in their houses
much to lose, earthen pots, and pans, and dishes, and cups to drink their
Chocolatte, being the chief commodities in their house. There is scarce any
house which has not also in the yard a stew, wherein they bath themselves with
hot water, which is their chief physic when they feel themselves distempered.
Among themselves they are in every Town divided into Tribes, which have one
chief head, to whom all that belong unto that Tribe, do resort in any
difficult matters, who is bound to aid, protect, defend, counsel, and appear
for the rest of his Tribe before the officers of justice in any wrong that is
like to be done unto them. When any is to be married, the father of the son
that is to take a wife out of another Tribe, goes unto the head of his Tribe
to give him warning of his sons marriage with such a maid. Then that head meets
with the head of the maids Tribe, and they confer about it. The business
commonly is in debate a quarter of a year; all which time the parents of the
youth or man are with gifts to buy the maid; they are to be at the charges of
all that is spent in eating and drinking, when the heads of the two Tribes do
meet with the rest of the kindred of each side, who sometimes fit in conference
a whole day, or most part of a night. After many days and nights thus spent,
and a full trial being made of the the one and other sides affection, if they
chance to disagree about the marriage, then is the Tribe and parents of the
maid to restore back all that the other side has spent and given. They give no
portions with their daughters, but when they die, their goods and lands are
equally divided among their sons. If any one want a house to live in, or will
repair and thatch his house anew, notice is given to the heads of the Tribes,
who warn all the Town to come to help in the work, and every one is to bring a
bundle of straw, and other materials, so that in one day with the help of many
they finish a house, without any charges more then of Chocolatte, which they
minister in great cups as big as will hold above a pint, not putting in any
costly materials, as do the Spaniards, but only a little Anniseed, and Chile,
or Indian pepper; or else they half fill the cup which Attolle, and power upon
it as much Chocolatte as will fill the cup and color it. In their diet the
poorer sort are limited many times to a dish of Frixoles, or Turkey beans,
either black or white (which are there in very great abundance, and are kept
dry for all the year) boiled with Chile; and if they can have this, they hold
themselves well satisfied; with these beans, they make also dumplins, first
boiling the bean a little, and then mingling it with a mass of Maiz, as we do
mingle Currants in our cakes, and so boil again the frixoles with the dumplin
of Maiz mass, and so eat it hot, or keep it cold; but this and all whatsoever
else they eat, they either eat it with green biting Chile, or else they dip it
in water and salt, wherein is bruised some of that Chile. But if their means
will not reach to frixoles, their ordinary fare and diet is, their Tortilla's
(so they call thin round cakes made of the dow and mass of Maiz) which they
eat hot from an earthen pan, whereon they are soon baked with one turning over
the fire; and these they eat alone either with Chile and salt, and dipping them
in water and salt with a little bruised Chile. When their Maiz is green and
tender, they boil some of those whole stalks or clusters, whereon the Maiz
grows with the leaf about, and so casting a little salt about it, they eat
it. I have often eat of this, and found it as dainty as our young green pease,
and very nourishing, but it much increases the blood. Also of this green and
tender Maiz they make a Furmity, boiling the Maiz in some of the milk which
they have first taken out of it by bruising it. The poorest Indian never wants
this diet, and is well satisfied, as long as his belly is thoroughly filled. But
the poorest that live in such Towns where flesh meat is sold, will make a hard
shift, but that when they come from work on Saturday night, they will buy one
half Riall, or a Riall worth of fresh meat to eat on the Lords day. Some will
buy a good deal at once, and keep it long by dressing it into Tassajo's, which
are bundles o^ flesh, rolled up and tied fast; which they do, when for
examples sake they have from a leg of beef sliced off from the bone all the
flesh with the knife, after the length, form, and thinness of a line, or
rope. Then they take the flesh and salt it, (which being sliced and thinly cut,
soon takes salt) and hang it up in their yards like a line from post to post,
or from tree to tree, to the wind for a whole week, and then they hang it in
the smoke another week, and after roll it up in small bundles, which become as
hard as a stone, and so as they need it, they wash it, boil it and eat it. This
is America's powdered beef, which they call Tassajo, whereof I have often
eaten, and the Spaniards eat much of it, especially those that trade about the
Country with Mules; nay this Tassajo is a great commodity, and has made many
a Spaniard rich, who carry a Mule or two laden with these Tassajo's in small
parcels and bundles to those Towns were is no flesh at all sold, and there
they exchange them for other commodities among the Indians, receiving
peradventure for one Tassajo or bundle, (which cost them but the half part of
a farthing) as much Cacao, as in other places they sell for a Riall or six
pence. The richer sort of people will fare better, for if there be fish or
flesh to be had, they will have it, and eat most greedily of it; and will not
spare their fowls and Turkeys from their own bellies. These also will now and
then get a wild Dear, shooting it with their bows and arrows. And when they
have killed it, they let it lie in the woodin in some hole or bottom covered
with leaves for the space of about a week, until it stink and begin to be
full of worms; then they bring it home, cut it out into joints, and parboil it
with an herb which grows there somewhat like unto our Tanzy, which they say
sweetneth it again, and makes the flesh eat tender, and as white at a piece of
Turkey. Thus parboiled, they hang up the joints in the smoke for a while, and
then boil it again, when they eat it, which is commonly dressed with red
Indian pepper; and this is the Venison of (...), whereof I have sometimes
eaten, and found it white and short, but never durst be too bold with it, not
that I found any evil taste in it, but that the apprehension of the worms and
maggots which formerly had been in it, troubled much my stomach. These Indians
that have little to do at home, and are not employed in the weekly service
under the Spaniards in their hunting, will look seriously for Hedge hogs,
which are just like unto ours, though certainly ours are not meat for any
Christian. They are full of pricks and brisles like ours, and are found in
woods and fields, living in holes, and as they say feed upon nothing but Amits
and their eggs, and upon dry rotten sticks, herbs, and roots; of these they eat
much, the flesh being as white and sweet as a Rabbit, and as fat as is a
January hen kept up and fatted in a Coope. Of this meat I have also eaten, and
confess it is a dainty dish there, though I will not say the same of a
Hedgehog here; for what here may be poison, there may be good and lawful
meat, by some accidental difference in the creature it self, and in that
which it feeds upon, or in the temper of the air and climate. This meat not
only the Indians but the best of the Spaniards feed on it; and it is so much
esteemed of, that because in Lent they are commonly found, the Spaniards will
not be deprived of it, but do eat it also then, alleadgging that it is no flesh
(though in the eating it be in fatness and in taste, and in all like unto
flesh) for that it feeds not upon any thing that is very nourishing, but
chiefly upon Amits eggs, and dry sticks. It is a great point of controversy
amongst their Divines, some hold it lawful, others unlawful for that time; it
seems the pricks and brisles of the Indian Hedgehog prick their consciences
with a foolish seruple. Another kind of meat they feed much on which is called
Ig^ana; of these some are found in the waters, others upon the land. They are
longer then a Rabbit, and like unto a Scorpion, with some green, some black
scales on their backs. Those upon the land will run very fast, like Lizards,
and will climb up trees like Squerrils, and breed in the roots of trees or in
stone walls. The fight of them is enough to affright one; and yet when they are
dressed and stewed in broth with a little spice, they make a dainty broth, and
eat also as white as a Rabbit, nay the middle bone is made just like the back
bone of a Rabbit. They are dangerous meat, if not thoroughly boiled, and they
had almost cost me my life for eating too much of them, not being stewed
enough. There are also many water and land Tortoi's, which the Indians find out
for themselves, and also relish exceeding well unto the Spaniards palate. As
for drinking, the Indians generally are much given unto it; and drink if they
have nothing else, of their poor and simple Chocolatte, without Sugar or many
compounds, or of Atolle, until their bellies be ready to burst. But if they
can get any drink that will make them mad drunk, they will not give it over as
long as a drop is left, or a penny remains in their purse to purchase it.
Among themselves they use to make such drinks as are in operation far stronger
then wine; and these they confection in such great Jarres as come from Spain;
wherein they put some little quantity of water, and fill up the Jar with some
Melasso's, or juyee of the Sugar Cane, or some honey for to sweeten it; then for
the strengthening of it, they put roots and leaves of Tobacco, with other kind
of roots which grow there, and they know to be strong in operation, nay in
some places I have known where they have put in a live Toad, and so closed up
the Jarre for a fortnight, or months space, till all that they have put in
him, be thoroughly steeped and the toad consumed, and the drink well
strengthened, then they open it, and call their friends to the drinking of it,
(which commonly they do in the night time, lest their Priest in the Town
should have notice of them in the day) which they never leave off, until they
be mad, and raging drunk. This drink they call Chicha, which stinketh most
filthily, and certainly is the cause of many Indians death, especially where
they use the toads poison with it. Once I was informed living in Mixco, of a
great meeting that was appointed in an Indians house; and I took with me the
Officers of Justice of the Town, to search that Indians house, where I found
four Jarres of Chicha not yet opened, I caused them to be taken out, and
broken in the street before his door, and the filthy Chicha to be poured out,
which left such a stinking sent in my nostrils, that with the smell of it, or
apprehension of its loath somenesse, I fell to vomiting, and continued sick
almost a whole week after.

Now the Spaniards knowing this inclination of the Indians unto drunkenness,
do herein much abuse and wrong them; though true it is, there is a strict
order, even to the forfeiting of the wine of any one who shall presume to sell
wine in a Town of Indians, with a money mulct besides. Yet for all this the
baser and poorer sort of Spaniards for their lucre and gain contemning
authority, will go out from Guatemala, to the Towns of Indians about, and
carry such wine to sell and inebriate the Natives as may be very advantageous
to themselves; for of one Jarre of wine, they will make two at least,
confectioning it with honey and water, and other strong drugs which are cheap to
them, and strongly operative upon the poor and weak Indians heads, and this
they will sell for current Spanish wine, with such pint and quart measures, as
never were allowed by Justice Order, but by themselves invented. With such wine
they soon intoxicate the poor Indians, and when they have made them drunk,
then they will cheat them more, making them pay double for their quart measure;
and when they see they can drink no more, then they will cause them to ly down
and sleep, and in the mean while will pick their pockets. This is a common
sin among those Spaniards of Guatemala, and much practiced in the City upon
the Indians, when they come thither to buy or sell. Those that keep the
Bodegones (so are called the houses that sell wine, which are no better then a
Chandlers shop, for besides wine they sell Candles, Fish, Salt, Cheese and
Bacon) will commonly entice in the Indians, and make them drunk, and then pick
their pockets, and turn them out of doors with blows and stripes, if they
will not fairly depart. There was in Guatemala in my time one of these
Bodegoner^, or shopkeeper of wine and small ware, named Joan Ramos, who by thus
cheating and tippling poor Indians (as it was generally reported) was worth two
hundred thousand duckates, and in my time gave with a daughter that was
married, eight thousand Ducats. No Indian should pass by his door, but he
would call him in, and play upon him as aforesaid. In my time a Spanish Farmer,
neighbor of mine in the Valley of Mixco, chanced to send to Guatemala his
Indian servants with half a dozen mules laden with wheat to a Merchant, with
whom he had agreed before for the price, and ordered the money to be sent
unto him by his servant (whom he had kept six years, and ever found him
trusty) the wheat being delivered, and the money received (the which mounted to
ten pound, sixteen shillings, every mule carrying six bushels, at twelve Rials
a bushel, as was then the price) the Indian with another Mate of his walking
along the streets to buy some small commodities, passed by John Ramos his shop,
or Bodegon, who enticing him and his Mate in, soon tripped up their heals with
a little confectioned wine for that purpose, and took away all his money from
the entrusted Indian, and beat them out of his house; who thus drunk being
forced to ride home, the Indian that had received the money, fell from his
mule, and broke his neck; the other got home without his Mate, or money. The
Farmer prosecuted John Ramos in the Court for his money, but Ramos being rich
and abler to bribe, then the Farmer, got off very well, and so had done
formerly in almost the like cases. These are but peccadillo's among those
Spaniards, to make drunk, rob, and occasion the poor Indians death; whose
death with them is no more regarded nor vindicated, then the death of a sheep
or bullock, that falls into a pit. And thus having spoken of apparel, houses,
eating and drinking, it remains that I say somewhat of their civility, and
Religion of those who lived under the Government of the Spaniards. From the
Spaniards they have borrowed their Civil Government, and in all Towns they
have one, or two Alcaldes, with more or less Regidores, (who are as Aldermen
or Jurates amongst us) and some Alguaziles, more or less, who are as
Constables, to execute the orders of the Alcalde, (who is a Mayor) with his
Brethren. In Towns of three or four hundred Families, or upwards, there are
commonly two Alcaldes, six Regidores, two Alguaziles Majors, and six under, or
petty Alguaziles. And some Towns are privileged wi^h an Indian Governor, who
is above the Alcaldes, and all the rest of the Officers. These are changed
every year by new election, and are chosen by the Indians themselves, who take
their turns by the tribes or kindreds, whereby they are divided. Their offices
begin on New-Yeers day, and after that day their election is carried to the
City of Guatemala (if in that district it be made) or else to the heads of
Justice, or Spanish Governors of the several Provinces, who confirm the new
Election, and take account of the last years expenses made by the other
Officers, who carry with them their Town-Book of accounts; and therefore for
this purpose every Town has a Clerk, or Scrivener, called Escrivano, who
commonly continues many years in his office, by reason of the paucity and
unfitness of Indian Scriveners, who are able to bear such a charge. This
Clerk has many fees for his writings and informations, and accounts, as have
the Spaniards, though not so much money or bribes, but a small matter,
according to the poverty of the Indians. The Governor is also commouly
continued many years, being some chief man among the Indians, except for his
misdemeanors he be complained of, or the Indians in general do all stomach
him.

Thus they being settled in a civil way of government, they may execute justice
upon all such Indians of their Town as do notoriously and scandalously offend.
They may imprison, fine, whip, and banish, but hang and quarter they may not;
but must remit such cases to the Spanish Governor. So likewise if a Spaniard
passing by the Town, or living in it, do trouble the peace, and misdemean
himself, they may lay hold on him, and send him to the next Spanish Justice,
with a full information of his offense, but fine him, or keep him about one
night in prison they may not. This order they have against Spaniards, but they
dare not execute it, for a whole Town stands in awe of one Spaniard, and
though he never so hainously offend, and be unruly, with oaths, threatenings,
and drawing of his sword, he makes them quake and tremble, and not presume to
touch him; for they know if they do, they shall have the worst, either by
blows, or by some misinformation, which he will give against them. And this
has been very often tried, for where Indians have by virtue of their order
endeavored to curb an unruly Spaniard in their Town, some of them have been
wounded, others beaten, and when they have carried the Spaniard before a
Spanish Justice and Governor, he has pleaded for what he has done, saying
it was in his own defense, or for his King and Sovereign, and that the Indians
would have killed him, and began to mutiny all together against the Spanish
Authority, and Government, denying to serve him with what he needed for his
way and journey; that they would not be slaves to give him or any Spaniard any
attendance; and that they would make an end of him, and of all the Spaniards.
With these and such like false and lying mis-informations, the unruly Spaniards
have often been believed, and too much upheld in their rude and uncivil
misdemeanors, and the Indians bitterly curbed, and punished, and answer made
them in such cases, that if they had been killed for their mutiny and rebellion
against the King, and his best subjects they had been served well enough; and
that if they gave not attendance unto the Spaniard that passed by their Town,
their houses should be fired, and they and their children utterly consumed.
With such like answers from the Justices, and ^redency to what any base
Spaniard shall inform against them, the poor Indians are fain to put up all
wrongs done unto them, not daring to meddle with any Spaniard, be he never so
unruly, by virtue of that Order, which they have against them. Amongst
themselves, if any complaint be made against any Indian, they dare not meddle
with him until they call all his kindred, and especially the head of that
Tribe, to which he belongs; who if he and the rest together, find him to
deserve imprisonment, or whipping, or any other punishment, then the Officers
of Justice, the Alcaldes or Majors, and their Brethren the Jurates inflict upon
him that punishment; which all shall agree upon. But yet after judgment and
sentence given, they have another, which is their last appeal, if they please,
and that is to their Priest, and Friar, who lives in their Town, by whom they
will sometimes be judged, and undergo what punishment he shall think
fittest. To the Church therefore they often resort in points of Justice,
thinking the Priest knows more of Law and equity, then themselves; who
sometimes reverseth what judgment has been given in the Town house, blaming
the Officers for their partiality and passion against their poor Brother, and
setting free the party judged by them; which the Priest does often times, if
such an Indian do belong to the Church, or to the service of their house, or
have any other relation to them, peradventure for their wives sake, whom either
they affect, or employ in washing, or making their Chocolatte. Such, and their
husbands may live lawless as long as the Priest is in the Town. And if when
the Priest is absent, they call them to trial for any misdemeanor, and whip,
fine, or imprison, (which occasion they will sometimes pick out on purpose)
when the Priest returns, they shall be sure to hear of it, and smart for it,
yea, and the Officers themselves peradventure be whipped in the Church, by the
Priests order and appointment; against whom they dare not speak, but willingly
accept what stripes and punishment he lays upon them, judging his wisdom,
sentence, and punishing hand, the wisdom, sentence and hand of God; whom as
they have been taught to be over all Princes, Judges, worldly Officers, so
likewise they believe, (and have been so taught) that his Priests and Ministers
are above theirs, and all worldly power and authority. It happened unto me
living in the Town of Mixco, that an Indian being judged to be whipped for
some disorders, which he committed, would not yield to the sentence, but
apealed to me, saying he would have his stripes in the Church, and by my
order, for so he said his whipping would do him good, as coming from the
hand of God. When he was brought unto me, I could not reverse the Indians
judgment, for it was just, and so caused him to be whipped, which he took
very patiently and merrily, and after kissed my hands and gave me an offering
of money for the good he said, I had done unto his soul. Besides this civility
of justice amongst them, they live as in other Civil and Politic and well
governed Commonwealths; for in most of their Towns, there are some that
profess such trades as are practiced among Spaniards. There are amongst them
Smiths, Tailors, Carpenters, Masons, Shoomakers, and the like. It was my
fortune to set upon a hard and difficult building in a Church of Mixco, where I
desired to make a very broad and capacious vault over the Chapel, which was
the harder to be finished in a round circumference, because it depended upon a
triangle, yet for this work I sought none but Indians, some of the Town, some
from other plac^s, who m^de it so complete, that the best and skilfullest
workmen among the Spaniards had enough to wonder at it. So are most of their
Churches vaulted on the top, and all by Indians; they only in my time built a
new Cloister in the Town of Amatitlan, which they finished with many Arches of
stone both in the lower walks and in the upper galleries, with as much
perfection at the best Cloister of Guatemala, had before been built by the
Spaniard. Were they more encouraged by the Spaniards, and taught better
principles both for soul and body, doubtless they would among themselves make
a very good Commonwealth. For painting they are much inclined to it, and most
of the pictures, and Altars of the Country Towns are their workmanship. In
most of their Towns they have a School, where they are taught to read, to
^ing, and some to write. To the Church there do belong according as the Town
i^ in bigness, so many Singers, and Trumpeters, and Waits, over whom the
Priest has one Officer, who is called Fisca; he goes with a white Staff with
a little Silver Cross on the top to represent the Church, and show that he is
the Priests Clerk and Officer. When any case is brought to be examined by the
Priest, this Fiscall or Clerk executes Justice by the Priests Order. He must
be one that can read and write, and is commonly the Master of Music. He is
bound upon the Lords Day and other Saints days, to gather to the Church before
and after Service all the young youths, and maids, and to teach them the
Prayers, Sacraments, Commandments, and other points of Catechism allowed by
the Church of Rome. In the morning he and the other Musicians at the sound of
the Bell, are bound to come to Church to sing and officiate at Mass, which in
many Towns they perform with Organs and other musical Instruments, (as has
been observed before) as well as Spaniard^. So likewise at Evening at five of
the clock they are again to resort to the Church, when the Bell calls, to
sing Prayers, which they call Completa's, or Completory, with Salve Regina, a
prayer to the Virgin Mary. This Fiscal is a great man in the Town, and bears
more sway then the Majors, Jurates, and other Officers of Justice, and when the
Priest is pleased, gives attendance to him, goes about his arrants,
appoints such as are to wait on him, when he rides out of Town. Both he
and all that does belong unto the Church, are exempted from the common weekly
service of the Spaniards, and from giving attendance to Travelers, and from
other Officers of Justice. But they are to attend with their Waits, Trumpets,
and Music, upon any great man or Priest that comes to their Town, and to make
Arches with boughs and flowers in the streets for their entertainment. Besides
these, those also that do belong unto the service of the Priests house, are
privileged from the Spaniards service. Now the Priest has change of servants
by the week, who take their turns so, that they may have a week or two to
spare to do their work. If it be a great Town, he has three Cooks allowed
him, (if a small Town, but two) men Cooks who change their turns, except he
have any occasion of feasting, then they all come. So likewise he has two or
three more (whom they call Chahal) as Butlers, who keep whatsoever Provision
is in the house under lock and Key; and give to the Cook what the Priest
appoints to be dressed for his dinner, or supper; these keep the Table
Clothes, Napkins, Dishes, and Trenchers, and lay the Cloth, and take away, and
wait at the Table; he has besides three or four, and in great Towns half a
dozen of boys to do his arrants, wait at the Table, and sleep in the house
all the week by their turns, who with the Cooks and Butlers dine and sup
constantly in the Priests house, and at his charges. He has also at dinner
and supper times the attendance of some old women (who also take their turns)
to oversee half a dozen young maids, who next to the Priests house do meet to
make him, and his family Tortilla's or Cakes of Maiz, which the boys do bring
hot to the Table by half a dozen at a time. Besides these servants, if he
have a Garden he is allowed two or three gardeners; and for his stable, at
least half a dozen Indians, who morning and evening are to bring him Sacate (as
there they call it) or herb and grass for his Mules or Horses, these diet not
in the house; but the groom of the stable, who is to come at morning, noone,
and Evening, (and therefore are three or four to change) or at any time that
the Priest will ride out; these I say and the Gardners (when they are at work)
dine and sup at the Priests charges; who sometimes in great Towns has above a
dozen to feed and provide for. There are besides belonging to the Church
privileged from the weekly attendance upon the Spaniards two or three Indians,
called Sacristanes, who have care of the Vestry and Copes, and Altar Clothes,
and every day make ready the Altar or Altars for Mass; also to every Company
or Sodality of the Saints, or Virgin, there are two or three, whom they call
Mayordomo's, who gather about the Town Alms for the maintaining of the
Sodality; these also gather Eggs about the Town for the Priest every week, and
give him an account of their gatherings, and allow him every month, or
fortnight, two Crowns for a Mass to be sung to the Saint.

If there be any fishing place near the Town, then the Priest also is allowed
for to seek him fish three or four, and in some places half a dozen Indians,
besides the offerings in the Church, and many other offerings which they bring
whenever they come to speak unto the Priest, or to confess with him, or for
a Saints feast to be celebrated, and besides their Tithes of every thing,
there is a monthly maintenance in money allowed unto the Priest, and brought
unto him by the Alcaldes, or Majors, and Jurates, which he sets his hand
unto in a book of the Towns expenses. This maintenance (though it be allowed
by the Spanish magistrate, and paid in the Kings name for the preaching of the
Gospel) yet it comes out of the poor Indians purses and labor, and is either
gathered about the Town, or taken out of the Tribute, which they pay unto the
King, or from a common plat of ground which with the help of all is sowed and
gathered in and sold for that purpose. All the Towns in America, which are
civilized and under the Spanish government, belong either to the Crown, or to
some other Lords, whom they call Encomendero's, and pay a yearly tribute unto
them. Those that are tenants to their Lords or Encomendero's (who commonly are
such as descend from the first conquerors) pay yet unto the King some small
tribute in money, besides what they pay in other kind of commodities unto their
own Encomendero, and in money also. There is no Town so poor, where every
married Indian does not pay at the least in money four Rials a year for tribute
to the King, besides other ^our Rials to his Lord, or Encomendero. And if the
Town pay only to the King, they pay at least six, and in some places eight
Rials by statute, besides what other commodities are common to the Town or
Country where they live, as Maiz, (that is paid in all Towns) honey, Turkeys,
fowls, s^lt, Cacao, Mantles of Cotton-wool; and the like commodities they pay
who are subject to an Encomendero; but such pay only money, not commodities to
the King. The Mantles of tribute are much esteemed of, for they are choice
ones, and of a bigger size, then others, so likewise is the tribute Cacao,
Achiotte, Coehinil, where it is paid; for the best is set apart for the
tribute; and if the Indians bring that which is not prime good, they shall
surely be lashed, and sent back for better. The heads of the several Tribes
have care to gather it, and to deliver it to the Alcaldes and Regidores, Majors
and Jurates, who carry it either to the Kings Exchequer in the City, or to the
nearest Spanish Justice (if it belong to the King) or to the Lord, or
Encomendero of the Town. In nothing I ever perceived the Spaniards merciful
and indulgent unto the Indians, but in this, that if an Indian be very weak,
poor, and sickly and not able to work, or threescore and ten years of age, he
is freed from paying any tribute. There be also some Towns privileged from
this tribute; which are those that can prove themselves to have descended from
Tlaxcallan, or from certain Tribes or families of or about Mexico, who helped
the first Spaniards in the conquest of that Country. As for their carriage and
behaviou^ the Indians are very courteous and loving, and of a timorous nature,
and willing to serve and to obey, and to do good, if they be drawn by love;
but where they are too much tyrannized, they are dogged, unwilling to please,
or to work, and will choose rather strangling and death then life. They are
very trusty, and never were known to commit any robbery of importance; so that
the Spaniards dare trust to abide with them in a wilderness all night, though
they have bags of gold about them. So for secrecy they are very close; and will
not reveal any thing against their own Natives, or a Spaniards credit and
reputation, if they be any way affected to him. But above all unto their Priest
they are very respective unto him; and when they come to speak unto him; put on
their best clothes, study their complements and words to please him. They are
very abundant in their expressions, and full of circumloqu^tions adorned with
parables and ^imile's to express their mind and intention. I have often sat
still for the space of an hour, only hearing some old women make their
speeches unto me, with so many elegancies in their tongue (which in English
would be nonsense, or barbarous expressions) as would make me wonder, and
learn by their speeches more of their language, then by any other endeavor or
study of mine own. And if I could reply unto them in the like phrases and
expressions (which I would often endeavor) I should be sure to win their
hearts, and get any thing from them. As for their Religion, they are outwardly
such as the Spaniards, but in wardly hard to believe that which is above ^ense,
nature, and the visible sight of the eye; and many of them to this day do
incline to worship Idols of stocks and stones, and are given to much
superstition, and to observe cross ways, and meeting of beasts in them, the
flying of birds, their appearing and singing near their houses at such and such
times. Many are given to witchcraft, and are deluded by the devil to believe
that their life depends upon the life of such and such a beast (which they
take unto them as their familiar spirit) and think that when that beast dies
they must die; when he is chased, their hearts pant, when he is faint they are
faint; nay it happens that by the devils delu^ion they appear in the shape of
that beast, (which commonly by their choice is a Buck, or Do, a Lion, or
Tigre, or Dog, or Eagle) and in that shape have been shot at and wounded, as I
shall show in the Chapter following. And for this reason (as I came to
understand by some of them) they yield unto the Popish Religion, especially to
the worshipping of Saint^ Images, because they look upon them as much like unto
their forefathers Idols; and secondly, because they see some of them painted
with Beasts; as Hierom with a Lion, Anthony with an Ass, and other wild
beasts, Dominick with a Dog, ^las with a Hog, Mark with a Bull, and John with
an Eagle, they are more confirmed in their delusions, and think verily those
Saints were of their opinion, and that those b^asts were their familiar
spirits, in whose shape they also were transformed when they lived, and with
whom they died. All Indians are much affected unto these Popish Saints, but
especially those which are given to witchcraft, and out of the smalnesse of
their means they will be sure to buy some of these Saints and bring them to the
Church, that there they may stand and be worshipped by them and others. The
Churches are full of them, and they are placed upon standers gilded or painted,
to be carried in procession upon men's shoulders, upon their proper day. And
from hence comes no little profit to the Priests; for upon such Saints days,
the owner of the Saint makes a great feast in the Town, and presents unto
the Priest sometimes two or three, sometimes four or five crowns for his Mass
and Sermon, besides a Turkey and three or four fowls, with as much Cacao as
will serve to make him Chocolatte for all the whole Octave or eight days
following. So that in some Churches, where there are at least forty of these
Saints Statues and Images, they bring unto the Priest at least forty pounds a
year. The Priest therefore is very watchful over those Saints days, and
sends warning before hand unto the Indians of the day of their Saint, that
they may provide themselves for the better celebrating it both at home and in
the Church. If they contribute not bountifully, then the Priest will chide, and
threaten that he will not preach. Some Indians through poverty have been
unwilling to contribute any thing at all, or to solemnize in the Church and at
his house his Saints day, but then the Priest has threatened to cast his Saints
image out of the Church, saying, that the Church ought not to be filled with
such Saints as are unprofitable to soul and body, and that in such a statues
room one may stand, which may do more good by occasioning a solemn celebration
of one day more in the year. So likewise if the Indian that owed one of those
images die and leave children, they are to take care of that Saint as part of
their inheritance, and to provide that his day be kept; but if no son, or heirs
be left, then the Priest calls for the heads of the several Tribes, and for
the chief officers of justice, and makes a speech unto them, wherein he
declares that part of the Church ground is taken up in vain by such an image,
and his stander, without any profit either to the Priest, the Church, or the
town, no heir or owner being left alive to proceed for that orphan Saint, to
own it; and that in case they will not seek out who may take charge of him,
and of his day, the Priest will not suffer him to stand id^ in his Church, like
those whom our Savior in the Gospel rebuked, quid hic statis tota die (...)?
for that they stoo^ idle in the market all the day (these very expressions have
I heard there from some Friars) and therefore that he must banish such a Saints
picture out of the Church, and must deliver him up before them into the
Justices hands to be kept by them in the Townhouse, until such time as he may
be bought and owned by some good Christian. The Indians when they hear these
expressions, begin to fear, le^t some judgment may befall their Town for
suffering a Saint to be excommunicated and cast out of their Church, and
therefore present unto the Priest (...) offering for his prayer^ unto the
Saint, that he may do them no harm, and desire him to limit (...) a time to
bring him an answer for the disposing of that Saint (thinking it will prove a
disparagement and affront unto their Town, if what once has belonged to the
Church, ^e now out, and delivered up to the secular power) and that in the mean
time, they will find out some good Christian, either of the (...) friends and
kindred to him or them who first owned the Saint, or else some stranger, who
may buy that Saint of the Priest (if he continue in the Church) or of the
secular power (if he be continue out of the Church and delivered up unto them,
which they are unwilling to yield to* having been taught of judgments in such
a case like to befall them) and may by (...) speedy feast and solemnity appease
the Sain^s anger toward them, for having (...) ^o slighted by the Town. Alas
poor Indians, what will they not be (...) unto by those Friars and Priests,
who study nothing more than their own ends, and to enrich themselves from the
Church and Altar* their policies (who are the wise and prudent children of this
world spoken of in the Gospel) can easily overtop and master the simplicity of
the poor Indians; who rather then they will bring an affront upon their Town,
by suffering any of their Saints to be cast out of their Church, or to be with
money redeemed out of the secular powers hands, will make have to present unto
him an owner of that orphan Saint, who for him shall give to the Priest not
only what he may be prized to be worth in a Painters shop for the workmanship,
gold and colors belonging to him; but besides shall present him what before
has been observed, for the solemnizing of his feast. These feasts bring yet
unto the Saints more profit then hitherto has been spoken of; for the Indians
have been taught that upon such days they ought to offer up somewhat unto the
Saints; and therefore they prepare either money (some a Riall, some two, some
more) or else commonly about Guatemala white wax-candles, and in other places
Cacao, or fruits, which they lay before the image of the Saint, whilst the
Mass is celebrating. Some Indians will bring a bundle of candles of a dozen
tied together of Rials a piece some, some of three or four for a Riall, and
will if they be let alone light them all together and burn them out, so that
the Priest at the end of the Mass will find nothing but the ends. Therefore
(knowing well of the ways of policy and covetousness) he chargeeh the Church
officers, whom I said before were called Mayordomo's to look to the offerings,
and not to suffer the Indians who bring candles to light more then one before
the Saint, and to leave the other before him unlighted (having formerly taught
them, that the Saints are as well pleased with their whole candles as with
their burnt candles) that so he may have the more to sell and make money of.
After Mass the Priest and the Mayordomo's take and sweep away from the Saint
whatsoever they find has been offered unto him; so that sometimes in a great
Town upon such a Saints day the Priest may have in money twelve or twenty
Rials, and fifty or a hundred candles, which may be worth unto him twenty or
thirty shillings, besides some ends and pieces. Most of the Friars about
Guatemala are with these offerings as well stored with candles, as is any
Wax-chandlers shop in the City. And the same candles, which thus they have
received by offerings they need not care to sell them away to Spaniards, who
come about to by them (though some will rather sell them together to such
though cheaper, that their money might come in all at once) for the Indians
themselves when they want again any candles for the like feast, or for a
Christening, and for a woman's Churching (at which times they also offer
candles) will buy their own again of the Priest, who sometimes receives the
same candles and money for them again five or six times. And because they find
that the Indians incline very much to this kind of offerings, and that they are
so profitable unto them, the Friars do much press upon the Indians in their
preaching this point of their Religion, and devotion. But if you demand of
these ignorant, but zealous offerers the Indians an account of any point of
faith, they will give you little or none. The mystery of the Trinity, and of
the incarnation of Christ, and our redemption by him is too hard for them; they
will only answer what they have been taught in a Catechism of questions and
answers; but if you ask them if they believe such a point of Christianity, they
will never answer affirmatively, but only thus, Perhaps it may be so. They are
taught there the doctrine of Rome, that Christ's body is truly and really
present in the Sacrament, and no bread in substance, but only the accidents; if
the wisest Indian be asked, whether he believe this, he will answer, Perhaps it
may be so. Once an old woman, who was held to be very religious, in the Town of
Mixco, came to me about receiving the Sacrament, and whilst I was instructing
of her, I asked her if she believed that Christ body was in the Sacrament, she
answered, Peradventure it may be so. A little while after to try her and get
her out of this strain and common answer, I asked her what and who was in the
Sacrament which she received from the Priests hand at the Altar; she answered
nothing for a while, and at last I pressed upon her for an affirmative answer;
and then she began to look about to the Saints in the Church, (which was
dedicated to a Saint which they call St. Dominick*) and, as it seemed, being
troubled and doubtful what to say, at last she cast her eyes upon the high
Altar; but I seeing she delayed the time, asked her again who was in the
Sacrament? to which she replied S. Dominick who was the Patron of that Church
and Town. At this I smiled, and would yet further try her simplicity with a
simple question. I told her she saw S. Dominick was painted with a dog by him
holding a torch in his mouth, and the globe of the world at his feet; I asked
her, whether all this were with St. Dominick in the Sacrament? To which she
answered, Perhaps it might be so; wherewith I began to chide her, and to
instruct her. But mine instruction, nor all the teaching and preaching of those
Spanish Priests has not yet well grounded them in principles of faith; they
are dull and heavy to believe or apprehend of God, or of heaven, more then
with sense or reason they can conceive. Yet they go and run that way they see
the Spaniards run, and as they are taught by their idolatrous Priests. Who have
taught them much formality, and so they are (as our Formalists formerly in
England) very formal, but little substantial in Religion. They have been
taught that when they come to confession, they must offer somewhat to the
Priest, and that by their gifts and alms, their sins shall be sooner forgiven;
this they do so formally observe, that, whenever they come to confession,
but especially in Lent, none of them dares to come with empty hands; some
bring money, some honey, some eggs, some fowls, some fish, some Cacao, some one
thing, some another, so that the Priest has a plentiful harvest in Lent for
his pains in hearing their Confessions. They have been taught that also when
they receive the Communion, they must surely every one give at least a Riall to
the Priest, (surely England was never taught in America to buy the Sacrament
with a two pence offering, and yet this custom too much practiced and pressed
upon the people) which they perform so, that I have known some poor Indians,
who have for a week or two forborne from coming to the Communion until they
could get a Riall offering. It is to be wondered what the Priests do get from
those poor wretches in great Towns by Confession and Communion Rials in great
Towns, where they deny the Sacrament to none that will receive it, (and in
some Towns I have known a thousand Communicants) and force all above twelve
or thirteen years of age to come to Confession in the Lent. They are very
formal also in observing Romes Monday, Thursday, and Good Friday, and then
they make their monuments and sepulchers, wherein they set their Sacrament, and
watch it all day and night, placing before it a Crucifix on the ground, with
two basins on each side to hold the single or double Rials, which every one
must offer when he comes creeping upon his knees, and barefooted to kiss
Christ's hands, feet, and side. The candles which for that day and night and
next morning are burned at the sepulcher are bought with another
Contribution-Riall, which is gathered from house to house from every Indian for
that purpose. Their Religion is a dear and lick-penny religion for such poor
Indians, and yet they are carried along in it formally and perceive it not.
They are taught that they must remember the souls in Purgatory, and therefore
that they must cast their alms into a chest, which stands for that purpose
in their Churches, whereof the Priest keeps the key, and opens it when he
wants money, or when he pleases. I have often opened some of those chests;
and have found in them many single Rials, some half pieces of eight, and some
whole pieces of eight. And because what is lost and found in the highways,
must belong to some body, if the true owner be not known, they have been
taught that such moneys or goods belong also to the souls departed; wherefore
the Indians (surely more for fear or vanities sake that they may be well
thought on by the Priest) if they find any thing lost will bestow it upon the
souls surer then the Spaniards themselves (who if they find a purse lost will
keep it,) and will bring it either to the Priest or cast it into the chest. An
Indian of Mixco had found a patacon or piece of eight in a highway, and when
he came to Confession, he gave it unto me telling me he durst not keep it, lest
the souls should appear unto him, and demand it. So upon the second day of
November which they call All souls day, they are extraordinary foolish and
superstitious in offering moneys, fowls, eggs and Maiz, and other commodities
for the souls good, but it proves for the profit of the Priest, who after
Mass wipes away to his chamber all that which the poor gulled and deluded
Indians had offered unto those souls, which needed neither money, food, nor any
other provision, and he fills his purse, and pampers his belly with it. A Friar
that lived in Petapa boasted unto me once that upon their All Souls day, his
offerings had been about a hundred Rials, two hundred Chickens and fowls, half
a dozen Turkeyes, eight bushels of Maiz, three hundred eggs, four sontles of
Cacao, (every sontle being four hundred granes) twenty clusters of plantins,
above a hundred wax candles, besides some loaves of bread, and other trifles of
fruits. All which being summed up according to the price of the things there,
and with consideration of the coin of money there (half a Ryall, or three pence
being there the least coin) mounts to above eight pounds of our money, a fair
and goodly stipend for a Mass, brave wages for half an hours work; a
politic ground for that Error of Purgatory, if the dead bring to the living
Priest such wealth in one day only. Christmas day with the rest of those holy
days is no less superstitiously observed by these Indians; for against that
time they frame and set in some corner of their Church a little thatched house
like a stall, which they call Bethlehem, with a blazing Star over, pointing
it unto the three Sage wise men from the East; within this stall they lay in a
Crib, a child made of wood, painted and gilded (who represents Christ newborn unto them) by him stands Mary on the one side, and Joseph on the other,
and an Ass likewise on the one side and an ox on the other, made by hands,
the three wise men of the East kneel before the Crib offering gold,
Frankincense and Myrrh, the shepherds stand a loof off offering their Country
gifts, some a Kid, some a Lamb, some Milk, some Cheese, and Curds, some
fruits, the fields are also there represented with flocks of Sheep and Goats;
the Angels they hang about the stall some with Vialls, some with Lutes, some
with Harps, a goodly mumming and silent stage play, to draw those simple souls
to look about, and to delight their senses and fantasies in the Church.

There is not an Indian that comes to see that supposed Bethlehem, (and there
is not any in the Town but does come to see it) who brings not either money
or somewhat else for his offering. Nay the policy of the Priests has been
such, that (to stir up the Indians with their Saints example) they have
taught them to bring their Saints upon all the holy days, until Twelfth day
in Procession unto this Bethlehem to offer their gifts, according to the number
of the Saints that stand in the Church, some days there come five, some days
eight, some days ten, dividing them into such order, that by Twelfth day all
may have come and offered, some money, some one thing, some another; The owner
of the Saint, he comes before the Saint with his friends and kindred (if
there be no sodality or company belonging unto that Saint) and being very well
apparelled for that purpose, he bows himself and kneels to the Crib, and then
rising takes from the Saint what he brings and leaves it there, and so
departs. But if there be a sodality belonging to the Saint, then the
Mayordomo's or chief Officers of that company they come before the Saint, and
do homage, and offer as before has been said. But upon Twelfth day the
Alcaldes, Majors, Jurates, and other Officers of Justice, must offer after the
example of the Saints, and the three Wise men of the East (whom the Church of
Rome teaches to have been Kings) because they represent the Kings power and
authority. And all these days they have about the Town and in the Church a
dance of Shepherds, who at Christmas Eve at midnight begin before this
Bethlehem, and then they must offer a Sheep amongst them. Others dance clothed
like Angels and with wings, and all to draw the people more to see sights in
the Church, then to worship God in Spirit and in Truth. Candlemas day is no
less superstitiously observed; for then the picture of Mary comes in
procession to the Altar, and offers up her Candles and Pigeons, or
Turtle-Doves unto the Priest, and all the Town must imitate her example, and
bring their Candles to be blessed and hallowed; of four or five, or as many as
they bring, one only shall be restored back unto them, because they are
blessed, all the rest are for the Priest, to whom the Indians resort after to
buy them, and give more then ordinary, because they are hallowed Candles. At
Whitsontide they have another sight, and that is in the Church also, whilst a
Hymn is sung of the Holy Ghost, the Priest standing before the Altar with his
face turned to the people, they have a device to let fall a Dove from above
over his head well dressed with flowers, and for above half an hour, from
holes made for that purpose, they drop down flowers about the Priest showing
the gifts of the holy Ghost to him, which example the ignorant and simple
Indians are willing to imitate, offering also their gifts unto him. Thus all
the year are those Priests and Friars deluding the poor people for their ends,
enriching themselves with their gifts, placing Religion in mere Policy; and
thus does the Indians Religion consist more in sights, shows and formalities,
then in any true substance. But as sweet meat must have sour sauce; so this
sweetness and pleasing delight of shows in the Church has its sour sauce
once a year (besides the sowrenesse of poverty which follows to them by
giving so many gifts unto the Priest) for, to show that in their Religion there
is some bitterness, and sowrenesse, they make the Indians whip themselves the
week before Easter, like the Spaniards, which those simples both men and women
perform with such cruelty to their own flesh, that they butcher it, mangle and
tear their backs, till some swound, nay some (as I have known) have died under
their own whipping, and have self murdered themselves, which the Priests
regard not, because their death is sure to bring them at least three or four
Crowns for a Mass for their souls, and other offerings of their friends.

Thus in Religion they are superstitiously led on, and blinded in the
observance of what they have been taught for the good and profit of their
Priests, then for any good of their souls, not perceiving that their Religion
is a Policy to enrich their teachers. But not only do the Friars and Priests
live by them and eat the sweat of their brows; but also all the Spaniards, who
not only with their work and service (being themselves many given to
idleness) grow wealthy and rich; but with needless offices, and authority are
still fleecing them, and taking from them that little which they gain with
much hardness and severity.

The President of Guatemala, the Judges of that Chancery, the Governors and
High Justices of other parts of the Country, that they may advance and enrich
their meniall servants, make the poor Indians the subject of their
bountifulness toward such. Some have offices to visit as often as they please
their Towns, and to see what every Indian has sowed of Maiz, for the
maintenance of his wife and children; Others visit them to see what fowls they
keep for the good and store of the County; others have order to see whether
their houses be decently kept and their beds orderly placed according to their
Families; others have power to call them out to mend and repair the high
ways, and others have Commission to number the Families and Inhabitants of the
several Towns, to see how they increase that their Tribute may not decrease,
but still be raised. And all this, those officers do never perform but so,
that for their pains they must have from every Indian an allowance to bear
their charges, (which indeed are none at all) for as long as they stay in the
Town, they may call for what fowls and provision they please without paying
for it. When they come to number the Towns, they call by lift every Indian and
cause his chiidren, sons and daughters to be brought before them, to see if
they be fit to be married; and if they be of growth and age, and be not
married, the fathers are threatened for keeping them unmarried, and as idle
lives the Town without paying tribute; and according to the number of the
sons and daughters that are marriageable, the fathers tribute is raised and
increased, until they provide husbands and wives for their sons and daughters,
who as soon as they are married, are charged with tribute; which that it may
increase, they will suffer none above fifteen years of age to live unmarried;
Nay the set time of age of marriage appointed for the Indians, is at fourteen
years for the man, and thirteen for the woman, alleging that they are sooner
ripe for the fruit of Wedlock, and sooner ripe in knowledge and malice, and
strength for work and service, then are any other people. Nay sometimes they
force them to marry who are scarce twelve and thirteen years of age, if they
find them well limbed, and strong in body, explicating a point of one of Romes
Canons, which allows fourteen and fifteen years, nisi malitia suppleat
aetatem. When I my self lived in Pinola, that Town by order of Don Iuan de
Guzman, (a great Gentleman of Guatemala, to whom it belonged) was numbered, and
an increase of tributary Indians was added unto it by this means. The numbering
it lasted a full week, and in that space I was commanded to join in marriage
near twenty couple, which, with those that before had been married since the
last numbering of it, made up to the Encomendero or Lord of it an increase of
about fifty Families. But it was a shame to see how young some were that at
that time were forced to marriage, neither could al my striving and reasoning
prevail to the contrary, nor the producing of the Register Boo^ to show their
age, but that some were married of between twelve and thirteen years of age,
and one especially who in the Register book was found to be not fully of
twelve years, whose knowledge and strength of body was judged to supply the
want of age. In this manner even in the most free act of the will, (which ought
to be in marriage) are those poor Indians, forced and made slaves by the
Spaniards, to supply with tribute the want of their purses, and the meannesse
of their Estates. Yet under this yoke and burden they are cheerful, and much
given to feasting, sporting and dancing, a^ they particularly show in the chief
feasts of their Towns, which are kept upon that Saints day to whom their Town
is dedicated. And certainly this superstition has continued also in England
from the Popish times, to keep Faires in many of our Towns upon Saints days
(which is the intent of the Papists to draw in the people and country by way of
commerce and trading one with another, to honor, worship, and pray to that
Saint, to whom the Town is dedicated) or else why are our Faires commonly kept
upon John Baptist, James, Peter, Matthew, Bartholomew, Holy Rood, Lady days,
and the like, and not as well a day or two before, or a day or two after, which
would be as good and fit days to buy and sell, as the other? True it is, our
Reformation allows not the worshipping of Saints, yet that solemn meeting of
the people to Fairs and mirth, and sport upon those days it has kept and
continued, that so the Saints and their days may be and continue still in our
remembrance. There is no Town in the India's great or small (though it be but
of twenty Families) which is not dedicated thus unto our Lady or unto some
Saint, and the remembrance of that Saint is continued in the minds not only
of them that live in the Town, but of all that live far and near by
commercing, trading, sporting, and dancing, offering unto the Saint, and
bowing, kneeling, and praying before him. Before this day day comes, the
Indians of the Town two or three Months have their meetings at night, and
prepare themselves for such dances as are most commonly used amongst them; and
in these their meetings they drink much both of Chocolatte and Chicha. For
every kind of dance they have several houses appointed, and masters of that
dance, who teach the rest that they may be perfected in it against the Saints
day. For the most part of these two or three months the silence of the night
is unquieted, what with their singing, what with their hollowing, what with
their beating upon the shells of fishes, what with their Waits, and what with
their piping. And when the feast comes, then they act publicly, and for the
space of eight days, what privately they had practiced before. They are that
day well apparelled with silks, fine linen, ribbands and feathers according
to the dance; which first they begin in the Church before the Saint, or in the
Church yard, and from thence all the Octave, or eight days they go from house
to house dancing, where they have Chocolatte or some heady drink or Chicha
given them. All those eight days the Town is sure to be full of drunkards;
and if they be reprehended for it; they will answer, that their heart does
rejoice with their Saint in heaven, and that they must drink unto him, that
he may remember them. The chief dance used amongst them is called Toncontin,
which has been danced before the King of Spain, in the Court of Madrid by
Spaniards, who have lived in the India's to show unto the King somewhat of the
Indians fashions; and it was reported to have pleased the King very much. This
dance is thus performed. The Indians commonly that dance it (if it be a great
Town) are thirty or forty, or fewer, if it be a small Town. They are clothed
in white, both their dublets, linen drawers, and Aiates, or towels, which on
the one side hang almost to the ground. Their drawers and Aiates are wrought
with some works of Silk, or with birds, or bordered with some Lace. Others
procure dublets and drawers and Aiates of Silk, all which are hired for that
purpose. On their backs they hang long tuffes of feathers of all colors, which
with glue are fastened into a little frame made for the purpose, and gilded on
the outside; this frame with Ribbands they tie about their shoulders fast that
it fall not, nor slacken with the motion of their bodies. Upon their heads they
wear another less tuffe of Feathers either in their hats, or in some gilded
or painted head-peece, or helmet. In their hands also they carry a fan of
feathers, and on their feet most will use feathers also bound together like
short wings of birds; some wear shoes, some not. And thus from top to toe
they are almost covered with curious and colored feathers. Their Music and
tune to this dance is only what is made with a hollow stock of a tree, being
rounded, and well pared within and without, very smooth and shining, some four
times thicker then our viols, with two or three long clefts on the upper side
and some holes at the end which they call Tepanabaz. On this stock (which is
placed upon a stool or fourm in the middle of the Indians) the Master of the
dance beats with two sticks, covered with wool at the ends, and a pitched
leather over the wool that it fall not away. With this Instrument and blows
upon it (which sounds but dull and heavy, but somewhat loud) he gives the
dancers* their several tunes, and changes, and signs of the mothion their
bodies either straight or bowing, and gives them warning what and when they
are to fing. Thus they dance in compass and circle round about that
instrument, one following another sometimes straight, sometimes turning about,
sometimes turning half way, sometimes bending their bodies and with the
feathers in their hands almost touching the ground, and singing the life of
that their Saint, or o^ some other. All this dancing is but a kind of walking
round, which they will continue two or three whole hours together in one
place, and from thence go and perform the same at another house.

This Toncontin the chief and principal only of the Town do dance it; It
was the old dance which they used before they knew Christianity, except that
then in stead of singing the Saints lives, they did sing the praises of their
heathenish Gods. They have another dance much used, which is a kind of hunting
out some wild Beast (which formerly in time of Heathenisme was to be
sacrificed to their Gods) to be offered up unto the Saint. This dance has
much variety of tunes, with a small Tepanabaz, and many shells of Tortoi's, or
in stead of them with pots covered with leather, on which they strike as on
Tepanabaz, and with the sound of pipes; in this dance they use much hollowing
and noise and calling one unto another, and speaking by way of Stage play, some
relating one thing, some another concerning the Beast they hunt after; These
dancers are all clothed like Beasts, with painted skins of Lions, Tigers,
Wolves, and on their heads such headpieces as may represent the head of such
Beasts, and other wear painted heads of Eagles or Fowls of rapine, and in
their hands they have painted Sta^s, Bills, Swords and Axes, wherewith they
threaten to kill that Beast they hunt after. Others in stead of hunting after a
Beast, hunt after a man, as Beasts in a wilderness should ^unt a man to kill
him. This man that is thus hunted after must be very nimble and agil, as one
flying for his life, and striking he^ and there at the Beasts for his defense,
whom at last they catch and make a prey of. As the Toncontin consists most of
walking and turning and leasurely bending their bodies, so this dance does
wholly consist in action, running in a circle round, sometimes out of circle,
and leaping and striking with those tools and instruments which they have in
their hand. This is a very rude sport, and full of scrieking and hideous noise,
wherein I never delighted. Another Mexican dance they use, some clothed like
men, others like women, which in Heathenish times they did use with singing
praises unto their King or Emperor; but now they apply their songs unto the
King of Glory, or unto the Sacrament, using these or commonly the like words
with very little difference, and some variety of prais^,

Salid Mexicanas, bailad T^ncontin.
C^salas galanas en ^uerpo g^til. And again,
Salid Mexicanas bailad T^ncontin.
Al Rey de la gloria tenemos aqui. Thus they go round dancing, playing in some
places very well upon their Guitarres, repeating now and then all together a
verse or two, and calling the Mexican Dames to come out to them with their
gallant Mantles to sing praise unto their King of Glory. Besides these they
have, and use our Morris dances, and Blackmore dances with Sonajas in their
hands, which are a round set of small Morris dancing bells, wherewith they make
variety of sounds to their nimble feet. But the dance which does draw to it the
peoples wondering is a Tragedy acted by way of dance, as the death of St.
Peter, or the beheading of John the Baptist. In these dances there is an
Emperor, or a King Herod with their Queens clothed, another clothed with a
long loose Coat who represent^ St. Peter, or John the Baptist, who whilst the
rest danceth, walks amongst them with a book in his hands, as if he were
saying his prayers, all the rest of the Dancers are apparelled like Captains
and soldier s with Swords, Daggers, or Holbards in their hands. They dance at
the sound of a small drum and pipes, sometimes ^ound, sometimes in length
forward, and have and use many speeches to the Emperor or King, and among
themselves concerning the apprehending and executing the Saint. The King and
Queen sit sometimes down to hear their pleading against the Saint, and his
pleading for himself; and sometimes they dance with the rest; and the end of
their dance is to crucify St. Peter downwards with his head upon a Cross, or
behead John the Baptist, having in readiness a painted head in a dish, which
they present unto the King and Queen, for joy whereof they all again dance
merrily and so conclude, taking down him that acted Peter from the Cross. The
Indians that dance this dance most of them are superstitious for what they do,
judging as if it (...) indeed really acted and performed what only is by way
of dance represented. When I lived amongst them, it was an ordinary thing for
him who in the dance was to act St. Peter or John the Baptist, to come first to
Confession, saying they must be holy and pure like that Saint, whom they
represent, and must prepare themselves to die. So likewise he that acted Herod
or Herodias, and some of the Soldiers that in the dance were to speak and to
accuse the Saints, would afterward come to confess of that sin, and desire
absolution as from bloodguiltinesse. More particular passages of the Indians
according to my experience of them, I shall in the Chapter following truly
relate unto my Reader.

CHAP. XX. Showing how and why I departed out of Guatemala to learn the
Poconchi language, and to live among the Indians, and of some particular
passages and accidents whilst I lived there.
HAving read in the University of Guatemala for three years space a whole
course of Arts, and having begun to read part of Divinity, the more I studied
and grew in knowledge, and the more I controverted by way of Arguments some
Truths and points of Religion, the more I found the spirit of Truth
inlightening me, and discovering unto me the lies, errors, falsities and
superstitions of the Church of Rome. My conscience was much perplexed, and
wavering, and I desirous of some good and full ^atisfaction: Which I knew might
not be had there; and that to profess and continue in any opinion contrary to
the Doctrine of Rome, would bring me to the Inquisition, that Rack of tender
Consciences, and from thence to no less then burning alive, in case I would
not recant of what the true Spirit had inspired into me. The point of
Transubstantiation, of Purgatory, of the Popes power and authority, of the
merit of man's works, of his free will to choose all soulsaving ways, the
sacrifice of the Mass, the hallowing the Sacrament of the Lords Supper unto
the Lay people, the Priests power to absolve from sin, the worshipping of
Saints though with (...)* as they call it, and not with (...), and the Virgin
Mary with a higher degree of* worship then that of the Saints* which they call
(...), the strange lies and blasphemies which they call miracles recorded in
the Legend and lives of their Saints, the infallibility of the Pope, and
council in defining for truth and point of Faith, what in it self is false
and erroneous; these points especially, with many more of Romes policies, and
the lewd lives of the Priests, Friars, Nuns, and those in authority, did much
trouble and perplex my conscience, which I knew would be better satisfied if I
could return again to my own Country of England, where I knew many things
were held contrary to the Church of Rome, but what particulars they were, I
could not tell, not having been brought up in the Protestant Church, and having
been sent young over to St. Omers. Wherefore I earnestly addressed my self to
the Provincial; and to the President of Guatemala, for a license to come home,
but neither of them would yield unto it, because there was a strict order of
the King and Council, that no Priest sent by his Majesty to any of the parts
of the India's to Preach the Gospel, should return again to Spain till ten
years were expired. Hereupon I seeing my self a prisoner, and without hopes for
the present of seeing England in many years, resolved to stay no more in
Guatemala, but to go out to learn some Indian tongue, and to preach in some
of their Towns, where I knew more money might be got to help me home, when
the time should come, then if I did continue to live in the Cloister of
Guatemala. Yet in the mean time I thought it not unfit to write to Spain to a
friend of mine an English Friar in San Lucar, called Friar Pablo de Londres to
desire him to obtian for me a License from the Court, and from the General of
the Order at Rome, that I might return unto my Country. In this season there
was in Guatemala, Friar Francisco de Moran, the Prior of Coban in the Province
of Vera Paz, who was informing the President and whole Chancery, how necessary
it was that some Spaniards should be ayding and assisting him for the
discovery of a way from that Country unto Iucatan, and for the suppressing of
such barbarous people and Heathens, as stopped his passage, and did often
invade some Indian Towns of Christians. This Moran (being my special friend,
and having been brought up in Spain in the Cloister of San Pablo de
Valladolid, where my self was first entered Friar,) was very desirous of my
company along with him, for the better bringing into Christianity those
Heathens, and Idolaters, telling me that doubtless in a new Country new
treasure and great riches was like to be found, whereof no small share and
portion should befall him and me for our pains and adventure. I was not hard to
be persuaded, being above all desirous to convert to Christianity a people that
had never heard of Christ; and so purposed to forsake that honor which I had
in the Universitie, for to make Christ known unto that Heathenish people. The
Provincial was glad to see this my courage, and so with some gifts and money in
my purse, sent me with Moran to the Vera Paz in the company of 50. Spaniards,
who were appointed by the President to aid and assist us.

When we came to Coban we were well refreshed and provided for a hard and
dangerous enterprise. From Coban we marched to two great Towns of Christians
called St. Peter, and St. John, where were added unto us a hundred Indians for
our further assistance. From these Towns two days journey we could travail on
Mules safely among Christians and some small villages; but after the two days
we drew near unto the Heathens Frontiers, where there was no more open way for
Mules, but we must trust unto our feet. We went up and down mountains amongst
woods for the space of two days, being much discouraged with the thickets and
hardness of the way, and having no hope of finding out the Heathens. In the
night we kept watch and guard for fear of enemies, and resolved yet the third
day to go forward. In the mountains we found many sorts of fruits and in the
bottomes spring^ and brooks with many trees of Cacao and Achiotte. The third
day we went on, and came to a low valley, in the mi^st whereof ran a shallow
river, where we found some Milpa's or plantations of Maiz. These were a
testimony unto us of some Indians not far off, and therefore made us keep
together and be in readiness, if any assault or onset should be made upon us
by the Heathens. Whilst we thus traveled on, we suddenly fell upon half a
dozen poor cottages, covered with boughs and plantin leaves, and in them we
found three Indian women, two men and five young children, all naked, who feign
would have escaped, but they could not. We refreshed our selves in their poor
cottages and gave them of our provision, which at the first they refused to
eat, howling and crying and pulling, till Moran had better encouraged and
comforted them, whose language they partly understood. We clothed them and
took them along with us* hoping to make them discover unto us some treasure or
some bigger plantation. But that day they were so sullen that we could get
nothing out of them. Thus we went on, following some tracks which here and
there we found of Indians, till it was almost evening, and then we did light
upon above a dozen cottage^ more, and in them a matter of twenty men, women,
and children, from whom we took some bows and arrows, and found there store
of plantins, some fish, and wild Venison, wherewith we refreshed our selves.
These told us of a great Town two days journey off, which made (...) be very
watchful that night. Here I began with some more of our company to be sick and
weary, so that the next day I was not able to go any further; whereupon we
resolved to set up our quarters there, and to send out some scouts of Indians
and Spaniards to discover the country, who found further more cottages and
plantations of Maiz, of Chile, of Turkey beans, and Cotton-wooll, but no
Indians at all, for they were all fled. Our scouts returned, and gave us some
encouragement from the pleasantness of the Country; but withal wished us to
be watchful and careful, for that certainly the flight of those Indians was a
sign that our coming was noised about the Country. The next day we purposed to
move forward to that plantation which our scouts had discovered, being (as we
were informed) safer and more open to foresee any danger ready to befall us.
All these plantatio^ lay along by the river, where the sun was exceeding hot,
which had caused fevers and a flux in some of us. With much weariness and
faintness I got that day to our journeys end, beginning now to ^epent me of
what I was engaged in and on foot, and ^ring some sudden dange^, by reason our
coming was now known by the Indians. The prisoners we had with (...) began to
tell us of some gold that they did sometimes find in that river* and of a gr^
lake ye^ forward, about which did inhabit many thousand Indians, who were very
warlike, and skillful in their bows and arrows. The one encouraged some, the
other much discouraged the rest, who wished themselves out of those woods and
unknown places, and began to murmur against Moran, who had been the cause of
their engagement in that great danger. Our night was set, and I and the rest of
the sick Spaniards went to rest, some upon the bare ground, but my self and
others in hamacca's, which are of net work tied at two posts or trees, and
hanging in the air, which with the least stirring of the body, rock one
asleep as in a Cradle. Thus I took my rest till about midnight; at which time
our watches gave an alarm against our approaching enemies, who where thought to
be about a thousand. They came desperately toward us, and when they saw they
were discovered, and our drums beat up, and our fowling pieces and muskets
began to shoot, they hollowed and cried out with a hideous noise, which uproar
and sudden affrightment, added sweat and fear to my fever. But Moran (who
came to confess with me, and to prepare himself for death or for some deadly
wound) comforted me, wishing me to fear nothing, and to lie still, for that I
could do them no good, and that less was my danger then I apprehended,
because our Soldiers had compassed me about, so that on no side the Heathens
could come in, and fly we could not without the loss of all our lives. The
skirmish lasted not above an hour, and then our enemies began to fly back. We
took ten of them, and in the morning found thirteen dead upon the ground, and
of ours five only were wounded, whereof one died the next day.

In the morning our Soldiers began to mutiny and to talk of returning back,
fearing a worse and more violent onset that day or the night following, for
some of the Indians who were taken, told them plainly that if they went not
away there would come six or seven thousand against them. They told us further,
that they knew well that the Spaniards had all the country about, except that
little portion of theirs, which they desired to enjoy quietly and peaceably,
and not to meddle with us, but rather if we would see their country and go
through it as friends, they would let us without doing us any hurt; but if we
came in a warlike manner to fight and to bring them into slavery, as we had
done their neighbors* they were all resolved to die fighting rather then to
yield. With these words our Soldiers were divided, some with Moran were of
opinion to try the Indians, and to go peaceably through their Country til they
could come to some Town of Iucatan; others were of opinion to fight, others to
return back again, considering their weakness against so many thousands of
Indians as were in the Country. But that day nothing was agreed upon, for that
we could not stir by reason of the sick and wounded. So we continued there that
night, and as the night before much about the same time the enemies came again
upon us, but finding us ready and watching for them, they soon fled. In the
morning we resolved to return back, and Moran sent the Heathens word, that if
they would let him go through their country quietly to discover some land of
Iucatan, he would after a few months come peaceably unto them with half ad^en
Indians, no more, trusting his life upon them; whom he knew if they wronged,
all the Spaniards in the country would rise up against them, and not leave one
alive. They answered that they would entertain him, and any few Indians well
and willingly; all which Moran and they performed according to their agreement
the next year following.

Thus we returned that day back the same way that we had come, and I began to
find my self better, and my fever to leave me. We carried with us some of
those young children which we had taken, to present them unto the President of
Guatemala. And in Coban the Prior Moran thought he might first do God good
service if he christened those youg children, saying that they might become
Saints, and that afterward their prayers might prevail with God for the
conversion of their parents and of all that country to Christianity. I could
not but oppose this his ignorance, which seemed much like unto (...) of the
Friars who entered America with Cortez, and increased after the conquest daily
more in number, who boasted to the Emperor, that they had some of them made
above thirty thousand Indians Christians by bapti^ing them; which truly they
did as sheep are forced to the waters and driver to be washed; so were those
first Indians by thousands sprinkled (or if I may use their word, baptized) for
they were driven by compulsion and force to the rivers, nnither were they first
principled in any grounds of belief and Christianity, neither themselves
bel^vers, nor children of believing and faithful parents. So would Moran
christen these children, though I told him that they ought not to partake of
that sacrament and Ordinance of Christ, unless they were grounded in articles
of Christianity and believed, or were children of believing parents. But as he
had been brought up in errors, whereof that Church of Rome is a wide and
spacious nest, so he would be obstinate in this point against me and the truth,
sprinkling with water those children, and naming them with names of Christians.
After this he sent them well apparelled to the resident of Guatemala, who
commanded them to be kept, and brought up in the Cloister of the Dominican
Friars.

I remained after this for a while in Coban, and in the Towns about, until
such time as the ships came to the Gulf; whither I went with Moran to buy
wines, oil, iron, cloth and such things as the Cloister wanted for the
present. At which time there being a frigate ready to depart to Truxillo) some
occasions drawing Moran thither) I took ship with him. We stayed not much
above a week in that Port (which is a weak one, as the English and Hollanders
taking of it can witness) but presently we thought of returning back to
Guatemala by land through the country of Comayagua, commonly called Honduras.
This is a woody and mountainous country, very bad and inconvenient for
Travelers, and besides very poor; there the commodities are Hides, Canna
fistula, and Zarzaparilla, and such want of bread, that about Truxillo they
make use of what they call Cassave, which is a dry root, that being eaten dry
does choke, and therefore is soaked in broth, water, wine or Chocolatte, that
so it may go down. Within the Country, and especially about the City of
Comayagua (which is a Bishops seat, though a small place of some five hundred
inhabitants at the most) there is more store of Maiz by reason of some Indians,
which are gathered to Towns, few and small. I found this Country one of the
poorest in all America. The chief place in it for health and good living is the
valley which is called Gracias a Dios, there are some rich farms of Cattle and
Wheat; but because it lies as near to the Country of Guatemala as to
Comayagua, and on this side the ways are better then on that, therefore more
of that Wheat is transported to Guatemala and to the Towns about it, then to
Comayagua or Truxillo. From Truxillo to Guatemala there are between fourscore
and a hundred leagues, which we traveled by land, not wanting in a barren
Country neither guides nor provision, for the poor Indians thought neither
their personal attendance, nor any thing that they enjoyed too good for us.

Thus we came again to Guatemala, and were by the Friars joyfully entertained,
and by the President highly rewarded, and by the City called true Apostles,
because we had ventured our lives for the discovery of Heathens, and opened a
way for their conversion, and found out the chief place of their residence, and
sent before us those children to the City, who witnessed with being in the
Cloister our pains and endeavors. Moran was so puffed up with the Presidents
favor, and the popular applause, that he resolved in Guatemala to venture
again his life, and, according to that message which he had sent before to the
Heathen Indians, to enter amongst them in a peaceable way with half a dozen
Indians. He would fain have had me gone with him; but I considered the
hardness of the journey, which I thought I should not be able to perform on
foot; and also I feared that the Barbarians might mutiny against us for those
children which we had brought; and lasty I liked not the Country, which seemed
poor and not for my purpose, to get means sufficient to bring me home to
England, which was the chiefest thought and desire of my heart for the
satisfaction of my conscience, which I found still unquiet. Wherefore I
resolved to forsake the company of my friend Moran, and to desist from new
discoveries of Heathens* and such difficult undertakings, which might endanger
my health and life, and at last bring no profit, but only a little vain glory,
fame and credit in that Country. I thought I might better employ my time, if I
learned some Indian tongue nearer to Guatemala, where I considered the riches
of the Towns, the readiness of the Indians, and their willingness to further
their Priests wants; and lastly, their ignorance in some points of Religion,
which I thought I might help and clear with some sound doctrine, and with
preaching Christ crucified unto them, and bringing them unto that rock of
eternal bliss and salvation. I trusted in my friends so much, that I knew it
would not be hard for me to take my choice of any place about Guatemala; from
whence I might facilitate my return to England, and write to Spain, and have
every year an answer easier then any where else* I opened my mind unto the
Provincial (who was then at Guatemala) and he presently and willingly
condescended to my request, and counseled me to learn the Poconchi language,
(whereof I had already got some grounds in the Vera Paz) which is most used
about Guatemala, and also is much practiced in Vera Paz, and in the Country of
San Salvador. He promised to send me to the Town of Petapa, to learn there the
language, with a special friend of his named Friar Peter Molina, who was very
old, and wanted the help and company of some younger person to ease him in the
charge that lay upon him, of so great a Town* and many Travelers that passed
that way. The Provincial as if he had known my mind, pitched upon my very
hearts desire; and thus two weeks before Midsummer day I departed from
Guatemala to Petapa, which is six leagues from thence, and there settled my
self to learn that Indian tongue. The Friars of those parts that are any way
skilful in the Indian languages, have composed Grammars and Dictionaries for
the better furthering of others who may supply their places after their
decease; but whilst they live are unwilling to teach the languages unto others,
lest their scholars should after a good and well grounded knowledge of the
tongues, supplant their own Masters, and be means of taking from them that
great profit which they have by living as Curates in the Indian Towns. Yet
this old Molina considering himself in years, and for his good friends sake
the Provincial, was not unwilling to accept of my company, and to impart unto
me what knowledge he had got by many years practice of the Poconchi tongue. He
gave me therefore a short abstract of all the rudiments belonging unto it,
which did consist chiefly of declining Nounes, and conjugating Verbs, (which I
easily learned in the first fortnight that I had been with him) and then a
Dictionary of Indian words, which was all the rest of my study to get without
book, until I was able of my self to preach unto the Indians, which with much
easiness I obtained by discoursing and conferring with them, what with my
private study I had learned.

After the first six weeks Molina writ down for me in the tongue a short
exhortation, which he expounded to me, and wished me to learn it without
book, which I preached publicly upon the feast of St. James. After this he
gave me another short exhortation in Spanish, to be preached upon the fifteenth
of August, which he made me translate into the Indian tongue, and he corrected
in it what he found amiss, wherewith I was a little more emboldened, and
feared not to show my self in public to the Indians. This practice I
continued three or four times until Michaelmas, preaching what with his help I
had translated out of Spanish, until I was able to talk with the Indians
alone, and to make mine own Sermons. After Michaelmas Molina being not a little
vain glorious of what he had done with me, in perfecting me in an unknown
tongue in so short a space, which was very little above one quarter of the
year, writ unto the Provincial acquainting him of what pains he had taken
with me, and of the good success of his endeavors, assuring him that I was
now fit to take a charge of Indians upon me, and to preach alone, further
desiring him that he would bestow upon me some Indian Town and Benefics, where
I might by constant preaching practice and further that which with so much
facility I had learned. The Provincial (who had always been my friend) needed
not spurs to stir him up to show more and more his love and kindness unto me;
but immediately sent me order to go unto the two Towns of Mixco and Pinala,
and to take charge of the Indians in them, and to give quarterly an account of
what I received thence unto the Cloister of Guatemala, unto which all that
valley did appertain. All the Indian Towns and the Friars that live in them
are subordinate unto some Cloister; and the Friars are called by their
Superiors to give up for the Cloisters use what moneys they have spared, after
their own and their servants lawful maintenanc^. Which Order yet in Peru is
not observed, for there the Frier^ who (...) once beneficed in Indian Town^,
depend not upon any Cloist^, but keep all that they get for themselves, and so
receive not from their Cloisters any clothing* or help for their provision,
neither give they any account to their Superiors, but keep, clothe and
maintain themselves, with what offerings and other duties fall unto them from
the Indians* which is the cause that the Friars of Peru are the richest in all
the India's, and live not like Friars but rather like Lords, and game and Dice
publicly without control. But the Friars of Guatemala, Guaxaca, and Mexico,
though they have enough and more then is well suitable to their vow and
profession of poverty, yet they enjoy not the liberty of the Peruan Friars in
their Indian Benefices; for what is over and above their expenses, they give to
their Superiors, and from them they receive every month a jar of wine, of an
Arrobe and a half, and every year a new habit with other clothing. Yet with
what I have said I must not excuse the Friars of Guatemala from liberty, and
the enjoyment of wealth and riches; for they also game and sport, and spend,
and fill their bags, and where in their accounts and reckonings to the
Cloisters they might well give up in a year five hundred Crowns besides their
own expvnces, they give up per adventure three hundred, and usurp the rest for
themselves, and their vain and idle uses; and trade and traffic under hand
with Merchants against their vow of poverty.

With this subordination therefore (which I have showed) unto the Prior and
Cloister of Guatemala, was I sent to preach unto the Indians of Mixco and
Pinola, from whence for my sake was removed an old Friar of almost fourscore
years of age, and called to his Cloister to rest, who was notable to perform
the charge which lay upon him of two Towns, three leagues distant one from
another. The settled means for maintenance which I enjoyed in these Towns, and
the common offerings and duties which I received from the Indians was this. In
Mixco I was allowed every month twenty Crowns, and in Pinola fifteen, which
was punctually paid* by the Alcaldes and Regidores, Majors and Jurates, before
the end of the month; for which payment, the Towns sowed a common piece of
land with Wheat or Maiz, and kept their book of accounts, wherein they set
down what crops they yearly received, what moneys they took in for the sale
of their Corn, and in the same book I was to write down what every month I
received from them; which book at the years end they were to present to be
examined by some officer appointed thereunto by the Court of Guatemala. Besides
this monthly allowance, I had from the Sodalities of the souls in Purgatory
every week in each Town two Crowns for a Mass; every month two Crowns in
Pinola upon the first sunday of the month from the Sodalitie of the Rosary;
and in Mixco likewise every month from three Sodalities of the Rosary of the
Virgin Mary, which were there belonging unto the Indians, the Spaniards, and
the Black-mores, two Crowns a piece. Further from two more Sodalities
belonging to the Vera Cruz, or the Cross of Christ, every month two Crowns a
piece. And in Mixco from a Sodality of the Spaniards belonging to St. Nicolas
de Tolentino, two Crowns every month. And from a Sodality of St. Blas in Pinola
every month two more Crowns; and finally in Mizco from a Sodality entitled
of St. Iacinthe every month yet two Crowns; besides some offerings of either
money, fowls, or candles, upon those days whereon these Masses were sung; all
which amounted to threescore and nine Crowns a month, which was surely settled
and paid before the end of the month. Besides from what I have formerly said
of the Saints statues which do belong unto the Churches, and do there
constantly bring both money, fowls, candles, and other offerings upon their
day, unto the Priest, the y^erly revenues which I had in those two Towns will
appear not to have been small; for in Mixco there were in my time eighteen
Saints Images, and twenty in Pinola; which brought unto me upon their day four
Crowns a piece for Mass and Sermon, and procession, besides fowls, Turkeys
and Cacao, and the offerings before the Saints, which commonly might be worth
at least three Crowns upon every Saints day, which yearly amounted to at least
two hundred, threescore and six Crowns. Besides the Sodalities of the Rosary
of the Virgin, (which as I have before said were four, three in Mixco, and one
in Pinola) upon five several feasts of the year (which are most observed by
the Church of Rome) brought unto me four Crowns, two for the days Mass, and
two for a Mass the day following, which they call the Anniversarie for the
dead, who had belonged unto those Sodalities, which besides those days
offerings (which sometimes were more, sometimes less) and the Indians presents
of fowls and Cacao, made up yearly fourscore Crowns more. Besides this, the
two Sodalities of the Vera Cruz upon two feasts of the Cross; the one upon the
fourteenth of September, the other upon the third of May, brought four Crowns
a piece for the Mass of the day, and the Anniversary Mass following, and upon
every Friday in Lent two Crowns, which in the whole year came to four and
forty Crowns; all which above reckoned, was as a sure rent in those two
Towns. But, should I spend time to reckon up what besides did acccidentally
fall, would be tedious. The Christmas offerings in both those two Towns, were
worth to me when I lived there at least forty Crowns. Thursday and Friday
offerings before Easter day were about a hundred Crowns; all Souls day
offerings commonly worth fourscore Crowns; and Candlemas day offerings
commonly forty more. Besides what was offered upon the Feast of each Town by
all the Country which came in, which in Mixco one year was worth unto me in
Candles and money fourscore Crowns, and in Pinola (as I reckoned it) fifty
more. The Communicants (every one giving a Riall) might make up in both Towns
at least a thousand Rials; and the Confessions in Lent at least a thousand
more, besides other offerings of Eggs, Honey, Cacao, Fowls and Fruits. Every
Christening brought two Rials, every Marriage two Crowns, every ones death two
Crowns more at least; and some in my time dyed, who would leave ten or twelve
Crowns for five or six Masses to be sung for their souls.

Thus are those fools taught that by the Priests singing their souls are
delivered from weeping, and from the fire and torments of Purgatory; and thus
by singing all the year do those Friars charm from the poor Indians and
their Sodalities and Saints an infinite treasure wherewith they enrich
themselves and their Cloisters; as may be gathered from what I have noted by
my own experience in those two Towns of Mixco and Pinola, (which were far
inferior yet to Petapa and Amatitlan in the same Valley, and not to be
compared in offerings and other Church duties to many other Towns about that
Country) which yet yielded unto me with the offerings cast into the Chests
which stood in the Churches for the souls of Purgatory, and with what the
Indians offered when they came to speak unto me (for they never visit the
Priest with empty hands) and with what other Mass stipends did casually come
in, the sum of at least two thousand Crowns of Spanish money, which might
yearly mount to five hundred English pounds. I thought this Benefice might be
a fitter place for me to live in, then in the Cloister of Guatemala, wearying
out my brains with points of false grounded Divinity for to get only the
applause of the Scholars of the University, and now and then some small profit;
which I thought I might look after as well as the rest of my profession, nay
with more reason, for that I intended to return to England, and I knew I should
have little help for so long a journey in leaving there my friends, if so be
that I made not my money my best friend to assist me by Sea and Land. My first
endeavor was to certify my self from the Book of Receipts and Accounts in
the Cloister of Guatemala, what reckonings my Predecessor and others before him
had given up to the Cloister yearly from Mixco and Pinola, that I might
regulate my self and my expenses so, as to be able to live with credit, and to
get thanks from the Cloister by giving more then any before me had given. I
found that four hundred crowns had been the most that my old Predecessor had
given yearly in his Accounts; and that before him little more was usually given
from those two Towns; Whereupon I took occasion once in discourse with the
Prior of Guatemala to ask what he would willingly expect from me yearly
whilst I lived in those two Towns; to which he replied that if I upheld for my
part the Cloisters usual and yearly Revenues, giving what my Predecessor had
given, he would thank me, and expect no more from me, and that the rest that
befell me in those Towns, I might spend it in Books, Pictures, Chocolattee,
Mules, and Servants; to which I made reply, that I thought I could live in that
Benefice creditably enough, and yet give from it more to the Cloister then ever
any other before me had given, and that I would forfeit my continuing there if
I gave not to the Cloister every year four hundred and fifty Crowns. The Prior
thanked me heartily for it, and told me I should not want for wine, (wishing
me to send for it every month) nor for clothing, which he would every year
once bestow upon me. This I thought would save a great part of my charges, and
that I was well provided for as long as I lived in the India's. And here I
desire, that England may take notice how a Friar that has professed to be a
Mendicant, being beneficed in America, may live with four hundred pounds a
year clear, and some with much more, with most of his clothing given him
besides, and the most charge of his wine supplied, with the abundance of
Fowls, which cost him nothing, and with such plenty of Beef, as yields him
thirteen pound for three pence? Surely well may he game, buy good Mules,
furnish his chamber with hangings, and rich pictures, and Cabinets, yea and
fill them with Spanish Pistols, and pieces of eight, and after all trade in the
Court of Madrid for a Mitre and fat Bishopric, which commonly is the end of
those proud worldly and lazy Lubbars.

After I was once settled in these my two Towns, my first care was to provide
my self of a good mule, which might soon and easily carry me (as often as
occasion called) from the one Town to the other. I soon found out one, which
cost me fourscore Crowns, which served my turn very well, to ride speedily
the nine miles cross the Valley, which were between the two Towns. Though my
chief study here was to perfect my self in the Indian tongue, that I might the
better preach unto them, and be well understood; yet I omitted not to search
out the Scriptures daily, and to addict my self unto the Word of God, which I
knew would profit me more then all those riches and pleasures of Egypt, which
for a while I saw I must enjoy, till my ten years were fully expired, and
License from Rome or Spain granted for me to return to England, which I began
speedily to solicit by means of one Captain I^dro de Zepeda, a Sevill
Merchant and Master of one of the Ships, which came that first year that I was
settled in Mixco with Merchandise for Guatemala; By this Captain (who passed
often through the Valley) I writ unto my friends in Spain and had answers,
though at first to little purpose, which did not a little increase the troubles
of my Conscience, which were great, and such where of the wise man said, A
wounded Conscience who can bear? My friendship with this Captain Zepeda was
such, that I broke my mind unto him, desiring him to carry me in his Ship to
Spain; which he refused to do, telling me the danger he might be in, if
complaint should be made to the President of Guatemala, and wishing me to
continue where I was, and to store my self with money that I might return with
License and credit. I resolved therefore with David in the 16 Psalm. and the ^.
Unto set the Lord always before me, and to choose him for my only comfort,
and to rely upon his providence who I knew only could order things for my
good, and could from America bring me home to the House of Salvation, and to
the household of Faith; from which I considered my self an exile, and far
banished. In the mean time I lived five full years in the two Towns of Mixco
and Pinola. Where I had more occasion to get wealth and money, then ever any
that lived there before me; for the first year of my abiding there it pleased
God to send one of the plagues of Egypt to that Country, which was of Locusts,
which I had never seen till then. They were after the manner of our
Grasshoppers, but somewhat bigger, which did fly about in number so thick and
infinite that they did truly cover the face of the Sun and hinder the shining
forth of the beams of that bright planet. Where they lighted either upon trees
or standing Corn, there nothing was expected but ruin, destruction and
barrenness; for the corn they devoured, the leaves and fruits of trees they
eat and consumed, and hung so thick upon the branches, that with their weight
they tore them from the body. The high ways were so covered with them that
they startled the traveling Mules with their fluttering about their head and
feet; my eyes were often struck with their wings as I rid along, and much a do
I had to see my way, what with a Montero where with I was saine to cover my
face, what with the flight of them which were still before my eyes.

The Farmers toward the South Sea Coast, cried out for that their Indigo which
was then in grass, was like to be eaten up* from the Ingenio's of Sugar, the
like moan was made, that the young and under Sugar Canes would be destroyed;
but above all grievous was the ^ry of the husbandmen of the Valley where I
lived, who feared that their Corn would in one night be swallowed up by that
devouring Legion. The care of the Magistrate was that the Towns of Indians
should all go out into the fields with Trumpets, and what other instruments
they had to make a noise, and so to affright them from those places which were
most considerable and profitable to the Commonwealth; and strange it was to
see how the loud noise of the Indians and sounding of the Trumpets, defended
some fields from the fear and danger of them. Where they lighted in the
Mountains and High ways, there they left behind them their young ones, which
were found creeping upon the ground ready to threate^ with a second years
plagues if not prevented; wherefore all the Towns were called with Spades,
Mattocks and Shovels to dig long Trenches and therein to bury all the young
ones.

Thus with much trouble to the poor Indians, and their great pains (yet after
much hurt and loss in many places) was that flying Pestilence chased away out
of the Country to the South Sea, where it was thought to be consumed by the
Ocean, and to have found a grave in the waters, whilst the young ones found it
in the Land. Yet they were not all so burled, but that shortly some appeared,
which not being so many in number as before were with the former diligence soon
overcome. But whilst all this fear was, these outcries were made by the
Country and this diligence performed by the Indians, the Priests got well by
it; for every where Processions were made, and Masses sung for the averting of
that Plague. In Mixco most of the idols were carried to the field, especially
the pictures of our Lady, and that of St. Nicolas Tolentine, in whose name the
Church of Rome does use to bless little Breads and Wafers with the Saint
stamped upon them; which they think are able to defend them from Agues, Plague,
Pestilence, Contagion, or any other great and imminent danger. There was scarce
any Spanish Husbandman who in this occasion came not from the Valley to the
Town of Mixco with his offering to this Saint, and who made not a vow to have a
Mass sung unto Saint Nicolas* they all brought breads to be blessed, and
carried them back to their Farms, some casting them into their Corn, some
burying them in their hedges and fences, strongly trusting in Saint Nicolus,
that his bread would have power to keep the Locust out of their fields; and so
at the last those simple, ignorant, and blinded souls, when they saw the
Locusts departed and their Corn safe, cried out to our Lady some, others to
Saint Nicolas, Magro, a Miracle, judging the Saint worthy of praise more then
God, and performing to him their vows of Masses, which in their fear and
trouble they had vowed, by which erroneous and idolatrous devotion of theirs I
got that year many more Crowns then what before I have numbered from the
Sodalities. The next year following, all that country was generally infected
with a kind of contagious sickness, almost as infectious as the Plague, which
they call Tabardillo, and was a Fever in the very inward parts and bowels,
which scarce continued to the seventh day, but commonly took them away from
the world to a grave the the third or fifth day. The filthy smell and stench
which came from them, which lay sick of this disease was enough to infect the
rest of the house, and all that came to see them; It rotted their very mouths
and tongues, and made them as black as a coal before they died. Very few
Spaniards were infected with this Contagion; but the Indians generally were
taken with it. It was reported to have begun about Mexico, and to have spread
from Town to Town, till it came to Guatemala, and went on forwards; and so
likewise did the Locusts the year before, marching as it were from Mexico over
all the Country. I visited many that died of this infection, using no other
Antidote against it, save only a handkerchief dipped in Vinegar to smell unto,
and I thank God I escaped where many dyed. In Mixco, I buried ninety young and
old, and in Pinola above an hundred; and for all these that were eight year
old, or upwards, I received two Crowns for a Mass for their souls delivery
out of Purgatory. See good Reader, whether the conceit of Purgatory have not
been a maine policy of Rome to enrich the Priest and Clergy, with Mass
stipends from such as die, making them believe that nothing else can help
their souls if once plunged into that conceited fire; Where thou may see
that one contagious sickness in two small Towns of Indians brought unto me in
less then half a year near a hundred pounds for Masses, for almost two
hundred that died. Nay such is the greedy covetousness of those Priests, that
they will receive three or four Mass stipends for one day, making the people
believe that the same Mass may be offered up for many, and do one soul as
much good as another. Thus with the Plague of Locusts, and the contagion of
sickness, for the first two years together had I an occasion to enrich my
self, as did other Priests my neighbors. But think not that because so many
died, therefore the Towns growing less my offerings for the future were
lessened. The Encomendero's or Lords of the two Towns took care for that, who,
that they might not lose any part of that Tribute which was formerly paid unto
them, presently after the sickness was ceased, caused them to be numbered, and
(as I have in the Chapter before observed) forced to marriage all that were
twelve years and upwards of age; which also was a new stream of Crowns
flowing into my bags; for from every couple that were married I had also two
Crowns besides other offerings, and in both the Towns, I married in that
occasion above fourscore Couple. Truly by all this, I thank the Lord, I was
more strengthened in my conceit against the Church of Rome, and not with that
greediness of that Lucre intised to continue in it, though I found the
preferments there far greater then any might be in the Church of England,
where I knew nothing was to be got with singing, or hudling over a Mass; But
yet though for the present my profit was great, my eyes were open to see the
errors whereby that profit came so plentifully to me, and to all that crew of
Idolatrous Priests: The judgments ceased not here in that Country in my time;
but after this contagion there was such an Inundation of rain that the
husbandmen feared again the loss of all their Corn. At noonetime the dark
clouds for a month together began to thicken and cover the face of the heavens,
pouring down such stormy showers as swept away much Corn, and many poor
Cottages of Indians; besides the rain, the fiery thunder bolts breaking
through the clouds threatened a doleful judgment to all the Country. In the
Valley of Mixco two riding together were stricken dead from their Mules, the
Chapel of our Lady of Car^al in the same valley was burnt to the ground, and
likewise two houses at the river of Vacas. In Petapa another flesh of
lightning, or thunderbolt fell into the Church upon the high Altar, cracking
the walls in many places, running from Altar to Altar, defacing all the gold,
and leaving a print and stamp where it had gone without any more hurt. In the
Cloister of the Franciscans in Guatemala, a Friar sleeping upon his bed after
dinner, was stricken dead, his body being left all black as if it had been
burnt with fire, and yet no sign of any wound about him. Many accidents
happened that year which was 1632. all about the Country. But my self was by
the safe protection of the Almighty wonderfully saved; for being on a Saturday
at night in Mixco trembling and ^earing, and yet trusting in my God, and
praying unto him in my chamber, one flash of lightning or thunderbolt fell
close to the Church wall to which my chamber joined, and killed two Calves,
which were tied to a post in a yard, to be slaughtered the next morning. The
lightning was so near and terrible that it seemed to have fired all my house,
and struck me down unto the ground, where I lay as dead for a great while;
when I came again to my self, I heard many Indians about my house, who were
come to see if either it or the Church were set on fire. This stormy season
brought me also much profit, for (as formerly) the Spaniards of the valley and
the Indians betook themselves to their Idol Saints carrying them about in
procession, which was not done without money, which they call their alms unto
their Saints, that they may the better be heard and entreated by them.

The summer following there was more then the ordinary earthquakes, which were
so great that year in the Kingdom of Peru, that a whole City called Truxillo
was swallowed up by the earth which opened it self, and almost all the people
were lost, whilst they were at Church worshipping and praying unto their Saints.
The hu^t they did about Guatemala was not so much as in other places, only some
few mud walls were shaken down, and some Churches cracked; which made the
people fear and betake themselves again to their Saints, and empty their purses
before them for Masses and processions, lest the danger should prove as great,
as was that of the great earthquake which happened before my coming into that
Country. These earthquakes when they begin are more often, then long, for they
last but for a while, stirring the earth with three motions, first on the one
side, then on the other, and with the third motion they seem to set it right
again. If they should continue, they would doubtless hurl down to the
ground any steeple or building though never so great, and strong. Yet at this
time in Mixco some were so violent, that they made the steeple be^d so much
that they made the bells sound. I was so used unto them that many times in my
bed I would not stir for them. Yet this year they brought me to such a fear,
that had not the Lord been a present refuge to me in time of trouble I had
utterly been undone. For being one morning in my chamber studying, so great and
sudden was an earthquake, that it made me run from my table to a window,
fearing that before I could get down the stairs, the whole house might fall
upon my head, the window was in a thick wall vaulted upwards like an ^ch.
(which the Spaniards hold to be the safest place if a house should fall) where
I expected nothing but death; as soon as I got under it, the earthquake ceased,
though my heart c^sed not to quake with the sudden affrightment. Whilst I was
musing and thinking what to do, whether I should run down to the yard, or
continue where I was, there c^ a second shaking worse then the first. I thought
with my self if the house should fall, the Arch would not save my life, and
that I should either be stifled or thrown out of the window, which was not
very low and ne^r unto the around, but somewhat high wide open, having no
glass (...) but wooden shut^, (such as there are used) and if ^ leaped out of
the window, I might chance to break a leg, or a limb^, yet (...) my life. The
suddainn^ of the astonishment took from (...) the best and most (...)
de^eration in such a case; and in the midst of these my troubled and perplexed
thoughts a third motion came as violent as the former, wherewith I had now set
one foot in the window to leap down, had not the same Lord (to whom David said
in the 46 Ps. v. 2. Therefore will not we fear, though the earth be moved)
by his wonderful providence spoken both to me and to the moving earth, saying
as in the 10. Verse, Be still and know that am I God; for certainly had it
gone on to a fourth motion, I had by casting down my self broke either my neck,
or a leg, or some other joint. Thus was I twice saved by my good God in
Mixco, and in Pinola I was once no less in danger in losing a leg by means of
a smaller instrument then is a flea.

This Town of Pinola in the Indian language is called Panac; Pan, signifies
in, or amongst, Cac, signifies three things; for it signifies the fire, or a
fruit otherwise called guiava; or thirdly, a small vermin, commonly called by
the Spaniards, Nigua; which is common over all the India's, but more in some
places then in others. Where there are many hogs, there is usually much of this
sort of vermin. The Spaniards report that many of the Soldiers of Sir Francis
Drake died of them, when they landed about Nombre de Dios, and marched up the
high Mountains of St. Pablo toward Panama, who feeling their feet to itch,
and not knowing the cause thereof, scratched them so much, till they festred,
and at last, (if this report be true)cost them their lives. Some say, they
breed in all places, high and low, upon Tables, Beds, and upon the ground; but
experience shows the contrary, that they only breed upon the ground, for
where the houses are sluttish, and not often swept, there commonly they are
most felt; and in that they usually get into the Feet and Shoes, and seldom
into the hands or any other part of the body, argues that they breed upon the
ground. They are less then the least Flea, and can scarce be perceived, and
when they enter into the Foot, they make it burn and itch; and if then they be
looked to, they appear black, and no bigger then the point of a pin, and with
a pin may easily be taken out whole; but if part of them be left, the
smallest part will do as much harm as the whole, and will get into the flesh.
When once they are got in, they breed a little bag in the flesh, and in it a
great many Nits, which increase bigger and bigger to the bigness of a great
Pea; then they begin again to make the Foot itch, which if it be scratched,
falls to sestering, and so indangereth the whole Foot. Some hold it best to
take them out when they cause the first itching and are getting in; but this is
hard to do, because they can hardly then be perceived, and they are apt to
be broken. Therefore others commonly let them alone, until they be got into
the flesh, and have bred a bag with nit^, which like a blister shows it self
through the skin, and then with the point of a pin, they dig round about the
bag, till they can with the pins point take it out whole, if it be broken, it
comes to breed again; if it be taken out whole, then they put in a little
Ear wax, or ashes where the bag lay, and with that the hole is healed up
again in a day or two. The way to avoid this vermines entering into the foot,
is to lay both shoos and stockings, or whatsoever other clothing upon some
stool or chair high from the ground, and not to go bare* foot; which yet is
wonderful in the Indians themselves, that though they cmmonly do go
barefoot, yet they are seldom troubled with them, which is attributed to the
hardness of their skin; for certainly were they as tender footed and skinned
as are those that wear both shoos and stockins, they would be as much troubled
with them as these are. Pancac or Pinola, is much subject to this Vermin, or
Nigua, and I found it by woeful experience, for at my first coming thither not
knowing well the quality of it, I let one breed so long in my foot, and
continued scratching it, until my foot came to be so festered, that I was fain
to li^ two whole months in a Chirurgions hand; and at last through Gods great
mercy and goodness to me I lost not a Limb^t that the Providence of God may be
known to me the worst of all his Creatures, living in so far a Country from
all my friends, and from me may be related unto future Generations, before I
conclude this Chapter, I shall further show both my dangers and deliverances.
Though true it is, most of the Indians are but formally Christians, and only
outwardly appear such, but secretly are given to witchcraft and idolatry, yet
as they were under my charge, I thought by preaching Christ unto them, and by
cherishing them, and defending them from the cruelty of the Spaniards, I might
better work upon them to bring them to more knowledge of some truths, at least
concerning God and Christ. Therefore as I found them truly loving, kind and
bountiful unto me, so I endeavored in all occasions to show them love by
commiserating their sufferings, and taking their part against any Spaniard that
wronged them, and keeping constantly in my Chamber such drugs (as hot Waters,
Anniseed and wine and the like) which I knew might most please them, when they
came to see me, and most comfort them, when they were sick or grieved. This my
love and pity toward them had almost in Pinola cost me my life; For an Indian
of that Town serving a Spaniard named Francisco de Montenegro (who lived a mile
and a half from thence) was once so pitifully beaten and wounded by his
Master, for that he told him he would complain to me that he paid him not
his wages, that he was brought home to the Town, and had I not out of my
charity called for a Surgeon from Petap^ to cure him, he had certainly dyed.
I could not but complain for the poor Indian unto the President of Guatemala,
who respecting my complaint, sent for my Spaniard to the City, imprisoned him,
and kept him close until the Indian was recovered, and so with a Fine sent him
back again. In a Sermon further I pressed this home unto the neighboring
Spaniards, warning them of the wrongs and abuses which they offered unto the
poor Indians, which I told them I would put up no more then any injury done
unto my self, for that I looked upon them as Neophytes and new plants of
Christianity, who were not to be discouraged, but by all means of love
encouraged to come to Christ, withal I commanded all the Indians that had any
wrong done unto them, to come unto me, assuring them that I would make such a
complaint for them as should be heard, as they might perceive I had lately
done to some purpose. This Sermon stuck so in Mon^gro his stomach, that (as I
was informed) he made an Oath, that he would procure my death. Though it was
told me; yet I could hardly believe it, judging it to be more a bravery and a
vain boasting of a Spaniard, then any thing else; Yet by the advice of some
friends I was counseled to look to my self, which yet I slighted, until one
day the boys and Indians that served in my house came running to my chamber
door, wishing me to look to my self, and not to come out, for that
Montenegroe was come into my Yard with a naked sword to kill me. I charged
them from within to call the Officers of the Town to aid and assist me; but
in the mean while my fu^ Spaniard perceiving himself discovered left the Town.
With this I thought of seruring of my self better, and called for a Blackmore
Miguel Dalva a very stou^ and lusty fellow who lived from me half a mile, to
be about me until I could discover more of Montenegroes designs and
malicious intents. The next Sabbath Day in the morning being to ride to the
Town of Mi^, I carried my Blackmore, and half a Black^ore of Indians in my
company, and going through a little wood in the midst of the Valley* there I
found my enemy waiting for me, who seeing the train I brought, d^t do
nothing, but gave m^e spightfull languages, telling me he hoped that ^e
should find me alone some time or other. With this I thought fit to delay no
longer my second complaint to the President against him, who as before heard
me willingly, and after a months imprisonment banished Montenegro thirty
leagues frof the Valley. And not only from Spaniards was I in danger for the
Indians sake while I lived in those Towns; but also from some Indians
themselves, (who were false in Religion) I did undergo great perils, and yet
was still delivered.

In Pinola there were some, who were much given to witchcraft, and by the power
of the Devil did act strange things. Amongst the rest there was one old woman
named M^rtha de C^rillo, who had been by some of the Town formerly accused for
bewitching many; but the Spanish Justices quitted her, finding no sure evidence
against her; with this she grew worse and worse, and did much harm. When I was
there, two or threedyed, withering away, declaring at their death that this
C^rrillo ha^ killed them, and that they saw her often about their beds,
threatening them with a frowning and angry look. The Indian^ for fear of her
durst not complain against her, no^ meddle with her; whereupon I sent word unto
Don (...) de (...) the Lord of the Town, that if he took^ order with her, she
would destroy his Town. He hearing of it, got for me ^ Commission from the
Bishop and another officer of the Inqui^on to make deligent and private inquiry
after her life and actions; which I did, and found among the Indian many and
griev^ complaints against her, most of the town affirming that certainly she
was a (...), and that before her former (...) ^ee was w^nt whither soever s^ee
w^nt about the Town to go with a D^ following her, which when she came to the
Church, would stay at the door ^ill she came out again, and (...) would (...)
with ^r, which Du^k they imagined was her beloved D^vill, and (...) Spirit, for
that the^ had often set dogs at her and they would not meddle with her, but
rather run away from her. This Duck never appeared more with her, since she was
formerly accused before the Justice, which was thought to be her policy, that
she might be no more suspected thereby. This old woman was a widow, and of the
poorest of the Town in outward show, and yet she always had store of money,
which none could tell which way she might come by it. Whilst I was thus taking
privy information against her (it being the time of Lent, when all the Town
came to Confession)she among the rest came to the Church to confess her sins,
and brought me the best present and offering of all the Town, for whereas a
Riall is common she brought me four, and besides a Turkey, eggs, fish, and a
little bottle of honey. She thought thereby to get with me a better opinion then
I had of her from the whole Town; I accepted of her great offering, and heard
her Confession, which was of nothing but trifles, which could scarce be judged
sinful actions. I examined her very close of what was the common judgment of
all the Indians, and especially of those who dying had declared to my self at
their death that she had bewitched them, and before their sickness had
threatened them, and in their sickness appeared threatening them with death about
their beds, none but they themselves seeing her. To which she replied weeping,
that she was wronged; I asked her, how she being a poor widow without any sons
to help her, without any means of livelihood had so much money, as to give me
more then the richest of the Town, how she came by that fish, Turkey, and honey,
having none of this of her own about her house? to which she replied, that God
loved her and gave her all these things, and that with her money she had bought
the rest. I asked her of whom? she answered that out of the Town she had them.
I persuaded her much to repentance, and to forsake the Devil and all
fellowship with him; but her words and answers were of a Saintly and holy
woman; and she earnestly desired me to give her the Communion with the rest
that were to receive the next day. Which I told her I durst not do, using
Christ's words, Give not the childrens bread unto dogs, nor cast your pearls
unto swine; and that it would be a great scandal to give the Communion unto
her, who was suspected generally, and had been accused for a witch. This she
took very ill telling me that she had many years received the Communion, and
now in her old age it grieved her to be deprived of it; her tears were many,
yet I could not be moved with them, but resolutely denied her the Communion,
and so dismissed her. At noone when I had done my work in the Church, I bad my
servants go to gather up the offerings, and gave order to have the fish
dressed for my dinner which she had brought; but no sooner was it carried into
the Kitchen, when the Cook looking on it found it full of maggots, and
stinking, so that I was forced to hurl it away. With that I began to suspect
my old witch, and went to look on her honey, and pouring it out into a dish, I
found it full of worms, her eggs I could not know from others, there being near
a hundred offered that day; but after as I used them, we found some rotten,
some with dead chickens within; the next morning the Turkey was found dead; as
for her four Rials, I could not perceive whether she had bewitched them out of
my pocket, for that I had put them with many other, which that day had been
given me, yet as far as I could, I called to memory who and what had been given
me, and in my judgment and reckoning I verily thought that I missed four
Rials. At night when my servants the Indians were gone to bed, I sat up late
in my chamber betaking my self to my books and study, for I was the next
morning to make an exhortation to those that received the Communion. After I
had studied a while, it being between ten and eleven of the clock, on a sudden
the chief door in the hall (wherein a lower room was my chamber, and te
servants, and three other doors) flew open, and I heard one come in, and for a
while walk about; then was another door opened which went into a little room;
where my saddles were laid^; with this I thought it might be the Black-more
Miguel Dalva, who would often come late to my house to lodge there, especially
since my fearof Montenegroe, and I conjectured that he was laying up his
saddle, I called unto him by his name two or three times from within my
chamber, but no answer was made; but suddenly another door that went out to a
garden flew also open, wherewith I began within to fear, my joints trembled,
my hair stood up, I would have called out to the servants, and my voice was as
it were stopped with the sudden affrightment, I began to think of the witch,
and putmy trust in God against her, and necouraged my self and voice calling
out to the servants, and knocking with a cane at my door within that they
might hear me, for I durst not open it and go out. With the noise which I
made the servants awaked and came out to my chamber door; then I opened it,
and asked them if they had not heard some body in the hall, and all the doors
opened. They said they were asleep, and heard nothing, only one boy said he
heard all, and related unto me the same that I had heard. I took my candle
then in my hand and went out into the hall with them to view the doors, and I
found them all shut, as the servants said they had left them. Then I perceived
that the witch would have affrighted me, but had no power to do me any harm;
I made two of the servants lie in my chamber, and went to bed. In the morning
early I sent for my Fiscal the Clerk of the Church, and told him what had
happened that night; he smiled upon me, and told me it was the widow Carillo,
who had often played such tricks in the Town with those that had offended her,
and therefore he had the night before come unto me from her desiring me to give
her the Communion, left she should do me some hurt, which I denied unto him,
as I had done to her self. The Clerk bad me be of good cheer, for he knew she
had no power over me to do me any hurt. After the Communion that day some of
the chief Indians came unto me, and told me that old Carillo had boasted that
she would play me some trick or other, because I would not give her the
Communion. But I to rid the Town of such a limb of Satan, sent her to
Guatemala, with all the evidences and witnesses which I had found against her
unto the President and Bishop, who commanded her to be put in prison, where she
died within two months.

Many more Indians there were in that Town, who were said in my time to do
very strange things. One called John Gonzalez was reported to change himself
into the shape of a Lion, and in that shape was one day shot in the nose by a
poor harmless Spaniard who chiefly got his living by going about the woods
and mountains, and shooting at wild Deer and other beasts to make money of
them. He espied one day a Lion, and having no other aim at him but his snout
behind a tree, he shot at him; the Lion run away; the same day this Gonzalez
was taken sick, I was sent for to hear his Confession, I saw his face and nose
all bruised, and asked him how it came, he told me then that he had fallen from
a tree and almost killed himself; yet afterward he accused the poor Spaniard
for shooting at him; the business was examined by a Spanish Justice, my
evidence was taken for what Gonzalez told me of his fall from a tree, the
Spaniard was put to his oath, who swear that he shot at a Lion in a thick
wood, where an Indian could scarce be thought to have any business, the tree
was found out in the wood, whereat the shot had been made and was still marked
with the shot and bullet; which Gonzalez confessed was to be the place; and was
examined how he neither fell nor was seen by the Spaniard, when he came to
seek for the Lion thinking he had killed; to which he answered that he ran
away lest the Spaniard should kill him indeed. But his answers seeming
frivolous, the Spaniards integrity being known, and the great suspicion that
was in the Town of Gonzalez his dealing with the Devil, cleared the Spaniard
from what was laid against him.

But this was nothing to what after happened to one John Gomez, the chiefest
Indian of that Town of near fourscore years of age, the Head and Ruler of the
principallest Tribe among the Indians, whose advise and counsel was taken and
preferred before all the rest, who seemed to be a very godly Indian, and very
seldom missed morning and evening prayers in the Church, and had bestowed
great riches there. This Indian very suddenly was taken sick (I being then in
my other Town of Mixco) the Mayordomos, or stewards of the Sodality of the
Virgin fearing that he might die without Confession and they be child for their
negligence, at midnight called me up at Mixco, desiring me to go presently and
help John Gomtz to die, whom also they said desired much to see me and to
receive some comfort from me. I judging it a work of charity, although the time
of the night were unseasonable, and the great rain at the present might have
stopped my charity, yet I would not be hindered by either of them, and so set
forth to ride nine miles both in the dark and wet. When I came to Pinola being
through wet to the skin, I went immediately to the house of old sick Gomez, who
lay with his face all muffled up, thanked me for my pains and care I had for
his soul; he desired to confess, and by his confession and weeping evidenced
nothing but a godly life, and a willing desire to die and to be with Christ. I
comforted him and prepared him for death, and before I departed, asked him how
he felt himself; he answered that his sickness was nothing but old age, and
weakness. With this I went to my house, changed my self and lay down a while
to rest, when suddenly I was called up again to give Gomez the extreme
unction, which the Indians (as they have been ignorantly taught) will not omit
to receive before they die. As I anointed him in his nose, his lips, his eyes,
his hands and his feet, I perceived that he was swelled, and black and blew;
but made nothing of it, judging it to proceed from the sickness of his body; I
went again home being now break of the day, when after I had taken a small
nap, some Indians come to my door for to buy candles to offer up for John
Gomez his soul, whom they told me was departed, and was that day to be buried
very solemnly at Mass. I arose with drousie eyes after so unquiet a nights
rest; and walked to the Church, where I saw the grave was preparing. I met with
two or three Spaniards who lived near the Town and were come to Mass that
morning, who went in with me to my chamber, and with them I fell into discourse
about John Gomez, telling them what comfort I had received at his death, whom I
judged to have lived very holily, and doubted not of his salvation, and that
the Town would much want him, for that he was their chief guide, and leader,
ruling them with good advise and counsel. At this the Spaniards smiled one at
another, and told me I was much deceived by all the Indians, but especially by
the deceased Gomez, if I judged him to have been a Saint, and holy man. I told
them that they as enemies to the poor Indians judged still uncharitably of
them; but that I who knew very well their consciences, could judge better of
them then they. One then replied, that it seemed I little knew the truth of
John Gomez his death by the Confession which he had made unto me, and that I
seemed to be ignorant of the stir which was in the Town concerning his death.
This seemed so strange unto me, that I desired them to inform me of the truth.
Then they told me that the report went, that John Gomez was the chief wizard of
all the wizards and witches in the Town, and that commonly he was wont to be
changed into the shape of a Lion, and so to walk about the mountains. That he
was ever a deadly enemy to one Sebastian Lopez an ancient Indian, and head of
another Tribe; and that both of them two days before had met in the mountain,
Gomez in the shape of a Lion, and Lopez in the shape of a Tigre, and that they
fought most cruelly, till Gomez (who was the older, and weaker) was tired, much
bit and bruised; and died of it. And further that I might be assured of this
truth, they told me that Lopez was in prison for it, and the two Tribes
striving about it; and that the Tribe and kindred of Gomez demanded from Lopez
and his Tribe and kindred satisfaction, and a great sum of money, or else did
threaten to make the case known unto the Spanish power and authority, which yet
they were unwilling to do if they could agree and smother it up among
themselves, that they might not bring an aspersion upon their whole Town. This
seemed very strange unto me, and I could not resolve what to believe, and
thought I would never more believe an Indian, if I found John Gomez to have so
much dissembled and deceived me. I took my leave of the Spaniards and went my
self to the prison, where I found Lopez with fetters. I called one of the
officers of the Town, who was Alguazil Mayor, and my great friend, unto my
house, and privately examined him why Lopez was kept so clos^prisoner; he was
loath to tell me fearing the rest of the Indians, and hoping the business would
be taken and agreed by the two Tribes, and not noised about the Country which
at that very instant the two Alcaldes and Regidores, Majors and Jurates, with
the chief of both Tribes were sitting about in the Towne-house all that
morning. But I seeing the officer so timorous, was more desirous to know
something, and pressed more upon him for the truth giving him an inkling of
what I had heard from the Spaniards before. To which he answered that if they
could agree amongst themselves, they feared no ill report from the Spaniards
against their Town; I told him I must know what they were agreeing upon
amongst themselves so closely in the Towne-house. He told me, if I would
promise him to say nothing of, him (for he feared the whole Town if they
should know he had revealed any thing unto me) he would tell me the truth. With
this I comforted him, and gave him a cup of wine, and encouraged him,
warranting him that no harm should come unto him for what he told me. Then he
related the business unto me as the Spaniards had done, and told me that he
thought the Tribes amongst themselves would not agree, for that some of Gomez
his friends hated Lopez and all such a^ were so familiar with the Devil, and
cared not if Gomez his dissembling life were l^id open to the world; but others
he said, who were as bad as Lopez and Gomez, would have it kept close, lest
they and all the witches and Wizards of the Town should be discovered. This
struck me to the very heart, to think that I should live among such people,
whom I saw were spending all they could get by their work and labor upon the
Church, Saints and in offerings, and yet were so privy to the counsels of
Satan; it grieved me that the Word I preached unto them, did no more good, and
I resolved from that time forward to spend most of my endeavors against Satan's
subtility, and to show them more then I had done, the great danger of their
souls who had made any compact with the Devil, that I might make them abandon
and abjure his works, and close with Christ by Faith. I dismissed the Indian,
and went to the Church, to see if the people were come to Mass; I found there
no body but only two who were making Gomez his Grave. I went back to my
Chamber, troubled much within my self, whether I should allow him a Christian
Burial, who had lived and died so wickedly, as I had been informed. Yet I
thought I was not bound to believe one Indian against him, nor the Spaniards,
whom I supposed spoke but by hearsay. Whilst I was thus musing, there came unto
me at least twenty of the chiefest of the Town with the two Majors, Jurates,
and all the Officers of Justice, who desired me to forbear that day the
burying of John Gomez, for that they had resolved to call a Crown Officer to
view his Corpse and examine his death, lest they all should be troubled for
him, and he again unburied. I made as if I knew nothing, but inquired of them
the reason; then they related all unto me, and told me how there were witnesses
in the Town who saw a Lion and a Tiger fighting, and presently lost the sight
of the beasts, and saw John Gomez, and Sebastian Lopez, much about the same
place parting one from another; and that immediately John Gomez came home
bruised to his bed, from whence he never rise more, and that he declaredupon
his death-bead unto some of his friends that Sebastian Lopez had killed him;
whereupon they had him in safe custody. Further they told me that though they
had never known so much wickedness of these two chief heads of their Town
whom they had much respected and followed, yet now upon this occasion, from the
one Tribe and the other they were certainly informed that both of them did
constantly deal with the Devil, which would be a great aspersion upon their
Town, but they for their parts abjured all such wicked ways, and prayed me not
to conceive the worse of all for a few, whom they were resolved to persecute,
and suffer not to live amongst them. I told them I much liked their good zeal,
and encouraged them as good Christians to endeavor the rooting out of Satan
from their Town, and they did very well in giving notice to Guatemala, to the
Spanish power, of this accident, and that if they had concealed it, they might
all have been punished as guilty of Gomez his death, and Agents with Satan, and
his instruments. I assured them I had no ill conceit of them, but rather
judged well of them for what they were agreed to do. The Crown Officer was
sent for who came that night and searched Gomez his body; I was present with
him, and found it all bruised, scratched, and in many places bitten and sore
wounded. Many evidences and suspicions were brought in against Lopez by the
Indians of the Town, especial by Gomez his friends, whereupon he was carried
away to Guatemala, and there again was tried by the same witnesses, and not
much denying the fact himself, was there hanged. And Gomez, though his grave
was opened in the Church, he was not buried in it, but in another made ready
for him in a Ditch.

In Mixco I found also some Indians no less dissemblers then was this Gomez,
and those of the chiefest and richest of the Town, who were four Brothers
called Fuentei, and half a score more. These were outwardly very fair tongued,
liberal, and free handed to the Church, much devoted to the Saints, great
feasters upon their day, and yet in secret great Idolaters. But it pleased God
to make me his instrument, to discover and bring to light the secrecy of their
hidden works of darkness, which it seems the privacy of a thick Wood and
Mountain had many years hid from the eyes of the World. Some of these being
one day in the company of other better Christians drinking hard of their
Chicha, boasted of their God, saying that he had preached unto them better
then I could preach, nay that he had plainly told them that they should not
believe any thing that I preached of Christ, but follow the old ways of their
Forefathers, who worshipped their Gods aright, but now by the example of the
Spaniards they were deluded, and brought to worship a false God. The other
Christians hearing of this began to wonder, and to enquire of them where that
God was, and with much ado, promising to follow their ways, and their God, got
out of them the place and Mountain where they might find him. Though this in
drunkenness were agreed upon, yet in sobernes the good Christians thought better
of what they had agreed upon, slighted what before in drinking they heard, and
yet it was not kept by them so close, but that it came to the ears of a
Spaniard in the Valley; who finding himself touched in Conscience, came to Mixco
to me, and told me what he had heard, that some Indians of that town followed
an Idol, and boasted that he had preached unto them against my Doctrine, and
for the ways of the former Heathens. I thanked God for that he was pleased to
undermine the secret works of Satan daily; and desired the Spaniard to tell me
by whom he came to know of this. He told me the Indians name from whom he had
it, and that he was afraid to discover the Indians, and to tell me of it. I
sent for the Indian before the Spaniard, who confessed unto me that he had
heard of such a thing; but knew that if he did discover the Indians, they with
the power of the Devil would do him much harm; I told him, if he were a true
Christian, he ought to fight against the Devil, and not to fear him, who
could do him no harm if God were with him, and he closed by Faith with Christ,
and that the discovery of that Idol might be a means for the converting of
the Idolaters, when they should see the small power of their false God against
the true God of the Christians. Further I told him plainly, that if he did not
tell me who the Indians were, and where their Idol was, that I would have him
to Guatemala, and there make him discover what he knew. Here the Indian began
to tremble, and told me the Fuentes had boasted of such an Idol, whom they
called their God, and gave some signs of a Fountain and of a Pine Tree at the
mouth of a Cave in such a Mountain. I asked him, if he knew the place, or
what kind of Idol it was; he told me, that he had often been in that
Mountain, where he had seen two or three springs of water, but never was in
any Cave. I asked him if he would go with me, and help me to find it out,
he refused still fearing the Idolaters, and wished me not to go, for fear if
they should be there, they might kill me rather then be discovered. I
answered him that I would carry with me such a Guard as should be able to
defend me against them, and my Faith in the true living God, would secure me
against that false God. I resolved therefore with the Spaniard to go to search
out the cave the next day, and to carry with me three or four Spaniards and
my Blackmore Miguel Dalva, and that Indian. I told him I would not suffer him
to go home to his house that day, for fear he should discover in the Town
my design and purpose, and so we might be prevented by the Idolaters, who
certainly that night would take away their Idol. The Indian still refused, till
I threatened him to send for the Officers of Justice, and to secure his person;
with this he yielded, and that he might have no discourse with any body in
the Town, nor with the Servants of my house, I desired the Spaniard to take him
home to his house, and to keep him there close that day and night, promising to
be with him the next morning. I charged the Spaniard also with secrecy, and
so dismissed him with the Indian. That day I rid to Pinola for the Blackmore
Miguel Dalva, and brought him to Mixco with me, not telling him what my intent
was; I went also to four neighboring Spaniards, desiring them to be in a
readiness the next morning to go a little way with me for the service of
God, and to meet me at such ^ neighbors house, and that if they would bring
their Fowling pieces, we might chance to find some sport where we went, and
as for Provision of Wine and Meat, I would provide sufficiently. They promised
to go with me, thinking that although I told them, it was for the service of
God, my purpose only was to hunt after some wild Dear in the mountains. I
was glad they construed my action that way, and so went home, and provided that
night a good Gammon of Bacon, and some Fowls roasted, cold, and others boiled,
well peppered and salted for the next days work. Where I had appointed my
Indian to be kept, I met with the rest of my company, and from thence we went
together to the place of the Idolaters worshipping, which was some six miles
from Mixco toward the Town of St. John Sacatepeques. When we came into the
Wood we presently met with a deep Barranca, or bottom, where was a running,
which encouraged us to make there diligent search, but nothing could be found;
from thence we ascended up out of the Barranca, and found after much time
spent a spring of water, and looked carefully about it, but could find no
Cave. Thus in vain we searched till the Evening, and fearing lest we might
lose our way and our selves, if the night over took us, my friends began to
speak of returning homewards. But I considering that as yet we had not gone
over one half part of the Wood, and to go home and come again might make us
to be noted, and spoken of, we thought it our best way to take up our lodging
that night in the Wood, and in that bottom which we first searched, where was
good water for to drink Chocolatte, and warm lying under the trees, and so in
the morning to make our second search. The Company was very willing to yield
unto it, and the calm night favored our good intentions. We made a fire for
our Chocolatte, and supped exceeding well of our cold meat, and spent most part
of the night in merry discourse, having a watchful eye over our Indian, lest
he should give us the slip, and committing him to the charge of Miguel Dalva.
In the morning we prayed unto God, beseeching him to guide us that day in the
work we went about, and to discover unto us the Cave of darkness and
iniquity, where lay hid that instrument of Satan, that so by his discovery
Glory might be given unto our true God, and shame and punishment brought upon
his enemies. We entered again into the thick Wood up a steepy hill, and
having thoroughly searched all the South side of it, we went on to the North
side, where we found another deep descent, which we began to walk down
looking on every side, and not in vain; for almost half a mile from the top we
found some marks of a way that had been used and trodden, which we followed
until we came to another spring of water; we searched narrowly about it, and
found some pieces of broken earthen dishes and pots, and one piece of a chasing
dish, such as the Indians use to burn Frankincense in, in the Churches before
their Saints, we verily imagined that these were pieces of some such
instruments wherewith the idolaters performed their duty unto their Idol, and
we were the more comforted for that we knew that earthen ware had been made
in Mixco; the pine Tree which immediately we discovered confirmed our hopes.
When we came unto it we made very little more search, for near at hand was the
Cave, which was dark within, but light at the mouth, where we found more
Earthen ware, with ashes in them, which assured us of some Frankincense that
had been burned. We knew not how far the Cave might reach within, nor what
might be in it, and therefore with a flint we struck fire and lighted a
couple of candles and went in; at the entering it was broad, and went a little
forward, but when we were in, we found it turn on the left hand toward the
mountain, and not far; for within two rods we found the Idol standing upon
a low stooll covered with a linen cloth. The substance of it was wood, black
shining like Jet, as if it had been painted or smoaked, the form was of a man's
head unto the shoulders, without either Beard or Mustachoes; his look was grim
with a wrinkled forehead, and broad startling eyes. We feared not his frowning
look, but presently seized upon him; and as we lifted him up we found under
him some single Rials, which his Favorites had offered unto him; which made us
search more diligently the Cave; and it was not amiss, for we found upon the
ground more single Rials, some plantines and other fruits, wax candles half
burned, pots of Maiz, one little one of Honey, little dishes wherein
Frankincense had been burned, whereby I perceived the Idolaters and Christians
both agreed in their offerings; and had I not been informed that they called
this Idol their God, I could have blamed them no more then the rest of the
Towns who worship, kneel before and offer such offerings unto their Saints
made of Wood, and some no handsomer then was this Idol, which I thought, might
have been some beasts shape; but being the shape and form of a man, they might
have named him by the name of some Saint, and so some way have excused
themselves, which they could not do, nor would they do it, in that they
persisted in this error, that he was their God, and had spoken and preached
unto them, and being afterward asked by me, whether it were the picture of
any Saint, such as were in Mixco, and other Churches, they answered, No, but
that he was above all the Saints in the Country.

We were very joyful to see that we had not spent our time in vain, we cut
down boughs of trees, and filled the Cave with them and stopped the mouth of
it up, and came away, making the Indian that went with us carry the Idol on his
back wrapped up in a cloth, that it might not be seen or perceived as we
went. I thought it fit to delay the time till night, and then to enter into
Mixco, that the Indians might see nothing. So I stayed at one of the Spaniards
houses, till it were late, and desired him to warn from me all the Spaniards
there* abouts to be at Mixco Church the next Sabbath, (fearing lest the
Idolaters might be many, and rise up against me) that I had somewhat to say
unto them and their Blackmores concerning their Sodalities, for I would not
have them know of the Idol, till they heard of it and saw it in the Church,
l^st it should come to the Indians hearing, and so the Idolaters might absent
themselves. At night I took my Indian, and Miguel Dalva with me, and went
home, and shutting up the Idol in a chest till the next Sabbath, I dismissed
the Indian, charging him to say nothing, for he knew if he did what harm
might come unto him from the Idolaters, and I knew few words now would suffice,
for that he feared himself if it should be known that he had been with me,
I kept Miguel Dalva with me, who was desirous to see the end of the business,
and prepared my self against the next Sabbath to preach upon the 3. v. of the
20. of Exodus, Thou shall have none other Gods before me, though it were a
Text nothing belonging to the Gospel of the day, from whence commonly in the
Church of Rome, the Texts and subjects of Sermons are deducted; but I judged
that Text most seasonable for the present occasion. On the Sabbath day in the
morning, when the Pulpit was made ready by him who had care of the Church and
Altars, I caused Miguel Dalva to carry under his Cloak the Idol, and to leave
it in the Pulpit upon the the ground that it might not be seen, till such
time as I should think fit in my Sermon to produce it, and to watch about the
Church till the Congregation came in, that none might see it or take it away.
Never was there a greater resort from abroad to that Church then that day of
Spaniards and Blackmores, who by the warning I sent unto them expected some
great matter from me; and of the Town very few were absent, the Fuentes and
all the rest that were suspected to be that Idols favorites (little thinking
that their God was brought from his Cave, and now lay hid in the Pulpit to
shame them) came also that day to Church. I commanded Miguel Dalva, to be
himself near the Pulpit at Sermon time, and to warn those Spaniards that knew
the business, and some more Blackmores his friends to be also near the
Pulpit stairs.

Thus Mass being ended, I went up to preach; when I rehearsed the words of my
Text, I perceived both Spaniards and Indians began to look one upon another, as
not being used to Sermons out of the Old Testament. I went on laying open this
command of God, for having no other Gods before him, so that the Doctrine might
seem to convince all that were there present, as well Saint-worshippers, as
indeed that Idols worshippers, if the cause of my preaching upon that Subject
had not diverted their eyes from themselves to behold their own guiltiness of
Idolatry, and to look only upon those who worshipped a (...) wood for God, and
not, as they did, for a Saint (which yet in my judgment was much alike.) After
I had spoken what I thought fit concerning that horrible sin, and showed that
no creature could have the power of God (who was the Creator of all things)
neither could do good or harm without the true living Gods Commission,
especially inanimate Creatures as stocks, and stones, who by the hands and
workmanship of man might have eyes, and yet were dead Idol^, and see not, might
have ears and not hear, might have mouths, and not speak, might have hands,
and not work, nor help or defend with them such as worshipped them, and bowed
down unto them.

Thus having half finished my Sermon, I bowed my self down in the Pulpit,
and lifted up the black, grim, and staring Devil, and placed that Dagon on one
side of the Pulpit, with my eyes fixed upon some of the Fuentes and others, who
I perceived changed their color, blashed, and were sore troubled looking one
upon another, I desired the Congregation ^o behold what a God was worshipped by
some of them, and all to take notice of him, if any knew what part of the earth
was the Dominion of this God, or from whence he came. I told them that some
had boasted that this p^ce of wood had spoken, and preached against what I had
taught of Christ, and that therefore he was worshipped by them for God, and
they had offered money, honey, and of the fruits of the earth unto him, and burnt
Frankincense before him in a ^cret and hidden Cave under the earth, showing
thereby that they were ashamed to own him publicly, and that he lurking in
the darkness of the earth, showed certainly that he belonged to the Prince of
darkness. I challenged him there in public to speak (...) himself, or else
by silence to ^ame and confound all his worshippers. I showed the^ how being
but wood, he had been made and fashioned by the hands of man, and therefore
(...) but a dead idol. I spent a great deal of time arguing with him, and (...)
Satan who had used him as his instrument, daring the Devil himself to take
him from that place which I had confi^ed him to if (...) could, to show what
little power he or Satan had against the power of my faith in Christ. After
much arguing and reasoning according to the shallow capacity of the Indians
present, I told them if that their God had power to deliver him from that
execution, which I had intended against him (which was there publicly to have
him cut in pieces and burnt) they should not believe the Gospel of Jesus
Christ; but if they saw no power at all in him against me the weakest
instrument of the true living God, then I beseeched them to be converted unto
that true God who created all things, and to embrace salvation by his Son the
only Mediator and Savior Jesus Christ, and to renounce and abjure from that
time all Heat henish Idolatry of their forefathers, assuring them for what was
past I would intercede for them, and secure them from what punishment might be
inflicted upon them by the President and Bishop, and if they would come to me,
I would spend my best endeavors for the helping and furthering of them in the
way of Christianity.

And thus concluding without naming any person, I went down out of the pulpit,
and caused the Idol to be brought after me, and sending for an axe, and for two
or three great pans of coals, I commanded him to be hewn in very small
pieces* and to be cast in the fire and burned before all the people in the
midst of the Church. The Spaniards cried out joyfully Victor Victor, and others
repeated, Gloria a nostro Di^s, Glory to our God, the Idolaters held their
peace and spoke not then a word. But afterward they acted most spightfully
against me, and conspired day and night to get me at some advantage, and to
kill me. I writ to the President of Guatemala informing him of what I had done;
and to the Bishop (as an Inquisitor to whom such cases of idolatry did belong)
to be informed from him of what course I should take with the Indians who were
but in part yet discovered unto me, and those only by the relation of one
Indian. From both I received great thanks for my pains in searching the
mountain, and finding out the Idol, and for my zeal in burning of it. And as
touching the Indian Idolaters their counsel unto me was, that I should further
enquire after the rest and discover as many as I could, and endeavor to
convert them to the knowledge of the true God by fair and sweet means,
showing pity unto them for their great blindness, and promising them upon
their repentance pardon from the Inquisition, which considering them to be but
new plants uses not such rigor with them, which it uses with Spaniards if
they fall into such horrible fins. This advise I followed, and sent privately
for the Fuentes to my chamber, and told them how merciful the Inquisition was
unto them, expecting their conversion and amendment. They seemed somewhat
stubborn and angry for that I had burned that God, whom not only they, but
many others in the Town, and also in the Town of Saint John Sacatepeques did
worship. I used reasons to persuade them no honor was due unto it, as to a
God. But one of them boldly replied, that they knew that it was a p^ce of wood
and of it self could not speak, but seeing it had spoken (as they were all
witnesses) this was a miracle whereby they ought to be guided* and they did
verlly believe that God was in that piece of wood, which since the speech made
by it was more then ordinary wood, having God himself in it, and therefore
deserved more offerings and adoration then those Saints in the Church, who did
never speak unto the people. I told them that the Devil rather had framed
that speech (if any they had heard) for to deceive their souls and lead them to
hell; which they might easily perceive from the Doctrine which I was informed he
had preached against Christ the only begotten son of God, whom the Father
loves and in whom he is w^ll pleased, and against whom he certainly would not
speak in that idol. Another answered boldly, our forefathers never knew what
Christ was, until the Spaniards came unto that Country, but they knew there
were Gods, and did worship them, and did sacrifies unto them* and for ought
they knew this God of theirs belonged in old times unto their forefathers. Why
then, said I unto them, he was a weak God who by my (...) has been burned? I
perceived that at that time there was no reasoning with them, for they were
stubborn and captious, and so I dismissed them. Had not God (...) graciously
protected me against these my enemies, I had certainly been murdered by them;
for a month after the burning of the idol, when I thought all had been
forgotten, and that the Idolaters were quiet, then they began to act their
spite and (...), which first I discovered by a noise which once at midnight I
heard of people about my (...), and at my chamber door; to whom I called (...)
from my bed not ^ring to open, but (...) have no answer from them. I perceived
they would have come in by force, for they pushed hard at the door. Whereupon
I took suddenly the sheets from off my bed, tying them with a strong knot
together, and with another to a bar of the window, making my self ready to
fall down by them to the ground, and so to fly in the dark night, if they had
used violence to come in. The sheets being thus prepared, and they still at the
door thrusting without any word from them, I thought by calling and crying out
aloud I might affright them away. Wherefore with a shrill voice I called first
to my servants, who were but boys, and lay at the further end of a long
gallery, then I cried out to the neighboring houses to come and assist me
against thieves. The servants had heard the noise and were awake, who presently
at my call came out; and with their coming my enemies ran down the stairs, and
were heard no more that night. But I perceiving which way their spite and
malice was bent, thought fit to be no more alone in the night, with boys only
in so great a house as was that of Mixco; whereupon the next day I sent for my
trusty friend Miguel Dalva who was able to fight alone with any half dozen of
Indians, wishing him to bring with him what weapons he could get for my
defense. I kept him with me a fortnight; and the next Sabbath I gave warning in
the Church, that whosoever came in the night to my house to affright me, or to
do me any other mischief should look to him self, for that I had weapons
both offensive and defensive. Though for a while I heard no more of them, yet
they desisted not altogether from their evil and malicious intents; for,
knowing that Miguel Dalva did not lie in the same chamber with me, a fortnight
after (I being till about midnight with my candle studying) they came up the
stairs so softly that I heard them not; but the Black-more being awake it
seems perceived that they were coming up, and softly arose up from a long table
were he lay upon a Mat, and took in his hand a couple of brick-bats of many
which lay under the table for a work which I had in hand, and as he opened the
door made a little noise, which was to them an item to fly down the stairs,
and to run (as they thought) for their lives. The Black-more did also run after
them, and finding they had got too much advantage of him, and not knowing which
way they might take, sent after them with a fury his two brick-bats, wherewith
he supposed he did hit one of them, for the next day walking about the Town he
met with one of the Fuentes having a cap on his head, and he inquired of sone
Indians what he ailed, and he understood by them that his head was broke, but
how they knew not. They perceiving that I was thus guarded by Miguel Dalva,
desisted from that time from coming any more in the night unto my house, but
yet desisted not from their spite and malice and from acting mischief against
me. For a month after when I thought that all had been forgotten, and they
seemed outwardly to be kind and courteous, there came a messenger to me from the
oldest of them, named Pablo de Fuentes, to tell me that he was very sick, and
like to die, and desired me to go to comfort and instruct him in the truth,
for that he truly desired to be converted. I conceived very great joy at this
news, and doubted not of the truth and certainty of it, and prayed to God to
direct me in the conversion of that soul; and so with haste and good zeal, I
went unto his house, where soon my joy and comfort was turned into bitterness;
for when I came to the door of his house, and was with one step entered, I found
all the brothers of Pablo Fuentes, and some others who were suspected to be
Idolaters, fitting round the room; and missing Pablo, I withdrew my foot a
little, and asked them where he was, mistrusting somewhat to see them there all
gathered together; but when I perceived that they stood not up, nor answered me
a word, nor so much as took off their hats to me, then I began to fear indeed,
and to suspect some treachery; and so I turned back resolving to go home
again. But no sooner was I turned, but behold Pablo Fuentes (who by his message
had feigned both sickness and conversion, came from behind his house with a
cudgel in his hand, listing it up to strike at me. Had I not catched hold of
his stick with both my hands, and prevented the intended blow, certainly he had
struck me down. But whilst he and I were striving for the stick who should be
Master of it, the rest of the Indians who were sitting in the house, came out
into the yard (which being a public place was more comfort to me then if they
had compassed me about within the house)and beset me round, some pulling me
one way, some another, tearing my clothes in two or three places, another to
make me let go my hand from the stick with a knife run me into the hand (which
to this day a small scar does witness) and certainly had we not been in a
public yard, that party would also have run his knife into my sides; another
seeing I would not let go the stick, took hold of it with Pablo and both
together thrust it against my mouth, and with such strength that they broke
some of my teeth, and filled my mouth with goar blood, with which blow I fell,
but soon recovered my self and arose, they laughing at me, but not daring to
do me any more harm for fear they should be seen, as God would have seen
what already they had done; for a Mulatta slave to a Spaniard in the valley, at
that very time when I was down and rising passed by, and hearing me cry out for
help to the neighbors (who lived somewhat far off that might help and succor
me, for all the houses thereabouts were of the brothers the Fuentes) came into
the yard, and seeing me all in blood thought I had been mortally wounded, and
calling them murderers ran along the street crying murder, murder in Pablo
Fuentes his yard, till she came to the Market place and Townhouse, where she
found the Majors and Jurats sitting, and a couple of Spaniards, who when they
heard of my danger, with drawn swords came presently running with all the
officers of Justce to the yard of Pablo Fuentes to aid and assist me; but in
the mean while the Idolaters perceiving the outcry of the Mulatta, began to
fall away and to hide themselves; Pablo Fuentes going to shut up his house also
to absent himself, I held him hard to it, striving with him that he might not
escape away till some help came unto me. The Spaniards when they came and saw
me all in a blood, made furiously to Pablo Fuentes with their naked swords,
whom I stopped desiring them not to hurt him, lest what harm they did unto him
should be imputed unto me. I wished the Justice not to fear him though he were
a rich Indian, and as they would answer before the President of Guatemala to
lay hold of him, and to carry him to prison, which they presently performed. I
made the Spaniards and the Mulatta to witness under writing by way of
information what they had seen, what blood about my clothes, what wound in my
hand, what blow in my mouth they had found, and sent with speed to the
President of Guatemala this their information. The business was soon noised
about the valley, whereupon most of the Spaniards came to offer their help and
aid unto me* Miguel Dalva also chancing to be near at a Spaniards house in the
same valley came with the rest, who would have done that night some mischief
among the Indians if I had not prevented them. I desired them to depart and go
home to their houses, telling them I feared nothing, and that Miguel Dalva his
company would be guard enough unto me. But they would by no means yield unto
this, saying that night might prove more dangerous unto me then I imagined, and
that I needed a stronger guard then of one man alone, for they conceived that
the Idolaters knowing what already they had done, and fearing what grievous
punishment might be inflicted upon them from the President of Guatemala, seeing
themselves lost and undone men might desperately that night rescue their
brother out of prison, and attempt some mischief against me, and so fly away.
Which I could not be brought to fear, or to believe any such thing of their
cowardly spirits, nor that they would fly away for that they had houses and
land there in and about the Town, yet I was willing for one night to yield to
have a stronger guard of Spaniards then at other times I had had with the
Blackmore Miguel Dalva alone. After supper they kept watch about my house till
such time as they perceived all was still, and the Indians a bed, and then they
set a watch about the prison that Pablo Fuentes might not be taken out; and
after this (pretending that they were in danger as well as I being but about a
dozen, if the Town should all rise and mutiny by the suggestion of the
Idolaters, who most of them were rich and powerful with the rest, which yet I
feared not) they would needs go and raise up the two Alcaldes or Majors alone,
with two more pe^ty officers to make search about the Town for the rest of the
Fuentes and other known Idolaters, that being found they might secure them in
the prison to appear at Guatemala, and prevented from doing any mischief either
that night, or at any other time. With this stir which they made, and their
care of me, they suffered me not to take any rest that night* but went and
called up the Alcaldes and two officers and brought them to my house, desiring
me to signify unto them, how fit and necessary it was to search for the rest
of the Indians. The poor Alcaldes trembled to see so many Spaniards at that
time in my house with naked swords, and durst not but do what they thought
best to be done, and so from my house about midnight they walked about the
Town, searching such houses as they most suspected might conceal any of the
Fuentes, or of the rest that had been that day in the rebellion and mutiny
against me. They could find none at home, till at last coming to the house of
one Lorenzo Fuentes, one of the brothers, they found all that had been in the
conspiracy against me, gathered together drinking and quaffing. The house
being beset there was no flying nor escaping, and seeing the Spaniards naked
swords, they durst not rebel, who doubtless (as we were afterward informed)
would have made a great stir in the Town that night, and were met together to
rescue Pablo their brother, and to do me some mischief and fly, not knowing
that I was so strongly manned and guarded by the Spaniards. There were ten of
them, and were presently without any noise in the Town carried to the Prison,
and there shut up, and guarded by the Spaniards.

In the morning the President of Guatemala (who then was Don Iuan de Guzman, a
Religious Governor) taking into his consideration what the day before I had
writ unto him, and judging my danger to be great, sent a Spanish Alguazile, or
Officer of Justice with a very large Commission to bring prisoners to the City
all those Indians who the day before had been in rebellion against me, and in
case they could not be found, then to seize upon what goods soever of theirs
could be found in Mixco. But with the diligence of the Spaniards the night
before they were all in a readiness for him, and paying the Alguazile first
his charges (which he demanded as he listed) and bearing the charges of
Miguel Dalva, and two or three more Spaniards, who were commanded in the Kings
Name to be aiding and assisting the Officer for the safer carrying them to
Guatemala, they were horsed and had away that day to the President, who
committed them close Prisoners, and afterward commanded them to be whipped
about the streets, banished two of them from Mixco to the Golf of St. Thomas de
Castilia, and would have banished them all, had they not humbled themselves,
and desired me to intercede for them, promising to amend their lives, and to
make me great satisfaction, if they might return again to their Town, and that
if ever more they did stir against me, the would yield to be hanged and to
lose al their goods. With this the President (fining them yet to pay twenty
Crowns a piece to the Church to be employed in what I should think fittest)
sent them back; who, as they had promised, came unto me, and humbled
themselves before me with much weeping, with many expressions, showing their
sorrow from their hearts for what they had done, casting all upon the Devil,
whom they confessed had been great with them in tempting them, whom also now
they did abjure and renounce, promising to live as good Christians, and never
more to worship any God but one. I was very much taken with their deep sorrow
expressed with many tears, and endeavored to instruct them in the true
knowledge of Christ, whom now I found they were very willing to embrace. I
lived not very long after in that Town; but for the time I did continue in it,
I found a great change and alteration in their lives, which truly made me apt
to judge that their repentance was unfeigned. And these former particulars of a
few Indians of those two Towns, I have not here inserted to bring an aspersion
upon all that Nation, (which I do very much affect, and would willingly spend
the best drops of blood in my veins to do them good, and to save their
souls) but to cause rather pity and commiseration toward them, who after so
many years preaching havebeen made as yet but formal and outward Christians,
and by the many Saints of wood, which they have been taught to worship by the
Priest, have rather been inclined to the superstition and Idolatry of their
Forefathers, and to trust to living Creatures, and bow to inanimate stocks and
stones, which they daily see performed publicly in their Churches. Certainly
they are of a good and flexible nature, and (were those Idols of Saints statues
removed from their eyes) might be brought easily to worship one only God; and
whereas they so willingly lavish out their small means and what they labor
for, in offerings to the Priests and to their Saints, and in maintaining Lazy
singing Lubbars, they without doubt would be free enough to true Ministers of
Gods Word, who should venture their lives to beat down those false Gods, and
set up Jesus Christ, and him that sent him into the World to save such as truly
believe in him.

The year that this stir happened in Mixco, I received from Rome from the
General of the Dominicans Order, License to come home to England; at which I
rejoiced much, for now I was even weary with living among the Indians, and
grieved to see the little fruit I reaped amongst them, and that for fear of
the Inquisition I durst not preach a new Gospel unto them, which might make
them true, real, and inward Christians; and lastly, for that I perceived that
Antonio Mendez de Satomayor (who was Lord of the Town of Mixco) did stomach me
for having caused two of his Town to be banished, and publicly affronted the
Fuentes for heir Idolatry, which he thought was a great aspersion laid upon
his Indians.

All which well considered I writ unto the Provincial (who was then in Chiapa)
of my desire to return home to mine own Country, for the which I had a
license sent unto me from Rome. But he having heard of what good I had done in
the Town of Mixco, in reducing some Idolaters, burning their idol, and
venturing my life in so good a cause; and also for the perfect knowledge which
now I had of the Poconcbi tongue, would by no means yield that I should go;
but with fair and flattering words encouraged me to stay, where he doubted not,
but I did, and I might yet do God much more good service; and that he might
the better work upon me, he sent a Patent of Vicar of the Town and Cloister
of Amatitlan, where at the present there was a new Cloister a building to
separate all that valley from the Cloister of Guatemala. He desired me to
accept of that small preferment, not doubting but that I speaking so well the
Indian language might prevail much in that place, and better then another,
further the building of that new Cloister; which work would be a good step for
him to advance me afterward to some better preferment. Although I regarded
neither that present Superiority, nor any better honor which might afterward
ensue unto me, I thought the time which God had appointed for my returning to
England was not yet come; for that if the Provincial, and with him the
President of Guatemala (for so much I conjectured out of the Provincialls
letter) should both oppose and hinder my departure from that Country, it would
be very hard for me to take my journey any way, and not be discovered and
brought back. Whereupon I resolved to stay the Provincialls coming to
Guatemala, and there to confer with him face^ to face, and to show him some
reasons that moved me to leave that Country, and to seek again mine own
wherein I was borne. So for the present I accepted of the Town of Amatitlan,
where I had more occasions of getting money than in the other two, where I had
lived five full years; for albeit that Town alone was bigger then both Mixco
and Pinola together, and the Church fuller of Saints pictures and statues, and
very many Confraternities and Sodalities belonged unto it; besides this from
without the Town I had great comings in from the Ingenio of Sugar, which I
related before stood close unto that Town, from whence I had daily offerings
from the Black-mores and Spaniards that lived in it* and besides this I had
under my charge another lesser Town called St. Christoval (...) Amatitlan,
standing two leagues from great Amatitlan. This Town of St. Christoval, or St.
Christopher, is called properly in that language, Palin^a, ha, signifying
water, and Pali, to stand upright, and is compounded of two words, which
express water standing upright; for the Town stands on the back side of the
Vulcan of water, which looks over Guatemala, and on this side sends forth
many fountains, but especially spouteth forth from a high rock a stream of
water, which as it falls from high with a great noise and downfall, the
rock standing upright over the bottom where it falls, and causes a most
pleasant stream by the Towns side, it has moved the Indians to call their
Town, Palin^a, from the high and upright standing rock, from whence the water
falls. In this Town there are many rich Indians, who trade in the coast of
the South sea; the Town is as an harbor shadowed with many fruitful trees;
but the chief fruit here is the Pinn^, which grows in every Indians yard, and
with the neernesse of the Ingenio of Sugar, are by the Spaniards thereabouts
much made up in Preserves, some whole, some in slices, which is the daintiest
and most luscious* Preserve that I ever did eat in that Country. The Indians
of this Town get much by boards of Cedar, which they cut out of many
Cedar-trees, which grow on that side of the Vulcan, which they sell to
Guatemala and all about the Country for new buildings.

Between great Amatitlan and this Town the way is plain, and lies under a
Vulcan of fire, which formerly was wont to smoke as much as that of Guatemala;
but having formerly burst out at the top, and there opened a great mouth, and
cast down to the bottom mighty stones (which to this day are to be seen) it
has not since been any ways troublesome unto the Country. In this way there
was in my time a new Trapiche of Sugar erecting up by one John Baptista of
Guatemala, which was thought would prove very useful, and profitable unto the
foresaid City. I had yet for the time that I lived in Amatitlan another very
little village at my charge, called Pampichi at the bottom of a high mountain
on the other side of the lake over against, which was but a Chapel of ease
unto great Amatitlan, unto which I went not above once in a quarter of a year,
and that for pastime and recreation; for this village is well in that language
a compound also of Pam, in, and Pichi, flowers, for that it stands compassed
about with flowers, which make it very pleasant, and the boats or Canoa's which
do constantly stand near the doors of the houses, invites to much pleasure of
fishing and rowing about the lake.

And thus whilst I lived in Amatitlan I had the choice of three places wherein
to recreate my self, and because the charge of many souls lay in my hands, I
had one constantly to help me. The Town of Amatitlan was as the Court in
respect of the rest, where nothing was wanting that might recreate the mind and
satisfy the body with variety and change of sustenance, both for fish and
flesh. Yet the great care that did lie upon me in the work and building of the
Cloister, made me very soon weary of living in that great and pleasant Town;
for sometimes I had thirty, sometimes twenty, sometimes fewer, and sometimes
forty worke-men to look unto, and to pay wages to on Saturday nights, which I
found wearied much my brain, and hindered my studies, and was besides a work
which I delighted not in, nor had any hopes ever to enjoy it. And therefore
after the first year that I had been there I betook my self unto the
Provincial, who was in Guatemala, and again earnestly besought him to peruse
the License which I had from Rome to go to England mine own Country for to
preach there (for that was the chief ground of letting me go home, as the
General largely expressed) where I doubted not but I might do God great
service, and in Conscience I told him I thought I was bound to employ what
parts God had bestowed upon me, rather upon my own Countrymen, then upon
Indians and strangers. The Provincial replied unto me that my Country men
were Heretics, and when I came amongst them they would hang me up. I told
him, I hoped better things of them, and that I would not behave my self among
them so as to deserve hanging, not daring to tell him what was in my heart
concerning points of Religion. After a long discourse I found the Provincial
inexorable, and half angry, telling me that he and that whole Province had
cast their eyes upon me, and honored me, and were ready and willing to promote
me further, and that I would show my self very ungrateful unto them, if I
should forsake them for my own nation and people, whom I had not known from
my young and tender age. I perceived there was no more to be said, and all
would be in vain, and so resolved to take my best opportunity, and with my
License from Rome to come away unknown unto him. But for the present I humbly
beseeched him to remove me from Amatitlan, for that I found my self unable to
undergo that great charge, and too weak for that strong work, that was then
building. With much ado he would be brought to this, alleging what an honor
it was to be a Founder and builder of a new Cloister, in whose walls my very
name would be engraven to posterity; all which I told him I regarded not, but
esteemed more of my health and a quiet mind, then of such preferments and
vanities. Upon which at last he condescended to my request, and gave me order
to go to Petapa, and that the Vicar of Petapa should go to finish the work
of Amatitlan. In Petapa I lived above a twelve month, with great ease,
pleasure and content for all things worldly and outward; but within I had still
a worm of Conscience, gnawing this gourd that shadowed and delighted me with
worldly contentment. Here I grew more and more troubled concerning some points
of Religion, daily wishing with David, that I had the wings of a Dove, that I
might fly from that place of daily Idolatry into England, and be at rest. I
resolved therefore to put on a good courage, and rely wholly upon my God,
knowing that the journey was hard and dangerous, and might bring shame and
trouble unto me, if I should be taken in the way flying and brought back to
Guatemala; here I weighed the affliction and reproach which might ensue unto
me, after so much honor, pleasure, and wealth which I had enjoyed for about
twelve years in that Country; but in another balance of better consideration,
I weighed the trouble of a wounded Conscience, and the spiritual joy and
comfort that I might enjoy at home with the people of God, and so resolutely
concluded upon that place of Heb. 11. 25, 26, 27. with Moses, to choose rather
to suffer affliction with the people of God (who as Paul well observes, ^
These. 3. 3. are appointed thereunto; and again Phil. 1. 29. unto whom it is
given in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe in him, but also to suffer
for his sake) then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season; esteeming the
reproach of Christ greater riches then the treasures in Egypt. So for faith and
a safe conscience I now purposed likewise with Moses to forsake Egypt, not
fearing the wrath of the President the Kings own Deputy, nor of the
Provincial, and my best friends; but to endure all this (if I should be taken)
as seeing him who is invisible. I thought this was a business not to be
conferred with flesh and blood, lest the best friend knowing of it should
betray me; yet on the other side, I thought it hard to fly alone without some
friend for the first two or three days journey; and besides having many things
to sell away to make money of, I thought I were better to employ some trusty
friend, then to do all alone. I thought of none fitter then Miguel Dalva, whom
by long experience I knew to be true and trusty, and that a small money matter
would content him; whom I sent for to Pinola, and charging him with secrecy, I
told him I had a journey for my conscience sake to make to Rome (I would not
tell him that I intended England, lest the good old Black-more should grieve
thinking never more to see me, and for the love he bare me, and interest he had
many times from me, he should by discovering my intent, seek to stop me) which
I would have none to know of but himself, not doubting but to return again,
as he know many had taken the like journey, and returned within two years.

The Black-more offered himself to go with me, which I refused, telling him
that the seas would be too hard for his old age to endure, and that as a
Black-more in foraine Countries he might be stopped and apprehended for a
fugitive; which reason he liked well, and offered himself to go with me as
far as the sea side; for which I thanked him and employed to sell me away
some Mules, Wheat, and Maiz which I had, and what else might well pass through
his hands. As for many rich pictures which hung in my chamber, I thought the
Town of Petapa would buy them for their Church, and propounded it unto the
Governor, who willingly accepted of them. Most of my books, chests, cabinets,
quilts, and many good pieces of household stuff, by the pains and industry of
Miguel (whom I kept with me for the space of two months before I came away) I
sold to Guatemala, reserving only two Petaca's or leatherne chests, with some
books and a quilt for my journey. When I had sold all that I intended, I found
I had in Spanish money near nine thousand pieces of eight, which I had got in
twelve years that I lived in that Country. So much money I thought would be too
combersome for a long journey; whereupon I turned above four thousand of them
into pearls and some precious stones, which might make my carriage the
lighter; the rest I laid up some in bags, some I sowed into my quilt, intending
in the way to turn them into Spanish Pistols. Thus the chief provision being
made of money, I took care for Chocolatte and some Conserves for the way, which
were soon provided. Now because I considered that my flight the first week must
be with speed, and that my chests could not post day and night as my self
intended to do; I thought of sending my carriage four days at least before
me; and not daring to trust any Indian of Petapa, I sent to Mixco for one
special Indian friend whom I had there, who knew the way that I was to
travail very well; to whom I opened my mind, and offered what money I knew
would well content him, and at midnight sent him away with two Mules, one for
himself, and another for my chests, wishing him to keep on traveling toward
St. Miguel, or Nicaragua till I overtooke him. I gave him the advantage of four
days and nights, and then resolutely with my good Blackmore in my company
leaving the key of my chamber in my door, and nothing but old papers within,
when all the Indians where fast sleep^ I had adien unto Petapa, and to the
whole valley, and to all my friends throughout America.

CHAP. XXI. Showing my journey from the Town of Petapa, into England; and some
chief passages in the way.
THe chief thing which troubled me in my resolved purpose to come home, was
the choice of the safest way; which made me utterly forsake the Gulf (though
the easiest way of all, and that sea nearest to the place where I lived) for
that I knew I should meet there with many of my acquaintance, and the setting
out of the ships was so uncertain, that before they departed, order might come
from Guatemala to stop me; if I should go by land through Comayagua to
Truxillo, and there wait for the ships, likewise I feared lest the Governor of
that place by some item from the President of Guatemala might examine me, and
send me back, and that the Masters of the ships might have charge given them
not to receive me into their ships. If I should go back to Mexico and Vera
Cruz, then I called to mind, how I was troubled in that long journey, when I
came first to Chiapa in company of friends, and that now alone I should
certainly be much put to it, for I would carry Miguel Dalva so far by land with
me. Wherefore rejecting these three ways, I chose the fourth, which was by
Nicaragua and the Lake of Granada; and therefore I deferred my journey till the
week after Christmas, knowing that the time of the frigates setting out from
that lake to the Havana was commonly after the middle of January, or at
Candlemas at the furthest, whither I hoped to reach in very good time. Now that
I might by no means be suspected to have taken this way; before I went I left
by the hand of Miguel Dalva a letter to a friend of his to be delivered to the
Provincial in Guatemala, four days after my departure, wherein I kindly
took my leave of him, desiring him not to blame me nor to seek after me; and
whereas I had a sufficient License from Rome, and could not get his, that I
thought I might with a safe Conscience go where I was born, leaving Linguists
enough to supply my place amongst the Indians. And because he should not make
enquiry after me by Nicaragua, I dated and subscribed my letter to him from the
Town of St. Antonio Su^epeques, which was the way to Mexico and quite contrary
to Nicaragua.

The next day after Twelfth day, being the seventh of January, 1637. at
midnight I set out of Petapa upon a lusty Mule (which afterward in the way I
sold for fourscore pieces of eight) with Miguel Dalva alone; and the first part
of the way being very hilly we could not go so fast as our hearts would have
posted; for it was break of day before we could get to the top of the
mountain, which is called Serra Redondo, or the round hill; which is much
mentioned in that Country, for the good pasture there which serves for the
Cattle and Sheep, when the valleys below are burnt and no grasing left for
Beasts. This hill is also a great refuge to Travelers, for there they find
good entertainment in a Venta, where wine and provision is sold, and is a great
Lodge, for to lay up dry what carriages they bring; there is besides one of the
best Estancia's or farms of Cattle in the Country, whereof Goats and Ewes
milk is made the best (...) thereabouts. This round hill or mountain is fi^e
leagues from Petapa, where I feared I might (...) with some people of Petapa,
and therefore the day now dawning I made haste by it, leaving in the lodge
asleep many Indians, who attended on two Spanish Requa's of Mules, which that
day were to go to Petapa; four leagues further from this Serro Redondo is a
Town of Indians called Los ^selavos, or the Slaves, not that now they ar^ more
slaves then the rest of the Indians, but because in the old time of M^ the
Emperor, and the Indian Kings that were under him, the people of this Town
were more slaves then any other, for from Amatitlan (which is so called from
Amat, which in the Mexican tongue signifies Letter, and Itlan which signifies
Town, for that it was the Town of Letters as some say, for a rine of a tree,
whereon they were wont formerly to write and express their minds, or because
it was the place whither from all parts letters were sent to be carried about
the Country, and to Peru) these Indians of the Town of Esclavo's or slaves,
were commanded as slaves to go all about the Country with letters, or
whatsoever else they should be charged with; and they were bound constantly to
send every week so many of their Town (as were appointed) unto Amatitlan,
there to wait and attend the pleasure of that Town for the conveying of
letters, or any carriages to other parts.

This Town of los Esclavos stands in a bottom by a river, over the which
the Spaniards have built a very strong stone Bridge to go in and out of the
Town, for otherwise with mules there is no passing by reason of the violent and
rapid stream of the water, and many rocks in the River, from which the water
falls down with great force. From this Town (where we only stayed to drink
a cup of Chocolatte and to bait our mules) we went on that day to Aguachapa,
being ten leagues further, and not far from the South Sea, and the port
called De la Trinidad; whither we came toward Evening, having that day and
part of the night traveled about threescore English miles up hills, and upon
stony ways from the Esclavo's unto this Town; which is much mentioned in that
Country for two things. The one is for the earthen ware which is made there (as
some think) exceeding that of Mixco. The other is for a place within a mile and
a half from the Town, which the Spaniards do credibly report and believe to
be a mouth of hell. For out of it there is constantly ascending a thick black
smoke smelling of Brimstone, with some flashes now and then of fire; the earth
from whence this smoke arises is not high, but low. None ever durst draw nigh
to find out the truth and ground of it; for those that have attempted to do
it, have been stricken down to the ground and like to lose their lives. A
friend of mine a Friar (whom I thought verily I might believe) upon his oath
affirmed unto me, that traveling that way with a Provincial he resolved to
go unto the place, and satisfy himself of the ground and cause of the
strange talk which was every where about the Country concerning that smoke. He
went within a quarter of a mile of it, and presently, he said, he heard a
hideous noise, which together with the stench of the fiery smoke and brimstone,
struck him into such a fear that he was like to fall to the ground, and
retiring himself back with all speed was taken with a burning Fever, which was
like to cost him his life. Others report that drawing near unto it, they have
heard great cries as it were of men and women in torment, noise of iron, of
chains, and the like, which (how simply I leave it to my Judicious Reader)
makes them believe that it is a mouth of hell. Of my knowledge I will say no
more, but that I saw the smoke, and asked the Indians what was the cause of it;
and if ever they had been near unto it? And they answered me, that they could
not imagine what might be the cause of it, neither durst they draw nigh unto
it; and that they had seen Travelers, attempting to go near it, and that
they were all stricken either to the ground, or with some sudden amazement,
or Fever. I told them that I would walk thither my self, and they desired me
that I would not, if I loved my life. It was not yet for all this report the
fear of being so near the Spaniards hell (as they call it) that made me haste
with speed out of that Town, but fear of some messenger that might come after
me to stop my journey. For at midnight I departed from thence, and went to
break my fast to a great Town called Chalchuapan, where the Indians made very
much of me, being Pocomanes, who spoke the Poconchi or Pocoman tongue which I
had learned. They would willingly have had me to stay with them and preach unto
them the next Sabbath, which I would have done, had not a better design called
upon me to make haste.

Here I was troubled, how I should get through St. Salvador, which was a City
of Spaniards, and wherein there was a Cloister of Dominicans, whom I feared
most of all, because I was known by some of them. My resolution was therefore
when I came near unto the City, to turn out of my way to a Spaniards Farm as
if I had lost my way, and there to delay the time till Evening in drinking
Chocolatte, discoursing, and baiting my mules well, that so I might travel all
that night, and be out of the reach of that City, and Friars (who lived in
Indian Towns about it) the next morning, early. This City of St. Salvador is
poor, not much bigger then Chiapa, and is governed by a Spanish Governor. It
stands forty leagues at least from Guatemala, and toward the North Sea side,
is compassed with very high mountains, which are called Chuntales, where the
Indians are very poor. In the bottom where the City stands there are some
Trabiches of Sugar, some Indigo made, but the chief Farms are Estancia's of
Cattle. Toward Evening I departed from that Farm where I had well refreshed
my self and my Mule, and about eight of the clock I rid through the City not
being known by any body. My purpose was to be the next morning at a great
River, called Rio de Lempa, some ten leagues from St. Salvador, for within two
leagues of it there lived in an Indian Town a Friar belonging to the Cloister
of St. Salvador who knew me very well. But such haste I made that before break
of the day I passed thuough that Town, and before seven of the clock I was at
the River, where I found my Indian of Mixco ready to pass over with my
carriage, who that morning by three of the clock had set out of that Town two
leagues off. I was not a little glad to have overtaken my Chests, wherein was
most of my treasure. There I sat down a while by the River whilst my mules
grazed, and my Indian struck fire and made me Chocolatte. This River of Lempa
is held the broadest, and biggest in all the Jurisdiction belonging unto
Guatemala; there are constantly two Ferry Boats to pass over the Travelers,
and their Requa's of Mules. This River is privileged in this manner, that if a
man commit any heinous crime or murder on this side of Guatemala, and San
Salvador, or on the other side of St. Miguel, or Nicaragua, if he can fly to
get over this River, he is free as long as he lives on the other side, and no
Justice on that side whither he is escaped can question or trouble him for the
murder committed. So likewise for Debts he cannot be arrested. Though I
thanked God I neither fled for the one, or for the other, yet it was my comfort
that I was now going over to a privileged Country, where I hoped I should be
free and sure, and that if any one did come after me, he would go no further
then to the River of Lempa. My Blackmore did much laugh at this my conceit,
and warranted me that all would do well. We Ferried safely over the River;
and from thence went in company with my Indian to a little small Town of
Indians two leagues off, where we made the best dinner that we had done from
the Town of Petapa, and willingly gave rest to all our mules till four of the
clock in the afternoon; at which time we set forth to another small Town
little above two leagues off, through a plain, sandy, and Champaigne Country.
The next day we had but ten leagues to travail to a Town called St. Miguel,
which belongs unto Spaniards, and though it be not a City, yet is as big
almost as San Salvador, and has a Spanish Governor; in it there is one
Cloister of Nuns, and another of Mercenarian Friars, who welcomed me unto
their Cloister; for here I began to show my face, and to think of felling away
the Mule I rid on, being resolved from hence to go by water or an Arm of the
Sea, to a Town in Nicaragua called La Vieja. I would here have dismissed my
Indian, but he was loath to leave me until I got to Granada, where he desired
to see me shipped. I refused not his kind offer, because I knew he was trusty
and had brought my Chests well thither, and knew well the way to Granada. So I
sent him by land to Realejo, or to La Vieja, which stand very near together
and thirty leagues by land from St. Miguel, and my self stayed that day and
till the next day at noon in that Town, where I sold the mule, I rid on,
because I knew that from Realojo to Granada I could have of the Indians a Mule
for nothing for a days journey. My Blackmores mule I sent also by land with
the Indian, and the next day went to the Gulf, being three or four miles from
St. Miguel, where that afternoon I took Boat with many other passenger^, and
the next morning by eight in the morning was at La Vieja, which journey by land
would have taken me up near three days. The next day my Indian came at
night, and we went to Realejo, (as I have observed before) a Haven very weak
and unfortified on the South Sea; where if I would have stayed one fortnight I
might have taken shipping for Panama, to go from thence to Portabelo, and
there stay for the Galeons from Spain. But I considered that the Galeons would
not be here till June or July, and that so I should be at great charges in
staying so long. But afterward I wished I had accepted of that occasion, for I
was at last forced to go to Panama, and Portabelo. From hence to Granada I
observed nothing, but the plainness and pleasantness of the way, which with
the fruits and fertility of all things may well make Nicaragua the Paradise of
America. Between Realejo and Granada stands the City of Leon, near unto a
Vulcan of fire, which formerly burst out at the top, and did much hurt unto all
the Country about; but since that it has ceased, and now lets the
Inhabitants live without fear. Sometimes it smokes a little, which shows
that as yet there is within some sulphurous substance.

Here it was that a Mercenarian Friar thought to have discovered some great
treasure, which might enrich himself and all that Country, being fully
persuaded that the metal that burned within that Vul^n was Gold; whereupon he
caused a great K^tle to be made, and hung at an iron chain to let it down from
the top, thinking therewith to take up gold enough to make him Bishop and to
enrich his poor kindred. But such was the power and strength of the fire
within, that no sooner had he let down the Kettle, when it fell from the
chain and from his hands being melted away.

This City of Leon is very curiously built, for the chief delight of the
Inhabitants consists in their houses, and in the pleasure of the Country
adjoining, and in the abundance of all things for the life of man, more then in
any extraordinary riches, which there are not so much enjoyed, as in other
parts of America. They are contented with fine gardens, with variety of singing
birds, and parrets, with plenty of fish and flesh, which is cheap, and with gay
houses, and so lead a delicious, lazy and idle life; not aspiring much to trade
and traffic, though they have near unto them the Lake, which commonly every
year sends forth some Frigates to Havana by the North Sea, and Realejo on the
South Sea, which to them might be very commodious for any dealing and rich
Trading in Per^, or to Mixco, if their spirits would carry them so far: The
Gentlemen of this City are almost as vain and fantastical as are those of
Chiapa. And especially from the pleasure of this City, is all that Province of
Nicaragua, called by the Spaniards Mahomets Paradise. From hence the way is
plain and Level to Granada, whither I got safely and joyfully, hoping that now
I had no more journey to make by land, till I should land at Dover in England,
and from thence post up to London. Two days after I had arrived at this place
and rested my self, and enjoyed the pleasant prospect of the Lake, I began to
think of dismissing my Indian and Blackmore. But true and faithful Miguel
Dalva would by no means leave me, till he saw me shipped; and that I had no
more need of him by land; Likewise the Indian would willingly have stayed, but
b^ (...) means I would permit him, for that I considered he had a wife and
children ^oke to at home. He was as willing to return a foot, as to ride,
because he would have me sell my mules, and make what money I could of them;
but I seeing the good nature of the Indian, would recompense his love with as
much money as might be more beneficial to him, then a tired Mule; which might
have dyed in the way under him, and left him on foot; so I gave him money
enough to bear his charges home, and to (...) Mules at his one pleasure, and
some to spare, when he came home. The Indian with many tears falling from his
eyes, saying, he feared he should never more see me, took his leave of me
the third day after we arrived at Granada. My Blackmore and I being left
alone, first began to think of selling away the two Mules, which had brought
thither the Indian, and my Chests; for which I got fourscore and ten pieces of
eight after so long a journey, and thought they were well sold. I would have
had Miguel have sold away that where^ he rid, (which was his own) and offered
to buy him another that might better carry him back, but the loving and
careful Blackmore would not suffer me to be at such charges, considering the
long journey which I was to make. After this, we hearing that the frigat^ were
not like to depart in a sortnight, thought of viewing well that stately and
pleasant Town a day or two, and then to betak^ our selves to some near Indian
Town, where we might be hid, (lest by the great resort of Requa's of Mules,
which a^ that time brought Indigo and Cochinill from Gua^ala to the Frigates,
we should be discovered) and might now and then come to the Town to treat
concerning my passing in one of the Friga^ to the Havana or to (...). What in
that Town we observed was, two Cloisters of Mercenarian and Franciscan Friars,
and one of Nu^, very rich; and one Parish Church, which was a^ a Cathedral,
for the Bishop of Leon did more constantly reside there then in the City. The
houses are fairer then those of (...), and the Town of more Inhabitants, among
whom there are some few Merchants of very great wealth, and many of inferior
degree very well to pass, who trade with Carthagena, (...), San Salvador, and
(...), and some by the South sea to Peru and (...). But at this time of the
sending a way the frigates, that Town is one of the wealthiest in all the North
Tract of America; for the Merchants of (...) fearing to send all their good^ by
the Gulf of H^, for that they have been often taken by the (...) (...) that
and H^, think is (...) to send them by the frigates to Carthagena, which passage
has not been so much stopped by the Hollanders as the other. So (...) many
times the Kings (...), and revenues (when there is any report of ships at sea,
or about the Cape of St. Anthony) are this way by the Lake of Granada passed to
Carthagena. That year that I was there, before I betook my self to an Indian
Town, in one day there entered six Requa's (which were at least three hundred
Mules) from St. Salvador and Comayagna only, laden with nothing else but
Indigo, Cochinil and Hides; and two days after from Guatemala came in three
more, the one laden with silver (which was the Kings tribute from that
Country; the other with Sugar, and the other with Indigo. The former Requa's I
feared not; but the latter made me keep close within my lodging, lest going
abroad, I should be known by some of those that came from Guatemala; who after
they had delivered what they brought, presently departed, and with their
departure set me at liberty, who for their sakes was a voluntary prisoner
within mine own lodging. But fearing lest more of these Requa's might come and
affright me, I went to a Town out of the rode, a league from Granada, and
took my pleasure up and down the Country where I was much feasted by the
Mercenarian Friars, who enjoy most of those Towns. Amongst these I heard much
of the passage in the frigots to Carthagena, which did not a little dishearten
and discourage me. For although, whilst they sail upon the Lake, they go
securely and without trouble, yet when they fall from the Lake to the river
(which there they call El Desaguadero) to go out to the Sea, hic labor, hoc
opus est, here is nothing but trouble, which sometimes makes that short voyage
to last two months; for such is the fall of the waters in many places amongst
the rocks, that many times they are forced to unlade the frigots, and lade
them again with help of Mules which are there kept for that purpose, by a few
Indians that live about the river, and have care of the Lodges made for to lay
in the wares, whilst the frigots pass through those dangerous places to
another Lodge, whither the wares are brought by Mules, and put again into the
frigots. Beside this trouble (which must needs be tedious to a passenger, to be
thus stopped, who would willingly come soon to his journeys end) the abundance
of gnats is such, which make ^m to take no joy in his voyage, and the heat in
some places so intolerable, that many do die before they get out to the sea.
Though all this was terrible to me to hear, yet I comforted my self that my
life was in the hands of the Lord, and that the frigots did commonly every year
pass that way, and seldom any were lost. I went now and then to Granada to
bargain for my passage, and to know when the frigots would for certain set
out, and to provide my self of some dainties and Chocolatte for my journey,
having agreed with a Master of a frigot for my diet at his table. The time was
appointed within four or five days; but suddenly all was crossed with a
strict command from Guatemala, that the frigots should not go out that year,
because the President and whole Court was informed for certain that some
English or Holland ships was abroad at sea, and lay about the mouth of the
river or Desaguadero waiting for the frigots of Granada, and that the said were
sometimes lurking about the Islands of St. John, and St. Catharine (which then
was our Providence) which made all the Merchants of the Country to fear and
sweat with a cold sweat, and the President to be careful for the Kings
revenues, left the loss of them should be imputed to his wilful negligence,
in stopping the frigots, whilst he might, and had warning given. This was but
sad news unto me, who knew not for the present, which way to dispose of
myself. I began to think of the ship that was at Realejo ready to set out to
Panama, thinking that would now be my best course, but enquiring after it, I
was for certain informed by some Merchants that it was newly gone. Then my
eyes looked upon Comayagua and Truxillo, and upon the ships of Honduras, but
these were but vain and troubled thoughts, arising from a perplexed heart, for
the ships were also gone from thence, without some small vessel or frigot
might be there with news from Havana or Carthagena (for those places send
often word and notice of what ships are abroad at sea) but this also was a mee^
chance, and not to be trusted unto, as my friends did advise, and counsel me.
Whereupon my perplexity more and more increased; only my comfort was that
there were more passengers besides my self, who I knew must take some course,
and whom I also resolved to follow by sea, or land. Amongst us all we were once
resolving to hire a frigot to carry us only to Carthagena, but this would not
be granted, for no body would hazard his vessel and life for our sakes.
Whilst we were thus distressed and perplexed enquiring about Granada of the
Merchants what course we might take to get to Spain that year, or to meet with
the Havana or Carthagena, one that wished us well, counseled us to go to
Costarica, where at Carthago we should be sure to hear of some vessels bound
for Portobel, either from the river called de los Anzuelos, or from the river
called Suere, from whence every year went outsome small frigots to carry Meal,
Bacon, Fowls, and other provision for the Galeons to Portobel. This we thought
was a hard and difficult, and of near a hundred and fifty leagues, over
mountains and through deserts, where we should miss the pleasure, variety,
and dainties of Guatemala and Nicaragua, and after all this peradventure might
miss of an opportunity of any frigot bound to Portobelo. Yet so unwilling were
we all to return to Guatemala from whence we came, that we would rather go
forward, and undergo any difficulties, so that at last we might find any
shipping to convey us where we might meet with the Galeons, which we knew were
not to come to P^rtoh l, till the month of June or July. We therefore agreed
four of us, three Spaniards and my self, to go to Costarica, and there to
try our fortune. They had each of them (as my self had) carriage for one
Mule, and none to ride on; but thought it their best way to buy each of them a
Mule to carry them, which they hoped after their journey to sell again at
Costarica, and to get money by them, and for their carriages to hire Mules and
Indians from Town to Town, who also might serve to guide us through many
dangerous places and passages, which we understood were in the way. Now I
wished I had my Mule which I sold at San Miguel, or any one of the two which I
sold before in Granada. But for my money I doubtednot, with the help of my
Black-more, but I should find one for my purpose. I furnished my self very
speedily, for fifty pieces of eight, of one which I feared not would perform
my journey. My good and trusty Blackmore would willingly have gone o^ with me,
and further round the world if I would have permitted him; but I would not; but
(thanked him heartily for what he had done, and gave him money enough in his
purse, and dismissed him) hoping that the company of the three Spaniards would
be sufficient comfort unto me.

Thus with one Indian to guide us we set four of us out of Granada, enjoying
for the two first days more of the pleasure of that Mahomets paradise
Nicaragua, finding the way for the most part plain, the Towns pleasant, the
Country shady, and every where fruits abounding. The second day after we set
out, we were much affrighted with a huge and monstrous Caiman or Crocodile,
which having come out of the Lake (which we passed by) and lying cross a
puddle of water bathing himself, and waiting for some prey, as we perceived
after, whom we not knowing well at the first, but thinking that it had been
some tree that was felled or fallen, passed close by it; when on a sudden we
knew the scales of the Cayman, and saw the monster stir and move, and set
himself against us; wherewith we made have from him; but he thinking to have
made some of us his greedy prey, ran after us, which when we perceived, and
that he was like to overtake us, we were much troubled, until one of the
Spaniards (who knew better the nature and quality of that beast then the rest)
called upon us to turn on one side out of the way, and to ride on straight for
a while, and then to turn on another side* and so to circumflex our way, which
advice of his without doubt saved mine, or some of the others lives, for thus
we wearied that mighty monster and escaped from him, who (had we rid out
straightway) had certainly overtaken us, and killed some mule or man, for his
straight forward flight was as swift as our Mules could run; but whilst he
turned, and wheeled about his heavy body, we got ground and advantage till we
left him far behind us; and by this experience we came to know the nature and
quality of that beast, whose greatness of body is no hinderance to run forward
as swift as a Mule; but otherwise, as the Elephant once laid down is troubled
to get up, so this monster is heavy and stiff, and therefore much troubled to
turn and wind about his body. We praised God who had that day delivered us,
and riding for a while by the side of the lake, we were watchful that we might
not fall again into the like danger. But the greatness of this lake of Granada
may from hence be known, in that the second and third day of our journey,
being at least threescore miles from whence we set out, we now and then found
our way lying by it. After that we had wholly lost the sight of it, we began
to enter into rough and craggy ways, declining more to the South then to the
North sea. And in all the rest of our journey to Carthago, we observed nothing
worth committing to posterity, but only mighty woods and trees on the South
sea fide, very fit for to make strong ships, and many mountains and desert
places, where we lay sometimes two nights together, either in woods or open
fields, far from any Town or habitation of Indians, yet for our comfort in
these so desert places we had still a guide with us, and found lodges, which by
the command of the nearest Justices had been set up for such as traveled that
way. We came at last through thousand dangers to the city of Carthago, which we
found not to be so poor as in richer places, as Guatemala and Nicaragna it was
reported to be. For there we had occasion to inquire after some Merchants for
exchange of gold and silver, and we found that some were very rich, who traded
by Land and Sea with Panama, and by Sea with Portobelo, Carthagena, and Havana,
and from thence with Spain. This City may consist of four hundred Families,
and is governed by a Spanish Governor; It is a Bishops Sea, and has in it
three Cloisters, two of Friars, and one of Nuns. Here we began to enquire
after that which had brought us through so many Mountains, Woods and deserts,
to wit, after some speedy occasion of shipping our selves for Portobelo or
Carthagena; and according to our desires we understood of one Frigate almost
ready to set out from the River called De los Anzuelos, and another from the
River Suere; and being well informed that Suere would be the best place for us
to Travail unto by reason of more provision in the way, more Towns of Indians,
and Estancia's of Spaniards, we resolved within four days after we had
rested in Carthago, to undertake a new journey toward the North Sea. We found
that Country mountainous in many places, yet here and there some Valleys where
was very good corn, Spaniards living in good Farms, who as well as the Indians
bred many hogs; but the Towns of Indians we found much unlike to those which
we had left behind in Nicaragua and Guatemala; and the people in courtesy and
clvility much differing from them, and of a rude and bold carriage and
behavior toward us; yet they are kept under by the Spaniards, as much as
those whom I have formerly spoken of about Gnatemala. We came in so good a
time to the River Suere, that we stayed there but three days in a Spanish
Farm near unto it, and departed.

The Master of the Frigate was exceeding glad of our company, and offered to
carry me for nothing, but for my prayers to God for him, and for a safe
passage; which he hoped would not be above three or four days sailing. What
he carried was nothing but some Honey, Hides, Bacon, meal and fowls. The
greatest danger he told us of, was the setting out from the River, (which runs
in some places with a very strong stream, is shallow and full of rocks in other
places) till we come forth to the maine Sea. Whither we got out safely and had
not sailed on above twenty leagues, when we discovered two ships making toward
us; our hearts began to quake, and the Master himself of the Frigate we
perceived was not without fear, who suspected that they were English, or
Holland Ships; we had no guns nor weapons to fight with, save only four or
five Muskets and half a dozen Swords; we thought the wings of our nimble
Frigate might be our best comfort, and flying away our chiefest safety. But this
comfort soon began to fail us, and our best safety was turned into near
approaching danger; for before we could fly on five leagues toward Portobel,
we could from our Top Mast easily perceive the two Ships to be Hollanders, and
too nimble for our little Vessel, which presently one of them (which being a
Man of War, was too much and too strong for our weakness) fetched up, and
with a thundering Message made us strike Sail. Without any fighting we durst
not but yield, hoping for better mercy. But O what sed thoughts did here run to
and fro my dejected heart, which was struck down lower then our Sail? How did
I sometimes look upon Deaths frighting visage? But if again I would comfort and
encourage my self against this fear of Death; how then did I begin to see an
end of all my hopes of ever more returning to my wished and desired Country?
How did I see that my treasure of Pearls, precious Stones, and (...) of Eight,
and golden Pistols, which by singing I had got in twelve years space, now
within one half hour ready to be lost with weeping, and become a sure prey to
those who with as much ease as I got them, and with laughing were ready to
spoil (...) of all that with the sound of Flutes, Waits and Organs I had so
long been ho^ding up? Now I saw I must forcedly and fainedly offer up to a
Hollander what supersticious, yea also forced and fained offerings of Indians
to their Saints of Mixes, (...), (...) and Petapa had for a while enriched me.
My further thoughts were soon interrupted by the Hollanders who came abord our
Frigate with more speed then we desired. Though their Swords, Muskets and
Pistols did not a little terrify, yet we were somewhat comforted, when we
understood who was their chief Captain and Commander, and hoped for more mercy
from him, who had been born and brought up amongst Spaniards, then from the
Hollanders, who as they were little bound unto the Spanish Nation for mercy, so
did we expect little from them. The Captain of this Holland Ship which took us
was a Mulatto, born and bred in Havana, whose Mother I saw and spoke with
afterward that same year, when the Galeons struck into that Port to expect
there the rest that were to come from Vera Cruz. This Mulatto for some wrongs
which had been offered unto him from some commanding Spaniards in the Havana,
ventured himself desperately in a boat out to the Sea, where were some Holland
Ships waiting for a prize, and with Gods help getting unto them, yielded
himself to their mercy, which he esteemed far better then that of his own
Countrymen, promising to serve them faithfully against his own Nation, which
had most injuriously and wrongfully abused, yea and (as I was afterward
informed) whipped him in the Havana.

This Mulatto proved so true and faithful in his good services unto the
Hollanders, that they esteemed mnch of him, married him to one of their Nation,
and made him Captain of a Ship under that brave and gallant Hollander whom the
Spaniards then so much feared, and named, Pie de Palo, or Wooden Leg. This
famous Mulatto it was that with his Sea Soldiers borded our Frigate, in the
which he had found little worth his labor, had it not been for the Indians
offerings which I carried with me, of which I lost that day the worth of four
thousand Patacons or pieces of eight in pearls, and precious stones, and near
three thousand more in money. The other Spaniards lost some hundreds a piece,
which was so rich a prize, that it made the Hollanders stomach loath the rest
of our gross provision of Bacon, Meal and Fowls, and our money tasted
sweeter unto them, then the Honey which our Frigate also afforded them. Other
things I had (as a Quilt to lie on, some Books, and Lamina's, which are
pictures in brass, and clothes) which I begged of that Noble Captain the
Mulatto, who considering my Orders and calling, gave me them freely, and
wished me to be patient, saying that he could do no otherwise then he did
with my money and Pearls, and using that common Proverb at Sea, Oy por mi,
manana por ti, to day fortune has been for me, tomorrow it may be for thee:
or to day I have got what tomorrow I may lose again. Here I made use also of
that common saying, that i^ gotten goods never thrive, and perceived it was the
will of my heavenly Father to take from me what so unlawfully by superstitious
and idolatrous Masses, by Offerings unto Idols and Statues of Saints I had got
amongst the Indians. I offered in lieu of those former offerings my will unto
my Lord Gods will, desiring him to grant me patience to bear that great loss.
I confess, though it was very cross to flesh and blood, yet I found an inward
spiritual strengthening from above, and to be very true what Panl writes to the
Hebrews in the 12 Chapter, and Verse 11. saying, No chastening for the present
seems to be joyous, but grievous; nevertheless afterward it yields the
peaceable fruit of righteousness unto them which are exercised thereby: for
that very day I found my inward man quiet and peaceable with a full and total
submission unto the holy will of God, which I desired might bec done in earth,
in the Sea, and performed and obeyed by me at that present, as it is always
done in heaven. And although this was my best and chief comfort, yet from the
creature by the Creators permission I had also some comfort left in a few
pistols, some single, some double, which I had sowed up in my Quilt (which the
Captain restored unto me, saying it was the bed I lay in) and in the doublet
which I had at that present, which mounted to almost a thousand Crowns, and in
their searching was not found out. After the Captain and Soldiers had well
viewed their prize, they thought of refreshing their stomachs with some of our
provision; the good Captain made a stately dinner in our Frigate, and invited
me unto it, and knowing that I was going toward the Havana, besides many
other brindi's or healths, he drank oneunto his mother, desiring me to see
her, and to remember him unto her, and how that for her sake he had used me
well and courteously in what he could; and further at Table he said that for
my sake he would give us our Frigate that we might return again to land, and
that I might find out from thence some safer way and means to get to Portobels,
and to continue on my journey unto Spain. After dinner I conferred with the
Captain alone, and told him that I was no Spaniard, but an English man born,
showing him the License which I had from Rome to go to England, and that
therefore I hoped, not being of an enemy nation to the Hollanders, he would
restore unto me what goods were mine. But all this was of little consequence
with him, who had already taken possession of mine, and all other goods in the
ship: he told me, I must suffer with those, amongst whom I was found, and that
I might as well claim all the goods in the ship for mine. I desired him then to
carry me along with him to Holland, that from thence I might get to England,
which also he refused to do, telling me that he went about from one place to
another, and knew not when he should go to Holland, and that he was daily
ready to fight with any Spanish ship, and if he should fight with the Spaniards
whilst I was in his ship, his soldiers in their hot blood might be ready to
do me a mischief, thinking I would do them harm, if in fight they should be
taken by the Spaniards. With these his answers I saw there was no hope of
getting again what now was lost, therefore (as before) I commended my self
again to Gods providence and protection. The Soldiers and Mariners of the
Holland ship, made have that afternoon, to unlode the goods of our Frigate into
their Man of war, which took them up that, and part of the next day, whilst
we as prisoners were wafting up and down the sea with them. And whereas we
thought our money had satisfied them enough, and to the full, we found the next
day that they had also a stomach to our fowls and Bacon, and wanted our Meal
to make them bread, and our honey to sweeten their mouths, and our Hydes for
shoes and boots; all which they took away, leaving me my Quilt, Books, and
brass pictures, and to the Master of the frigate some small provision, as much
as might carry us to land, which was not far off, and thus they took their
leaves of us, thanking us for their good entertainment. And we weary of such
guests, some praying to God that they might never entertain the like again,
some cursing them all, and especially the Mulatto to hell, calling him
Renegado; some thanking God for their lives which were given them for a prey,
we all returned again to Suere from whence we had set out, and going up the
river, were almost like to be cast away, and lose our lives, after we had lost
our goods. When we came to land, the Spaniards about the Country pitied our
case, and helped us with alms gathering a Collection for us. The three
Spaniards of my company lost all their money and most of their best clothes, yet
they had reserved some bills of Exchange for money to be taken up at Portobelo;
which I wished I had also for what I had lost. For the present we knew not what
course to take; we thought of going to Rio de los Anzuelos, but we were
informed that certainly the frigates there were either gone, or would be gone
before we could get thither; and if they stayed not with the news of the
Hollanders ships at sea, they either already were or would be their prize, as
we had been. We resolved therefore with the charitable assistance of the
Spaniards about the Country to return again to Carthago, and from thence to
take some better directions. In the way we conferred what we had saved, the
Spaniards bragged yet of their bills of Exchange, which would yield them money
at Garthago, I would not let them know what I had saved, but somewhat I told
them I had kept; and we agreed all the way we went to signify nothing but
poverty and misery, that the Indians and Spaniards in the way might pity and
commiserate us, and our great losses. When we came to Carthago we were indeed
much pitied, and Collections were made for us; and as it was expected from
me, that I should sing again at the Altars (who truly could rather have
cried to see and consider my many misfortunes and disasters, which I desired
might at last by a safe return to England, prove the trials of the faith I
intended to search out) and that I should preach wheresoever I came; so by
these two ways, of singing and of hudling over Dominus vobiscum and the rest
of the Mass, and by accepting of what Sermons were recommended unto me, I
began again to store my self with moneys. Yet I knew that in such a poor
Country as that was, where I was little known, I could not possibly get
enough to bring me home with credit into England; and therefore the cunning
enemy finding me to stand upon my credit, began strongly to tempt me to return
again to Guatemala (where I doubted not but I should be welcomed and
entertained by my friends) and to settle my self there, until I had again by
sacrilegious, base, superstitious, and idolatrous means, and works, made up a
new purse to return with credit home.

But I perceiving that God already had showed himself angry, and justly taken
from me, what by unlawful means I had in twelve years obtained, bad Satan
avaunt, purposing never more to return to the flesh pots of Egypt, and to go
still homewards, though in the way I did beg my bread. Yet (lest I might be
suspected amongst the Spaniards, and troubled for not exercising my orders and
function) I resolved to take what as to a stranger and traveller for preaching
or any other exercise might be offered unto me.

Thus with courage resolving to go on still toward England, I enquired at
Carthago which way I might get to Portobelo. But this door of hope was fast
shut up; though my trust in Gods providence was not weakened. In this season,
there came to Carthago some two or three hundred Mules unsadled or unloaden
with some Spaniards, Indians, and Black-mores, from the parts of Comayagua and
Guatemala to convey them to Panama by land, over the mountains of Veragua
there to be sold. This is the yearly and only trading by land, which
Guatemala, Comayagua, and Nicaragua, has with Panama over that narrow Isthmus
lying between the North, and South sea, which is very dangerous by reason of
the craggy ways, rocks, and mountains, but more especially, by reason of
many Heathens, Barbarians and savage people, which as yet are not conquered by
the Spaniards, and sometimes do great hurt and mischief, and kill those that
with Mules pass through their Country, especially if they misdemean
themselves, or please them not well. Yet for all these difficulties, I was
entertaining a thought to go along with those Mules and Spaniards, which were
now on their way by land to Panama. The three Spaniards were half of the same
mind; but the providence of God who better orders and disposes man's affairs
then he himself, disappointed these our thoughts for our good and safety, as
after we were informed; for we heard for certain at Nicoya, that some of those
Mules and Spaniards were killed by the Barbarians and savage Indians, amongst
whom my life might have been lost, if I had attempted that hard and dangerous
journey; from which many well wishers at Carthago did dissuade me, both for the
danger of the Indians, and for the difficulties of the ways and mountains,
which they told me the weakness of my body would never endure. After we had
wholly desisted from this Land journey, the best counsel, that we had from
some Merchants our friends, was to try whether Mar del Zur, or the South sea,
would favor our design and journey, better then the Mar del Nor^, or the
North sea had done; who wished us to go to Nic^ya, and from thence to Chira,
and to the Golfo de Salinas, where they doubted not but we should find shipping
to Panama. We were willing to follow any good advise and counsel; yet we knew
that this was the last shift which we could make, and the non plus ultra of our
hopes, and that if here we should be disappointed, we could expect no other way
ever to get to Panama, except we should venture our lives most desperately over
the mountains of Veragua, and by land without any guide or company through the
Country of the Barbarians, (who before had slain some Spaniards passing that
way) or else should return again, all the way that we had come, to Realejo,
where our hopes might be frustrated, and peradventure no shipping found for
Panama, without a years waiting for it.

We resolved therefore to follow this our friends counsel, and to go yet to
Nicoya, and from thence to Golfo de Salinas, where laughing, I told the three
Spaniards of my company, that if we were disappointed, we would like Hercules
set up a Pillar to eternize our fame, with our names, and this inscription upon
it, Non plus Ultra, for that beyond it there was no other Port, Haven, orplacc,
to take shipping to Panama; neither could any man have done more (nor ever did
any English man in that Country do more then my self) then we had done, but
especially my self, who from Mexico had thus traveled by land to Nicoya at
least six hundred leagues, or eighteen hundred English miles straight from
North to South, besides what I had traveled from Vera Cruz to Mexico, and from
Guatemala to Vera Pa^, and to Puerto de Cav^es, or Golfo dulce, and from thence
to Truaillo, and from thence back again to Guatemala, which was at least
thirteen or fourteen hundred English miles more, which I thought to eternize
upon a pillar at Nicoya. But what there was not erected, I hope here shall be
eterni^ed, and that this my true and faithful History shall be a Monument of
three thousand, and three hundred miles traveled by an English man, within the
main land of America, besides other sea navigations to Panama, from (...) to
Carthag^, and from thence unto the Hav^na. The way which we traveled from
Carthago to Nicoya was very mountainous, hard, and unpleasant, for we met with
^w Estancia'^ of Spaniards, and few Indian Towns, and those very poor, small,
and all of dejec^d and wretched people. Yet Nicoya is a pretty Town, and head
of a Spanish government, where we found one Iusto de Salazar, Alcalde Mayor,
who entertained us very well, and provided lodgings for us for the time that
we should abide there, and comforted us with hopeful words, that though for
the present there was no ship or frigate in the Golfe of Salinas, yet he doubted
not, but very shortly one would come from Panama thither, for Salt and other
commodities, as yearly they were wont. The time of the year when we came
thither, was a fit time for me to get again some moneys after my great loss;
for it was in Lent which is the Friars chiefest harvest, who (as I have before
observed) then by Confessions and by giving the Communion get many money
offerings.

The time, and the Franciscan Friar who had the Pastorship and charge of that
Town, were both very commodious unto me, who could not refuse as long as I
stayed there to exercise my function, lest I should bring a just cause of
suspicion and aspersion upon my self. The Friar of the Town was a Portingal,
who about three weeks before my coming thither had had a very great bickering
and strife with Iusto de Salazar the Alcalde Mayor, for defending the Indians,
whom Salazar did grievously oppress, employing them in his, and his wifes
service as slaves, and not paying them what for the sweat of their brows was
due unto them, and commanding them to be from their home and from their wives,
and from their Church upon the Sabbath, working for him as well that day as any
other. Which the Friar not enduring, charged them in the pulpit, not to obey
any such unlawful commands from their Alcalde Mayor. But Iusto de Salazar (who
had been trained up in wars and fighting, and had served formerly in the
Castle of Milan) thought it a great disparagement unto him, now to be curbed by
a Friar, and by such a one to be interrupted in his government of the Indians,
and in the ways of his own lucre and gain. Therefore after many bitter words
and defiances, which had passed between him and the Friar, he came one day
resolutely to the Friars house with his sword drawn; and certainly had not the
Friar been assisted by some of the Indians, he had killed him. The Friar being
as hot as he, and standing upon his calling, Orders, and Preisthood, presuming
that he durst not touch him violently, lest his privilege should bring an
excommunication upon the striker and offendour, would not fly from him, but
dared him boldly; which was a strong provocation to Satazars heat and passion,
and caused him to lift up his sword, and aim his blow and stroke at the Friar,
which fell so unhappily that with it he struck of two of the Friars fingers,
and had undoubtedly seconded another blow more hurtful and dangerous to the
Friar, had not the Indians interposed themselves, and shut up their Priest into
hi^ chamber. Iusto was for this action excommunicated, yet for that he was a
man of high authority, he soon got off his excommunication from the Bishop of
Costarica, and sent his complaint to the Chancery of Guatemala against the
Friar, where with friends and money he doubted not but to overcome the Mendicant
Priest, as it happened after; for (as I was informed) he caused the Friar to
be sent for up to the Court, and there prevailed so much against him, that he
got him to be removed from Nicoya. In this season the Friar kept his house and
chamber, and would by no means go out to the Church, either to say Mass, or
to preach, or hear Confessions, (all which that time of the year did require of
him) but had got one to help him; who alone not being able to perform so
great a charge of many hundred Indians, Spaniards, Black-mores, and Mulaito's,
who from the Country without, and from the Town within expected to have their
Confessions heard, their sins absolved, the word preached, and the Communion to
be given them; hearing of my coming desired me to assist and help him, and
that for my pains I should have my meat and drink at his table, and a Crown
daily for every Mass, and whatsoever else the people should voluntarily offer,
besides the Sermons, which should be well rewarded unto me. I stayed in this
Town from the second week of Lent until Easter week, where what with three
Sermons atten Crowns a piece, what with my daily stipend and many other
offerings, I got about an hundred and fifty Crowns.

The week before Easter news came of a frigate from Pan^ma to Golfo de
Salina^, which much comforted us, who already began to mistrust the delay. The
Master of the frigate came to Nic^ya, which is as Court thereabouts; and with
him the three Spaniards and my self agreed for our passage to Panama. About
Chira, Golfo de Salinas, and Nic^ya, there are some farms of Spaniards, few
and very small Indian Towns, who are all like slaves employed by the Alcalde
Mayor, to make him a kind of thread called Pita, which is a very rich Commodity
in Spain, especially of that color wherewith it is dyed in these parts of
Nicoja, which a is purple color; for the which the Indians are here much
charged to work about the Sea shore, and there to find out certain shells,
wherewith they make this purple dye.

There are also shells for other colors, which are not known to be so
plentifully in any other place as here. About Chira and Golfo de Salinas the
chief commodities are Salt, Honey, Maiz, some Wheat and Fowls, which every year
they send by some few Frigates to Panama, which from thence come on purpose to
fetch them with this purple colored thread, or Pita, which I have spoken of.
The Frigate which came when I was there, was soon laden with these Commodities,
and with it we set out ho^ng to have been at Panama within five or six days.
But as often before we had been crossed, so likewise in this short passage we
were striving with the Wind, Sea, and Corrientes, as they are called (which are
swift streams as of a River) four full weeks. After the first day that we
set out, we were driven with a wind and storm toward Peru, till we came
under the very Aequinoctiall line, where what with excessive heat, what with
mighty storms, we utterly despaired of life. But after one week that we had
thus run toward, it pleased God in whom and by whom all creatures live, move,
and have their being, to comfort us again with hopes of life, sending us a
prosperous gale, which drove us out of that Equinoctial heat, and stormy Sea,
toward the Islands of Perlas, and Puerta de Chame, lying on the South side of
the Mountains of Veragua, from whence we hoped within two days at the most,
to be at rest and Anchor at Panama. But yet these our hopes were frustrated,
for there our wind was calmed, and we fell upon those strong Corrientes or
streams, which drove us back in the night for the space of almost a fortnight
as much as we had sailed in the day. Had not God again been merciful here
unto us, we had certainly perished in this our striving with the stream; for
although we wanted not provision of food, yet our drink falled us so, that for
four days we tasted neither drop of wine or water, or any thing that might
quench our thirst, save only a little honey which we found did cause more
thirst in us, which made me and some others to drink our own Urine, and to
refresh our mouths with pieces of lead bullets, which did for a while refresh,
but would not long have sufficed Nature, had not Gods good Providence sent us
such a wind which in the day drove us quite off from those Corrientes. Our
first thoughts were then to strike either to the Continent, or some Island of
many which were about us to seek for water, finding our bodies weak and
languishing; which the Captain of the Ship would by no means yield unto,
assuring us that that day he would land us at Panama; but we not being able
to sail on without drink, unless we should yield to have our dead and not
live bodies landed where he promised, thought it no good purchase though we
might buy all Panama with our lives, which we judged could not hold out
another day; and seeing that the wind began to slacken, we all required him to
strike into some Island for water; which he stubbornly refused and denied to
do; whereupon the three Spaniards and some of the Mariners mutined against him
with drawn Swords, threatening to kill him if he betook not himself presently
to some Island. The good Master thought it bad sport to see Swords at his
breast, and so commanded his Ship to be turned to two or three Islands, which
were not above two or three hours sail from us. When we drew nigh unto them,
we cast our Anchor, and our Cock-boat, and happy was he that could first cast
himself into it to be rowed to land to fill his belly with water. The first
Island we landed upon, was on that side unhabitable, where we spent much time
running to and fro, over heating our selves and increasing our thirst; thus
whilst one ran one way, and another tried another to find out some fountain,
our hopes being frustrated and I lost in the Wood, and my shoes torn from my
fee^, with stony rocks, and many thorns and bushes in other places; my company
betook themselves to the Cock-boat to try another Island, leaving me alone,
and lost in the Wood; out of which at last when I came, and found the Cock-boat
gone from the shore, I began to consider my self a dead man, thinking that they
had found water and were gone to Ship, and not finding me would ^oise up their
sails for Panama. Thus being dejected I cried out to the Ship, which I
perceived could not possibly hear my weak voice, and running up and down the
Rocks to see if I could discover the Cock-boat, I perceived it was not with the
Ship, and espied it at the next Island. With this I began to hope better things
of them that they would call for me when they had gotten water; so I came down
from the Rocks to the plain shore, where I found a shade of trees and amongst
them some berries (which might have been poison, for I knew them not) wherewith
I refreshed my mouth for a while; but my body so burned that I thought there
with heat, weakness and faintness I should have expired and given up the
Ghost. I thought by stripping my self naked and going into the Sea unto my
neck, I might thus refresh my body, which I did, and coming out again into
the shade, I fell into a deep sleep, in so much that the Cock-boat coming for
me, and the company hollowing unto me, I awaked not, which made them fear
that I was dead or lost; till landing, one searched for me one way, and
another another, and so they found me, who might have been a prey to some wild
Beast, or slept till the Frigate had gone away, and so have perished in a barren
and unhabitable Island. When they awaked me, I was glad to see my good
company, and the first thing I enquired for, was, if they had got any water;
they bad me be of good cheer and arise, for they had water enough, and
Oranges and Lemmons from another Island, where they met with Spaniards that did
inhabit it. I made haste with them to the Boat, and no sooner was I entered into
it, but they gave me to drink as much as I would. The water was warm and
unsettled, for they could not take it up so but that they took of the gravel
and bottom of the Fountain, which made it look very muddy; yet for all this
(as though my life had depended upon it) I drank up a whole pot of it; which no
sooner had I drank, but such was the weakness of my stomach that it presently
cast it up again not being able to bear it. With this they wished me to eat
an Orange or a Lemmon; but them also did my stomach reject; so to our Frigate
we went, and in the way I fainted so that the company verily thought I would
die, before we got aboard. When we came thither I called again for water,
which was no sooner down my stomach, but presently up again; they had me to
bed with a burning Fever upon me; where I lay that night expecting nothing
but death, and that the Sea should be my grave.

The Master of the Ship seeing the wind was turned, began to be much troubled,
and feared that with that wind he should never get to Panama. He resolved to
venture upon a way, which never before he had tried; which was, to get between
the two Islands which we had searched for water, knowing that the wind, which
on this side was contrary, on the other side of the Islands would be
favorable unto him. Thus toward the Evening he took up Anchor and hoised up
his sails, and resolved to pass his Frigate between the two Islands; which how
dangerous and desperate an attempt it was, the event witnessed. I lay in this
season (as I may truly say) upon my death bed, not regarding which way the
Master of the Ship, or fortune carried me, so that the mercy of the Lord
carried my soul to heaven. No sooner had the Frigate steered her course between
the narrow passage of the two Islands, when being carried with the stream too
much to the one side of the land it ran upon a Rock; so that the very stern was
lifted up, and almost cast out of the Pilots hands, who cried out not to God,
but unto the Virgin Mary saying, Ayudad nos Virgen Santissima, que si no aqui
nos perece^os, help us, O most holy Virgin, for if not, here were perish. This,
and the outcry of all that were in the Frigate gave unto me an Alarm of death;
from the which yet it pleased God by the means and diligence of the painful
Mariners to deliver me and all the Company, for with much ado most part of
that night they haled from the Cockboat the Frigate off from the Rock, after the
stream had made it three several times to strike upon it. After a very
troublesome night in the morning we got our little Shi^ out of all danger and
from between the two Islands on the other side of them, where we sailed
prosperously toward Panama. That morning my stomach recovered some of its lost
strength, and I began to eat and to drink, and to walk about, rejoicing much to
see those pleasant Islands which we sailed by. In the Evening we got to
Puerto de Perico; where we cast Anchor, expecting to be searched in the
morning; but that night (the Master of our Ship having gone to shore) the wind
turned and blew so strong that we lost our Anchor* and and were driven back
almost to la Pacheque and feared we should be carried out into the Ocean
again so far that we should with great difficulty get to Panama. But that
God whom the Sea and winds do obey, turned again that contrary wind into a
prosperous gale, wherewith we came once more unto Perico; and being searched
we went on with full sail to Panama; Being near the* Port and without an
Anchor in our Ship the wind once more blew us back and had not the Ship Master
sent us an Anchor, we had gone again to Pacheque or further. But with that
anchor we stayed all that night at Perico, wondering among our selves that so
many crosses should befall us, which made some say that we were bewitched;
others, that certainly there was amongst us some excommunicated person, whom
they said if they knew of, they would hurl him over board. Whilst they were in
this discourse, the wind turned yet again, and we levying our anchor went on
to Panama, whither it pleased God that time safely to conduct us in. I being
now well strengthened made no stay in that frigate, which I thought would have
been my last abiding place in this world, but went to land, and betook my
self to the Cloister of the Dominicans, where I stayed almost fifteen days
viewing and reviewing that City; which is governed like Guatemala by a
President and six Judges, and a Court of Chancery, and is a Bishops sea. It
has more strength toward the South sea, then any other Port which on that
side I had seen, and some Ordnances planted for the defense of it; but the
houses are of the least strength of any place that I had entered in; for lime
and stone is hard to come by, and therefore for that reason, and for the great
heat there, most of the houses are built of timber and bords; the Presidents
house, nay the best Church walls are but bords, which serve for stone and
brick, and for tiles to cover the top. The heat is so extraordinary that a
linen cut doublet, with some slight stuff or taffetie breeches is the common
clothing of the inhabitants. Fish, fruits and herbage for sallets is more
plentiful there then flesh; the cool water of the Coco is the women's best
drink, though Chocolate also, and much wine from Peru be very abounding. The
Spaniards are in this City much given to sin, looseness and venery
especially, who make the Black-mores, (who are many, rich, and gallant) the
chief objects of their lust. It is held to be one of the richest places in all
America, having by land and by the river Chiagre commerce with the North sea,
and by the South, trading with all Peru, East-India's, Mexico, and Honduras.
Thither is brought the chief treasure of Peru in two or three great ships,
which lie at anchor at Puerto de Perico some three leagues from the City; for
the great ebbing of the sea at that place especially suffers not any great
vessel to come nearer, where daily the sea ebbs and falls away from the City
two or three miles, leaving a mud, which is thought to cause much
unhealthinesse in that place, being seconded with many other muddy and moorish
places about the Town. It consists of some five thousand inhabitants, and
maintains at least eight Cloisters of Nuns and Friars. I feared much the
heats, and therefore made as much haste out of it as I could. I had my choice
of company by land and water to Portobelo. But considering the hardness of the
mountains by land, I resolved to go by the river Chiagre; and so at midnight
I set out from Panama to Venta de Cruzes, which is ten or twelve leagues from
it. The way is thither very plain for the most part, and pleasant in the
morning and evening.

Before ten of the clock we got to Venta de Cruzes, where live none but
Mulatto's and Black-mores, who belong unto the flat boats that carry the
merchandise to Portobel. There I had very good entertainment by that people,
who desired me to preach unto them the next Sabbath day, and gave me twenty
Crowns for a Sermon, and procession. After five days of my abode there, the
boats set out, which were much stopped in their passage down the river; for in
some places we found the water very low, so that the boats ran upon the
gravel; from whence with poles and the strength of the Black-mores they were
to be lifted off again; sometimes again we met with such streams that carried
us with the swiftness of an arrow down under trees and boughs by the river
side, which sometimes also stopped us till we had cut down great branches of
trees. Had not it pleased God to send us after the first week plentiful
rain, which made the water run down from the mountains and fill the river
(which otherwise of it self is very shallow) we might have had a tedious and
longer passage; but after twelve days we got to the sea, and at the point
landed at the Castle to refresh our selves for half a day. Certainly the
Spaniards trust to the streams and shallowness of that river, which they
think will keep off any forain nation, from attempting to come up to Venta de
Cruzes and from thence to Panama, or else they would strengthen more and
fortify that Castle, which in my time wanted great reparations, and was ready
to fall down to the ground. The Governor of the Castle was a notable
wine-bibber, who plied us with that liquor the time that we stayed there, and
wanting a Chaplain for himself, and Soldiers, would feign have had me stayed
with him, but greater matters called me further, and so I took my leave of
him, who gave us some dainties of fresh meat, fish, and conserves, and so
dismissed us. We got out to the open sea, discovering first the Escudo de
Veragua, and keeping somewhat close unto the land we went on rowing toward
Portobel, till the evening which was Saturday night; then we cast anchor behind
a little Island, resolving in the morning to enter in Portobel. The Black-mores
all that night kept watch for fear of Hollanders, whom they said did often lie
in wait thereabouts for the boats of Chiagre; but we passed the night safely,
and next morning got to Portobelo, whose haven we observed to be very strong
with two Castles at the mouth and constant watch within them, and another
called St. Miguel further in the Port.

When I came into the Haven I was sorry to see that as yet the Galeons were not
come from Spain, knowing that the longer I stayed in that place, greater would
be my charges. Yet I comforted my self that the time of the year was come, and
that they could not long delay their coming. My first thoughts were of taking
up a lodging, which at that time were plentiful and cheap, nay some were
offered me for nothing with this caveat, that when the Galeons did come, I must
either leave them, or pay a dear rate for them. A kind Gentleman, who was the
Kings Treasurer, falling in discourse with me promised to help me, that I
might be cheaply lodged even when the ships came, and lodgings were at the
highest rate. He, interposing his authority, went with me to seek one, which
at the time of the fleets being there, might continue to be mine. It was no
bigger then would contain a bed, a table, and a stool or two, with room
enough besides to open and shut the door, and they demanded of me for it
during the foresaid time of the Fleet, sixcore Crowns, which commonly is a
fortnight. For the Town being little, and the Soldiers, that come with the
Galeons for their defense at least four or five thousand; besides Merchants
from Pern, from Spain and many other places to buy and sell, is the cause that
every room, though never so small be dear; and sometimes all the lodgings in
the Town are few enough for so many people, which at that time do meet at
Portobel. I knew a Merchant who gave a thousand Crowns for a shop of
reasonable bigness, to sell his wares and commodities that year that I was
there, for fifteen days only, which the Fleet continued to be in that Haven. I
thought it much for me to give the sixcore Crowns which were demanded of me
for a room, which was but as a mouse hole, and began to be troubled, and told
the Kings Treasurer that I had been lately robbed at sea, and was not able to
give so much, and be besides at charges for my diet, which I feared would
prove as much more. But not a farthing would be abated of what was asked;
whereupon the good Treasurer pitying me, offered to the man of the house to pay
him threescore Crown^ of it, if so be that I was able to pay the rest, which I
must do, or else lie without in the street. Yet till the Fleet did come I
would not enter into this dear hole, but acceptted of another fair lodging
which was offered me for nothing. Whilst I thus expected the Fleets coming,
some money and offerings I got for Masses, and for two Sermons which I preached
at fifteen Crowns a piece. I visited the Castles, which indeed seemed unto me
to be very strong; but what most I wondered at was to see the requa's of Mules
which came thither from Panama, laden with wedges of silver; in one day I told
two hundred Mules laden with nothing else, which were unladen in the public
Market place, so that there the heaps of silver wedges lay like heaps of
stones in the street, without any fear or suspicion of being lost. Within ten
days the fleet came, consisting of eight Galeons and ten Merchant ships, which
forced me to run to my hole. It was a wonder then to see the multitude of
people in those streets which the week before had been empty.

Then began the price of all things to rise, a fowl to be worth twelve Rials,
which in the main land within I had often bought for one; a pound of beef then
was worth two Rialls, whereas I had had in other places thirteen pound for half
a Riall, and so of all other food and provision, which was so excessive dear,
that I knew not how to live but by fish and Tortoises, which there are very
many, and though somewhat dear, yet were the cheapest meat that I could eat.
It was worth seeing how Merchants sold their commodities, not by the Ell or
yard, but by the piece and weight, not paying in coined peaces of money, but in
wedges which were weighed and taken for commodities. This lasted but fifteen
days, whilst the Galeons were lading with wedges of (...) and nothing else; so
that for thos^ fifteen days, I d^re boldly say and avouch, that in the world
there is no greater Fair then that of Portobel, between the Spanish Merchants
and those of Peru, Panama, and other parts thereabouts.

Whilst this traffic was, it happened unto me, that which I have formerly
testified in my Recantation Sermon at Paul's Church, which if by that means it
have not come unto the knowledge of many, I desire again to record it in this
my History, that to all England it may be published; which was, that one day
saying Mass in the chief Church, after the Consecration of the bread, being
with my eyes shut at that mental prayer, which the Church of Rome calls the
Memento for their dead, there came from behind the Altar a mouse, which running
about, came to the very bread or wafer God of the Papists, and taking it in his
mouth ran away with it, not being perceived by any of the people who were at
Mass, for that the Altar was high by reason of the steps going up to it, and
the people far beneath. But as soon as I opened my eyes to go on with my
Mass, and perceived my God stolen away, I looked about the Altar, and saw the
mouse running away with it; which on a sudden did so stupifie me, that I knew
not well what to do or say, and calling my wits together, I thought that if I
should take no notice of the mischance, and any body else in the Church should,
I might justly be questioned by the Inquisition; but if I should call to the
people to look for the Sacrament, then I might be but chid and rebuked for my
carelessenesse; which of the two I thought would be more easily borne, then the
rigor of the Inquisition. Whereupon not knowing what the people had seen, I
turned my self unto them, and called them unto the Altar, and told them
plainly, that whilst I was in my Memento prayers and meditations, a mouse had
carried away the Sacrament, and that I knew not what to do, unless they would
help me to find it out again. The people called a Priest that was at hand, who
presently brought in more of his Coat; and as if their God by this had been
eaten up they presently prepared themselves to find out the thief, as if they
would eat up the mouse that had so assaulted and abused their God; they lighted
candles and torches to find out the Malefactor in his secret and hidden places
of the wall; and after much searching and enquiry for the sacrilegious beast,
they found at last in a hole of the wall the Sacrament half eaten up; which
with great joy they took out, and as if the Arc had been brought again from
the Philistines to the Israelites, so they rejoiced for their new found God,
whom with many people now resorted to the Church, with many lights of candles
and Torches, with joyful and solemn music they carried about the Church in
procession. My self was present upon my knees, shaking and quivering for what
might be done unto me, and expecting my doom and judgment; and as the
Sacrament passed by me, I observed in it the marks and signs of the teeth of
the mouse, as they are to be seen in a piece of cheese gnawne and eaten by it.

This struck me with such horror, that I cared not at that present whether I
had been torn in a thousand pieces for denying publickely that Mouse-eaten
God, I called to my best memory all Philosophy concerning substance and
accidents, and resolved within my self that what I saw gnawne, was not an
accident, but some real substance eaten and devoured by that vermin, which
certainly was fed and nourished by what it had eaten, and Philosophy well
teaches; substantia Cibi (non accidentis) convertitur in substantiam aliti,
the substance (not the accident) of the food or meat is converted, and turned
into the substance of the thing fed by it and alimented; Now here I knew that
this Mouse had fed upon some substance, or else how could the marks of the
teeth so plainly appear? But no Papist will be willing to answer that it fed
upon the substance of Christ's Body, ergo by good consequence it follows that
it fed upon the substance of bread; and so Transubstantiation here in my
judgment was confuted by a Mouse; which mean and base creature God chose to
convince me of my former errors, and made me now resolve upon what many
years before I had doubted, that certainly the point of Transubstantiation
taught by the Church of Rome is most damnable and erroneous; for besides, what
before I have observed, it contradicts that Philosophical Axiom, teaching
that duo contradictoria non possunt simul and semel de codem verificari, two
contradictories cannot at once and at the self same time be said, and verified
of the same thing; but here it was so; for here in Romes Judgment and opinion
Christ's body was gnawne and eaten, and at the same time the same body in
another place and upon another Altar in the hands of another Priest was not
eaten and gnawne, Therefore here are two contradictories verified of the same
body of Christ: to wit, it was eaten and gnawne, and it was not eaten and
gnawne. These impressions at that time were so great in me, that I resolved
within my self, that bread really and truly was eaten upon that Altar, and by
no means Christ's glorious body which is in heaven, and cannot be upon earth,
subject to the hunger or violence of a creature. Here again I desired with
godly David, that I might have the wings of a Dove to fly into my Country of
England, and there be satisfied upon this point, and be at rest of Conscience.
Here I resolved that if I had been questioned for my carelessenesse, or for my
contempt of that Romish Sacrament (which I thought would be the judgment of
the Spaniards, who knew me to be an English man borne) that I would sacrifice
willingly my life for the Protestant truth, which as yet I had been no
otherwise taught, but by that Spirit which (as Solomon well observes) in a man
is the candle of the Lord. I conceived here that this was some comfort to my
soul, which my good God will afford me in the way of my traveling to Canaan,
that I might more willingly bear whatsoever crosses yet might befall me in my
way and Journey to England. The event of this accident was not any trouble that
fell upon me for it; for indeed the Spaniards attributed it unto the
carelessness of him, who had care of the Altars in the Church, and not to any
contempt in me to the Sacrament. The part of the wafer that was left after the
Mouse had filled her belly, was laid up after the Solemn Procession about the
Church, in a Tabernacle for that purpose, that afterward it might be eaten up
by some hungry Priest. And because such a high contempt had been offered by a
contemptible Vermin to their Bread God, it was commanded through Portabel that
day, that all the people should humble themselves and mourn, and fast with
bread and water only. Although I saw I was not questioned for the case, yet I
feared where there were so many Soldiers, and forain people, that by some or
other I might be mischiefed out of their blind zeal, wherefore I thought it
not amiss for a day or two to keep within my lodging. Don Carlos de Ybarra,
who was the Admiral of that Fleet, made great haste to be gone; which made
the Merchants buy and sell apace, and lade the ships with silver wedges;
whereof I was glad, for the more they laded, the less I unladed my purse with
buying dear provision, and sooner I hoped to be out of that unhealthy place,
which of it self is very hot, and subject to breed Fevers, nay death, if the
feet be not preserved from wetting when it raineth; but especially when the
Fleet is there, it is an open grave ready to swallow in part of that numerous
people, which at that time resort unto it, as was seen the year that I was
there when about five hundred of the Soldiers, Merchants, and Mariners, what
with Fevers, what with the Flux caused by too much eating of fruit and
drinking of water, what with other disorders lost their lives, finding it to
be to them not Porto bello, but Porto malo. And this is usual every year;
and therefore for the relief and comfort of those that come sick from Sea, or
sicken there, a great and rich Hospital is in the Town, with many Friars
called* De la Capacha, or by others De Iuan de Dios, whose calling and
profession is only to cure, and attend upon the sick, and to bear the dead
unto their graves. The Admiral fearing the great sickness that year, made
haste to be gone, not fearing the report that was of some three or four Holland
or English ships abroad at Sea, waiting (as it was supposed) for some good
prize out of that great and rich Fleet. This news made me begin to fear,
and to think of securing my self in one of the best and strongest Galeons;
but when I came to treat of my passage in one of them, I found that I could not
be carried in any under three hundred Crowns, which was more then my purse
was able to afford. With this I thought to address my self to some Master of a
Merchants ship, though I knew I could not be so safe and secure in any of
them, as in a Galeon well manned and fortified with Soldiers, and Guns of
Brass; yet I hoped in God, who is a strong refuge to them that fear him, and
in this occasion provided for me a cheap and sure passage. For meeting one day
with my friend the Treasurer, he again pitying me as a stranger and lately
robbed, commended me to the Master of a Merchant Ship, called St. Sebastian,
whom he knew was desirous to carry a Chaplain with him at his own Table. I no
sooner addressed my self unto him, using the name and favor of his and my
friend the Treasurer, but presently I found him willing to accept of my
company, promising to carry me for nothing, and to board me at his own Table,
only for my prayers to God for him and his; offer^ further to give me some
satisfaction for whatsoever Sermons I should preach in his Ship. I blessed God,
acknowledging in this also his Providence, who in all occasions furthered my
return to England. The Ships being laden we set forth toward Carthagena; and
the second day of our sailing we discovered four Ships which made the
Merchant Ships afraid, and to keep close to the Galeons, trusting to their
strength more then their own. The Ship I was in, was swift and nimble under
sail, and kept still under the wings either of the Admiral or of some other of
the best Galeons; but all the other Merchants Ships were not so, but some
slowly came on behind, whereof two were carried away by the Hollanders in the
night, before ever we could get to Carthagena.

The greatest fear that I perceived possessed the Spaniards in this Voyage,
was about the Island of Providence, called by them Sta Catalina, or St.
Catharine, from whence they feared lest some English Ships should come out
against them with great strength. They cursed the English in it, and called the
Island, the den of thieves and Pirates, wishing that their King of Spain would
take some course with it; or else, that it would prove very prejudicial to the
Spaniards, lying near the mouth of the Desaguadero, and so endangering the
Frigates of Granada, and standing between Portobel and Carthagena, and so
threatening the Galeons, and their Kings yearly and mighty treasure.

Thus with bitter invectives against the English and the Is^nd of Providence we
sailed on to Carthagena, where again we met with the four ^ps, which before
had followed us and had taken away two of our Ships, and now at our entering
into that Port, threatened to carry away more of our company; which they might
have done, i^ they would have ventured to have come upon the Ship wherein I
went, which at the turning about the land point to get into the Haven, ran upon
the shore, which if it had been rocky, as it was sandy and gravelly, had
certainly there been cast away by keeping too near unto the land, from which
danger by the care of the Mariners, and their active pains we were safely
delivered, as also from the ships which followed us as far as they durst for
fear of the Cannon shot of the Castle; and thus we entered into the Haven of
Carthagena, and stayed there for the space of eight or ten days; where I met
with some of my Country men their Prisoners, who had been taken at Sea by the
Spaniards, and belonged unto the Island of Providence; among whom was the
Renowned Captain Rouse, and about a dozen more, with whom I was glad to meet,
but durst not show them too much countenance, for fear of being suspected; yet
I soon got the good will of some of them, who, being destined to Spain, were
very desirous to go in the ship, wherein I went; which desire of theirs I
furthered, and was suitor unto my Captain to carry four of them in his ship,
which for my sake he willingly yielded unto; amongst these was one Edward
Layfield, (who afterward setting out of St. Lucar for England, was taken
Captive by the Turks, and since from Turkey writ into England unto me to
help to release him) with whom both at Carthagena, and in the way in the ship
I had great discourse concerning points of Religion, and by him came to know
some things professed in England, which my conscience (whilst I lived in
America) much inclined unto. I was much taken with his company, and found him
very officious unto me, whose kindness I requited by speaking for him in the
ship to the Masters and Mariners, who otherwise were ready and forward to abuse
him and the rest of the English company as prisoners and slaves.

At Carthagena we heard a report of threescore sail of ships of Hollanders
waiting for the Galeons, which struck no little fear into the Spaniards; who
called a council whether our Fleet should winter there, or go on to Spain. It
proved to be but a fa^ report of the Inhabitants of Carthagena, who for their
own ends and lucre would willingly have had the ships and Galeons to have
stayed there; but Don (...) de Ybarra replied, that he feared not a hundred
sail of Hollanders, and therefore would go on to Spain, hoping to carry
thither safely the Kings treasure* Which he performed and in eight days
arrived at Havand, where we stayed eight days longer, expecting the Fleet from
Uera Cruz. In which time I viewed well that strong Castle manned with the twelve
Guns, called the twelve Apostles, which would do^ little hurt to an Army by
land, o^ marching from the River of (...). I visited here the mother or that
Mulatto, who had taken away all my (...) at Sea* and spent much time in
comforting my poor Country*men the prisoners; but especially that gallant
Captain Rouse, who came unto me to complain of some (...) which had been
offered unto him by Spaniards, in the ship wherein he came; which he not being
able to put up* though a Prisoner unto them desired to question in the field,
challenging his proud contemners to meet him if they durst in any place of the
Havana, (a brave courage in a dejected and imprisoned English man to challenge
a Spaniard in his Country, a Cock upon his own dunghill,) which as soon as I
understood by Edward Layfield, I desired to take up, fearing that many would
fall upon him cowardly and mince him small in pieces. I sent for him to the
Cloister where I lay, and there had conference with him, prevailing so far as
that I made him desist from his thoughts of going into the field, and showing
his manhood in such a time and place, where his low condition of a Prisoner
might well excuse him. The rest of my poor country men were here much
discouraged and in some want; whom I relieved (especially Layfield) and
encouraged as much as I was able. I chanced here to have occasion to take a
little physic before I went again to Sea, and thereby I learned what before I
never knew, to wit, the diet which on such aday the best Physicians of Havana
prescribe unto their patients. Whereas after the working of my physic, I
expected some piece of Mutton, or a fowl, or some other nourishing meat, my
Physician left order that I should have a piece of roasted Porke, which seeming
unto me a Diet contrary to that days extremity, I began to refuse it,
alleging to my Doctor the contrary course of all Nations, the natural
quality of that meat to open the body. To which he replied, that what Porke
might work upon man's body in other Nations, it worked not there, but the
contrary; and so he wished me to feed upon what he had prescribed, assuring
me that it would do me no hurt. Now as Hogs flesh there is held to be so
nourishing, so likewise no other meat is more then it, and Tortoises, wherewith
all the ships make their provision for Spain. The Tortoises they cut out in
long thin slices, as I have noted before of the Tassajos, and dry it in the
wind after they have well salted it, and so it serves the Mariners, in all
their voyage to Spain, which they eat boiled with a little garlic, and I
have heard them say that to them it tasted as well as any Veale. They also take
into their ships some fowls for the Masters and Captains tables, and live
hogs, which would seem to be enough to breed some infection in the ship, had
they not care to wash often the place where such unclean beasts lie. In the
ship where I was passenger, was killed every week one for the Masters, Pilots
and passengers table. Thus all things being made ready for the ships provision
to Spain, and the Merchants goods and the Kings Revenue being shipped in nine
days that we abode there; we now wanted nothing, but only the company of the
Fleet from Vera Cruz, which should have met us there upon the eight day of
September. But Don Carlos de Ybarra, seeing it stayed longer then the time
appointed, and fearing the weather, and the New Moon of that month which
commonly proves dangerous in the Golf of Babama, resolved to stay no longer,
but to set out to Spain. On a Sabbath day therefore in the morning we hoised
sails, (being in all seven and twenty ships with those which had met with us
there from Honduras and the Islands), and one by one we sailed out of Havana to
the main Sea, where we that day wafted about for a good wind, and also waiting
for our guide, which was not yet come out of the Havana to guide us through the
Gulf of Bahama. But that night we wished our selves again in the Havana,
thinking that we were compassed about with a strong Fleet of Hollanders; many
ships came amongst us, which made us provide for a fight in the morning. A
Council of War was called, and all that night watch was kept, the Guns
prepared, red Clothes hung round the ships, ^^^ers sent about both to the
Galeons and to the Merchants ships what posture and place to be in. That which
I was in, was to attend the Admiral, which I hoped would be a strong defense
unto us; Our men were courageous and ready to fight, though I liked not such
Martial business and discourse; but for me a place was prepared where I
might lie hid, and be safe among some barrels of biscuit; I had all the night
enough to do, to hear the confessions of those in the Ship, who thought they
could not dye happily with the shot of a Holland Bullet, until they had
confessed all their sins unto me, who toward morning had more need of rest,
then of fighting, after the wearying of my ears with hearing so many wicked,
grievous and abominable sins. But the dawning of the day discovered our
causeless fear; which was from friends, and not from any enemies or
Hollanders; for the ships which were joined unto us in the night were as
fearful of us, as we of them, and prepared themselves like wise to fight in
the morning, which showed unto us their colors, whereby we knew that they
were the Fleet which we expected from Vera Cruz to go along with us to Spain.
They were two and twenty Sail, which little thought to find us out of the
Havana, but within the Haven lying at Anchor, waiting for their coming, and
therefore in the night feared us much more then we them. But when the day
cleared our doubts, fears and jealousies, then began the Martial colors to
be taken down; the joyful sound of Trumpets with the help of Neptunes
Kingdoms e^choed from ship to ship, the boats carried welcoming messages from
one to another, the Spanish Brindis with buen Viaje, buen passaje, was
generally cried out, the whole morning was spent in friendly acclamations and
salutations from ship to ship. But in the midst of this our joy, and Sea
greetings, we being now in all two and fifty Sail, (yet we not knowing well
how many they were from Vera Cruz, no^ they how many we were from the Havana)
two ships were ^ound amongst us, whether English or Hollanders we could not
well discover, but the English prisoners with me ^old me they thought one was
a ship of England called the Neptune) which having got the wind of us, singled
out a ship of ours (which belonged to Dunkerk and from St. Lucar or Cales had
been forced to the Kings service in that voyage to the India's, laden with
sugars and other rich commodities to the worth of at least fourscore thousand
Crowns; and suddenly giving her a whole broad side (receiving a reply only of
two Guns) made her yield, without any hope of help from so proud and mighty a
Fleet, for that she was somewhat far straggled from the rest of the ships. The
whole business lasted not above half an hour: but presently she was carried
away from under our noses; the Spaniards changed their merry tunes into voto a
dios and voto a Christo, in raging, cursing, and swearing, some reviling at the
Captain of the ship which was taken, and saying that he was false and yielded
on purpose without fighting, because he was forced to come that Voyage; others
cursing those that took her, and calling them hijos de puta, Borrachos,
infames Ladrones, Bastards, Drunkards, infamous thieves, and Pirates; some
taking their swords in their hands, as if they would there cut them in pieces,
some laying hold of their Muskets as if they would there shootat them, others
stamping like mad men, and running about the ship, as if they would leap over
board, and make haste after them; others grinning their teeth at the poor
English prisoners that were in the ship, as if they would stab them for what
(they said) their Country men had done. I m^t needs say, I had enough to do to
hold some of those furious and raging brains from doing Layfield some mischief,
who more then the rest would be smiling, arguing and answering their
outrageous nonsense. Order was presently given to the Vice Admiral and two
more Galeons to follow and pursue them; but all in vain, for the wind was
against them, and so the two ships laughing and rejoicing as much as the
Spaniards cursed and raged, sailed away con Viento en Popa, with full Sail,
gallantly boasting with so rich a prize taken away from two and fifty ships, or
(as I may say) from the chiefest, and greatest strength of Spain.

That afternoon the Fleet of Vera Cruz, took their leave of us, (not being
furnished with Provision to go on to Spain with us,) and went into the Havana;
and we set forwards toward Europe, fearing nothing for the present but the
Gulf of Bahama; through which we got safely with the help and guidance of
such Pilots, which our Admiral Don Carlos had chosen, and hired for that
purpose.

I shall not need to tell thee my Reader of the sight which we had of St
Augustin^, Florida, nor of many storms which we suffered in this Voyage, nor
of the many degrees we came under, which made us shake with cold more then the
Frost of England do in the worst of winter; only I say, that the best of our
Pilots not knowing where they were, had like to have betrayed us all to the
Rocks of Berm^da one night, had not the breaking of the day given us a fair
warning that we were running upon them. For which the Spaniards in stead of
giving God thanks for their delivery out of that danger, began again to curse
and rage against the English which inhabited that Island, saying, that they had
enchanted that and the rest of those Islands about, and did still with the
devil raise storms in those Seas when the Spanish Fleet passed that way. From
thence when we had safely escaped, we (...) well to the Islands called
Tercer^, where feign we would have taken in fre^ water, (for that which we had
taken in at Havana now began to stink, and look yellow, making (...) stop our
noses, whilst we opened our mouths,) but rigid Don Carles would not pity the
rest of his Company, who led us by the Island^; and that night following we
all wi^ed our selves in some harbor of them; for (though in their conceit
those Islands were not enchanted by English men, but inhabited by holy and
Idolatrous Papists) we were no sooner got from them, when there arose the
greatest storm that we had in all our voyage from Havana to Spain, which
lasted full eight days, where we lost one Ship and endangered two Galeons,
which shot off their warning pieces for help, and made us all stay and wait on
them, till they had repaired their Tacklings and maine Mast. We went on
sometimes one way, sometimes another, not well knowing where we were, drinking
our stinking water by allowance of pints, till three or four days after the
storm was ceased, we discovered land, which made all cry out, Hispania,
Hispania, Spain, Spain; whilst a Counsel was summoned by the Admiral to know
what land that was, some sold away barrels of biscuit, others of water, to those
that wanted (every one thinking that it was some part of Spain,) but the result
of the wise Counsel was, after they had sailed nearer to the land, and had
laid and lost many wages about it, that it was the Island of Modera, which
made some curse the ignorancee of the Pilots, and made us all prepare our
selves with patience for a longer voyage. It pleased God from the discovery of
this Island, to grant us a favorable wind to Spain, where within twelve days
we discovered Cales; and some of the ships there left us, but most of them went
forward to San Lucar, as did the ship wherein I went; when we came near to
the dangerous place, which the Spaniards call La Barra, we durst not venture
our ships upon our Pilots own knowledge; but called for Pilots to guide us in,
who greedy of their lucre came out in boats almost for every ship one. Upon the
eight and twentyeth of November, 1637. we cast Anchor within St. Lucar de
Barameda about one of the clock in the afternoon, and before evening other
passengers and my self went a shore (having first been searched) and although
I might presently have gone to the Cloister of St. Dominick, where my old
friend Friar Pablo de L^ndres was yet living, whom I knew would be glad of my
coming from the India's, yet I thought fit the first night to enjoy my friends
company both Spaniards and English, (who had come so long a voyage with me) in
some Ordinary, and to take my rest better abroad then I should do in a
Cloister, where I expected but a poor Friars supper, a hard and mean lodging,
many foolish questions from old Friar Pablo de Londres concerning the India's,
and my abode there so many years, and finally the noise of Bells and ratlers
to rouse up the drowsy Friars from their sleep to Matines at midnight. That
night therefore I betook my self to an English Ordinary, where I refreshed my
self and my poor prisoners, (who by the Master of the ship were committed to
my charge that night and forwards upon my word, so as to be forth coming when
they should be called) and the next morning I sent my honest friend Layfield
with a letter to the Cloister to old Pablo de Londres, who upon my summons came
joyfully to welcome me from the India's, and after very little discourse told
me of ships in the Haven ready to set out for England. The old Friar being of
a decrepit and doting age, thought every day a year that I stayed there, and
suspended my Voyage for England, and (not knowing the secrets of my heart)
judged already that the Conversion or turning of many Protestant souls to
Popery waited for my coming, which made him hasten me, who was more desirous
then he to be gone the next day, if I might have found wind, weather, and
shipping ready. But God, who had been with me in almost ninety days sailing
from Havana to San Lucar, and had delivered me from many a storm, prepared
and furthered all things in a very short time for the last accomplishment of my
hope and desire, to return to England my native soil, from whence I had been
absent almost for the space of four and twenty years.

My first thought here in St. Lucar, was to cast off now my Friars weed, that
outward sheepskin, which covers many a wolvish, greedy, and covetous heart
under it; which doubtless is the ground, why in Germany in the Protestant and
Lutheran towns, when the boys and young men see a Friar go along their
streets, the cry out to the neighbors, saying, a Wolf, a Wolf, shut your
doors; meaning, that though what they wear seem to be pellis ovina, or
Agnina, a sheep or Lambeskin and their condition of mortified, humble, and meek
men, yet under it lies cor L^pinum, a Wolves heart, greedy of some prey,
either worldly, of wealth and riches, or spiritual, of sed^cing, deceiving and
misleading poor souls. Such was the habit, which (...), desired to shake off,
which was a white Coat or gown hanging to the ground girded about with a
leathern belt, and over it from the shoulders downward a white Scapulary (so
called there,) hanging shorter then the gown both before and behind, and over
that a white hood to cover the head, and lastly, over that a black cloak with
another black hood; both which together, the black and white make the Friars of
that profession look just like Mag-pies, and is acknowledged by the Church of
Rome it self in a verse which they feign of Mr. Martin Luther, (with what just
ground I know not) saying of his former life and profession before his
Conversion, Bis Corvus, bis Pica fui, ter fune ligatus. I was twice a Crow,
twice a Magpie, and thrice was bound or tied with a Cord; by a Crow meaning an
Augustine Friar, who is all in black; by a Magpie, meaning a Dominican, and by
bound with a rope or cord, meaning a Franciscan, who indeed is girded about
with a cord made of hemp. Though the Dominican Magpie by this his habit make
such a gloss and understanding, which is contrary to his life and
conversation; for by his outward black habit, he says, is signified an
outward show of deadness and Mortification to the world, and by his inward
white habit, an inward purity and chastity of heart, thoughts and life; both
which truly are little seen in those Friars especially, who outwardly are
worldly, and living to the world, covetous and ambitious of honors,
preferments, Bishoprics, and places of public reading and preaching; and
therefore have by favor obtained many places of authority, as by the laws of
Aragon to be the King of Spain his Ghostly father, to be Masters of the Popes
Palace, and there to read a lesson of Divinity, to be chief heads of the
Inquisition, and from these places to be promoted to sit in the Council of
the State in Spain, or to be Cardinals in Rome, and so Popes, or to enjoy the
richest and fattest Bishoprics and Arch-Bishopricks in Spain, Italy, and
India's, which shows how little they are dead to the world, nay how they are
living to the world and its preferments* contrary to the black and dead color
of their habits. So likewise do they not live according to the whiteness of
their inward habits, whose lives are found impure and unchaste, as I could
exemplify at large, showing what base and unclean acts have been committed by
some of that profession in the Low Countries, in Spain, in the India's, in
Italy, nay here in England by one Dade the Superior of them, by one Pophar well
known to be a good fellow, and still at this day abiding in the Spanish
house, by one Crafts and others, which would be too too long a digression from
the whiteness of their habit. But I applying the Allegory of this black and
white habit otherwise unto my self, and in the outward black part of it seeing
the foulness and filthiness of my life and Idolatrous Preisthood in the
exercise of that profession, and Orders which from Rome I had received; and in
the white inward habit considering yet the purity, and integrity of those
intentions and thoughts of my inward heart, in pursuance whereof I had left
what formerly I have noted, yea all America, which, had I continued in it,
might have been to me a Mine of wealth, riches and treasure; I resolved here
therefore to cast off that hypocritical cloak and habit, and to put on such
Apparel whereby I might no more appear a Wolf in sheepskin, but might go
boldly to my Country of England, there to show and make known the Candor of my
heart, the purity and sincerity of my thoughts, which had brought me so far,
by a publik profession of the pure truths of the Gospel, without any invention
or addition of man unto it. With the small means therefore which was left me
after so long and almost a whole years journey from Petapa to St. Lucar
(having yet about a hundred Crowns) I gave order for a suit of Clothes to be
made by an English Tailor, which I willingly put on, and so prepared myself for
England. Three or four ships were in readiness, who had only waited for the
Fleet, to take in some Commodities, especially some wedges of silver, of which
I was with old Pablo de Londres, in doubt which to choose. The first that went
out was thought should have been my lot, in the which my friend Layfield
embarked himself (for all the English prisoners were there freed to go home
to their Country) and from which the great providence of God diverted me, or
else I had been this day with Layfield a slave in Turkey; for the next day
after this ship set out, it was taken by the Turks, and carried away for a
rich prize, and all the English in it for prisoners to Argell. But God (who I
hope had reserved me for better things,) appointed for me a safer convoy home
in a ship (as I was informed) belonging to Sir William Curtin, under the
command of an honest Flemming, named Adrian Adrianzen living at Dover then,
with whom I agreed for my passage and diet at his Table. This ship set out of
the Bar of St. Lucar the ninth day after my arrival thither, where it waited
for the company of four ships more, but especially for some Indian wedges of
silver, which upon for^eiture of them it durst not take in within the Bar and
Haven.

And thus being now clothed after a new fashion and ready to lead a new life;
being now changed from an American into the fashion of an English man, the
tenth day after my abode in San Lucar, I bad adieu to Spain and all Spanish
fashions, factions, and carriages, I bad farewell my old Friar Pablo de
Londres, with the rest of my acquaintance, and so in a boat went over the bar
to the ship, which that night in company of four more set forward for England.
I might observe here many things of the goodness of Adrian Adrianzen, and his
good carriage toward me in his ship, which I will omit, having much more to
observe of the goodness of God, who favored this our voyage with such a
prosperous wind, and without any storm at all, that in thirteen days we came
to Dover, where I landed, the ship going on to the Downs. Others that landed
at Margaret were brought to Dover, and there questioned and searched; but I,
not speaking English, but Spanish, was not at all suspected, neither judged to
be an English man; and so after two days I took post in company of some
Spaniards and an Irish Colonel, for Canterbury, and so forward to Gravesend.
When I came to London, I was much troubled within my self for want of my
Mother tongue, (for I could only speak some few broken words) which made me
fearful I should not be accknowledged to be an English man born. Yet I
thought my kindred (who knew I had been many years lost) would some way or
other acknowledge me, and take notice of me, if at the first I addressed my
self unto some of them, until I could better express my self in English.
The first therefore of my name, whom I had notice of, was my Lady Penelope
Gage, widow of Sir John Gage, then living in St. Jones; to whom the next
morning after my arrival to London, I addressed my self for the better
discovery of some of my kindred; whom though I knew to be Papists, and
therefore ought not to be acquainted with my inward purpose and resolution; yet
for fear of some want in the mean time, and that I might by their means
practice my self in the use of my forgotten native tongue, and that I might
enquire what Child's part had been left me by my father, that I might learn some
fashions, and ^astly, that in the mean time, I might search into the Religion
of England, and find how far my conscience could agree with it, and be
satisfied in those scruples which had troubled me in America, for all these
reasons I thought it not amiss to look and inquire after them. When therefore
I came unto my Lady Gage, she believed me to be her kinsman, but laughed at
me, telling me, that I spoke like an Indian or Welsh man, and not like an
English man; yet she welcomed me home, and sent me with a servant to a
Brothers lodging in Long Aker, who being in the Country of Surrey, and hearing
of me sent horse and man for me to come to keep Christmas with an Uncle of
mine living at Gatton; by whom as a lost and forgotten Nephew, and now after
four and twenty years returned home again, I was very kindly entertained,
and from thence sent for to Cheam, to one Mr. Fromand another kinsman, with
whom I continued till after twelfth day, and so returned again to London to my
brother.

Thus my good Reader, thou see^t an American, through many dangers by Sea and
Land, now safely arrived in England; and thou may well with me observe the
great and infinite goodness and mercy of God toward me a wicked and wretched
sinner. How I have answered to this Gods gracious calling me from so far and
remote a Country, to do him service here, I will show thee in the Chapter
following, and so conclude this my long and tedious History.

CHAP. XXII. Showing how, and for what causes, after I had arrived in England,
I took yet another Journey to Rome, and other parts of Italy, and returned
again to settle my self in this my Country.
NOw Reader, as the stone that is falling, the nearer it comes to its Center*
more haste it makes: So I the nearer I am coming to the conclusion of this my
History, more haste I desire to make in this last Chapter, for the completing
and finishing of it* With brevity therefore I will relate some of my travels in
Europe, in which I will yield to many of my Nation, but for America, and my
travels and experience there, I dare boldly challenge all travelers of my
Country. After my return to London, from Surrey, I began to expostulate with my
younger Brother (knowing he had been present at my Fathers death, and had a
chief hand in the ordering and executing his last Will and Testament,)
concerning what child's part was left unto me. To which he made me answer,
that my father had indeed left him, and my Brother the Colonel, and two other
sons by a second wife, and my own sister, every one somewhat, but to me
nothing, nay that at his death he did not so much as remember me; which I
could not but take to heart* and called to mind the angry and threatening
letter which I had received from him in Spain, because I would not be a
Jesuit. Though for the present I said nothing, yet afterward in many
occasions I told my Brother I would have the Will produced, and would by course
of law demand a child's part; but he put me off, assuring me I should never
want amongst other my friends and kindred, with whom he knew I should be well
accommodated as long as I continued in England. After few days that I had been
in London, my kinsman at Cheam, desired me to come to live with him; where I
continued not long; for my Uncle at Gatton invited me to his house, offering
me there meat, drink, lodging, horse and man, with twenty pound a year, which
he promised in other ways to make as good as thirty. Here I continued a
twelve month, refining my self in my native tongue, and (though altogether
unknown to my Uncle and kindred) searching into the Doctrine and truth of the
Gospel professed in England; for which cause I made many journeys to London,
and then privately I resorted to some churches, and especially to Paul^ Church
to see the service performed, and to hear the Word of God Preached; but so,
that I might not be seen, known or discovered by any Papist. When in Paul's
Church I heard the Organs, and the Music, and the* Prayers and Collects; and
saw the Ceremonies at the Altar, I remembered Rome again, and perceived little
difference between the two Churches* I searched further into the Common Prayer,
and carried with me a Bible into the Country on purpose to compare the Prayers,
Epistles, and Gospels with a Mass Book, which there I had at command, and I
found no difference but only English and Latin, which made me wonder, and to
acknowledge that much remained still of Rome in the Church of England, and that
I feared my calling was not right. In these my scruples coming often to London,
and conversing with one D^de, Popham, and Cr^, Connel and Brown, English and
Irish Dominican Friars, I found their ways and conversations base, lewd, light
and wanton, like the Spanish and Indian Friars, which made me again reflect
upon the Popish Church, upheld by such Pillars. I came yet to the acquaintaince
of one Price, Superior to the Benedictine Monks, whom I found to be a mere
Statesman, and a great Politician, and very familiar, private, and secret with
the Archbishop of Canterbury William Land; in conversation with my Brother,
(who belonged then unto one Signior Co^, the Popes Agent, and was in such
favor at the Court, that he was sent over by the Queen with a rich present to
a Popish Idol, named our ^ady of Sichem, in the Low Countries) I heard him
sometimes say, that he doubted not but to be shortly Curate and Parish Priest
of Coven Garden, sometimes that he hoped to be made Bishop in England, and
that then I should want for nothing, and should live with him, till he got me
another Bishopric; by which discourse of his, and by his and other Priests
favor at Court and with the Archbishop I perceived things went not well,
Spanish Popery was much rooted, Protestant Religion much corrupted, and the
time not seasonable for me to discover my secret intents and purpose of heart.
At this time coming once from Surrey to London, I chanced to be discovered
and known to one of the State* Officers, a Pursevant, who had a large
Commission for the apprehending of Seminary Priests and Jesuits, named John
Gray, who meeting me one day in Long Aker, followed and dogged me as far as
Lincolns Inn wall, where he clapped me on the shoulders, and told me, that he
had a Commission against me, to apprehend me, and carry me to the Council
Table or to one of His Majesty's Secretaries. To whom I spoke in Spanish
(thinking thereby to free my self out of his hands for a Spaniard:) but this
would not do, for he replied he knew me to be an English man born, and by
the name of Gage, and Brother to Colonel Gage and Mr. George Gage, and that
before he left me I must speak in English to him, he carried me to a Tavern,
and there searched my Pockets for Letters and money, which in discourse he told
me was too little for him (not being above twelve shilling) and that I must go
with him to answer before one of His Majesty's Secretaries. I told him that I
would willingly go before the Archbishop of Canterbury, or before Sir Francis
Windebanke; at which he smiled, saying* I knew well whom to make choice of to
favor and protect me, but he would carry me to none of them, but to
Secretary Cook. I fearing the business might go hard with me, and knowing
him to be greedy of money, told him that I would give him any thing that might
content him, and so offered him twelve shillings then about me, and my word to
meet him in any place the next day, with a better and fuller purse. He
accepted of my money for the present, and further offer for the day following,
and appointed the Angel Tavern in Long Aker, (knowing that I lodged
thereabout) to be the place of our meeting, and so dismissed me. I being free
from him, went immediately to my Brother, and told him what had happened unto
me, what money I had already given unto him, and what I had promised the next
day following. My Brother hearing me began to cha^e and vex, and to fall into
furious words against John Gray, calling him knave and rogue, and that he could
not answer what he had done, and that he would have his Commission taken from
him, chiding me for that I had given him any money, and calling me young
novice and unexperienced in the affairs of England. This seemed strange to me,
that my Brother should not only not fear a Pursevant, but should threaten to
take away the Commission from him, who was appointed to search for and find
out Priests and Jesuits. Yet I told him I would according to my word and
promise meet him the next day, and satisfy him for his fair carriage toward
me; to which my Brother would by no means yield, but said he would meet him;
which he accordingly performed, and although for my sake and promise he gave
him some money, yet he brought him before Signor Con, and there himself and
the Popes Agent with him spoke most bitter words unto him, and threatened him
very much if ever again he durst meddle with me.

After this my Brother carried me to one Sir William Howard a Papist Knight,
living at Arundel gate over Clements Church, who was very familiar with Sir
Francis Windebanke, telling him what had happened unto me, and desiring him to
carry me with him in his Coach to Sir Francis, and to get his protection for
me. Secretary Windebanke understanding who I was, told me I should fear no
Pursevant of them all, and that if I lived quietly in England, no body should
trouble me, and that John Gray was a knave, and wished me if ever he meddled
with me ag^n to come unto him. Though for the present this was good and
commodious for me to have such favor and protection, yet I perceived, this my
Brothers power, and this conniving at Priests and Jesuits could not be
useful for me^, if I should publish my mind and and purpose to alter my
Religion. I was therefore much troubled in mind and conscience, which I found
was curbed with the great power of the Papists. I resolved therefore to go
again out of England, and to travel in some other Countries amongst both
Papists and Protestants, and to try what better satisfaction I could find for
my conscience at Rome in that Religion, or in France and Germany amongst the
Protestants. I wr^ therefore to the General of the Dominicans at Rome,
(without whose License I could not go thither) that he would be pleased to
send me his Letters Patents, to go to cons^re some points with him; which he
willingly granted unto me. I wanted not money from my Uncle (who commended
unto me some business to be dispatched for him at Rome) for so long a
journey, other friends also helped me; but my chief trust was upon my Brother
Colonel Gage, then in the Low (...), whom I knew not, nor had seen him from a
child. I had no other pass to take shipping at Dover, but only the letter of
a Papist in London, (by means of one Popham a Dominican Friar) to Sir John
Manwood his Lady, who was then Governor of Dover Castle, and with the foresaid
letter suffered me not to be troubled, examined or searched, but gave order
that I should freely and quietly pass over in the Packet boat to Dunkerke,
wherewith in four hours with a good wind I arrived, and from thence by
Newport and Bridges went to Gant; not far from whence my Brother with his
Regimeut lay in field against the Hollander. He was glad to see me, and
knowing what journey I was minded to take, furnished me with more money, and
for my Uncles business recommended me to the Marquis De Seralvo (then at
Brussels) and to other great men, desiring them to give me their letters to
their friends at Rome; from them I got a letter to Don Francisco Barbarini, the
Popes Nephew, and one of the chief Cardinals then in Rome, likewise to Cardinal
Cucua, and Cardinal Albornos both Spaniards. With these letters I thought I
should have occasion of some conversation with these pillars of the Church of
Rome, and in discourse might pry into the hearts and ways of them, and see
whether in them were more Policy then Religion. By reason of the Wars between
France and the Low Countries, I durst not make my journey the nearest and
shortest way through France; but though there were Wars also in Germany, I
thought that would be my safest way, and I desired much to look into the
Protestant, and Lutberan Church in that Country. Whereupon I resolved from
Brussels to go to Namurs, and from thence by water to Leidge, and from thence
to Collen in Germany. From Leidge to Collen though we were twelve in company,
we were much troubled with Soldiers; yet God still delivered me and brought
me safe to Collen; from whence by the river Rhine I went in boat to Frankefort
in September at the time of that great Fair, where I knew I should meet company
of Merchants to any part of Italy. In all my travells I never made a more
pleasant journey then that which I made by the river Rhine, where I had
occasion to see many fair and goodly Cities. In Frankefort there I began to
take notice of the Lutheran Church, and for the space of a fortnight that I
stayed there, had many thoughts of discovering my self there, and disclaiming
Popery, thinking that there I might be sure and fafe, and lie hid and unknown
to my Brothers and kindred, who in England would not suffer me to live a
Protestant. Yet again I considered how hard it would be for me a stranger to
subsist there, and to get any livelihood, for the which I must first get the
native tongue, and though many points that were opposite to the Church of Rome,
pleased me, yet in some points of that Religion my conscience was not
satisfied. At the end of the Fair I sought out for company, and found near a
dozen wagons which were upon setting out toward Auspurg with goods of
Merchants, who had also hired a Convoy of thirty soulders to go along with
them; which I thought would be safe company for me; with them, and many other
passengers and travelers that went in the Wagons, and on foot, by them, I went
as far as the famous and gallant City of Auspurg; from whence forward there was
no great danger, neither in what part belonged to the Duke of Bavaria, nor in
the County of Tirol: from whence we passed some four together to Trent; where
I was taken with the first Agu^ that ever in my life I remembered I had, which
continued seven months upon me. I thought from thence to have continued my
journey by land to Venice, but my Ague suffered me to go but to Verona; from
whence I turned to Millan, and so to Genoua, leaving my good company; that from
Genou^ I might go by Sea to Ligorne, and so likewise to Rome. After a
fortnights stay in Genoua, I went with the Galleys of the great Duke of
Florence to Ligorne, where I found no boats ready to Rome, and so in the mean
time, whilst they were preparing, I went to Pisa and Flarence to see those
brave Cities, and returned again to Ligorne, where I found many boats ready to
set out to Rome.

The first night and day we had a fair wind to Piombino; but there it
turned, and continued contrary for almost three weeks. At last it pleased God
to send us a fair wind wherewith we went out many Boats and Falluco's in
company together, thinking all had been friends; but when we came near to the
Castle of Montalto, most of the boats having got before us, two that went in
company with the boat wherein I was, suddenly set upon us, and showed,
themselves to be French Pirates, who robbed us all, and took from me all the
money I had, which was not then above five pound, leaving me some Bills of
exchange which I had to take up money at Rome: after we were robbed we called
in at Civita Vecha; for relief, where I met with a good English Merchant, who
freely bestowed upon me provision both of wine and meat, as much as would well
suffice me and a friend to Rome, whither we got in a day and night. When I
came to Rome I delivered my Letters to the Cardinals; of whom the two Spaniards
I found proud and stately; but Don Francisc^ Barbarini, (who was entitled the
Protector of England) I found more tractable, kind, and loving. I perceived by
his discourse that he knew much of England, and desired to know more; and
propounded unto me many questions concerning the state of this Kingdom, and
especially concerning the Archbishop of Canterbury, whom he seemed to affect;
and yet sometime again would say he feared, he would cause some great
disturbance in our Kingdom, and that certainly for his sake and by his means
the King had dissolved lately the Parliament (which was that which before this
now sitting was so suddenly dissolved by his Majesty) which he feared,
Scotland and most of the people of England, would take very ill. He asked me
further what conceit the people had of the said Archbishop; and whether they
did not mistrust that he complied much with the Court of Rome. And lastly, he
told me that he thought, the creating of an English Cardinal at Rome might be
of great consequence for the conversion of the whole Kingdom. I laid up in my
heart all this discourse, and well perceived some great matters were in
agitation at Rome, and some secret compliance from England with that Court,
which I purposed to discover more at large among some friend^ there.

After this discourse with the Cardinal, I was invited to the English College
to dinner by one Father Fitzherbert, who was then Rector, a great Statesman
and Politician, with whom I had also great discourse concerning my Brother
Colonel Gage, concerning my travels in America, and lastly concerning England;
whereo^ I perceived little discourse could be had in Rome, except the
Archbishop William Laud had his part and share in it; The Jesuit began highly
to praise the Arch-prelate for his moderate carriage toward Papists and
Priests, boasting of the free access which one Simons, alias Flood, a Jesuit
had unto him at all hours, and in all occasions; and to extol him the more,
he brought in the Archbishop, Abbot whom he cried down as much for a cruel
enemy and persecutor of the Church of Rome, and of all Papists and Priests.
But the now Archbishop, said he, is not only favorable unto us there, but
here desires to make daily demonstrations of his great affection to this our
Court and Church; which, he showed not long since in sending a Common Prayer
Book, (which he had composed for the Church of Scotland) to be first viewed,
and approved of by our Pope and Cardinals. Who perus^ngit, liked it very well,
for Protestants to be trained in a Form of Prayer and service; yet considering
the State of Scotland, and the temper and tenants of that people, the
Cardinals, (first giving him thanks for his respect and dutiful compliance
with them) sent him word; that they thought that form of prayer was not ^itting
for Scotland, but would breed some stir and unquietness there, for that they
understood the Scots wereaversed from all set Forms, and would not be tied and
limited to the invention of man's spirit, having (as they thought) the true and
unerring Spirit of God in them, which could better teach and direct them to
pray. All this (said Father Fitzherbert) I was witness of, who was then sent
for by the Cardinals (as in all like occasions, and affairs concerning
England) to give the^ opinion concerning the said Common Prayer Book, and the
temper of the Scots. But the good Archbishop (quoth he) hearing the censure of
the Cardinals concerning his intention and Form of Prayer, to ingratiate
himself the more into their favor, corrected some things in it, and made it
more harsh and unreasonable for that Nation; which we already hear they have
stomacked at, and will not suffer it in many parts to be read; and we justly
fear that this his Common Prayer Book, and his great compliance with this
Court, will at last bring strife and division between the two Kingdoms of
Scotland and England.

And this most true Relation of William Laud late Archbishop of Canterbury,
(though I have often spoken of it in private discourse ^and publicly preached
it at the Lecture of Wingham in Kent,) I could not in my conscience omit it
here; both to vindicate the just censure of death, which the now sitting
Parliament have formerly given against him for such like practices and
compliance with (...); and secondly to reprove the ungrounded opinion and
error of some ignorant and Ma^ant spirits, who to my knowledge have since his
death highly exalted him, and ^yed him up for a Martyr. At the same time whilst
I was at Rome, I understood of another great buf^sse concerning England, then
in agitation amongst the Cardinals, and much prosecuted by this Fitzherbert,
and one father Courtney a Jesuit, son to one Sir Thomas Leeds; which was, to
create one of the English Nation Cardinal; that so the Conversion of England,
what by the Assistance of William Laud, what by the power of a higher person,
and what by the authority of the said Cardinal, might be more fully and
earnestly plotted and endeavored. This business was much agitated in England
by Signior Con, at whose house in Long Aker were many meetings of the chief
Gentry of the Papists. In Rome Sir William Hamilton then Agent for the Queen,
vied much for the said Cardinals Cap, and got a great number of friends to
further this his ambitious design. But he was too young, and some scandal of a
Gentlewoman, who stuck too close to him, made the red Cap unfit for his head;
and secondly, because a greater then he, to wit, Sir Ke^lham Digby was
appointed by the Queen to be her Agent there; who sent before him his
Chaplain, a great Politician and active Priest, named Fitton, to take up his
lodging and make way, and friends for his ambitious preferment; who in his
daily discourse cried up his Master Digby for Cardinal, and told me
absolutely, that he doubted not but he would carry it. But though he had
great favor from the Queen, and was her Agent; yet he had strong Antagonists
in Fitzherbert, Courtney, and the rest of the crew of the Jesuits, who looked
upon that honor and red Cap as better becoming one of their profession, and
fitter for a head which had formerly worn a four Cornered black Cap, to wit,
Sir Toby Matby. But in case the said Cap should fall from Sir Toby his head;
then they would help and further a third, whose birth and Nobility should
advance him before Sir Kenelham Digby, to wit, Walter Mountague, the old Earl
of Manchester his son at that time.

And thus it was a general and credible report in Rome, that either a Digby, a
Mathy, or a Mount^gue, should that year be made Cardinal. Whereby I
perceived that England was coming near to Rome, and that my design of
professing and following the truth in England was blasted, and that in vain I
had come from America for satisfaction of my conscience in England. I was more
troubled now then ever; and desired to try all ways, if I could be better
satisfied concerning the Popish Religion in Rome, Naples or Venice, (whither I
went) then I had been in America and among the Spaniards. But I found such
exorbitances and scandalls in the lives of some Cardinals of Rome, whilst I was
there, especially in Don Antonio Barbarini, and Cardinal Burgest* who at
midnight was taken by the Corchetes or Officers of justice in uncivil ways,
and came off from them with money, that I perceived the Religion was but as I
had found it in America, a wide and open door to loosnesse and policy, and the
like in Naples and Venice, which made me even hate what before I had professed
for Religion, and resolve, that if I could not live in England, and there enjoy
my Conscience, that I would live in France, for a while, until I had well
learned that tongue, and then associate my self unto the best reformed
Protestant Church; Whereupon I obtained from the General of the Dominicans this
ensuing order to live in the Cloister of Orleans, intending from thence at my
best opportunity to go to Paris, Lions, or some other place, and shake off my
Magpy habit, and to live and dye in France in the true Protestant and refo^med
Religion as professed there.

In Dei filio sibi Dilecto Reverendo Patri fratri Thomae Gageo Provinciae
Anglicanae Ordinis Praedicatorum, Frater Nicolaus Rodulfius totius ejusdem
Ordinis Magister Generalis ac servus in Domino salutem.

Conventui nostro Aurelia nensi Provinciae nostrae Franciae de probo and optimo
Patre Sacerdote providere cupientes, Tenore praesentium, and nostri authoritate
officii supra nominatum Reverendum Patrem Fratrem Thomam Gageum revocamus te a
quovis alio Conventu, and Assignamus in dicto Conventu nostro Aurelianensi
Assignatumque declaramus, in Nomine Patris, and Filii, and Spiritus Sancti,
Amen. Mandantes Rdo. admodum Patri Magistro Priori illius, ut te benign
recipiat, and cum omni charitate tractet. In quorm fidem his officii hostri
sigillo munitis propria manu subscripsimus.

Datum Suriani die nono Aprilis, 1640. Frater Nicolaus Magister Ordinis. Frater
Ignatius Ciantes Magister; Provincialis Angliae, and Socius.


The Form whereof (as also the manner of sending Friars from one Cloister to
live in another, commonly called by them, an Assignation) is in English as
follows.

To our Beloved in the Son of God, the Reverend Father Friar Thomas Gage, of
the English Province, of the Order of Preachers, Friar Nicholas Rodulfius of
the same whole Order Master General, and Servant in the Lord, health and
greeting.
WE being willing and desirous to provide for our Convent of Orleans, of our
Province of France, of an honest and very good Father and Priest; by Tenor of
these present, and by the authority of our Office do recall you the above
named Reverend Friar Thomas Gage, from any other Convent, and do Assign you
in our said Convent of Orleans, and declare you to be assigned, in the Name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen. Commanding the very
Reverend Father Master Prior thereof, that he receive you courteously, and
entertain you with all love and charity. In witness whereof with our own
hand we have subscribed these being sealed with the seal of our Office.

Dated at Soriano the ninth day of April, 1640. Friar Nicholas Master of the
Order. Friar Ignatius Ciantes Master Provincial of England and Companion.


Yet after I had got this Order, I bethought my self further that I would try
one way, which was to see if I could find out a Miracle, which might give me
better satisfaction of the Romish Religion, then had the former experience of
my life, and the lives of the Priests, Cardinals, and all such with whom I had
lived in Spain and America. I had heard much of a Picture of our Lady of
Loretto, and read in a Book of Miracles or lies concerning the same, that
whosoever prayed before that picture in the state of mortal sin, the picture
would discover the sin in the soul, by blushing, and by sweating. Now I
framed this argument to my self, that it was a great sin, the sin of
unbelief, or to waver and stagger in points of Faith; but in me (according to
the Tenants of Rome) was this sin, for I could not believe the point of
Transubstantiation, and many other; therefore (if the Miracles which were
printed of the foresaid Lady of Loretto were true, and not lies) certainly she
would blush and sweat, when such an unbeliever as I prayed before her. To make
this trial, I went purposely to Loretto, and kneeling down before God, not
with any faith I had in the picture; I prayed earnestly to the true Searcher of
all hearts, that in his Son Jesus Christ he would mercifully look upon me a
wretched sinner, and inspire and enlighten me with his Spirit of truth, for
the good and salvation of my soul; In my prayer I had a fixed and settled eye
upon the Ladies picture, but could not perceive that she did either sweat or
blush, wherewith I arose up from my knees much comforted and encouraged in my
resolution to renounce and abandon Popery, and saying within my self as I went
out of the Church, surely if my Lady neither sweat nor blush, all is well with
me, and I am in a good way for salvation, and the miracles written of her are
but lies. With this I resolved to follow the truth in some Protestant Church in
France, and to relinquish error and superstition. Upon which good purpose of
mine, I presently perceived the God of truth did smile, with what I heard he
was ordering in England by an Army of Scotland raised for Reformation, and by a
new Parliament called to Westminster, at which I saw the Papists and Jesuits
there began to tremble, and to say that it would blast all their designs, and
all their hopes of settling Popery; William Laud his policy was now condemned
and cursed, Con was dead at Rome, the Cardinal^ Cap for one of the three
forenamed was no more spoken of, Fitton was daunted, Fit zherbert and Courtney
quite disheartened, Sir Kenelham Digby his Agency and coming to Rome put off
and suspended, and with all this good news I was much heartned and encouraged
to leave off my journey to France, and to return to England, where I feared not
my Brother nor any kindred, nor the power of the Papists, but began to trust in
the protection of the Parliament, which I was informed would reform Religion,
and make such laws as should tend to the undermining of all the Jesuits plots,
and to the confusion and subversion of the Romish errors and Religion. I was
too weak of body to make my journey by land (by reason of my long Ague which
had but newly left me) and so resolved to go to Ligorne to find out shipping
there; where I found four or five ships of English and Hollanders ready to set
out, but were bound to touch at Lisboe in their way. I bargained with one
Captain Scot for my passage, first to Lisboe, intending there to make a second
bargain. We had no sooner sailed on as far as to the Coast of France, joining
to the Duchy of Savoy, but presently from Canes came out part of a Fleet lying
there under the command of the Bishop of Bordeaux to discover us, and take us
for a lawful prize. I might say much here of the valor of the good old
Captain Scot, who seeing all the other ships had yielded to the French men of
War, would upon no terms yield to be their prize, (which they challenged
because we were bound for Lisboe, then their enemies Country) but would fight
with them all, and at last rather blow up his ship, then to deliver the goods
which had been entrusted to him by the Merchants of Ligorne. We were in a
posture to fight, our guns ready, and Mariners willing to dye that day, which
was heavy news to me. After much treaty between the French and our valorous
Captain, who still held out and would not yield, there came up to us two ships
to give us the last warning that if we yielded not, they would immediately set
our ship on fire. With this all the passengers and many more in the ship
desired the Captain to yield upon some fair Articles for the securing of what
goods he had for England, and should appear were not any way for the
strengthening of any enemies to the State and Kingdom of France. With much
ado our Captain was persuaded, and we were carried with the rest into Canes
for a lawful prize. I seeing that the ships were like to be stayed there
long, obtained the Bishop of Bordeaux his pass to go to Marcells, and from
thence by land through France. Which being granted, I went by water to Tolon,
and from thence to Marcells, and so in company of Carriers to Lions, and from
thence to Paris, Roane, and Deep, where in the first packet boat to Rye I
passed over to Enggland, where I landed upon Michaelmas day the same year that
this present Parliament began to ^it the November following. My Brothers Spirit
I found was not much daunted with the new Parliament, nor some of the proudest
Papists, who hoped for a sudden dissolving of it; But when I saw their hopes
frustrated by His Majesty's consent to the continuing of it, I thought the
acceptable time was come for me, wherein I ought not to dissemble any further
with God, the world and my friends, and so resolved to bid adieu to flesh and
blood; and to prize Christ above all my kindred, to own and profess him
publicly maugre all opposition of hell and kindred to the contrary. I made my
self first known to Doctor Brunnick, Bishop of Exeter, and to Mr. Shu^e of
Lumbard street, from whom I had very comfortable and strong encouragements. The
Bishop of Exeter carried me to the Bishop of London then at Fullom, from whom I
received order to Preach my Recantation Sermon at Paul's: which done, I thought
I must yet do more to satisfy the world of my sincerity, knowing that
Converts are hardly believed by the common sort of people, unless they see in
them such actions which may further disclaim Rome for ever for the future.
Whereupon I resolved to enter into the state of Marriage (to which God has
already given his blessing) which the Church of Rome disavowes to all her
Priests. What I have been able to discover for the good of this State I have
done, and not spared (when called upon) to give in true evidence upon my Oath
against Jesuits, Priests, and Friars; for the which (after a fair invitation
from my Brother Colonel Gage, to come over again to Flanders, offering me a
thousand pound ready money) I have been once assaulted in Aldersgate street;
and another time like to be killed in Shoe lane by a Captain of my Brothers
Regiment, named Vincent Burton, who (as I was after informed) came from
Flanders on purpose to make me away or convey me over, and with such a
malicious design followed me to my lodging, lifting up the latch and opening
the door, (as he had seen me done) and attempting to go up the stairs to
my chamber without any inquiry for me, or knocking at the door; from whom God
graciously delivered me by the weak means of a woman my Land-lady, who stopped
him from going any further; and being demanded his name, and answering by the
name of Steward, and my Land-lady telling him from me that I knew him not, he
went away chasing and saying that I should know him, before he had done with
me. But he that knows God well, shall know no enemy to his hurt; neither
have I ever since seen or known this man. I might here also write down the
contents of a threatening letter from mine own Brother, when he was Colonel
for the King of England and Governor of Oxford, which I forbear with some
tender consideration of flesh and blood. At the beginning of the wars I
confess I was at a stand as a Neophyt and new plant of the Church of England
concerning the lawfulness of the war; and so continued above a year in
London spending my own means, till at last I was fully satisfied, and much
troubled to see that the Papists and most of my kindred were entertained at
Oxford, and in other places of the Kings Dominions; whereupon I resolved upon a
choice for the Parliament cause, which now in their lowest estate and condition
I am not ashamed to acknowledge. From their hands and by their order I received
a Benefice, in the which I have continued almost four years preaching
constantly for a through and godly Reformation intended by them, which I am
ready to witness with the best drops of blood in my veins, though true it is I
have been envied, jealousied and suspected by many; to whom I desire this my
History may be a better witness of my sincerity, and that by it I may perform
what our Savior Christ spoke to Peter, saying, And thou being converted
strengthen thy Brethren. I shall think my time and pen happily employed if by
what here I have written, I may strengthen the perusers of this small volume
against Popish superstition whether in England, other parts of Europe, Asia, or
America; for the which I shall offer up my daily prayers unto him, who (as I
may well say) miraculously brought me from America to England, and has made
use of me as a Joseph to discover the treasures of Egypt, or as the spies to
search into the land of Canaan, even the God of all Nations, to whom be
ascribed by me and all true and faithful Believers, Glory, Power, Majesty and
mercy for evermore.

Amen.
FINIS.
Some brief and short Rules for the better learning of the Indian tongue called
Poconchi, or Pocoman, commonly used about Guatemala and some other parts of
Honduras.
ALthough it be true that by the daily conversation which in most places the
Indians have with the Spaniards, they for the most part understand the Spanish
tongue in common and ordinary words, so that a Spaniard may travel amongst
them, and be understood in what he calls for by some or other of the
Officers, who are appointed to attend upon all such as travel and pass
through their towns: Yet because the perfect knowledge of the Spanish tongue
is not so common to all Indians, both men and women, nor so generally spoken by
them as their own; therefore the Priests and Friars have taken pains to learn
the native tongues of several places and countries, and have studied to bring
them to a Form and method of Rules, that so the use of them may be continued
to such as shall succeed after them. Neither is there any one language general
to all places, but so many several and different one from another, that from
Chiapa and Zoques, to Guatemala, and San Salvador, and all about Honduras,
there are at least eighteen several languages; and in this district some
Friars who have perfectly learned six or seven of them. Neither in any place
are the Indians taught or preached unto but in their native and mother tongue,
which because the Priest only can speak, therefore are they so much loved and
respected by the Natives. And although for the time I lived there, I learned
and could speak in two several tongues, the one called ^acchiquel; the other
Poconchi, or Pocoman, which have some connection one with another* yet the
Poconchi being the easiest, and most elegant, and that wherein I did constantly
preach and teach, I thought fit to set down some rules of it, (with the Lords
Prayer, and brief declaration of every word in it) to witness and testify to
posterity the truth of my being in those parts, and the manner how those
barbarous tongues have, are, and may be learned.

There is not in the Poconchi tongue, nor in any other the deversity of
declensions, which is in the Latin tongue; yet there is a double way of
declining all Nownes, and conjugating all Verbes, and that is with diverse
particles according to the words beginning with a vowell or a consonant;
neither is there any difference of cases, but only such as the said Particles
or some Prepositions may distinguish.

The Particles for the words or Nownes beginning with a Consonant are as
follows,

Sing*, Nu, A, Pa, plural. Ca. Ata. Qui tacque. As for example, Tat, signifies
a house, and Tat, signifies father, which are thus declined;

Sing. Nupat, my house, Apat, thy house, R^pat, his house. Plural. C^pat, our
house, Apa^ta, your honse, Zuipat tacque, their house.

Sing. Nutat, my Father, Atat, thy Father, Rutat his Father. Plural. Catat, our
Father, Atatta, your Father, Quita tacque, their Father. Thus are declined
Nownes beginning with a Consonant. As, Queh, a horse, Nuqueh, Aqueh, Ruqueh,
etc. Huh, book, or paper, Nuhuh, Ahuh, Ruhuh. Moloh, Egg, Numoloh, Amoloh,
Rumoloh. Holom, Head, Nuholom, Aholom, Ruholom. Chi, Mouth, Nuchi, Achi, Ruchi.
Came, hand, Nucam, Acam, Rucam. Chac, flesh, Nuchac, Achac, Ruchac: Car, fish,
Nucar, Acar, Rucar. Cacar, Acarta, Qui cartacque. Chacquil, body or flesh of
man; Nuchacquil, Achacquil, Ruchacquil, Cachacquil, Achacquilta, Quichacquil
tacque.

Some words there are which are pronounced like ts, which are written not with
ts, but with this letter t3, peculiar in that tongue; as for tsi, dog,
tsiquin, bird, Nutsi, my dog, Atsi, thy dog, Rutsi, his dog, Catsi, our dog,
Atsita, your dog, Quitsi tacque, their dog. Nutsiquin, my bird, Atsiquin, thy
bird, Rutsiquin, his bird, Catsiquin, our bird, Atsiquinta, your bird, Quitsi
quintacque, their bird.

There are no several terminations for cases, as in Latin; but the cases are
distinguished with some particles or prepositions, as for example. The house of
Peter, Rupat Pedro, putting the possessours name, and the particle, Ru, which
is a possessive. So for the dative, add the particle Re; as for example, give
to Peter his dog, Chaye re Pedro rutsi. For the accusative, when it is motion
to a place, or else not, add Chi, as for example, I go to the house of Peter,
Quino chi rupat Pedro. The Vocative admits of this particle ah, or ha, of
wishing or calling, as, O my son, or ho my son, Ah vacun, or ha vacun. The
Ablative keeping still the same termination with the Nominative, is expressed
with some preposition or other, as in my mouth, pan nuchi, with my hand, chi
nucam. In signifying I, is undeclinable, as also At, signifying you, or thou.
The possessive mine, is also undeclinable, as vi chin, mine, or for me; so
thine, or for thee, Ave. Where note that in this tongue there is no w, but v,
or u, are pronounced as w, as though we pronounce, wacun, my son, wichin,
mine or for me, Awe, thine or for thee; we write vacun, vichin, Ave.

The Particles or letters, which serve for Nounes beginning with a Vowell, are
as follows. Singular. V. Av. R. Pural. C. or Qu. Av ta. C. or qu. tacque, as
for example, Acun, signifies son, Ixim, Corn, Ochoch, likewise house, which
are thus declined.

Sing. Vacun, my son, Avacun, thy son, Racun, his son. Plural. Cacun, our son,
Avacunta, your son, Cacuntaque, their son.

Sing. Vixim, my corn, Avixim, thy corn, Rixim, his corn. Plural. Quixim, our
corn, Aviximta, your corn, Quixim tacque, their corn.

Sing. Vochoch, my house, Avochoch, thy house, Rochoch, his house. Plural.
Cochoch, our house, Avochochta, your house, Cochochtaque, their house.

So likewise are varied or declined, Abix, signifying a plantation, or piece of
ground sown. Acal, earth or ground. Vleu, also earth or ground. Acach, hen.
Save only that the words beginning with I, admit qu, in the first and third
person plural; the rest admit for the same persons plural, C, only.

And as thus I have observed for the varying or declining of Nounes; so also
do all the Verbes admit of several particles for their conjugating, according
as they begin either with a vowell or a consonant.

Those that begin with a consonant have somewhat like the Nounes these articles
following.

Sing. Nu, Na, Inru. Plural. Inca, Nata, Inquitacque. As for example, locoh, to
love.

Sing. Nulocoh, I love, Nalocoh, thou love, Inrulocoh, he loves. Plural.
Incalocoh, we love, Nalocohta, ye love, Inquilocohtaque, they love.

Nuroca, or Nurapa, I whip, or beat. Naroca or Narapa, thou whippest, or
beatest; Inruroca, or Inrurapa, he whippeth or beats. Plural. Incaro^a, or
Incarapa, we whip, or beat; Narocata, or Narapata, ye whip, or beat,
Inquirocatacque, or Inquirapatacque, they whip or beat.

Nutsiba, I write, Natsiba, thou writest, Inrutsiba, he writes. Plural.
Incatsiba, we write, Natsibata, ye write, Inquits^batacque, they write.

There is no preterimperfect tense, nor preterpluperfect tense; but the
preterperfect tense stands for them; neither is there any Future, but the
present tense ex presses it, and is understood for it, according to the sense
of the discourse, as Nulocoh Pedro, I love or will love Peter. Tinulocoh, I love
thee, or I will love thee. Yet sometimes for fuller expression of the Future
tense, is added this Verb, inva, I will, nava, thou will, Inra, he will, as
Inva nulocoh Pedro, I will love Peter.

The Particles for the Preterperfect tense, are as follow:

Sing. Ixnu. Xa. Ixru. Plural. Ixca. Xa ta. Ixqui tacque. Where note, that in
all these particles, and in all this language, the letter X, is pronounced like
sh. as Ixnu, like Ishnu. xa, like sha. Ixru, like Ishru. Ixca like Ishca, and
so forth.

Preterperf. Sing. Ixnulocoh, I have loved; Xalocoh thou have loved, Ixrulocoh,
he has loved. Plural. Ixcalocoh, we have loved, Xalocohta, ye have loved,
Ixquilocohtacque, they have loved. And so of all the Verbes above.

The Particles for the Imperative Mood are these following;

For the singular number, and second person, Cha; for the third person singular
Chiru; for the first person plural, Chica; for the second, Cha ta, for the
third Chiqui tacque: as for example. Chalocoh, love thou. Chirulocoh, let him
love. Plural. Chicalocoh, let us love; Chalocohta, love ye. Chiquilotacque,
let them love. And so of the rest of the Verbes above.

The Optative Mood is the same with the Indicative, adding to it this Particle
Ta, which signifies as much as utinam, or, would to God, as Nalocoh ta Dios,
would God thou love God; Ixnulocoh ta Dios, would God I had loved God.

The Conjunctive Mood also is the same with the Indicative, adding to it this
Particle, or Preposition vei, and ta, if. As for example; vei nalocoh ta Dios,
if thou love God, vei ixnulocoh ta Dios, if I had loved God.

There is no Infinitive Mood, but the Indicative serves for it. As, Quinchol
nutsiba, I can write. Quinquimi, signifies to die, Nuraeh, I desire, Nuraeh
quinquimi, I desire to dye.

Note further, that in all Verbes Actives, when me and thee are expressed as
the Accusative case following the Verb, they are coupled to the person that
does or goes before the Verb, by these two Particles for the present tense,
Quin, me, Ti, thee. And for the preterperfect tense, xin, me, ixti, thee. As
for example.

Quinalocoh, thou love me. Xinalocoh, thou have loved me. Quinraalocoh, thou will love me. Quinalocohta, love me, or I pray God thou love me. Vei
quinalocoh, if thou love me; vei xinalocoh, if thou have or had loved me;
Quinaraeh nalocoh, thou desire to love me. So for the personbeing the
Accusative. Ti^locoh, I love thee. Ixtinulocoh, I have loved thee. Tiranulocah,
I will love thee. Tinulocohta, pray God I love thee; vei tinulocoh, if I love
thee; vei ixtinulocoh, if I have or had loved thee. Tinuraeh nulocoh, I desire
to love.

Note further, thathese two Verbes, Quinchol, which signifies, I can or am
able, and Inva, which signifies I will, when they are put with other Verbes of
whatsoever person, they are elegantly put impersonally in the third person
singular. As for example:

Inchol nulocoh, I can love. Inra nulocoh, I will love. Ixra ixnulocoh, I have
been willing to love. Ixchol ixnulocoh, I have been able to love. Tichol
nulocoh, I can love thee, Tira nulocoh, I will love thee.

The Letters or Particles for Verbes beginning with a Vowell, are these that
follow.

Sing. Inv. Nav. inr. Plural. Inqu. or Inc. Nau ta. Inqu tacque, or Inc tacque.
As for example, Eca, signifies to deliver, which is thus formed.

Sing. Inveca, I deliver. Naveca, thou deliverest, Inreca, he delivers.
Plural. Inqueca, we deliver, Navecata, ye deliver; Inqueca tacque, they
deliver.

A is a simple signifying to wish or desire, or will a thing, which is never
found without these particles.

Sing. Inva, I will, Nava, thou will, Inra, he will; Plural. Inca, we will,
Navata, ye will, Incatacque, they will. Ivereh, to hear. Invivireh, I hear.
Navivireh, thou hear, Inrivireh, he hears. Plural. Inquivireh, we hear;
Navivirehta, ye hear; Inquivirah tacque, they hear.

Thus have I briefly set down the way of declining all sorts of Nounes, and
conjugating all sorts of Verbes of this tongue. It remains now that I speak
of Verbes Actives; their forming and their conjugating with like Particles. The
Verbes Actives being of diverse terminations, are diversely formed. Commonly
those that end with an A, cut off the A, in the passive, and to the last
consonant add hi. As for example, Nuroca, I whip or beat, the passive is
Quinrochi. So Nurapa, I whip or beat, in the passive is Quinraphi. Except
Nutsiba, I write, which changes b into m. Quintsimhi, I am written. Those that
end in oh, change oh into onhi. As nulocoh, I love. Quinloconhi, I am loved. So
those that end in ch, do change ch into hi, as Invivireh, I hear, Quinivirhi.
I am heard. Nucuta, I teach, Quincuthi, I am taught, by the first rule. But
those that end in ca (where note this letter c or c, with a tittle under it, is
pronounced like s,) change the a into ihi. As for example: inveca I deliver,
Quinecihi, I am delivered. Nucamca, I kill, Quincamcihi, I am killed: those
that end in ach, add hi in the passive, as Nucach, I forgive, in the passive
makes Quincachhi, I am forgiven. The particles that vary, or conjugate the
Verbes passives, are these following:

Sing. Quin. Ti. In. Plural. Coh, or Co. Tita. Quitacque. As for example:

Quinloconchi, I am loved, Tiloconhi, thou art loved. Inloconhi, he is Plural.
Coloconhi, we are loved. Tiloconhita, ye are loved. Quiloconhitacque, they
are loved.

Quinrochi, I am beaten or whipped; Tirochi, thou art beaten or whipped;
Inrochi, he is beaten or whipped. Plural. Corochi, we are beaten or whipped;
Tirochita, ye are beaten or whipped; Quirochi tacque, they are beaten or
whipped.

The Particles for the preterperfect tense are these following.

Sing. Xin. Ixti. Ix. Plural. Xoh, or Xo. Ixti ta; xi tacque. As for example.

Sing. Xinloconhi, I have bin loved. Ixtiloconhi, thou have bin loved.
Ixloconhi, he has been loved. Plural. Xoloconhi, we have been loved.
Ixtiloconhita, ye have been loved, Xiloconhi tacque, they have been loved.
Xinrochi, I have been whipped or beaten. Ixtirochi, thou have been whipped or
beaten. Ixrochi he has been whipped or beaten. Plural. Xorochi, or xohrochi,
we have been whipped or beaten, Ixtarochita, ye have been whipped or beaten.
Xirochi tacque, they have been whipped or beaten.

The Imperative Mood is thus:

Tiloconhi, Be thou loved* Chiloconho, let him be loved Plural. Chicaloconho,
let us be loved, Tiloconhota, be ye loved, Chiquiloconho tacque, let them
be loved. Where you see the particle hi is changed into ho.

The Optative Mood, and the Conjunctive are after the manner of the Verbs
Actives, by put to ta in the Optative, and vei in the Conjunctive. As for
example.

Quinloconhi ta, I pray God I be loved. Tiloconhi ta, I pray God thou be
loved; Inloconhita, I pray God he be loved; Cohloconhita, I pray God we be
loved. Tiloconhitata, I pray God ye be loved. Quiloconhi ta tacque, I pray God
they be loved.

So in the preterperfect tense ta only is added: as for example.

Xinloconhi ta, would to God I have or had been loved. Ixtiloconhita, pray God
thou have or had bin loved, Ixloconhita, Pray God he have or had been loved.
Plur. Xoloconhita, pray God we have or had been loved, Ixtiloconhi ta ta, I
pray God ye have or had bin loved, Xiloconhi ta tacque, I pray God they have or
had been loved. Where note that the particle Ta, if any other word or sentence
be put with the Verb, may be put before the Verb, as Nim ta Quinloconhi, I
pray God I be greatly loved. Otherwise if the Verb be alone, ta is placed
after it.

The Conjunctive Mood is thus* Vei Quinloconhi, if I be loved, Vei tiloconhi,
if thou be loved, and so forth.

This is all, which commonly is taught concerning this tongue. In which grounds
he that is perfect in, and has a Dictionary of the several words of it, may
soon learn to speak it. As I shall understand by my best friends, that there
is a desire of further printing a Dictionary, I shall satisfy their desires,
and apply my self unto it. These few rules for the present I have thought fit
to print, for curiosity sake, and that it may appear, how easy the Indian
tongues are to be learned. I shall conclude this unparalleld work, with the
Lords Prayer in that tongue, and with a brief explication of it.

Catat taxah vilcat; Nimta incaharcihi avi; Inchalita Avihauripan Cana.
Invanivita Nava yahvir vachacal* he invantaxah. Chaye runa cahuhunta quih viic*
Nacachtacamac, he incacachve quimac ximacquivi chiquih; Mac^acana chipam
catacchihi; Coavecata china unche stiri, mani quiro, he inqui. Amen.

Note. Catat, according to the rule of declining Nounes, is the first person
plural, which is known by the partlcie Ca, added to Tat, which signifies
father; and Catat is our father.

Faxah signifies heaven* it is put before the word or verb vilcat, for more
elegancy sake, and for better placing of it, contrary to the Latin and English,
where es, and art, is put before in coelis, or in heaven. Likewise it is put
without a preposition, contrary to the Greek, Latin and English: for in this
tongue many times the prepositions are omitted and understood.

Vilcat signifies es or art: it is the second person of the Verb, S^, es,
fui. which is a Verb Anomal, and not conjugated after the rule of Verbes*
above. As for example Vilq^in, I am* Vilca^* thou art, villi, he is* Plural*
Vilcoh, we (...) (...) (...) Vilque (...), the^ are* The (...) ^invi, I (...)

Nim ta Incaharcihi, which signifies, I pray God may be greatly magnified. Nim
signifies great or greatly. Ta is ^ptantis, or of wishing. Incaharcihi, is the
third p^on of the Verb Quincaharcihi, which signifies to be magnified or
extolled; and is formed according to the rule above, from the active verb,
Nucaharca, to magnify or extol, by changing the last a into ih^, and adding
quin the particle of the passive.

Avi thy name. Vi, signifies name, and according to the rule above for Nounes
beginning with a Confonant a is the particle of the second person.

Inchalita avihauri, let come thy Kingdom, is the proper expression of this in
English, Inchali, is the third person of the Verb Quinchali, which signifies
to come. Ta is as before optantis, or of wishing. Ihauri or ^hauric, signifies
kingdom. Av, added, shows the second person.

Pan cana, upon our heads. This is a peculiar expression in that tongue; which
(as all other tongues) has many phrases, strange expressions, proper
elegancies and circumlocutions. Whereof this one, to say, Let thy Kingdom come
upon our heads. Pam or Pan, is a preposition, signifying in or within, or upon.
Na signifies head; Nuna, my head, Cana, our head, according to the rule above:
from whence they call a hat, Pan Nuna, as being upon the head.

Invanivi ta Nava, let be done what thou will. They have no proper Noun to
express a man's will, but express it by a Verb: Invanivi, is the third person
of the Verb, Quinvanivi, which signifies to be made or done. The Active is
Nuvan, I do or make: from whence are formed many passives, as Quinvan or
Quinvanhi, or Quinvani, or Quinvanivi, or Quinbanari; or Quinvantihi, whereof
this last signifies to be done speedily. And so to all Verbes Actives and
Passives, this particle tihi, is added at the end, to signify have or speed in
doing any thing. Nava, is the second person of the Verb, Inva, I will,
according to the rule for verbes beginning with a vowell, Nava, thou will,
Inra, he will.

Yahvir vach a call, here upon the face of the earth; Yahvir, is an Adverbe
signifying here, Vach, signifies face, Nuvach, my face, Avach, thy face,
Ruvach, his face. Acal, signifies the earth or ground.

He invan taxah, as it is done in heaven. He is an Adverbe, signifying even as,
Invan, is the third person of the passive Verb, Quinvan, to be done. Taxah,
as before, signifies in heaven without any preposition to it.

Chaye runa, give to day. Nuye is the first person of the present tense,
signifying, I give, Cha, is the particle (according to the rule above) of the
second person of the Imperative, Mood. Chaye, give thou; Chyrue, let him give.
(...), to day.

Cahuhun ta quih vii^, our every day bread* where note that (...), put before
^hun is very elegantly placed; though it do belong to the word vii^, which
signifies bre^* Nuvi^c, my bread; (...), our bread. (...) is an undechned
word, signifying every one, or every thing. (...) signifies the (...) or the
day.

(...), I pray God the forgive our sins. They use not here the Imperative
Mood* as in (...) dem^, (...) in English forgive; but with the particle^* o^
wi^ing* they use the (...) Mood* (...) is the second person of the Verb, N^h,
I forgive. M^, signifies (...). Numac, my (...) or sins; ca^, our (...) is
(...) word (...) also to signify sin. (...) is put at the end for elegancy
sake. Quimac is the third person plural. Where note that in a whole speech or
sentence, sometimes the particle tacque, observed above in the rule for
declining is left out; and sometimes it is added. As here, quimac their sins;
or else it might have been quimac tacque.

Xim acquivi chi quih, that have sinned against our backs, of Mac, signifying
sin, is this Verb formed, quinmacquivi, to sin. So likewise of laval, sin* is
formed another Verb, quinlavini, to sin. This Verb quinmacquivi is a Deponent;
of which sort there are many in that tongue, as quincutani, to preach, which
have the same Particles as the Verbes Passives. Chiquih is a word compounded of
the Preposition chi* and ih, which signifies back, an^ varied like the Nounes
beginning with a Vowell, and joined with chi, sig^th against, as Chivih,
against me, chavih, against thee, chirih, against him Plural. Chiquih, against
us, chavihta, against ye, chiquih tacque, against them. And if another third
person be named, chirih, stands for against, as chirih Pedro, against Peter,
that is, against the back. If many be named in the third person Plural, then
chiquih is used, as chiquih unche, or chiquih cunch elal, against all.

Macoacana, leave us not. This Verb is here compounded of three: first, Ma, is
abbreviated from the word mani, which signifies no or not, as likewise
manchucu. Co or coh, signifies we or us, and as in the rules before I have
observed, is put here before the Verb; which causes then to be cut off from
the verb, which otherwise should have been nacana, of nucana, I leave, nacana,
thou leavest, inrucana, he leaves, and so forth.

Chipam catacchihi, in our being tempted. This is another great elegancy in
that tongue to use a Verb Passive for a Noune, and to add to it a Preposition;
as here, chipam, which signifies in; and putting to the Verb the Particles
wherewith the Nounes are varied and declined. Nutacchih, signifies I tempt.
The Passive is quintacchihi, I am tempted; from whence n^tacchihi* signifies
my being tempted, or my temptation; atacchihi, thy temptation, rutacchihi, his
temptation, catacchihi, our temptation.

Coavecata china unche tsiri. Deliver us from all evil things. Inveca, as I
have noted before, signifies to deliver. Co is the first person Plural put
before the Verb, as I observed in the rule above, and in that Conjunction or
compound macoacana. China is a Preposition, signifying above or from. Unche,
signifies all, which is undeclinable. tsiri, is an Adjective properly
undeclinable also or unvariable, in Gender, Case, and Number; as are all
Adjectives in that tongue. It signifies evil or bad; as tsiri vinac, an evil
man, tsiri ixoc, a bad woman, tsiri chicop, a bad or evil beast; so likewise
in the Plural number it is the same. Without a Substantive it is as the Newter
Gender, as malum for malares, signifying an evil thing, or evil things. The
Substantive that is formed from it, is tsir^ quil, which signifies evil or
wickedness. Voronquil, signifies the same.

Mani quiro, not good: this is put for a further expression of evils to be
delivered from whatsoever is not good. Mani, as I noted before, signifies not.
Quiro, is as tsiri, an Adjective, signifying good or a good thing, and is
undeclinable, unvariable in both numbers. Quiro vinac, a good man, quiro ixoc,
a good woman, quiro chicop, a good beast; so likewise in the plural number,
quiro vinac, good men. The Substantive that is derived from this Adjective, is,
quirohal, goodness* Chiohal, signifies the same. quirolah, is very good,
tsirilah, very bad, where lah is added at the end of an adjective, it puts the
same aggravation as valde in Latin.

He inqui, even as he says. The meaning is, even as he says that taught this
prayer. Quinqui, signifies I say, tiqui, thou say, inqui, he says,
Cohqui, we say, tiq^, ye say, quiquitacque, they say.

Amen. All words which have no true expression in the Indians tongues, are
continued in the Spanish, or in the proper tongue, as here Amen. So wine which
formerly they had not, they call vino; though by an improper word some call it
Castilana ha, that is, the water of Castile. So God, they call Dios commonly;
though some call him Nim Ahval, that is, the great Lord.

And thus for curiosities sake, and by the entreaty of some special friends, I
have furnished the Press with a language which never yet was printed, or known
in England. A Merchant, Mariner, or Captain at Sea may chance by fortune to be
driven ^n some Coast, where he may meet with some Pecoman Indian; and it may
be of great use to him, to have some light of this Poconchi tongue. Whereunto
I shall be willing hereafter to add something more for the good of my Country;
and for the present I leave thee Reader to study what hitherto has briefly
been delivered by me.

FINIS.
A Table of the Chapters of this Book, with the Contents of the most
Remarkable things in them.
CHAP. I. HOw Rome does yearly visit the American and Asian Kingdoms. page 1.
Contents.
The Popes Policy in maintaining constantly some poor Pensionary Bishops in
Rome. page 1. Without great Sums of Money, and new Purple Clothing given to the
Cardinals, Suits are not Canonized at Rome. page 2. Moneys sent out of England
to Rome, for Indulgencies to be granted to private Altars in Papists private
chambers. page 2. More power granted to the Kings of Spain over the Clergy in
the West-India's, then to other Princes in Europe, upon condition that they
maintain there the Popes Authority, and Priests to preach. page 2. 3. The
Jesuits challenge from Francis Xavierius the Preaching of the Gospel as due
only to them. page 3. Missions of Priests, Friars, or Jesuits, are yearly
sent at the King of Spain his charge to the India's. page 3.
CHAP. II. Showing that the Indians wealth, under a pretense of their
Conversion, has corrupted the hearts of poor begging Friars, with strife,
hatred and ambition. page 3. Contents.
Hatred grounded upon difference in Religion, is most bitter. Page 3. 4.
Jesuits and Friars, but especially Dominicans, deadly enemies. Page 4. A
Jesuitical trick well acted at Venice. page 4. Doctor Smith Bishop of
Chalcedon sent by the Pope into England, as private Head over all the Romish
Clergy, chiefly by the cunning subtilty of Jesuits was banished. page 4. A
College privately intended to be built in England, by Jesuits at Winifreds
Well; as also the Soap houses at Lambeth, with the Soap Patentee belonging to
them. page 5. More (...) prankes discovered. page 5. Why Jesuits and
Dominicans are dead enemies* page. 5. 6. Valentia the Jesuit, his death most
shameful, for causing a false Print upon Augustins works. page. 5. 6.
Jesuits, excellent Musicians, Fencers, Dancers, Vaulters, Painters, Bribers,
and Merchants. p. 6.
CHAP. III. Showing the manner of the Missions of Friars, and Jesuits to the
India's. page 7. Contents.
Distinction of several Provinces amongst the Friars, and Jesuits, under head
at Rome, named General; page 7. West India Friars rich prizes to the
Hollanders. page 7. Popes indulgence granted to such Friars, as go to the
India's, and his excommunication to such as oppose them* page 8. Liberty draws
most of the Friars to the India's. page 8. The death of an unchaste wife
murdered by her own husband, caused by the too much liberty of a wanton Friar
in Guatemala, Anno 1635. p. 9.
CHAP. IV. Showing to what Provinces of the East and West-India's belonging to
the Crown of Castilia, are sent Missions of Friars and Jesuits. And
especially of the Missions sent in the year 1625. page 9. Contents.
Two sorts of Spaniards in the India's deadly enemies to one another, viz. the
Natives borne there, and such as go from Spain thither. page 9. 10. What
Religious Orders are the chief Preachers in the Province of Guatemala. page.
10. The Spaniards chief trading from Spain to Philippinas, is first, by their
ships to St. John de Ulhua, upon the North Sea; and secondly, from Acapulco,
upon the South Sea to Manila. page 11. A vain and worldly discourse of a Friar
of the India's, page 11. 12. The chief cause of the Authors resolution to go
to East and West-India's. page 12. 13. Four poor Mendicant Friars, as
Apostles entertained by Don Frederique de Toledo, and the Galleys in Puerto de
Santa Maria. page 14.
CHAP. V. Of the Indian Fleet, that departed from Cales, Anno Dom. 1625. And of
some remarkable passages in that voyage. page 14. Contents.
The love of Nuns too powerful over Friars. page. 14. The Author hid in an
empty barrel on shipboard, in the Bay of Cales, page 15. The pleasure of the
Indian Navigation, 1625. until the first land was discovered. page 16.
CHAP. VI. Of our discovery of some Islands, and what trouble befell ut in one
of them. p. 16. Contents.
The Islands called Desseada, Marigalante, Dominica, Guadalupe, are the first
discovered in America, in the Spanish Navigation. page 17. A Christian Mulatto
having lived twelve years among Heathens, with an Infidel wife and Children,
found in Guadalupe. page 18. A sudden uproare and mutiny of the Indians of
Guadalupe, who slow and wounded many of the Spanish Fleet, 1625. page 25.
CHAP. VII. Of our further sailing to St. John de Ulhua, alias, Vera Crux, of
our landing there, page 19. Contents.
A Friar wounded at Guadalupe, died, and was solemnly cast to the Sea. page 20.
A Spaniard swimming in the sound of Mexico, cruelly slain, and partly devoured
by a Sea Monster. page 21. The Virgin Mary, called upon more then God, in a
sudden apprehensiou of a storm. page 21.
CHAP. VIII. Of our landing at Vera Crux, otherwise St. John de Ulhua, and of
our entertainment there. page 22. Contents.
The vanity and worldliness of a Religious Dominicnn Superior in St. John de
Ulhua, page 23. The houses and Churches of St. John de Ulhua, builded with
boards and timber, and therefore easily and often fired. page 23. 24. A further
relation of the town of St. John de Ulhua, with the rich trading of it from
most parts of the West-India's, as also from the East-India's. page. 24.
CHAP. IX. Of our journey from St. John de Ulhua to Mexico, and of the most
remarkable Towns and Villages in the way, page 25. Contents.
Our Friars first entertainment by the Indians of the old Vera Crux. page 25. A
Franciscan Friars vow and profession contrary to the vanity, carding, dicing,
and swearing, practiced by them of Xalappa, in the India's. page 26. Abundance
of Gnats in the Rinconada, takes away the comfort of the great abundance of
provision that is there. page 27. From whence the Town called Segura de la
Frontera had its beginning. page. 27. 28.
CHAP. X. Wherein is set down the Estate and Condition of the great Town of
Tlaxcallan, when the first Spaniards entered into the Empire of Mexico. Cortez
his first encounter with the Tlaxcalteca's, their League with him; with a
description of the Town, and of the state and condition of it now. page 29.
Contents.
A wall of stone without Lime or Mortar, of a fadome and a half high, and
twenty foot br^d, built by the Indian, for a defense in time of Wars before
the coming of the Spaniards. page 29. Fourscore thousand Indians, soon raised
and armed by those of Tlaxcallan, and soon over come by a thousand only
Indians and Spaniards with Cortez. page 30. 31. Yet further a hundred and fifty
thousand overcome by four hundred Spaniards, and six hundred Indians. page 31.
32. Three presents sent to Cortez, viz five slaves, Frankincense and feathers,
Fowls, (...) and Cherries, to know whether hee^ere a God or a man. page 3^.
Montezuma the Emperor his great present sent to Cortez. page 34. The
Tlaxcalteca's pay no Tribute to the King of Spain, as others do, save only
^ne Corn of Mo^. page 35. A description of the four chief streets of
Tlaxcallan, with the standard of the Town. page 35. Twenty thousand persons
wont to meet in one Market place of Tlaxcallan, to buy and sell. page 35.
Severe Justice executed upon a^ thief by the inhabitants of Tlaxcallan. page 36.
CHAP. XI. Concluding the rest of our Journey from Tlaxcallan to Mexico,
through the City of Angels, and Guacocingo. page 36. Contents.
The City of Angels first builded by the Command of Antonio de Mendoza, in the
year 1530. page 37. It was first called by the Indians Cuctlaxcoapan, that is
to say, a snake in water. Ibid. Many more particulars of the City of Angels
briefly related. Ibid. The Town of Guacocingo, why privileged by the
Spaniards. page 38. Tezcuco, the first Town in the West-India's, that received
a Christian King. page 39. How the Vergantines, (wherewith Cortez besieged
Mexico by water) were brought by Land in pieces from Tlaxcallan to Tezcuco; and
four hundred thousand men, fifty days employed in making a sluice or Trench
for the finishing of them, and launching them forth to the Lake. page 40.
Cortez his Army divided into three parts in the plain of Tezcuco, for the
better besieging of Mexico. page 40. 41. Cortez made use of seven thousand
beams of Cedar trees for the building of his house in Mexico. page 41.
CHAP. XII. Showing some particulars of the great and famous City of Mexico in
former times; with a true description of it now. And of the State and Condition
of it, in the year 1625. page 42. Contents.
Little substance or nourishment found in the fruits, and other food of Mexico.
page 42. 43. Several opinions concerning the difference of fresh and salt
water in the Lake of Mexico. p. 43, 44. Montezuma his stately Palace in Mexico,
called Tepa^; with two more, the one with many ponds of salt and fresh water
for several ^orts of fowls; the other for hawking fowls* and fowls of
rapine. p. 44, 45. Three thousand were the Attendants in Montezuma his Court,
fed with what came from his Table. p. 46. Mexico called formerly Tenuchtitlan,
and why? ibid. What Mexico properly signifies, and from whence so called. p.
47. The Names of the ten Emperors that were of Mexico; and Montezuma his
death. ibid. Quahutimoc Emperor of Mexico taken prisoner, and that great City
conquered by Cortez the 13. of August, 1521. p. 49. Two hundred thousand little
boats called Canoas, belonged to Mexico, to bring provision into the City. p.
50. A Description of the chief Market of Mexico, wherein a hundred thousand
persons did usually meet to buy and sell. p. 50, 51. A Description of the great
Church of Mexico, before the entering of the Spaniards. p. 51, 52. The Papists
have continued the fashion of their Churches, Altars; Cloisters, and many other
their abuses from the Heathens. p. 52, 53. The Gods of Mexico, two thousand in
number. p. 53. Mexico after the Conquest, was built again with a hundred
thousand houses. p. 54. Fifteen thousand Coaches are judged to be in the City
of Mexico. p. 56. A Popingay presented to the King of Spain, worth half a
million of Duckates. ibid. A Lamp in Mexico worth four hundred thousand
Crowns. ibid. The Attire of the female sex of Blackmores, Mulatta's, and
Mestiza's in Mexico. p. 56, 57. The Spaniards with their gifts to the Churches
and Cloisters cover their lascivious lives, as is showed by an example in
Mexico. p. 57. About two thousand Coaches daily meet in the Alameda of Mexico.
59. Of a fruit in the India's, called Nuchtli. p. 60. Of some other fruits, and
especially of a tree called Metl. p. 60, 61. A memorable history of a great
mutiny in Mexico, caused by the too great power of an Archprelate, and the
Covetousness of the Viceroy. With some observations gathered for the good of
England out of the said mutiny. p. 62. and sequent.
CHAP. XIII. Showing the several parts of this new world of America; and the
places of Note about the famous City of Mexico. p. 68. Contents.
A Description of the fiery Mountain, called Popocatepec. p. 69. The riches
belonging to the Viceroy his chapel at Chapultepec, worth above a million of
Crowns. p. 70. A Description of a rich Desert, or wilderness, three leagues
from Mexico. ibid. The cruelty of Don Nunio de Guzman in Mechoacan. p. 71. The
manner of burying the Kings of Mechocan, before it was conquered by the
Spaniards. p. 71, 72. The Spaniards themselves wonder that our English Nation
is not more Active in conquering more of the Continent of America beyond
Virginia. p. 73. Nova Albion in America, named so by Sir Francis Drake. p. 74.
How the Country of Jucatan was first named. ibid. In the year 1632. the
Indians of Jucatan mutinied against the Spaniards. ibid. The City of Valdivia
so named from a Spaniard of that name too greedy and covetous of gold. p. 76.
The famous Attempt of John Oxenham an English man, from the Coast of Nombre de
Dios, to the Island of Pearls in the South sea. p. 77. The Spanish Fleet of
Nova Hispania taken by the Hollanders, in the river of Matanzos. p. 80.
CHAP. XIIII. Showing my Journey from Mexico to Chiapa, Southward, and the most
remarkable places in the way. p. 81. Contents.
For what reasons I stayed in America, and would not go on to the Philippina
Islands in the East-India's. p. 82. A Proclamation from the Viceroy in the
market place of Mexico, against such as should conceal, harbor, and hide any
Friar bound for the Philippina Islands. p. 83. A double Wheat harvest every
year in a Valley, called St. Pablo. p. 85. The Dominicans Cloister in Guaxaca,
very rich, and strong. p. 86. The great River Alvarado, though it run from St.
John de Ulhua far into the heart of the Country toward Guaxaca; yet there is
no Castle, Tower, or Ordnance upon it. ibid. An Old Friar, Master of Divinity,
spightfully and maliciously buried in a garden by the Friars of Guaxaca. ibid.
Friars in the India's may travail, and call for Turkeys, Capons, or what they
please to eat, without any money, upon the Indians charges. p. 87. Tecoantepeque
a Sea Town, upon Mar del Zur, altogether unfortified. ibid. The Author lodged
in a Wilderness, and affrighted with a sure apprehension of death by Wild
beasts. p. 88, 89. The Author, and his Companies dangerous passage over the
mountain of Maquilapa, feeding three days upon green sour lemmons, and
water. p. 90. and sequ. Two mysterious games of Tables played between the
Superior of the Dominican Friars of Chiapa, and the Author and his Company. p.
94, 95. Our stately entertainment in a Town colled St. Philip, near Chiapa. p.
95, 96. Our imprisonment in the Cloister of Chiapa, and three days penance
with bread and water. p. 96. A Friars penance in Chiapa for a Love letter to a
Nun. p. 97. The Author made Schoolmasters in Chiapa. ibid.
CHAP. XV. Describing the Country of Chiapa, with the chiefest Towns and
Commodities belonging to it. p. 98. Contents.
Some foolish questions moved to the Author by a great Don of Chiap^* (...) his
answer to them accordingly. p. 99. and sequ. One thousand and six hundred Duck
ates got by a Bishop of Chiapa in one month only for Confirmation of little
children in Indian Towns. p. 102. A Bishop of Chiapa poisoned by women, with a
cup of Chocolatte, for forbidding Chacolatte to be drunk in the Church. p.
103. The Author his answer to a token sent to him by a gentlewoman of Chiapa.
p. 104. The great Dexterity of the Indians of Chiapa in shows, and public
feasts. ibid. The River of Tabasco very commodious for any Nation to enterup
toward Chiapa. p. 105.
CHAP. XVI. Concerning two daily, and common Drinks, or Potions much used in
the India's, called Chocolatte, and Atolle. p. 106. Contents.
The Nature of the Cacao, and the tree it grows it upon, and the two sorts of
it. p. 106, 107. Cinnamon one of the best ingredients in the Chocolatte; and
why? p. 108. Achiotte how it grows; and for what it is good. ibid. Several
ways to drink the Chocolatte. p. 109.
CHAP. VII. Showing my Journey from the City of Chiapa unto Guatemala, and the
chi^ places in the way. p. 111. Contents.
Six thousand Duckates sent by a Friar to Spain to buy a Bishopric. p. 112. A
rich treasure and picture of Mary in a poor and small Town of the Indians,
called Chiantla, among the mountains* named Cuchumatlanes. p. 113. The water
of the river of a Town, called Scapula, causes great swellings in the throat.
p. 114. The Author his dangerous f^ll from the mountain of Zojabah, and his
great deliverance attributed to a miracle by the Indians* with the con^eit the
Indians had of his sanctity and holiness. p. 115. The Indians guide the Friars
in the night, when they travail, with lights of ^ood. p. 116. The great Fair of
Chimaltenango. p. 117. The Author abused, and suspected to be a spy, by an old
friar in Chimaltenango. ibid. Stones of a fruit, or plumme, called Xocotte, fit
for fiering, and also good to fat hogs. 117, 118.
CHAP. VIII. Describing the Dominions, Government, Riches, and gr^ of the City
of G^temala, and Country belonging to it. p. 118. Contents.
Guatemala a^ open City without any walls, forts, or Bulwarks about it. p.
118. The Author welcomed to Guatemala; and first graced with a public Act of
Divinity; and after made Master of Arts in the same City. p. 118, 119. The
form of the Letters Patents, as are used there, and sent to the Author to
read Arts in the University of Guatemala. ibid. The manner of presenting the
Author to the Bishop for obtaining his License to preach publicly. p. 120.
121. The form of the Bishops License to preach and hear Confessions within
his Bishopric, in Spanish, and English; with some glosses upon it. p. 121,
122. Donna Maria de Castilia swallowed up by a river which suddenly gushed out
of a mountain near to Guatemala, for blaspheming and defying God. p. 124. The
horror of the Vulcan of fire ueer Guatemala. ibid. Thirteen pound and a half
of Biefe sold about Guatemala for three pence. p. 125. One man only enjoying
40000. head of Cattle, and one only that bought 6000. near Guatemala. ibid.
How Guatemala and the Towns about are stored with provision of Biefe and
Mutton; and by whom. ibid. Four exceeding rich Merchants in Guatemala, besides
many other of great* but inferior wealth to them. p. 126. The Covetousness of
a President of Guatemala showed in Carding and gaming. ibid. Thirty thousand
Ducats yearly, the rent of one Cloister in Guatemala; besides the treasure in
it, worth a hundred thousand Crowns. p. 127. A thousand persons commonly
living within one Cloister of Nuns in Guatemala. ibid. The Bishop of Guatemala
his Nun, very powerful and rich. p. 128. The strength of the Blackmore slaves
about the Country of Guatemala. p. 129. All the power of Guatemala is not able
to reduce a few Blackmore slaves, who are fled to the mountains about Golfo
Dulce. p. 130. Between the Town of Acacabastlan and Guatemala are Mines of
Copper, and iron, and probably a treasure of Gold. p. 131. A rich Miser, worth
six hundred thousand Duckates, living like abeast in the valley of Mixco. p.
132. A kind of wheat in the valley of Mixco, called Tremesino, which after
three months son is harvested in. p. 135. A Town called St. Lucas, where
wheat threshed is laid up in Barnes, and (...) peth two or three years with
much increase. ibid. A Town of twelve thousand Indian inhabit^ not yet
conquered, lying between Jucatan and Vera Paz. p. 136.
CHAP. XIX. Showing the Condition, quality* fashion and behavior of the
Indians of the Country of Guatemala, since the Conquest; and especially of
their feasts and (...). p. 138. Contents.
The Indians of the Country of Guatemala, like the Israelites by Pharaoh, much
oppressed by the Spaniards, because they multiply and increase. p. 138. The
West-India's easier to be conquered now, then in the time that Cortez conquered
them. p. 139. Some Indians choose rather to die by pining away willingly, then
to be subject to the Spaniards oppression and cruelty. ibid. How the Indians
are forced, and distributed out by a Spanish Officer to serve the Spaniards
weekly. p. 140. The manner of the Indians beds; as also their manner of
clothing. p. 141, 142. They are divided into Tribes, with a chief head over
every Tribe. p. 142. How they agree upon contracting Marriage one with another.
ibid. The powdered bief of the Indians, commonly called Tassajo. p. 143. The
Indian Venison, or flesh of wild Dear, how dressed and eaten. ibid. A Hedgehog
good meat in the India's. ibid. Of an Indian drink, called Chicha. p. 144. The
Spaniards use much to make the Indians drunk; and then pick their pockets.
144, 145. The Priests that live in the Indian Towns are above the Justices,
and Officers for peace, and whip, and give sentence and judgment in the Church
against the best. p. 146. The Service, and Attendants allowed to the Priest. p.
147. How, and what tribute the Indians pay yearly. p. 148. The Saints and Idols
of the Romish Religion differ not from the heathenish Idols in the Indians
opinion. p. 149. Saints held unprofitable by the Priests in the India's, and
fit to be cast out of the Churches, which bring not money and gifts unto them at
least once a year. ibid. The Priests trade much in wax candles, and sell
sometimes one candle five or six times. p. 150. An old Indian Woman's judgment
concerning the Sacrament of the Lords supper. p. 150, 151. All souls day,
Christmas, Candlemas day, and Whitsunday, days of great lucre, and profit to
the Priests. p. 151, 152. The Indians are forced to marry at thirteen and
fourteen years of age; and why? p. 153. The ground of our Fairs in England. p.
154. Several dances of the Indians. p. 154, 155.
CHAP. XX. Showing how, and why I departed out of Guatemala, to learn the
Poconchi language, and to live among the Indians; and of some particular
passages, and Accidents whilst I lived there. p. 156. Contents.
The Author going with some few Spaniards, and Christian Indians into a
Country of unknown Heathens, fell dangerously sick; and was further in a
skir^h with the Barbarians, and by that means also in danger of his life. p.
157. 158. Indians grown up in age, forcedly driven to Baptis^, without any
principl^s (...), by the Priests and Friars that first entered into America.
ibid. (...), a woody, mountainous, and barren* Country. p. 159. (...) India's
are Grammers and Dictionaries of the several Indian tongues. p. (...). The
Author became perfect in the Poconchi language in one quarter of a (...).
ibid. The means, chiefly from the Church, which the Author enjoyed yearly in
the Towns of Mixco and Pinola. p. 161, 162. A Plague of Locusts in the India's
brought no small profit to the Author. p. 163, 164. The Spaniards confidence
in some blessed breads against the plague of Locusts* ibid. An infectious
disease amongst the Indians, brought to the Author near a hundred pounds in
half a year. ibid. The Author struck down as dead to the ground with a flash
of lightning; and again in danger of his life by an Earthquake. p. 165, 166. Of
a small Vermin, less then a flea called Nigua, common in the India's,
wherewith the Author was in danger of losing a leg. ibid. The Author like to
be killed by a Spaniard, for defending the poor Indians, p. 167. A notorious
Witch in the Town of Pinola affrighted the Author. p. 167. and sequ. The
Indian Wizards and Witches changed into shapes of beasts by the Devil, as
appears by two examples. p. 169. and sequ. Some Idolaters in the Town of
Mixco discovered their preaching Idol found out by the Author, and burnt
publicly in the Church; and he in great danger to be killed by them. p. 171.
and sequ. The Authors conflict within himself about coming home to England
for conscience sake; and his resolution therein. p. 180, 181. Near upon 9000.
pieces of Eight got by the Author, in twelve years that he lived in the
India's. p. 181.
CHAP. XXI. Showing my Journey from the Town of Petapa into England; and some
chief passages in the way. p. 182. Contents.
Relation of a place called Serro Redondo, five leagues from Petapa. p. 182. A
strange fire and smoke constantly coming out of the earth near unto a Town,
called Aguachapa; which by the Spaniards is supposed to be a mouth of hell. p.
183. The privilege of a great river, called Lempa, dividing the Country of
St. Salvador, and Nicaragua. p. 184. A Friar thinking to take up gold from the
bottom of the fiery Vulcan of Leon deceived. p. 185. The City of Leon, and
Country about, called by the Spaniards, Mahomets paradise. ibid. About the
beginning of February, the City of Granada in Nicaragua is one of the richest
places in the India's, by reason of many rich commodities, and some of the King
of Spain his revenews carried thither, to be transported by the Frigates to
Carthagena or Havana. p. 185, 186. The dangerous passage from the Lake of (...)
(...) led El Des^adero. p. (...). The Author and his (...) like to be
surprised by (...) Crocodile. p. 187. The Author ro^bed at sea by a Holland
man of War, of the (...) Crowns. p. 188, 189. A Friar f^ defending the po^re
Indians of Nicoy^ (...) two fingers, which were cut off by the (...) de Mayor.
p. 192. The Author forced to drink his own urine, and lost, and like to
perish in an unknown Island, and afterward upon a Rock. p. 193, 194. Some
particulars of the City of Panama. p. 195. The river of Chiagre very shallow in
many places, without some great rain cause the water to fall into it from the
mountains. ibid. Some particulars of Portobello, during the time that the
Spanish Fleet stays there. p. 196. The Papists Bread God, or Sacrament eaten
and gnawne by a Mouse in Portobello; with a Fast in bread and water for that
contempt done unto their God. p. 197, 198. The Spaniards fear of the English
that then inhabited the Island called Providence. p. 199. Some English
Prisoners at Carthagena, with one Captain Rouse, who at Havana challenged some
Spaniards into the field, who had abused him. p. 199* 200* From the whole
Spanish Fleet, one gallantly taken (...) worth fo^re (...) thousand Ducats, by
two Holland or English ships not well known, upon the Coast of Havana. p. 201.
The manner of the Dominicans habit, with the meaning of it. p. 203.
CHAP. XXII. Showing how, and for what causes, after I had arrived in England,
I took yet another journey to Rome, and other parts of Italy, and returned
again to settle my self in this my Country. p. 205. Contents.
Price a Monk very familiar with William Laud late Archbishop of Canterbury.
p. 205. The Authors Brother in great favor at Court, and aspiring to a
Bishopric^e* or to be Parish Priest of Covengarden. ibid. The Author
apprehended by a Pursevant; a^ protected by Sir Francis VVindebank. p. 207. The
Author from the low Countries got letters of recommendation to some chief
Cardinals in Rome. p. 207. The Author robbed by French Pirates going from
Ligorne to Rome. ibid. The Cardinal Don Francisco Barbarini entitled the
Protector of England (...) and proceedings of William Laud (...) (...)* p.
20^. William Laud his further Compliance with the Cardinals of Rome, as
testified by Fitzherbert the Jesuit in a conference with the Author. ibid. A
design of making an English Cardinal at Rome; and who chiefly eyed for that
purpose. p. 20^. A true Copy of the manner of sending the Author to live at
Orleans in France. p. 209, 210. The miracle printed by the Papists of the
blushing and sweating of the Ladies picture of Loretto, tried by the Author,
and found to be a mere lie. p. 210. At the calling of the Parliament now
sitting, the Romish crew in Italy much perplexed. p. 210, 211. The Author
taken again by a French Fleet of ships, as he was coming home from Ligorne. p.
211. The Author twice assaulted in London by Papists, and like to be killed for
his profession of the truth, and service to the State. p. 211, 212.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 6, l. 54, read that Kingdom, p. 8, l. 34, r. their own, p. 10, l. 46, r.
party, p. 11, l 56, r. S^via, p. 15, l. 2^. r. St. John de Ul^, ibid. l. 49. r.
the spurnings, p. 16, l. 33, 34, r. the first founder, p. 17* l. 23. r. were,
p. 24, l. 3, r. (...), ibid. l. 5, 6, r. Grij^lva, p. 25, l. 42, r. out of the
Arbor, p. 27, l* 23, r. keepers, p. 28, l. 46, r. (...)* and (...), p. 35* l.
12, r. well b^ked, p. 36, l. 6, r. sacrificed, p. 43, l. 5, r. in a Spanish,
ibid. l. 55* r. it makes, p. 51, l. 39, r. those sacrifices, p. 53, l. 43, r.
consecrated, p. 62, l. 30, r. to be the Viceroyes, p. 65* l. 31, r. Uiva ^l
Roy, p. ^9, l. 51, r. Antiqu^ra, p. 71, l. 4, r. it glorietli, ibid: l. 47, r.
made, p. 72, l. 1, r. glorious, p. 74* l. 23, 24. r. (...), p. 76* l. 12, r.
have in it, p. 79* l. 21, r. S^villa, p. 83, l. 2, r. to follow him, p. 85, l.
59, r. which, p. 88, l. 2, r. met here, p. 95, l. 14, r. merr^, p. 96, l. 28,
r. Cloister, p. 100, l. 21, r. bodies, ibid. l. 22* r. planet, p. 102, l. 51*
52, r. women, p. 109, l. 19* r. another, p. 114, l. 33, r. those that, p. 115,
l. 41, r. any thing with them, p. 116, l. 14* r. ten leagues, p. 11^, l. 10, a
deadly, p. ^19, l. 3, r. Original sin, ibid: l. 42, r. 1^27, ibid: l. ult: r.
Preachers, p. 122, l. 22* r. not holy, p. 123, l. 2, r. grieving, p. 125, l.
51, r. cheap, ibid: l. 59, r. stately, p. 126, l. 38, r. he lift, p. 128, l.
26, r. thousand Crowns, ibid^ l. 55* r. is no landing, p. 129, l. 20, r. to
enrich Guatemala. p. 130, l. 46, r. (...), ibid: l. 54, r. his power, p. 141,
l. 26, r. which after, p. 149, l. 38, r. provide, p. 150, l. 31, r. buy, p.
153, l. 9, r* taught more for, ibid: l. 33, r. livers in the town, p. 156, l.
26, r. halving, p. 159, l. 7, r. President, p. 169, l. 38, r. killed him, p.
170, l. 44, r. taken up, p. 171, l. 54, r. a running water, p. 178, l. 45, r.
Priests, p. 179, l. 12, r. sent me a Patent, ibid: l. 16. r. to further, p.
180, l. 2, r. against it, which, p. 182, l. 14* r. would not, p. 183, l. ul^:
r. (...), p. 184, l. 50, r. there, p. 187, l. 5, r. difficult journey, p. 193,
l. 17, toward death, p. 198, l. 13, r. would, p. 203, l. 30, r. Popham, p.
209, l. 48, 49, put ( t^) before supr^ominatum, and leave it ou^ in the next
line, p. 213, l. 40, r. R^, ibid* l. 43, r. quipat, p. 214, l. 2, r. quit^
tacque, p* 215, l: 26, r: chiquil^h tacque, ibid: l* 4^, r* the second person,
ibid: l: 49: r: love thee, p: 216* l* 18, r. (...), ibid: l: 21, 22, r* verbs
passives, ibid: l: 28, r: in (...), and r: change ^h, ibid: l: 51* ^* (...).


