IMPRIMATUR,

November 7. 1663. Roger L'Strange.

Tyrocinium Linguae Latinae, OR THE LATIN APPRENTICE MADE FREEMAN; Wherein
are Discussed the Difficulties which do Incumber those who have to Translate
the English Particles, Moods, and Tenses, according to the Latin Idiome, or to
make the Reduction of Verbs, and Participles, from Actives to Passives, from
Personals to Impersonals, from Finits to Infinits, or Contrariwise;

To these are Subjoined the Differences and Proprieties of Latin Particles,
such as, Suus, Sui, Ipse, Quidam, Quispiam, etc. And an Alphabetical Catalogue
of Verbs, which under one Signification will have diverse Regiments and
Constructions.

In the Last Place follows (as an Epiphonema) most Useful and Methodical
Rules of Composing.

Ovid. Principiis obsta, sero Medicina paratur
Cum mala per longas invaluere moras.
Published for the Instruction of Youth, By Alex. Gordon, Gent.

LONDON, Printed by T. M. For Mathias Walker, at the Sign of the three Hearts,
at the West end of St. Paul's, 1664.

modern bookplate

FOR THE Right Honorable, HENRY HOWARD Esquire, Eldest Son of the Right
Honorable Henry Howard Esquire, and Heir Apparent to his Grace the Duke of
Norfolk, Premier Duke, Premier Earl, and Premier Baron of England, and First
of the HOWARDS.
Most Honored SIR,
I Hope I shall not need a further Apology for this Presumption, then to let
Your Honor understand, that I have been known a Servant to Your most
Illustrious Family, and have been Dignified with the Quality of Conductor (As
Tutor) to Your Noble Cousin, Mr. John Howard, Only Son to that Incomparable
Person, the Right Honorable, my Lord Viscount Andever, and Heir apparent to
the House of Berkshire; Quem terris tantum ostenderunt fata, An inestimable
Jewel, that Nature but showed, and straight put up again. This Gemm being thus
Ravished from the World, and me, to whom I originally intended this Service,
Elucent reason cast me upon this boldness, to make my Address to Your Most
Honorable Patronage, who are the Heir of all the Hopes of all Your
Superexcellent House, and the Top of so Numerous and Noble a Family, next after
Your most Illustrious Father, who has by His known Gallantry, and Transcendent
Generosity superadded more Luster and Glory to his dead Ancestors than ever he
received from them, though all so Eminently Recorded in the Book of Fame; In
the next place, I presume Your Noble Goodness will be more inclinable to Pardon
this great Boldness that I have taken, to Plant Your Honored Name in the
Frontispiece of this Tyrocinium, it being so suitable to Your Tender Years; and
I hope it will prove useful for Your Honor, and all the Nobility of the
Nation, to make Your Ingress more easy into the Latin Tongue; which with Your
other Perfections, that all the World already not only Prognosticates, but
reads in Your present Epitome, will (I doubt not) place you in a greater
Volume, amongst all those Glorious Heroes, before spoken of, under the Canopy
of Immortality; and if this small Mite of Mine, may contribute any thing
toward it, I shall arrive at my utmost ambition, which is (next after my
Deceased Master) to have Served so Princely a Person as Your Self, and to be
Honored so far as to be Owned still, by Your Most Excellent Family, in Quality
of a Servant; and by Your Great Goodness; As,

Sir, Your Most Humble Honourer, and Oblidged Faithful Creature, Alexander
Gordon.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
MAny there are that think that a Scholar, who has been carefully Instructed
in his Rules of Grammar, and has Learned his Syntax several times over, needs
no further Instruction for matter of Composing; But it is not known by
Experience, the most evident Demonstration in Nature, that, notwithstanding the
Grammattical Theorie done in the exactest manner, Young beginners when they
come to the Practical part, do not only stick, but fall into great absurdities
and faults, no less worthy of Pity then Remedy; The reason hereof is so
manifest, that there can be nothing said against it; to wit, that every
Language has its own Dialect, or particular way of speaking, the Latin has
its Latinismes, the English its Anglicismes, but of the last of the Grammar
makes not (nor cannot) any mention, therefore it is no marvel, if one that has
learned his Grammar, fail exceedingly, when he meets with difficulties whereof
he has heard nothing. And as often as this falls out, our Young Scholars
striving to Regulate the Latin by the English Phrase, stumble into most
Ridiculous errors, not knowing the Antipathie and diversity that is oftentimes
found betwixt two Languages, As for Example.

The English Verbs are often to be rendered into Latin by the Active Voice,
when they are of themselves of the Passive; and contrariwise, by the Passive,
when they are in the Active; As, Cicero is followed by all Orators; If you
would say according to the English Dialect; Cicero sequitur ab omnibus
Oratoribus, you should be guilty of Incongruity, because a Deponent has no
Passive Voice, wherefore you must put it Actively into Latin, and say,
Ciceronem sequntur omnes Oratores: I am well pleased with your Civility; here
your English Verb is of the Passive Voice, and in Latin it is put Actively,
thus; Placet mihi tua urbanitas; But in following your English Phrase, you
would say, Placeor tua urbanitate, Although it has not the Passive Voice.

Oftentimes there goes Prepositions in the English before the Infinitive; As,
Without drinking, without eating, before drinking, or eating; so that in this
Case, if one would follow the English phrase* and say; Sine manducare, antequam
Libere, antequa, manducare, He would be Ridiculously Incongruous.

But what shall I say of the diversity of the Tenses in both Languages? which
is so great, that the Imperfect of the English, is often expressed by the
Present in the Latin; As, He loves you so much, that he would loose his life
for you, Ita te amat, ut pro te vitam amittat. Sometimes the Present Tense of
the English is rendered by the Perfect Tense of the Latin, and the English
Perfect by the Plusquam Perfect.

Neither can the English Gerunds or Participles be put by the same Gerunds and
Participles of the Latin, and we are often necessitate, to reduce the
Participles to the Finite Mood of the Verbs from which they descend, specially,
when the Verbs have no participle and then it is hard to know in what Tense
they are to be put.

Besides all these difficulties, consider how hard a thing it is, to change the
English Particles, such as, (That What, By, Of, etc.) into the Particles and
ways of speaking suitable to the Latin: seeing they are so diversely taken in
both Languages.

Lastly, That I may not insist in showing a thing of it self so manifest, what
gross mistakes are there seen amongst young beginners, in not knowing the
Nature and Proprieties of the Latin Particles? such; As, Alius, Alter,
Quisque, Aliquis Quidam, Sui, Suus, etc.

Of all which difficulties (and that not small ones) your Grammar gives you no
Solution: neither can it Arm you, against the Pains and Troubles that is found
in Translating the English into Latin; seeing it was only molded to Initiate
us in the Rules and Artifice of the Latin Tongue, and not to discuss the
difficulties arising from the Translation of strange Tongues and Languages.

Wherefore to supply this defect, and to give young beginners greater Facility
and Encouragement, I have by much Industry and Pains, Compendis'd and Expounded
in this little Book, the most Importent and Obvious difficulties, that we meet
with in Composing; when we have to do with the English particles; As, When,
What, That, etc, or with the Latin Particles; such as, Aliquis, Quidam,
Quispiam, Sui, Suus, etc. or when we are to change the English Moods and
Tenses, into the Moods and Tenses of the Latin; or if there be any reductions
to be made from the Active to the Passive; from an Impersonal, to a Personal,
from the Infinite Mood, to the Finite, and contrariwise; to which I have added,
a Catalogue of Verbs, which have diverse Regiments and Constructions under one
signification; with the most considerable Verbs, that in changing their
signification, change their Construction; and a most curious and sure Method
to be practiced in Composing. But although this Work stood me in great Pains,
and long Study; Yet, I will hold my self well satisfied and recompensed, if
you can Reap any Profit thereby, the which, I heartily wish and pray for; who is,

Your Well-wisher and Servant, Alexander Gordon.

The Bookseller, to all Ingenious Youths, Especially those of Sheffield, in
Yorkshire.
Dear Country Men;
FEaring that you should have Charged me with the Detestible Vice of
Ingratitude (having from your AIR Received my BIRTH and EDVCATION) if at this
occasion I should have been forgetful of Your Advancement, when I am in some
Capacity to Contribute thereto, I thought this a fit oppertunity for the better
vindication of my Self from the aforesaid Crime, and to give a most evident
proof of the Zeal I have for Your Progress in Virtue and good Literature. It is
my good fortune to Print a Book so Ingeniously contrived and fitted for all
sorts of Persons that intend to attain the Perfection of the Latin Tongue that
it can sooner be Paralleled then be enough Commended, though both Impossible.

Yet least I seem to cry it up above its Merit, I wish you not to pass Sentence
before due Perusal, and then I doubt not but you will dignifie it with some
Loftier Elogium and Commendation than what has fallen from my Unlearned Pen.
Wherefore Countrymen, since I am so happy as to have the Publishing and
Vending of this Inestimable Book, I should have justly been Taxed with
Ingratitude, a most unnatural Vice; If I had not by some means (then which none
seemed to me more fitting then this) to Acquaint You therewith, desiring your
pains in perusal, that thereby You may be Arts-Master, and Free Men in the
Latin Tongue; Is the continual Wishes Of;

Dear Country Men, Your Affectionate Friend and Servant, MATHIAS WALKER.

TO MY Honored Friend Mr. Alexander Gordon, On His Most Excellent, Tyrocinium
Linguae Latinae.
Dear Friend;
It Is said the work that is well begun, Dimidium facti qui been caepit, habet.

Is half at least already done
The Latin Tongue (if that be true)
Is here in brief, half taught by You;
And if that half be more than whole, Dimidium plus toto.

You are the Master of the Schole,
Must teach our Teachers, and the first,
That ever I could see, that durst,
Attempt amongst the Learned Throng,
To Rudiment aright, the Latin Tongue.
Thou open'st Shop, and giv'st whole Sale,
What others do but by Retale.
For as the whole consists of Parts, Totum constat ex partibus.

So Particles accomplish Arts;
Thus whole in part, and whole in all, Anima est totam toto and tota in
qualibet part.

You Are Soul of Art Scholastical.
J. M. A. M. Ludi-Magister.

TO MY Ingenious Friend, Mr. Alexander Gordon: Requiring my Judgment upon His,
Tyrocinium Linguae Latinae.
Sir,
When you command the judgment of your Friend,
You do not sure oblige him to commend,
Or favor what you write, but do desire
His strictest censure, as a Test of Fire;
Nor can you bribe my Judgment, you shall be
Not purchased deer, nor yet sold cheap by me.
I Will tell you of your faults, and I must say
You have done ill, at this high time of day,
To offer yet more Light; which being done
Seems like a Candle lighted to the Sun,
Or drops to augment the Sea, and 't oddly looks,
That learning should be overwhelmed with Books,
Which like or'ridden Horses, are soon foiled,
And Nauseous turn, as Cramb that's twice boiled
Yet Methods may be several, and Books
Like the same dishes, vary with the Cooks;
So then the World may pardon you and say
To the same place, thou go a new found way:
Though after many, yet thou follow'st none,
Thy way tends clearly to perfection.
But yet another Quarrel does occur
Against thy Book, which gives the greatest slur,
That thou do prostitute the Latin Tongue,
To Porters, Carmen, and the numerous throng
Of Common People, nay to the other Sex,
Whose constant course, is for to Plague and Vex
The world with torrent of their tongues too much,
It is supposed you would not have yours such;
But well, to excuse that fault, it may be said
That tongue by tongue as Burn, by fire is laid;
And it is presumed, those tongues (if not subdued)
Would, with a Lingua, never be so Rude:
Then teach'em tongue it right, and ben't ashamed
To make a woman to be Linguist Famed.
These are the Exceptions I have met, and true,
And salv'd them, but not flattered Book, or You.
H. R. Amica Veritas.

Tyrocinium Linguae Latinae.
CHAP. I. Of the Particle (That.)
WHEN this Particle (That) may be changed into any of those Following, to wit,
which, who, whom, then of Necessity it must be rendered in the Latin, by the
Relative (qui, quae, quod,) which according to the Nature of the Verb
following, will be put in diverse cases; As in the Accusative, when the Verb
following is an Active; an Example, I have read the Book that you did write, id
est, which you did write, Vidi librum quem scripsisti; The Injury that I
forgot, id est, which I forgot; Injuria cujus oblitus sum; The Man that I hurt,
homo cui nocui.

But if (That) cannot be changed into none of the above mentioned Particles,
then you must have recourse to the Rules following.

(That) Following English Verbs which are expressed in Latin be any of these;
dico, affirmo, credo, puto, scio, intelligo, narro, commemoro, memini, spero,
pollicior, and many others of the like signification, is cut off in the Latin,
and the Verb following it, is put by the Infinitive Mood; As, I say that Peter
is a good Man, Dico Petrum esse probum; I hope that Paul will become Learned,
Credo Paulum fore Doctum. Take heed of saying, spero, quod Paulus futurus sit
doctus; Trusting to the Authorities of some Ancient Writers, who studied more
to make their concepts, and notions be understood, then to the purity and
Elegancy of Speech; neither take for your warrant in this point, the
Ecclesiastical Writers, who for the too frequent use of this way of speaking,
Credo quod Paulus futurus sit Doctus, do clearly hold out the verity of the
Proverb, Grammaticae Leges plerumque Ecclesia Spernit.

When (That) does follow in your English Verbs of fear, which are put in the
Latin by, timeo, metuo, vereor, and their Synonimes or Verbs of the like
signification; you must know if you fear any thing, which you would not wish to
come to pass, or if you fear that any thing will not come to pass which you
desire should fall out. If it be the first sort of fear, then the Particle
(That) is put be (ne) as the Scholar fears that the Master comes to know his
ignorance; Veretur Scholasticus ne ignorantiam suam resciat Preceptor, which he
would not wish to come to pass, least it being known, he should suffer for it.

If in place of (That) you have (Least) as the Scholar fears least the Master
come to know his ignorance; it is to be done with, as you have heard of (That;)
But if your fear be the second sort, then (That) is expressed by (ne non,) or
(ut) with the Conjunctive Mood, as I fear that my Father send me no Money,
Vereor ne Pater non mittat ad me pecuniam, separating ne, and (non) as you see
in this Example; or you may say, vereor ut mittat pater ad me pecuniam.

If (That) chance to go after any of these Verbs, Consulo, moneo, suadeo,
persuadeo, rogo, impero, statuo, permitto, efficio; it is to be rendered in the
Latin by (ut) with the Verb following in the Subjunctive, or the Verb
following is put in the Subjunctive Mood, and (ut) is understood; or it may be
put in the Infinitive Mood; and if in place of (That) the Particle (To)
follows any of the above written Verbs, do with it as you have heard of
(That) Examples hereof. I advise you that you obey your Master, or to obey your
Master; Suadeo tibi ut praeceptori obtemperes, vel praeceptori obtemperes, vel
obtemperare; I admonish you that you shun idleness, or to shun, moneo te ut
otium fugias, vel otium fugias, vel otium fugere; I pray that you come and see
me, or to come and see me; Rogo ut ad me venias, vel venias, venire.

If (That) Follow the Substantive, Nouns descending from these Verbs, it is put
by (ut) with the Conjunctive Mood; As it is the Kings pleasure that the
Citizens Assemble; Vult Rex ut Cives congregentur; or, by the Substantive
descending from the Verb (Vult) Voluntas Regis est, ut Cives Congregentur; So
you say, Desiderat Pater ut studeas, vel desiderium Patris tui est, ut studeas,
Your Father desires that you Study.

When the Particle (That) does follow any of these Particles, (tam, so, ita,
so, adeo, s^, tantus, so much, talis, such, tot so many,) it is put by (ut,)
with the Subjunctive Mood; As my Brother is so Learned, that he is ignorant of
nothing; Adeo doctus est Frater meus, ut nihil ignoret; The desire I have to
see you, is so great, that I cannot express it; Tantum est mihi desiderium, tui
videndi, ut illud verbis complecti nequeam. Curious Dentatus had so many Men,
and so much Land, that he knew not in which he was Richest; Tot Homines erant
Curio Dentato, tantumque Agri, ut in utro Ditior esset, non ipse posset
aestimare; The Battle of Can, was so bloody, that the Romans lost forty
thousand Men in it. Adeo cruentum fuit praelium ad Cannas, ut in eo desiderata
fuerint Quadraginta Romanorum millia.

(That) being put after Verbs that signify to hinder, dissuade, or forbid, is
expressed, be (ne quin, quo minus.) As the Master forbids that we play; Vetat
praeceptor ne ludamus, vel quo minus ludamus. I was not the cause that you
brought not to pass your intent. In causa non eram, vel non per me stetit,
quin, propositum tenueris, vel quo minus propositum tenueris; The ill Weather
will hinder me that I cannot come to you. Impediet me adversum tempus, quo
minus ad te proficiscar. You may likewise put these Verbs in the Infinitive
Mood; as Impediet me ad te proficisci.

If (That) follow (But) it is put by (quin,) with the Verb following in the
Conjunctive Mood; As I doubt not, but that you love me. Non dubito quin me
ames; and since (quin) is made mention of, know this much of it, by the way:
that when it is an Interrogative Particle, it is put with the Indicative Mood;
As why do not you read? Quin Legis? why follow you not your Friends good
Counsel? quin amicis been momentibus obtemper as?

If (That) follow these Verbs, Oportet, decet, convenit, necesse est, aequum
est, par est; or if your English have (to) in place of (that) any of them are
put by (ut) with the Subjunctive Mood; As, it is needful that you learn, or,
which is the same, you must needs learn, necesse est ut discas, vel discas, and
suppress (ut;) it behooves you to give place to the stronger, or you must give
way to the stronger; Oportet valentiori cedas; it is necessary that a man pay
tribute to Nature, necesse est ut homo naturae satisfaciat. It is reasonable
that we oblige those who have obliged us; aequum est ut de nobis been
merentibus parem gratiam referamus.

All these ways may be said also by the Infinitive, as Oportet valentiori
cedere, hominem nature satisfacere, aequum est, nos de nobis been merentibus
parem gratiam referamus.

(That) after these Impersonal Verbs, to wit, (fit, evenit, accidit, contingit)
is only expressed by (ut) with the Subjunctive Mood; As it falls out often
that the most Learned are deceived; Saepe fit, vel contigit ut doctissimi
hallucinentur.

(That) signifying (because) is put by (quod,) with the Verb following it in
the Indicative Mood, or the Verb is put in the Infinitive, and (That) is
omitted; As, I am glad that you are come, id est, because you are come; Gaudeo
quod venisti, vel quod veneris, vel te venisse.

Mark these ways of speaking in the Particle (That,) when it follows (one,)
which are expressed by, puta to wit, nempe idem, scilicet, idem, with the
Infinitive: when there follows no Verb, which will have the Particle (That,)
put by (ut) with the Subjunctive; As, the Master says one thing of you, that
you are given to play. Vnum de te ait praeceptor, puta te ad ludum propensum
esse; But if the Verb requires (That,) to be changed in (ut,) then you put the
Verb following (ut) in the Conjunctive; As I request you one thing, that you
would lend me money, unum te rogo nempe, vel quippe ut pecuniam mihi des
mutuam; for (rogo) is one of the Verbs after which (That) is changed into (ut)
as I have already shown.

(That) after (idem,) is expressed by (ac, atque, ut, cum;) as I am of the
opinion that Peter is of, or I am of the same mind that Peter is of. Idem
sentio ac Petrus, atque Petrus, ut Petrus, cum Petro; I have the same right
that my Brother has; Idem mihi jus est ac Fratri, vel cum fratre.

(That) is some times put by an Adverb, as in those two Examples; It is not the
first time that he has done this. Non nunc primum hoc fecit; The time will
come that I can repay your Favor; erit ubi parem tibi gratiam referam.

(That) being put between two Comparatives in the English, is changed into
(quo) which has (hoc) or (eo) before the last Comparative; as, the more that a
man is modest, the more he is to be loved; quo quis modestior, eo vel hoc
amabilior, or it is put by (ut quisque) with the Superlative going after it,
and has (ita) with the Superlative after it, where the last Comparative of the
English is, as ut quisque modestissimus, ita and, amabilissimus; Another
Example, The more that a man is worthy of honor, the lesser he coveteth it;
Quo quis gloria dignior, eo minus gloriae cupidus, or by the second way; ut
quisque gloriae dignissimus est, ita and gloriae minime cupidus.

But if in these ways of speaking, the Particle (That) is found between two
Verbs which have before them, the mark of the Comparative degree, to wit (the
more, the lesser) or between a Verb, and an Adjective, which is compared by
(magis) for the Comparative, and (maxim for the Superlative; Then because
neither a Verb, nor this sort of Adjectives can be compared, according to the
General Rule, you must use (quo magis) for the first Comparative, and (eo
magis, or hoc magis) for the second; Or if you will make use of the
Superlative, according to the second way, you must make use of (ut maxim) all
is clear in the following Examples; The more one drinks that has the Dropsy,
the more he thirsts, Quo magis bibit qui intercute laborat, eo magis sitit, or
by the second way, ut quisque maxim bibit, qui intercute laborat, ita maxim
sitit; the lesser that one studies, he is the less capable of Learning, Quo
minus aliquis studet eo minus est ad discendum idoneus, vel, ut quisque minime
studet ita ad ediscendum minime idoneus. Some times the Particles that
accompany the Superlative, are left out, As the gooder a man is, he dies the
more cheerful; Optimus quisque aequissimo animo moritur.

(That) In these following ways of speaking is put by (quod or tamen) as, not
that I hate you, non quod te oderim, vel te tamen non odi; if there be two
negations, it is put by (quin) As, not that I am not for you, Non quin tua
causa cupiam.

(That) Is put by (quod or ut) with the Subjunctive indifferently, specially
when it follows the word (strange or admirable) in the English; As, it
seems strange to a Country Clown, that a cloth is laid for him at Dinner;
Mirum, novum, vel insolitum, videtur Rustico, quod, vel ut sibi prandienti
mantile apponatur. The People of Rome thought strange that the Consul his Son
should be put to death; Populo Romano mirum videbatur ut Consulis Filius, vel
quod Consulis Filius ad supplicium raperetur.

At other times (That) is expressed by (quidem) as it is true that you have
done me great service, but yet you have disobliged me; Multa quidem mea causa
fecisti, verum tamen mihi displicuisti.

When (That) follows the English Particles (so far) it is expounded by (ut,
ne) with the Subjunctive, or (nedum) with the same Mood; As Lucan is so far
from surpassing Virgil, that he comes far short to him; Tantum ab est ut
Lucanus, Virgilium superet, ut ne assequatur quidem, vel ne assequitur quidem
Virgilium, Lucanus, nedum superet, vel adeo non superat, ut nec assequatur;
Another affirmative Example; I am so far from dispising you, that I prefer
you to all my School-fellows; Tantum abest ut te contemnam, ut te caeteris meis
anteponam Condiscipulis.

In these Interrogations, to wit, is it so that? shall it be said that? you
must make use of the Conjunctions (ita ne vero, siccine vero) as, is it so that
you mock me? itane vero mihi illudis? shall it be said that you will gain-stand
a man who has so much obliged you? Siccine v^rum tam been de te meritum
oppugnas.

(That) In these ways of speaking; were it not that, if it were not, etc. is
put by (nisi quod) or tamen) As, I would in this compare the with Children,
were it not that, or if it were not that you seem to me more Imprudent then
they; In hoc te cum pueris conferrem, nisi quod mihi etiam videris iis
imprudentior, vel videris tamen illis Imprudentior.

(That) After (Interest or Refert) is changed into (ut) with the Subjunctive;
As it is good for the Commonwealth, that evil men be punished; Interest vel
Refert Reipub ut Improbi coerceantur; Or you may say by the Infinitive,
Interest Reipub. Improbos coerceri.

The Particle (That) in these ways of speaking, (there is no appearance that,)
it is not likely that,) is put two ways, according to the two expositions
which the above mentioned words admit; for if (there is no appearance that) is
the same in sense with (I cannot believe that) then the Verb following (That)
is put in the Infinitive without exception, As there is no appearance that a
wise man has done so filthy an Action, id est, I cannot believe that, etc. Non
mihi fit verisimile virum prudentem ita turpiter errasse; But if (there is no
appearance that) is the same that (it is not just or reasonable that) then
(That) is put by (ut) with the Conjunctive; As, there is no appearance that a
Schooler will despise his Master, id est, it is not just, or it is not
reasonable that etc. Aequum non est, ut Discipulus Magistrum vituperet.

(That) In these ways of speaking (suppose that I have spoken so, I will that
I have said so) is put all these ways; volo dixerim, ut dixerim, fac dixerim,
dixerim sane, or by the Infinitive, fac me dixisse, volo me dixisse.

(That) In these ways of speaking, (The thing that troubles me most is that,
etc) the thing which comforts me most is that, etc.) can be put two ways; An
Example of the first: the thing that troubles me most, is that you oppose a
man who has so much oblidged you: Quod autem me vehementius offendit illud
est, quod eum hominem oppugnas a quo tot beneficia acceperis: The which is put
thus after the second way: Illud autem me vehementius offendit quod virum de te
been meritum allatrare non desinis.

(That) in these ways of speaking (take heed that) have a care That) give
order That) is put by (ut) with the subjunctive, if it be an Affirmative
speech: As have a care that all things be ready at my coming: Cura ut parata
sint omnia cum venero. But if it be a Negative speech, you must use (ne) as
take heed or see, that nothing be wanting: Vide nequid desit: Have a care that
your Enemy assault you not, when you least think of it: Cave ne te in opinantem
Inimicus opprimat.

When you find (That) in this Speech (he is the learnedest man that ever I
know) you must put it in the plural Number, though it be a Relative of the
singular Number, in the English, as, Est Omnium quos noverim doctissimus; or
you may make use of this way; Neminem eo novi doctiorem.

If (That) be found in this sort of speech or (as) in place of (That) it is
rendered into Latin by (quam) which has after it the Superalative. As, I will
do your affairs the carefulest that I can, or as carefully as I can. Res tuas
curabo quam diligentissime potero: I have recommended you to the Master with
all the affection that I could. Te praeceptori commendavi quam diligentissime
potui: I shall inform my self the exactest that I can, or as exactly as I can;
quam accuratissime potero singula percunctabor: sometimes (ut) is put in place
of (quam) as, Commendavi te preceptori ut studiosissime potui.

In these and such like Interrogations, is that to say that? does it follow
that? think you that? the particle (That) which is in the last place, is
changed, into (number ideo, number continuo) as, though the Master has not chide me,
think you that he will forebear you? Si me praeceptor non objurgavit, number ideo,
vel number continuo idem tibi licere putas? If I perform not what I promised, is
it therefore that I am to be holden as a false man? Si nondum prestiti quod
pollicitus sum number continuo me perfidum appellabis?

If it be not an Interrogative speech, then you must put (non) in place of
(number) as, though I have spoken with a wicked man, it follows not that I am
wicked also: Si cum Improbo ex occursu locutus sum, non ideo vel non continuo
sum Improbus.

Here are some particular ways of speaking in the Particle (That) How comes it
that you are so glad? Quid est quod tam laetus sis? I shall tell you the reason
that I write not so often to you, as I was accustomed to do: dicam quid sit
quod ad te tam saepe non scribam quam solebam, vel cognosces ex me quid est
quamobrem non scribam tam saepe quam solebam: What is it needful that I say?
Quid dicam? vel quid commemorem? What does hinder that you come not when you
list? Quid causae est quin cum libet venias?

If (That) go after (providing) or (if) it is expressed by (modo ut, modo, si)
As all things will go to your liking, providing, or if, that you follow your
brothers Counsel: Omnia tibi ad votum eadent, modo ut fratris sequaris
consilium, vel, modo sequaris, vel, si sequaris fratris confilium; Sometimes
(That) is left out, as may be seen in these examples: It is just that Cicero be
praised; Jure laudatur Cicero. Although that I have written and spoke to you:
Quamvis and tibi scripserim and coram monverim.

Having now as exactly, as briefly, resolved all the difficulties which arise
in composing one, this Particle (That) I would entreat all who desire to profit
hereby, to make and contrive such Theams, as may contain these difficulties,
and practice, till they be well acquainted with them; neither speak I only of
what is contained in this Chapter; but also concerning the difficulties which
are to be explained in the Chapters following.

CHAP. II. Of the Particle (What.)
THis particle is put many ways in the Latin, as the former.

When it is so repeated in the English, there was twenty, what good what bad:
it is put by (tum, tum) or (partim, partim) as, Erant viginti tum boni, tum
mali, vol partim boni, partim mali.

(What) in these ways of speaking which follow, is many ways expressed: As,
from what place so ever he comes: unde, unde, veniat, vel undevis veniat,
undelibet veniat, undecunque veniat. In what part so ever he be, or wheresoever
he be, Vbi, ubi sit; Vbivis sit, ubicunque sit, ubilibet sit: By whatsoever
part he goes: Quaqua transeat, qualibet, quacunque, quavis transeat; To
whatsoever part he goes: Quocunque eat, quequo eat, quolibet quovis eat: At
whatsoever price you bought this Book: Quanti, quanti* emeris librum hunc,
quanticunque, quantilibet, quantivis hunc librum emeris: Come what will come,
whatsoever comes to pass: ut ut cadat, ut cunque cadat, utilibet cadat.

(What) being an Interrogation is diversely expressed; as, in these following
Interrogations: what is the matter? quid rei est? What means this? Quid sibi
vult istud? What have you to do with this man? Quid tibi rei cum viro isto? Vel
quid tibi cum isto viro? What reason have you to be glad? Quid est quod tam
latus sis? What shall become of me? Quid mihi fiet postea? What shall become of
the money? Quid pecunia fiet? What of that, or what then? Quid tum? Quid inde?
Quid tum postea? Quid tum inde? What can I help that; if you he resolved to do
it? Quid isthic? Si certus es ea facere facias? What can you do, you must
accommodate your self to the humor of the man: quid facias? Vt homo est ita
morem geras: To what purpose should I speak to you? Quorsum te alloquar? Cui
bono te alloquar, quamobrem, quem ob finem te alloquar? What shall I say to
you? Quid tibi dicam, quid commemorem? As to what concerns me; Quod ad me
attinet, quod ad me spectat, vel pertinet, quoad me: As to what you writ
concerning your Brother: Quod ad me scribis de fratre.

This Particle, has other praticular ways of speaking, without an
Interrogaon: as, I know not what to think or say; Inops sum consilii, vel quid
consilii capiam nescio: I know not what is my destiny, Quae me fata maneant
ignoro.

If (What) can be changed in (so far as) then it is put by (eatenus,
quatenus) as, I Love you in what you are good: Id est, in so far as you are
good: Eatenus te amo, quatenus te virum bonum Intelligo.

CHAP. III. Of the Particle (Then.)
(THen) is expressed (by tunc, tum, tunc temporis) when it specifieth a certain
time; As, then I was not at home, tunc, vel tum, vel tunc temporis domi non
eram.

(Then) going after a Comparative is put two ways: to wit, it is either cast
out of the speech, and the word following is put in the Ablative case; As my
brother is learneder then I: Frater meus est me doctior: Or else, (Then) is put
by (quam) which has the same case after it that the Comparative going before
it is of; As, Frater meus est doctior quam ego, aiunt meum fratrem esse
doctiorem quam me: but the best way is, by leaving out (Then) as in the first
example?

(Then) is put by (quin, ut, quam ut,) when it is to be put after these
Particles (parum abfuit, nihil propius factum, prope factum est) As there was
little wanting then I had thrust him out of my house, parum abfuit, vel nihil
propius factum erat, quin illum domo mea extruserim, vel quam ut illum
extruserim, vel prope factum est, ut eum extruserim: If your English phrase be,
I was very near thrusting him out of my house, it is also, to be this way
rendered in the Latin. In these ways of speaking, he is no sooner gone then,
(he is no sooner come then) The Particle (Then) is put by (statim atque, simul
ac, ubi primum) as, the Master is no sooner gone out then the Scholars fall a
playing: Staim atque egreditur Magister ludunt Scholastici, vel ubi primum
egreditur, etc. he was no sooner come then he told all things: Simul ac venit
omnia mihi nunciavit.

(Then) is put by (quam, ac, atque) when it follows (Alius, alias, aliter,
alibi,) as, he is another sort of man then I did take him to be: Alius est quam
putabam, ac putabam, atque putabam: That is to be otherwise understood then you
think: Id aliter Intelligendum est, atque existimas.

In these ways of speech following (Then) is expressed by, (tanquam, quasi,
sicut, ut, velut, etc. And this is when (Then) goes after the Particle (more)
as, he looked no more on me then as a servant. Me tanquam famulum intui usest,
vel qua si famulum me habuit

But if (Then) in this sort of speaking has a Verb after it, which is, as
often as (if) follows (Then,) you must change it into (quam si, ac si,) as,
he praised me no more, then if I had deserved none: tam parc^ me laudavit ac si
nihil laudis meritus fuissem: I have no more power then if I had no friends:
Tam nihil possum quam si nullus mihi amicus esset.

(Then) is diversely put in these ways of speech following: I will be finer now
then ever I was. Tam elegens ac splendidus ero ut alias numquam, vel nunquam
alias elegentior, quam nunc ero: I was never sicker then I am now: Nunc primum
aegr^to, vel aegroto ut nunquam alias, vel ingravescit morbus, vel aegroto ut
nunquam gravius, there is nothing more acceptable to a rich man then money:
Nihil diviti magis in votis pecunia.

CAAP. IV. Of the Particle (To.)
THis Particle is put sometimes by (quam, or atque) as, you have done contrary
to what I commanded: Fecisti contra quam mandaveram; vel contra atque
mandaveram.

(To) going after (mos, or Consuetudo) is expressed by (ut) with the
subjunctive: As it was a custom amongst the Romans to praise Valiant men after
their death: In more positum erat apud Romanos, vel mos erat Romanoru^,
praeclaros viros post mortem public laudare.

If (To) follow ^ Verb of motion, which is a Verb that signifies to go out of
one place to an other, and if it answers to the question (quo) to what place,
if a proper name of a Town follow it, it is put in the Accusative without a
Preposition; As my brother goes to London: Frater meus proficiscitur Londinum:
If (rus, and domus) follow, they are put this same way: as, he has sent his
Son to the Country: Filium suum misit Rus: I go home: Eo domum.

But if the name following (To) be an Appellative, or a name of some Nation,
Island, or Province, then you must use the Accusative, with the Preposition
(in, or ad) As, he has sent his Son to the School: Misit suum filium in
Scholam: He is gone to Flanders: Contulit see in Belgium.

But if (To) following a Verb of motion, have after it a Verb, this Verb may be
put four ways, if it be not a defective Verb: First by the supine in (um) As,
I go to Rome, to see my Brother, Proficiscor Romam visum fratrem: or, by the
gerund in (di) with (causa or gratia) as, causa videndi fratris, or by the
Gerund in (dum) with the preposition (ad) as, ad videndum fratrem: Lastly by
the future of the participle, which agrees as with its substantive, with the
Nominative of the Verb of motion, in gender, number, and case; as, Porficiscor
Romam visurus fratrem.

Here remarke two things: first that defective Verbs, such as Neuter Verbs,
which want for the most part their Supins and consequently the future of the
participle which is formed thereof, cannot be put all these ways, but only by
the Gerunds.

Secondly, That Active Verbs which are put in the Gerund in (di) or (dum) agree
with the Substantives following, in Gender, Number and Case, which sort of
Speeches the Grammarians call Oration per Gerundivum; as, Can a amandae pacis,
for Causa amandi pacem, The first way is the best, though the last is not to be
contemned, specially in Poetry: Ad petendam pacem, for ad petendum pacem: The
first way is only to be followed amongst the Latins, and the last is proper to
the Greek. What I have said of Active Verbs, let it serve also for Deponents of
the Active signification, and for these two, which are not Actives (frui, uti)
for you say, Causa fruendae tuae consuetudinis, vel ad fruendam tuam
consuetudinem: But let these Verbs which have not the Accusative after them,
but the Genitive, Dative, or Ablative, let them I say, abide in their Gerund
without alteration; and put the Substantive following them, in the Case that
they govern: As, Causa Miserendi Matris, and not Miserendae matris, ad
placendum parentibus; and not, ad placendos parents.

(To) being put after (pertinet, attinet, spectat) is changed into (ad) with
the Accusative; As, this belongs to me: Hoc ad me spectat, vel, pertinet: All
his Intentions are to make War: Omnia illius Consilia ad bellum spectant: And
sometimes you say without the praeposition, Quod me Spectat, what belongs to
me: Quod me attinet, Idem.

(To) after these Verbs delector, capior, afficior) is not expressed: but these
Verbs will have the Ablative after them, without a Preposition: and thus is the
Particle (In) put, if you have it, in place of (To) As, I take great pleasure
to hunt, or in hunting, Delector venatione, I take pleasure to read Cicero:
Afficior lectione Ciceronis.

If (To) following these three Verbs have after it a Verb, this last Verb is
put in the Gerund in (do,) as I delight to read: Delector legendo, vel
lectione: And if the Verb have a Noune after it, and be an Active or deponent
of the Active signification, it is put Gerundively, that is, made an Adjective,
agreeing with the Noune substantive following, in Gender, Number and Case; As,
I love to read Cicero: In legendo Cicerone multum Delector.

(To) put after (Refert, est, Interest,) has the Noune following it, in the
Genitive; As it belongs to a wise man to foresee things; Sapientis est
Prospicere futura; But if it has after it one of these Pronouns; mea, tua,
sua, then these Pronouns are put in the Ablative, with this note that is
prefixed; As, it belongs to me, mea Interest, to you, tua Refert; but if you
make use of (est,) then you must put the Pronoun in the Neuter Gender, as, meum
est, tuum est, suum est.

(To) going after, Pronus proclivis, propensus, is expressed by (ad,) which
has the Noun following it, in the Accusative, and the Verb in the Gerund in
(dum;) As, he is inclined to Vice, Pronus est ad vitia, vel in vitia; Youth is
prone to undertake things rashly; Proclivis est Juventus, ad res temere
suscipiendas; You are much given to flattery, Pronus es ad blandiendum; Under
this Rule is also comprehended the Substantive Nounes, descending from these
Adjectives; as Proclivitas, propensio.

Some times (To) is left out, and the Noune following it, is put in the
Ablative, without a preposition, or with the prepositions, (cum, or sine,) and
this is done when (To) is the same that (not without;) as, Cicero was banished
to the great grief of the People; id est, not without the great grief, etc.
Summo totius populi dolor, Cicero in exilium ejectus fuit, vel cum summo
totius populi dolor, vel non sine summo totius populi dolor; He was called
back to the great contentment of all; Summa omnium laetitia ab exilio revocatus
fuit Rochel was taken to the great admiration of all Europe; Magna cum
admiratione totius Europae capta fuit Rupella.

If (To) be the Mark of the Infinitive Mood, and has a Substantive before it,
the Verb of the present of the Infinitive, is put in the Gerund (in di:) yet in
Poetry you may use the present of the Infinitive; and most commonly these
Substantives are, tempus, occasio, opportunitas, desiderum, causa,
impedimentum, etc. As, it is time to study; Tempus est studendi; You have no
cause to complain; Nulla tibi causa est conquerendi; You have an occasion to
write; Oblata est occasio tibi scribendi; which likewise must be done, if any
of these Adjectives go before (To,) to wit, Cupidus Avarus, Avidus, Studiosus,
Peritus, Imperitus, and others of the same signification; As, desirous to know;
Cupidus sciendi; Your Brother was very earnest to know your health; Avidus er
at Frater tuus cognoscendi tuam valetudinem; He is mighty desirous to learn
Liberal Arts; Artium liberalium est studiosissimus, vel ediscendi arts
liberales; He is very fiting to ride; Est equitandi idoneus.

Mark these ways of speaking in the Particle (To) What had I best do, to
sight? It were to endanger my self; to suffer disgrace? it is worser then death
it self; Quid agam, aut quo me convertam, pugnem? tum in ri^ae discrimen
adducor; feram dedecus? and hoc morte pejus, vel si pugnem, sin contumeliam
feram, etc.

When (To) following, rogo, quaeso, suadeo, obtestor, consulo, and others of
this signification, goes before some other Verb; It is expressed by (ut) with
the Subjunctive; As your Father prays you to obey your Master; Rogat te pater
tuus, ut preceptori mori gereris; I counsel you to leave ill Company; Aucior
sum tibi, at ab Improbis te se jungas.

Some times (To) going before an Infinitive, is expressed in the same Mood, and
becomes a Nominative to a Verb; As Deum and proximum amare est legem ad
implere; To love God and our Neighbor is to fulfill the Law. To Read, and not
to understand is to neglect; Legere and non Intelligere, est negligere.
(Intelligere) is the Nominative to (est.)

(To) after the Verb (Jubeo) has the Verb following in the Infinitive Mood;
As, I command you to come into the School, Jubeo te Scholam Ingredi

Here are certain ways of speaking in this Particle, which cannot be reduced
to any General Rule; As, this will turn to your Honor; Istud tibi erit Honori,
vel istud cadet in honorem tuum; To your profit, in tuum emolumentum hoc
verget, vel hoc erit in rem tuam, vel erit hoc tibi magno usui; To speak to
ones praise; Ad vel in laudem alicuj^s dicere; To boil any thing to the half;
In partem dimidiam aliquid decoquere.

(To) Following these Verbs, Cohortor, Accendo, Acuo, Pervenio, Aspiro, Specto,
and many of the like signification, is expressed by (ad,) with the Substantive
Noune, following in the Accusative, and the Verb in the Gerund in (dum;) As,
Caesar did exhort his Soldiers to Cross Rubicon; Hortatus est suos milites
Caesar, ad transmittendum Rubiconem amnem.

Catiline did stir up the factious Citizens to make War; Catilina ne farios and
tumultuantes Cives ad bellum acuebat, vel accendebat. Caesar came to the Empire
by his Valor; Caesar ad Imperium pervenit virtute sua; Every one cannot aspire
to such praise; Non est cujusvis ad eam laudem aspirare; Pompey did not look so
much to his own Renown, as to the safety of the Commonwealth; Non tam ad
gloriam suam Pompeius spectabat, quam ad Publicam Salutem.

(To) going after these Verbs, Attribuo, Ascribo, Assigno, has the Noune
following it in the Dative; As, Alexander did attribute the Germans Answer to
pride; Alexander Macedo Germanorum responsionem attribuit superbiae, vel
Germanis responsionem attribuit superbiae; I ascribe it to your wisdom; do hoc
tuae prudentiae; I impute this to your rashness; Assigno istud tuae temeritati.

When (To) goes after, the Verb (Sum,) the thing and person is put in the
Dative; As, it is profitable to the Commonwealth; Est summae utilitati Reipub.
This is acceptable to me; Hoc mihi cordi est; This will prove Honorable to
you; Hoc erit tibi honori.

If (To) follow these Verbs, Antepono, Praepono, Postpono, Posthaheo, etc. The
Noune following (To) is likewise put in the Dative; As, Cato did prefer a
cruel death to a dishonest Life: Mortem atrocem Cato anteposuit ignominiosae
vitae, vel vitam ignominiosam morti atroci postposuit.

CHAP. V. Of the Particle (After.)
THis Particle is sometimes a Preposition, and sometimes an Adverb, and because
the ways of speaking in this Particle, cannot well be drawn to some General
Heads and Observations, as I have done in these proceeding: I will here insert
Examples, containing the greatest difficulties, that can arise upon this
Particle.

Many things come in my mind, one after another; Aliud ex alio mihi occurrit;
He had three Sons Consuls one after another; Tres habuit Filios deinceps
Consules; He was killed some Months after; Aliquot post menses occisus est; The
day after his death; Postero die quam excessit e vivis, vel postridie illius
diei, etc. Five days after you did write to me; Quinto die quam ad me
scripseras, vel postquam scripseras, vel post diem quintam scripseras.

He that was Admiral after Lysander; Qui praefectus classis proximus post
Lysandrum fuit.

After Egypt, there is no part so fertile of Roses; as Campania; Proxime post
Aegyptum, vel ab Aegypto Campania, copia Rosarum.

After I had gone from you; Vt abii a te, vel postquam a te discessi.

A little after he did come and see me: Non ita multo post venit me visurus.

After you, there is nothing I love more then solitariness; Secundum te nihil
mihi amacius solitudine.

He was made Heir after the Son: Secundum filium Haeres institutus fuit.

After my Father, there is none I love so much as him: Cum a patre discessi
nemo mihi illo charior.

The next after him: Froximus ab illo.

The first after the King: Secundus a Rege.

I shall be wiser hereafter: Sapiam posthac, vel imposterum ero cautior.

After labor, rest seems more pleasant: Post laborem quies gratior.

After Breakfast: a Jentaculo: After Dinner: a prandio.

Sleep is not good immediately after Dinner: Non bonus est somnus statim a
prandio.

After some space of time: Ex intervallo.

After many presents, sent from the one to the other: Multis ultro citroque
missis muneribus.

A Man eloquent after Wine: Homo ad Vinum disertus.

After such Letters: Sub tales Literas.

Immediately after the Holy days: Statim sub dies Festos.

After the General had fallen, the Army did loose Courage: Vt cecidit Imperator
confestim acies cecidit.

After many prayers, I did obtain Favor: Post quam multoties rogavi tandem in
gratiam redii, vel eum saepissime precatus in gratiam redii, vel multis effusis
precibus in gratiam redii.

After many Assaults, the Town was taken: Postquam sepissime oppugnatum,
tandem expugnatum est oppidum, vel crebro lacessitum, tandem captum est oppidum.

CHAP. VI. Of (Because.)
When (Because) goes before a Verb, it is expressed by (quia, or quod) with
the Indicative; As, he is angry, because fortune frowns: Irascitur, quia
fortuna, vel quod fortuna sibi adversatur.

But if it have a Substantive Noun after it, then it is expressed by (e, ex, a
ab) with the Ablative; whereof here follows the most considerable and hardest
examples.

My Head aketh because of the Sun: Caput mihi dolet a sole.

He has a red face because of his bodily heat: a Color corporis vultus rubet.

He is most clement, because of his Innocence: Ab innocentia clementissimus est.

He did make use of Soothsayers, because of his superstition: a Superstitione
animi vates adhibuit.

To cry because of his Friends death: De amici inter^tu flere.

Because of certain Reasons: Certis de causis.

He is mad because of the Injury that is done to him: Insanit ex Injuria.

He is guilty because of that matter: Ex ea re est in culpa.

To honor a Man much because of his Quality: Multum alicui tribuere ex
dignitate.

He is become proud because of his Riches: Ex Divitiis eum superbia invasit.

He did fall sick because of his anguish: Ex aegritudine animi in morbum
incidit.

Sometimes you may use (prae, or pro;) As he sees not the Sun, because of the
Multitude of arrows; Prae sagittarum multitudine solemn non videt.

He will easily do it, because of his great power: Pro summa Auctoritate, id
facile consequetur.

CHAP. VII. Of the Adverb (Otherwise.)
THis Adverb is Expressed three ways, according to its three diverse
significations, which may be shown in as many Examples almost.

Thou speak otherwise then thou thinks: Aliter loqueris, ac sentis; aliter
loqueris, aliter sentis.

Thou have done otherise then I commanded: Aliter fecisti quam mandaveram, vel
contra fecisti quam mandaveram.

Write to me oftener then you have done, otherwise I will accuse you of pride or
negligence: Scribe sepius ad me quam antea, alioqui, te vel naegligentiae, vel
superbiae accusabor, vel scribe saepius quam hactenus scripseris sin minus, vel
sin aliter, super biae aut negligentiae nomine mihi suspectus eris.

Alexander the Great was proud, otherwise a Gallant Man, and of very good
parts: Macedo erat elato animo, alioqui vir praestantissimus, multisque animi
dotibus and ornamentis instructus, vel caetero vir praestantissimus, etc.

He used me no otherwise then as his Servant: Non secus mecum egit ac cum Servo
suo.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Particle (Against.)
THis Particle is diversely put, seeing it is sometimes an Adverb, and sometimes
a Preposition, the which diversity will be easily known in the following
Examples, which shall consist of both parts.

Cicero did speak at other times, many things against Verres: Cicero olim multa
dixit in Verrem, vel multis orationibus invectus est in Verrem.

That which you say makes against your self: Contratemet facit quod dicis.

The Tribunes did stir up the People against the Senate: Tribuni adversus
Senatum plebem concitarunt.

You ought not to go against the Prince's Ordination: Adversus edictum
Principis facere non debes.

That is come to pass contrary to all men's expectation: Praeter omnium spem,
and expectationem id accidit.

Against my Opinion: Contra Sententiam meam, vel Opinionem.

Against my desire: Praeter votum.

Against all right and reason: Praeter jus and fas, vel praeter jus and aequum.

He has done contrary, or against his custom: Praeter norem fecit.

Against his Nature or Inclination: Praeter Naturam and Ingenium.

You speak against your self: Tecum ipse pugnas, vel a te ipse dissent is, tibi
ipsi contradicis, pugnantia loqueris.

He goes against all men: Omnibus adversatur.

He has done this against his will: Invitus hoc fecit

The Law was made against the Senates will: Nolente ac repugnante Senatu lata
Lex est.

This Herb is powerful against the biting of Beasts: Herba ad Bestiarum morsus
efficax.

I am ready to fight against any man: Paratus sum cum quovis in certamen
descendere, vel cum quovis congredi.

You have ever been against me: Semper mihi fuisti infensus, me semper
oppugnasti.

My House is just over against the Kings Palace: Domus mea est e Regione
curiae, vel est juxta Curiam.

To go against his word: Fidem violare, pactum rescindere, a side resilire, ire
inficias promissi.

Have all things ready against the morrow: In diem crastinum vide ut parata
sint omnia.

I keep'd this against your coming: In adventum tuum hoc reservavi.

Against what time shall I come: Quota hora veniam, quando veniam.

To fight man against man: Vir viro congreditur, vel congredi viritim. Foot
against foot: Concertis pedibus decertare.

To lay a Siege against a Town: Opidum obsidione cingere, obsidere Vrbem.

To lay ten pieces against one: December nummos aureos ad unum deponere, vel
periclitari.

CHAP. IX. Of (Not only) or (Only) alone.
IF this double Particle have after it (but also) then it is expressed by (non
solum, non modo:) As, I am ready to put in hazard, not only my goods, but also
my life for you: Non opes modo verum etiam and vitam ipsam pro te effundere
paratus sum: He has not only spoiled this poor Traveller, but also wounded him
grievously: Miserum hunc viatorem non solum spoliavit, verum etiam eum graviter
vulneravit.

The which way of speaking may be yet put otherwise: As, Viatorem spoliavit,
atque adeo vulneravit graviter, cum spoliavit, tum etiam graviter vulneravit,
vel parum erat spoliasse, nisi and graviter vulnerasset.

(Only) in these ways of speaking following, to wit, (except only my Brother,
or my Brother being only excepted) has the Substantive Noun, with the
Adjective agreeing therewith, in the Ablative: As I give you power over all of
them, except only my Brother, or my Brother only being excepted: Do tibi
Authoritatem in caeteros omnes, excepto Fratre meo: But if in these Speeches
there follow a Verb; then (Only) is put by (modo, si,) with the Verb in the
Subjunctive, or else the Verb is put in the Imperative; As, Do tibi in alios
quoscunque Auctoritatem, modo Fratrem exceperis, vel si Fratrem exceperis, vel
tamen fratrem excipe.

This Particle is yet put diverse ways, as will be seen in the following
Examples; As, Let us two only speak together: Nos duo inter nos loquamur, vel
loquamur remotis arbitris.

You are my only stop: Praeter te nullum, mihi impedimentum, vel tu unicus mihi
obex, atque impedimentum: You are the only man that can prefer me to this
charge: Tui solius opera, hanc provinciam assequar, vel per te tantum, vel te
adjuvente aut favente perveniam ad hoc munus, vel fave as solus, and mea haec
erit provincia: Speak only when you are desired: Rogatus tantum loquere.

CHAP. X. Of the Particles (By, and Through.)
When these Particles are found in the English, most commonly the Substantive
Nouns following them, are put in the Ablative without a Preposition: As, Caesar
came to the Empire by his Courage: Caesar Imperium fortitudine sua adeptus est:
Cicero did become the best of Latin Orators, by his Industry: Labor and
Industria sua omnium Latinorum Oratorum facundissimus evasit Cicero, vel
eloquentiae Principatum tenuit: He is fallen into these Inconveniences by his
own fault: Sua culpa incidit in has miserias.

Sometimes we use (per) with the Accusative; As to do any business by an
Ambassador: Per Legatum rem agere: To kill his Enemy by snares: Per insidias
inimicum interficere.

To do any thing through malice, through Strife, Impudence, Deceit, Play, Jest,
Envy, Violence: Per Malitiam, per Cavillationem, per Imprudentiam, per Dolum,
per Fraudem, per Ludum, per Jocum, per Invidiam, per Vim, aliquid facere.

To spend excessively that which was gotten by robbing: Luxuria effundere quod
per scelus paratum fuit.

To obtain any thing through meekness, or by meekness: Aliquid per amicitiam
and gratiam impetrare.

He has los'd all through his too great meekness: Per comitatem nimiam omnia
disperdidit.

He killed himself through despair: Per desperationem manus sibi violentas
Intulit, vel attulit.

To absolve a man through favor: Per gratiam aliquem absolvere.

To desire a thing through Avarice: Per avaritiam aliquid appetere.

To entertain his friends by Letters: Cum amicis per Literas colloqui.

They pray through the streets: Per compita viarum supplicatum est.

To become great by another ruin: Per alterius ruinam, vel incommodum
ascendere.

To fall in want or necessity through his own fault: Per culpam suam venire in
necessitatem.

He did lose the Empire by his cowardliness: Per Ignaviam suam Imperium amisit.

To end his Life by a disgraceful death: Per dedecus and Ignominiam, vitam
amittere.

To do any thing through Contempt, or Despite: Per contemptum aliquid facere.

I Conjure you by the Memory of your deceased Father: Per cinerem defuncti
patris, vel per manes defuncti patris te testor.

By the honor that is due to the immortal gods: Per deos Immortales, vel per
deum Immortalium fidem.

I have received two Letters from you, by the Post: Binas a te Literas per
Tabellarium accepi.

These Evils were brought upon us by the Shouldiers: Nobis sunt haec mala per
milites Importata.

In these and such like Examples (by or through) are expressed by (per.) In
these Examples following, they are put by (de, e, ex, a, ab.) as,

I shall pay you by my Brother: a fratre tibi solvam.

Who cannot be tamed by Labor? Quis a Labor invictus?

He did this through Anger or Envy, or out of anger ab ira and odio hoc fecit.

This is done by my Counsel: De meo consilio id actum est. By the common
opinion: Ex communi Sententia.

To do any thing by Agreement or appointment: Ex Compacto, vel de Compacto,
aliquid agere.

By the Authority of Parliament: Ex Auctoritate Senatus.

To do a thing by force or necessity: Ex necessitate quid quam facere.

I shall know that by you: Id ex te Cognoscam.

I understand by my Friends Letters: Ex amicorum Literis Intelligo

Men Judge of the Intention by the issue: Ex eventu rerum animus Judicatur.

I did it by the Physicians advise, or ordinance: Ex Medicorum praescripto, vel
consilio id feci.

To say any thing by Heart: Aliq memcoriter dicere, vel memoria aliquid
exponere.

To rule himself by the will and pleasure of another: Ex alterius voluntate se
gerere.

To begin Dinner by a Drink: a potu prandium Incipere

To keep ones Friendship by good Offices: Alicujus benevolentiam Officiis
tueri, vel retinere.

You will pass through my Hands, some of these days: In manus meas, vel
Inpotestatem meam aliquando venies.

I have passed through many dangers: Multa subivi discrimina; vel multis
periculis defunctus sum.

Remark this by the way: Hoc obiter attend, vel observa.

I pass by your former Escapes: Anteriora crimina missa facio, vel praetereo
silentio, vel praetermitto, vel taceo.

By your Leave: Tua bona venia, vel cum tua bona venia.

By your Favor be it spoken: Pace tua dixerim, vel cum tua bona venia dixerim.

CHAP. XI. Of the Particle (For.)
When this Particle is opposite to (contra) then it is put by (pro) As, the
good Subject fights for his Country: Bonus Subditus pugnat pro Patria;
Therefore not against his Country: I have often hazzarded my Life for my
Friends: Saepe capitis periculum adii pro amicis.

If (For) be the same that (Because) it is expressed by (ob, propter;) As,
Aeneas is praised for his piety, id est, because of his piety: Laudatur Aeneas
ob pietatem, vel propter pietatem: Nero is condemned for his cruelty: Ob
crudelitatem damnatus est Nero: If you love me, you will do this for my cause:
Si me amas id mea causa facies: There should not be so great a punishment for
so small a fault: Non erant tam graves paenae exigendae ob culpam tam levem.

In these ways of speaking, which follow (For) is put by (quamvis, quantumvis)
and others of the like signification: As, for as Valiant and Courageous as you
are, you dare not fight with me: Quantumvis fortis and audax es, vel quamvis
sis fortis and audax, mecum tamen in certamen descendere non audes: For as
great an Orator as Cicero was, he would never, though he were alive persuade
me: Cicero quantumlibet eloquens and disertus, vel eloquentissimus licet, and
si a mortuis resurgeret id mihi neutiquam persuadere potuisset.

When (For) can be changed into (Be,) it is put by (cum) with the Subjunctive:
As, for a Learned man he is exceedingly mistaken, id est, to be a Learned man
he is etc. Cum sit vir Doctus turpiter errat, vel hallucinatus est.

In this sort of speech following (for) is put by (a cum, or pro) As that what
you say makes for me: Quod dixisti pro me facit, a me facit, mecum facit: To
plead for one that is criminal: a Reo dicere: I am for you: Sto a tuis partibus.

Sometimes you use (secundum) in place of (for;) As the Judge has given
Sentence for me: Judex secundum me judicavit.

Again, you will find (for) expressed by putting the Noun or Pronoun in the
Dative, and this so often as (for) follows an Adjective, or Verb of Commodity
or Discommodity; As this food is healthful for you: Cibus hic est tibi
saluberrimus: The pot does not boil for you: Tibi nec seritur, nec metitur: I
had not keep'd this too long time for you: Hoc tibi tam diu non servareram.

When (for) signifies (in stead) it is put by (pro, loco, vice, in vicem) As
he gave me Brass for Silver, id est, in stead of Silver: Aes mihi dedit pro
argento, loco argenti: I have ever holden you for a Father, id est, instead of
a Father: Te semper pro Patre, vel Patris loco habui.

Sometimes (for) is put by (in) with the Accusative, as, He gave me an
excellent Tablet for a reward, Insignem mihi bullam dedit in praemium, vel
praemio; He did give five hundred acres of Land to his daughter, for her
dowry, Quingenta terra jugera filiae dedit, in dotem: He has roast meat for
supper, Vtitur assa carne in coenam: He has alleged many things for proof
hereof, Multa in hujus rei fidem vel argumentum protulit; to take for a
pattern, in exemplum sumere; He ordained two Censors for each City, Duos in
singulas Civitates describebat Censores, He gave four hundred Sesterces for
every man, Quadringintos in singula capita sistertios dedit; He takes a penny
of Impost for every Bottle of Wine, Assem portorii nomine in singulas vini
Amphoras exigit; He pays twenty pence for every supper, Viginti asses dat in
singulas caenas. When (for) is followed by the Future tense, then it is put by
(in) with the Noun of time following in the Accusative; as, He has invited me
to supper for the next day: Me in diem proximum ad caenam condixit, vel vocavit.

There is a truce made for ten years, Induciae in december annos factae sunt; for
ever, in aeternum; for the Year to come, in annum sequentem; for the time to
come, in reliquum tempus; for some few days, in paucos dies; for ever and
ever, in perpetuum, in omne tempus, in secula seculorum.

Sometimes (for) may be put by (pro, vel ut) and this is when it can be changed
into (in regard) as he is most wise for his age, id est, in regard of his age;
prudentissimus est pro aetate, vel est, ut in e^ aetate prudentissimus; he was
learned for these times, Erat ut illis temporibus eruditus.

(For) is put by (de) when it is the same, that (because) as, he is not angry
for nothing, id est, because of nothing, non irascitur de nihilo, for certain
causes or considerations, certis de causis.

(For) being put after the Verbs of Buying, Selling, Changing or Acquiring, and
others of the like signification, has the Noun following in the Ablative,
without a Preposition, as, I have bought Ovid for twenty pence: Mercatus sum
Ovidium viginti solidis. I have sold my Horse for fifty crowns, Quinquagenta
coronariis equum vendidi. I have changed Lucan for Virgil; Lucanum Virgilio
commutavi.

When the Particle (for) specifieth the end, or final cause why such a thing is
done, then it is put by (ad) as all things were created for the use of man,
then the cause of creating things was for the use of man, Omnia creata sunt ad
usum hominis. Great men do many things for the instruction of others, Viri
magni multa faciunt ad aliorum disciplinam: The Consul ordained that there
should be Money lifted for the use of the Church: Ad templum Consul decrevit
pecuniam.

(For) Is sometimes put by (de) specially, when it may be changed in (as
concerning) as, for the hand-ball I fear no man, id est, as concerning the
hand-ball, etc. De pila palmaria neminem timeo.

At other times it is expressed by (a, or ab,) As, for Friends I have none:
Inops sum ab Amicis: For Philosophy he knows it alittle: a Philosophia
mediocriter est Instructus.

There be some ways of speaking, wherein (for) is omitted, and the Noun
following is put in the Nominative: As, he is holden for a Learned man: Habetur
vir doctus: You take me for the man that I am not: Is tibi videor qui non sum.

Now do I set down particular ways of speaking upon this Particle (for) which
cannot be reduced to some general heads: As, Every one for himself: Pro sua
quisque part: Virtue ought to be desired for it self: Virtus per se expetendae
est, vel propter se: For one pleasure, a thousand griefs: Mill dolores parit
unica voluptas: For what man do you take me to be? Quid hominis me esse putas?
For what cause are you angry with me! Quid mihi succenses? vel quid est quod
mihi succenseas? That shall be for your profit: I^ crit e tua, vel in rem tuam,
vel ex usu tuo, ex rationibus tuis: This Herb is good for the Fever: Herba
ista valet ad Febrim: For to speak nothing of his thefts: Vt de furtis ejus
taceam, ut furta illius missa faciam, ut silentio praeteream furta illius: He
has this Suit for Sunday, or Holy Days: Hac Vest utitur ad dies Festos: For
one los'd two saved: Damnum etiam cum lucro compensatum, ex damno dupla nata
utilitas, vel copiam peperit inopia.

CHAP. XII. Of the double Particle (Without.)
THe ways of speaking in this Particle (Without) can be better shown by
Examples then by general Observations.

He was condemned without knowing the cause. Indicta causa damnatus est, vel
incognita causa: This way may be put (He was condemned without being heard;)
which is one thing with the former.

He was made Consul without opposition: Consul facius est nemine repugnante,
vel refragrante nemine reclamante, nemine prohibente, nemine invito.

In these and other such like ways of speaking, you make use of the
Independent, or absolute Ablative, when after (Without) there comes a
Substantive, and an Adjective Independent, one what goes before; As, Damnatus
est indicta causa, or when you may in keeping the same sense, form a
Substantive and an Adjective, from the Substantive Noun following (Without;) as
instead of (without opposition) you may say no man opposing) and so put Nemine
repugnante Consul factus est.

Sometimes (Without) is put by (Quod) with the Subjunctive: As, providing it
may be without your Discommoditie: Quod tuo Commodo fiat, quod sine molestia tu
fiat.

In the Examples following it is put diversely: As, he did this without thinking
thereof: Id temere fecit, vel Imprudens fecit, vel incogitanter, vel inconsulto
fecit.

This did befall me without thinking thereon: Id mihi Improvisum, vel
inopinatum contigit, vel mihi nec opinanti contigit.

Without delay: Nulla interposita mora, vel nulla facta mora, continuo,
evestigio.

To do any thing without Example: Nullo Exemplo aliquid agere.

He obtained this without any man's help: Id consec^tus est sine cujusquam
auxilio, nullius open aut opera emendicata and accersita, vel nullius advocato
aut Implorato subsidio, ^uvante nemine.

Without stumbling: In offenso pede.

Without offense: Citra offensionem.

To strike without missing: Certo jectu ferire.

He escaped without being hurt: Ill aesus and incolumis evasit.

I have lived without being Calumniate: a Calumnia tutus vixi.

Hortentius did attain to old Age without being mocked: Intactus a sibilo
pervenit ad senectutem Hortentius.

He has done this without the consent of his Master: Hoc fecit in, cio, and
inconsulto praeceptore.

Without danger of any offense: Ab injuria tutus, extra omnem injuriam positus.

The Enemy plundered all the Houses without touching the Churches: Hostis Domos
omnes expilavit, a templis manus abstinens, vel templa intacta relinquens.

This was not without much debate, Non nisi post longam concertationem ac
disceptationem, hoc factum est.

You cannot become a Learned man, without you endure much: Si vir Doctus esse
vis multa tibi necessario ferendae sunt, vel ut multa f^r^s necesse est.

A Town without defense: Vacuum a defensoribus oppidum.

You have done me wrong without having deserved it: Mihi Immerenti Injuriam
obtulisti.

He was ill used without having deserved it: Nullo suo merito pessime exceptus
fuit.

The Soldiers do begin a new the Battle without the Captains Command: Haud
expectato Ducis Imperio milites praelium redintigrant.

He has come to honor without any trouble: Per ludum, and negligentiam ad
honores pervenit.

The Army had been routed without the Consul's help: Acium fuisset de exercitu
nisi in suppetias venisset Consul, vel nisi subsidiarias copias mississet
Consul, nisi cohortes subsidio misisset Consul.

Without any hope: Sine ulla spe, vel omni spe deposita, omni spe praecisa
abjecta, adempta.

Without doing wrong to any: Nulla cuiquam facta, irrogata, vel imposita
injuria.

Without being wearied: Citra taedium, and molestiam.

The matter is without danger: Res vacat periculo, vel sal^a res est.

Without fear: Metu vacuus, vel securus.

Without passion: Perturbationis expers.

Without respect of Quality: Nulla habita ratione dignitatis.

He has taken many Towns without stroke of Sword: Citra pulverem and
sanguinem, multas Vrbes cepit, vel sine pulvere and sanguine, sine caede.

I do not Esteem much Learning without Virtue: Doctrinam magni non facio, si
virtus abfuerit, nisi accedat virtus, nisi cum virtute conjuncta sit.

Without reason: Abs re, vel immerito.

Without consideration: Temere vel praecipitanter, inconsulto, caeco Impetu.

A man without Friends: Vir ab amicis Inops.

Without civility: Vir inurbanus, inhumanus, rusticus, humanitatis expers.

Without experience: Vir rerum imperitus, rudis, vir ab usu rerum imperitus,
usu rerum carens.

Without Renown, or Reputation: Vir obscurus, nullius neminis, inglorius,
ignotus.

Take him without this fault, and he is very good: Vir alioqui praestantissimus.

He is not angry without cause: Non ab^ re irascitur, vel non irascitur de
nibilo.

Without trouble: Facile, nullo labor, nullo negotio.

I have not got this without pains: Aegre hoc impetravi, vix hoc sum Consecutus.

Without noise: Per silentium.

He did come without making noise: Suspenso gradu venit.

Without Order or Method: Passim, nullo Ordine, citra Delectum.

Without taking his breath: Vno spiritu.

Without Interruption: Continenter, assidue.

Without weariness: Citra fatigationem.

Without satietie: Citra satietatem.

I cannot see that without weeping: Hoc videns tenere lachrymas non possum; a
lacrymis temperare nequeo cum hoc intueor.

I cannot hear these trifles without laughing: Has audiens ineptias risum
tenere non possum, facere non possum quin rideam cum his nugis aures meae
verberantur.

To suffer without complaining: Aequo animo pati, vel aequa nimiter pati.

To pass days and nights without sleep: Dies noctesque insomnes, vel vigiles
traducere.

He went to bed without Supper. Discessit cubitum incaenatus.

Without Dinner: Impransus.

He has done this without being forced by any: Id fecit a nemine coactus, vel
sponte and ultro h^c fecit.

Without being requested: Non rogatus hoc fecit.

I say these things without braging: Non ut quidquam exprobrem haec dico.

Without making known his will: Sine significatione suae voluntatis.

Without taking notice of any thing: Te mere Imprudenter inconsulto.

To do any thing without deceit: Ex animo aliquid facere, aperte, vel
simpliciter aliquid agere.

To hear one speak without being troubled: Bona venia, vel sine molestia
aliquem dicentem audire.

Without complement: Vt vere dicam quod res est, ut verum fatear, ut ingenue
libereque loquar, ut nihil dissimulem, ut absque verborum fuco and lenocinio
loquar.

I will pass over these things without speaking: Haec omnia silentio involuam,
tacitus praeter mittam.

You will know well without my speaking how much I love you: Facile intelliges,
vel me tacente quantum te diligam.

You will do this without danger: Ab omni periculo tutus id facies, vel nullum
est ab ea re periculum.

You cannot do this without the hatred of many: Id ut facias multorum tibi
inimicitiae subeundae sunt, vel multorum suscipienda sunt odia.

I did this without fear: Intrepide hoc feci, nulla pericula exhorrescens,
levia ducens pericula.

Without speaking of his Insatiable desire: Vt de effraenata ejus cupidi^ate
taceam.

Without saying any more: Vt ne quid amplius dicam.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Particle (According.)
THis Particle is expressed often by (e, or ex) as may be seen in the following
Examples.

To live according to reason: Ex aequo and bono vivere.

A Life led according to the Phylosophick precepts: Ex Philosophicis praeceptis
acta vita.

To do any thing according to his quality: Aliquid ex dignitate agere.

This is fallen out according to my desire: Hoc accidit ex voluntate, ex animi
sententia.

To do according to his inclination: Ex natura agere.

To say any thing according to the common report: Aliquid ex hominum opinione,
aut fama dicere.

To require his money according to Law: Ex Lege pecuniam repetere.

To give to a man according to his quality: Alicui ex dignitate sua tribuere.

According as the occasion offers: Ex occasion, vel ex re nata.

To Judge one man according to another: Aliquem ex aliorum ingeniis judicare.

To consider a cause according to the Clyent's Riches, and not according to
equity: Causam ex Clyentis opibus non ex aequitate pendere.

You will see what you will buy according to the plenty of Merchandise: Ex
copia mercium consulere licebit quid emas.

To praise ones actions according to the truth: Celebrare facta alicujus ex
veritate.

To do according to the custom: Ex more ex consuetudine agere.

According to command: Ex mandato, ex praecepto.

Things are judged according to the Event: Res ex eventu Judicantur.

Sometimes according is put by (Pro) As, to take Counsel according to the
times: Consilium pro tempore capere.

To do all things according to ones power and authority: Pro suo jure omnia
agere.

Nothing is fallen out according to my hope: Nihil contigit pro spe mea.

Every one according to his Power: Pro sua quisque facultate, pro suis quisque
viribus.

I have spoken briefly according to my Custom: Pro mea consuetudine breviter
dixi.

He Imposed sums of Money upon the Cities according to the number of
Shouldiers: Pro numero militum civitatibus pecuniae summas describebat

I doubt not but that you understand according to you singular prudence: Non
dubito quin pro tua singulari prudentia Intelligas.

According to every ones deserving: Pro cujusque merito.

Sometimes (according) is put by (ad) as,

To speak according to ones mind: Ad alterius voluntatem, vel Ingenium loqui.

To resolve according to the time: Ad tempus consilium capere.

According to my meaning: Ad meum Sensum.

To live according to the instinct of Nature: Ad Naturam vivere.

According to the time and place: Ad rationem loci and temporis.

To do according to the Command of another: Ad alterius praescriptum agere.

According to my ability and strength: Ad portionem virium.

To speak according to the opinion of others, and not to his own: Ad
conjecturam alieni sensus, non ad judicium suum loqui.

Sometimes (accoding) is put by (Secundum) As, according to what is alleged and
proved: Secundum allegata and probata.

According to your opinion: Secundum tuam Sententiam.

There be yet some other ways of putting (according) as,

According as I can Guess: Quantum conjectura consequi possum, quantum animi
conjectura colligere valeo

According as I see him given to his studies: Vt illum video erga literas
animatum.

I thanked him according as I was obliged: Pro eo ac debui elli gratias egi.

According to my Judgment: Vt meae fert Sententia, prout Sentio.

A Man according to my heart or mind: Alter ego, vir mei similis, vir mihi ad
Ingenium.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Particle (Upon.)
THis Particle is put diversely, according to the diverse significations
thereof: as will appear in the following examples. There comes every day new
hindrances one upon another. Alia ex aliis me quotidie Impediunt.

He has made a brave Speech upon the miseries of man: Praeclaram Orationem
habuit de vitae humanae miseriis.

He lays the fault upon his Neighbor: In socium culpam suam transfert, vei
transfundit.

Every body lays the cause of this mischance upon you: Huju, ce mali causam
omnes in te Conferunt.

These reproaches will fall upon your self: In te cadent hae contumeliae.

I have Gardens upon the Theams: Ad Tamesim Hortos habeo.

To lift upon his Shoulders: In humeros tollere.

You have put a heavy burden upon my Shoulders: Grave onus meis humeris
Imposuisti: And if it be mean'd of any Charge or Office; you say, Durum ac
difficilem provinciam mihi mandasti

He ought not to have been condemned upon so light suspicions: Tam levibus
conjecturis, vel ob tam leves conjecturas damnari non debuit.

The King has taken the Town upon his Enemies: Ex Hostibus, vel ab Hostibus
vrbem Rex Caepit.

I confide, or rely upon your power and favor: Tua gratia and potentia nitor,
vel in tua Auctoritate and gratia conquiesco, in te omne mihi praesidium stat.

He did show upon his Countenance, the envy he had in his Heart: Internum
odium, vultu suo praeferebat.

To play upon the Flute: Ad tibiam Canere.

I rely upon your Honesty: Fidei tuae me permitto.

I will take the blame upon me: Omnem ad me culpam accipio, rem mei periculi
facio, prestabo culpam.

I oblidge my self to do this upon pain of Death: Vel capitis mei perculo
spondeo me hoc facturum, aut peream nisi fecero.

He was robed upon the way: In Itinere spoliatus fuit

The matter is just upon doing: In manibus res est.

There is Money laid upon every City: In singulas civitates imposita Pecunia.

Your Reputation and Innocence is upon the point of loosing: Fama tua and
Innocentia sub ictu est, periclitatur fama.

The King did ordain upon pain of Death, that, etc. Rex edixit sub capitis
paena, vel proposita capitis paena.

He is ever bent upon his studies: Semper libris incumbit, studiis semper
affixus est, a libris non discedit, libros e manibus non amittit.

The Swans stand sometimes upon one foot, and sometimes upon another: Alternis
pedibus insistunt Grues.

Upon what ground, or what account do you speak so? Quamobrem haec de me
loqueris? vel quid ita de me praedicas? sentis?

He relieth upon a weak assurance: Infirmis nititut fundamentis, rationibus,
argumentis.

To insult upon a Man: Insultare alicui, vel in aliquem.

He was taken upon doing of the fact: In flagranti delicto deprehensus est.

I did this upon my Brothers behalf: Rogatu fratris id feci, vel a fratre
rogatus id feci* causa fratris, vel in gratiam fratris.

He did run desperately upon the Enemy: Praeceps in Hostem ferebatur, caeco
impetu in Hostem ruebat.

He knows not upon what foot to stand: Rerum omnium inopia laborat, non habet
ad quem confugiat, adsummas adductus est Angustias.

I cannot answer upon such demands: Non habeo quod respondeam ad talia
postulata.

Verres did impose great sums of Gold and Silver yearly upon the People:
Verres quotannis magnam vim Auri, atque Argenti a Populo exigebat.

You are ever upon your toys and trifles: A nugis and deliramentis non
discedis, vel jocis semper intentus es.

He has shown his industry upon a light matter: In levi Argumento, vel in
ejuna materia probavit suam industriam.

Many evils hang upon your head: Multa tibi mala Impendent.

He is upon a brave enterprise: Praeclarum quiddam meditatur.

To seize upon another man's goods: In alienas opes involare, impetum facere in
bona aliena, invadere bona aliena

All the disgrace w^ll fall upon you: Omne ad te dedecus redundabit.

To look upon himself proudly: Magnifice sese circumspicere, vel efferre sese
gloria and praedicatione, sibi plu^^m^m tribuere, arrogare, assumere.

The King has power of death and life upon every one of his Subjects: In
singulos subditorum Rex vitae necisque potestatem habet.

He has said thus upon the Testimony of the Poets: Ex fide and Testimonio
Poetarum id protulit.

He relieth upon his Riches: Opibus suis nititur, vel confidit, animos illi
pecunia facit.

To build his fortune upon the ruins of another: Ex alterius incommodis, vel
per alterius incommodum, and calamitatem ascendere.

To do any thing upon a sudden: Ex tempore aliquid agere, ex Improviso.

He said upon his Oath: Juratus dixit.

Upon my faith I will not do this: Do fidem me hoc non facturum.

To fight upon the head of an Army: Pugnare in prima acie, vel in primis
ordinibus.

He came here upon horse: Equo vectus huc venit, vel equo insedens.

Upon your peril be it: Tuo sit periculo, vel cum tuo fiat periculo.

CHAP. XV. Concerning the Particle (Of.)
When this Particle (of,) is put before a word, it is expressed by putting the
word in the Genitive Case; and although this observation be very obvious, yet
it is not to be neglected, but often to be inculcate into the memories of young
beginners; specially since it comprehends a great many of the Rules belonging
to the Genitive, as may easily appear in the following Examples

But mark first that this way of speaking (John's Book) is the same with (the
Book of John;) And so in these ways of speaking, the Letter (S) put with the
Substantive; As (John's Book) is the mark of the Genitive, and sometimes (his)
is the mark of the Genitive case; As John his Book, Liber Joannis: But to come
to the proof of the preceding Assertion, which is that the former Observation
comprehends the most part of the Rules belonging to the Genitive.

As much of Water, as of Wine: Tantum Aquaequantum vim: By the Rule, Adverbs of
Quantity, Time and Place govern the Genitive.

A young man of great expectation: Magnae spei Adolescens: By the Rule, Nouns
of Propriety, Praise, or Dispraise are put in the Genitive.

I have need of money: Opus est mihi pecuniae: By the Rule, Opus governs the
Genitive or Ablative.

Desirous of honor: Cupidus laudis: By the Rule, Adjectives of Desire, and of
the Active signification govern the Genitive.

Caesar's Cousin: Affinis vel Consanguineus Caesaris: By the Rule, Adjectives
of Affinity, Similitude, etc. govern the Genitive or Dative.

Some of the Philosophers: Phylosophorum aliqui: By the Rule, Partative Nouns
govern the Genitive.

The modestest of the Brethren: Modestior fratrum: By the Rule, that the
Comparative when we speak only of two things, governs the Genitive.

To stand in need of Counsel: Egere Consilii: A hogs-head of Wine: Dolium
plenum Vini; Both said by the Rule that Verbs and Adjectives of Plenty, and
Scarcity, are put with the Genitive or Ablative.

To take care of his own Affairs: Rerum suarum satagere; By the Rule, that
Satago governs the Genitive.

Condemned of theft: Damnatus furti: Accused of Avarice: Accusatus Avaritiae:
By the Rule, Verbs of Condemning and Accusing have the Genitive.

I remember of a Proverb: Recordor Proverbii: By the Rule, Verbs of Remembering
and Forgetting govern the Genitive or Accusative.

He repents him of his enterprise: Paenitet eum incaepti: You are ashamed of
this disgrace: Pudette hujusce infamiae: By the Rule, Paenitet, Taedet,
Miseret, Pudet, Piget, have the thing in the Genitive, and the Person in the
Accusative.

It is for the good of the Commonwealth, that evil men be punished: Interest
Reipub ut mali coerceantur: By the Rule, Interest, Refert, Est, govern the
Genitive.

But seeing that the Noun following (Of) is not always put by the Genitive: I
will touch the most frequent and necessary Exceptions arising from this
Observation.

Sometimes (Of) is put by (e, or ex,) with the Ablative, as in these ways of
speaking; Of a Slave he is become a Freeman: e Servo Libertus facius est: Of a
Rich man, a Poor man, of an Ignorant, a man most Learned, of a Blessed, an
Unhappy man: e Divite, Pauper, ex Ignaro, Doctus, e Beato, Miserrimus, Evasit:
Of a man, he became as suddenly a Boar, as if he had tasted of Circes Potion:
Repent ex homine factus est Verres tanquam gustato Circeo poculo.

When (Of) is put before the matter, whereof any thing is made, then it is put
by (ex) with the Ablative: As, an Image of Brass: Simulachrum ex aere: a
Vessel made of one Precious Stone: Vas ex una Gemma conflatum: And by (e) if
the Noun of the matter begin by a Consonant.

When (Of) is put for concerning, then it is put by (de:) As, the Master told
us a pretty story of the Fox, id est, concerning the Fox: I epidam fabulam
narravit nobis Praeceptor de Vulpe.

Likewise (Of) is put by (de) after the Verbs of Diminishing, and taking Away;
As, you have taken away much of your affection: Multum detraxisti de amore tuo:
We must sometimes quit some thing of our right: Interdum aliquid de jure nostro
cedere oportet.

Now comes particular ways of speaking, which cannot be reduced to any
general Observation: As, I am glad of your coming: Adventu tuo gaudeo: One of
the Vulgar sort: Vnus e plaebe, unus e multis: A man greedy of Nature: Homo ex
natura sua avidus: To do a thing of purpose: Ex destinato aliquid agere, de
indurist^ aliquid agere, data opera, ex praeparato, consulto vel studiose
aliquid agere.

He was a Soldier the space of ten years without Interruption: December continuos
annos militavit.

He did this of his own accord: Id su^ sponte fecit, vel non invitus id fecit:
He is of such a nature: Talis est ejus indoles, ita ^ natura est comparatus: He
is a handsome man of person: Corporis praestantia conspicuus est: He is of mean
Parentage: Est natus obscuris Parentibus, humili loco natus, vel ortus est: He
is of Noble Parents: Est nobili loco ortus, natus est praeclaro Stemmate, vel
conspicuis Parentibus: He is of my acquaintance: Est mihi notus, est mihi Cum
illo familiaritas, illo utor valde familiariter: I make great account of your
favor Magni facio tuum beneficium, in summo pretio est tuum beneficium.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Particle (in.)
THough I may very safely leave off to speak of (In) as it is a Latin
Preposition, as of a thing not belonging to my purpose, yet in behalf of young
beginners, of whose profit I am most sollicitous; I will rather be thought
guilty of transgressing in matter of Method, then sparing of my pains in
serving them; to the effectuating of which, I will speak of this Particle, as
it is a Latin Preposition, and an English Particle.

(In) As a Latin Preposition, governs sometimes the Accusative, and
sometimes the Ablative, according to the diversity of Verbs that are put with
it, or its own diverse significations, concerning both which the Scholar must
have recourse to the following Rules.

The Preposition (In) being put with a Verb of Rest, id est, which signifies
no local Mutation, or going from one place to another, has after it the
Ablative: He prays in the Church; here is no change from one place to
another, wherefore you say, Oratin Templo: He walks in the Hall: Ambulat in
Aula.

But, when it follows a Verb of Motion; id est, which signifies to go from
one place to another, then it has after it the Accusative; As, he is gone to
the Church, the place from which he is gone, is the place that is left; and the
(Church) to which he is gone, is that which he has acquired; and so you say,
Abiit in Templum: He has gone up to his Chamber: Ascendit in cubiculum,

Remember that it is not enough that a Verb signify a Moving, but it must of
necessity signify to move out of one place to another, in such ways that the
two places, to wit, (a quo) the place from which, and (ad quem) the place to
which you go, must be distinct; As when a man goes from his House to the
Church, he leaves his House to go to the Church: Wherefore we say not, Ambulat
in Hortum, he walks in the Garden, nor, natat in Fluvium, he swimeth in the
River, although (Ambulo and Nato) signify a moving or motion, but we say (In
horto, ambulat, natat in Fluvio) Because he that walks in the Garden does not
go out of it so long as he walks therein, and although he changes places in
going from one end to the other, these places are all of the Garden; neither is
it the same thing when you say he walks in the Garden, and he walks from
one end of it to the other; For in the first there is no deserting of one place
to acquire another; but in the second you leave this end to go to the other,
and this way it is a motion.

This Rule comprehends also all Metaphorick motions, which are so called,
because of the Proportion and Similitude which they have with a true motion;
As, he has casten his goods into the Sea, here is a true motion, from one
place to another; But when we say, he has casten himself in misery; here is a
Metaphorick motion, which will have also the Accusative; As, Se met conjecit in
summas Angustias: Besides this local motion, there is another which the
Philosophers call (Motus Alterationis) a Motion of Alteration, which is, when a
thing changes from one Estate to another, or from one Nature to another,
whether it be from one Accident to another, or from one substance to another;
In this sort of motion, the Preposition (In) will have after it the Accusative:
As, God did change Water into Wine* here is one substance changed into another:
Deus Aquam in Vinum mutavit. Daphne was metamorphosed into a Laurel: Daphne in
Laurum est transformata: He changes white into black, cold into heat, moisture
into dryness: Album in nigrum, frigidum in calidum, humidum in siccum
convertit; he turns all to his own gain: In suum emolumentum omnia convertit.

There be vet many significations, wherein this Preposition governs the
Accusative.

First when (In) is put for (Contra) or Adversus,) As Cicero said many things
against Catiline: In Catilinam Cicero multa dixit: Caesar did make wars
against the Frenchs: Caesar in Gallos bellum gessit.

Secondly, when it is put for (Erga,) my love for my Brother: Meum studium in
Fratrem, id est, erga Fratrem: Your spite against your Enemies: Tuum in tuos
inimicos odium, id est, erga inimicos.

Thirdly, when (In) is put for (Pro;) As, he has given Land to his Daughter
for her Dowry: Agrum dedit Filiae in dotem, id est, pro dote, loco dotis, vice
dotis: The King has promised to him that is Victorious, a Horse for a Reward:
Victori Rex pollicitus est Equum in praemium, id est, pro praemio, loco
praemii. He did allege many things for proof: Multa attulit in hujus rei
fidem.

Fourthly, When (In) goes before some thing that is to come: As, they have
made a Truce for twenty years: Inducias in viginti annos Impetraverunt. He has
called me to Supper to morrow: Me ad caenam invitavit in posterum diem. The
Ecclipses of Sun and Moon, are foretold for many years: Solis and lunae
defectiones praedicuntur in multos annos. The enemy does increase from day to
day: Crescit in singulos dies hostium numerus. I expect my Brother at every
hour: Fratrem in horas expecto.

Fifthly, When (In) is found in a distribution or division, it has the
Accusative: As, Binos censores in singulas civitates distribuit. He did
establish two Censors for every Town: Quaternos denarios in singulas vini
Amphoras exigebat.: He did exact a penny of every bottle of Wine.

Now it remains that I speak of it, as it is an English Particle.

When (In) is the same thing with (for) then it is put by (In) with the
Accusative; As, he gave his Daughter Land in Dowry: Id est, for her Dowry,
Dedit filiae agrum in dotem. The King did promise a horse to him that should be
Victorious in recompense: Id est, for a Recompense: Rex pollicitus est equum
Victori in praemium. He has alleged many things in proof of this: Multa
attulit in hujus rei fidem, vel Argumentum. To do any thing in hate or spite to
another: Aliquid in odium alterius facere. I will do this in your Favor: In
gratiam tui id agam.

When (In) does answer to the question (quomodo) it is put likewise by (In)
with the Accusative: As, let him be clothed in some strange kind of way:
Peregrinum in modum exornetur. Here (In) answers to (quomodo) or how was he
clothed. They were tormented in a slavish fashon: Servilem in modum cruciati
sunt.

You take all things in ill part: In malam partem accipis omnia.

When (In) is in a speech answering to the question, (in quo, or, qua in re) It
is left out in the Latin, and the Noune following is put in the Ablative,
without a Preposition, as he exceeds some in Piety, others in Learning: Alios
peitate, alios Doctrina superat. Sometimes the Ablative has before it the
preposition (In) as in these ways of speaking, following, it is a brave thing
to out go others in some thing: Praeter caeteros in re aliqua excellere
pulchrum est. He has spent his Life in Grief and Sadness: Exegit vitam in
Luctu and Maerore,

Although (in) be put before a Noune of time in the English, it is ordinarily
left out in the Latin: As, in the Winter season, Hyme: in Summer, Aestate: in
the Spring time, Vere: in harvest, Autumno. in these times, Temporibus illis:
the Month of April, Mense Aprili: Yet in these ways following, the Preposition
is expressed, as in the flower of his Age: In florente etate, vel in flore
aetatis. In his Youth: in juventute sua. In his old Age: In senectute, vel, in
extremo vitae tempore. In our Time: In nostro saeculo. In five years: In
quinquennio. In Cicero his Counsel-ship, In consulatu Ciceronis: In Charles the
Second his Reign: In Imperio Caroli ejus nominis Secundi.

(In) going after Verbs of plenty, or scacity, is left out in the Latin; As he
abounds in learning: Abundat doctrima. He is wanting in friends: Eget amicis:
Neither is this only to be done with Verbs, but with Adjectives likewise of
this Nature: As, he is Rich in Lands: Est dives agris: A Land barren in Grain:
Terra infaecunda frugibus.

Now follows particular ways of speaking, upon this Particle (In) which can
be easier expressed in Examples then drawn to some general heads; As, to turn
In a Circle: In Orbem vertere. In a Point, In aciem vertere. In Peace and
War: In Toga and Sago, in Pace and Bello.

In time of the Pest, Grassante lue, in full Senate, in frequenti Senatu. In a
public Place: In Publico, in Propatulo, in Aperto. A place in Sight: Locus
editus, vel facile, in aspectum cadens, vel in conspectu locus. In form of a
Hill: In speciem Montis, instar Montis. In shape or form of a Cap: In modum
pilei. In Readiness: In Procinctu, in Promptu. To set an Army in array: Aciem
Instruere. To fight in the front of an Army: In prima Acie, vel in primis
ordinibus Pugnare. There was four in All: Erant in universum quatuor, vel
omnino quatuor, ad summum quatuor: A thing pleasant in show: Res preclara in
speciem. In a word: Paucis. In despite of you: Velis Nolis. In despite of the
Senate: Nolente ac refragante Senatu. A matter in question or debate: Res
controversa, vel de qua ambigitur, vel quae in controversiam cadit. To keep his
own in subjection. Tenere auctoritatem in suos. To live in private: Privatam
vitam agere, domi se tenere, aliorum consuetudinem colloquia, vel contubernia
fugere: To live in good Reputation: Sancte and Religiose vivere. Died in Blew:
Ceruleo color infectum. He is in his right and proper Element: Hic Regnat, hic
Triumphat, hac in materia Luxuriat and abundat He is in great power and favor:
Gratia and auctoritate pollet. He is in good humor: Hilaris est, totus ad
hilaritem compositus est.

He is in to an Ecstasy: Extra se est, a seipso peregrinatur.

He is in an Agony: Animum agit.

He is not in capacity of appealing: Appellationis beneficio excidit,
provocationis munus non habet.

In Play, per ludum, per jocum, joco.

He is in danger for your Cause: Periclitatur tua causa,

Your Father is in trouble for you: Patrem afficit sollicitudo ex te.

In Imitation of any one: Per similationem alicujus.

He is in danger of his Life: Periclitatur salus illius, vel capite
periclitatur.

He is in danger of losing his Cause: Periculum est ne causa cadat, vel ne ejus
causa laboret.

To be in good esteem: Been audire.

He is in a happy condition: Omnia illi ad voluntatem fluunt, omnia succedunt
ex animi Sententia, arridet illi fortuna, res illi cadit ad nutum.

To Sail in going up the River: Adverso flumine Navigare. In going down:
Secundo flumine Navigare.

To speak in considerately: Temere and in cogitanter loqui.

He is in bad Terms with his Father: Cum patre non Convenit.

He is in good Terms with his Brother: Amantissime and Conjunctissime cum
fratre vivit.

He has given his Daughter in Pledge: Filiam in obsidem dedit.

He came in great Pomp: Amplissimo comitatu venit.

He comes in great have: Magna celeritate, vel magna cum celeritate Advolat*

In Short: Vt paucis dicam, verbo dicam, ne multa, ne multis.

To tell every thing in Order: Ordine singula persequi, per capita singula
commevovare.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Particle (If.)
When the Partile (If) goes after any of these Verbs, Nescio, Quaero, Dubito,
Perpendo, it is put by (utrum, ne, an, number) which have the Verb following in
the Subjunctive: As, I know not if you Love me: Nescio utrum me ames. He asked
me if you was of my opinion: Quaesivit ex me mecumne sentires. I doubt if I
should grant you your request: Dubito an petitioni tuae subscribere debeam. The
King is consulting with his Officers, if it be expedient to declare War:
Deliberat Rex cum ducibus suis number bellum indicendum sit.

(If) is put also by (utrum, number, ne,) after (refert, interest) as it is little
matter, if you did this your self, or by another: Parum interest, utrum ipse
hoc feceris an aliis faciendum mandaveris. It is nothing to you if I said this
or not: utrum hoc dixerim nec ne tua nihil refert.

(If) is put by (si, or quamvis) when it is the same in English with (although,
albeit) As, if you would give me all the World, I would not do that: Si mihi
dares omnia, non istud agerem. If you were Eloquent, as Cicero, you could never
persuade me: Id est, although, or albeit you were Eloquent, as Cicero, etc.
Quamvis par esses Ciceroni Eloquentia, nunquam mihi persuaderes.

When (if) is the same with (when) it it is put by (si) with the Subjunctive:
As you shall oblidge me if you will write often to me: Id est, when you will
write, etc. Gratissimum mihi feceris si ad me sepissime scribas. You shall
befriend me if you send me Money: Id est, When you send, etc. Mihi maxim
proderis si ad me pecuniam mittas. You will come if you think good: venies si
tibi visum fuerit.

When (if) can be changed into (unless) it is put by (nisi) which has after it
the Subjunctive or the Indicative: As, if you carry not your self more humble
and modest you will cause your friends to forsake you: Nisi te submissius atque
modestius geras omnes a te amicos alenabis.

If I be not deceived this is the man that I did suspect: Nisi me animus
fallit, hic profecto est quem suspicabar: (If) in both these Examples can be
changed into (unless.)

When (If) has after it these words (at least) which is expressed in the Latin
by (tamen, attamen, certe, at certe, at saltem) it is rendered into the Latin
by (si non, si minus,) As, If I cannot altogether take away your grief, at
least I shall diminish it: Si dolorem tibi hunc eripere non possum, diminuam
saltem. But here observe that (si) is put without (non, or minus) if your
speech have in it a Negative Verb, As, Si dolorem hunc tibi eripere nequeo
diminuam saltem. If then you should put after (si) (non, or minus) with the
Negative Verb (nequeo) your speech would be Affirmative; two Negatives making
always an Affirmative. But where the Verb with the which (if) goes, is
Affirmative, there (si non, or si minus) are put conjunctly: As if I cannot
prevail too day, at least the day after, here (prevail) is an Affirmative Verb,
and so you say, si hodie non possum, postridie saltem.

Moreover albeit the Verb be Affirmative: Yet if there be any other part of
your speech rendering it Negative, you must use (si) only: As, Si mihil possum
body, at certe postridie.

If my affairs have not succeeded well, I cannot at least but praise your good
will: Si minus beneres meae contigerint, non possum non laudare voluntatem
tuam. If you could not come, at least you might have written: Si venire non
potuisti, saltem potuisti scribere.

(If) is most commonly put by (si) after the Pronouns: As, if you should do
this: Hoc si feceris: Who if he comes: Qui si Venerit. I do marvel if this
should come so too pass: Mirabar hoc si sic abiret.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Particle (When.)
IF (When) go before a Passive Verb, or an Adjective Noune, which is not a
participle of the Active voice, it may be put either by (cum) with the Verb in
the Indicative: As, I came when I was desired: Veni cum rogabar. I did this
when I was sick: Id feci cum eram aeger. Or else (when) is left out in the
Latin, and the passive Verb is put in the Preterit. or Future Tense of the
Participle: according to the Tense of your English; neither is the Substantive
Verb expressed with the Adjective following it, but the Adjective alone: As,
Rogatus veni, I came when I was desired: I did this when I was sick; aegrotus
hoc feci. I did subscribe when I was forced, Coactus subscripsi. I did fight
when I was hurt: Saucius pugnavi.

And that you may know when this Particle is put so, it is when it can be
resolved into (being) As, I subscribed being forced. I did fight being hurt,
etc.

If (When) go before an Active Verb, Neuter, or Deponent of the Active
signification, it is put either by the Ablative absolutely, or by (cum) with
the Subjunctive or Indicative; and to know when it is put absolutely, and when
by (cum) take notice if (that) go before (when) and then it is expressed by
(cum;) As, they say that when Caesar came to Rubicon, he doubted if he should
cross the River, Aiunt Caesarem cum pervenisset ad Rubiconem haesitaste
transmitteretne Fluvium nec ne: They say that Marcus Antonius, when he was
Loving Cleopatra did seldom sleep: Dicitur Marcus Antonius cum deperiret
Cleopatram, raro dormivisse: But if (that) neither expressly nor tacitly does
go before (when,) then it is put by the Ablative absolutely; As, Thieves are
robbing when good men sleep, Fures Latrocina exercent dormientibus bonis.

If (When) be put betwixt a Verb, and a Particle of the Present Tense, it is
there left out; As, I did observe this when I was reading: Hoc legens annotavi,
or it is put by (cum) with the Subjunctive, and sometimes the Indicative; As,
Cum legerem hoc annotavi; or, it is put by (Inter) with the Gerund in (dum;)
As, Inter legendum hoc annotavi; And (when) is put this last way, when it is
the same with (whiles.)

But if there follow the Verb a Noun, then you must not use the Gerund in (dum)
with (inter,) but other the Gerund in (do) in giving it the case that the Verb
from which it descends, does govern; As, I did learn this in reading Cicero:
Legendo Ciceronem hoc annotavi, or you may make a Gerundive of the Gerund, id
est, make the Gerund to agree with the Substantive following, in Gender and
Number and in the Ablative Case with (in) going before; As, In legendo Cicerone
hoc annotavi.

I said before, that (When) was sometimes expounded by the Independent, or
absolute Ablative; but that you may know when this ought to be done; Observe
that if the English Participle, which is known by its ending in (ing) have no
dependence upon the Nominative of the preceding or following Verb, then you use
this Ablative; As, when I was reading Cicero, you was playing; Here playing
depends not upon (I) which is the Nominative to (Reading) nor contrarywayes
(Reading) depends not upon (you) the Nominative to (Playing,) wherefore you
say, Me legente Ciceronem ludebas, vel te ludente legebam Ciceronem.

But if there be a dependence, then you use, (cum, dum, or inter) according to
what is already said.

Mark well this way of speaking upon (When,) what think ye were my thoughts
when I did hear these words: Quo animo me esse putas his auditis, haec ut
audivi, haec audientem, haec dum audiebam.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Particle (Since.)
THis Particle is sometimes the same that (Seeing,) and then it is put by (cum)
with the Verb following it in the Conjunctive Mood; As, Since you are such a
man, I will have nothing to do with you: Talis cum sis, nolo mihi tecum rem
esse; or else by (Quandoquidem, or quoniam) with the Indicative; As, Since I
cannot escape, I will fight manfully: Gnaviter pugnabo quoniam, vel
quandoquidem nullus super est fugae locus.

(Since) going before a Substantive Noun, is changed into (ex quo,) and in
place of the Noun, is used the Verb descending from it; As, Since Dinner: Ex
quo pransus sum: Since I supped: Ex quo caenavi.

But if you cannot have a Verb from the Substantive Noun following (Since,)
then you must put the Noun in the Ablative with (Ex;) As, I had no Letter from
you since Friday: Ex die Veneris nulla mihi a te reddita Epistola: I did hear
nothing since Yesternight: Ex Hesterna nocte audivi nihil.

(Since) in these ways of speaking, following, is put by (Quod, quum, ex quo;)
As, It is a long time since he departed; Diu est quod abivit, quum abivit, ex
quo abivit, It is ten years since he dyed: December anni exierunt ex quo mortuus
est, decimus hic est annus ab ejus morte.

Sometimes (Since) is put by (Jam dudum, jam pridem,) (dudum est quod pridem
est quod:) As, it is long since you played: Jamdudum non lusisti, dudum est
quod lusisti: It is not long since: Non ita pridem est: These other ways of
speaking, are to be observed; Since that day, Ex illo Die: Since the first of
January, Ex Calendis Januariis: Since Cicero's Consul-Ship, Ex Consulatu
Ciceronis: Since Nero's time, a Tempore Neronis: Since the day before the Nones
of June, till the day before the Calends of September, Ex ante diem Nonarum
Juniarum, usque ad pridie Calendas Septembris: Since that time, Ex illo
tempore: A long time since, A Longo Tempore.

CHAP. XX. Of the Particle (Whether.)
THis Particle (Whether) being put Interrogatively, is expressed diversely;
sometimes by (quo,) and this is when you ask one whether he goes; As, Quo
tendis: Whether go you? At other times whether is changed into (utrum,) and
this is when you ask one which of two, or more things he will do, or embrace;
As, whether will you study, or play, Vtrum vis operam studiis navare, an ludo?

It is put by (utrum) without an Interrogation; As also after (Refert,
Interest,) As, It matters not whether you did it your self, or commanded it to
be done by others: Parum Interest, utrum ipse feceris, an aliis faciendum
mandaveris.

When (Whether) is followed by (so ever) then it is put diversely according to
the signification of the Verb following; for if it be a Verb of motion to a
place, then it is put by (quocunque, quolibet, quovis) As whether soever he
goes: Quocunque, vel quolibet se confert; But if the Verb following signify a
rest in a place, then (whether) is put by (Vbicunque, ubilibet, ubivis;) As,
whether so ever he be, I shall think on him; Vbicunque sit, ubivis sit, semper
illius Recordabor.

(Whether) In these ways of speaking which follow, is put by (sive;) As, you
shall not be rewarded for your works, whether they be good or bad: Nullum feres
praemium laborum tuorum, sive boni, sive mali sine; And fail not to put the
Verb after (sive) in the Conjunctive Mood.

These other ways of speaking, are to be observed: Whether I dye or live, you
shall not repent it: Moriar, non moriar te non paenitebit: Do I well, do I ill,
it concerns you nothing: Recte an perperam agam, tua nihil refert: Go whether
you please: Ito quocunque velis: Whether he be Poor or Rich I care not: Sit
pauper an dives perinde mihi est.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Particle (But.)
THe Particle (But) is most elegantly doubled sometimes in stead of (and) As, I
say not that he is a wicked man, but a good and honest man: Ipsum non dico
Improbum esse sed probum sed honestum.

When (But) is taken conditionally, it is expounded by (sivero) (sin autem;)
As, you shall oblige me if you come hither, but if your health cannot permit
you, I pray stay: Gratissimum mihi feceris si huc veneris; si vero per
valetudinem non potes, quaeso domi maneas.

If (But) follow the Verb (Dubito) or its Synonimes, it is rendered by (Quin)
with the Conjunctive; As, I doubt not but you love me: Non dubito quin me ames;
and not only is it so expounded after (dubito) and the like Verbs; But also
when it follows a Negation; As, I connot but think much of your Virtue: Non
possum quin Virtutem tuam magni faciam: There passes never a day but he comes
to see me: Nullum intermittit diem quin ad me veniat.

(But) is put by (quam, nisi, praeter, praeterquam,) and thus so often as it
goes after (what is) or (nothing else) As, poverty is nothing else but the
despising of riches: Nihil aliud paupertas quam contemptus, praeter contemptum
divitiarum: What is envy, but a grief conceived of another man's happiness:
Quid est invidia quam dolor, praeterquam dolor, nisi dolor, ex alterius
faelicitate conceptus.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Particle (At.)
AS this Particle is put by the Latin Preposition (Apud,) it suffices to say
that it governs the Accusative; As, at that same place: Apud eundem locum.

There are many excellent ways of speaking on this Particle, whereof here
follows the most considerable.

At mid night: De media nocie.

At night come hither: Huc veni sub noctem

At the third watch: De tertia vigilia.

At the break of day: Sub primam lucem, subauroram.

At the declining of his age: Sub exitu vitae.

You deal with me at the Rigor: Summo jure mecum agis.

He did speak at his own commodity: Suo commodo dixit.

Write at your leisure: Per otium tuum scribe.

(At) going before a Noun of Time, is expressed by the Ablative, when the
question is by (Quando,) without a Preposition; As, he did return at three of
the clock: Rediit hora tertia: He went away at the dawning of the day, Prima
luce profectus est: You came at the right time, Tempore advenisti: It shall not
be ill said if you use (per or sub;) As, Per tempus venisti, sub lucem
profectus est.

To ask at any body, Quaerere ex aliquo.

I have obtained this at my Brothers request: Id rogatu Fratris assecutus sum.

I am at your devotion or will: Sum tibi ad arbitrium, sum tibi ad nutum.

The Labourer is wakened at the Cocks crowing, the Soldier at the sound of the
Trumpet: Agricola ad Galli cantum, miles ad tubae sonitum excitatur.

Cicero was banished at the great grief of the People, Cicero in exilium
conjectus est, magno totius populi maerore.

To serve one at a fit occasion, Alicui ipso tempore praesto esse.

To pay at his day, Ad diem solvere.

At the first sight, Prima front, primo congressu, primo obtuitu vel intuitu.

To tell at a word, Verbo dicere.

To expect on at every hour and minute, Aliquem in singulas horas, and momenta
expectare.

One waits for you at the door, Te praestolatur ad fores aliquis.

I know my lesson at twice reading over, Bis relegendo lectionem meam teneo.

At the second time, Secunda vice.

At our House, Domi, vel in aedibus nostris.

He lives at the Sign of the Lion, Degit ad Leonem.

I did this at another man's charges, Istud alieno sumptu praestiti.

At the most, Ad summum; At the least, Ad minimum.

I come at a call, Vocatus advolo.

He is angry at a word, Verbo excandescit.

At an instant, Continuo, statim.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Particle (Out.)
HEre as in the former Particle, are many useful ways of speaking, whereof I
have collected the most considerable.

To do a thing out of folly, Temere and inconsulto aliquid agere, ex inscitia
aliquid facere.

To outlive his Parents, Superesse Parentibus.

You are out of purpose: Jam ineptis, a scopo deflectis.

You are out of Countenance, Erubescis.

He is out of his wit, Extra se est, inops mentis est.

You are out of danger, Extra periculum es.

You are out of the fashion, Es consuetudini difformis, vel dissimilis, a
consuetudine, alienus es, vel abhorres.

You are out or mistaken, Hallucinatus es, captus es.

Without doubt, Procul dubio.

Out of one trouble into another, e Scylla in Charybdim, e foco in cineres.

He is out of hopes, Spem omnem abjecit, vel deposuit, despondet animum.

To put out ones eye, Alicui oculum effodere, vel exculpere.

To put one out of doors, Aliquem suis aedibus ejicere, vel extrudere.

To put out of mind, Ex animo delere aliquid.

Out of pride and envy, Ex superbia and invidia, prae Arrogantia and invidia:

You are out of your Element, a Propria deflectis materia.

To lay out money upon any thing, Pecuniam in rem aliquam insumere, vel
impendere.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the Particles (Whiles) or (Till.)
(VVHiles) is commonly expressed by (dum, or donec,) with the Indicative, or
Conjunctive Mood; the Conjunctive Mood is made use of, when (dum or donec) is
betwixt two Verbs; As, hear whiles he speaks, Audi dum loquatur; But if
(Whiles) goes not between two Verbs, then you make use of the Indicative; As,
none hears whiles he speaks, Dum loquitur nemo audit.

(Whiles or Till) going after (Expecto) are always put by (dum or donec,) with
the Subjunctive; As, I expect whiles my Brother, or till my Brother come,
Expecto dum veniat Frater.

When (Whiles) is put with a Verb, which has no dependence upon any other Verb
in the speech with it, then it is put by the absolute Ablative: This dependence
is known, if the Nominative of both Verbs be one and the same, and if they be
diverse, then are they said to be independent one of another: As while the Navy
was fighting* Cleo patra was flying, Here (Navy, and Cleopatra) the two
Nominatives, are two diverse things: Wherefore you say, Pugnantibus classiariis
militibus, fugiebat Cleopatra, vel fugiente Cleopatra pugnae Instabant
Classiarii: This may be said by (dum, or donec) As, Dum pugnabant Classiarii
fugrebat Cleopatra.

But if the Verb or Verbs following (whiles) have a dependence on what goes
before, then it is put by (dum, donec, or inter) with the Gerund in (dum)
according as I have shown above in the particle (when) with whom this particle
has great Affinity.

CAAP. XXV. Of the Particle (Above.)
(ABove) is sometimes put by (supra) As, What is above us, does not concern
us, Quod supra nos, nihil ad nos.

In these ways following it is put by (praeter, in, inter) As, above all
virtues I praise modesty, Praeter caeteras, virtutes laudo modestiam; in
caeteris virtutibus, inter caetera^ virtutes

Sometimes by (in, or, prae) As, I detest Avarice, above all things, Ab
Avariti^ imprimis abhorreo: The Captain did forbear above others, In Caeteris,
vel prae caetera dux se abstinuit.

Mark these Particular ways of speaking, I have ever esteemed this above all
things. Mihi id semper. Antiquissimum fuit: I Love Plato above all
Philosophers, Ex omnibus Philosophis Platonem unice dilig^: This is above my
quality, Id digintat^m meam excedit, veb exuperat: It is a thing above my
ability or force, Hoc viribus meu^ est Impar. This is fallen out above
expectation, Id praeter spem contigit: To Swim with the Head above Water, Super
natare aquam capite.

It is yet put by (amplius) As, I had walked a mile and above, when I did meet
you, miliare and aliquid amplius confeceram, cum me tibi habuisti obvium.

In these ways it is expounded by (ante, Imprimis) As, above all things fear
God, Ante omnia Deum time: Imprimis Deum time: Or, you may say, Quidquid
feceris Deum time.

It is sometimes put by a Verb; As in these following examples: There is none
above the King in his own Kingdom, Nullus Regi praesidet in Regno suo, nemo
Regi praeest, vel nemini Rex subest.

These ways of speaking deserve attention; He is learned above measure, Est
supra modum, vel fidem Doctus, mirandum in modum est Doctus, majorem in modum
est Doctus.

He is above me in Leaning and Virtue, Doctrina and Virtute me superat,
Antevertit* Antecellit: He is above, Est Superne.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the Particles (As.)
THis Particle (As) in a Comparison is put by (ut, sicut, velut, tanquam) As,
for example, our time slideth away, as the gliding water, Vt aqua labatur sic
tempus.

When (As) goes before an English Participle, it is expressed by (cum,) with
the Verb in the Conjunctive: An example hereof: As I was walking by the Thames,
I did see our Master, Cum d^ ambularem in Thamesis ripa vidi praeceptorem,
nostrum: You may say by the participle though not so Elegantly, nor according
to the Latin phrase, specially in prose, Deambulans vidi preceptorem nostrum:
But in Poetry you may speak so.

If there follow not your participle which has (As) before it, a Noune, you
can express (as) by (inter) with the participle in the Gerund in (dum;) As;
Inter deambulandum prope Thamesim vidi praeceptorem: If there follow a Noune
then it is put Gerundively according to what is already said in the preceding
Chapters: As I was Reading Virgil, I did see our Master, In Legendo Virgilio,
Vel legendo Virgilium vidi nostrum praeceptorem: This way of speaking by the
Gerundive is only in Active Verbs; Neuters and Deponents are other put by
(cum;) or in the Gerunds in (do) if they be not wanting, or by (inter) with the
Gerund in (dum,) but take heed that you use not this last way of speaking, when
the Nominatives of the Verbs which are in your speech, are diverse and distinct
things, otherwise you will commit an Amphibologie, or Doubtsome speech; for
Example, As, I was fighting, John did hurt me. Here (J. and John) which are the
Nominatives are diverse, so if you should say, Inter pugnandum mihi nocuit
Johannes, it would be doubtsome whether (pugnandum) went to (mihi) or to
(Joannes) wherefore you must in this case use (cum) As, Cum pugnarem mihi
nocuit Joannes: Or the Participle, specially when it is not in the Nominative
Case; As, mihi pugnanti nocuit Joannes.

When this Particle (As) is twice put, the first (As) is expressed by (adeo,
ita, tam) and the last by (ac, quam, ut) which have after them the same Case
and Moods that goes before them; As Caesar was, as Courageous, as Alexander,
Adeo fuit strenuus Caesar, quam Alexander, Ita fuit strenuus ac Alexander: He
Reads as well as he writs, Ita Legit, ut Scribit; aeque Legit ac Scribit: Where
it is to be remarked that, (As) in this Example insinuates a Comparison.

But when (As) is doubled without a comparison, it is to be put by (quam) with
the Adjective following Adverbially put in the Superlative degree as, I shall
recommend you to the King as carefully as I can, Te Regi commendabo quam
Studiosissune potero: I did inform my self, as exactly as I could, Quam
accuratissime potuerim singula perscrutatus sum: And here in stead of (quam)
you may use (ut) As, ut Studiosissime potui, ut Accuratissime potui.

These two ways of speaking are not to be forgot; I Love you as much as any
man, Tam te amo quam qui maxim: My House is as much frequented as ever it was,
Domus mea frequentur ut cum Maxim: To which I add yet a third way, As I am an
honest man this is true, Vel honestus non sum vel hoc verum est; vt honestus
sum ita and hoc verum; ne honestus sim nisi hoc verum sit.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the Particle (Would.)
THese be the most usual and considerable ways of speaking upon this Particle.

What more? he would have killed me, Quid? Quod me etiam occidere voluit.

What would you give for that time again? Quanto velis pretio tempus illud
Redemptum, vel Redimendum?

Who would not be angry with you? Quis tibi non succenseat?

If you did so, would you not put your self in great danger? Ita si faceres
nonne te praecipitem in discrimen ageres?

Would I could see him whom I look for? Faxit Deus hominem quem expecto videam.

Would you ever have thought this? Numquid unquam hoc tibi in mentem venisset*

Who would have ever thought of this? Quis hac de re unquam cogitasset.

Here is one would speak with you, Aliquis te alloqui cupit, vel quaerit te ad
coloquium quispiam.

Who would believe any such thing? Quis tale credat?

I would not do this for my life, vel si mibi vitam daret istud non facerem;
ne, si de vita salvanda ageretur, istud agerem.

I would not disoblidge my friend for any thing, Nullam ob causam deessem amico.

I would not do this for twenty pieces, Vel propositis mihi viginti numis
aureis hoc non agerem.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the Particle (from.)
THough this Particle be of a large extent, I shall only insist upon the most
considerable ways of speaking thereon.

(From) going after (Celo) is expressed by putting the thing as well in the
Accusative as the Person; As, I will keep or conceal nothing from my Friends,
Nihil celabo amicos.

When (From) follows, (peto, postulo,) and their Synonime, or Verbs of
Receiving, and Distance it is put by (a, or ab) with the Ablative; As, you,
should not have asked so much money from me, Tantam vim pecuniae a me petere
non debebas: I received Letters from my Father, Accepi Literas a patre meo: The
Castle is not far from the Town, Non multum abest castrum ab Vrbe.

(From) is also put by (a or ab,) in these ways of speaking from my Infancy,
Ab ine^nt^ aetate, a teneris unguiculis, ab incunabulis: From the beginning, Ab
initio: This did not come from him, a se id non prompsit: There is no danger to
come from the Nobility, Nihil periculi est a Nobilitate: Salute him from me,
Dic illi salutem a me.

Sometimes by an Adverb, as in these speeches following, The Lungs draws in the
Air from without, Ducunt spiritum extrinsicus Pulmones: He was killed with a
stone from above, Lapide desuper interfectus est.

Elsewhere (From) is put by (in) with the Accusative; As, the number of our
Enemies increases from day to day, Hostium numerus in singulus dies augetur,
The Plants grow from hour to hour, In singulas horas crescunt Plantae; From
time to time, Identidem, subinde, per intervalla.

Or it is rendered by (per,) As to give a thing from hand to hand, Per manus
aliquid tradere.

Sometimes by (e, or ex,) or by this Adverb (Eminus,) As, to fight from a far,
Ex longinquo praeliari, To fight from a high place, Ex edito loco pugnare, To
fight far from off himself, Eminus pugnare.

There are yet many ways whereby this Particle may be put, which I shall
comprehend in some few Examples.

To relate all from point to point, Ordine singula persequi, per capita,
singula commemorare.

From the beginning to the end, A capite ad calcem.

From one thing to another, Ex alio in aliud.

From door to door, Ostiatim, vel per ostia.

From house to house, Domatim, per Domos

To run from one place to another, Hinc illuc vagari, vel transcurrere.

Men come here from all parts, Un lique huc accurrunt homines, ex qualibet
gente huc congregantur homines.

There is something fallen from you, Aliquid tibi excidit.

To rise from a low Degree, to a high Dignity, Ab infimo Gradu, ad summam
Dignitatem evehi, vel ascendere.

A man risen from nothing, Ex vili and obscuro illustris.

From a child I was ever so minded, Eo fui animo a puero.

From my youth, I have ever been so brought up, A juventute ita fui educatus.

After many presents sent from both hands, post multa hinc inde, vel ultro
citroque collata munera.

CHAP. XXIX. Of the Verb (to Make or Cause)
IF this Verb (Make) be the same thing in signification with these words (was
the cause) then it is expressed by, Facio, Efficio* Perficio, Impello, Adduco
and others of the like signification, with the Verb following in the
Subjunctive, after the Conjunction (ut;) As, your Civility made me implore your
assistance, id est, was the cause that I implored your assistance, Fecit
humanitas tua, ut tuam opem implorarem: Your request made me undertake a thing
so hard, and so far contrary to my profession, Effecit postulatio tua ut rem
tam arduam tamque ab instituto alienam susciperem: His great learning made me
desirous of his acquaintance, Summa hujus v^ri eruditio me impulit ut in ejus
familiaritatem venirem: The Masters too great vigor and severity made me
forsake my Studies: Magistri nimia severitas fecit, vel in causa fuit, ut
discendi voluntatem abjicerem: It was anger made him do this ill action, Ad hoc
tam atrox facinus patrandum ipsum ira impulit.

All which ways may be put by the Ablative in changing the Verbs into the
Passive voice; As, Humanitate tua adductus sum, ut opem tuam implorarem, ira
impulsus tam atrox facinus patravit.

You may make use of (propter, or ob) when (made) is the same with (was the
cause;) As, the singular Courtesy of Pompey made him be loved by all men,
Effecit singularis humanitas Pompeii ut ab omnibus amaretur; vel propter
singularem humanitatem Pompeius amabatur ab omnibus.

Sometimes (made or cause) is put by (Jubeo) with the Verb following in the
Infinitive of the Passive; or by (Curo,) with the future of the Participle of
the Passive; As, the King did make build a stately Church, Rex Aedem
magnificentissimam construi Jussit, vel construendam curavit: The King caused
levy new Forces, Rex novas copias contrahi jussit, vel contrahendas curavit.

Cogo, Adduco, Compello, are the Verbs whereinto (make or cause) are changed,
when they are the same in signification with (to force;) As, necessity makes a
man do many things, id est, forces a man to do many things, Multa facere
hominem cogit necessitas: Cicero made Catiline go out of Rome, Compulit Cicero
Catilinam Vrbe cedere; But if (make or cause) do not signify to do any thing
through compulsion, but perswasively, and without using violence; then it is
put by (suadeo, persuadeo;) As, he caused me by his wise Counsel, or
admonitions leave off sensensual pleasures, Sapientissimis suis admonitionibus
mihi persuasit, ut voluptatibus nuntium remitterem: I could never make him
forsake ill company, Nunquam illi suadere potui, vel precibus meis ab illo
nunquam impetrare potui, ut improborum congressus fugeret.

In these ways following, (Make) is expressed by one Verb in the Latin,
though it has two in the English; As, a good Prince makes himself beloved by
the People, Bonus Princeps sibi Populi benevol entiam conciliat, vel allicit
sibi benevolentiam populi: A Tyrant makes himself be hated by all men, Omnium
in se invidiam concitat Tyrannus.

Thus having reduced to some general heads all the ways of speaking on this
Particle, that are capable of any general Observation; I come now according to
my ordinary Method to speak of the particular ways of speaking on those
Particles.

To make himself be admired by all men, Omnibus movere admirationem, omnes in
admirationem traducere, vel rapere.

To make others be admired, In aliis admirationem efficere.

To make ones peace with the Prince, Benignum aliquem reddere Principi, in
Principis gratiam aliquem reducere.

To cause an untimely birth or abortion, Partum abigere.

To Cause, abolish a Law, Legem abrogare.

To make his house larger, Aedibus accessionem adjungere.

To cause, pull down the Walls of a Town, Vrbis Maenia diruere.

To cause, augment any thing, Alicui rei incrementum dare.

To make a man change his way of living, Hominem ad aliam viam aliosque mores
traducere, hominis naturam Ingeniumque mutare bominem de statu vitae dejicere.

To make one fear, Alicui metum incutere torrorem alicui injicere; aliquem in
terrorem adjicere, in metum adducere.

To make himself be feared by his Subjects, Auctoritatem tenere in suos.

To make ones hat fly off, De capite pileum decutere.

To make a branch or fruit fall from a Tree, Ramum vel fructum de arbore
decutere.

To make one confess the Truth, Alicui veritatem extorquere.

To make a thing unknown to appear, Rem occultam aperire.

To make one angry, Aliquem ad indignationem, vel iracundiam adducere; alicui
bilem aut stomachum movere; aliquem ad iram impellere, aut provocare.

To make one comprehend or understand any thing, Aliquem ad Intelligendum
aliquid adducere; vel ad rei alicujus intelligentiam aut notitiam perducere.

To make one condescend to our will, Aliquem ad voluntatem nostram adducere.

To make, id est, force or constrain one to consent, Alicui consensum
extorquere, vel exprimere.

To make one desirous of any thing, Alicui rei alicujus cupiditatem adferre,
vel injicere.

To make one despair, Desperationem alicui afferre spem cuipiam addimere, ad
desperationem adducere, adigere compellere, e spe aliquem deturbare, alicui
spem praecidere.

To make one fall from his Dignity, De Honoris loco, vel gradu aliquem dejicere.

To make mad, angry any body, Aliquem uvere, ad furorem adigere.

There is an Herb that makes men drunk, Est Herba quae temulentos facit, quae
temulentiam facit.

To make man look for great things of himself, Magnam sui expectationem apud
omnes concitare.

To make his mind known, Alicui mentem suam aperire.

To make one proud, Alicui animos facere, aut inflare.

To make ones escape, Alicui fugam patefacere, vel viam ad fugam aperire.

To make himself be heard, Sibi audientiam facere.

To make the Master have an aversion from the Servant, Herum a servo abalienare
Servum apud Herum in invidiam vocare.

To make one do any mischief, Aliquem ad nefas adducere vel impellere.

To make one err, Aliquem in errorem inducere.

To make room in a throng, Turbam sum movere.

To make one sigh, Alicui gemitus exprimere aut elicere.

To make himself be laughed at by all men, Omnibus se ridendum proponere, vel
cachinnas movere.

To make a Colonie, In Regionem aliquam, vel Coloniam, incolas mittere.

To make a man give his oath, Sacramento, vel jurejurando aliquem adigere.

To make information against any one, In aliquem quaestionem habere vel
quaerere.

To cause Register, In Commentarios neferre, in Publicas Tabulas perscribere,
in acta refer.

To cause Act a Comedy, or Tragedy, Comaediam aut Tragaediam in Theatrum
dare, Public e exhibere.

This will make you praiseworthy, Id tibi laudem afferet.

To make a Rebellion, or Troubles, Tumultus and Seditiones ciere, Excitare,
commovere.

To make one forget any thing, Alicui res alicujus oblivionem afferre, rem
aliquam in oblivionem alicui adducere.

To make one cry, Alicui lachrymas elicere, aliquem ad fletum movere vel
adducere.

To make himself be spoken of forever, Nomen suum ad posteros transmittere, vel
ab interitu vindicare: He will make his house or family be ever more spoken of,
Memoriam sempiternam in domum suam inferet:

To make one loose courage, Alicujus animum frangere.

To make every man pay his reckoning, or shot, Ab aliquo symbolam, vel
collectam exigere.

To make two quarrel together, Duos inter se committere, inter duos rixam
commovere.

To make one change his Opinion, Aliquem de sent entia depellere.

To make one leave off his work, Ab opere aliquem avocare.

To make Victual dear, Infer carit aetem annonae, annonam incendere, vel
excandefacere.

To make victual cheap, Levare annonam.

To make one laugh, Alicui risum movere, cachinnos commovere, vel concitare.

To cause one revive, Demortuum ab Inferis revocare, vel defunctum resuscitare.

To make one mindful of any thing, Aliquid in memoriam cujusdam revocare,
alicui, rei alicujus memoriam commovere; aliquid in memoriam redigere, vel
reducere.

To make a Town yield by force, Vrbem ad deditionem cogere.

To make a Town yield without external compulsion, Ad voluntariam deditionem
perducere urbem.

To make himself be looked on by all men, Omnium infe oculos convertere.

To make one take Courage again, Alicui animum reddere, erigere, excitare,
relevare.

To make one ashamed, Alicui pudorem incutere, aliquem pudore suffundere.

To make a Shire revolt, Provinciam ad defectionem trahere.

To cause the people revolt, Plebem concitare, seditionem conflare.

To make one silent, Alicui Imponere silentium.

To make one tremble for fear, Aliquem horrore perfundere, vel ei horrorem
incutere.

To cause ones goods to be sold at Port Sale, Subhastare bona alicujus; Per
praeconem vendere; praeconis voci subjicere.

To make an end of any labor, labori finem imponere, vel postremam manum;
laborem absolvere.

Here ends the Treatise of those English Particles, which give greatest
occasion of failing to young beginners, when they are to be put according to
the Latin version: now come I to speak, how the English Tenses and Moods may
be changed according to the style of the Latin Tongue: and how the Active
voice in the English, can be reduced by the passive in the Latin, or
contrariwise: how an Impersonal does become personal, etc. And because that
Tenses are included in Moods; I will first speak of the Moods, wherein I shall
have occasion to treat of the Tenses.
CHAP. I. How the Finite Moods and all their Tenses may be changed according to
the Latin, when they are not to be reduced to the Infinitive Mood.
THere be certain ways of speaking in the English, that seem to be in the
Present Tense, which must be expressed in the Latin by the Preterit. Tense;
As, my brother is born, Natus est frater meus: The Church is built, Constructum
est Templum: The Town is ruined, Eversum est oppidum.

I said that these speeches seem to be in the Present Tense; because they have
not before their Verbs (Have or Did) which are most commonly the mark of the
English Preterit. Tense; but being rightly considered, they be of the Preterit.
Tense; because they express bypast actions, and so of all Verbs containing
the like actions, although they never have (Did nor Have) before themselves.
As, he bought, he fought, Emit, Pugnavit.

When the Present Tense or Future of the Indicative, do follow the Particle
(If) they are put by the Future of the Conjunctive or Indicative Mood: As, You
will come if you please, Venies si tibi videbitur, vel visum fuerit: If you do
this, or if you will do this, you shall oblidge me, Id si feceris, magnam a me
gratiam inieris: which also is to be done, whenever any of these Tenses do
follow Verbs of doubting, and have, (If) going before them* As, I doubt not but
you will send me money, if you receive, or shall receive any, Non dubito quin
pecuniam missurus sis, si aliunde acceper is.

An Interrogation being made in the Imperfect of the Subjunctive, or rather
Potential; whose mark is (Might, Should, Could) is put in the Latin by the
Present Tense of any of those two Moods; As, who would love so wicked a man?
Virum tam nefarium quis amet? Who could not understand so easy a thing? Quis
rem ita facilem non Intelligat? What should I say? Quid dicam?

This Imperfect of the Subjunctive of these two Verbs (Volo and Nolo;) is
expressed most commonly by the Present of this Mood. As, I would rather die then
live in so great shame, Mori malim quam tam ignominiose vivere.

I could wish that you were more circumspect in your Affairs, Velim te in rebus
tuis cautiorem esse.

The Present of the Imperative may be put many ways; As, Write to me often,
Scribe ad me saepi sime, scribito, scribas velim, fac scribas.

The Future of the Indicative, the Imperfect and Plusquamperfect of the
Subjunctive, must be rendered by the Future Tense of the Participle of the
Active, with the Substantive Verb (Sum,) as often as these Tenses follow after
any of these Particles. (Tam, ita, adeo, tantus, quantus,) and others of this
nature. As, He is so impudent that he will deny this, Adeo est Impudens ut hoc
negaturus sit: He is so liberal, that he would give you all he is worth, tam
liberalis est, ut omnia sua bona tibi daturus sit vel esset: He did love you so
much, that he would have loosed his Life for you, if you had desired him, Tanto
te amore prosecutus est, ut pro te moriturus fuisset, si ita tibi visum fuisset.

Sometimes the Future of the Indicative, is put by the Present of the
Subjunctive; As, You will see Men there who slight all things, Videas illic
homines, qui omnia rideant: Perhaps you will object, that he is too old to
carry Arms, Forsitan mihi objicias eum seniorem esse, quam qui arma ferat.

Sometimes the Imperfect of the Potentional is put by the present Tense; As,
You would think him mad, eum delivare putes.

The Future of the Indicative Mood, is put by the Future of the Participle, and
the Verb (Sum) after the Verbs (Nescio, Ignoro, Dubito.) As, I know not if you
will come, Vtrum venturus sis nescio: I know not what you shall do, quid
facturus sis ignoro: For the rest of the Moods and Tenses belonging to this
Chapter they are so easy, that there needs nothing be spoken of them.

CHAP. II. How to put a Verb of the Finite Mood into the Infinite Mood, in the
Tenses suitable to your Speech.
YOu must first know that any Mood, excepting the Infinitive, is a Finate Mood,
such as the Indicative, Imparative. Optative, etc.

Next, that when two Verbs occur in a Speech, no Conjunction intervening; the
last is put in the Infinitive: but to know in what Tense, here is the
difficulty. Hoc Opus, Hic Labor; Wherefore to the better understanding hereof,
consider the Rules following.

When the Verb that is to be put in the Infinitive is of the Present, the
Perfect or Future Tense in the English, you may safely keep it in the self same
Tenses in the Infinitive of the Latin; As, I think Peter is a good man, Credo
Petrum esse bonum: That he was ignorant, Fuisse ignarum: That he will be
ignorant, Fore ignarum.

The Future of the Subjunctive, whose mark is (will have, shall have) being to
be put in the Infinitive, is put by the Preterit; As, I trust he will have read
my Letters before now, Illum meas Literas legisse reor ante hoc tempus.

When the English Imperfect Tense, whose mark is (was) is to be put by the
Infinitive Mood; You must know what Tense goes before it; If there be either
the Present Tense of the Indicative, or Future of the same Mood, whose mark is
(shall or will) then the Imperfect following is put by the Preterit Perfect
Tense of the Infinitive; As, I believe that Caesar was Valliant, Fortem fuisse
Caesarem puto: Perhaps you will say that you was doing thus, Fortassis dices te
hoc fecisse.

If the Imperfect of the Indicative be to be used in the Infinitive, it is put
by the Preterit Perfect Tense, how often it follows the Imperfect of the
Subjunctive, whose mark is (should or could) or the Plusquamperfect of this
Mood, whose mark is (would or could have;) As, you would say that I was
Learned, Diceres me fuisse Doctum: I would have said that Pompey was very
happy, if he had not died miserably, Dixissem Pompeium fuisse fortunatissimum,
nisi misere periisset: But if the Imperfect of the Indicative, which is to be
put by the Infinitive Mood, have before it another Imperfect of that same Mood
with it, then it is used in the Present Tense of the Infinitive; As, you was
saying, that you was my Friend, Te esse mei amantissimum praedicabas: Which
likewise must be done with this Imperfect, if there goes before it the
Plusquamperfect of the Indicative, whose mark is (had) As, I had believed that
you was an honest man, unless, etc. Arbitratus eram te bonestissimum esse
nisi, etc.

If this Imperfect of the Indicative, have going before it the Preterit Perfect
Tense of the same Mood, whose mark is (have or did) it is rendered by the
Present or Perfect Tense of the Infinitive; As, I have heard from your
Commarads that you was very foolish in your Youth, Accepi ab Aequalibus tuis,
te Juvenem fuisse imprudentissimum: Hearing this report of you, I did think
that you was to be pitied, His de te auditis putavi te commiseratione dignum
esse: Cicero has left in writing that Catiline was the betrayer of his
Country, Cicero memoriae, vel script is prodidit Catilinam suae Patriae
proditorem esse, vel fuisse.

If the Imperfect of the Subjunctive be to be put by the Infinitive, and have
before it a Verb of any other Mood or Tense, it is put by the Future of the
Infinitive; As, I hope that my Father would come if he were in good health,
Arbitror Patrem meum venturum esse si valeret: I thought you would do this for
my sake, Id mea causa te facturum esse putavi: I did foresee that this would
have no good success, Id male cessarum auguratus fui: But if the preceding
Verb be of the same Mood and Tense, with the Imperfect of the Subjunctive, then
this Imperfect being to be used in the Infinitive, is put by the Present Tense;
As, I should think that Peter would become a good man, if he would hearken to
his Master, Petrum crederem probum esse si auscultaret Preceptorem suum.

The Plusquamperfect of the Indicative Mood, whose mark is (Had,) being to be
used in the Infinitive, is put by the Present Tense, when a Verb of this same
Mood and Tense goes before it, or the Plusquamperfect of the Subjunctive; As,
I had thought that ye had been ingrate, or I should have thought that ye had
been ingrate (by the Plusquamperfect of the Subjunctive) Te ingratum esse
judicassem, vel judicaveram.

But if the Verb going before the Plusquamperfect of the Indicative, which is
to be put by the Infinitive, be not of the same Tense, then it is put by the
Preterit Tense, and the Future of the Participle; and and for the better
knowing these ways of speaking, it is to be observed, that they are
accompanied with these Conjunctions (Si, nisi, modo, sed;) As, I believe the
Post had come if the Weather had been fair, Credo venturum fuisse Tabellar^um
si per tempus Licuisset: I heard that Peter had not died, if he had not spoken
harshly to the Judge, Audivi Petrum non moriturum fuisse, nisi judicem Verbis
Injuriosis lacessisset.

But if it chance that the Verb which is to be put in the Future of the
Participle has no Supine, and consequently no Future of the Participle; you
must in this case have recourse to the Substantive Verb (Sum) and put in the
same Tense that the Defective Verb is of, and the Defective is put in the
Subjunctive with (Vt) before it; As, I believe Peter had studied if he had had
wherewith to maintain himself, Credo fore ut Petrus Studuisset, si per opes
potuisset: Which may also be done with Verbs that have both Supine and Future
of the Participle; As, I believe that John had read if, etc. Credo sore ut
legeret Joannes si, etc. vel Lecturum fuisse Joannem si, etc.

If the Future of the Subjunctive, whose mark is (shall have, or will have,)
have going after it self the Present or Future Tense of the Indicative, it is
put by the Future of the Verb (Sum) with (Vt) going after it; As, I trust my
Son shall have done all that I commanded him when he comes, or shall come to
us again, Credo futurum esse ut filius mandata confecerit cum ad nos remeat vel
remeabit: I believe the King will have obtained many Victories when he returns,
or will return from the Wars, Credo futurum esse, ut Rex multas reportaverit*
Victorias, cum a Bello redit, vel redibit.

If any Verb following (Promitto, Polliceor, Spero, Minor, and their Synonimes)
be of the Present of the Infinitive in the English, it is put in the Latin by
the Future of the Infinitive; As, he has promised to come, Pollicitus est se
venturum esse: I hope to become Learned some day, Spero me aliquando fore
Doctum: He threatens to put all to Fire and Sword, Omnia se Flamma, and ferro
Vastaturum esse minatur: Yet nevertheless Cicero uses sometimes the Present
of the Infinitive after (Spero;) As, in this Example, Speramus quidem fier^
senes, in stead of saying, Speramus nos senes factum iri.

CHAP. III Of the Difficulties upon the Infinitive Mood.
OFtentimes Young Beginners confound the Present Tense of the Infinitive with
the Gerund in (di;) for preventing whereof I have set a Chapter apart; But
before we enter into the difficulty, it is to be remarked that (To) going
before a Verb is a Mark that the Verb is of the Infinitive Mood.

When between a Verb of the Finite Mood, and a Verb of the Infinitive, there is
no Substantive Noun, then the Verb is to be put in the Infinitive in the
Present Tense, or any other that your English requires; As, I desire to see my
Brother, Cupio videre Fratrem.

But if there goes a Substantive before the Verb, that is to be put in the
Infinitive; Such as, Tempus, Otium, Occasio, Facultas, Licentia, Necessitas,
Consilium, Voluntas, Consuetudo, Causa, Cupiditas, Desiderium, Ratio; then
instead of the Infinitive you use the Gerund in (di;) As, he waits his
opportunity to surprise his Enemy, Captat opportunitatem opprimendi Adversarii:
The Master has given us liberty to play, Magister nobis fecit ludendi veniam:
He takes liberty to do all that he lists, Sumit sibi licentiam quodvis
faciendi: I am necessitate either to pay or to give over, Incumbit mihi
necessitas aut solvendi, aut cedendi: I am resolved to make a Voyage into
France, Cepi consilium proficiscendi in Galliam: He has no desire to study,
Abjecit animum studendi: You have no reason to be angry with me, Causam
succensendi mihi nullam habes: I have a desire to go into Italy, Incessit me
cupido eundi in Italiam.

If before the Infinitive there go an Adjective, which is put in the Neuter
Gender, and so becomes a Substantive, which falls out when it can be
resolved by (res) as (turpe) id est, res turpis, the Verb may be kept in the
Infinitive, or it may be put by the Subjunctive with (ut) As, it is needful to
suffer many things in this life, Necessarium est multa pati in hac vita, vel ut
multa patiamur: It is free to every body to study, Liberum est unicuique
Studere, vel ut Studeat unusquisque: It is a brave and honorable thing to dye
for his Country, Praeclarum atque honorificum est pro Patria mortem oppetere,
vel ut quis pro Patria mortem oppetat, vel spiritum reddat.

It is a base thing to give way to his passion, Turpe est libidini servire, vel
ut quis libidini serviat: It is a hard and rare thing to excel in many things,
Difficile atque adeo satis rarum est in multis excellere, ut in multis quis
excellat.

If the Infinitive follow after these Adjectives, Cupidus, Avidus, Studiosus,
Gnarus, Peritus, Imperitus, and their Synonimes; It is to be rendered by the
Gerund in (di,) and the Substantive Nouns descending from it, are to be put in
the Genitive; As, Caesar was desirous to make wars, Caesar cupidus erat
faciendi bellum, vel belli: Alexander was skillful to Command an Army, Erat
Alexander peritissimus gubernandi Exercitus: He is very unapt to teach, Est
imperitus docendi.

If the Infinitive go after (Dignus, Indignus) it is put in the Subjunctive in
the Person, that the Pronoun of your English is of, and it has (qui, quae,
quod) before it; As, he is worthy to be praised, Dignus est qui laudetur: She
is unworthie to be heared, Indigna est quae audiatur.

If there go a Verb of Motion, (id est,) which signifies a local Mutation, as
I have already spoken of above;) Before the English Infinitive; this Infinitive
may be put four ways, to wit, by the Supine in (um,) by the Gerund in (di)
with (causa or gratia) by the Gerund in (dum) put Gerundively, if the Verb be
an Active or a Deponent of the Active signification; and lastly by the Future
of the Participle which agrees with the Nominative of the Verb of Motion, in
Gender, Number and Case; Examples hereof;

There came a Trumpeter from the King to admonish, etc. Praeco a Rege venit,
monitum, monendi gratia ad monendum, moniturus.

Here observe that Neuter Verbs cannot be put all these ways, because they
want for the most part the Supine, and the Future of the Participle; next that
when you make use of the two Gerunds, to wit, (in di, and in dum) they may be
elegantly in Active Verbs and Deponents of the Active signification put
Gerundively, id est, made agree with the Noun following, in Gender, Number and
Case, As, Veni causa monendae Matris, ad monendam Matrem: But other Verbs are
kept in the Gerunds, and have the Noun following in the Case that they Govern.

The Passive Infinitive of the English, being to be rendered by the Latin
Infinitive, is either put by the Future of the Passive, or by the Relative
(Qui, quae, quod) or (ut) with the Verb in the Subjunctive of the Active; As, I
give you my Son to be Instructed, Trado tibi Filium meum erudiendum, vel quem
erudias, vel ut erudias eum.

The English Infinitive is put by (cum, or quamvis) with the Subjunctive Mood,
in these ways of speaking; He has profited little to have studied so long,
Parum profecit cum tam diu Studuerit, Quamvis diu studuerit: You have used
Peter very ill to have received so many Courtesies of him, Quamvis tam multa
beneficia a Petro, acceperis, pessime tamen a te exceptus est: He is
exceedingly deceived to be a Learned Man, Cum sit Doctus turpiter hallucinatus
est.

These ways of speaking by the English Infinitive, to wit, he is not a man to
lie, to betray his Friend; are so rendered in the Latin, Non is est qui
mentiatur, qui amicum prodat.

When these Particles, (Tam, Adeo, Ita, Tantus, Tantum, Tot, Talis;) are to go
before the English Infinitive, then it is put in the Conjunctive Mood with (ut)
going before it; As, he is so impudent, as to despise his Master, Adeo est
Impudens, ut Magistrum vituperet: Take heed you fall not into the fault that is
so common among young beginners, which is not to put the Verb that is to be in
the Subjunctive, in the same Tense that the preceding Verb is of; As, Adeo est
Impudens ut Magistrum vituperaret; for to say, vituperet, because (est) going
before is of the Present Tense: And to Illustrate this further, I will bring an
Example of every Tense; He was so Impudent as to despise his Master, Adeo erat
Impudens ut Praeceptorem suum vituperaret: He has been so Impudent as, etc.
Adeo fuit Impudens ut Praeceptorem vituperaverit: He will be so Impudent as to
despise his Master, Tam erit Impudens ut Magistrum vituperaturus sit.

CHAP. IV. Of the Gerunds.
THough I have already spoken of the Gerund in (di,) yet I must needs in this
Chapter speak again of it, (though a little more amply then before) for
formality's cause.

When the Participle of the English, which is known by its ending in (ing) has
going before it, (in or by,) it is commonly rendered in the Latin by the Gerund
in (do;) As, he spends his time in Reading, Legendo tempus terit: He is much
delighted in hunting, Delectatur venando: He is lean by Studying, Emarcescit
studendo: Here again remark what I have often said, that if your Gerunds be to
govern any Noun after themselves, (I mean Gerunds of Active Verbs, or of Verbs
of the Active signification) then may you put them Gerundively, id est, as
Adjectives agreeing with the Substantive Nouns following, in Gender, Number and
Case; As, Tempus est visendi amici, for visendi amicum; It is time to see a
Friend, In legendis historicis tempus impendit, for legendo historicos; He
spends his time in reading Histories: Est ad amicitiam colendam idoneus, for ad
amicitiam colendum: He is good to keep Friendship with: but the Gerunds are not
to be changed, if they are neither Actives, nor of the Active signification; As
you have no reason to hate your Friend, Nulla tibi causa est invidendi amico,
and not amici.

Nevertheless, Fruor, Vtor and Fungor, though they govern the Ablative, are
found to be put Gerundively, because they did formerly govern the Accusative,
as is to be seen in Old Authors; As, Causa fruendae voluptatis, ad utendas
divitias, ad defungendum officium.

You change the English Infinitive by the Gerund in (di) when it has a
Substantive Noun before it; As, I had no occasion to write to you, Nulla mihi
oblata fuit occasio ad te scribendi; The Substantives which most frequently go
before it, are already set down in the Chapter, showing the distinction of the
Infinitive from the Gerund in (di.)

When the English Infinitive has going before it a Verb of motion, whereof you
have heard the mark; which is a changing or removing from one place to another,
or from one substance or quality to another, it is put by the Gerund in (dum;)
this last way of changing is called a Metaphorick motion; so it is absolutely
necessary that we understand by motion a desertion or leaving off one place to
acquire another; For though you say, I walk in my Chamber; and walking cannot
be without a motion, yet it is not the motion that I speak of, because you may
walk all day long in your Chamber without going out of it; Examples of both
motions Real and Metaphorick: I am going to London to salute my Friends; here
is a desertion of a place, for you must go from some place, and so say,
Proficiscor Londinum ad videndos amicos: The Master exhorts his Scholars to
study, Praeceptor Discipulos impellit ad studendum. This Verb (Exhort) is a
Verb of a Metaphorick motion, because it carries with it the change of a
condition, which is from not studying, to study; For if they did study, he
would not exhort them to study; The General exhorts his Soldiers to fight
valiantly, Imperator Milites accendit ad fortiter dimicandum.

These Adjectives, Aptus, Idoneus, Facilis, Pronus, Proclivis, Segnis, Acer,
Alacris, and others such like, will have the Verb which is of the Infinitive
Mood in the English, to be put by the Gerund in (dum) in the Latin; or if a
Noun follow them, it is put by (ad) in the Accusative; As, he is a fitting man
to move Sedition, Est ad Tumultum excitandum ldoneus: He is easily brought to
pardon injuries, Est ad condonandas injurias facilis, vel est facilis ad
veniam: He is given to revenge, Pronus est ad ulciscendum, vel ultionem: He is
loath to break peace, but most careful to keep it, Ad pacis faedus violandum
segnis, ad continuandum alacris.

In these ways of speaking, to wit, when the Verb has no Substantive after it
to govern, as in time of Supper, in time of Reading, the Verb is put in the
Gerund in (dum) with (inter,) and if there go a Noun after (in time of) you use
the Verb from which it descends; As, in time of Supper, Inter Caenandum, from
(caenare) comes (caena:) In time of studying, Inter Studendum, which ways
that you may know better, may be changed thus; Whiles, or when I was Supping,
whiles, or when I was reading.

But if in these ways the Verb governs a Noun after it, then this Verb is
put by the Gerund in (do) Gerundively, if it be an Active, or any of that
signification, or in the Present of the Participle which agrees with the
Nominative of the Verb following, or else by (dum, or cum) with the Indicative
or Subjunctive; As, in time of hearing my Lesson I laughed, In audienda
Lectione risi, audiens Lectionem risi, dum audiebam Lectionem risi, cum audirem
Lectionem risi.

CHAP. V. Of Participles of the Present, and Preterit Tense.
THe mark of the English Participle of the Present Tense is its ending in
(ing,) as Loving, and the Participle of the Preterit Tense is known by its
ending in (ed) as Loved.

If there go before the Participle (ing) this English Particle (without) you
must know if your Speech be Negative, or Affirmative; If it be Negative, then
the Participle is put by the Conjunctive Mood, and (without) is put by (Quin,
Prius, Quam, Antequam;) As, he will not undertake so weighty a thing without
asking my Advise, Rem tantam non suscipiet quin me consulat, rem tantam non
ante suscipiet quam me consulat, vel consulverit.

But if the Speech be Affirmative, (without) is put by (Quamvis, Nec, Neque,
Tamen,) and other such like Particles, with the Participle, as before in the
Subjunctive Mood; As, he has undertaken, a Voyage without acquainting me
therewith, Peregrinationem suscepit quamvis me non consuluerit, nec tamen me
consuluit; or by (Priusquam or Antequam) you may say, Prius peregrinationem
suscepit quam me consuluerit; Ante perigrinationem suscepit quam me
consuluerit; Or by the Independent, or absolute Ablative you may say, Me
inconsulto peregrinationem suscepit; But take heed in using this way, that the
Nominative of the Verb which is expressed by an Adjective in the Ablative, be
not the same thing with the Nominative of the following or preceding Verb, in
which case you must not use this Ablative, unless you can diversifie or
distinguish them without altering the sense; As, he did undertake this Voyage
without asking my advise; Here the Nominative to (asking) and (undertake) is
one thing, to wit, (he;) So that you cannot here use the Ablative, if you put
it into Latin, according as it is in the English, but if you will diversifie
them so, He undertook this Voyage, I not being consulted; you may say then, Me
inconsulto peregrinationem hanc suscepit; But if it cannot be diversified, then
you must have recourse to some of the ways abovementioned; As, he was
condemned without being heard; here the Nominative to condemned, is the same
thing that goes to the Participle (being heard;) neither can it be
diversified, wherefore you do not here use the Ablative; but (Priusquam)
Antequam, etc.) Prius damnatus est quam auditus fuerit.

Or if it be a Participle of the Passive Voice, which is known by its ending in
(ed) or, by the Particle (being) going before a Verb, then if it cannot be
diversified or made independent of the Verb preceding or following, it is put
in the Preterit of the Participle, and agrees with the Nominative of the
Personal Verb, in Gender, Number and Case; As, he did escape his Enemies hands
without being hurt, Illaesus hostium manus evasit: He did this undesired, Id
fecit non rogatus.

Sometimes you may express these ways of speaking by the Substantives
descending from the Participles; As, without declaring his will, Sine
significatione suae voluntatis: Without doubting, Procul omni dubio.

These ways of speaking (having Loved, having Taught in the Active Voice, or
(having been Taught, having been Loved) in the Passive Voice, are diversely
expressed in the Latin, according to the diverse nature and sorts of Verbs
which you shall have to do with; for if your English Participle be in the
Active Voice, and the Verb that you must render it by, be either a Deponent, or
Common Verb, then it is put in the Preterit Tense of the Participle, and made
agree with the Nominative of the Finite Verb, as with its Substantive; As,
having spoken many things to good purpose he went away, Multa Commode locutus
abiit: The Father having comforted his Children dyed, Pater consolatus Filios
obiit.

Observe further, that (having) going before a Verb, makes it of the
Participle of the Active; But if (been) go between it and the Verb, then the
Verb is in the Participle of the passive; Just so, if a Verb ending in (ed)
follow the particle (after) it is in the participle of the Active, but if the
word (been) go between (after) and the Verb, the Verb is in the Participle of
the Passive; neither in this do I contradict my self in what I have said in the
beginning of this Chapter concerning the mark of the Participles; because I
speak of Participles taken absolutely, id est, without having any thing going
before them, as Loving in the Active, Loved in the Passive; therefore if you
find in the English (after) instead of (having) what I have said of the one,
may be applied to the other; As, After that the Father had comforted his
Children he dyed, Consolatus filios suos Pater obiit.

But if your English Participle be to be rendered by an Active or Neuter Verb,
then you must make use of (postquam, or cum) with the Indicative or
Subjunctive, and not of the Preterit of the Participle, because they have none;
As, The Father having admonished his Children, departed this Life, Postquam
monuisset suos Libros Pater; e vivis excessit; The Scholars having Studied do
play, Cum Studuissent Scholastici Ludo vacant.

But know that the Active has this privilege which the Neuter Verb cannot
have, to wit, that it may be put Absolutely in the Ablative, when it is changed
into the Passive Voice, the which the Neuter wants; As, The Scholar goes home
having said his Lesson, Dicta Lectione Scholasticus domum repet^t.

If the Relative (is, and ille) follow your Participle of the Active you cannot
use the Independent or Absolute Ablative, but you must either make it agree in
Gender, Number and Case (if you will change it from the Active to a Participle
of the Passive) with its Antecedent, or by (Postquam or cum) with the
subjunctive Mood, if you will keep it in the Active Voice.

As, The Master did send away his Scholars, having told them of what they had
to do, Dimisit Discipulos suos Magister, de officio suo monitos, vel postquam
eos de officio movisset: And in this case the Neuter Verbs are put by (cum, or
postquam) because they have no Preterit Participle of the Passive voice, to be
put the other way.

In these ways of speaking, following, the Preterit participle of the Passive
voice in the English, is kept so in the Latin, if you have to do with an
Active Verb; As, the Scholar becomes more diligent being chided by his
Master, diligentior evadit Discipulus objurgatus a Praeceptore; This does also
comprehend common Verbs; As the sick man dyed having been comforted by his
Pastor, Aeger a Pastore consolatus obiit. But if the Verb be a deponent, you
must not put it so, by reason that it has no Passive, and for evading of this
fault so common among Scholars, change the Verb which was in the Passive in
the English, into an Active in the Latin; As, The Captain escaped without
being followed by his Enemies, Dux evasit Hostibus eum minime sequentibus. Or
if this way seems not good to be used, strive to find a Synonime to this
deponent, which may be put Passively.

Sometimes the English Participle is put in the Conjunctive by (quamvis) and
this so often, as there follows it in the English the word (Nevertheless;)
As, Themistocles having done great service to his Country, was nevertheless, or
notwithstanding put away by his fellow-Citizens. Quamvis Themistocles fortiter
and praeclare pro patria gessisset, a Civibus tamen suis ejectus fuit.

CHAP. VI. Of the Participles of the Future Tense.
THere be two Participles of the Future Tense, that of the Active which ends in
(rus) and the other of the Passive which ends in (dus.)

The Future of the Indicative, the Imperfect and Plusquamperfect of the
Subjunctive are expressed in the Latin by the Future in (rus) so often as there
goes before these Tenses any of these Latin Particles, (tam, ut, adeo, ut,
ita, ut, eatenus, ut, and such like; As, He has so great power with the King,
that he will obtain easily of him what he lists, Tantum valet apud Regem ut
ab eo facile quidlibet Impetraturus sit; He is so merciful and meek that he
would pardon his Enemies, Adeo clemens est and humanus, ut veniam daturus esset
Inimicis; He loved me so much, that he would have shed his blood for me, ita me
diligebat ut Sanguinem suum pro me profusurus fuisset.

And if these Moods be of the Passive Voice, and these Latin Particles go
before them; they are expressed in the Latin by the Future in (dus;) As the
Town is so destitute of help, that it will be taken before the fifteenth of this
Month, Ita ab omnibus presidiis inops est, and vacua Civitas, ut ante decimum
quintum mensis diem capenda sit; The Citizens were in such extremity, that the
Town had been sooner taken if it had sooner been Seiged, Adeas Angustias
adducti erant cives ut citius oppidum capiendum fuisset si Citius obsessum.

Sometimes the Future of the Indicative of the Active is put by the Present of
the Subjunctive, although it follow the Latin Particles abovementioned; and
this is when the Verb that should express the Future of your English, has no
Supine, and consequently no Participle of the Future Tense; As, The Enemy is so
formidable, that none will Assault him, Adeo formidabilis est hostis ut cum eo
congredi nemo velit; The matter is so Intricate, that you shall not be able to
clear it, Ita res Implicata est ut eam explicare non possis.

These three Tenses are put by the Future in (rus) when they follow (utrum, an
number;) As, I know not if the Post will come, Vtrum venturus sit Tabellarius
nescio; He asked of me if I should send him Books, Quaesivit ex me number missurus
essem Libros; I doubt if he would have done this for my cause, Dubito an hoc
mea causa facturus esset.

You may in these ways of speaking, make use of the Verb (Debeo) and put the
English Verb which ought to be in the Future of the Participle, in the
Infinitive Mood: As, I know not if I shall go to the Judge, Vtrum Judicem
convenire debeam ignoro; You ask me if you shall come to this Country, Quaeris
an in Gentem hanc venire debeas; I doubt if I shall do this for you, Vtrum hoc
tua causa facere debeam dubito.

If these ways of speaking (my Brother should come, my Master should write)
carry no obligation or necessity with them, then you make use of the Future in
(rus) As, Venturus est Frater, Scripturus est Magister; but if these speeches
include any necessity, then you make use of (debeo, oportet, necesse est.) As,
My Brother should come to see his Father; here is an Obligation, wherefore you
say, Debet frater venire causa videndi patris, A Son should obey his Parents;
Oportet Filium Parentibus morem gerere.

These three Tenses, the Future of the Indicative, the Imperfect, and
Plusquamperfect of the Subjunctive, are expressed in the Future of the
Participle with the Verb (Sum) in the Conjunctive, because of (Quin) going
before it, whenever they follow (dubito) or its Synonimes; and this as well
in the Passive, as the Active: As, I doubt not but that the Post will come to
morrow, Non dubito quin cras venturus sit Tabellarius; I doubt not but you
should be punished, Non dubito quin mulctandus esses.

CHAP. VII. How to reduce a Participle to the Finit Moods of its Verb.
THis Reduction of the participle to the Finite Tense of its Verb, is,
necessary because of certain Verbs, such as, Odi, Caepi, Novi, Memini, which
having no participle of the present Tense, must be reduced to the Finite Mood
and Tense of its Verb suitable to your Speeches, by means of some certain
particles.

Another reason is, because, the frequent using of the present of the
participle, is not so elegant in the Latin as in the Greek; wherefore let
these reasons be sufficient for the Consideration of the following Rules.

When you find any of the above written Defective Verbs in the Participle of
your English, or if the present of the Participle of other Verbs can be changed
into a Finit Mood by (when, or, if,) then you put them by a Finit Mood in the
Latin with (Cum, Dum, Quando, Quandiu;) As, a Scholar makes great progress
in a short time, he being diligent, id est, if he is diligent, or when he is
diligent, Scholasticus magnum progressum brevi facit cum diligens est, and in
lectione assiduus: The Soldier remembering the dangers past, is glad, Quando
Miles in animum revocat pericula quibus perfunctus est, gaud^t: Caesar not
being desirous to Reign, was loved by the Romans, id est, when he desired not
to Reign, etc. Caesar Populo Romano Charus fuit, quamdiu Imperium non
affectabat: A Scholar being modest, is praised by his Master, Discipulus a
Praeceptore laudatur dum modestus est.

When your English Participle of the present Tense, can be put Finitly by
(because,) then it is put in the Indicative or Subjunctive with (quod,) or in
the Subjunctive with (cum;) As, the King is Loved deservedly being so meek a
Prince, id est, because he is so meek a Prince, Jure merito amatur Rex quod
Princeps sit, vel est humanissimus: Pompey did overcome many Nations, he being
a brave Warrior, id est, because he was a brave Warrior, Pompeius multas
Nationes subjugavit cum, vel quod esset bellicosissimus

You may put these Participles by (ut pote, quippe,) As, Omnes amant Regem ut
pote humanum, or you may use (qui, quae, quod) before these Particles, and say,
Omnes amant Regem quippe qui sit humanus.

The participle of the present is expressed, when we speak generally of any
thing, by the Adverb (Quando, or Cum;) As, a Prince is much Esteemed being
Courageous; here it is not specified what Prince, and so you say, Commendatur
Princeps quando est magnanimus: But when we descend to particulars, the
participle is expressed better and oftener by the Conjunction (quod) with the
Conjunctive Mood; As, Commendatur Carolus ejus nominis secundus quod sit
Magnanimus.

When the present of the participle can be rendered into a Finit Mood by
(although,) then it is put in the Latin in the Conjunctive Mood with (cum or
quamvis;) As, so long as a Child is in the years of minority, he differs
nothing from a Servant, being the Lord and proprietor of all, id est, although
he be the Lord, etc. Quamdiu Pupillus durat in tutela nihil deffert a servo
cum, vel quamvis sit Dominus omnium: Socrates was condemned as guilty, being
most innocent, Socrates ut nocens daninatus est quamvis fuerit Innocentissimus.

I doubt not but you think already this reducing of participles to be most
necessary in respct of the Verbs, which have not this Tense, but it is not
unnecessary in other Verbs, who have the present of the participle; seeing (as
I have above said) the present of the participle is more elegantly used in the
Greek then in the Latin, yet it is sometimes found in the Latin, and most
frequently in the Poets; wherefore I have shown you how to change it in Prose
sufficiently, I only add that if your participle does not agree with the
Nominitive of the Finit Verb, then it is put by the absolute Ablative; As, the
Scholars take heed whilst the Master is a Teaching, Attendunt Scholastici
docente Praeceptore.

CHAP. VIII. How, and when the Impersonal Verb should be reduced to a Personal.
IT is necessary to know first your English Impersonal before you can reduce it
to a personal in the Latin; wherefore observe that when your Verb has no
certain or particular Nominative, then it is an Impersonal, as it is believed;
here is no mention made of any particular or determinate thing: but it will yet
appear better, by comparing a Personal with an Impersonal, as (Ego Amo,) here
is a certain determinate person, but (Creditur) has no certain Nominative,
when it is Impersonally taken.

If before your English Verb there be (They, or One) which have no dependence
upon any Antecedent, then this Verb is Impersonally put in the English, and may
be kept so in the Latin; As, they drink when they Suppe, or one drinks when
one Suppeth, Bibitur cum Caenatur; but if (One, or They) be Relatives depending
upon some Antecedent, then the Verb following them is only put Personally,
because in this occasion they will signify some certain and determinate thing,
they being of the same Number and Person with their Antecedent; As, I love my
Brother and Sister, and they Love me, Amo Germanum and Sororem, and illi me,
vicissim amant; Here (They) is a Relative to the Antecedent (Brother and
Sister.)

Having given you the mark of English Impersonals, I come now to speak of the
way of reducing them.

If the English Impersonal is alone, and has no Noun or Pronoun after it, then
it is kept Impersonally in the Latin, as it is reported every where, Ita
fertur undique.

But if it be accompained with a Noun or Pronoun, with which it has
Connection, then it may be reduced to a Personal Verb, which is done diversely,
according to the diverse sorts of Verbs which you meet with.

First the English Impersonal is reduced to a Personal in the Latin, by
changeing it out of the Active voice into the Passive, and in putting in the
Nominative the Noun or Pronoun which should have been in the Accusative after
the Active now changed; As, they praise the Scholars modesty, id est, the
Scholars modesty is praised, Laudatur Scholasticorum modestia: They esteem you
a prudent man, id est, you are esteemed prudent, Haberis sapiens: One thinks
you too meek, Haberis plus aequo mansuetus.

But if the Verb that you have to do with, have no Passive, as the Neuters and
Deponents; in this case we must make use of the first or third person of the
Plural Number; As, one favors for the most part the Powerful, Potentioribus
ut plurimum favemus, vel favent, supp. Homines: One does admire Learned Men,
Miramur Doctos, or Mirantur Doctis, supp. Studiosi: They may bring Remedy
sometimes for the greatest Diseases, Interdum medemur, periculosissimis Morbis,
vel medentur, supp. medici.

If a Neuter Verb be taken Passively in the English, it may not only be put by
these two ways, but also Impersonally in the Passive Voice; As, evil men are
favored, (here favored is taken Passively in the English) and so you may not
only say, Favemus Improbis, vel favent, Supp. Homines, but also favetur
improbis: Princes are obeyed, Obtemperamus Principibus vel obtemperant, supp.
subditi, vel obtemperatur Principibus; which cannot be done with a Deponent,
though it have a Passive Construction in the English.

To reduce these two Impersona's (one should, or ought, one can,) you must put
the Verb following them in the Passive, though it be in the Active of the
English, and the Noun and Pronoun following it, is made the Nominative to
(debeo) into which these Impersonals are changed; As, one should or ought Love
Virtue, Debet virtus amari: One cannot do that, Id fieri non potest.

But when the Verb that goes after (debeo, or possum) has no passive, then
you must do as is already said concerning Neuters and Deponents, which is, to
make use of the first or third person of (debeo or possum) and the Verb
following is put in the Infinitive, according to the fashion of an Active; As,
one ought to obey Gods Commands; Debemus parere Dei Praeceptis, vel debent
supp. Christiani: One ought to follow or imitate Good men, Probos imitari
debemus, vel debent supp. Homines.

These Impersonals, Aiunt Dicunt, Ferunt, Scribunt, Narrant, Memorant, etc. may
be put two ways, first Impersonally with the Noun or Pronoun following in the
Accusative, and the Verb in the Infinitive; As, they say that I am apt to
study, Dicunt me ad Studia, esse maxim idoneum: They write that Attilius
Regulus dyed for his Country, Scribunt Attilium Regulum pro Patria occubuisse.

Secondly, these Verbs may be put personally in the passive Voice, and have for
the Nominative to them the Noun or pronoun following (that;) As, Dicor aptus ad
studia, Fertur Attilius Regulus pro patria occubuisse; Here take heed that you
use not these Verbs Impersonally in the passive, and put the Noun or pronoun in
the Accusative; As, Fertur Attilium Regulum pro patria occubuisse; which way of
speaking is not used.

If the Impersonal have a case put with it, which goes before (That,) then it
is kept Impersonally in the Latin with the case that it requires; As, it was
told me that you were rash, Nunciatum est mihi te esse temerarium, and not,
Dictus es mihi esse temerarius.

If there goes a Verb of the Future Tense after the Impersonal, this Verb of
the Future is expressed in the Future of the Participle of (Rus, or, Dus;) As,
it is thought that you will dye, Crederis moriturus esse: It is thought that
you will be praised, Crederis laudandus esse.

But if in this case there follow your Impersonal a Verb in the Future Tense,
which has no Future of the participle in the Latin, then your Impersonal is
kept in the Latin, and instead of the Future of the participle which is
wanting, you use (fore) with (ut) going to the Defective Verb, which is put in
the Subjunctive Mood; As, it is believed that you will study, Credunt fore ut
studeas: It is reported that you will please your parents, Nunciatum est, fore
ut placeas parontibus: It is expected that the Sun will shine to morrow, Vere
simile est fore ut cras Sol splendescat.

Take heed you fall not into that common mistake concerning the Impersonal (it
seems to me) which is expressed by (videri;) oftentimes have I seen it put
thus; It seems to me that you are unmindful of your Duty, Videtur te esse
immemorem tui officii; But in these ways of speaking (videri) must be made a
personal, and say, Videris mihi immemor esse tui officii.

These English Impersonals are kept Impersonally in the latin, to wit, it
Raineth, Snoweth, Haileth, Thundreth, Lightneth, Pluit, Ningit, Grandinat,
Tonat, Fulgurat; yet according to the opinion of some that will have (Deus or
Natura) to be the Nominatives to these Verbs, they may be called personals.

CHAP. IX. When and how you should reduce an Active to a Passive, or contrarily.
THis Reduction is sometimes voluntary and without necessity, safe only for
variety: but at other times it is so needful, that it cannot be omitted, as
may be seen in the ensuing discourse.

If your English Verb be of the passive voice, and must be expressed in the
Latin by a Neuter or Deponent, then you must change it into an Active; As, the
Grecians and the Romans are admired by all other Nations, id est, all other
Nations do admire the Grecians and the Romans, Mirantur Graecos and Romanos
aliae Nationes: Cicero should be followed by all Orators, id est, all Orators
ought to follow Cicero, Ciceronem caeteri Oratores imitari debent: Innocent men
are favored by good men, id est, good men do favor Innocent men, Boni favent
Innocuis: The reason is, because Neuter Verbs taken personally have no passive,
neither can we use Deponents in this Voice, otherwise we could say, Graeci and
Romani mirantur a caeteris nationibus, Innocents faventur a bonis.

Yet you may use the Future of the participle in (dus) of Deponent Verbs, and
that passively with the Dative in place of the Ablative; As, Cicero imitandus
est Caeteris Oratoribus.

When the Action of an Active Verb does fall upon some Animate or living thing,
then it is most commonly kept in its Voice; As, I accuse you of Pride, Accuso
te Arrogantiae.

But if it falls upon an Inanimate thing, then it is changed into the Passive
Voice, and this thing is put in the Ablative, without a Preposition, the which
reduction is not so much for necessity's cause, as variety: Seeing it may in
this case be kept Actively, in making the Inanimate thing the Nominative, and
putting in the Accusative, which was in the Nominative, of your English; As, I
am very angry at your Pride. Here (Pride) is the Inanimate thing, Offender tua
Superbia, vel tua Superbia me offendit; I am not moved at your threats, Minis
tuis non moveor, vel minae tuae non me movent; And as you see done with these
two Active Verbs (Offendo and Moveo) so do in this case with others.

You must change the Active into the Passive, so often as there is danger of
making an Amphibologie or doubtsome speech; As, I think that Peter exceeds
Paul, Petrum a Paulo superari Puto; And if you would say by the Active, Patrum
superare Paulum puto; It is uncertain whether it be Peter or Paul that does
exceed, because the Latin construction can suffer any of these senses. Peter
does exceed Paul, or Paul exceeds Peter, which Pyrrhus King of the Epyrods
knew to be true to his woeful experience in the Response that he had from the
Oracle; Aio te Aeacida Romanos vincere posse; I say Pyrrhus Son to Aeacus, that
you (according to his explication) can overcome the Romans; When the true
Interpretation was; I say that the Romans can overcome you, for so it did fall
out; into which mistake Pyrrhus had never fallen, if the Devil had spoken to
him by the Passive Voice, and said, Aio te vinici posse a Romany; But he
desired not to be understood, wherefore he made choice of this doubtsome way by
using the Active Voice.

If you be to reduce an Active (which governs the thing in the Accusative,
and the person in the Dative) to the Passive Voice; As, If you had this
example, Tabellarius mihi reddidit Epistolam; the thing to wit (Epistolam) is
put in the Nominative, and that which was the Nominative to the Active Verb, is
put in the Ablative, with (a, or ab,) and so you say a Tabellario mihi reddita
fuit epistola.

And when you would reduce a Verb to the Passive Voice, which had not the thing
in the Accusative, then the person is made the Nominative to it in the Passive
Voice; and the thing in the Case that it was in before; As, In this example:
Interdico tibi domo mea, I forbid you coming to my house; you say, Interdiceris
a me domo mea; here (domo mea) which is the thing, is kept in the Ablative as
it was before, but the Person (tibi) is here made the Nominative.

To make this reduction of the Active to the Passive in these Verbs (Celo,
Rogo, Doceo,) which taken Actively, govern two Accusatives; one of the Person,
and another of the Thing you must make the Person the Nominative, and the
Thing, is yet kept in the Accusative; As, Celasti me consilium tuum; You kept
up your Counsel from me, you reduce it thus. Celatus sum a te consilium tuum*
Praeceptor docet Scholasticos Rhetoricam, The Master teaches his Scholars
Rethorick; Scholastici docentur Rhetoricam a Praeceptore.

If an Active Verb follow after (Jubeo, praecipio, mando) and their Synonimes,
it is put by the Passive voice; As, The King did command to build a Church, Rex
Templum aedificari Jussit; He commanded to levy Forces, Copias conscribi
jussit.

Yet you may use the Infinitive of the Active, if there go an Accusative before
it; As, The King commanded the Architector to build a Church, Rex jussit
Architectorem Templum aedificare; or if there go any other case before it
besides the Accusative; As, The King gave order to the Officers to levy new
Troops, Mandavit Rex Ducibus novas copias contrahere.

CHAP. X. What must be done when you join two Verbs of a Diverse Construction
with one word.
IT is a very ordinary thing in our young Scholars, to join with one word two
or more Verbs, which are of a diverse Regiment; because it is usual in the
English phrase: Wherefore I have set a Chapter a part for preventing of this
fault.

When you find in your English, Verbs of diverse Regiments put with one word;
you may put them one of two ways, either by changing them into their Synonimes
until they both be of one nature, and consequently of one Regiment or
Government, or by rendering to each Verb the Case that it requires, which is
done by doubling the word Governed; as for example, A Flatterer praises and
Flattereth every body, if you would put it so; Adulator laudat and blanditur
omnibus, or blanditur and Laudat omnes, you would defraud one of these Verbs of
its case, but in applying any of the ways above mentioned, you will satisfy
both of them.

First, Then change (Blanditur) into a Synonime of the Active signification,
that it may have the same case that (Laudat) has, which is (Colo) and then
say; Adulator colit and Laudat omnes; or you may change your Active (If it be
easier to be done, then by altering the other) into a Synonime of the same
nature that the other Verb is of.

Secondly, You may repeat the word Governed (Omnes) and put it after each Verb
in their proper Cases; As, Adulator and omnibus blanditur, and omnes laudat; if
you find it not expedient to repeat the governed word, then after the last
Verb put (is, or ille) in the case convenient, and say Adulator omnibus
blanditur eosque Laudat.

Remember to leave out the Conjunction, if the governed word be repeated oftener
then twice; As, Adulator omnes Laudat, omnibus blanditur, omnium captat
benevolentiam, by the figure Polyptoton, or Metagoge.

Perhaps you may say that in satisfying one Verb explicitly, you do not defraud
the other, since the Case that it governs is understood; As, Adulator laudat
omnes and blanditur, supp. omnibus; yet this is rather to be remarked then
followed wheresoever you find it, and most usually these ways of speaking are
put by one of the ways above, and use in matters of this kind, is equivalent
to a positive Rule or Law.

CHAP. XI. Concerning the mark of an Active Verb, and the Regiment of Passive
Verbs; and Verbs of Receiving.
IT is hard, if not impossible to make known perfectly by precepts, which is
known by practice; so stands the Case now with me, who is to give the mark of
an Active Verb, which by practice and long experience is certainly know. For
let a young Scholar consider the definition of the Active Verb left to him by
the Grammarians, and he will find it in appearance agree to a Neuter Verb, for
they say, that an Active ends in (o) and signifies to do some Action, which by
adding the letter (r,) becomes a Passive; but one that is little acquainted
with an Active Verb, may imagine all these marks to agree to the Verb (Noceo)
which is a Neuter, and so he is little surer by this definition then without
it: But though it were harder then it is, yet I would not refuse to contribute
something herein, for the benefit and ease of young beginners, who are often
deceived in this point; notwithstanding, the definition of an Active Verb.
Neither do I promise to bring you such a definition, that it can put you out of
all doubts; but one that will bring you easier and more sure to the general
knowledge of an Active Verb. A Verb is most commonly either an Active or of the
Active signification (thse words comprehend the Deponents of the Active
signification) if it ends in (o) or being a Deponent, in (or) and if it can be
joined with these two words (Some thing) in a right and pertinent sense; As, I
Read, this Verb which is (lego) ends in (o) and you may say in good sense, I
Read (Some thing;) but (Sedeo, Gaudeo, Valeo,) are not Actives, albeit they end
in (o,) because you cannot add to them in a right sense these two words (Some
thing) for we say not I fit some thing, but upon some thing; neither I rejoice
some thing, but at some thing, etc. So the words must have an immediate
dependence upon the Active Verb. Thus having given you a general kind of
knowledge on this subject, I come to the general exceptions.

You must except these kind of Verbs following from this definition, who
though they end in (o,) and may have after them in right sense (some thing,)
yet are they not to be used as Actives, these are they: Verbs of Studying,
Placing, Displacing, Favoring, Obeying, Envying, with Noceo, Interdico, Egeo,
Careo, Fido. Except of Deponents; these, Blandior, Adversor, Medeor, Medicor;
which have the Dative, with Vescor, Vtor, Abutor, Fungor, Fruor, which have the
Ablative, Misereor and Miseresco, which have the Genitive.

Though you will find many more, both Actives and Deponents to be excepted;
when you give your self to reading; yet these that I have made mention of, are
the most general and obvious, and are capable with the preceding definition to
give you a general Idea and knowledge of an Active Verb.

The mark of a Passive Verb is, that it ends in (or) and signifies to suffer,
id est, signifies the reception of some action; As, Amor, I am Loved, then I
receive the Love of another.

The Syntax says, that the Passive has after it, the Ablative with the
Preposition (a, or ab) but this should be so understood, when the word that is
put in the Ablative, is a Person or any living Thing; As, Amor a Deo, I am
loved by God; otherwise if that which is in the Ablative, be not a living or
animate thing, you must leave out the Preposition; As, I am overcharged with
grief, Obruor dolor; He is troubled with a heavy sickness, Gravissimo
conflictatur morbo.

According to what has been said of the Passive in Living and Animate things,
so must you do with the Verbs of Receiving, for if the word which is put in the
Ablative after these Verbs, be a Person or living thing, Then is put before it
(a or ab;) As, I received Letters from my Father, Accepi Literas a Patre meo.
And if this word be inanimate or without life, then it has going before it (e,
or ex;) As, I received great contentment from your Letters, Incredibilem ex
Epistolis tuis cepi voluptatem; or e venatione, In hunting; e Musica, in
Music; Ex Agricultura, In husbandry; Albeit you will find Cicero in these
ways of speaking, make use of the Genitive; As, Capere fructum Laboris,
Vigiliarum, Industriae; To reap Fruits of his Labor, Vigilancie and Industry.

By the way I remarke, that the Compound, (accipio) is used most with Persons
or Animate Things, and the Simple (Capio) with Inanimate or not Living Things,
or else some of its Synonimes; As, Haurio, duco, peto, traho.

The Grammar says that the Participle governs the Case of its Verb,
nevertheless the Participle of the Passive is put with the Dative, although
the Verb from whom this Future descends, governs the Ablatve; as we must
suffer in this Life; Multa nobis ferenda sunt in hac vita. I must write a
Letter; Scribenda est mihi Epistola. And thus far of English Particles, Moods
and Tenses, etc, To this I add a most useful Treatise of Latin Particles and
of Verbs, which have a Particular Regiment.

CHAP. I. Concerning the Relative Particles (Qui, Quae, Quod.)
THese Pronouns (Qui, Quae, Quod,) being put after a Negation, has the Verb,
whereof it is the Nominative in the Subjunctive Mood; As, There is no
Philosopher of Epicur. his opinion, Nullus est Philosophorum qui cum Epicuro
sentiat vel Epicuro assentiatur; You have said nothing that is approved by
Learned men, nihil dixisti quod probetur eruditis, there is none but accuses
you of negligence, Nemo est qui te negligentiae non accuset; I find nothing
here suitable to my mind, Nulla mihi res hic occurit quae animo meo satisfaciat.

This must also be done as often as (Qui, Quae, Quod,) follows an
Interrogation; As, Is there any that thinks so? Est ne aliquis qui ita
sentiat?

Oftentimes (Qui, Quae, Quod,) is put in stead of (ut) and then it has the
Verb following in the subjunctive; As, I sent my servant to you, to acquaint
you with my return, Mitto ad te pueru^ meum, qui te de riditu meo certiorem
faciat, in stead of, ut te certiorem faciat: I bring my son, that you may
instruct him; Trado tibi filium meum quem erudias, vel ut erudias, That you may
have a care of him; Vt ejus curam habeas, vel cujus curam habeas, That you may
show him the way of Virtue, Cui virtutis viam monstres, vel ut ei vertutis viam
monstres: I shall send you my Fathers Letters, that you may read them, Mittam
ad te Patris Literas, quas Legas.

These Relatives are put very appositely with the Conjunctive Mood, in stead of
(ut) after the Particles (tam, ita, adeo, talis, qualis, tantus) and their
Synonimes; As, I am not so Impudent, as to call my self too Good, Non sum tam
Impudens qui me nimis Bonum dicam; Neither am I so ignorant as not to know my
one defects, Neque adeo sum ignarus qui meos defectus non cognoscam, vel ut
meos defectus non cognoscam; He is not so well advised as to do this, non est
ita Imprudens qui hoc faciat.

Observe that it is not required that these Particles (Tam, ita, adeo, etc.) be
in express words, to the useing of these Relatives, (Qui, Quae, Quod,) with
the Subjunctive, in place of (ut,) it is enough if they be understood; As, A
good Prince ought to make Laws, that may keep the Peace and Unity of his
Subjects: before (Laws) may be understood the word (Talis) which is one of the
named Particles, and so you say; Bonus Princeps Leges condere debet, vel tales
Leges condere debet, quae subditorum pacem and concordiam tueantur; I wish you
children, that may follow your virtues, id est, (such Children,) Vtinam liberi
tibi contingant, qui virtutes tuas imitentur; send me a boy that may be
serviceable to me, id est (such a boy) Mitte ad me puerum, qui commodis meis
inserviat, qui rebus meis consulat.

In all which examples, you see only mention made of Actions to be done; in
which ways of speaking, you must of necessity put the Verb in the Subjunctive
Mood, after (Qui, Quae, Quod) but if you speak of an Action past, or which is
in doing, then after these Relatives you make use of the Subjunctive or
ndicative; As, the Prince has made Laws which keep the Peace and Unity of his
Subjects: here is a thing actually done, to wit (Laws made,) wherefore you say;
Princeps Leges condidit quae pacem and concordiam tuentur, vel tueantur, He
has children that do follow or imitate his Virtues: Here is a thing actually a
doing, Liberos habet qui illius virtutes imitantur vel imitentur.

We say also by the Indicative or Subjunctive, Aliquid dixit quod Praeceptorem
offendat, vel offendit; he has said something that offends the Master, but
by the Subjunctive only, Vereor ne quid dicat quod Praeceptorem offendat; I
fear least he say something that may offend the Master, which proceeds from
the diversity of the Tenses above remarked, because the last Example is of a
thing to come; for as yet he has not offended the Master; and the first a
thing done, for in it he has actually offended the Master.

These Relatives (Qui, Quae, Quod,) comprehends sometimes under their
signification, these Pronouns (Ego, Tu, Ille,) and this so often as before
these Relatives in the English these words, (Because, Seeing, Although) can be
understood; As, you ought not to spare money, you who abound in all things,
Pecuniae parcere non debes, qui scilicet rerum omnium Copia circumfluis, vel
cum rerum omnium Copia circumfluas; Because before the Relative Particle (You,)
is understood (Seeing;) As, seeing you abound in all things; he will soon
discover the cause of the sickness, he who is a skillful Physician, Supp.
because he is a skillful Physician, Morbi causam facile pervestigabit quippe
qui sit Medicus peritissimus, vel quod sit Medicus peritissimus: You are to
blame in accusing others of Avarice, you that thinks only how to enrich your
self, Supp. Seeing you think only how, etc. Immerito alios Avaritiae insimulas
qui ad augendas opes totus incumbas, vel cum totus incumbas: You assault me who
has ever been for you, Supp. Although I have ever been for you, Tu me oppugnas
qui ad tuam causam me semper adjunxerim: He has disappointed me in a little
thing, I who have so often exposed my life for him, Supp. Although I have
exposed my, etc. In re minima mihi defuit qui pro ispo toties vitae periculum
adierim, vel quam vis adierim periculum vitae: Sometimes you may use before
these Relatives (Nempe, Scilicet, Quippe ut Pote,) as you see in the foresaid
Examples.

Take heed that you use not these Relatives after (Quaero, Interrogo, Nescio,
Dubito, etc.) A mistake very incident to young Beginners, but instead of them
put after these Verbs (Quis, or Quid;) As, he did ask me who was come hither?
Quaesivit ex me quis huc venerit: What is my Brother now a doing? Quid agit
Frater meus? If there be an Interrogation it avails as much as if the Verb
(Quaero) were expressed; I know not who did this wicked action, Quis tam
nefarium facinus patraverit nescio: He bethinks himself what to answer, Secum
cogitat quid responsurus sit: But sometimes (Qui) is found as well as (Quis,)
whether the Speech be Doubtful or Interrogative; As, Qui tantus fuit Labor, was
there ever so great a Labor? Si diligenter considerabis qui vir ille fuerit:
If you consider narrowly what sort of man he was.

In the preceding Examples, where there is an Interrogation, you use the
Indicative; As, Quis ita sentit? Who thinks so? But if in these Interrogative
ways, your Verb be of the Potential, which is known if there go before it
(can, or would, or should,) then it is put in the Potential Mood; As, who can
think so? Quis ita sentiat? Who would not weep? Quis non fleat? Who should not
be angry? Quis non succenseat?

When these Relatives (Qui, Quae, Quod) have before themselves the Pronoun (Is)
and be both to be put in the same Case, then you may leave out the Antecedent
(Is,) expressing the Relative by the Neuter Gender in Number and Case
convenient; As I do much approve that which you say, Valde probo quod dicis,
instead of valde probo id quod dicis; But if they be not to be put in one Case,
then you must express the Antecedent; As, I am much delighted in that which
you say, In iis admodum delector quae dicis.

If there go explicitly in the English, and tacitly in the Latin these
Particles, (Aliquis, Quidam;) these Relatives put with the Conjunctive Mood,
serve for expressing these two abovenamed; As send some body before to
acquaint me of your coming, Praemitte qui me de adventu tuo moneat, Supp.
Aliquem qui me de adventu, etc. He did appoint a certain man to kill me,
Destinavit qui me trucidaret, Supp. quendam.

I have often seen Scholars who had made a good progress, use these Relatives
(Qui, Quae, Quod,) to the expressing of (Who) or Which) in a comparison between
two; As, which is the Learnedest of the two Brothers? and so they have put, Qui
est amborum Fratrum Doctior? Take heed therefore not to use these Relatives in
this Case, but in place thereof make use of (Vter) in Gender, Number and Case
convenient; as, Amborum Fratrum uter Doctior: I know not which of the two is
wisest, Vter prudentior sit nescio: And if your Comparison pass the number of
two, then you must not use any of the Relatives but (Quis) with the
Superlative; As, if you would say, speaking of many Soldiers, who is the
stoutest of them? Quis omnium est fortissimus, vel quis quem fortitudine
superet? He asked me which was the modestest of my Scholars, Quaesivit ex me
quis meorum Scholasticorum esset modestissimus, vel quos qui modestiae laud
seperarent.

(Quod) is elegantly taken for a Substantive; As, Quod habebat militum ad
Caesarem adduxit; for quos habebat Milites, etc. He brought to Caesar what
Soldiers he had, Quod Floris, quod roboris in juventute erat, amiserant: They
had lost that vigor and strength that is found in youth.

(Qui, Quae, Quod) are put sometimes for (Modo, Dummodo) with the Verb in the
Subjunctive Mood; As, he will obtain easily this favor of the King, so great
is his power with him, Quae est ejus Auctoritas apud Regem, ut abeo beneficium
hoc facile impetraturus sit.

CHAP. II. Of the Particles (Quis, Quantus, Qualis, Cum, Postquam, Tametsi,
Etiamsi, Quamvis, Quando.)
BEcause there is little to be said upon these Particles, I thought it fitting
to comprehend them all in this one Chapter; but though it is little that can be
said of them, yet is it very useful and necessary to be known.

Besides that, I have said in the preceding Chapter, that (Quis) is used in an
Interrogative Speech, instead of (Qui;) and then has it the Verb in the
Indicative, and this (Quis) going before (Can, Could or Should) has the Verb
in the Potential Mood; It is needful that you know that after these Particles
(Si, Nisi, Ne) (Quis) is most appositely put for (Aliquis;) As, if any body
comes, Si quis venerit: If he says any thing unseasonably, Si quid incommode
dixerit: Least he do any thing rashly, Ne quid temere and inconsulto agat: And
if it chance that after these above-written Particles, (Si, Nisi, etc. you are
to make use of the Feminine of (Quis,) which is (Quae, vel Qua,) or of the
Neuter of the Plural Number, which is likewise (Quae, vel Qua) you must make
use of (Qua;) As, if any storm begin to rise, Si qua excitetur tempestas: Least
there fall out some misfortune, Ne qua clades contingat: If any wars should
threaten us, Si qua bella nobis imminerent: Least some evil befall us unawares,
Ne qua mala nos incautos opprimant.

(Quis) being put Interrogatively, with the Potential Mood, is equivalent in an
Affirmative Speech to (Nemo;) As, who would approve these things? Quis haec
approbet? which in signification is the same with Nemo haec approbet: and if it
be a Negative Speech, (Quis) is equivalent to (Omnes;) As, Quis haec non
approbet? Who would not approve these things? which is the same that, Omnes
haec approbent.

(Quid) is often and most elegantly put in place of a Substantive; As, Quid
Hominis est? quid Mulieris? pro quis Homo est, quae Mulier: What sort of man is
he? What sort of woman is she? So we say, quid animi, quid consilii, quid
causae, quid rei.

(Quis) going between two Verbs, has the last of them in the Conjunctive Mood,
if it be the Nominative to it* As, I know; not if any body has told him this,
Nescio number quis illi hoc dixerit.

(Quantus) is sometimes put as a Substantive in the Neuter Gender; As; Tantum
Agri, Quantum Pecuniae; and if (Quantus, and Qualis) go between two Verbs, and
be the Nominative to the last Verb, then they have it in the Subjunctive Mood;
As, you cannot believe how much I love you, Vix credas quantum te diligam: You
do not consider what man he is, Non attendis qualis vir sit.

When (Cum) is an Adverb of Time, and signifies (When,) it is put with the
Indicative, says the Grammarians; As, Cum Amo, when I Love, Cum Doceo, when I
teach: But notwithstanding it is put with the Subjunctive Mood, rather then the
Indicative; When it goes before a time past; As, when I was writing, Cum
Scriberem, vel Scribebam: He holds his peace when he has said many things,
Tacet cum multa dixerit, vel dixit: He did play when he had studied, Ludebat
cum studuisset, vel studuerat: The which you are to do also with (Postquam) as,
he does study after he has prayed, Studet postquam oraverit, vel oravit: After
he had prayed, Postquam oraverat, vel oravisset.

Although that (Quando) an Adverb of Time, has the same signification with
(Cum;) Nevertheless it is not put with the Subjunctive but with the
Indicative: If (Cum) signify (Seeing) then it has always the Subjunctive;
As, I will go visit my Cousin, seeing I am so near, Ibo visurus cognatum cum
illi sim proximus.

(Quamquam, Etsi, Tametsi,) have after themselves the Indicative; but (Quamvis,
Etiamsi,) will have the Subjunctive, neither is it needful to set down the
Examples.

CHAP. III. How to distinguish (Quidam) with (Aliquis, or Quispiam) and
concerning the Proprieties of (Quispiam and Vllus)
When you use the Preterit or Imperfect Tense, you must make use of (Quidam,)
because it signifies a certain or determinate thing, which is particular to
these Tenses, seeing a thing being done is no more indefferent to be or not to
be done; As, he sent to me one of his Servants, then it is no more indifferent
which of them he may send, Peter or Paul; but one of them particularly is sent,
and so you say, Misit ad me quendam e suis.

But if your speech be not limited to a certain and determinate person, as it
is, when you use the Future Tense; because if you be to do a thing, it is
indifferent to do it this way, or another way; or, if there be many in your
choice to do this or the other thing, and so no limitation; In this case I say
you must use (Aliquis, or Quispiam;) As, I will send you one of my men, Mittam
ad te e meis aliquem, vel quempiam meorum: so we say by the former Rules,
Quidam me rogavit: A certain man inquired for me, Rogabit me quispiam: Some
body will inquire for me; because the last Verb is of the Future Tense, and so
no limitation; and the first is of the Preterit Tense, and consequently of a
determinate thing.

Albeit you will find in some Authors (Quispiam) instead of (Quidam;) yet this
is rather to be remarked then followed.

Though (Quisquam and Vllus) be almost of the signification that (Quispiam) is
of, yet they differ from it in this, that they are never used but in an
Interrogation, Negation, Doubt, or Inhibition; As, is there any man in the
World more greedy? Number quisquam est Mortalium magis avarus? There is none that
can perform these things, Haud ullus est qui haec praestare queat: If ever a
man was delighted with Music, Si quisquam fuit qui Musica caperetur: I forbid
any man to come hither, Veto ne huc accedat quisquam.

(Quisquam) has after it most elegantly the Genitive; As, An hoc dubitavit
quisquam omnium quin prudentia fortitudini esset Anteponenda: Was there ever a
man that doubted, but wisdom ought to be preferred to strength, An quisquam
gentium est aeque miser? Is there under Heaven a man so miserable?

(Quisquam) is sometimes put with (Vnus) or (Alter;) As, Ne quisquam unus malis
artibus postea esset tam Popularis: Least that any in time coming should make
himself Popular by unlawful means, Non est alter hodie quisquam illo faelicior:
There is none in the World this day more happy then he.

Lastly (Quisquam) may be put instead of (Quamvis or Quilibet;) As, Nisi vos
fortiores cognovissem quoquam, id est, quovis vel quolibet.

CHAP. IV Of the Pronoun (Quisque.)
(QVisque) which is the same in signification with (Vnusquisque,) goes after a
Superlative most elegantly; As, Optimus quisque ita sentit; It is the opinion
of every good man, Optimus quisque aequissimo animo moritur: The best man dies
with greatest Indifference, Vt quisque optime decit, ita maxim decendi
facilitatem tenet: The more a man is eloquent, the easier he finds it to
express himself.

It is found also going after (quo) with the Superlative; As, in this passage
of Cicero, quo quisque te maxim cognatione attingebat, ita maxim manus tua
putabatur: The nearer that one is in Relation to you, the more he is believed
to be one of your Company; sometimes (quo, quisque) is found with the
Comparative, as, quo quisque modestior, eo omnibus charior; but the first way
is most in use.

Oftentimes (quisque) is put with (quotus) in an Interrogation; As, Quotus
quisque invenitur qui privatis Commodis salutem Publicam Anteponat? How many
are found that prefer the common good and happiness to their own particular
interests?

(Quisque) is put with the Ordinal Number, in these ways following; Decimus
quisque, Every tenth man: Vicesimus quisque, Every twentieth man, etc. Tertio
quoque die ad me venit, He came to see me every third day; Quarta quaque hora
comedit, He eats every fourth hour, or once in four hours: Quinto quoque anno
Romam petit, He goes once in five years to Rome, or every fifth year; in which
kind of Speeches (quisque) must ever follow and never preceed the Ordinal
Number.

It is likewise found going after (Sui, Suus, Qui, Quae, Quod;) As, Pro se
quisque contendit, Every one does what he can: Est sua cuique sententia, Every
one has his own opinion: Suas cuique dotes largitur Deus, God gives to every
one a Talent: Natura animantium cuique sua dedit Arma, Nature has given Arms
for defense to every living Creature: Quod cuique contigit, Which befell every
man: Videndum est diligenter cui quodque loco sit aptissimum: It must be
observed carefully for what place every thing is fittest, Permagni refert, quo
quidque tempore agatur; It is of great consequence the time that every thing is
done.

(Quisque) is repeated sometimes, as in this Example of Cicero; Quid, quemque,
cuique praestare oportet, What one man ought to do for another.

CHAP. V. Of the Pronouns (Alius, and Alter,) and wherein they differ.
When we speak of two things we make use of (Alter;) As, Of two Consuls, the
one was for Peace, and the other for War, Amborum Consulum alter ad pacem,
alter ad bellum incumbebat: The one was stouter, the other wiser, Alter
audacior erat, alter prudentior: One of them betrayed the Army, and the other
sold it, Alter exercitum prodidit, alter vendidit: The one side was strong in
men, the other in skilful Commanders, Alteri numero militum, alteri ducum
peritia praestabant.

But if in these ways of speaking, you speak of more then two, then must you
use (Alius;) As, some of the Senators did praise the action of Brutus, and some
did think it blameworthy, and others had not the courage to speak their mind,
Senatorum alii Bruti factum laudarunt, alii repraehend^bant, alii quid
sentirent exprimere non audebant.

There are some Scholars modest, and some Impudent, Scholasticorum alii
modesti, alii impudentes.

When you should repeat these Particles (Alter, Alius) you may make use of
(Vnus) for any of them; As, Vnus ludit, alter studet, The one plays, and the
other does study: Vnus garrit, alius tacet, and alius dormit, One talks,
another keeps silence, and another sleeps.

You will find sometimes (Nemo) put with (Alter;) As, that of Quintilian,
tantum inter se distant ut nemo sit alter similis; There is so great a
difference between them, that they have no resemblance to one another; Although
I must confess this way of speaking to be very rare, and rather worthy to be
remarked then followed.

(Alter) is often put for (Secundus;) As, Alter a Rege, Next to the King, or
the second man of the Kingdom: Altero quoque die, Every second day, or other
day, one of two days: Altero and vicesimo die, the one and twentieth day:
Altera die quam a Brundusio solvit, The day after he took sail from Brundusium:
Vnis and alteris literis, By my first and second Letters: Vnus aut alter dies
intercesserat, A day or two had past.

(Alter) does express the great similitude that is found between two; As, if
you would say of a great Orator, Est alter Tullius: He is another Cicero; or of
a Poet: Est alter Virgilius, he is another Virgil, or of a Gallant man: Est
alter Caesar: Alter Alexander, He is another Caesar, another Alexander: Hence
is it, that the Etymologists say (Frater) is Quasi fere alter, because of the
great resemblance and sympathy that is often found in Brothers.

If (Alter) ought to be repeated, then you may do according to what has been
already said, or else repeat (Vterque) in its place; As, Alter alterum odit,
the one hates the other, Vel uterque utrumque odit: Or here you may use a Verb
of the contrary signification, and say, Alter alterum non amat, vel neuter
alterum amat, by a Noun.

There be some other ways of speaking upon this Particle worthy of remark;
As, Alterum tantum, As much again: Etiamsi alterum tantum perdendum sit;
Although I should loose as much again, or twice as much, necesse est partem
pedis aut aequalem esse alteri parti, aut altero tanto, aut sequi esse majorem,
A part of a foot must of necessity be equal to another, or twice as bigg, or as
much and half as much. For (altero tanto) you may use duobus tantis, for
(tertio tanto) tribus tantis etc.

(Alius) Is repeated, and that very emphatically, for it comprehends, being
repeated, more in two words then four or five English words can express; As,
Alios alia delectant, Some are delighted in one thing, and some in another:
Aliis alius vivendi mos est, Some lives after one fashion, and some after
another; Alius alio dicendi stylo utitur, every man has his own way of
speaking. Aliud ex alio me quotidie impedit, I meet every day with new
hindrances; Aliud ex alio mihi occurrit, One thing calls to mind another;
Aliud ex alio malum, One evil brings with it another; Aliud ex alio peccato
non destitit, He commits fault upon fault; Alia ex aliis iniquior a
postulando, Demanding things more and more injust; Aliud ex alio quaerebat, He
went from one purpose to another; Aliis super alias epistolis mihi gratias
egit, He sent me letters of thanks one after another.

As (Alter) Does signify a Sympothy or similitude, so (Alius) signifies a
diversity, and dissimilitude; As, Alia mihi men's est, I am of another mind or
of a contrary mind; Alius es multo quam soles, You are far another man then
you use to be; Alia atque alia commemorabat, He told diverse things; Haec Herba
alio atque alio loco exoritur; This Herb grows in many places; Alium atque
alium Dominum sortientur, They will choose diverse Masters; Rem eandem alio
atque alio verbo efferre novit, He can express one thing diversely, and by the
Adverbs, (Alias and Alio) you say Aliud alias de iisdem rebus indicant, They
think sometimes one thing, and sometimes another concerning one thing; Simia and
sorts ipsas disturbavit, and alias alio dissipavit, The Ape did trouble the
Lots, and threw some one way some another.

CHAP. VI. Of the Pronounes (Sui, and Suus)
AMongst all the Latin Particles there is none more hard to be understood or
fuller of doubts and incertaintie then those two (Sui, Suus) for oftentimes the
Masters themselves are mightily put to it, yea and often fail. Wherefore many
learned Grammarians, have often strived to clear these mistakes and
difficulties; but by the too great abundance and diversity of Precepts, the
young beginner falls into greater mistakes then before. Wherefore I will for
remedy hereof, make only use of one observation, which as it is easier put in
practice then many, so of all, I know it to be the best and surest for this
purpose.

When (Sui and Suus) and the Nominative of the preceding Verb, belong both to
one and the same Person; and the English Particles of these pronounes, to wit,
(Him, His, Hers, Theirs,) cannot without altering the true sense, be rendered by
(Of Him, Of Her, Of Them,) then you use to express them in Latin by these
reciprocal Pronouns (Sui, Suus,) But these two conditions being wanting, you
ought to make use of (is, ipse, ille,) the proof hereof may be shown in one
example; The Master Loves his Scholar for his modesty, Magister amat
discipulum suum propter modestiam ejus; Here (suus) and the Nominative of the
Verb Preceding, belongs both to the same Person, to wit, (Magister;) but the
last (his) in the English, goes to the Scholar and not to the Nominative of
the Verb, (Amat.)

Next you cannot change the first (his) by (of him) and keep the right sense;
for if you say the Master loves the Scholar, of him, its understood that of
another man, and not his own Scholar; but the last (his,) may very well be
changed by (of him,) because it is not the Masters modesty, but of some other
man; to wit, of his Scholar.

Neither imagine with your self that to the putting of (sui and suus) both
these conditions must be had, it is sufficient if you find the last, though
the first be wanting, As, Aiunt Jacobum and suum filium hinc profectos esse,
They say that James and his son are gone from hence; you cannot say here, (the
son of him;) otherwise it is of another man then James; but the Nominative of
the Verb, is (homines,) and so it does not with (suus) belong to the same
person.

Further, that you may more easily know when (suus) and the Nominative of the
Verb goes both to one and the same person, look if the Substantive Noun with
which it agrees, appertains to the Nominative of the Verb; As, (discipulus)
in the former example, appertains to the Nominative (Magister) therefore
(suus) which goes with (discipulus) as with its Substantive, and the
Nominative of the Verb, belongs both to one person.

For the demonstrative (sui) your English, may give you assurance when it
should be put, to wit when you have (himself, or her self;) As, John loves
himself, Joannes se amat, vel seipsum, aut semet amat.

And to know when the Particle (him) is put by (sui) look if (him) and the
Nominative of the preceding Verb (but with all of the most noble and most
considerable Verb) (for often there goes two or more Verbs before it) belong
to one person, which if it come so to pass, requires (sui,) and if not, one
of those, (is, ille, ipse;) As my Brother prays you to write to him, Frater
meus te rogat ut ad se scribas. Here (him) is the same thing with the
Nominative to (rogat.) Marcellus recommendeth his son to you, and prays you
to keep him in his homage, Marcellus commendat tibi filium suum, atque petit ut
eum in officio contineas. (Him) is not the same thing here with the person that
recommendeth or prays: Wherefore I use one of these three (ille, is, ipse) If
you are in doubt whether to put (sui, suus,) or (ille, is.) You may for greater
security, make use of (ipse,) which participateth both of the Reciprocol
Pronouns signification, and of the Relatives.

When there may be an Amphibulogie in following the preceding rule, you must
not use it, but change the Active into a Passive; As here, Petrus amat amantes
se, it is doubtsome whether Peter loves those that love him self, or those
that love themselves, for the Latin can suffer both ways, Frater meus
indignatur quod condiscipulus suus accuset se negligentiae: here (se) may go
with the Nominative of the first Verb (Frater,) or with (condiscipulus) the
Nominative to (Accusat.) Wherefore to speak more clear; Frater meus indignatur
quod a condiscipulo negligentiae accusetur; Petrus amat eos a quibus redamatur.

Sometimes the sense is so clear, that though the Pronounes could agree with
diverse things without altering the Latin Concordance, yet you need not change
your Verbs; As, Petrus rogat Paulum ut ad se scribat; here (se) belongs to
(Petrus) because if it went to (Paulus,) then it would be out of sense: For no
man is requested to write to himself; but if you say Petrus rogat Paulum ut res
suas curet, Peter requesteth Paul to look to his affairs, it is doubtsome both
in English and Latin, for (suas) may as well be meant of the affairs of Peter
as of Paul, and so may (his) and by changing the voice of your Verb, the doubt
will yet remain; so this doubt or any of this kind cannot be cleared better,
then by referring the Pronoun (suus) to the principal Verb (rogat,) and so it
goes with Peter's affairs, and not with Paul's, and if it were, Petrus monet
Paulum ut res suas curet, (suas) is to be understood as belonging to Paul's
affairs, because we admonish our friend to have a care of his affairs, and we
request him to look to ours.

When the Verb (videtur) is an Impersonal, that is, has no Nominative, then it
has after it self the Pronounes (ille, is;) As, Vbi Caesar Romam venit visum
est ei senatum cogere, When Caesar came to Rome, he thought good to Convocate
the Senate: but being taken personally, id est* having a Nominative, then it
will have after it the reciprocal Pronoun (sui;) As, Petrus videtur sibi esse
doctissimus, Peter imagines himself very learned.

CHAP. VII. Of the Negative Particles, Non, Haud, Nemo, Nunquam, Nullus, Nihil,
Nec, Neque, etc.
WE say Commonly in Latin, (duo negativa saciunt affirmativum) two Negatives
make an Affirmative, but to come to the right knowledge of this axiom, you
must look to the ordering and placing of the Negatives.

First, If these Adverbs, (Non, Haud, Minime,) be put after (Nemo, Nunquam,
Nullus, Nihil:) It is true that the affirmation, resulting from these Particles
so placed, is diametrally opposite to a negation; As, Nunquam non, id est
semper, nemo non, vel nullus non, id est, omnes, nihil non, id est, omnia.

If (non) go before these Particles* there will not be so great a contrariety
and opposition betwixt the Affirmation and Negation; As, Non nunquam, id est,
aliquando, non nullus, id est aliquis, non nihil, id est aliquid.

When the Conjunctions (Nec neque) goes before a Negation, the Speech is
Affirmative; As, Neque illum non amo, id est illum amo, neque sum nescius, id
est, probe scio, nec vel neque nego, id est fateor.

When (Nec, Neque) follows any Negative, they cannot make an Affirmative
Speech, although you should repeat them never so often; As, Nunquam illum neque
vidi, neque attigi, I never saw him, nor touched him: Nemo unquam istum virum
nec laudavit nec amavit, No man ever did praise or love this man, Vsque adeo
partinax est and perfrictae mentis, ut nemo illum nec precibus flectere, nec
nimis movere potuerit, aut a suscepta semel sententia depellere; He is so
stuborn and fierce-minded that none can get him neither by prayers nor
threatenings to leave off the opinion that he once undertakes.

CHAP. VIII. Of the words (Patria) and (Gens.)
When the word (Patria) is accompanied with any of the possessive Pronouns,
either in Latin or English; As, Meus, Tuus, Suus, Noster, Vester, Mine, Thine,
His, Ours, Yours, it is made use of; As, I have foughten for my Country,
Pugnavi pro Patria mea: Cicero did save his Country, Cicero Patriam suam ab
interitu vindicavit.

But when it is not accompanied with these Pronouns, then you must make use,
for expressing (Country) Of Regio, Ager, Provincia, Solum, Locus, Pars, Gens,
and other such like; As, Ulysses traveled over many Countries, Ulysses varia
loca peragravit: Hannibal did west Italy, Agrum Italicum vastavit Hannibal:
Pompey did enlarge the Roman Empire by the Conquest of many Countries, Multas
Regiones, vel Provincias Imperio Romano Pompeius adjecit; My Brother is to come
very soon to this Country, In has patres Frater meus propediem est venturus:
This Country did at other times flourish in Learning, Gens haec olim Studiis
floruit.

Of (Gens) remark likewise, that it is not taken only for a Country, but also
for a Family; As, Gens Fabiorum, The Family of the Fabians: Vir ex Gente
Patritia, A man of a Noble Family, or of good Extraction.

To this Treatise I subjoyn another of great concernment, which is concerning
Verbs that have a particular, or diverse Regiment, and because there are four
which must be explained at large, because they contain greater difficulties
then others, I will set apart two Chapters for treating of them.

CHAP. IX. Of (Persuadeo) and (Moneo.)
So often as these two Verbs are of the same signification with (consulo,
hortor, impello) and others such like, they have the same Regiment with them,
that is, they have (Vt) going after them with the Verbs following in the
Conjunctive Mood; As, the Master persuades me to join piety with Learning, id
est, he counsels me, etc. Praeceptor suadet mihi ut cum literis pietatem
conjungam: He did often admonish me to shun Idleness, id est, he did often
exhort me, etc. Saepe me monuit ut otium fugerem.

But if (Persuadeo) signifies to make one believe, and (Moneo) to acquaint or
advertise, then the Verb following is in the Infinitive; As, he did acquaint or
or advertise me that my Brother was dead, Monuit me Fratrem fato functum esse:
He did make me believe that you were gone, Persuasit mihi te profectum fuisse.

It is to be observed that (Suadeo) is most commonly used in the first
signification, and (Persuadeo) in the second.

Although it may be known by the tenor and order of speech, what signification
(Moneo and Persuadeo) are of; yet because the Young Scholar oftentimes takes
not time to peruse the whole Speech, I shall give him two short and sure Rules
for this purpose.

The first is, when (Moneo and Persuadeo) are of the same signification with
(Consulo, Hortor, Impello, Auctor sum, etc.) Then the Verb following, is either
of the Indicative or Infinitive Mood, as may be seen in the preceding Examples
of the first signification; As, the Master does persuade me to add piety to
Virtue; here the Infinitive, or that I add piety to virtue, here is the
Indicative.

But when they are of the second signification, to wit, to make one believe, or
to advertise one, the English Verb following is in the Indicative, and not in
the Infinitive; As, he would make me believe that he has greatly obliged me,
and not, to have greatly obliged me.

The second is, that these two Verbs, being of the second signification, to
wit, for, Certiorem facio fidem facio, may have after them a Verb of the
Present, Preterit, or Future Tense; As, he makes me believe that he has
obliged me, or does oblige me, or will oblige me; but being of the first
signification, to wit, of Hortor, Consulo, Auctor sum, they will be put with a
Verb of the Present Tense; As he counsels me to distrust my Enemies.

There is yet another mark to come to the knowledge of what signification they
are of; which is, they being taken for (Consulo, Hortor, etc.) they have after
themselves a Verb of a diverse person; because no man does counsel himself, but
some other, as, Suades mihi ut fiam diligentior, te monuit ut melius negotia
curares.

Where you see in the first Example, the second and first Person, and in the
second, the third and second; but being of the second signification, to wit, of
Confirmo, fidem facio, etc. They with the Verb following are both of the same
person; As, you will make me believe that you have obliged me; here the
Nominative to (Make) and (Oblige) is (You.)

CHAP. X. Of the Verbs (Consentio, Dissentio) and their Synonimes.
THese Verbs, Consentio, Convenio, Congruo, and others such like, will have
after them the Person to whom the consent or agreement is made, in the Dative,
or in the Ablative* with (Cum;) As, Socrates Platoni, vel cum Platone
consentit, Socrates is of Plato's Opinion.

The Verbs that are of a contrary signification to these, govern the Ablative
with the Preposition; A, or Ab; As, Ab Aristotile Plato dissentit, Plato is not
of Aristotle's Opinion: Ab Antonio Caesar dissidet, Caesar disagreeth with
Antony.

But when there is two on more persons consenting or dissenting, copulated by a
Conjunction, and therefore will have the Verb in the Plural Number, then you
must put the person which ought to be in the Dative after Consentio, and that
which was to be put in the Ablative after Dissentio, in the Accusative with the
Preposition (Inter;) As, Socrates and Plato are of one mind, Socrates and Plato
inter se consentiunt, and not Sibi vel secum consentiunt, otherwise it were to
say that Socrates is of his own mind or opinion, and Plato of his; which is not
the sense of your English; So likewise Antonius and Caesar inter se d^ssident,
Antony and Caesar are at variance, or disagreeth; The reason hereof is, that
the Verbs (Consentio, Dissentio, etc.) must of necessity have two distinct
terms, to make a convenience or disconveniency betwixt the two persons.

Now (Petrus and Paulus) being thus coupled make but one term, unless they be
distinguished and multiplied by the Preposition (Inter) which has a
Disjunctive force with it; hence it follows that, if you had to put; Antony
dissenteth from himself, and Caesar from himself, you should not use (Inter) to
diversifie them, because Antony nor Caesar are not distinct from themselves,
although they both dissent from themselves, and so you say, Antonius and Caesar
a se dissentiunt, which is the same with, Antonius a se dissentit, Caesar a se
dissentit.

Although (Inter) cannot be put with a Noun of the Singular Number, because it
tends to a distinction of persons, yet if it be a Collective Noun, you may
use (Inter) because taken Collectively, this Noun is equivalent to the Plural
Number; As, Phylosophi inter se dissentiunt, and consentiunt, The Philosophers
do agree and disagree; but if you say, Phylosophi secum consentiunt, and a se
dissentiunt; It is, that every one in particular agrees or disagreeth with
himself; so likewise, Homines inter se amant, it is, men loves one another, but
Homines se amant, signifies every one loves himself.

A Catalogue of Verbs which have diverse Regiments and Constructions under one
signification.
JOhn Behourt, Scholar amongst the Jesuits, besides many worthy observations
wherewith he has enriched John Dispauter's Grammar; did make a little
Treatise, De varia verborum in vario sensu Constructione, Of the diverse
construction of Verbs of diverse significations; At the end whereof he did
promise another, De varia verborum in eodem sensu Constructione, Of the diverse
Construction of Verbs under one signification; but because he did never, nor
will not fulfill his promise, I have for the comfort of young Beginners,
gathered them out, and for their greater convenience, I have set them down
according to the Alphabet.

I will not herein, more then in my former Treatises be teadious, by setting
down the whole Text of the Writers out of which these Verbs are drawn, although
Behourt has done so in his De varia verborum in vario sensu Constructione; I
will only set down simply the Examples which I have drawn out of good Authors,
whose Authorities are holden for Rules in the Schools.

A.
ABdicare Magistrum, vel abdicare se Magistratu, To give over his Office.

Abrogare Legem, vel Lege, To abolish a Law.

Abjicere se alicui ad pedes, vel ad pedes alicujus se abjicere, To kneel down
to any Body.

Abnuere aliquid alteri, vel alteri de re aliqua abnuere, To refuse any thing
to any body.

Abdere in terra, vel in terram, To hide any thing under ground.

Abjudicare sibi libertatem, vel abjudicare se a liberate, To deprive himself
of liberty.

Abire Vrbe, vel ab Vrbe, To go out of Town; and this way may you put many
Verbs which have the Preposition repeated wherewith they are composed, or
understood, according to the Writers will; So we say promiscuously: Abesse,
Vrbe, Domo, Curia, vel ab Vrbe a Domo, a Curia, To be out of Town, from Home,
or from the Court: Exire Class, vel e Class, To go out of School: Ingredi
Templum, vel in Templum, To go into the Church: Adire aliquem, vel ad aliquem,
To go to one, etc.

Acquiescere rei alicui, vel in re aliqua, To rest, or take pleasure in any
thing.

Abstinere scelere, and a schelere, vel a schelere se abstinere, To refrain
from wickedness

Abundare re aliqua, vel in re aliqua, To abound in any thing.

Accedere ad Dei similitudinem, vel Deo ad similitudinem accedere, To resemble
God.

Adjicere, adjungere, appellere animum studiis, vel ad studia, To set his mind
upon his studies, by the Rule, Ternum pro quarto, etc

The which Rule comprehends a great many more Verbs of this same
construction, so we say, Accidere, and advolui pedibus alicujus, To fall at
ones knees: Abdere se literis and in literas, To betake himself to reading:
Accingere se operi and ad opus, To buckle, or prepare himself to his work.

Accommodare se tempori and ad tempus, To turn with the times.

Applicare scalas muris and ad muros, To scale the Walls: Alligare Arbori and
ad Arborem, To tie one to a Tree: Adrepere amicitiae, vel in amicitiam
alicujus, To creep into ones favor: Imminere occasioni, vel in occasionem, To
wait upon an occasion: Illabi animis and in animos. To enter into ones mind or
Affection: Imprimere aliquid animo and in animunt, To imprint or beat any thing
into ones memory: Instillare auribus aliquid, vel in aures, To pour any thing
into ones ears: Imponere onus alicui, ve^ in aliquem, To impose a charge or
burden on any man, and many others.

Abhorrere aliquem, vel ab aliquo, To have an aversion to any man.

Accedere alicui ad genua, vel ad genua alicujus, To prostrate himself at ones
knees.

Accipere aliquid ab aliquo, ex aliquo, and de aliquo, To hear something of any
body.

Acceptus est Plebi, in Plebem and apud Plebem, He is Papular, or much liked by
the People.

Accusare aliquem inertiae. inertia and de inertia, vel alicujus inertiam
accusare, To accuse one of negligence or slothfulness: We say likewise,
Aliquem in re aliqua Accusare.

Acceptum refer, vel in acceptum, To keep an account of any thing, and set it
down in the book of receipts.

Adaequare pietatem doctrinae, vel cum doctrina, To make equal piety with
devotion, or to be as devout as learned.

Adherescere rei alicui, in re aliqua, and ad rem aliquam, To adhear, or stick
to a thing.

Adhibere saevitiam aut severitatem in aliquo, and in aliquem, To use one
severely.

Admirari rem aliquam, vel de re aliqua, To marvel at any thing; Admirari
hominem in aliquo, vel aliquid in homine admirari, To marvel at something in any
man.

Admiscere aquam vino, vel cum vino, To mingle water with wine.

Admonere aliquem, aliquid, alicujus aut de aliquo, To admonish one of any
thing.

Adoptare aliquem, pro filio, vel aliquem sibi in filium adoptare, To adopt one
for his son.

Adesse judicio, in judicio, ad Judicium, To be present at the giving out of
Judgment.

Adulari aliquem, vel alicui, To flatter any body.

Aequiparare virtutes suas, ad virtutes alterius, vel cum Virtutibus, To
compare his Virtues with another man's.

Aggredi dicere, vel ad dicendum, To begin to speak.

Allicere aliquem ad benevolentiam, aut, allicere benevolentiam alicujus, To
obtain ones grace or favor.

Antecedere, antecellere, anteire alteri, aut alterum, To exceed, or out go
another.

Appellare Tribunos vel ad Tribunos, To appeal to the Tribunes.

Appellere Classem ad locum aliquem, aut Class appellere, To Arrive, or Land
at any place.

Arcere progressu, vel a progressu, To hinder one from advancing.

Adscribi in civitatem, in civitate, and civitati, To be enfranchised, or made
freeman of the City.

Aspergere sale carnes, vel salem carnibus, To salt meat; We say also, Maculis
vitam Aspergere, vel maculas vitae; To wrong ones Reputation.

Assentiri aliquid alteri, vel in aliquo, To be of one mind with another in
any thing.

For Verbs of this sort, beginning by the letter (B) there is seldom found
any, wherefore I pass to (C.)

C.
Caelare Argentum, argento and in Argento, To grave in Silver.

Capere aliquid manu, vel in manum, To take in your hand.

Capio taedium, odium, satietatem, hujus rei, and hujus rei taedium, odium,
satietas me capit, I am become weary of this thing.

Capere fructum laboris, and Industriae, vel ex labor and Industria, To reap
fruits of his Labors and Industry.

Carere re aliqua, and aliquando rei, and rem, To want any thing.

Cavere aliquem, vel ab aliquo, and eavere sibi ab aliquo, To take heed least
any man hurt you, or to distrust any body.

Cedere jus, vel de jure, To yield off his own Right.

Cedere honorem suum altere^, vel honor, To yield up his honor to another; So
we say, Cedere foro alicui, and curia, The trick of Bankers to be out of the
way, and so defraud him that had put money into their Bank.

Certare cum aliquo, and apud poetas, alicui, To contest with any man.

Circundare maenibus Vrbem, vel maenia Vrbi, To wall a Town.

Cogitare, cognoscere rem aliquam, vel de re aliqua, To think, or know of any
thing.

Cogitare animo, in animo, cum animo, To think with himself.

Colloqui cum aliquo, alicui, and aliquem, To speak with one.

Colere aliquem loco, vel in loco Parentis, To esteem one as a Parent.

Committere se fidei alicujus, vel in fidem, To confide, or trust himself to
one.

Committere existimationem suam alicui, vel de existimatione sua, To give up
his honor and reputation to another.

Commonere aliquem officii, officium, and de officio, To admonish one of his
duty.

Communicare cum altero rem aliquam, vel de re aliqua, To communicate or reveal
any thing to another.

Communicare honores alicui, vel cum aliquo, To make one partaker of his
honors.

Commutare fidem pecunia, vel cum pecunia, to sell his trust and faith.

Comparare accusatores alicui, and in aliquem, To suborne men to accuse others.

Confer vel comparare alterum alteri, vel cum altero, To compare the one with
the other.

Comprehendere memoriam rei, vel rem memoria comprehendere, To remember of any
thing.

Comprimere linguam alicujus, vel alicui, To put one to silence.

Concedere alicui doctrina vel de doctrina, To yield to one in matter of
Learning.

Concidit animus, vel animo, He loses courage, or he faints.

Concitare Expectationem sui, vel de se, To gain himself a good Reputation.

Conciliare sibi benevolentiam alicujus, and ab aliquo, To gain ones affection.

Conciliare alterum alteri, vel alterum cum altero, To reconcile two that had
fallen out.

Concludi in cavea and in Caveam, To be shut up into a Cave or dark place.

Condemnare aliquem Arrogantiae, Arrogantia and de Arrogantia, To condemn one
of Pride; and so of other Verbs of the like signification; Accusare, arguere,
insimulare.

Condere Corpus sepulchro, in sepulchrum, and in sepulchro, To bury any dead
Corpse.

Confidere firmitati Corporis and firmitate, To confide, or trust to his Bodily
strength.

Confiteri crimen, vel de crimine, To confess of his fault.

Conflictare morbo, vel cum morbo, To struggle or fight with a disease.

Congerere Titulos alicui and in Aliquem, To Honor one with Titles.

Congredi alicui, cum aliquo, and contra aliquem, To fall out with any man, or
to encounter him.

Congruit ejus sermo tuis literis, vel cum tuis literis, His discourse agrees
with your letters.

Consentire alicui, vel cum aliquo, to be of another man's mind.

Conjungere Pietatem Doctrinae, vel cum Doctrina, To add Piety to Virtue.

Conqueri fortunam and de fortuna, To complain of fortune.

Conscendere navem, and in navem, To embarke.

Conjunctum esse alicui and cum aliquo, To be familiar with any man.

Consequi aliquem Itinere, vel in Itinere, To wait upon one in a Journey.

Conserere manum, vel manu cum Hostibus, To come to hands with the Enemies.

Considere in aliquo loco, and apud aliquem locum, To sit down in some place.

Consulere male, de aliquo, and in aliquem, To use a man hardly.

Consulere alterum de re aliqua, and aliquid alterum consulere, To ask ones
advice concerning any thing.

Constat ei men's, vel constat mente, He is of the same mind without alteration.

Consuescere alicui, vel cum aliquo, To frequent ones company.

Contendere vires and nervos, vel viribus and nervis contendere, To employ his
force and power.

Contingere se inter se, and contingere inter se, To be allied with one
another, to touch one another in Lineage.

Convenit Petrus cum Paulo, vel inter Petrum and Paulum convenit, Peter and
Paul, do agree together.

Convenit hoc Petro cum Paulo, vel Petro convenit cum Paulo de hoc, Peter and
Paul, do agree in this.

Convincere aliquem maleficii, vel maleficium alicujus, To convince one of some
wicked deed.

Convivere alicui and cum aliquo, To live with one.

Cupere alicui, vel causa alicujus, To desire ones good.

D.
Damnari sceleris, To be condemned of some wicked deed.

Damnari de Vi, To be condemned for having used Violence.

Capite damnari, To receive sentence of Death, to be condemned to Die.

Damnari in Metallum, To be condemned to the Mines.

Decedere officio, vel de officio, To fail in his duty; and likewise we say,
Decedere, jure, sententia, provincia, via, vita, possessione, etc. vel de jure
de sententia, etc.

Decernere, aut deliberare rem aliquam, aut de re aliqua, To ordain, or consult
of any matter.

Decidere spe, ex spe, and de spe, To loose hopes.

Declinare de vitiis, vel a vitiis, To fly, or shun vice.

Declinare de via, vel declinare se extra viam, To go out of the way.

Defendere aliquem ab injuria, vel defendere injuriam alicujus, To save one
from receiving a wrong.

Defendere solemn, and a sole, To save one from the heat of the sun.

Defer Studium suum amicis, vel ad amicos, To offer his service to his
friends.

Deficit me animus, uel mihi, deficio animo, deficitur animus. I faint, or am
discouraged.

Defigere oculos in terram, vel in terra, To cast down his eyes.

Deflectere ex itinere, and iter deflectere de cursu, and deflectere se de
curriculo, To go out of the right way.

Delinquere aliquid, and in aliquo, To offend in something.

Depellere agnos lacte, and a lacte, To wean the lambs; so you say, Depellere
sententia, and a sententid, To make one change his opinion.

Deperire aliquem amore, vel amore alicujus, To be passionatly in love with any
one.

Deplorare miserias, and de miseriis, To lament calamities.

Deponere mentum in gremio alicujus, To lay his chin upon another breast.

Deponere malleolum in terram, To beat a hammer into the earth.

Deponere aliquid in fide, in fidem and apud fidem alicujus, To put any thing
in another man's trust.

Deprecari reditum alicujus ab aliquo, vel pro reditu alicujus aliquem
deprecari, To pray one, for the returning of another.

Derogare fidei testium, vel de fide, To derogate from the Testimony of witness.

Desistere sententia, a sententia, vel de sententia, To leave off, or forsake
his opinion.

Desperare salutem alicujus, saluti, vel de salute, To despair of ones health.

Deturbari spe, de spe, ex, spe, To be quite out of hopes.

Detrahere alicui and de aliquo, To detract, or speak ill of any one.

Detrahere dignitatem, vel de dignitate, To diminish ones honor and reputation.

Detrahere pretio, and de pretio, To take, or withdraw from the price of any
thing.

Diffidere alicui, and de aliquo, To distrust one.

Dimicare de re, vel pro re, To contest about any thing.

Disceptare controversias, vel de controversiis, To examine differences.

Disputare aliquid, vel de aliquo, To dispute, or treat of any thing.

Discrepare sibi, vel a se, in re aliqua and de re aliqua, To disagree, or
dissent from himself in something, to contradict himself.

Dissentire ab aliquo, and cum aliquo, To be different in opinion from another
man.

Dividere Nummos militibus and in milites, To distribute Money amongst
Soldiers.

Dare pecuniam faenori, faenore, and in faenus, To give money upon interest.

Dare aliquid in manu and in manum, To give into ones hand.

Dare operam alicui exercitationi, and in aliquam exercitationem, To betake
himself to some exercise.

Doleo Caput, Capite, vel a Capite, vel Caput mihi dolet, My Head does pain me.

Doleo Patris interitum, interitu, and de intoritu, I am much troubled for my
Fathers death.

Dubitare aliquid and de aliquo, To doubt of any thing.

Ducere gloriae, vel in gloriam aliquid, To esteem any thing honorable.

Dominari alicui, and in aliquem, To dominier over one; and likewise, Fortuna
in rebus dominatur, Fortune dominiereth over all things.

E.
Efferri funere, and cum funere, To be carried forth to burial.

Efflagitare auxilium alicujus, vel ab aliquo, To ask help of any man.

Egredi urbe, urbem, extra urbem, To go out of Town.

Elabi e telis alicujus, and inter tela, To escape ones darts.

Elaberare in re aliqua, and aliquando, in aliquid, To take pains upon any
thing.

Emergere, aquis, ex aquis, and extra aquas, To go out of the water.

Eminebat ex ore, crudelitas, vel in ore, cruelty did appear in his face.

Emungere alicui argentum, and aliquem argento, To cheat any man of his money.

Enunciare Arcana hominibus, and apud homines, to divulge secrets.

Ire subsidio and in subsidium, to assist, or help one.

Eripere alicui vitam, vel aliquem vitae, to kill one.

Eripere aliquem morti, vel a morte, to deliver one from death.

Exardescere gloriae cupiditate, and ad gloriae cupiditatem, to be much
ambitious of honor.

Excellere aliis, inter alios, preter alios, and super alios, to exceed others.

Excidit memoria hujus rei, vel haec res excidite memoria, they speak no more,
or mind no more of this thing.

Excusare se alicui, and apud aliquem, to excuse himself to any one.

Excusare aliquid and de aliquo se excusare, to excuse himself of any thing.

Eximere vinculis and e vinculis, to take one out of prison or bondage.

Exorare, expetere, exposcere aliquid deos, aut a diis, to ask the gods
something.

Expectare ducem in castris aut in castra, Supp. venturum, to expect the
Captains coming to the Camp.

Explere animum alicujus, and alicui, To give all satisfaction and contentment
to a man.

Expostulare cum altero in injuriam, vel de injuria, To complain to one of the
injury that he has done.

Exprimere vocem alicujus, and alicui, To draw a discouse or words out of one.

Exprimere verbum verbo, e verbo, de verbo, To tell, or give an account of a
thing, word by word.

Exprobare vitia adversariorum, vel adversariis vitia exprobrare, To object to
our adversaries their vices.

Expellere, expedire, ejicere, exterminare extrudere, exturbare, Vrbe, vel ex
Vrbe, To' banish one from off the Town, or out of the Town.

Exuere vestem alicui, vel vest aliquem, To take off ones clothes.

Exuere Jugum, and exuere se Jugo, To shake off the Yoke.

F.
Id facit a reo, pro reo, cum reo, That makes for him that is Arraigned.

Facere bona alicui, and in aliquem, To do good to any one.

Facere mentionem alicujus, and de aliquo, To speak or make mention of any one.

Facere aliquid consilio, vel de consilio, alicujus, To do a thing by another
man's Counsel.

Fastidire aliquem, vel alicujus, To loath any one.

Far fructum victoriae, and a victoria, To reap the fruit of the Victory.

Fateri scelus and de scelere, To confess his wickedness.

Fraudare milites stipendio, vel militum stipendium, To defraud the Soldiers
of their pay.

Fugere conspectum alicujus, and e conspectu, To fly or shun any body.

Fungi officio, and officium, To do his duty.

So frui re, and frui rem, To enjoy any thing.

G.
Gaudere gaudio and gaudium, To rejoice exceedingly.

Gigni capite, and in caput, To be born with the head first.

Gloriari aliquid, de re aliqua, ob aliquam rem, To glory in any thing.

Gratulari adventu alicujus, vel de adventu, vel adventum, To be glad at ones
return.

H.
Habere aliquid certum, vel pro certo, compertum vel pro comperto, To hold a
thing for certain.

Habere quaedam dubia, in dubiis and pro dubiis. To doubt of some things.

Habere aliquid derelictum, and pro derelicto, To leave or abandon any thing.

Habere aliquid despicatui, vel despicatum habere, To despise a man.

Habere alicui praecipuum honorem, vel habere aliquem praecipuo honor, and in
honor habere, To respect and honor one greatly.

Habere aliquem pro patre, loco patris, and in loco patris, To look upon one,
or esteem him as a Father.

Habere aliquid odio, in odio and in odium, To hate any thing.

Habere orationem ad aliquem, apud aliquem, and cum aliquo, to make a speech
before one.

Habere in potestate, vel in potestatem, To have in power.

Belle habere, and belle habere se, To be in good health.

Habere usum alicujus rei, vel in aliqua, To be well seen, or expert in any
thing.

Haeret peccatum illi, and in illo, All the fault is in him.

I.
Jactare se de re aliqua, in re aliqua, ob rem aliquam, and rem aliquam
jactare, To vaunt or brag of any thing.

Illabi animis, animos and in animos, To get into ones affection or good
likeing.

Illudere alicui, and aliquem in aliquem, and in aliquo, To scorn or jest at
one.

Imminere occasioni and in occasionem, To look or wait for an occasion.

Impertire alicui salutem, vel aliquem salute, To greet or salute one.

Implicari morbo and in morbum, To be detained by sickness.

Imponere summam manum rei, and in re, To accomplish any thing.

Imprimere aliquid animo, in animo, and in animum, To imprint any thing in ones
mind.

Incessit me cupido, vel mihi, I have a desire to, etc.

Incidere in aes, and in aere, to grave in brass, or cut out upon brass, so
likewise, Incidere Marmori, to cut in Marble.

Inclinat acies, vel inclinatur, The Army takes the flight, or turns their
backs.

Includere in carcerem, and in carcere, to put into prison.

Incubare ova, and ovis, to sit on eggs.

Incumbere gladio, vel in gladium, to fall upon his sword.

Incursare aliquem, vel in aliquem, to justle, or dash one against another, to
run against another.

Indicare Conjurationem, vel de Conjuratione, to discover a Plot or Conspiracy.

Inducere animum, vel in animum, to imagine, or call to mind.

Induere sibi vestem, aut se vest induere, to put on his clothes.

Induere se in laqueos, to ensnare himself.

Inire gratiam ab aliquo, vel cum aliquo, to oblige a man.

Infer periculum capiti alicujus, and in periculum capitis aliquem infer,
to accuse one of a capital crime.

Infundere aliquid naribus, in nares, per nares, to pour any thing into the
nostrils.

Indulgere alicui, aliquem, and in aliquem, to make much of one, and use him
kindly.

Ingerere probra and convitia alicui, and in aliquem, to reproach a man.

Ingredi orationem and in orationem, to begin a discourse.

Inniti hastae, vel hasta, to lean upon a Pike, or Halbard.

Insistere rei, in re, and in rem, to be bent, or earnest upon any thing.

Insistere viam, vel iter, to keep on his way.

Insputare aliquem, and alicui, to spit upon one.

Insternere lectum pallio, vel lecto pallium, to spread a cloak upon a bed.

Intercludere commeatum hostibus, vel hosts commeatu, to hinder an Army from
geting victuals.

Interdicere alicui purpura and purpuram, to forbid one to wear Scarlet.

Interesse convivio, and in convivio, to be at a Feast.

Interjacet via Romam and Venetias, vel Romae and Venetiis, vel inter Romam and
Venetias, there is a way betwixt Rome and Venice.

Intueri aliquem, and in aliquem, to look upon one.

Invadere Vrbem, and in Vrbem, to assault a Town.

Invasit cupiditas animis, animos and in animos, I have got a desire to, etc.

Invehi Vrbem, and in Vrbem, to be brought into the Town by force.

Insultare alicui, and in aliquem, to insult upon a man.

Invidere alicujus dignitati, vel alicui dignitatem, to envy ones honor.

Invitare aliquem Hospitio, vel in Hospitium, to invite one to lodging.

Invocare subsidium alicujus, aut aliquem in subsidium, to call to one for help.

Jungere pietatem doctrinae, vel cum doctrina to add piety to learning.

Irruere in aliquem, and aliquando active, irruere aliquem, to rush, or run
upon one.

Jungere currum equis, vel jungere equos ad currum, vel currui, to put the
horses in the Coach.

L.
Laborare invidia, vel ex invidia, to be greatly envied and hated.

Laborare capite, and e capite, To have a pain in the head.

Laborare ad rem aliquam, vel circa rem aliquam, To take pains upon a thing.

Levare alicui onus, and aliquem onere, To lighten one of his burden, so we
say, Levare hominibus curam, dolorem, metum, laborem, paupertatem, vel levare
homines, cura dolor, metu, labor, paupertate.

Liberare aliquem culpa, and interdum culpa, To declare one innocent, or not
guilty of what he is accused.

Male loqui alicui and de aliquo, To speak ill of one.

Ludere ludum, vel ludo, to play a game, or at a game.

Ludere aleam, aut alea, to play at Dice, or other games of hazard.

M.
Manner ad Vrbem, vel in Vrbe, ad exertitum, vel in exercitu, To stay in Town,
or in the Army.

Sententia mihi manet, vel maneo in sententia, I am still of my former opinion.

Manat arbor picem vel pice, vel pix manat ex arbore, The pitch dropeth out of
the tree.

Mederi vulneribus, and contra vulnera, To cure wounds.

Meditari rem aliquam, aut de re aliqua, To think of any thing.

Memini me videre, vel memini videre, and vidisse, I remember to have seen.

Mergere aliquem aequore, in aequore, sub aequore, To dip, or plunge one in the
Sea.

Metuere alicui and pro aliquo, To be in fear for one.

Mirari aliquid and de aliquo, To marvel at any thing.

Miscere aquam Vino, vel Vinum aqua, To mix water with Wine.

Moderari cupiditatibus, and cupiditates, To bridle or moderate his passions.

Maerere alicujus mortem, and morte alicujus, To be troubled for the death of
any one.

Monere aliquem alicujus rei, aliquam rem, and de re aliqua, To advertise one
of any thing, and sometimes, monere alicui.

Morari apud aliquem, and cum aliquo, To stay, or live with one

Movere aliquem senatu, and e senatu, to put one out of the Senate, or
Parliament.

Mutare pacem Bello, and in Bellum, to change Peace into War.

Mutare se loco, vel mutare locum, to change his room or place.

Mutare Palium Vest, vel cum Vest, to change his Cloak for a Garment.

N.
Narrare alicui pericula sua, and de periculis, to tell one of his dangers

Niti conjectura and in conjectura, to build upon ones conjecture.

In ejus vita nitebatur salus civitatis, on his life, was depending the safty
of the city.

Nocere alicui, and sometimes aliquem, to hurt any body.

Nupta est Caesari, vel cum Caesare, She is married to Caesar.

O.
Obambulare foribus, vel ante fores, to walk before the gate or door.

Obequitare Agmen, vel Agmini, to ride round about the Troops or Army.

Objicere aliquid crimini, vel in loco criminis, to object any thing as a
fault, or crime.

Oblivisci injuriam, vel injuriae to forget an injury.

Obrepere animis, and in animos, To creep in to ones affection insensibly.

Obrepit te fames, Hunger will presently come upon you.

Obruere terra, vel in terra, To hide under ground.

Obtrectare laudibus alieujus and aliquando lauds, To detract from ones praise.

Obvenire haereditate, vel ex haereditate, To fall by inheritance.

Observare oculis and ante oculos, To appear to the eye.

Obumbrare domum, vel domo, To overshaddow the house.

Obvertere signa hosti, and in hostem, To turn the Ensigns toward the Enemy.

Occumbere morti, mortem, and morte, to die.

Occupare se ad aliquod negotium, and in aliquo negotio, To be occupied in
doing of any thing.

Occupare pecuitiam faenore alicui, vel apud aliquem, To give unto one money
upon interest.

Offendere alicui, and aliquem, To hurt or offend one.

Offendere in scopulis and ad scopulos, To hit, or hurt himself against a Rock.

Offendere animum alicujus, and animum alicui, To offend one, or move him to
anger.

Opponere se periculis, and ad pericula, To expose himself to danger.

Opponere manum oculis, and ante oculos, To put his hand before his eyes.

Oppugnare aliquem capite, and fortunis, and alicujus caput, and fortunas
oppugnare, To labor to bring one in danger of life and goods.

P.
Participare aliquem consilii, vel consilium cum aliquo, To make one partaker
of his Intentions.

Pellere curia vel e curia, To put, or thrust out of the pleading place.

Pendet animus meus, pendet mihi animus, vel pendeo animo, I am uncertain, or
in doubts.

Pendere ex arbore, vel in arbore, To hang upon a tree.

Pendere paenas sceleris, and pro scelere, To suffer for his wickedness.

Pensare laudem crimine, vel cum crimine, To recompense praise with reproach.

Penetrare in Vrbem, To go into the heart of the Town.

Penetrare se in fugam, To take the flight.

Penetrare se in speluncam, To go into a Cave or Den.

Percontari aliquid aliquem, ex aliquo, ab aliquo, vel aliquem de re aliqua
percontari, To ask one any thing.

Permittere se fidei, and potestati, vel in fidem and potestatem alicujus, To
confide or trust to the discretion and power of another.

Persequi aliqnem vestigiis, and alicujus vestigia, To follow the footsteps of
another.

Personabat Vrbs tota clamoribus, vel clamores tota Vrbe personabant, Cries are
heard all the Town over.

Pervadere Agros, and per Agros, To pass through Lands or Countries.

Petere de aliquo, and poetice, aliquem, To ask at one.

Petere aliquid alicui, vel pro aliquo, To ask something for another.

Petere veniam errati, vel ex errato, To ask pardon for his fault or escape.

Pollet Auctoritate, aut pollet ejus Auctoritas, He has Power and Credit.

Ponere coronam in capite, and in caput, To put the Crown upon his head.

Ponere aliquem, in gratia aut in gratiam apud alterum, To bring one into
favor with another.

Ponere in oculis, and ante oculos, To lay before the eyes.

Ponere spem in re aliqua, and rem aliquam in spe, To put great confidence in
ang thing;

Ponere insidias alicui, and contra aliquem, To lay snares for any man.

Ponere diem totum in aliqua re, and in aliquam rem, To pass a whole day in
doing something.

Poscere aliquid alterum, vel ab altero, To require any thing from another.

Postulare injuriarum vel de injuriis aliquem, To accuse one of Injuries.

Potiri Regno, vel Vrbe, and Regni vel Vrbis, To make himself Master of a
Kingdom and Town.

Praebere se virum fortem, and praebere virum fortem, To show himself a Gallant
Man.

Praecavere insidias, and ab insidiis, To evite snares by foreseeing them.

Praecurrere aliquem, and alicui, To outrun one.

Praestare caeteris, inter caeteros, and aliquando caeteros to exceed others.

Praestare strenuum Ducem, vel se strenuum Ducem, to show himself a Courageous
Captain.

Praestringere oculos alicujus, and alicui, to dim, or dazzle ones eyes

Procumbere pedibus alicujus, ad pedes, and ante pedes, to fall at ones feet.

Prodere memoriae vel memoria, to leave in Record.

Prohibere aditum alicui, vel aliquem aditu, to hinder one from entering.

Proficisci Romam, and ad Romam, To go to Rome.

Propugnare aequitatem, and pro aequitate, To fight for Equity, or maintain the
Truth.

Pugnare cum Host, aut contra Hostem, To fight against an Enemy.

Purgare crimen, and purgare se de crimine, To clear himself of a crime.

Putare nihil, and pro nihilo, To think of nothing.

Q.
Quaerere aliquid ex aliquo, ab aliquo, and de aliquo, To ask any thing from
any one.

Queri injurias and de injuriis, To complain of injures done him.

Queri alicui, cum aliquo, and apud aliquem, To complain to any body.

R.
Recordarirem aliquam, and rei alicujus, To remember of any thing.

Reddere Spiritum Patriae and pro patria, To dye for his Country.

Refer aliquem in reos, and inter reos, To put one among the number of guilty
persons.

Renunciare aliquid aut de re aliqua, To relate or tell any thing.

Reponere in numerum, and in numero, To put in the number of, etc.

Reposcere aliquid alterum, aut ab altero, To ask one any thing.

Repugnare veritati, aut contra veritatem, To gainsay the truth.

Rescribere Literis, and ad Literas, To answer ones Letters.

Respicere aliquem, and ad aliquem, to look back upon one.

Restituere sanitatem alicui, aut aliquem, sanitati, To give health to one.

Retinere memoriam alicujus rei, aut memoria aliquid retinere, To keep any
thing in mind.

Ridere aliquid and de re aliqua, To laugh at any thing.

S.
Scatere molestiis, and molestiarum, To be exceeding troubled.

Sedere equo, vel in equo, To ride or go on hors-back.

Sequi vestigiis aliquem, and alicujus vestigia, To follow ones footsteps.

Serpere humi, and per humum, To creep on the ground.

Solvere e portu, aut navem e portu solvere, To depart by Ship from any Haven.

Solvere obsidionem Vrbis, aut obsidione Vrbem, To raise a Seige from a Town.

Solvere vitam alicui, aut, aliquem vita solvere, To put one to death.

Spectare gloriam, honores, opes, vel ad gloriam, honores, opes, To aspire to
glory, honor and riches.

Haec domus spectat orientem vel, in orientem, This house stands Eastwardly.

Statuere exemplum in homine, and in hominem. To make one an example to others.

Stare ab aliquo, and cum aliquo, To take ones part, and be for him.

Stare fide and in fide, To keep his word.

Struere odium alicui, and in aliquem, to make one be hated.

Suadere pacem, and de pace, To be for making of Peace.

Subducerese pugnae vel e pugna, To retire himself from the fight.

Subire, vel succedere muris, muros, and ad muros, to go over, or scale the
walls.

Subjicere oculis, and sub oculos, to lay before ones eyes.

Supersedere pugnae, pugnam, and pugna, to defer the battle to another occasion.

Suscitare somno, vel esomno, to awake one from sleep.

Suspendere arbori, de arbore, and in arbore, to tie or hang up to a tree.

T.
Tacere aliquid, and de aliqua re, to conceal any thing.

Temperare lachrymis, and a lachrymis, to abstain from crying, and dicimus,
temperare se ab aliquo maleficio, to refrain from any wicked thing, or wicked
deed.

Timere aliquem, and timere sibi ab aliquo, to fear that he will receave harm
from any one.

Tradere custodiae, and in custodiam, to commit one to prison.

Transfigere aliquem gladio, per pectus, and pectus alicujus transfigere, to
run a sword through ones body.

V.
Vacare morbo, metu, and a morbo a metu, to be free of sickness and fear.

Vacare operi, and poetice in opus, To betake himself to the doing of some work.

Vagari orb, in orb and per orbem, To gad and wander up and down the world.

Valet auctoritate, aut valet ejus auctoritas, He is a man of power and credit.

Vehi equo, and in equo, curru, and in curru, To go on Horse, or in Coach.

Venire auxilio alicui, vel in alicujus auxilium, To come for ones assistance.

Vertere aliquid laudi, and in laudem, crimini, and in crimen, To praise, or
dispraise one in any thing.

Vigilare ad multam noctem, vel de multa nocte, To sit up late.

Vindicare se ab aliquo, and de aliquo, To revenge himself upon one.

Vindicare scelera alicujus in alterum and in altero, To punish one for
another crime, or misbehaviour.

Verbs, that in changing their Syntax, change their signification.
AEMulari alicui, id est, invidere, to envy, Aemulari aliquem, id est, imitari,
to imitate, or follow ones example.

Auscultare alicui, id est, obedire, to obey.

Auscultare aliquem, id est, audire, to hear.

Cupere alicui, id est, favere, to befriend one.

Cupere aliquem, id est, expetere, to desire any one.

Deficere al cui, id est, desse, to be wanting, or to fail to one.

Deficere aliquem, id est, destituere, to forsake, or abandon any one.

Do tibi literas, id est, do tibi perferendas ad alium, I give you letters to
deliver to another.

Do ad te literas, id est, per alium literas, ad te mitto, I send you letters
by some one.

Vaenerare alicui pecuniam, id est, dare ad usuram, to lend out money upon use.

Faenerare ab aliquo pecuniam, id est, accipere ad usuram, to borrow money upon
use.

Prospicio meae saluti, id est, salutem procuro, I take a care of my health.

Prospicio periculum, id est, praevideo, I foresee the danger.

Recipio tibi, id est, promitto, I promise to you.

Recipio librum, id est, iterum accipio, I receive a book which I had before.

Recipe te dominum, id est, i, go thou home.

Refero tibi, id est, narro, I relate or tell to you.

Refero ad Senatum id est, quod in consultationem venit, I refer it to the
Senat's Ordinance or Decree.

Vaco Philosophiae, id est, operam do, I study to Philosophy.

Vaco ad Philosophiam, id est, otium habeo, I have time to study to Philosophy.

Vaco culpa, id est, careo, I am blameless.

Vacat locus, id est, vacuus est, The place is empty.

Most easy and useful Rules which ought to be Learned and Practiced by all
those who are Inexpert in matter of Exercise or Composition.
I have oftentimes seen and had to do with Scholars, who knew the Speculative
part, or precepts of Grammar sufficiently; but when they came to the practical
part, or application of these precepts, they failed exceedingly; and being
studious to know the cause of this so frequent defect, I found it to be the
want of Method and Orderly proceeding in composing.

Some there is, who will impute this to the want of custom or use; but they
are much mistaken herein, for a custom or habit has for its chief end, to
beget a facility, and not a certitude, which is the effect of Rules and Method;
wherefore, it is necessary to learn exactly these methodical directions
following, and I can assure all those who will take pains herein, (by the
experience, that I have had of others) that one or two months practice will
improve them to admiration.

There is no word in the English, which cannot be reduced to one of the eight
parts of Speech.

If then you meet with a Noun Substantive or Pronoun in the English Argument of
your Exercise; the greatest difficulty, and first thing to be looked to, is, in
what case they must be put, which is known by finding out the Verbs that follow
in your Sentence; As, if you had, My Brother studies and thou plays; the Noun
is (Brother) the Pronoun (Thou) the Verbs are, (studies and plays;) question
now your self who, or what, does the action of these Verbs, to wit, who is it
that studies? and you will find it to be the Noun (Brother?) who plays? and it
will appear to be the Pronoun (Thou;) therefore the Noun and Pronoun are put by
the Nominative case, because they do the actions of the two Verbs following.

But if the Noun or Pronoun do not do the actions of the Verbs following, they
are not to be put by the Nominative case; but in the cases that the Verbs
following requires; As, I read Cicero, (Cicero) does not read, but (I;)
wherefore it is put by the Accusative, because the Verb requires an Accusative,
Lego Ciceronem; So, God sees him, (Him) is not the thing that sees but (God)
wherefore (Him) is put in the Accusative, because the Verb (Sees) requires it,
Deus videt eum.

The Nominative of a Passive Verb is that which suffers or receives the action
of another; As, I am loved (I) is the Nominative, because (I) receives the love
of another.

After you have made a right Concordance with the Nominative and it is Verb;
fail not in the next place to look what nature of Verb it is, whether an
Active, Passive, Neuter, Deponent or Common.

If it be an Active, or a Deponent of the Active signification, then it will
have the thing that the Action of it falls on in the Accusative; As, I worship
God, and love my friends; After you have found the Nominative to (Worship and
Love) which is (I) then enquire what or whom do I worship and love? and you
will find that the action of the first Verb, falls upon (God) and the action of
the second, upon (Friends;) therefore you say Veneror Deum, and amo Parents.

If the Verb be a Passive, or a Deponent of the Passive signification, then it
has after it the Noun or Pronoun in the Ablative, to wit, that Noun or
Pronoun, from whence proceeds the suffering; As, I am loved by you, here the
suffering proceeds from (You) because (I) does receive the love that comes from
(You;) Amor a te, if it be an inanimate thing that the suffering proceeds from,
it is put in the Ablative without a preposition; As, Obruor miseriis, I am
overcharged with miseries; and thus much of the Nominative and the Verb.

If you meet with an Adjective, do nothing with it before you know its
substantive, which is found out by taking your Adjectives (As, if you had a
good Citizen and valiant Soldier,) (good and vaviant) and say who or what is
good? and it will be found to be the (Citizen,) who or what is valiant? and you
will see it to be (Soldier,) having found out your Substantives then make them
agree; after see of what degree of Comparison your Adjective is; If it be of
the Comparative, remember to give it the Ablative.

If it be of the Superlative, it will have the Genitive.

Secondly, consider if it signifies Plenty or Scarcity, Pleasure or
Displeasure, and give it the cases after it, according to its nature.

To know in what case to put the Substantive, you first look if it be the
Nominative to a Verb or not; if it be, it is put by the Nominative, if not,
look then if the action of any Active Verb falls upon it, as has been already
said; or if it be an Instrument, wherewith an action is done, or of Price,
Time, Measure, Distance, the way how to do an action, the cause why any thing
is done, and proceed according to the Rules of the Syntax concerning these
Substantives, whereof here are Examples, Pugno ense, emi ass, latus tres
ulnas, vel tribus ulnis, disto tria mili aria vel miliaribus, dormio duas
horas, vel duabus horis; Surrexi hora sexta, lego magna difficultate, vel magna
cum difficultate, taceo pudore, vel prae pudore.

When you meet with a Relative, which is most commonly (That, Whom, Which, He,
She, They) The first thing you are to do, is to know the Antecedent, which is
done by taking the Verb or Adjective following the Relative, and questioning
your self by who, or which; As, my Brother whom I Love; (whom) is the Relative;
to know its Antecedent, then question your self so, who is it, or which is it,
that I love? It will appear to be (Brother,) then having made it agree in three
with the Antecedent, to wit, in Gender, Number and Person, (for in case it does
not agree, unless it go before the Antecedent: As, Quas scribo Literas, etc.)
The next care is, to see in what case it is to be put; to know this, look to
the Verb or Verbs following, and see if there be found a Nominative to them
besides the Relative; If there is one, then your Relative must be put in the
case that the Verb or Verbs will have after them, as in the former Example, my
Brother whom I love; here (whom) is not the Nominative to (Love) but (I,)
wherefore (whom) is put in the Accusative, it being the case that the Verb will
have after it; if there is no Nominative besides the Relative, then the
Relative is the Nominative; You must proceed this same way with the Antecedent
to know into what case it ought to be put.

But because young Apprentices are often mistaken in this Concordance, in
putting the Relative with the Verb that goes to the Antecedent, and
contrariwise in joining the Antecedent with the Verbs that have to do with the
Relative; I will give him a sure mark to distinguish what belongs to the
Relative, from that which belongs to the Antecedent.

Consider then so often as you have to do with a Relative and an Antecedent, if
the Relative sentence be as a Parenthesis, that is, a sentence having so little
a dependence or Connection with what goes before it, or after it, that both
these parts can make a perfect sentence without it; As, Caesar, when he came to
Rubicon, doubted whether he should pass over the River; here (when he came to
Rubicon) has so little a connection with what goes before it, to wit, (Caesar)
and the words that go after it, that they can make a perfect sentence without
it, thus, Caesar doubted whether he should pass over the River.

The Relative sentence, is as a Parenthesis, so often as the words going before
it, cannot make a perfect sense; but leaves the mind in suspense, and
expectation of something to come after; As, If I should begin to speak to one,
and say, Caesar, and stop here, would not he expect something to follow, and lie
in suspense till I should complete the sentence?

Thus having made clear what Verbs goes to the Relative, and what Verbs to the
Antecedent, it is easy according to what has been said, to know into what Case
to put them.

There remains now, I should speak of a Participle, seeing of a Noun, Pronoun
and a Verb, I have spoken sufficiently, and because I have treated of it at
large in some preceding Chapters, I shall only hint at these two things now:
first, that so often as it is to be put in the Future of the Passive, you put
the Dative after it in stead of an Ablative; As, Amandus est mihi probus, and
not a me.

Secondly, That you look if it has any dependence upon any Verb Following, or
Preceding, or not; if it has, put the Participle of your English by the
Subjunctive Mood, with (Cum) if it has not a Dependence, put it by the
Absolute Ablative.

This Dependence is known, if your English Participle, agrees with the
Nominative of any Verb of the sentence, as knowing that you was come, I came to
see you; Here (I) the Nominative to (came) agrees with (knowing,) and
consequently it depends upon the Nominative, for so you may say; I knowing that
you was come, did come to see you, Cum noverim te venisse, veni huc te visum.

And if there is no agreement betwixt the Participle and the Verb, then you put
it by the Absolute Ablative; As, The Soldiers being killed, the Captains did
fly; Here you cannot say as in the former example, The Captains being killed,
they did fly, wherefore there is no Dependence and so you may put it by the
Ablative, Occisis militibus aufugerunt duces.

If you find an Adverb, set it plainly down, unless it be of Quantity, Time,
or Place, and then you ought to give it a Genitive; of Place, there is four
sorts.

The first is, Adverbs to a Place, which are Huc, to this Place, isthuc illuc,
and them you use after Verbs of Motion to a Place.

The second is, Adverbs from a Place; As, Hinc, from hence, isthinc, illinc,
etc. and they are put after Verbs signifying a motion from a Place; As, Abeo,
Recedo, Venio.

The third sort is, Adverbs by a Place; As, Hac, By this Place, isthac, illac,
and they are put after Verbs signifying a Motion by a Place; As, Transeo,
praetereo, etc.

The last is Adverbs of Rest; As, Hic, here, isthic, illic, and they follow
Verbs of Rest; As, Quiesco, Sedeo. As concerning a Preposition, Interjection,
and Conjunction, there can be said nothing more of them then is said in the
Grammers.

ERRATA'S.
PAge 2. l. 3, 4. Polliccor. p. 3. l. 3. r. come. p. 20. l. 18. r. Intuitus. p.
22. l. 14. r. se. p. 31. l. 16. r. amicius. p. 35. l. 9. r. negligentiae. p.
36. l. 24. r. morem. p. 43. l. 25. r. alicujus. p. 46. l. 29. r. terrae. p. 48.
l. 17. r quinquaginta. p. 49. l. 25. r. take. p. 53. l. 12. r. redintegrant. p.
59. l. 13. r. your. p. 62. l. 2. r. duram. p. 63. l. 19. r. nititur. p. 67. l.
1. r. vini, and l. 20. r. partitive. p. 82. l. 17. r. alienabis. p. 83. l. 18.
r. nihil. p. 85. l. 24. r. then. p. 90. l. 1^. r. si^t. p. 105. l. 3. r.
singulos. p. 116. l. 28. r. th^se. l. 30. same p. a (.) p. 166. l. 21. r. send.
p. 167. l. 23. r. ill. p. 186. l. 1. r. Sympathy. p. 202. l. 25. r. scelere.

The Index.
CHap. 1. Of the Particle, (That.) p. 1 Chap. 2. Of the Particle, (What.) p. 16
Chap. 3. Of the Particle (Then.) p. 18 Chap. 4. Of the Particle (To.) p. 21
Chap. 5. Of the Particle (After.) p. 30 Chap. 6. Of the Particle (Because.) p.
33 Chap. 7. Of the Adverb (Otherwise.) p. 34 Chap. 8 Of the Particle (Against.)
p. 35 Chap. 9. Of (Not only) or (Only) alone. p. 38 Chap. 10. Of the Particle
(By and Through.) p. 40 Chap. 11. Of the Particle (For.) p. 44 Chap. 12. Of the
double Particle (Without. p. 50 Chap. 13. Of the Particle (According.) p 57
Chap. 14. Of the Particle (Upon.) p. 61 Chap. 15. Concerning the Particle (Of.)
p. 66 Chap. 16. Of the Particle (In) p. 71 Chap. 17. Of the Particle (If.) p.
80 Chap. 18. Of the Particle (When.) p. 84 Chap. 19. Of the Particle (Since.)
p. 87 Chap. 20. Of the Particle (Whether.) p. 89 Chap. 21. Of the Particle
(But.) p. 91 Chap. 22. Of the Particle (Ar.) p. 92 Chap. 23. Of the Particle
(Out.) p. 94 Chap 24. Of the Particles (Whiles) or (Till) p. 96 Chap. 25. Of
the Particle (Above.) p. 97 Chap. 26. Of the Particle (As.) p 99 Chap. 27. Of
the Particle (Would) p. 102 Chap. 28 Of the Particle (From) p. 103 Chap. 29. Of
the Verb (To Make or Cause.) p. 106


CHap. 1. How the Finite Mood, and all their Tenses may be changed according to
the Latin, when they are not to be reduced to the Infinitive Mood. p. 115
Chap. 2. How to put a Verb of the Finite Mood into the Infinitive Mood, in the
Tenses suitable to your Speech. p. 110 Chap. 3. Of the Difficulties upon the
Infinitive Mood. p. 125 Chap. 4. Of the Gerunds. p. 130 Chap 5. Of Participles
of the Present, and Preterit Tense. p. 135 Chap. 6. Of the Participles of the
Future Tense. p. 141 Chap. 7. How to reduce a Participle to the Finite Moods of
its Verbs. p. 145 Chap. 8. How, and when the Impersonal Verb should be reduced
to a Personal. p. 148 Chap. 9. When, and how you should reduce an Active to a
Passive, or contrarily p. 154 Chap. 10. What must be done when you join two
Verbs of a diverse construction with one word. p. 159 Chap. 11. Concerning the
mark of an Active Verb, and the Regiment of Passive Verbs, and Verbs of
Receiving. p. 161


CHapter, 1. Concerning the Relative Particles (Qui, Quae, Quod.) p. 166 Chap.
2. Of the Particles, (Quis, Quantus, Qualis, Cum, Postquam, Tame^si, Etiamsi,
Quamvis, Quando.) p. 174 Chap. 3. How to distinguish (Quidam) with (Aliquis or
Quispiam) and concerning the proprieties of (Quispiam and Ullus.) p. 177. Chap.
4. Of the Pronoun (Quisque.) p. 180 Chap. 5. Of the Pronouns (Alius, and Alter,
and wherein they differ. p. 182 Chap. 6. Of the Pronouns (Sui, and Suus.) p.
188 Chap. 7. Of the Negative Particles, Non, Hand, Nemo, Nunquam, Nullus,
Nihil, Nec, Neque, etc. p. 192


CHap 8. Of the words (Patria) and (Gens) p. 194


CHap. 9. Of (Persuadeo) and (Moneo.) p. 195 Chap. 10. Of the Verbs (Consentio,
Dissentio,) and their Synonimies. p. 198


A Catalogue of Verbs which have diverse Regiments and Constructions, under one
signification. p. 200 Verbs, that in changing their Syntax, change their
signification. p. 233 Most easy and useful Rules which ought to be Learned
and Practiced, by all those who are Inexpert in matter of Exercise or
Composition. p. 235


FINIS.

