A PROPHECY Lately Transcribed From an Old MANUSCRIPT Of Doctor Barnaby Googe
That lived in the Reign of Qu. Elizabeth, PREDICTING The Rising, Meridian, and
Falling condition OF The States of the United Provinces, Which started up
immediately after the appearance of the new Star in Cassiopoeia.

In which Prophecy it is predicted, that that State will suddenly be brought
to that mean and low condition they were in about an hundred years since.

Now Published and Explained.

LONDON: Printed by J. C. for R. Robinson, near Grays Inn, Holborn. 1672.

The Prophecy.
WHen a new Light shall shine whose name none ken,
Ne has beheld the like all Christen men;
A Lion from a Castll shall break loose,
Who shall a Maiden for his Guarden choose:
She by her Skyll and Might shall guard him too
From Foes that eagerly do him pursue.
But this vile Viper, after myckle time,
Shall Foster harm geust them that succored him.
This happens, when within a Solar year
Three Starry Lanthorns in the Sky appear:
And to his help he subtilie shall draw
The Lilly, Fir Tree, and the Eagles Claw.
But the just Heaven agenst them all shall fight,
And thrice shall cause this villainous Lions flight.
Then will again this Lion Couchant lie,
But yet shall ponder Mischief privilie,
Till the High Lyghts of Heaven Aspected are
By Opposition from the Maiden Star:
Then shall the Virgins Kyn this Lion make,
For his false plays and Fiend-like Villainies quake:
Then will he seek for Aid, but all in vain;
He is begirt with Foes by Land and Main:
His privy Wiles Heavens Justice will disclose,
Which makes his former Friends to be his Foes:
He wooes the Eagle; but the Crescent Moon
With her sharp Aspects quickly calls him home:
He will the Heliotrop eke to his Aid pray,
But he will only Feed him with delay:
For, former faults, that Flower of the Sun
Will cause to be espyer of his Doom.
From henceforth Heaven foretells this Lion shall
Like to his Astral Guarden, backward crawl,
Till Jove five times Chronos oppose, and then
Three Lions shall confyne him to his Den.
The Explanation of the Prophecy.
When a new Light shall shine, whose name none ken,
Ne has the like beheld all Christen men.
BY this is meant the appearance of a new Star in Cassiopoeia, which the famous
Tycho exactly observed; and from which appearance, the Astrologers of that Age
did predict the rise of some new Government that should trouble and vex the
world.

A Lion from a Castil shall break loose,
Who shall a Maiden for his Guarden choose.
By the Lion, is meant the United Provinces, who bear a Lion in their Arms: by
from a Castil is meant Spain, which was anciently called Castile: shall break
loose, that is, shall throw off that Government. Who shall a Maiden for his
Guarden choose: by this Maiden is meant Queen Elizabeth, to whom the then Poor
distressed States came for Aid, viz. in the year 1581.

Who by her Skyll and Might shall guard him too,
From Foes that eagerly do him pursue.
By the prudence and valor of her Commander and Forces which she sent to their
assistance, the Spanish Armies were overcome, and They acknowledged and
established by the King of Spain to be a Free State.

But this vile Viper, after mickle time,
Shall foster harm genst them that succored him.
They shall forget, after some time, them that set them up, and shall supplant
their Trade, and deal treacherously with them; as it has been verified in
Amboyna, Surinam, and other parts of the East and West Indies, where they
treacherously burnt our Stores, and murdered our Men, committing outrages that
the world cannot parallel.

This happens when within a Solar year
Three Starrie Lanthorns in the Sky appear.
By the three Starry Lanthorns, is meant the three Comets that appeared in the
latter end of 64, and the beginning of 65. This is so remarkable, as the like
no History relates.

And to his help he subtly shall draw
The Lilly, Fir Tree, and the Eagles Claw.
By the Lilly is meant France; the Fir Tree, Denmark; the Eagles Claw, Munster:
all which were assistants to Holland in the years 65 and 66.

But the just Heavens against them all shall fight,
And thrice shall cause this faithless Lions flight.
Heaven shall defend the Justice of our Cause against all our Enemies. This was
verified in the years 65 and 66, when we obtained three remarkable Victories
over the Dutch Fleet.

Then will again this Lion couchant lie,
But yet shall ponder Mischief privilie.
They shall come to Articles of Peace, and couch their Lion when they see ours
passant. But yet they will follow their old treacherous Designs against the
lives and fortunes of the Kings Subjects.

Till the high Lyghts of heaven Aspected are
By Opposition from the Maiden-Star.
That is, till Saturn and Jupiter oppose each other; which happened October. 25.
1671.

Then shall the Virgins kin this Lion make,
For his false plays, and all his treacheries, quake.
By the Virgins Kyn is meant the King of Great Britain, being of the Kindred of
the Maiden-Queen Elizabeth.

Then will he seek for Aid, but all in vain;
He is begirt with Foes by Land and Main.
They shall send their Ambassadors to the Princes round about for Aid; but
they shall refuse to assist them; and on the contrary, shall become their
Enemies.

His privy Wiles heavens justice will disclose;
Which makes his former Friends to be his Foes.
Their former Friends, that before assisted them, now discovering their frauds,
become their Enemies.

He wooes the Eagle; but the Crescent Moon
With her sharp Aspects quickly calls him home.
They court the Emperors Aid; but the Turkish Forces making some attempts and
inroads into Hungary, finds him work enough to secure his own Dominions.

He will the Heliotrope eke to his Aid pray;
But he will only feed him with delay.
They will court the Spaniard; but he must take care of his own Territories.

For, former faults, that Flower of the Sun
Will cause to be espyer of his doom.
The Spaniard will remember their former Revolt, and for that reason will
rather stand Neuter then assist them.

From henceforth Heaven foretells this Lion shall,
Like to his Astral Guarden, backward crawl.
That is, from the time of the first Opposition of Saturn and Jupiter, they
shall decline, and go backwards, like their Astral Guarden, which is the Crab,
the Celestial Sign that rules over Holland.

Till Jove five times Chronos oppose, and then
Three Lions shall confyne him to his den.
That is, till Saturn and Jupiter oppose each other five times, viz. the first
Opposition October. 25. 1671. the second Opposition, Jan. 15. 1671-72. the third
Opposition, Sept. 12. 1672. the fourth Opposition, April 20. 1673. the fifth
Opposition, August 6. 1673. Then, by the Force and Valor of the Fleet and
Armies of his Majesty of Great Britain, who bears in his Arms three Lions
passant, they shall be brought to that low and mean condition in which they
were, in the year 1580. For by the Prognostication of the famous Astrologers
that have calculated the Horoscope of the State of Holland, it should last but
one hundred years, which will be completed in the year 1680: of which year the
Learned Cardanus writes these words: Incipiet mutatio Legum, cui nunquam fuit
similis, and consurget una nova Lex, and cum his alia multa.

FINIS.

