THE TRIAL OF A CHRISTIANS GROWTH IN Mortification, OR Purging out Corruption.
Vivification, OR Bringing forth more fruit.

A Treatise handling this CASE, How to discern our Growth in GRACE: Affording
some Helps rightly to judge thereof, BY Resolving some Tentations, Clearing
some Mistakes, Answering some Questions, About Spiritual Growth.

Together with some Observations upon the Parable of the Vine, John 15. 1, 2.
verses.

By THO: GOODWIN, B. D.

2 COR. 7. 1. Let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of flesh and
spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God. LONDON, Printed by J. G. for
R. Dawlman, 1650.

TO THE READER.
THis following Treatise [The Trial of a Christians Growth] was formerly
printed during the time of my absence out of my native Country: and by reason
thereof had many imperfections and incongruities both in style and matter;
which, now being again (through the good hand of God upon me) returned, I have
endeavored to amend. So as partly through some alteration in the method and
frame of it, partly by cutting off some redundancies, I have reduced it to some
better shape, and nearer proportion to its fellows.

The scope and way of handling this subject [Growth] is not Doctrinall so much,
nor yet Hortatory, as either persuading to, or discoursing of a Christians
growth in general, (concerning which much has been already written by others)
But the more proper aim of this is to resolve A Case of Conscience, (like as
those two other preceding Tractates of mine have done) namely this, How to
discern our growth, and to answer more usual temptations about it: And so
these three Treatises being of like sort and kind, and properly belonging to
that part of Theology which we call Case Divinity; I have therefore in this
new Edition of the whole ordered to put them together, (which is all the
alteration I have made) although in their first and single publishing some
other came between.

If in the performance this falls short of many more raised experiments of
Growth which are found in such as the Apostle John calls Fathers, elderly
Christians, who with Enoch have walked long with God; yet I have hoped that you
that are young men (as he also styles the middle sort of Christians) that you
may find many things helpful to your right understanding and judging of your
growth, and which may free you from many mistakes in mis-judging thereof, and
so consequently of many tentations about it, which that Age of Believers are
more peculiarly incident unto. I dare not say, I write these things to you
Fathers, I never presumed it in my thoughts; I my self wrote and preached it
when I was but young in years, and for the time far younger in grace and
experience. And I dare not (if the great Apostle would not) stretch my self
beyond that measure which God has distributed to me. 2 Cor. 10. 14.
A measure, which, yet, may reach you that are young men, though more eminent
grown Christians are gone far beyond the line of it.

The God of grace and peace grant us and all his children spirits endeavoring
to speak the truth in love (in these dividing times) that we may grow up into
him in all things, Ephesians. 4. 15.
who is the Head, even Christ.

April 26. 1643. Tho: Goodwin.

THE TRIAL OF A CHRISTIANS GROWTH.
AN INTRODVCTION.
Some OBSERVATIONS premised upon this Parable of the VINE,
JOHN 15. 1, 2. I am the true Vine, and my Father is the Husbandman. Every
branch in me that bears not fruit, he takes away: and every branch that
bears fruit, he purges it, that it may bring forth more fruit.
The sum and division of the words, and subject of this Discourse.
A Fair and fruitful Parable this is, spread forth into many Branches. In
which, under the pleasant shadow of a Vine, (upon occasion they had but newly
been real partakers of his blood in the fruit of the Vine) Christ elegantly
sets forth himself in his relation to his visible Church, and the estate of his
Apostles, and in them, of all visible Professors to the end of the world:
Showing withal under that similitude, what his Father meant to do with Judas,
now gone out to betray him; as with all other unfruitful branches like unto
him, even cut them off, and throw them into the fire. But on the contrary,
encouraging them, and all other fruitful branches, that they should still
continue to abide in him, with promise, that they should yet bring forth more
fruit.

The Parable has three Parts:

1. A Vine here is, of all the fairest, ver. 1.

2. A Husbandman, of all the carefullest.

3. The end of planting this Vine, fruitfulness.

Vine, as all Vines else, has two sorts of branches:

1. Such as (though green) bring forth no true fruit, naught but leaves.

ver. 2.

The Husbandman has answerably offices of two sorts toward them both, (...),
which is a witty Paranomasia, Amputare and Putare, to Lop and Cut off. First,
clean to cut off those that are utterly unfruitful, which thereupon are cast
out, do wither, and are gathered and cast into the fire: So ver. 2. and 6. And
thus now he meant to deal with Judas.

But 2. to Purge, and but lop off the luxuriancies, and too much runnings out
of the fruitful branches into springs, which they are subject to.

end in all is, that fruit, and more fruit might be brought forth. This is his
end of planting this Vine, this is the end of purging these branches of it,
which he being frustrated of, in those other, is the cause why he takes them
clean away.

And to exhort these unto fruitfulness, was one main end of Christ's using this
Parable, and unto this tends all in the following verses, either as means or
motives unto fruitfulness.

First, as means,

verse 3. Assurance is a means of fruitfulness.

He speaks of Purging them by his word, in the same verse; Ye are clean
through the word I have spoken to you: This is a means he further uses.

3. He inculcates into them the sense of their own inability to do any thing
without him, ver. 5.

4. Therefore to abide in him, and suck from him, ver. 5.

5. And to let his Word abide in them, by which himself shall also abide in
them, and by which they may still be purged, and so be fruitful.

The motives are,

1. If not, they know their doom, to the fire with them, ver. 6.

2. If they do, their prayers shall be granted, ver. 7.

3. Hereby his Fathers is glorified, ver. 8.

4. They shall show themselves his Disciples, ver. 8.

5. They shall continue in his love, who loves them as dearly as his father
does him, ver. 9, 10.

And so you have the sum of all this Parable.

The principal subject I aim at in this Scripture, is this maine case of
Conscience, which uses to be the exercise, and inquisition of many good souls,
How a Christian may discern his growth, both in purging out corruptions, and
increase of grace, and the fruit of it.

Therefore what ever other spreading fruitful observations grow upon this
stock, (and this Vine affords many) we will but shortly, and as men in haste,
view and take notice of, but as in our way to that other which I principally
intend, and only so far stay upon the observation of them, as the bare opening
this similitude here used, does give sap and vigor to them.

The first Observation, how Christ is a Vine, and only the true Vine.
First, Christ, he is a Vine. To explain this first. Adam indeed was a Vine,
planted in Paradise, to bear all Mankind upon, but he turned a wild one, he
proved not the true Vine. God planted him (to allude to that, Jer. 2. 21.) A
noble Vine, a holy and right seed, but he degenerated, and so have all
engraffed on him, and so bring forth nothing but grapes of Sodom, as Isaiah
speaks.

But 2. God the Father having many branches of chosen ones, that grew by nature
on this cursed stock of Adam, whom yet, as ver. 16. he had ordained to bring
forth fruit, that is, to spring and spread forth in the earth in all ages, and
then to be transplanted unto Heaven, the Paradise appointed for them; the earth
being but the nurserie of them for a while: Hence therefore he did appoint his
own Son to be a new root, as into whom he meant to transplant them, and
ordained him to be that bulk, and body, and chief branch which they all should
grow out of, who is therefore called The root of David, Rev. 22. and that
Righteous branch, Jer. 22. 6.

Whom therefore 3. he planted as a root here on earth with us, and clothed
with a humane nature, a weak and mean bark and body, and a rind and out side,
such as ours is; that so both root and branches might be of the same nature,
and Homogeneall: which nature of ours in him, he likewise filled with his
Spirit (as with juice and sap) without all measure, that so he might fructify,
and grow into all those branches appointed to be in him, by communicating the
same spirit to them.

And 4. although he was of himself the fairest Cedar that ever the earth bare,
yet in relation to those multitude of branches, he was to bear, chooses to be a
Vine, which is of all trees the lowest, the weakest, and of the meanest bark,
and outside of any other, only because of all others it is the plentifullest
of branches, and runs out and spreads its bulk in branches; and those, of all
branches else of any other trees, the fruitfullest, it is therefore called The
fruitful Vine, Psalm. 128. 3. and for that reason only does he single out this
comparison, as suiting with his scope, showing therein his love; that as he
condescended to the lowest condition, for our salvation, so to the meanest
resemblances for our instruction, yet so as withal he tells us, that no Vine,
nor all the Vines on earth were worthy herein to be compared, nor to be so much
as resemblances of him.

For he, 2. Obser.
and he alone is the true Vine, That Christ is only the [True Vine*]
that is the second Observation.

For take those choicest excellencies in a Vine, for which the comparison here
is made, as more particularly, that of fruitfulness either in boughs or fruit,
and it is but a shadow of that which is in him. As God only is [I am that I
am,] and all things else have but the shadow of Being: so Christ alone has
only all the excellencies in him in the true real nature of all things to
which he is compared. So in like manner he is said to be Bread indeed, John 6.
55. and ver. 32. The true bread from heaven. Manna, and all other meat, and all
that sweetness which is in meat, is and was but a shadow to that which he
affords. He excells and exceeds all things he is compared to, in what they
have, and they are but shadows to him, Heb. 10. 1.

First therefore, never any Vine so fruitful. All our fruit is found in him,
Hos. 12. If you abide in me, you shall bring forth much fruit. He has juice to
supply you with every grace, to fill you with all the fruits of righteousness,
which if the branches want, it is for want of faith in themselves, to draw from
him, not want of sap in him.

Secondly, this he is at all times, has been in all ages, thus flourishing;
this root never withers; is never dry or empty of sap, it is never winter with
Christ. Every branch, says the second verse, that is, every one that has born
fruit in any age, bears all its fruit in him: branches in him fear no
drought, Jer. 17. 8.

Thirdly, for largeness of spreading, no such Vine as this: He (as the
Psalmist says, Psalm. 80. 11, 12.) sends out his boughs unto the sea, and his
branches to the rivers: all the earth is, or has been, or shall be filled with
them.

Is to persuaded us to take Christ alone, Use.
and make him our All in all, because in him all excellencies are
supereminently found. All creatures are not enough to serve for comparisons to
set him forth, and when they do in part, for some particular thing that is the
excellentest in them, yet therein they are but shadows, Heb. 10. 1. He only
is the truth, he is the true light, John 1. The Baptist, Moses, and all lights
else were but as twilight, but a shadow: So he is the true bread, the true
Vine, he has really the sweetness, the comfort, the excellencies of them all.
The like may be said of all those relations he has taken on him; so he only
is a true Father, and Husband, etc. and the love and sweetness in all other
Fathers and Husbands are but a shadow to what is in him.

Obser. 2. How the Father is the Husbandman.
As CHRIST is thus a Vine, so his Father is the Husbandman, and as strange a
Husbandman as Christ a Vine.

For first, he is the very root of the Vine it self, which no Husbandman is to
any Vine; therefore he that is the Vine calls the Husbandman his Father, My
Father is the Husbandman. This Vine springs out of his bosom by eternal
generation, for this is the derivation of our Offspring, Chap. 14. 20. I am in
my Father, and you in me. And Chap. 5. 26. The Father, He has life (original)
in himself, and gives it to the Son, and the Son to us, and thence spring
living fruits, the fruits of righteousness.

2. He is the ingraffer, and implanter of all the branches into this Vine. Esaias
60. 21. he calls them his righteous people, [the branch of my planting] the
work of my hands. Other Husbandmen do but expect what branches their Vines
will of themselves bring forth, but God appoints who, and how many shall be the
branches, and gives them unto, and ingraffs them into his Son.

3. He appoints what fruit, and what store of fruit these branches shall bring
forth, and accordingly gives the increase, which other Husbandmen cannot do:
Paul my plant, and Apollos may water, but God only gives the increase, 1 Cor.
3. 7. Though Christ merited, yet the Father decreed every man's measure of
fruitfulness.

4. He is the most diligent Husbandman that ever was; for he knows, and daily
views, and takes notice of every branch, and of all their fruit: for says the
Text, Every branch that brings not forth fruit, he takes away, etc. therefore
knows who bears fruit, and does not. He knows their persons, who are his,
and who are not, 2 Timothy 2. 19. not so much as one man could come in without a
wedding garment, but he spies him out.

5. The most careful he is daily to purge his Vine: so says the second verse.
And of all possessions, says Cato, Nulla possessio majorem operam requirit,
Vineyards need as much care, and more then any other. The Corn, when it is
sown, comes up, and grows alone, and ripeneth, and comes to perfection, the
Husbandman sleeping and waking, he knows not how, says Christ: But Vines must
be dressed, supported, sheltred, pruned, well-nigh every day.

And of all trees God has most care of his Vines, and regards them more then
all the rest in the world.

Is to honor the Father in all the works tending to our salvation, Use 1.
as much as we honor the Son: If Christ be the Vine, his Father means to be
the Husbandman: and indeed it may teach us to honor all the three Persons in
every work that is saving, for in all, they bear a distinct office; the Father
has not only a hand in Election, but also in Sanctification, concerning which
this Parable was made. If Christ be the root that affords us sap, whence all
fruit buds, the Father is the Husbandman that waters the Vine, gives the
increase, purges the branches, and is the root of that life which Christ
affords to us: and then the Spirit also comes in to have a work and influence
herein also; for he is the sap, though not here mentioned, yet which is
employed, which lies hid in this Parable of the Vine, and appears in all the
fruits that are brought forth, therefore called, Gal. 5. Fruits of the Spirit.
None of the three Persons will be left out in any relation, or in any work,
that is for our salvation. That ever three so great Persons should have a joint
care of our salvation and sanctification, and we our selves neglect it! That
they should be so careful, we so negligent and unfruitful! If they do all so
much for us, what should not we endeavor to do for our selves?

Be careful of your words, Use 2.
thoughts, ways, affections, desires, all which are the fruits of your souls;
for God takes notice of all, he walks in this his garden every day, and spies
out how many raw, unripe, indigested performances, as Prayers, etc. hang on
such or such a branch, what gum of pride, what leaves, what luxuriant sprigs,
what are rotten boughs, and which are sound, and goes up and down with his
pruning knife in his hand, and cuts and slashes where he sees things amiss; he
turns up all your leaves, sees what fruit is under; and deals with men
accordingly.

When the Church is in any distress or misery, Use 3.
go to him that is the Husbandman; such is the usual condition of this his
Vine, spread over the face of the earth. Complain as they, Psalm. 80. 12. Why
have thou broken down her hedges, so as all they which pass by do pluck her?
the boar out of the wood does waste it. Complain to him that the hogs are in
his Vineyard, and do much havoc and spoil therein; and tell him that he is
the Husbandman, who should take care for it. So they go on to pray, Return, we
beseech thee O God of Hosts, look down from heaven, behold and visit this
Vine, and the Vineyard which thy right hand has planted, v. 14, 15.

3. Obs. Two sorts of branches in this Vine, fruitful and unfruitful: and the
difference between temporary and true Believers, as they are laid down in the
Text.
We see this Vine has branches of two sorts, fruitful and unfruitful, which
is the third thing to be observed.

And herein our Savior follows the similitude; for experience shows the like
in Vines. And writers of Vines observe it, and accordingly distinguish the
branches of Vines into Pampinarios, which bring forth naught but leaves, and
Fructuarios, which bring forth fruit.

The unfruitful they are such as make profession of being in Christ to
themselves and others, and receive some greenness from him, but no true fruit:
for their profession they are branches, for their emptiness, unfruitful ones.

The only question is, Quest.
How such as prove unfruitful, are said to be branches, and to be in Christ;
Every branch in me, etc.

Many comparisons there are of Christ, Ans. How the unfruitful are in Christ.
as he stands in various relations to his Church: whereof some serve to
express one thing concerning him, some another. That of a Vine, here presents
him only as he was to spread himself into a visible Church on earth, in the
profession of him: and so considered, he may have many branches that are
unfruitful. That other of An head over all the family in heaven and earth,
which imports his relation only to that invisible company of his Church
mystical, which together make up that general assembly spoken of in Heb. 12.
which are his fullness, Ephesians. 1. ult. And agreeable to this meaning, in
comparing himself to a Vine, in this large and common relation of a root to
both sorts of Professors, true and false, is that other expression also,
whereby he sets forth his Fathers office, when he calls him not (...), a
Vine-dresser, or a tiller of a Vineyard, in a strict sense, as Luke 13. 7. but
(...), (as it were at large,) the Husbandman: As thereby denoting out, not
simply and alone, that peculiar care that he has to true believers only, that
are branches of this Vine, (though including it) but withal importing that
common care and providence which he bears to others of his creatures; and this
because some of these branches of this Vine, are to him but as others out of
the Church and of no more reckoning with him. The Fathers relation herein,
answering to, and in a proportion running parallel along with that which Christ
bears toward them: Those that Christ is head unto, those he is a Father unto:
Those whom Christ is but as a Vine unto, Christ he is but (...), an Husbandman
unto, whose office is seen, as well in cutting off such branches, as in
pruning and dressing of those other.

These unfruitful ones are not in Christ's account, 2. Ans.
reckoned as true branches here: For in the 5. verse, he calls those Disciples
of his that were there and then present with him, (when now Judas was gone
forth before, as appears Chap. 13. 30.) them only The branches: and therefore
repeats it there again, I am the Vine, with this addition, Ye are the branches.
Implying hereby, that as he is the true Vine, so that these only were the true
branches; the other he calls but [(...)] as a branch, ver. 6. He is cast forth
(as a) branch, giving them the name of branches, thereby the better to express
his Fathers dealing with such, that as they that are dressers of a Vineyard,
use to do with such branches, so my Father with them: but they themselves are
but Tanquams, Quasi palmites, As branches; not really and in truth such.

That expression which seems most to make for it, 3. Ans.
is that in the second verse, when he says, Every branch [in me] that bears
not fruit, but those words [in me] may as well, yea rather be understood to
have reference to their not bringing forth fruit [in him] then to their being
properly branches [in him:] so as the meaning should be, they are branches that
bring not forth fruit in me. Though they do some good, yet it is not fruit; if
so [not in me:] though from me, and from my assistance. And so his meaning is
not so much to declare tha^ they are branches in him, as that they bring not
for fruit in him. Which indeed is one of the characteristicall differences
between true and unsound branches, and one maine scope of the parable; and this
the Syriack translation makes for also, and confirms it, Omnem palmitem qui in
me non fert fructum, Every branch which in me brings not forth fruit. And
there is this reason that this should be his meaning, that He never reckoned
them at all true branches; Because that is the difference God puts between
these and those other, that Those that bring forth fruit, his Father purges,
that they may bring forth more fruit. He lets them not run so far out into sin,
as to become altogether unfruitful: But these he takes away: So as true
branches were never unfruitful.

The Use is to stir up all that profess themselves to be in Christ, Use.
to examine whether they be true genuine branches of this true Vine or no. Here
in this Kingdom, Christ is spread forth into a fair and pleasant Vine in
show, as this earth affords: But if we Ministers were able with this Husbandman
here, to turn up the leaves of formal profession, and look with his eyes, we
should discern that there are but a few true branches indeed to be found in
flourishing Congregations, as Isaiah foretold there should be in Israel, Isa.
17. 5, 6. Like the gleaning grapes, two or three in the top of the uppermost
bough, four or five in the outmost fruitful branches.

Now for a general help to discern whether you be true branches, The several
sorts of branches that prove unfruitful.
consider, that union with Christ is it that makes men branches, that is, men
are accounted branches of Christ in regard of some union with him: and such as
their union is, such also is their communion with him, and accordingly such
branches are they, and such their fruit.

1. Some (and indeed the most) are united to him but by the external tie of
the outward Ordinances, such as their obligation made in Baptism: and are knit
to him thereby, no otherwise then many graffs are, that do not take or thrive
in their stocks, only stand there as bound about by a thread; and suitable is
their communion with him, even wholly external: they continuing to partake of
the outward ordinances, but without any sap or inward influence derived,
without any inward work of the Spirit, or stirring of affection: And answerable
also is their fruit, when no other are found on them, but such as you shall
find grow in the waste of the wilderness among Heathens, which ingenuity and
modesty, and natural honesty and natural conscience do bring forth: but not
any such, as an inward sap from Christ uses to produce. Civil men are not
true branches; for look on Christ the root, and see what fruits abounded in him
most, as fruits of holiness did; and therefore if such were true branches, the
same would abound in them likewise: for every tree brings forth according to
its kind.

2. You have some (they living in the Church) Christ begins to shoot some sap
of his Spirit into their hearts, quickening them with many good motions, and
stirring up some juicenesse of affections in the administration of the Word and
Sacraments, which causes them to bud forth into good inward purposes, and
outward good beginnings: but this being not the communication of the Spirit, as
sanctifying and changing the branch into the same nature with the root,
therefore it comes to pass they are still nipt in the bud, as the stony ground
was, and the sap stricken in again, like rath ripe fruit; which looking forth
upon a February Sun, are nipt again with an April frost. Many, when young, and
their affections are green and tender, are wrought upon, and bud, but the
scoffs of men nip them, and their lusts draw the sap another way, as hopes of
preferment, and the pleasures of sin, and so these buds wither and fall off,
and the Spirit withdrawes himself wholly in the root again.

Again, 3. some there are, as the thorny ground, in whom this inward sap
communicated to them, though not spiritually, changing and renewing them, yet
being communicated in a further degree, abides in them longer, shoots up
farther, and these prove exceeding green branches, and are owned for true, even
by the people of God themselves, as Judas was by the Apostles, and therefore
are outwardly like unto them; for how else are they said to be cast out? ver.
16. who therefore had once some fruit to commend them, for which they were
accounted of by the people of God, and received amongst them, who judge of
trees by the fruit. Neither are their fruits merely outward, like Solomon's
apples of gold, in pictures of silver, merely painted, but they have a sap that
puts a greenness into what they do, and by reason of which they bear and
bring forth; for how else are they said to wither also? ver. 6. (which is a
decay of inward moisture, and outward greenness:) and these also have some
kind of union with Christ as with a Lord, 2 Pet. 2. 1. he ascending to bestow
gifts, even upon the rebellious also, Psalm. 68. 18. so far to enable them to
do him some service in his Vineyard: They are not united unto Christ as unto
an Head. Neither is it the spirit of adoption which they do receive from him;
and such a branch was Judas, who was not only owned by the Disciples, who knew
him not to be false, but who surely at the first had inward sap of gifts
derived from Christ, to fit him for the Ministry, he being sent out as an
Apostle to preach; whom therefore Christ here aimed at in this place.

Now for a more particular differencing of these branches and their fruits,
Some differences of branches fruitful and unfruitful.
it is not my scope to ingraffe a large common place, head of all the
differences, between temporaries and true believers, upon this stock; this root
is not big enough to bear them, those differences being many; Only I will
explain those differences which the Text affords, because they are in our way,
and will further open the words.

1. That which they do bring forth, 1. Difference. How the good works of
Hypocrites are not true fruits.
is not true fruit, the holy Ghost vouchasfeth it not that name, They are said
here, not to bring forth fruit. That speech in Hosea 10. 1. will give clear
light to understand this; with the ground of it also; Israel is, there called,
an empty Vine, which brings forth fruit to her self. It implies a seeming
contradiction, that it should be called an empty Vine, and yet withal to bring
forth any fruit. And these bring forth not leaves, good words only, but good
works, good actions, and those green, and therefore Jude 12. their fruit is
said to wither, as themselves are said to wither here, ver. 6. And as there
Israel is said to be an empty Vine, though it has fruit, so here these are
said not to bring forth fruit at all. Now the meaning of both, is one and the
same: For a thing is said to be empty, when it wants that which is proper to
it, and ought to be in it; as Wells are called empty, when are not full of
water, they are full of air: for Non datur vacuum. So they are called an empty
Vine, and these branches to have no fruit, because not such as ought to grow
upon them, such as is proper to the root they seem to grow upon. Therefore in
Heb. 6. 7. that Epithet is added, [Meet] herbs, or fruit; that is, such as
should grow there. So Luke 3. 8. They are to bring forth fruit [worthy]
amendment of life, or else they were to be cut down: that is, such as became
true repentants, as were answerable, suitable thereunto. As we say a man carries
himself worthy of his place, when answerably to to what is required of him in
it. That place forecited out of Hosea further acquaints us with the true
ground, why their fruits (though green, which Chap. 6. 4. is called goodness
also, yet) were not to be accounted meet fruit, and so not fruit at all; even
because of this, that it brought forth all its fruit, whether good or bad, to
it self: That is, those ends that did draw up the sap, and did put it forth in
fruit, were drawn but from themselves, they bring them not forth principally
to God. and for him. All their prayers, all their affections in holy duties, if
they examine the reason of them all, the ends that run in them all, and
whence all the motives that do actuate all they do in these, they will find
they are taken from themselves: And though the assistance wherewith they are
enabled to do what they do, is more then their own, yet their ends are no
higher then themselves, and so they employ but that assistance God gives them
wholly for themselves. Now the end for which a true branch brings forth fruit,
is, that God might be glorified. Thus Romans 7. 8. when married to Christ they
are said to bring forth fruit to God; which is spoken in opposition to bringing
forth fruit to a man's self. Thus also Christ here uses this as the great and
main motive to fruitfulness in ver. 8. Hereby is my Father glorified, that you
bring forth much fruit. Now whom will this move, into whose affections will
such an argument draw up sap, and quicken them? None but those hearts who do
make Gods glory their utmost end, and so all true branches do or else this
motive should have been used by Christ in vain unto them. And as this end
makes their performances to be fruit, so this being wanting, all that is
brought forth deserves not the name of fruit, for it is not fruit worthy, as
the Baptist says, not meet fruit for the dresser to receive, (as was noted out
of the Hebrews) not such as ought to grow on that tree. They should be trees of
righteousness, the planting of the Lord, that he might be glorified, Esaias 61.
3. Again, not fruit meet or suitable for the root it seems to grow upon,
that is, such as Christ did bring forth; for he did all, that his Father might
be glorified: and therefore says he, exhorting them to fruitfulness, ver. 8.
of this Chap. If you do likewise, ye shall be my Disciples. Again, otherwise
it is not such as is meet for the Husbandmans taste and relish* it being equal
that He that planteth a Vineyard, should eat the fruit of it, 1 Cor. 8. 7. And
in fruit you know above all we regard the taste, and esteem the relish of it.
Eve first considered the fruit was good for food, then pleasant to the eye,
Genesis 3. It is not the sap that is in fruit only makes it acceptable; Crabs are
as full of sap as apples: Not is it the greenness, or color, or bigness, but
the relish that is the chiefest excellency in it, though those other, when
joined with a good relish, do make it more desirable: So though thy
performances be full of life and affection, and green, and long, and many, yet
if they relish and taste of none but self ends, God regards them not, they are
not ad gustum suum; it is the end that gives the relish, and makes them fruits,
and acceptable to God.

The second difference this Text holds forth, 2. Difference. How Hypocrites
bring not forth their fruit [in Christ]
is, That they bring not forth their fruit in Christ: for so the Syriack
Translation reads it, as making the sense to be, that they bring not forth
fruit in me: and so this particle [In me] refers not so much to their being
branches in him, as to not bearing their fruit in him. Which indeed seems to
have been Christ's meaning, for his scope in this Parable is to show how that he
is the root of Sanctification; and how not the habitual power only, but every
act of grace, and the performance, comes from him; Without me ye can do
nothing, ver. 5. And thereupon he exhorts his Disciples to fetch all from him,
and to abide in him; and therefore also, when he speaks of these unfruitful
branches at ver. 6. that which here he calls bearing not fruit in me, he
expresses there, by not abiding in me, as the cause of their not bringing forth
fruit in him. Yea, and the principal scope of that phrase, Abide in me, is,
(as evidently appears by ver. 4, 5.) to depend upon him for bringing forth of
fruit, and to fetch strength from him by faith. There is therefore this
essential defect in the work that is upon such, that they do not do all in
that dependence upon Christ, such a dependence as a branch has upon the root,
in bringing forth its fruit. For, my brethren, this you must know, that as it
is essential to Evangelicall* Sanctification to do all for another, as your
end, namely, to God; so to do all in the strength of another, as your sole
assistant, namely Christ, who works all in you, and through whose strength,
says Paul, I am able to do all things, and nothing without it. The life we
lead is by faith, and it is not I, but Christ who lives in me. Therefore we
find both these joined, Phil. 1. 11. The fruits of righteousness by Jesus
Christ, to the praise and glory of God. The latter [To the glory of God] is
mentioned as the final cause; the other [By Jesus Christ] as the efficient
cause: What it is to bring forth fruit [in Christ] explained.
Both these are necessary unto true Sanctification. For as we are to honor the
Husbandman by making him our end, so also the root, by doing all in him, and
from him. Now temporary Believers, as they do all principally for themselves,
so also all as from themselves: and as they do not make God their end, so nor
Christ their root. And so some expound that phrase in the Parable of the stony
ground, Luke 8. 13. when it is said they have no root, (though I think he means
also inherent habits of grace infused, for it is added, no root [in
themselves,] which Job call the root of the matter which was in him) it is
because they fetch not their strength to do all they do from Christ by faith,
and from their union with him. And the reason is this, because they are never
emptyed of themselves, (which is the root we all do grow upon) either in
regard of their own ends, or of their own efficiencie of working. Whereas we
must all be brought to nothing in our selves, both in regard of self-aymes, and
also abilities of working; and till our hearts are inwardly taught that
lession, that we are not sufficient, as of our selves, we will not go out of
our selves, to do all in Christ. And therefore there was nothing which Christ
endeavored more to engraffe upon their hearts then this Principle now at his
departure, as it is ver. 4, 5. And indeed it is as hard a thing for nature to
live out of its self, and fetch all from another, as not to live to its self,
but to another. We are full of our own strength, as well as of our own ends.
And although these unfruitful branches they do indeed receive all their
strength from Christ, and so all they do in what is good, is from him: yet
they do no honor Christ in receiving it, by doing all as in his strength, and
so do not do it as in him. But though they receive all, yet they work with it,
as if it were their own stock, and so glory (as the Apostle says) as if they
had not received it. And thus though the sap and liveliness which stirs them,
is really, and all efficiently from Christ, yet they may be said to bring forth
fruit in themselves, because both they neither fetch not receive it by faith,
nor act by faith that strength received, as men that were acted by Christ, and
as working all in Christ, but they do all, as if all proceeded from their own
root: Even as the Ivy, though it clasping about the Oak, receives much sap
from it, which it digesteth and turns into it self, yet it brings forth all
its be^ries by virtue of its own root, rather then as in the Oak, which yet
sustaines and supplies it with juice and sap; whereas a true Believer brings
forth fruit in Christ, as a branch that is in and of the Oak it self, as its
own root, and so from him all their fruit is found, Hos. 14. 8. he fetches
his assistance from him: where as the inward assistance of another unsound
branch is strengthened and supported by pride, and self sufficiency of gifts
and parts, and not derived by faith, and maintained by confidence in Christ's
strength to act all in them; so that, as it is said of the Corinthians, that
they reigned, but without us, says Paul. So I may say, Temporaries perform
duties, and pray, but as without Christ. But all true Believers are emptied
first of their own strength and ability, and so walk as those who can do
nothing without Christ, as those who are not able to love, believe one moment
more without him. So Phil. 4. 13. I am able to do all things, but through
Christ that strengthens me. And this they lay for a principle in their hearts
which they walk by, which therefore Christ presses upon his Disciples here, as
the maine requisite and fundamental principle of Evangelicall Sanctification,
Without me ye can do nothing. And therefore such an one is sensible of that
cursed self sufficiency in him, and humbles himself, checks himself for
it, as for as great and foul a sin as any other; and humbles himself not
only for the want of what life, and stirring, etc. should have been in the
duty fell short of, in performing it; but also for that he sanctified not
Christ, in the strength he received to do it with: But another does not so; if
he finds strength, and power, and vigor to perform, and quickness in the
performance, he looks no further. That poor man in the Gospel, as he
acknowledged his want of faith, that he had much unbelief in him, so he goes
out to Christ for the supply, Lord h^lp my unbelief, for he knew that it was
he was to be the worker of every degree of faith in him. And again, a true
believer being thus sensible of his own unability, does (when he is any thing
assisted) attribute all to Christ when he has done; and honors him as the
Author of it in himself; confesses in his heart, between Christ and himself,
that it was not he, but Christ that strengthened him: It is not I, (says the
Apostle) but the grace of God in me, though I have labored more then they all.
But another, though he receives all, yet not being emptyed of himself,
boasts as if he had not received it. As the Pharisee, though he thanked God
in words, yet in his heart attributed all to himself; such an one is the more
full, and lift up when he has done, but the true branch more empty and humble.
A true believer glories not of himself as in himself, but only as he is a
man in Christ; and that as a man in Christ, he did thus or thus; as Paul did,
and no otherwise. So 2 Cor. 12. 2. I knew a man in Christ, etc. of such a man I
will glory, but of my self I will not glory. And yet it was himself he
spoke of, but yet not in himself as of himself, but as he was in Christ.

And if it be asked, Quest.
whether in every act a Christian does thus?

I answer, Answ.
It is in this as in that other parallel to this, Whether in every act a
Believer does all in Christ.
The making God a man's end: Now as it does not require, that in every action a
man should actually think of that his end, whilst yet habitually he makes it
his aim: (as a man in his journey, does not think of the place he goes into
every step he takes, yet so habitually has it in his thoughts, as he keeps in
the way to it.) Parallel to this is it in doing all in Christ, it cannot be
supposed that in every act a man has such a distinct thought of recourse to
Christ; but at the beginning and entrance of greater actions, he still has
such actings and exercise of faith; And also often, in the progress he
renews them, and in the conclusion, when he has performed them, he does
sanctify Christ in his heart, by ascribing the praise of all unto him.

If in the second place, 2. Quest.
the question be, Whether all Believers do distinctly fetch virtue from Christ
by faith.
Whether, every true believer does from his first conversion thus distinctly
and knowingly (to himself) fetch thus all power from Christ, and do all in him?

The answer is, 1. That to all believers this principle of having recourse to
Christ for acting their Sanctification, Answ. 1.
may (happily) not presently be so distinctly revealed as it has been to some;
this indeed is common and absolutely necessary to all believers, to constitute
and make them such; namely, that their faith should have recourse to Christ,
and to take him for their Salvation, in the large and general notion of it, as
it infolds all under it that is to be done to save them; and thus many more
ignorant do, when yet they have not learnt explicitly in every particular
that concerns their salvation, to have frequently a distinct recourse unto
him: it is probable that these very Disciples of Christ (who yet savingly
believed) had not this particular principle of bringing forth all their fruit
of holiness in Christ, as their root, until this very time and Sermon whereby
Christ informed them in it, so clearly revealed to them, nor till then so
clearly apprehended by them; for ignorant they were of, and negligent in having
recourse to Christ in many other particulars, and making use of him therein,
which are of as much concernment as this. They had not so distinctly and
explicitly (as would seem) put their prayers up in Christ's name, Hitherto you
have asked nothing in my name, John 16. 24. Neither had they so frequently
exercised faith on Christ in all things as they had upon God. Therefore John
14. 1. he calls upon them, Ye believe in God, believe also in me.

2. Many sorts of principles believers hearts may secretly have been taught,
which also habitually they practice, and yet they may be exceeding hidden and
latent in them in respect of their own discerning them; as was the case also of
these Disciples, John 14. 4. says Christ, The way (namely, to heaven) ye know:
and yet, ver. 5. Thomas says, How can we know the way? and then, ver. 7.
Christ says of them again, that They knew him and the Father; and yet ver. 8.
Philip again says to him, Lord, show us the Father, speaking as if they were
ignorant of him, for Christ rebukes him, ver. 9. and tells him he had both seen
him and his Father. Those principles of Atheism and unbelief, (as those
sayings in the heart, that there is no God, etc. of which the Scriptures speak
so much) they are the principles that act and work all in men that are wicked
and carnal, and are the encouragers and counselors to all the sins committed
by them, and yet they are least of all discerned by them, of all other
corruptions, for they are seldom or never drawn forth into distinct
propositions, or actually thought upon; but do lie as common principles taken
for granted, and so do guide men in their ways. And thus it is and may be long
with some of the contrary principles of faith, they may act all secretly in the
heart, and yet not be discerned; until called forth by the ministry of the
Word, or some distinct information, when it comes more distinctly to clear such
a practice to them.

Neither 3. is union with Christ presently cleared up to all believers; Union
with Christ is not cleared up to all in Christ.
which whilst it is darkly and doubtfully apprehended by them, Christ's
communication of his grace and strength to them in every action, remains
doubtful also, and is not discerned by them. Of these Disciples Christ says,
John 14. 20. That in that day (namely, when they received the Comforter more
fully, of the promise of whom he there speaks) they should know that they were
in him, and he in them: But not so clearly was this as yet apprehended by them;
and so likewise that intercourse betwixt Christ and them, both for grace and
comfort, etc. was not so clearly discerned by them, though continually
maintained by him in dispensing all grace and power to them.

And yet 4. in the mean while take the lowest and poorest believer, Yet every
Believer does five things which are really to bring forth fruit in Christ.
and he does these five things, which put together, is really and
interpretatively a bringing forth their fruit in Christ, though not in their
apprehensions.

1. In that their hearts are trained up in a continual sensiblenes of their
own insufficiency and inability for any good thought or word, as of
themselves; for poverty of spirit, to see their own nothingnesse, in this
respect is the first Evangell grace, Mat. 5. 1. and and if the contrary would
arise in them, to think through habitual grace alone received, they were able
of themselves to do good, it is checked soon, and confuted by their own
experience, both of their own weakness, being sure to be left to themselves,
(as Peter was) when confident in his own strength; as also by those various
blowings of the Spirit in them as he pleases; with which when their sails are
filled, they are able to do any thing, but when withdrawn, they lay
wind-bound, (though all habits of grace be hoyst up and ready) and not able to
move of themselves. Now this principle of self emptiness habitually to live by
it, no carnal heart in the world has it, or does live by it.

And 2. for this assistance, they are trained likewise up (from the first) to
have a continual dependence, from a power from above, (without which they find
they are able to do nothing) to come from God, and from the Spirit of Christ;
with a renunciation of themselves, which implicitly is the same with this
immediate intercourse with Christ, and is really equivalent thereunto, though
they hit not at first happily on the right explicit notion thereof (as having
not been taught it by the Ministry of the Word, or other ways) in that
distinct manner that others do: and yet in honoring the Spirit of Christ
dwelling in them, they honor Christ, who sends that Spirit into their hearts,
even as in honoring the Son, Christ says, that we honor the Father also:
although our thoughts may sometimes more distinctly be exercised toward one of
the three Persons more then to another.

And thirdly, when they are once taught from the Word, that it is the duty of a
Christian, and part of the life of faith, to live thus in Christ, and to bring
forth all in him and so come distinctly to apprehend this, as requisite to a
right bringing forth of fruit, then their hearts instantly do use to close
with the truth of it, as being most suitable and agreeable to that holy frame
of their own spirits, which are Evangelically wrought to glorify Christ all
manner of ways that shall be revealed; there is an instinct, a preparedness
in their faith to make Christ their All in all, as any particular comes to be
revealed to them, wherein they ought to exalt him in their hearts; and so this
being once revealed to be one way whereby they are to honor him, if they have
gone on before in a confidence on their own graces, henceforth they do so no
more, yea they humble themselves as much for so robbing Christ of glory, or
neglecting of him, in not having had that distinct recourse to him, as for any
other sin.

And 4. though happily after all this, yet still their union with him is not
cleared to them, and so their communion with him herein (as must needs) does
still remain dark also, they therefore neither discern that they have any true
communion with his person, nor can say how strength comes from him; yet having
bin thus taught to fetch all from him, as was formerly explained, they do in a
continual renunciation of their own strength, deny all offers of assistance
from any other strength, as namely that which their gifts and parts would make;
(even as they deny unlawful lusts or by-ends) and they still have their eyes
upon Christ, to work in them both the will and the deed, and so by a faith of
Recumbencie, or casting themselves on him for strength in all, (such as they
exercise toward him for justification, Gal. 2. 16.) they live by faith on the
Son of God, and have thereby such a kind of faith, a continual recourse unto
him. Upon which acts of true faith being exercised by them toward him, He (as
he is pleased to dispense it) moves them, and works and acts all in them;
although still not so sensibly unto their apprehensions, as that they should
discern the connection between* the cause and the effect; nor can they hang them
together, that is to say, know how, or that this virtue does come from Christ,
because their union with him is as yet doubtful to them; and also because the
power that works in Believers is secret; and like that of the heavens upon
our bodies, (which is as strong as that of physic, etc.) yet so sweet and so
secretly insinuating it self with the principles of nature, that as for the
conveyance of it, it is insensible, and hardly differenced from the other
workings of the principles of nature in us: and therefore the Apostle prays
for the Ephsians, That their eyes may be enlightened to see the power that
wrought in them, Ephesians. 1. 18. 19.

Yet so as 5. their souls walk all this while by these two principles firmly
rooted in them; both 1 That all good that is to be done, must and does come
from Christ, and him alone; and 2 That if any good be done by them, it is
wrought by him alone, which do set their souls a breathing after nothing more
then to know Christ in the power of his resurrection: And having walked thus in
a selfe-emptines and dependence upon Christ by way of a dark recumbencie, when
once their union with him comes to be cleared up unto them, they then
acknowledge as they Es. 26. That he alone has wrought all their works in them,
that they are nothing, and have done nothing; and though before this revelation
of Christ, (as Christ said to Peter, What I do now thou know not, but thou
shall know, so) they knew not then that Christ had wrought all in them, yet
then they know it, and when they do know and discern it, they acknowledge it
with the greatest exaltation of him, they having reserved, even during all that
former time of their emptiness, the glory for him alone; staying as Joab did
for David, till Christ come more sensibly into their hearts, to set the crown
of all upon his head.

This I thought good to add, to clear this point, lest any poor souls should
be stumbled.

Doct. 4. In the most fruitful branches there remain corruptions unpurged out.
The 4. Doct. is, That in the most fruitful branches there remain corruptions
that still need purging out.

This is taken but as supposed in the text, and not so directly laid down, and
I shall handle it but so far as it makes way for what does follow. What shall I
need to quote much Scripture for the proof of it? Turn but to your own hearts,
the best will find proofs enough of it.

Reasons.

Romans wherein he was led captive to a Law, and an army of sin within him,
warring against the law of his mind, presently upon that woeful exclamation
and outcry there mentioned, Oh miserable man that I am, etc. he falls admiring
the grace of justification through Christ, they are his first words after the
battle ended, [Now] (says he) there is no condemnation to them that are in
Christ: Mark that word [Now] that now after such bloody wounds and gashes there
should yet be no condemnation, this exceedingly exalts this grace, for if ever
(thought he) I was in danger of condemnation, it was upon the rising and
rebelling of these my corruptions, which when they had carried me captive, I
might well have expected the sentence of condemnation to have followed, but I
find, says he, that God still pardons me, and accepts me as much as ever,
upon my returning to him; and therefore I do proclaim with wonder, to all the
world, that Gods justifying grace in Christ is exceeding large and rich. And
though there be many corruptions in those that are in Christ, yet there is no
condemnation to those who are in Christ, that walk after the Spirit, though
flesh be in them: And this at once both clears our justification by Christ's
righteousness alone, and also magnifies and extols it.

It clears it, therefore how does this remaining of corruptions afford to our
Divines that great demonstration against the Papists, that we are not justified
by works, nor are those works perfect, (which they so impudently affirm
against their own experience) even because corruption stains the best, and our
best righteousness is but as a menstruous cloth.

And as it clears it, so likewise it extols it: For how is Grace magnified,
when as not only all the sins and debts a man brought to Christ to pardon at
first conversion are pardoned, but after many relapses of us, and provings
bankrupt, we are yet still set up again by free grace with a new stock; and
though we still run upon new scores every day, yet that these should still be
paid, and there should be riches of love enough, and stock enough, that is,
merit enough to hold out to pardon us, though we remained in this mixed
condition of sinning, to eternity, this exceedingly advances the abounding of
this grace.

2. It serves exceedingly to illustrate the grace of perseverance, and the
power of God therein; for unto the power of God is our perseverance wholly
attributed. 1 Pet. 1. 5. Ye are kept (as with a garrison) as the word
signifies, through the power of God unto salvation. And were there not a great
and an apparent danger of miscarrying, such a mighty guard needed not; There is
nothing which puts us into any danger, but our corruptions that still remain in
us, which fight against the soul, and endeavor to overcome and destroy us. Now
then to be kept maugre all these; to have grace maintained; a spark of grace in
the midst of a sea of corruption; how does this honor the power of God in
keeping us? As much in regard of this our dependency on him in such a
condition, as he would otherwise be by our service, if it were pepfect, and we
wholly free from those corruptions. How will the grace of God under the Gospel,
triumph over the grace given Adam in his innocence? when Adam having his heart
full of inherent grace, and nothing inwardly, in his nature, to seduce him, and
the temptation that he had, being but a matter of curiosity, and the pleasing
his wife, and yet he fell: When as many poor souls under the state of grace,
that have but mites of grace in comparison, and worlds of corruption, are yet
kept, not only from the unnecessary pleasures of sin in time of prosperity,
but hold out against all the threats, all the cruelties of wicked persecutors
in times of persecution, which threaten to debar them of all the present good
they enjoy? And though Gods people are foiled often, yet that there should
still remain a seed within them, 1 John. 3. 9. this illustrates the grace of
Christ under the Gospel. For one act in Adam expelled all grace out of him,
when yet his heart was full of nothing else. Were our hearts filled with grace
perfectly at first conversion, this power would not be seen. The Angels are
kept with much less care, and charge, and power then we, because they have no
bias, no weights of sin, (as the Apostle speaks) hung upon them to draw them
aside, and press them down, as we have.

Neither 3. would the confusion of the devil in the end be so great, and the
victory so glorious, if all sin at first conversion were expelled. For by this
means the devil has in his assaults against us, the more advantages, fair
play, (as I may so speak) fair hopes of overcomming; having a great faction in
us, as ready to sin as he is greedy to tempt; And yet God strongly carries on
his own work begun, though slowly, and by degrees, backeth and maintains a
small party of grace within us, to his confusion. That as in Gods outward
government toward his Church here on earth, he suffers a great party, and the
greater still by far, to be against his Church, and yet upholds it, and rules
amongst the midst of his enemies, Psalm. 110. ult. so does he also in every
particular believers heart. When grace shall be in us but as a spark, and
corruptions as much smoke and moisture damping it; Grace but as a candle and
that in the socket, among huge and many winds, Then to bring judgment forth to
victory, that is a victory indeed.

Lastly, as God does it to advance his own grace, and confound the devil, so
for holy ends that concern the Saints themselves: As,

1. To keep them from spiritual pride. He trusted the Angels that fell, with a
full and complete stock of grace at first, and they, though raised up from
nothing a few days before, fell into such an admiration of themselves, that
heaven could not hold them, it was not a place good enough for them; [They
left] (the text says) their own habitation and first estate, Jude, ver. 6.
Pride was the condemnation of the devil, 1 Timothy 3. 6. But how much more would
this have been an occasion of pride to a soul that was full of nothing but
sin the other day, to be made perfect presently? perfectly to justify us the
first day by the righteousness of another, there is no danger in that, for it
is a righteousness without us, and which we cannot so easily boast of vainly;
for that faith that apprehends it, empties us first of our selves, and goes out
to another for it. But Sanctification being a work wrought in us, we are apt to
dote on that, as too much upon excellency in our selves; how much ado have
poor believers to keep their hearts off from doting upon their own
righteousness, and from poring on it, when it is (God wot) a very little? They
must therefore have something within them to pull down their spirits, that
when they look on their feathers, they may look on their feet, which Christ
says are still defiled, John 13. 10.

2. However, if there were no such danger of spiritual pride upon so sudden a
rise, (as indeed it befalls not infants, nor such souls as dye as soon as
regenerated, as that good thief) yet however God thinks it meet to use it as
a means to humble his people this way: even as God left the Canaanites in the
land, to vex the Israelites, and to humble them. And to have been thoroughly
humbled for sin here, will do the Saints no hurt against they come to heaven,
it will keep them Nothing for ever, in their own eyes, even when they are
filled brim full of grace and glory.

For 1. nothing humbles so as sin. This made him cry out, Oh miserable man
that I am! He that never flinched for outward crosses, never thought himself
miserable for any of them, but gloried in them, 2 Cor. 12. when he came to be
led captive by sin remaining in him, cries out, Oh miserable man!

And 2. it is not the sins of a fore-past unregenerate estate, that will be
enough to do this thoroughly: For they might be looked upon, as past, and gone;
and some ways be an occasion of making the grace after conversion the more
glorious: but present sense humbles most kindly, most deeply, because it is
fresh, and therefore says Paul, Oh miserable man that [I am.] And again, we
are not able to know the depth, and height of corruptions at once; therefore we
are to know it by degrees: And therefore it is still left in us, that after we
have a spiritual eye given us, we might experimentally gage it to the bottom,
and be experimentally still humbled for sin: And experimental humbling is
the most kindly, as pity out of experience is.

And 3. God would have us humbled by seeing our dependence upon him for
inherent grace; And how soon are we apt to forget we have received it; and
that in our natures no good dwells? We would not remember, that our nature
were a stepmother to grace, and a natural mother to lusts, but that we see
weeds still grow naturally of themselves.

And 4. God would have us not only humbled by such our dependence on him, but
by a sense of our continual obnoxiousnesse to him, and of being in his lurch;
and therefore leaves corruption still, that we might ever acknowledge that our
necks do even lie on the block, and that he may chop them off, and to see that
in him, we should not only live, and move as creatures; but further, that by
him we might justly be destroyed every moment, this humbles the creature
indeed, Ezekiel. 36. 31, 32.

3. As thus to humble them, so that they might have occasion to deny
themselves: Which to do is more acceptable to God, then much more service
without it; and therefore the great promise of having an hundred fold, is made
to that grace. It was the great grace, which of all other Christ exercised. Now
if we had no corruption to entice and seduce us, what opportunities were there
for us, thus of denying our selves? Christ indeed had an infinite deal of
glory to lay down, not so we: unless there be a self in us, to solicit us,
and another self to deny those solicitations, we should have no occasions of
self-denial, or the exercise of any such grace. Therefore Adam was not capable
of any such grace, because he had no corruption to seduce him. And therefore a
little grace in us, denying a great deal of corruption, is in that respect,
(for so much as is of it) more acceptable then his obedience. Though we have
less grace, yet in this respect of a higher kind in the exercises of it.

To be meek and charitable to those who fall into sin, Use. 1.
as knowing corruption is not fully yet purged out of thy self. This is the
Apostles admonition upon this ground, Gal. 6. 1. If a man be overtaken in a
fault, (he speaks indefinitely, that any man may) if it be but an overtaking,
not a sinning wilfully, and obstinately, but a falling by occasion, through
rashness, suddenness, and violence of temptation, etc. ye which are
spiritual, restore such a man with the spirit of meekness, considering thy
self, lest thou also be tempted. He would have every man be meek in his
censure, and in his reproof of such an one, and restore him, and put him in
joint again, as the word signifies; for still he may be united to Christ, as a
bone out of joint is to the body, though for the time rendered thereby
unusefull; and do this, says he, with tenderness and pity, with the spirit of
meekness, which a man will not do, unless he be sensible of his own
frailty, and subjection to corruption; unless he reflect on himself, and that
seriously too: [considering] says the Apostle there, as implying more then a
slight thought, (I may chance to fall also) but the seeing and weighing what
matter of falling there is in thine own heart, if God but leave thee to thy
self a little then; this works a spirit of meekness toward such an one: For
meekness and pity is most kindly, when we are sensible of the like in our
selves, and make it our own case. And this he speaks to the most spiritual
Christians, not to those who are as yet but as carnal, (as he speaks of the
Corinthians) Christians newly converted, who (finding their corruptions at the
first stounded with that first blow of mortification given them, and though but
in part killed, yet wholly in a manner for a while laid asleep, and having not
as yet, after their late conversion, had a fresh experience of the dangers and
temptations a man after conversion in his progress is subject to) are
therefore apt to imagine they shall continue free from assaults, and think not
that their lusts will get up again, and so are prone to be more censorious of
the falls of others: But you, who are more spiritual, to you I speak, says
the Apostle, for you are most meekned with a sense of your own weakness; and
even you, (says he) if you consider your selves, and what you are in your
selves, have cause to think that you also may be tempted.

Never set thy self any stint or measure of mortification, Use. 2.
for still thou have matter to purge out: Thou must never be out of physic all
thy life. Say not, Now I have grace enough, and health enough, but as that
great Apostle, (Not as if I had as yet attained, For indeed, thou have not)
Still press forward to have more virtue from Christ. If thou have prevailed
against the outward act, rest not, but get the rising of the lust mortified,
and that rolling of it in thy fancy; get thy heart deaded toward it also: and
rest not there, but get to hate it, and the thought of it. The body of death it
must not only be crucified with Christ, but buried also, and so rot, Romans 6.
4, 6. it is crucified to be destroyed, says the Apostle there: that is, to
moulder away more and more, after its first deaths wound.

Obser. 6. That branches that have brought forth true fruit, God takes them not
away.
The 6. Doctrine is, That those who are true branches, and bring forth any true
fruit pleasing to God, though they have many corruptions in them, yet God takes
them not away, cuts them not off: The opposition implies this, he speaks of
Taking away the other, not so of these, But purges them. It is an elegant
Paranomasia, (...), which the holy Ghost here uses.

For an instance to prove this, (wherein I will also keep to the Metaphor here
used) I take that place. Esaias 27. where this his care of fruitful branches,
with the very same difference put between his dealing with them, and the
unfruitful that is here, is elegantly expressed to us. God professes himself
the Keeper of a Vineyard his Church, ver. 2, 3. I the Lord do keep it, and
ver. 6. He shall cause them that come of Jacob to take root, Israel shall
blossom and bud, and fill the earth with fruit. But Israel having corruption
in him which would hinder his growth, he must be lopt and cut. And so in the
next verses, God is said to deal with him; but not so as to cut them off, as
he does others that are both his and their enemies. Has he smitten them as he
smote those that smote him? No. For in measure when it shoots forth, thou will debate with it. When Israel is but a tender plant, and first shoots
forth, he does but in measure debate with it, that is, in such a proportion as
not to destroy it, or cause it to wither, but that it may blossom more, he
measures out, as it were, afflictions to them, but stays his rough wind, as it
follows; that is, such afflictions as would shake that his plant too much, or
quite blow it down; but such a wind as shall make it fruitful, and blow away
its unkindly blossoms and leaves: so much and no more will He let out of his
Treasury, even he who holds the winds in his fists, and can moderate them as he
pleases. For his scope and purpose is nothing less then to cut off Jacob,
both root and branch, because of corruptions and sins that do cleave to him.
But this is all the fruit to take away the sin, says he, ver. 9. that is,
this is the fruit of that wind, and of all these his dealings with them: and
it is [All] the fruit, that is, all that he intends thereby, even to purge them.

But does he deal so with others? No, for the boughs of the most fenced City
wither, and are broken off and burned, ver. 10, 11.

First, Reas. 1.
because in Christ God accepts a little good, and it pleases him more, then
sin in his does displease him: And therefore as in nations he will not destroy
the righteous with the wicked, so nor in men will he cast away their
righteousness that is in them for a little wickedness sake, but will rather
purge out the one, and so preserve the other. This we have expressed under the
same Metaphor, Esaias. 65. 8. we have in hand, Thus says the Lord, as the new
wine is found in the cluster, and one says destroy it not; for a blessing is
in it: That is, look as when a man is about to cut down a Vine, and his axe
is even at the root of it, and one standing by, spies a cluster upon it, that
has new wine in it; which also argues there is sap still in the root, which
may yet bring forth more; Oh says he, destroy it not: even so says God of
nations and men that fear him: of nations, where he has many holy ones: So
there it follows, So will I do (with Israel) for my servants sake I will not
destroy them all; so it follows there: and thus he likewise says of particular
men, there is a blessed work in such a man's heart, though mingled with much
corruption, Oh destroy it not. Take away the sin if possible, but cut not off
the man: why should his grace perish with his wickedness? every dram of grace
is precious, it cost the blood of Christ, and he will not suffer it to be
destroyed.

Because he has ordained, Reas. 2.
that all the fruits of his children should remain, John 15. 16. Now if they
should be cut off, their fruit would wither, their work must perish with them;
now no man's work shall prove in vain in the Lord, 1 Cor. 15. ult. But though
the world, and all works, and lusts of the world will with their makers come to
nothing, Yet he that does the will of God endures for ever, 1 John 2. 17. As
the works of Christ in himself are eternal, so his works in us are eternal
also, because they are the fruits of what he did: He that sows liberally, and
gives to the poor, his righteousness remains for ever.

Thirdly, Reas. 3.
because he loves the person, and hates only the sin, therefore he preserves
the one, destroys only the other. This is all the fruit to take away the
sin. Thus Psalm. 99. 8. He forgave the persons, and took vengeance only on
their inventions. The Covenant that is made with us in Christ, is not a
covenant made with works, but with persons: And therefore though the works be
often hateful, yet he goes on to love the persons: And that he may continue to
love them, destroys out of them what he hates, but cutteth not them off. A
member that is leprous or ulcerous, a man loves it as it is his own flesh,
Ephesians. 5. 29. though he loathes the corruption and putrification that is in it:
and therefore he does not presently cut it off, but purges it daily, lays
plasters to it to eat the corruption out: whereas a wart or a wen that grows
to a man's body, a man gets it cut off, for he does not reckon it as his flesh.

Fourthly, Reas. 4.
therein God shows his skill, that he is able to deal with a branch which
has much corruption in it, so artificially, as to sever the corruption, and
let the branch stand still; utterly to cut down, and make spoil of all, there
is no great skill required to it; but to lop the branches in the right place,
and due time and season, so as they may become fruitful, this is from the
skill of the Husbandman. Come to unskilful Surgeons with a sore leg or arm,
and they seeing it past their skill, they talk of nothing but cutting it off,
and tell you it is so far gone, that there is no way else; but come to one that
is skillful indeed, that discerns it is not so perished, but it may be cured,
and he will try his art upon it: And so does God with branches and members that
have much corruption in them, he tryes his skill upon them, makes a great cure
of a leg or an arm, where he discerns some sound flesh, though much corrupted;
he can cut out the dead flesh, and let the sound remain, and so makes it whole
in the end.

Of comfort to those who are true branches, Use. 1.
and continue to bring forth fruit in the midst of of all the trials that
befall them, that God will not suffer them to be cut off by their corruption:
if any thing in them should provoke God to do it, it must be sin: Now for
that, you see how Christ promises that God will take order therewith, and will
purge it out of them. In the 89. Psalm. ver. 28, 29, 30. this is the covenant
made with David, (as he was a type of Christ, with whom the same covenant is
made sure and firm) That if his seed forsake my Law, and walk not in my
judgments, What, presently turn them out of doors, and cut them off, as those
he meant no more to have to do with? What, nothing but utter rejection? Is
there no means of reclaiming them? Never a rod in the house? Yes, Then will I
visit their transgressions with a rod, and their iniquity with stripes, whip
out their stobbornnesse and sinfulness, but my loving kindness will I not
take from him as I did from Saul, as it is 1 Chronicles. 17. 13.

Let the Saints consider this, that they may return when they are fallen, and
submit to him and his nature, and suffer him to do what he will with them, and
endure cutting, and lancing, and burning, so long as he cuts them not off;
endure chastning, and all his dealings else, knowing that all the fruit is but
to take away the sin to make them partakers of his holiness, and if by any
means, as Paul speaks of himself, as Phil. 3. be the means what it will, it
is no matter; And God, if at any time he seems to cut thee off, yet it is but
as the incestuous Corinthian was cut off, that the flesh might be destroyed,
and the spirit saved.

Of encouragement to go on still to bring forth more fruit to God: Use. 2.
For if you do, God will not cut you off, he will spare you as a man spares
his son that serves him; he will not take advantage at every fault to cast
one off. It was his own Law, Deuteronomy. 20. 19. that such trees as brought forth
fruit fit for meat, they should not destroy when they came into an enemies
country. Does God take care of trees? No, it was to teach us, that if we bring
forth fruit, he will not destroy us, if it be fruit indeed, fit for meat: Oaks
bring forth apples, such as they are, and acorns, but they are not fit for
meat; such treees they might cut down: So if thou bring not forth such fruit
as is for Gods taste and relish, wherein thou sanctifiest not God and Christ in
thy heart, thou may and wilt be cut down, but else not; If thou be
betrothed to Christ, and he has begotten children on thee, fear not a bill of
divorce, he will not lightly cast thee off: And it is a good argument to use to
him, desire him to spare thee by all the children he has begotten on thee:
Children increase love between man and wife, so between Christ and us.

Doct. 6. That unfruitful branches, God in the end cuts off, and the several
degrees whereby he cuts off professors that are unfruitful.

That unfruitful branches God in the end takes away: As he did Judas, who was
here especially aimed at. For proof, take Psalm. 125. It is a Psalm made of
purpose to show the different estate of the professors of Religion: Those that
are upright, ver. 4. he says, God will continue to do them good, and They
shall be at mount Sion, and all the gates of hell shall not be able to remove
one of those mountains: But because there are many, that like Planets go the
same course with the other Orbs, and yet have some secret by-way besides of
their own, of these he says, Those that turn aside into crooked ways, God
will lead them forth with the workers of iniquity: That is, in the end he will
discover them to be what they are: And though they go amongst the drove of
Professors, like sheep, yet God will detect them, either in this life, or in
the life to come, to be Goats: Though they did not seem to be workers of
iniquity, yet God will lead them forth with them.

Reasons why God deals thus with them.

First, because they dishonor the Root which they profess themselves to be
graffed into; they profess themselves to be in Christ: Now he is a fruitful
root, full of sap, and for any to be unfruitful in him, is a dishonor to him.
When you see unfruitful branches upon a tree, you blame the root for it; so
does the world blame the grace of Christ, the profession of Christ, yea even
the root it self, for the unfruitfulnesse of the branches. Therefore that they
may dishonor the root no more, he takes them away, cuts them off from that
root they seemed to stand in, and then they run out into all manner of
wickedness.

Secondly, Reas. 2.
because the Husbandman has no profit by them: Heb. 6. The ground that
brings forth thorns, and not fruit meet for him that dresseth it, is nigh to
cursing. In the 8. of the Cant. it is said, Solomon had a Vineyard, and he let
it out to Keepers, etc. He speaks this of Christ, of whom Solomon was a Type,
and of his Church; and his comparison stands thus: Solomon being a King, and
having many Vineyards for his Royalty, (for the riches of ancient Kings lay
much in husbandry) he let them out to Vine-dressers, and they had some gain by
them; But Solomon must have a thousand, and they but two hundred; the chief
gain was to come to Solomon. So the Vineyard that God had planted here below,
he lets it out to men, and they shall have some profit by it, you shall all
have wages for the work you do; yet so as the chief gain must return to
God, he must have a thousand for your two hundred. But when men will have all
the gains that is in what they do, set up their own ends only, and the
Husbandman shall have none, such branches he takes away, because they are not
for his profit, for it is made a rule of equity, 1 Cor. 9. 7. That he that
planteth a Vineyard, should eat of the fruit of it.

Because of all trees a Vine is good for nothing else but to bring forth fruit;
Reas. 3.
as we see it expressed to us, Ezekiel. 15. it is good for nothing but the fire
when it becomes unfruitful: Other trees are good for building, to make pins
of, but not the Vine: And this similitude God chose out, to show that of all
trees else, Professors, if unfruitful, are good for nothing, their end is to
be burned.

Now if you ask, The degrees of Gods cutting off unfruitful branches.
How God takes them away? The degrees he does it by are set down here, ver.
6. If a man abide not in me, etc. that is, fall away, then 1. They are cast
out, and 2. They wither, 3. They are gathered, 4. They are burned.

First, they are cast forth, that is, out of the hearts of Gods people, out of
their company, out of their prayers, yea and out of their society by
excommunication often, and many times they cast out themselves, being given up
to such errors, as discover them to be unsound: As Hymenaeus and Philetus, they
were forward Professors, so that their fall was like to have shaken many of the
fruitful branches, in so much that the Apostle was feign to make an Apology
about their fall, Nevertheless the foundation of God remains sure, 2 Timothy 2.
18. God gave them up to such opinions and heresies, as discovered their hearts
to be rotten and unsound: So also he gives these carnal professors up to such
sins as will discover them. This was the case of Cain, he brought forth some
fruit, for he sacrificed; yet because not in sincerity, he envied his brother,
and was given up to murder his brother, upon which it is said, that He was
cast out of the sight of the Lord, Genesis 4. 16. that is, cast out of his Fathers
family, and from the Ordinances of God there enjoyed, and made a vagabond upon
the face of the whole earth, which of all curses is the greatest: or else, as
was said, they of their own accord forsake the assembly of the Saints. The
Apostle makes this a step to the sin against the holy Ghost, Heb. 10. 25. he
says, That when men forsake the assemblies and company of the people of God,
public and private, and love not to quicken and stir up one another, or begin
to be shye of those they once accompanied, they are in a nigh degree to that
which follows in the next verse, To sin wilfully after they have received the
knowledge of the truth.

Secondly, being thus cast forth, they wither; that is, the sap of abilities
which they once had, begins to decay; that life in holy duties, and in holy
speeches, begins to be withdrawn, and their leaves begin to fall off, they
cannot pray nor speak of holy things, as they were wont. Thus it is said of
such Professors, Jude 12. That their fruit withers, even here in the eyes of
men; for when God casts them out, then he withdrawes his Spirit from them;
and then, although they come to the Ordinances, yet they have no breathings;
they come to Prayer, and the Spirit of God is departed, and so by degrees God
withdraws sap from them, till they be quite dead. Thus he dealt with Saul, when
he had discovered himself by sparing the Amalekites, and by persecuting David,
it is said, The Spirit of God departed from him, and he withered ever after,
all his gifts vanished, and the spirit or frame of heart he once had, departed
from him. So likewise they that had not gained by their talents, Mat. 25. 26.
their talents were taken from them, even in this life,, and the Spirit of God,
which rested upon them, rested upon some other that were more faithful.

Thirdly, lying long unfruitful, in the end it is said they are gathered. Our
Translation has it, Men gather them, which either respects a punishment in
this life, that when they are cast out from the society of Gods people, wicked
men gather them, they fall to those that are naught: Popish persons, or profane
Atheists take them, as the Pharisees did Judas, when he cast himself out of
the society of the Apostles. Or else it may in a Metaphor refer to the life to
come; the Angels, they are the Reapers, they gather them in the last day, and
bind them in bundles for the fire.

So lastly, it is said, They are cast into the fire, and they burn. A man
would think he needed not to have added that, for being cast into the fire,
they must needs burn: but his meaning is, that of all other they make the
fiercest, hottest fire, because they are trees most seared, and fuel fully
dry, as the Prophet speaks.

You then that profess the name of Christ, Use. 1.
take heed that you be fruitful branches indeed. I say to you as the Apostle
says, Rom: 11. 19, 20. Because of unbelief, they were broken off: Thou
stand by faith, be not high minded, but fear. Take heed that it be fruit
that you bring forth, do all for GOD, make him your end in all, bring forth
more fruit every day, let your fruit be riper, and more spiritual daily,
labor to spread, and root your selves as much downward in inward holiness, as
you do upward in outwardprofession, and purge your selves continually, lest
that which is threatened here, befall you, which are fearful things to be
spoken, and yet concern many a soul. The Apostle compares such to trees twice
dead, and plucked up by the roots. You were borne dead in Adam; since that you
have had perhaps some union with Christ by common graces; if your wither
again, then you are twice dead, and therefore fit for nothing but to be
stubbed up, and cast into the fire. And if any soul begin to forsake the
assemblies of the Saints, or be cast out from them, let him look to himself
lest he wither in the end, and be twice dead, and so he never come to have life
put into him again, that is, repent, and return again: And know this, that if
you being cast out by the Church and people of God, break your hearts, so that
you mourn for your sin, as the incestuous Corinthian did, it is a sign you
are such branches as God will yet make fruitful; but if beingcast out you
begin to wither, as here, the end will be burning.

THE TRIAL OF A CHRISTIANS GROWTH.
THE FIRST PART.
JOHN 15. 2. -- He purges it, that it may bring forth more fruit,
Of Growth in VIVIFICATION, and bringing forth more fruit.
CHAP. I.
That all true branches in Christ do grow.
GRowth in Grace is the main thing held forth unto us in these words; and
therefore I make in the chief subject of this Discourse.

Now as in the work of Sanctification at first there are two parts,
Mortification and Vivification; so our progress in that work has two parts
also apart to be considered, and both here in the Text:

1. A growth in Mortification, or purging out of sin, He purges it.

2. A positive growth in holiness, and all the fruits of it, That it may bring
forth more fruit.

And my purpose is accordingly to treat of these two, distinctly and apart by
themselves: And although purging out of sin is here first mentioned, yet our
growth in fruitfulness shall have the first place in the method of handling of
them; both because growth in positive holiness, and bringing forth more fruit,
is the end and perfection of the other, and so chiefly intended; the other but
subserving unto this, and is accordingly made mention of here by Christ, He
purges it, [That] it may bring forth more fruit.

Now in handling this first Head, I shall do three things:

First, in general, show, That all true branches do grow in grace and
fruitfulness, and the reasons of it.

Secondly, propound such considerations by way of explication, as may conduce
to satisfy the tentations of such Christians as discern not their growth
herein.

Thirdly, explicate more largely by way of trial, what it is to bring forth
more fruit, thereby further to help Believers to discern and judge aright of it.

My scope in this discourse being not so much to give means or motives unto
growth, as helps to judge of, and try our growth, and prevent such mistakes
herein, as Christians are apt to fall into.

First, in general, to demonstrate, that all true believers do grow more or
less in fruitfulness. I shall give both proofs and reasons of it.

For proofs out of Scripture, those two places Hosea the 14. 5. compared with
Psalm. 92. where the holy Ghost singleth out the choicest trees and flowers in
the world, on purpose to express the Saints fruitfulness, and their growth
therein.

As first, to show the sudden springing up of the new creature, as it falls out
upon some men's conversions, or upon the Saints recovery again after falls, he
compares them to the Lilly, Hos. 14. 5. whose stalk, though long hid in the
earth, when once it begins to feel the dew, grows up oftentimes in a night.
But yet a Lilly is but a flower, and soon decays.

Therefore secondly, so show their perpetuity, and stability, together with
their growth, the Prophet there compares them to the Cedar, whose wood rots
not, proverbially put to express immortality; Digna Cedro: And which is not
only most durable, but of all trees the tallest, and shoots up the highest.

But yet thirdly, suppose the new creature be kept under, and oppressed with
tentations and oppositions, yet to show that still it will grow and flourish
again: therefore he further compares them to a Palm tree, which uses to
grow, the more weight is hung upon it, and sprouts again, even when it is cut
down to the roots.

Fourthly, to show that they grow with all kinds of growth: therefore the
Prophet expresses their growth both by the spreading of their root, and also
of the branches, and so in a growth both upward and downward, He shall cast
forth his roots as Lebanon: that is, grow inwardly in habitual grace in the
heart, and then outwardly spread forth their branches, and so grow in the
outward profession of Gods ways and truth, and external holiness in their
lives.

Neither fifthly, is it a growth merely in bulk, but also in fruitfulness, and
therefore he compares them to the Olive and the Vine, (so in that place of
Hosea) which are of all trees the fruitfullest, and most useful to God and
man, Judge. 9. 9, 13.

But yet sixthly, trees have a flourishing time of it but for some while, during
which, although they may be thus green and fruitful, yet in their age they
wither and rot, and their leaves fall off, and their fruit decays: The holy
Ghost therefore as preventing this exception to fall out in the Saints growth,
he adds, Psalm. 92. They bring forth fruit still in their old age: When nature
begins to decay, yet grace renewes its strength; which if it be wondered at, and
how grace should grow and multiply, the soil of our hearts being a stepmother
to it, From me, says Christ, is thy fruit found, ver. 8. of that 14. of Hosea.
It is God that gives this increase, and I will be as the dew to Israel, ver. 5.

The reasons why Christians do thus grow, are drawn

First, Reas. 1. Drawn from Christ's being our head.
from Christ his being our Head, and we his members. Now although clothes
though never so gorgeous, grow not, yet members do. This similitude the
Apostle uses in two places, to express the growth of the Saints, Ephesians. 4.
15, 16. and Col. 2. 19. where he says, Christ is a head, from whom the whole
body grows up to him in all things. Now the consequence of this reason will
many ways appear.

First, if no more but that there might be a conformity of the head and
members, it was meet we the members should grow, for we are predestined to be
conformable to the Image of his Son, Romans 8. Now Christ did grow in wisdom,
Luke 1. ult. and 2. 40. and 42. and therefore so must we.

But secondly, as he is our Head, he has received all fullness to that every
end that we might grow even to fill all in all, Ephesians. 1. ult.

Now we are empty creatures, at his first taking of us, Joh. 10. 10. I came,
says Christ, that they might have life, (and not only so much as will keep
body and soul together, as we say, but) that they might have it more
abundantly. Why is grace called life, and of lives the most excellent, but
because it contains all the essential properties of life in it? Now the main
properties of life are to move and grow. The Stars they have a moving life, but
they grow not; the Sun increases not, for all its tumbling up and down, as
snow-balls do: Plants they have a growing life, but they move not out of their
place; but in Grace there is both. It is an active thing, and it is a growing
thing also; and because the more it is acted the more it grows, therefore its
growth is expressed by its motion.

Yea thirdly, as his fullness is for our growth, so our growth makes up his
fullness, even the fullness of Christ mystical, though Christ personal is
full without us: therefore the stature that every Christian grows up to, is
called, Ephesians. 4. 13. The stature of the fullness of Christ. In like speech to
this, Ephesians. 1. 23. it is said, that his body is his fullness: and Ephesians. 4. 13.
the growth of these members is said to be the fullness of Christ: so that as
Christ should be an head without a body, if he had no members, and his body a
lame body, if he wanted any of those his members: so it would be found a
disproportioned body, as it were, if any of these members should not grow to
that stature God has appointed them: So that as there will be plenitudito
partium, a fullness of parts, no member lacking; so also plenitudo graduum; no
degree of growth wanting in any part, that so Christ who fills all in all,
may be fully full. And as there would be a deformity if any one should not
grow, (as to have a withered member were a dishonor ^o the head) so to have
any one grow in immensum, to too great a stature, would breed as great a
deformity on the other side: therefore he adds, that every member has its
measure. The hand grows according to the proportion of a hand, and so the rest;
and so in the 13. ver. he has it, that there is a measure of the stature of
the fullness of Christ, that every one attains to.

The second reason is taken from God the Father.

Who first has appointed, Reas. 2. From God the Fathers appointment.
as who shall be members, so also what growth each of these members shall
attain to: therefore it is called an increasing with the increase of God, Col.
2. 19. Other parents appoint not what stature their children shall attain to,
but the Lord does, that when they meet in heaven, there may be a proportion in
the body: as all Christ's members were written in Gods book, so the growth of
them also.

Secondly, he has promised that they shall grow: therefore it is said, Psalm.
92. They so all bring forth fruit in their age, to show the Lord is faithful,
which respects his promise; for faithfulness is the fulfilling a promise.

Thirdly, God the Father has accordingly appointed means to that end,
principally that they might grow.

As first, Ephesians. 4. it is said, he has given gifts unto men, not that they may
be converted only, but also to build them up for the edifying of the body of
Christ: he speaks as if that were one maine end. Therefore the Word is not
only compared to seed, that begets men, but to milk also, that so babes may
grow, and to strong meat, that men may grow, and thus that all sorts of
Christians may grow. So also Sacraments, their principal end is growth, and
not to convert, but to increase; as meat puts not life in, but is ordained for
growth, where life is already.

2. He gives his Spirit, which works growth in the hearts of his people; and by
him they have a nutritive power conveyed from Christ: For it might be said,
though there be never so much nourishment, if they have no power to concoct it,
still they cannot grow; therefore the Apostle says, that there is an effectual
working to the measure of every part, Ephesians. 4. 16. the same power working in us,
which raised up Jesus Christ from death to life, Ephesians. 1. 19.

The last reason is taken from the Saints themselves; Reas. 3. From the Saints
themselves.
they could not otherwise enter into heaven; which I take from that place,
Except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye cannot enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven. He speaks this to his Disciples, who were converted before;
but says Christ, unless ye grow, (there being a farther measure appointed you
of my Father) you cannot enter into heaven. There is therefore as great a
necessity to grow, as to be borne again, or else we cannot enter into Heaven.

CHAP. II.
An explication how the Saints do grow: many considerations to satisfy those
that discern not their Growth.
HAving given you the reasons, I will now explicate the point.

And that chiefly for the satisfaction of those whose maine doubts and troubles
about their estate, are occasioned by their want of discerning themselves to
grow, and so call into question the work begun, because not carried on so
sensibly unto perfectias they expect and desire.

Their objections are many and diverse.

They say, when they were young, they then had more spiritual enlivenings, and
quickness of affections, more joy in duties, etc. that formerly they had more
zeal in what they did for the good of others, and more fruit of their labors;
that heretofore they have spent more time in duties, in conference, and
hearing, etc. that others start up, who have more grace the first day, then
they have been getting many years. Yea they are so far from discerning that
they grow, that they rather think that they fall back, and therefore fear even
the truth of grace in them, because all believers grow.

Now the scope of all which I shall speak of this argument, will tend to this,
to help such to discern and judge aright of their estates herein, and to free
them from such mistakes and errors as their objections are usually founded
upon.

And first, 1. Consideration in general.
concerning this kind of tentation and trouble, let me premise this one
Observation, concerning what sort of converts this temptation is aptest to
seize on.

You all know, that there are two more eminent and conspicuous manner of
conversions of Gods people usual in the Church. The conversion of some is more
sudden and apparent, like the bringing of Joseph out of a dungeon, into a
mavelous glorious light. It is with a sudden change, which therefore is
accompanied with a mighty violent inundation, and land-floud of humiliation for
sin, increased with many gracious enlargements and dews from heaven, which
afterward abating, and the stream settling and growing less, and coming to an
ordinary channel, and falling but unto so much as the natural spring of grace
(as I may so call it) will serve to feed, they then begin to call all into
question for their want of growth. Others on the contray, whose conversion has
been insensible, and carried on with a still and quiet stream, and have had a
more leisurely, gentle thaw; and their change from darkness to light has not
been sudden; but as the breaking forth of the morning, small at first, and not
discernable at what time day began then to break; these on the contrary are
exercised rather about the truth of the work begun, about the work of
conversion it self, and the right beginning of all at first; but their
tentations arise not from a want of growth so much, for this to them is more
evident and sensible, being like the morning light which grows clearer and
clearer to the perfect day, Prove. 4.

Now observe the different condition of these two sorts; The former of these
has a more apparent work at first, to show, as the evidence of their estate,
but are apt through desertions, neglects, and carnal presumption to call into
question their progress in it, and from thence to question the truth of that
first work begun. The other on the contrary sees a constant spring and stream
increasing, but cannot show the Wellhead, or when or where the spring began.
So that so apparent a work of grace begun, would become matter of assurance to
the one, but is checked with want of discerning growth answerable to such
beginnings. But an apparent growth, and fast going up of the building, comforts
the other, but yet so as they still are apt to question whether the foundation
of such a building be well and surely laid; that they are going on further to
perfection, this they clearly see, but whether they come in at the right gate,
or no, that is the scruple which exercises their spirits. Thus has our wise
God, as in the work of his providence, so of his grace, set the one against the
other, as Solomon speaks, that unto both these there might be occasion of
exercise left, that neither might confide in any works wrought upon them, but
fly alone to Christ; and that neither should rejoice against the other, or be
discontented with that way, wherein God has dealt with them.

In the second place, 2. More particular considerations.
there are some considerations to be added concerning a Christians discerning
his spiritual growth, which will be profitable to the thing in hand.

As first, 1. Consid.
that our growing in grace is a mystery to be apprehended by faith, rather
then by sense; our spiritual life it self is carried along by faith, much
more the discerning the increase of it. Yea and it being carried on by
contraries, as by falls and desertions, and even by our own opinions of our
decrease; therefore it is rather discerned by faith, then sense, for faith is
the evidence of things not seen.

Secondly, 2. Consid.
the eager desire that many Christians have to have more grace, together with
them, their going on to discern more and more their wants, (which in some
respect is a growth) these do keep them from thinking that indeed they do
grow. There is (as Solomon says) that makes himself poor, and has great
riches, Prove. 13. 7. because he enlarges his desires still, therefore still he
thinks himself poor. So hungry and greedy Christians, looking still to what
they want, and not to what they have, are still complaining and unthankful. If
thou would discern thy growth, do not compare the copy with thy writing,
but rather thy writing now with thy writing at the first: For this is a sure
rule, that the better thou learnest to write, the better copy does God daily
set thee; that is, gives thee to see more strictness in the rule, and so still
may think that thou want as much, and art as far short as at first, if
thus thou comparest thy self with nothing but thy sight of the rule it self.

The third Consideration, 3. Consid.
that if growth at any time be made sensible, and be discerned by sense, yet so
as after a while it is not so discernable as that great change was which was
made upon a man's first conversion: the reasons whereof are,

1. For at first conversion, the change was specificall, wholly from want of
grace, unto beginnings of grace: but the change in our growth afterward is but
graduall, that is, but addition of more degrees only, of something of the same
kind still: and therefore it does not so eminently affect the heart, as the
change at first conversion does. To be translated out of a Prison to a
Kingdom, as Joseph was, would affect more, then to have new Kingdoms added to
one that is a King already, as Alexander had.

2. Because then the newness makes a great impression: One that begins anew to
study any Art, his growth is sensible, because every thing he reads is new;
when as afterward in his reading he meets with the same thing again and
again, and with new notions but now and then, and yet he studies, it may be
harder, and learns what he knew before more perfectly, and adds new to his old.

A fourth Consideration to discern thy growth, 4. Consid.
there must be time allowed; For the time, says the Apostle, they might have
been teachers, Heb. 5. 12. implying, they must have had time to grow up to
perfection. Christians do not grow discernably till after some space. The
Sun goes up higher and higher, but we discern not its progress, till after
an hours motion. Things most excellent, have the slowest growth; but rushes
grow fast, but they are weaker kind of plants; herbs, and willows, and
alder-trees grow fast, but full of pith; Oaks more slowly, yet more solidly,
and in the end attain to a greater bulk.

Fifthly, 5. Consid.
consider the growth it self; there may be a great difference thereof in
several men: You heard that every man has a measure appointed to which he
must grow, but men are brought to this fullness several ways, which makes a
difference in their growth.

First, Some have the advantages of others, at first setting out; God gives
them a great stock of grace at first, and that for these causes:

1. When there is a present use of them; Paul was the last of the Apostles,
borne out of time, as himself complains, as one that was set to school long
after the rest of the Apostles, and yet came not behind any of them in grace,
because God was to use him presently. To some God gives five talents, to others
but two; so that he that has five, has as much given him at first, as he that
had but two had with all his gains, all his life time.

2. When a man is converted late, as he that came into the Vineyard at the
eleventh hour, was furnished with abilities to do as much as the rest, for
they all received but a penny.

Secondly, in the manner of their growth, some have advantage of others.

1. Some grow without intermission, as that great Apostle, and the Colossians,
who from the first day they heard of the Gospel, brought forth fruit, Col. 1.
15. Others have rubs, and for some time of their lives stand at a stay: And
thus some do, presently after their first conversion, as the Church of
Ephesus, who fell from her first love: Heb. 5. ult.
Others in old age, as the Hebrews, who when for the time they might have
taught others, were so far cast behind, that they had need be taught again the
first principles of Religion. Measure therefore not so your growth by a piece
of your lives, but by comparing your whole life together.

2. Some die sooner, and therefore God fits them for heaven sooner. Dorcas dyed
rich in good works, Stephen dyed full of the holy Ghost, Act. 9. It is with
several Christians, as with several, Planets: the Moon goes her course in a
month, the Sun in a year, the rest in many years, so as often they that live
shortest grow fastest.

CHAP. III.
What it is to bring forth more fruit, explicated Negatively by removing many
mistakes.
LEt us now see what it is wherein Christians may be said to grow, that so you
may be able to discern what it is to bring forth more fruit.

And this I will explicate two ways. First, negatively, what it is not to
bring forth more fruit really, though in appearance and in show it be a growth
in fruit, which occasions many mistakes.

Secondly, positively, what it is truly to bring forth more fruit.

For the first. First, to grow is not only or chiefly to grow in gifts, or
abilities, as to preach, and pray, etc. but to increase in graces: in gifts
only, so Reprobates may grow; yea, and so true Believers may grow, and yet not
bring forth more fruit: The Corinthians grew fast this way in respect of gifts,
they were enriched in all utterance and knowledge, and came behind in no gift,
1 Cor. 1. 7. and yet he tells them, that they were babes and carnal, Chap. 3.
2, 3. And therefore in the 12. Chap. after he had spoken of gifts, and
endeavoring to excel therein, (as they did) he tells them that indeed they
were things to be desired, and therefore exhorts them to covet the best gifts;
but, yet, says he, I show unto you a more excellent way, in the last ver. of
that 12. Chapter. And what was that? It follows in the 13. Chap. even true
grace, charity, love to God, and love of our brethren: A dram of that is, says
he, worth a pound of the best fruit of gifts. And so his discourse, Chap. 13.
does begin, ver. 1. Though I speak with tongues of men and Angels, yet if I
have not charity, etc. Gifts are given for the good of others, to edify them
especially, 1 Cor. 12. 7. but Graces, as love, faith, and humility, these are
given to save a man's own soul; and therefore therein is the true growth: Yet as
concerning this, I will propound a Caution or two.

Indeed, Caution 1.
growth in gifts, together with growth in Sanctification running along with it,
will increase our account, for God will crown his own gifts in us, if as they
come from Christ, so they be used in him, and for him in our intentions; but
otherwise they puff up and hinder. They serve indeed to set out, and garnish
the fruit, and to help forward the exercise of graces; they are good fruit
dishes, to set the fruit forth: But if grace grow not with them, we bring not
forth much fruit, for at best they are but blossoms, not fruit.

Again, 2.
men are indeed to endeavor to grow in these gifts of memory, and instructing
others, and conferences, etc. As was said to Timothy, Let thy profiting appear
to all, 1 Timothy 4. 15. and to the Corinthians, Covet the best gift, especially
whilst you are young; yet we are not simply thereby to take an estimate of our
growth.

Though this let me withal add, 3.
that often by increasing in grace, a man increases in gifts, and for want of
increasing in grace, gifts also do decay. The Talents being used faithfully,
were doubled, and unfaithfully, were lessened.

And this consideration may help to answer some doubts and objections which
some Christians have about their growth, as because they cannot pray so well as
others, nor do so much service to the Saints as some do, therefore they bring
forth less fruit. Thou may bring more fruit for all that, if thou walk
humbly in thy calling, and prayest more fervently, though less notionally, or
eloquently. By how much the more we are humble, prize our selves less by them;
and use them in Christ, and for Christ, seeing they come all from him: the more
we are contented to want them, and not envy others that have them; so much the
more fruit we bring forth, even in the want of such gifts.

Again, decay in gifts, as in old age, does not always hinder men from
bringing forth more fruit. As, although they cannot remember a Sermon so well
as they had wont, nor preach with that vigor, and vivacity, and quickness
when they are old, nor be so active, stirring, forward, it follows not that
they bring not forth more fruit. David when he was old, could not govern the
Kingdom, nor do the Church that service he had done formerly, yet true fruit
he might grow in, in regard of his personal carriage toward God for his own
salvation. A Musician when he is young, is able to sing sweetlier then when he
is old; or when his vigor decays, his joints grow lame, he cannot play as he
had wont; yet still he may grow a better Musician, and have more skill, and set
better. Affections, the quickness of them depends much upon bodily spirits.

Secondly, 2.
our bringing forth more fruit, it is not to be measured simply by our success
toward others in the exercise of those gifts (though that be called fruit
also: so Jer. 17. 10. they are called the fruit of our doings: there are our
doings, and the fruits of our doings; that is, the success which our examples,
or gifts, or graces, have upon others; and so the conversion of the souls of
men by the Apostles is called by Christ their fruit, John 15. 16.) yet simply
by this we are not to reckon our growth: for in success toward others in the
exercise of those gifts (though that be called fruit also: so Jer. 17. 10. they
are called the fruit of our doing: there are our doings, and the fruits of our
doings; that is, the success which our examples or gifts, or graces, have upon
others; and so the conversion of the souls of men by the Apostle is called by
Christ their fruit, John 15. 16.) yet simply by this we are not to reckon our
growth: for in success and exercise of gifts, a man may decrease when he
grows older, and so see less fruit of his labors them formerly, or happily he
may be laid aside; so says the Baptist of himself, I must decrease, John 3.
30. John, when Christ came to preach, had less commings in: And in this
respect, old Christians, and ancient Ministers, may decrease, and young ones
increase, and yet they decay not in grace; for there are Gods works in us, and
Gods works with us: Now Gods work with us in doing good to others, may be
less, when yet his works in us may be more: for as there are diversities of
gifts, so of operations, 1 Cor. 12. The holy Ghost may use one of less grace
to do more good then one of more, though herein this caution is to be added,
that he delights usually to honor those of most sincerity, with most success;
as in that eminent Apostle, Paul, the grace of God was more in him, and so
wrought more with him in doing much good to others, 1 Cor. 15. 10. and God also
will reward according to the fruit of our doings, as Jer. 17. 10. when our
desires are enlarged to do much good, and we intended and aimed to do that
good which is done: there it is added there, in that Jer. 17. Whose heart thou
know. When he sees the heart clearly enlarged to do much good, then the
fruit that is done is reckoned him as his; otherwise what ever it be he does by
us, he will reward but according to our works, as concurrent with his. So 1
Cor. 3. 8. the Apostle upon this occasion intimates, that seeing it is God that
gives the increase, he says, that God will reward men according to their [own
labors;] not simply according to his works by them: as if God does not go
forth with a Minister, whose heart is much set to do good, and to convert
souls, to do so much good by him as with another, who is in his own spirit
less zealous; yet if his heart was large in desires, and his endeavors great
to do good, God will reckon more fruit to him then to another that had fewer
endeavors, though more success.

Thirdly, 3.
this growth in grace, and bringing forth more fruit, is not simply to be
reckoned by the largeness or smallness of those opportunities which men have
of doing more or less good, and so, By the bringing forth of more fruit, in
respect of more opportunities vouchsafed. Some that have more grace, and better
gifts, have their shop-windowes shut, night overtakes them, and the power of
darkness, as it did Christ himself in the end, and then they cannot work.
Others have lesser shops to work in, and yet have more grace; yea, the same man
may have larger opportunities when young, and lesser when he is old, and yet
grows, and brings forth before God more fruit, because he accepts the will for
the deed: So the Baptist was hindered in his latter time in prison, when yet he
brought forth more fruit, and therefore he envied not Christ that got all his
custom, his hearers and Disciples, but rejoiced that the work went forward,
though not by himself: here was as much grace expressed, as in many Sermons. So
Paul, he was much of his time in prison, yet then he ceased not to bring forth
more fruit that should tend to his salvation, for Phil. 1. 15, 16. when as he
being in prison, he heard others preached, and that out of envy to him, others
out of good will, I in prison rejoiced, says he, that Christ is preached,
though I cannot do it my self: and I know, says he, that this shall turn to
my salvation, ver. 19. These fruits were as much, and would bring him in as
much glory as his preaching. Indeed when a man shall prize opportunities of
doing good, and for them voluntarily let go all opportunities of advancing
himself and his credit, or ease, or carnal advantages, then the more fruit he
brings forth in those opportunities, the more is reckoned on his score.

Fourthly, 4.
it is not always to be measured by accessory graces, as joy, and spiritual
ravishment, etc. which tend to the been esse, the comfort of a Christian: but
it is to be estimated rather by those substantial graces, as faith, humility,
love, strong and solid affections to what is good. The other may decrease, when
these that are more substantial do increase. These sweet blooms may fall off,
when fruit comes on; though the gloss wear out, no matter, so the stuff be
strong and substantial. Young Christians grow like new instruments; they have
more varnish then old, but not so sweet a sound. Yea, often the decreasing of
those superadded graces are a means of the increase of the other: want of
feeling causes more exercise of faith, as taking away bladders exercise a man
to swim: One that has bladders, and the stream with him, seems to swim as
well and as fast as one that has learned long, and has more skill and
strength, but wants these, and swims against the stream, yet not so fast.
Spiritual withdrawings cause more humility, more cleaving to God. A man, as
the Leper cleansed, happily at the first leaps more, but goes as fast afterward.

Fifthly, 5.
it is not increasing in outward professing, and a seeming forward, but
especially in inward and substantial godliness; the other is but as
increasing in leaves; but in growth, there must be a bringing forth more fruit.
When the root strikes not deeper downward, and farther into the earth, but
spreads much upward in the branches, this is not a true growth; though look
where there is more rooting, there will be more spreading also above ground.
Growth, it lies not in this, That men should think of me above what I am
indeed, 2 Cor. 12. 6. Many at first grow into so great a profession, as they
cannot fill up, and grow up to all their days; make bigger clothes then they
can grow to fill: As they say of Elephants, that the skin is as big at first,
as ever after, and all their life time their flesh grows but up to fill their
skin up. True growth begins at the vitalls, the heart, the liver, the blood
gets soundness and vigor, and so the whole man outwardly; this heart
Godliness is the thing you must judge by.

And yet sixthly, 6.
even in inward affections many be deceived: even there the party for Christ in
appearance may be greater then in truth. So often in a young Christian, there
is a greater army of affections mustered, but most of them but mercenaries: his
affections are then larger, his joys greater, his sorrows violenter then
afterward: More of his heart joins in duties at first; but afterward, though
less, yet more spiritually and truly. The objects being then new, draw all
after them; not only Spirit, or that new principle of grace is stirred then,
but flesh also. The unregenerate part becomes a Temporary Believer for a time,
has a work upon it per redundantiam, as an unregenerate man has who is a
Temporary: which work on the unregenerate part does decay, as in Temporaries it
does, and grows less: not only godly sorrow is stirred to mourn for sin,
but carnal sorrow being awakned by Gods wrath, joins also, and so makes the
stream bigger. Infidelity it self, like Simon Magus, for a while believes.
Whilst the things of grace are a wonder to a man, (as at first they are)
presumption joins and eekes out faith; a great party in the heart cleaves by
flattery, (as the phrase is in Daniel) and for by-ends, which after some
progress fall off and faint in the way; and those lusts that over and above
their true mortification were further cast into a swoune, begin again to
revive. All this was resembled to us by the coming of the Children of Israel
out of Egypt, when by those plagues in Egypt, and Moses his call, not only the
Israelites, but even many of the Egyptians were wrought upon, and began out of
self-love to fear the Lord, Exodus 9. 20. and so a mixed multitude, it is said,
went out with the Israelites, Exodus 20. 38. to sacrifice to the Lord; but ere
long, as Numb. 11. 4. this mixed multitude began to murmur, and to fall off: So
at a man's first setting out, at his first conversion, mixed carnal affections,
the unregenerate part, through the newness of the objects, and impression of
Gods wrath, and heavenly ravishments, are wrought upon, and go out with the
new Israel to sacrifice, but after a while these fall away, and then the number
is less; but the true Israelites may be increased. Hence it is, that young
Christians, (if they know their hearts) complain more of hypocrysie, and old
Christians of deadness. So in times of peace, presumption eeks out faith, and
makes it seem a great deal, which in times of desertion and trial, falls off;
and then though the believing party be less, yet more sincere. When the fire
is first kindled, there is more smoke, even as much as fills the house; but
after the flame comes, that contracts all into a narrow compass, and has more
heat in it: So it is in young Christians, their affections, (which Christ
compares to the smoking flax) their joy in duties, their sorrow for sin,
their love of God is more, but exceeding carnal; the flame after, though less,
grows purer, and less mixed with vapors of corrupt self-love.

Seventhly we must not measure our bringing forth more fruit by one some kind
or sort of duties, 7.
but by our growth in godliness, in the universal extent and latitude of it,
as it takes in and comprehends the duties of both callings, general and
particular, and all the duties of a Christian. Thus it may be when grown up we
are less in some sort of duties, then we were when we were young Christians:
Happily we were more then in praying, in fasting, and reading, and meditating,
yea spent the most (if not the whole) of our time in these; But because now we
spend less time in these, we must not say therefore that we are fallen, or
decayed: for there are many other duties to be done besides these, which happily
then we neglected, but now make conscience of. So that take all sorts of duties
in the latitude of them, and we may be grown more, and do bring forth more
fruit. Perhaps we bring forth less fruit of some one kind then before, but if
we be filled with all variety of fruits of the first and second table of our
general and particular callings, this is to bring forth more fruit. Men at
their first conversion are necessitated often for to spend their whole time in
such duties wherein they immediately draw nigh to God: Paul then spent three
whole days in fasting and prayer: And then we allow them to do it, because
their estates require it; they want assurance, and establishment, they see
grace to be that one thing necessary, and therefore we give them leave to
neglect all things for it; they are new married to Christ, and therefore they
are not to be pressed to war the first year, (as I may so allude) as for young
married persons it was provided in Leviticus; and parents and masters are to
give allowance to such, then in their travel of their new birth to lie in, and
not to be cruel to them, in denying them more time then ordinary. So also when
they are in desertion, (which is a time of sickness, and in sickness you
allow your servants time from their work) as the Church, when she wanted her
Beloved, Cant. 3. 2. no wonder if she leaves all to seek him: As your selves,
when you want a child or a servant, you cry him in every street, and leave all
to find him, as he left ninety nine to find one lost sheep. And they then come
new out of prison, out of their natural estate, and out of the fresh
apprehension of the wrath of God, and therefore no wonder if they run so fast
to haste out of it, and salute none by the way, stay to do no business; but
when once they are gotten to the City of refuge, then they fall about their
business and callings again. Hence young Christians are apt to be more
negligent in their particular callings, and are all for the duties of Religion,
for their present distress and estate requires it: Ancienter Christians are
apt to abound more in the duties of their particular calling; but he that has
learnt to be conversant in both aright, to be conversant in his calling, so as
to keep his heart up in communion with God, and so attend upon God without
distraction, and to be conversant so in duties, as to go about his calling
cheerfully, and to do with all his might what his hand therein finds to do,
he is the best Christian: And therefore 1 These. 4. 10. when he had exhorted
them to increase more and more in grace, he goes on, ver. 11. to exhort them
also to do their own business, and to work with their hands, that they may
walk honestly toward them without: for to neglect our callings, gives offense
to them without; and therefore masters stumble at young Christians: but both,
you see by the Apostles exhortation in that Epistle, may stand together,
increasing in holiness, of which he had spoken before, Chap. 3. 12. and Chap.
4. 1. and ver. 10. with diligence in a calling, of which he speaks, ver. 11.
etc. To be conversant all day in holy duties, is indeed more sweet to a man's
self, and is an heaven upon earth: but to be conversant in our callings, is
more profitable to others, and so may glorify God more: And therefore as when
Paul would gladly have been with Christ, (for that is best for me, says he)
yet says he, To abide here is more profitable for you, Phil. 1. so to enjoy
immediate communion with God in Prayer, and to meditate all the week long, is
more for the comfort of a man's particular; but to be employed in the business
of a man's calling, the more profitable for the Church, or Commonwealth, or
Family. And therefore it is to be accounted a bringing forth of more fruit,
when both are joined, and wisely subordinated, so as the one is not a hindrance
to the other: though the child out of love to his mother, and the sweetness he
has in her company, could find in his heart to stay all day at home to look on
her; yet it pleases her more for him to go to school all day, and at night,
to come home and be with her, and play with her; and she then kisseth him, and
makes much of him. Children when they are young, they eat often, and do
little, and we alllow them to do so; afterward you set them to work, and to
school, and reduce them to two good meals, and they thrive as well with it.

CHAP. IV.
What it is to bring forth more fruit, explicated positively, wherein many
direct trials of Growth are given.
THus I have shown you negatively, what this growth is not to be measured by,
and so by way of intimation wherein it consists; I will secondly do it more
positively, and directly, and affirmatively.

First, 1. Trial.
we grow, when we are led on to execise new graces, and so to add one grace to
another, as the Apostle Peter exhorts; as when in our knowledge we are led into
new truths, and have answerable affections running along with those discoveries
toward the things revealed. At first a Christian does not exercise all graces,
though all are radically in him: But as a man lives first the life of a plant,
then of sense, then of reason, so is it in Graces. There are many forms
Christians go through, as scholars at school do, wherein their thoughts are
in a more especial manner taken up about divine objects of an higher or
inferior nature. The first form is to teach them to know their sinfulness of
heart and life more; and so they go to school to the Law, and are set to
study it, even oftentimes a good while after conversion, and faith begun: and
then after they have learned that lesson thoroughly, they are led up higher to
have their faith drawn out, and to be exercised about free grace more, and
toward Christ his person, union with him, and about the art and way of drawing
virtue from him, and doing all in him. And herein it falls out with particular
Christians, as with the Church in general; that as although the most infant
days of the Church from Adams time in the old world had the knowledge of all
Fundamentals, necessary to salvation, yet God went over (...), piecemeale, Heb.
1. 1. Age after Age, to instruct his Church in a larger knowledge of those
Fundamentals: So is it in Gods dealing with particular Christians, though a
Believer in his conversion has the substance of all these taught him, yet he
goes over them by piecemeale again, throughout his whole life; and has often
such a distinct apprehension renewed of them, as if he had not known or minded
them before: And sometimes his thoughts do dwell more about the emptynesse of
his own righteousness, sometimes about that fullness is in Christ, sometimes
more about the spiritual strictness he ought to walk in: And because some are
apt to give up the old work, when they have new; hence that which is indeed but
growth in grace in them, many account to be but their first conversion; though
every such eminent addition be to be accounted as a conversion, as Christ
speaks to his Disciples, Except ye be converted; yet they were converted before.
Now the purpose I speak this for, is an help to discern our growth; for when
God thus is leading us with farther light and affection to a larger
apprehension of spiritual things, or to the trying new graces, so long we
grow. Therefore Cant. 7. ult. the Church is said to lay up for her beloved
[fruits new and old:] And Romans 5. from patience a man is led to experience,
from experience to hope. As wicked men are led on from one sin to another,
and so grow worse and worse; so godly men from one grace to another: and when
it is so with us, then we increase.

Secondly, 2. Trial.
when a man finds new degrees of the same grace added, and the fruits of them
grow bigger and more plentiful; as when a man's love grows more fervent, as 1
Pet. 4. 8. when faith, from man's casting it self on Christ, comes to find
sweetness in Christ, which is to eat his flesh, and drink his blood; and then
from that grows further up to an assurance of faith, which is an addition to
it: When any thing that was lacking in faith, (as the Apostle speaks, 1 These.
3. 10.) is added. So when a man grows up to more strength of faith in
temptations, and is less moved and shaken in them, more rooted in faith, as
the Apostle speaks. Thus in godly sorrow, when from mourning for sin as
contrary to Gods holiness, we go on to mourn for it as contrary to him who
loves us, which follows upon assurance, as they mourned over him which once
they had pierced: not only that we mourn that we should offend a God has so
much mercy in him, but out of a sense of it to us, which many cannot find: so
when our motives to hate sin grow more raised, more spiritual, these are
additions of the same degree. So in Prayer, when we find our prayers to grow
more spiritual, as in that part of Prayer, Confession, when more spiritual
corruptions are put into our confessions; and so in like manner, stronger
grounds of faith put into deprecation, and petitions for pardon; more
enlargednesse to thankfulness; more zeal to pray for the Churches; when we go
on to pray with all prayer more, as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 6. 18. Or in
obedience, when we abound more and more in the work of the Lord, as Rev. 2. 9.
it is said of that Church, that their last works were more then the first; so
as the boughs are laden, and we are filled with the fruits of righteousness,
Phil. 1.

Thirdly, 3. Trial.
when the fruits and duties we perform grow more ripe, more spiritual though
less juycie; that is, less affectionate: and though they grow not in
bigness, nor in number, that is, we pray not more, nor longer; yet they grow
more savoury, more spiritual, more compact and solid. It is not simply the
multitude of performances argue growth: When one is sick, and his body is
decayed, he may be less in duties; but it is the spiritualnesse, the holiness
of them: One short Prayer put up in faith, with a broken heart, is in Gods eye
more fruit then a long one, or a whole day spent in fasting; even in the same
sense that the widows mite, is said to be more then they all cast in, Luke 21.
3. Young Christians perform more duties at first, and oftener, then after; as
young stomachs eat more and oftener. As in nothing Sermons, so in performing
duties, some will note more words, but not more matter, because with less
understanding; young Christians perform more duties, and withal spoil more
duties; young Carpenters make many chips: But the more spiritual your
performances grow, the more fruit there is to be esteemed that there is in
them. It is not the bigness of the fruit, or juycinesse of them, for then
crabs were better then apples, but the relish it is that gives the
commendation: And it is the end you have therein, that puts this relish into
them: when your ends are raised more to aim at God, and to sanctify him more,
and to debase your selves in a sense of your own vileness, and emptiness,
and unability; and when your obedience proceeds more out of thankfulness, and
less out of the constraint of conscience. As the greatest growth of wicked men
is in spiritual wickedness, (in which the Pharisees grew, and sinners against
the holy Ghost do grow, when yet it may be they leave more gross evils) so
the greatest growth of grace is in spiritual holiness, in sanctifying God
much in the heart, and worshipping him in spirit and truth.

Fourthly, 4. Trial.
when a man grows more rooted into Christ, that is the true growth; and that
which makes the fruit to be more in Gods sight and esteem: therefore Ephesians. 4.
15. we are said to grow up in him; that is, to live the life we lead, more out
of our selves and in Christ: as when for the acceptance of our persons we are
emptied of our own righteousness; so for strength to perform duties, we are
emptied of our abilities, seeing without him we can do nothing: So when for
acceptance of our performances when we have done them, our hearts have learnt
habitually to say more and more with the Apostle, Not I, but Christ in me; when
we interest Christ more and more in all we do, as the efficient and also the
final cause. And therefore I observe when growth of grace is mentioned, it is
still expressed by growing in the knowledge of Christ: So 2 Pet. 3. 17. Grow in
grace, and in the knowledge of Christ; as if to grow in grace without him, were
nothing, as indeed it is not. So in the Ephesians we are said both to grow up
in him, and for him. Philosophers did grow in moral virtues, but not in
Christ; so do Civil men and others; Temporaries do duties from him, but yet
as in themselves; as the Ivy that has sap from the Oak, but concocts it in
its own root, and so brings forth as from it self. To do one duty,
sanctifying Christ and free grace in the heart, is more then a thousand: young
Christians, it may be, do more works, but not as works of grace: and the more
men think by duties to get Christ, and Gods favor, the more in duties they
trust, and so they become as works of the Law; but the more dead a man grows to
the Law; and to live to Christ, and Christ in him; and the more free grace is
acknowledged in all, trusted in above all; the more Evangelicall our works are,
and the more to God, (for that is the end of the Gospel, to honor Christ and
free grace) the more we grow. We are of the Circumcision, says the Apostle,
who rejoice in the Lord Jesus, worship God in the spirit, and have no
confidence in the flesh, Phil. 4. As these are the surest signs of true grace,
so of true Growth.

Fifthly, 5. Trial.
the more we learn to bring forth fruits in season, the more fruit we may be
said to bring forth: For the seasonable performance of them makes them more.
All the fruits in their season, how acceptable are they? which out of season,
they are not. In the first Psalm a righteous man is said to bring forth his
fruits in due season: and in the Proverbs, Words in season are as apples of
gold and pictures of silver. In Ezekiel. 41. they are said to bring forth pleasant
fruits in their months; as in reproving he is not so much to reprove, as to
reprove in season; to have our senses exercised to know fit seasons, and to
consider one another to provoke to love, as it is Heb. 10. Young Christians do
more, but more out of season, and the devil abuses them, putting them upon
duties, when they would be at their refreshings, at their callings; he
deceiving them with this, that holy duties in themselves as alone simply
compared, are better then to do any thing else; when as the season adds the
goodness to our actions: Thus to recreate thy self at some seasons is better
then to be a praying. A righteous man orders his conversation aright, Psalm. 50.
and order gives a rectitude, a goodness to things.

Sixthly, 6. Trial.
when we grow more constant in performances, and more even in a godly course,
and settled in spiritual affections without intermission, it is a sign we
grow. It argues that our inward man is more renewed day by day, when we can
walk closely with God a long while together. A righteous man is compared to
the Palm tree, whose leaf never fades, Psalm. 1. whereas other trees bring
forth by fits: And by fits to be much in duties, is not a sign of growth, but
weakness; it is out of inordinacie; and of such a frame are young Christians
hearts, like new lute strings, which when they are wound up high, are still a
falling ever and anon; whereas strings settled long on an instrument, will stand
long, and not slip down.

Seventhly, 7. Trial.
a man may be said to grow and bring forth more fruit, when although the
difficulties of doing duties become greater, and his means less, yet he
continues to do them, and this though it may be he does no more then he did
before. For a tree to bring forth much fruit in cold weather, or standing in
the shade, is more then in summer, or when it stands in the sun. I know thy
work, thy labor, [and thy patience] Rev. 2. 13. When a man though he do fewer
works, yet with much labor, having it may be now a body grown weak; or holds
out in the profession of the ways of God, with more scoffs, and hazarding
more, in a place where Satan's throne is, this makes a little done for Christ a
great deal: So when a man thrives with a little trading, with small means of
grace, and yet exceeds those that have more; to pray, and to continue to do
so, though the stream is against us, and gales cease; to pray and to continue
to pray, when we hear no answers but the contrary. It is noted of Daniel, that
he did the Kings business after he had been sick, Dan. 8. 27. and so he prayed
(you know) when he ventured his life for it: when we have less straw to make
the same number of brick with; less wages, less encouragements, and yet do
as much work with cheerfulness.

8. When a man though he does less for the outward bulk, 8. Trial.
yet grows more wise and faithful to lay out all his opportunities and
abilities to the best advantage, this is to bring forth more fruit. Thus Moses
who at first began to hear himself all causes both small and great, but in
the end he gave over the lesser causes to others, and reserved the hearing of
the greater to himself, Exodus 18. 10. yet still he continued to do more, and
laid himself out to the greater advantage: His former course would in the end
have killed him; Thou will wear away like a leaf, says Jethro to him: So the
Apostle who strived to preach the Gospel where Christ had not been known,
Romans 15. 20. When a man forbeares lesser things to lay out all for the Churches
advantage; less ventures himself in a smaller course (unless particularly
called to it) not out of fearfulness but faithfulness, and will lay all the
stock on it in a greater: Young Christians are as young Fencers, they strike
hand over head, down right blows: whereas if they would consider their
brother, or a wicked man whom they would reprove, as skillful fencers do, and
at an advantage hit them a good blow, is it not much better? when a man
watches in all things, as he exhorts Timothy, 2 Timothy 4. 5. and serves the
season, as some read it, Romans 12. 11. that is, waits for the best advantages
of doing good, both which may stand with fervencie of spirit, and enduring
afflictions, for so the next words are in both those places. A man is no less
liberal that studies how to lay out his money to most charitable uses, though
he gives less to fewer particulars. We live in a wicked world, and godly men
cannot do what they would, as wicked men also cannot. When therefore a man
looks about him, and studies to improve himself to the utmost advantage for
God in his place, to lay out his credit, his parts, and all for God, as a
faithful Factor in the best wares, though he deals in fewer particulars, he
may notwithstanding bring forth more fruit. And thus much for matter of Trial
about the first thing, positive growth in fruitfulness.

THE TRIAL OF A CHRISTIANS GROWTH.
THE SECOND PART.
Of Growth in MORTIFICATION, or Gods purging out Corruption, -- He purges it,
that it may bring forth more fruit.
CHAP. I.
The Observation out of the Text propounded, That God goes on to purge
corruptions out of true branches: Bounds set to this discourse about it,
according to the scope of the Text: The reasons of the point.
I Come now to the Trial of our Growth in that other part of Sanctification,
namely, the Mortification of lusts, and purging out of corruptions, which the
Text also calls for; Christ here saying not only that they bring forth more
fruit, but that God purges them that they may bring forth more fruit.

The Observation from which words is clearly this, That God chooses true
branches to grow, in a purging out of their corruptions, as in true
fruitfulness.

In the handling of this point, I shall do these four things:

First, set the bounds and limits of this Discourse about it, according to
Christ's intendment, as here he speaks of it.

Secondly, give some reasons of the point.

Thirdly, show the ways which God uses to carry on the progress in this work.

Fourthly, give some helps of Trial about it.

Now for the first, the explication and limiting this point unto Christ's
intendment here, that so I may only so far handle it as the scope of the words
will bear, I premise these three things about it.

1. That purging here intended, (which is indeed all one with Mortification,
and emptying out sin out of our hearts and lives) is to be restrained here to
the progress of a Christian in that work, and not as taking in with it that
first work of mortification wrought at a man's first conversion: so as I intend
not now to lay open to you the nature of mortification, and what it is, by way
of Common place, but only intend to speak of Growth in it: for of that Christ
speaks, because it is such a purging, as is after bringing forth some fruit,
and whereof the end is to bring forth more fruit.

Neither 2. are we so much to speak of it here, as it is a duty to be done by
us, (though it be so) but as it is a work of God upon us, which he takes care
to go through with, and perfect in all those who are fruitful: for he speaks
here of it rather as an act of Gods, He purges, then as it is to be an act of
ours, that we ought to purge our selves; though both do go together, as in
that speech, Romans 8. We by the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the flesh; so
as that which is proper to the point in hand, for the explication of it, (as
here in this place it is laid down) is not so much to give you motives or
means of purging your selves, as to show you the ways and courses God takes
still one way or other to purge his children by, that they may be more
fruitful.

And yet 3. in this work of Mortification, considered thus in the progress of
it, we are not mere passives, (as at that final perfecting and finishing of
it, and carrying away all sin at death we are, and are at that first habitual
beginning of it, at conversion) but therein we are workers together with God:
(We being purged from sin, as the body is by physic from humors; though the
physic work, yet nature joins with the physic, being quickened and helped by
it, to cast out the humors: For give a dead man physic, and it carries not
any humors away:) So as those means whereby God purges us, are not to be
imagined to do it as mere physical agents, like as the pruning hook cuts off
branches from a tree, or as when a Surgeon cuts out dead flesh; but these
means do it by stirring up our graces, and quickening them, and by setting our
thoughts, and faith, and affections awork, and so God assisting with the power
of Christ's death, he does purge us daily, by making his word, afflictions, and
the like, to set our thoughts awork against sin, and so to cast it forth. It
is certain, that unless our thoughts work upon the means, as well as the
means work upon us, and so do mingle themselves with those means; that
unless faith and Christ's death be mingled in the heart, it purges not: And
therefore it is said as well that we purge our selves. So 2 Timothy 2. 20. and
also 1 John 3. 3. and Romans 8. that we by the Spirit mortify the deeds of the
flesh, as it is said that God purges us, (which is the thing affirmed here)
because God still in going on to purge us, does it by stirring up our graces,
and uses therein acts of our faith, and love, and many motives and
considerations to stir up our graces so to effect it.

Now 2. for the reasons that move God thus to go on to purge corruptions out
of his children. Reasons.


First, 1.
because Jesus Christ has purchased an eternal divorce between corruption
and our hearts: He has bought off all our corruptions, and redeemed us from
all iniquity. Titus 2. 14. He gave himself for us, that he might redeem us
from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people, and God will
have the price of Christ's blood ^ut.

Secondly, 2.
because God desires more and more to have delight in us, and to draw nigh to
us, and therefore he more and more goes on to purge us; For though he loves us
at first, when full of corruptions, yet he cannot so much delight in us as he
would, nor have that communion with us, no more then a Husband can with a wife,
who has an unsavory breath, or a loathsome disease. They must therefore be
purified for his bed, as Hester was for Ahasuerus. Draw nigh to God, says
James, and I will draw nigh to you, James 4. 8, 9. but then you must Cleanse
your hands, and purify your hearts, as it follows there; God else has no
delight to draw nigh to you.

Thirdly, 3.
he daily purges his that they may be fit for use and service; for unless he
purged them, he could not use them in honorable employments, such as to suffer
or to stand for him, in what concerns his glory, they would be unfit for such
uses, as a vessel is that is unscoured. Therefore 2 Timothy 2. 21. If a man purge
himself from these, he shall be a vessel unto honor: that is, he shall be
used in honorable employments, and not laid aside; and he shall be meet for
his masters use, as vessels kept clean; when on the sudden the master has
occasion to use them, and to have them served in.

Fourthly, 4.
that as our persons, so that our services may be more and more acceptable;
that our prayers and such performances may savor less of gifts, and pride,
and self-love, and carnal desires: So Mal. 3. 3, 4. it is said, He shall sit
as a purifier of silver, and he shall purify the sons of Levi, as gold is
purified, from their dross, that they may offer to the Lord an offering in
righteousness, and then shall their offerings be pleasant to the Lord. The
more the heart and life is purged, the more acceptable your prayers are, and
your obedience, and all you do.

CHAP. II.
The ways God uses to purge out our corruptions: and means whereby he
causes us to grow therein.
NOw in the third place, for the ways whereby God goes on to purge us, there
are many and diverse, he blesses all sorts of means and dealings of his to
accomplish it.

First, 1. Occasional.
he uses occasional means to do it, and blesses them, as even falling into
sins. Thus it was with David when he fell, thereby God set him anew upon this
work, as by his prayer appears, Psalm. 51. Oh purge me, make me clean.

Secondly, by casting them into afflictions. So Dan. 11. 35. They shall fall to
purge them, and make them white. What the Word does not purge out, nor mercies,
that afflictions must. These Vines must be cut till they bleed. Summer purges
out the outward humors that lie in the skin by sweating, but winter concocteth
the inward by driving in the heart, and so purges away the humors that lie in
the inward parts, and so what by the one, what by the other, the body is kept
in health. Thus mercies prevail against some sins, and afflictions against
others. Moses neglected to circumcise his child, (as we do our hearts, it is
such a bloody work) till God met him, and would have killed him: and in like
manner God sometimes puts us in the fear or danger of losing our lives, casts
us into sicknesses, and the like, making as if he meant to kill us, and all to
bring us off to this work of purging, to circumcise our hearts.

As these occasional, 2. Isntrumental.
so also isntrumental instituted helps, as his Word: So Ephesians. 5. 26. Christ is
said to cleanse his Church with the washing of water by the Word: by the Word
spoken, either in preaching, or in conference. So in the very next words to my
text, Now ye are clean through the words I have [spoken unto you:] they had
then received the Sacraments, and had heard a good Sermon. The Word at once
discovers the sin, and sets the hearts against it; It was ignorant, till I went
into the Sanctuary: There goes a light with it to see sin after another manner,
although a man did know it before, and then the Word sets out the vileness of a
sin; and to hear a sin declaimed against, and reproved, sets an
exasperation upon the mind against it, and so a man goes home, and sets upon it
to kill it and destroy it. Or else by the Word meditated upon, as by keeping
some truth or other fresh and sweet in the mind, which the mind cheweth on; God
fastens the mind upon some new promise, or new discovered sign of a man's
estate, and these cleanse him, 2 Cor. 7. 1. or upon some Attribute of his, and
that quickens the inward man, and overcomes the outward: some consideration or
other every day God does make familiar to a man's spirit, to talk with him, (as
the phrase is Pro. 6.) and to keep him company, and usually some new one; God
leading us through varieties of sweet truths to chew upon, one this day, and
another to morrow, and these have an exceeding purging virtue in them, they
keep the purging issue open, even as those that have issues made in their arms
or legs, use to have a pease, or some such small thing, to lie in the orifice
of the issue to keep it open; and so does such a new truth with spiritual
light discovered, still keep the purging issue of sin open, and draws out
the filth, and keeps the heart; so says Solomon Pro. 6. 21, 22, and 24.
observe the coherence there, and it is as if he had said, Keep this command
fresh in mind, and it shall keep thee.

God uses also the examples of others as means to provoke a man to purge
himself. 3. Examples.


Example of those that have been Professors, and fallen away; they provoke a man
to set fresh upon this work, lest that the like sins should prevail against
him also, and cause him to fall* Therefore the Apostle, when he heard of
Hymenaeus and Philetus their fall, 2 Timothy 2. ^9. Let every one, says he, that
calls upon the name of the Lord, make this use of it, to depart from iniquity:
And it follows. If you [purge your selves] from these, ye shall be vessels of
honor. It follows upon that occasion.

Examples of holy men: To hear very holy men speak what victory over lusts may
be attained here, does much provoke another to purge himself, who else would
content himself with a lesser degree: So Phil. 3. 17.

In the last place, 4. Inward workings.
there are many inward workings upon the heart, whereby God goes on still to
purge us.

First, by a further discovering of corruptions unto us; either a greater
filthiness in the evils we saw before, or to see more of them, and by what one
sees to suspect more. God never discovers lusts to his, but to carry them away;
he stirs the humors, to purge them: Thus when David saw his sin, he sets
anew upon cleansing himself in the 19. Psalm. coming new from taking a view of
his heart, and having seen such volumes of corruptions, so many Errataes in all
that he did, he cries out, Who can understand his errors? and withal, Oh
cleanse me from secret sins. He then saw secret evils, and suspected more
then as yet he saw; and this made him cry out, Oh cleanse me, and so to use all
means, and to go to God to cleanse him. So when in the 15. Psalm. God let down
a light to let him but see the corruption of his nature afresh, that he was
borne in sin, and had no truth there, more falsehood then he could ever have
imagined, Oh purge me, says he upon it.

Secondly, he sets the heart on work to make it a business to get ones lusts
mortified more and more, and not to rest in the measure attained. Phil. 3. 1.
Paul forgot what was behind, he did still desire to have more fellowshig with
Christ in his death and sufferings, in the death of sin; when a man's heart is
set upon the work, as that (...), he came into the world for, as David, who
took up a resolution, I said I would look to may ways; so when a man has said
unto himself, I will grow in grace, as they say, I will be rich, 2 Timothy 6. and
so looks at it as his business, being as much convinced of this, that he
should be more holy, as he was at first that he was to be newborn; when
growth of grace is as much in a man's eye, as getting grace at first was, and as
great a necessity made of the one as of the other. This conviction many want,
and so take no care to grow more holy and more pure. Phil. 3. 15. If any be
otherwise minded, (says the Apostle) that there is no such absolute necessity
of going on still to perfection, God shall reveal it to him. God does reveal
and set on this upon every godly man's heart at one time or another, and so goes
on to purge them. And this is also expressed to us, 1 Pet. 4. 1. For as much as
Christ has suffered for us in the flesh, [let us arme] our selves with the
same mind; namely, to mortify our lusts: for it follows, He that has suffered
in the flesh, that is, has mortified his lusts, has ceased from sin. That
same arming there, is Gods putting into the mind a strong and invincible
resolution to go through with this work; when he arms and steeles it against
all difficulties, all encounters. This is meant by arming us with the same
mind; That as Christ looked upon it as his business why he came into the
world, even to suffer for us; so for us to look upon it as our business, to
crucify our lusts. When therefore we intend all our endeavors upon this
work, and mind nothing in comparison, pray for nothing more, receive
Sacraments for this purpose, and hear and perform all other duties with an
eye to this, prosecute this business as the main; when God has put such a
resolution into a man, and preserves it, then he goes on to purge him.

Thirdly, God does it by drawing the sap and juice of the affections of the
heart more and more into holy duties, and into obedience; when that intention
of mind, as our morning thoughts, and the like, which we formerly spent upon
vanities, are now drawn into prayer and holy meditations, then lusts do
wither; and when our care is how to please God more, and our hearts are more in
the duties of obedience, then does corruption shale off more and more; and thus
by diverting our intentions, does God work out corruptions. And look, as the
Sun does draw up the sap out of the root, so does Christ draw out the heart at
some times more then at others to holy duties, and unto communion with himself
in the duties: this kills sin, and causes it to wither, namely, by taking
away the sap, that is, that intention of mind which does usually nourish it:
Thus 1 Pet. 1. 22. We purify our hearts by obeying the truth.

Fourthly, by bringing the heart more and more acquainted with Christ his
Son: (which is the Fathers work to do, for none comes to the Son, but whom
the Father draws) Now how many souls are there, who have gone puddring on (as
I may so speak) in the use of other means, and though in the use thereof
Christ has communicated some virtue to them, yet because they did not trade
with him chiefly in those duties, they have had little in comparison to what
afterward they have had, when he has been discovered to them, as that great
ordinance who is appointed by God to get their lusts mortified. Before this they
have washed, and washed, but they have washed without soap, until Christ has
been thus revealed to them, and the virtue of his death, and rising again,
which is compared, Mal. 3. unto Fullers soap, etc. In the 13. Zach. 1. it is
said, that God opens a fountain to the house of David, for sin and for
uncleanness: that is, for the guilt of sin, and the power of sin. Now by
that opening is not meant the promise of sending his Son into the world to be
crucified, but the discovery of him to believers after his being crucified: For
Chap. 12. 10. he is supposed to be crucified already, for they there see him
whom they have pierced; therefore that opening there is meant the discovery of
him to his people, and him to be the great ordinance of cleansing them. Now the
more distinctly a man understands Christ, and how to make use of him, (who is
already made Sanctification to us) the more easily he gets his lusts purged;
such an one that trades immediately with Christ, will do more in a day, then
another in a year; for seeing that the power of purging us lies immediately in
him; and that he is the purging drug which mingles it self with the Word, and
all means else, and sets them all aworke: therefore the more of him we have,
and the more immediate application we have of him to us, and of his power, the
more recourse our hearts have to him, the more our lusts are purged; as it is
in drugs or minerals, if the infusion and steeping of them in liquors will
work; how much more if the substance of them be taken down inwardly and
immediately? now this comes to pass, as God does go on to open our faith to
see him, and know him, and to be acquainted with him: for so the Apostle
expresses it, Phil. 3. That I may know him, and the power of his resurrection.
The more we look upon all means else in the use of them as ineffectuall without
him, the more power we shall find from him.

Fifthly, by assuring the soul of his love, and shedding it abroad in the
heart, and by working spiritual joy in the heart, does God also purge his
people: And to work all these is in Gods power immediately and solely; I am
Crucified with Christ, Gal. 2. 20. And how? by believing that Christ gave
himself for me, and loved me. This deads a man to the world, makes a man
crucify that which Christ was crucified for, and this makes a man hate sin,
the more he loves Christ, or apprehends his love; And it does this in a double
relation or respect, not only because sin so displeases him, nor only as it
is contrary to his will, but because it did afflict him so much once, and
because to take sin away was the intent he came into the world: for so 1 John
3. ver. 4. although a believer is said to mortify sin upon this
consideration indeed, that it is the transgression of the Law; yet much more
upon this other, because Christ was manifest to take sins away: and the more
assurance I have of another life and a better, and of being like Christ
hereafter, the more a man purges himself to be fit for that condition: He
that has this hope in him, purges himself as he is pure; so in the 2. ver.
of that 3. of John. The more joy a man has in Christ, the more deaded he must
needs be to the world; the one eats up the other: for the ground of all sin
is but the love of pleasure; now if I find it in God, and Christ, it deads me
for seeking it in the world: For Omnis vita gustu ducitur, All life is
maintained by a taste of some sweetness. Now when the sweetness of sin, the
relish of it is spoiled by the taste of a greater, it must needs die and abate;
and though that sweetness from God does not always remain in the present
taste and relish of it, yet it leaves such an impression behind it, that
whatever a man tastes after, it has no relish with him, in comparison; still he
says the old is better: and though the taste of one sinful pleasure may take
us off from another, yet none but a contrary pleasure does kill the sin, and
the pleasure in it.

CHAP. III.
The trial of Mortification: and that first by Negative signs; or such as
argue much corruption yet remaining unpurged out.
I Will now come to that third thing which was propounded, namely, Helps
whereby you may discern what progress has been made in this work: And as I
said at first, that my purpose was not so much to handle Mortification in the
common place of it, as only growth therein; So those things I shall now
deliver about discerning the measure of it, I intend them not so much for
Signs of mortification, as Rules whereby we may judge how this work goes
forward in us, and how far we are still short in it.

And first, I will handle it negatively, and give you such symptoms, as argue
much corruption, a great deal of humors yet remaining to be purged out: Such
as argue little proficiency in this work, though such as withal true grace
may be supposed to be in the heart.

1. When a man does magnify, and sets a high price upon yet if) in your eyes
and opinions they seem glorious and goodly things, and oh we secretly think
the enjoying such a pleasure, the obtaining such an excellency, or such or
such a condition of life, accommodated with such and such conveniences and
circumstances, would be so great an addition of happiness to us; this argues a
green heart, much want of mortification, though truth of grace be there. These
Apostles, to whom Christ spoke this Parable of the Vine, (and unto them
especially) how were they affected, and transported with a trifle? Even that
very night that Christ was to be attached, they strive for precedencie, and who
should be the greatest amongst them* Luke 22. who should be chief of that
noble order: And it was such a precedencie which they affected, as Noblemen
have in Kingdoms, as appears by the following words: they showed themselves
but Gentiles in it, (as ver. 25. Christ insinuates) who stand upon their blood
and their outward privileges: It was not for nothing Christ tells them in this
Parable, they needed purging; but the reason was, they were but children yet,
and babes in Christ, now in their minority, and were not weaned from rattles
and trifles, Christ was not yet crucified, not they so thoroughly crucified with
him, as they were afterward: The holy Ghost had not yet come upon them, as
fire to burn up their lusts, and to consume this their dross. That other
Apostle, Paul, (who says of himself, that he was borne out of time, in
comparison to them) had attained to a greater measure, he glorying in this as
his highest title, that he was the least of the Apostles. This magnifying of
outward things in our conceits and opinions, is indeed but knowing things after
the flesh, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 5. 16. because the flesh does
fascinate and corrupt the judgment, in judging our selves by such things. And
this argues exceeding much want of mortification, for it is lust that puts that
luster, and gloss, and varnish upon the things of the world; for the things in
themselves are vain, and we have had experience that they are such; How comes
it then we should esteem them, and be taken with them, that we should have
such high conceits of them? It is by reason of our lusts unpurged out, which
represent them falsely: and therefore it is observable, that John, 1 Epist. 2.
16. speaking of the things of the world, he puts the lust which is in us to
express the things themselves: He says not, riches, and preferment, etc.
(though he speaks of them) but the lusts of the eye, and pride of life, (so he
expresses them) because they are these lusts, makes the things so glorious to
us, and sets a price upon them. And therefore so much magnifying and high
esteem of outward things as there is in us, so much inordinate lust there is
in the heart after them, and so much want of mortification; and when these
lusts boiling in us fume up so high as to intoxicate and corrupt our esteem
and judgments (which though grace should keep us from pursuing these vanities)
that yet we look upon them with a wanton eye, and think great matters in them,
and think our selves as it were debarred and restrained of so much of our
happiness, whilst we want, and cannot enjoy them, this argues an
unmortifyednesse: for herein lies the power of mortification, even to count all
things dross and dung, to look upon them as crucified things, to have them
seem all as withered flowers, as small things, as he speaks of man's esteem, 1
Cor. 4. 3.

Secondly, when our minds are carried out to superfluities, and superfluity of
naughtiness, the excess of corruption that thinks stolen meat sweet, as in
the Proverbs. When our longings are wild and humorous, like the longings of
women with child, whom nothing but some one odd thing they have set their
fancy on, will please; like sick men's stomachs, with whom nothing will down
that is provided for them, but still they have a mind rather to something else;
so nor we with what God allots us. And when we are environed about with
comforts, yet all are nothing, if some one be wanting. Such unmortifyed lusts
we see in Sampson, though a good man, yet none of the daughters of Israel could
please, but he must have one of the Philistims, Judge. 14. 3.

Thirdly, when our minds are so glued to any thing, as we cannot tell how to
part with it, how to lose such a friend, or such a conveniencie, we would think
our selves half undone if such or such a thing should fall out; David's heart
was full of humors, and needed purging, when he ventured so much of his
comfort in his Absalom alone, that when he was cast away, he wished he had dyed
for him. It is good often to try our hearrs, by supposing the worst that can
befall us. What if a change should come, such a thing I should be put to; to
see how the heart can bear it. When some men have a loss in their estates and
riches, it is as it were raked out of their bellies, as Zophar speaks, Job 20.
15. and a piece even of their very heart goes with them.

I know how to want, I know how to abound, Phil. 4. 12. He was much therefore
mortified; he could work hard in Summer, without much sweating, and he could
undergo the cold of Winter without catarrhs and such weaknesses as others are
subject to; his soul was well purged of humors. And so Job had learnt to
bless God when all was gone; he was a man thoroughly mortifyed before, he had
carried himself in his best estate without security and carnal rejoicing;
thus he says of himself that he made not gold his hope, nor his confidence,
nor had rejoiced because his wealth was great, Job 31. 25. and answerably he
behaves himself in his worst estate with patience and thanksgiving.

Fifthly, the more carnal confidence we have in the creatures, rather carnal
then spiritual, 1 Cor. 3. 1. Now this their carnal mindedness, among other
things, was expressed in their carnal confidence they had in outward things;
they had riches, and gifts, and learning, and they did swim in these; and
reigned and domineered in their own thoughts, and excelled all other Churches
in their own opinions and so despised others in comparison, they were carried
aloft by these waxen wings, which I take to be the Apostles meaning, 1 Cor. 4.
8. Now ye are full, now ye are rich, ye have reigned: they had riches, and
gifts, etc. and they thought themselves as Kings, full of happiness, having
the world before them, and were filled with conceits of it; and I wuold to God
you did reign, says he: that is, that it were not regnum in capite, in your
own conceits only; and that there were indeed such real cause to applaud
your own conditions. We are of the Circumcision, says the Apostle, and have no
confidence in the flesh, Phil. 1. 3. The more the heart is truly circumcised,
(of which he there speaks in opposition to those who rested in outward
circumcision) it trusts not, nor bears not it self upon outward things,
privileges and endowments, as riches, blood, credit, learning, righteousness;
these, when the heart is not circumcised, do puff it up, but we, says he,
have no confidence in the flesh, either for comfort, or for justification, or
any thing else; but we rejoice in Christ Jesus.

Sixthly, the more full of envyings, and heart-burnings against come from a
fullness of bad humors. Whereas there is among you envying and strife, are ye
not carnal? 1 Cor. 3. 3. That is, this argues you to be such, for envy and
strife are not only lusts in themselves, but further they are such lusts, as
are always the children and fruit of some other; they are rooted in, and spring
from inordinate affections to some things which we contend for; and accordingly
if this fire of envy or strife prove great, it argues the fuel, that is, the
lusts after the things we envy others for, to be much more: For envy is but
an oblique lust, founded on some more direct lust: these are but the outward
flushings, that show the distemper to be much more within: Jam. 4. 1. From
whence comes wars and fightings amongst you? come they not hence, even of your
lusts which fight in your members? There is something the heart would have, as
it follows in the 2. ver. Ye lust and have not, etc. A contentious spirit is an
unmortifyed spirit; If ye bite and devour one another, Gal. 5. 15. This I say
then, walk in the spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh. Mark
the coherence, it comes in upon biting one at another, for such walk not in
the spirit, flesh does prevail in them, that is his meaning.

Be swift to hear, but slow to wrath; take heed of raging when you are touched;
And it follows a verse after, Casting away all superfluity, receive the word
with meekness, for it is your lusts uncast out, unpurged, that cause that
wrath and heart-boiling against reproof. That good King was in a great
distemper of spirit, when he cast the Prophet in prison that reproved him, for
he oppressed the people also at the same time, as is said, 2 Chronicles. 16. 10. he
was then taken in the springtide, and swelling of his lusts of covetousness
and oppression; they brake down all that withstood and opposed the current of
them: and if (as he in this fit at this time, so) we be found in such
passionate tempers upon such occasions of reproof ordinarily, it argues the
habitual frame of our hearts to be much unmortifyed, as this argued him at
this time to have been actually much distempered.

Eighthly, the more quick and speedy the temptation is in touch and take, so as
there needs not much blowing, but the heart is presently on fire, as Prove. 7.
22. it is said, He went [straight-way] after her. A man will find that when his
heart is actually in a good temper, a temptation does not so easily take: his
heart is then, though tinder, yet as wet tinder, that is more slow in taking.
As there is a preparedness to good works, so there is a preparedness to
evil; when the heart is in a covetous humor, and will be rich, then a man
falls into temptations and a snare, 1 Timothy 6. His lusts will nibble at every
bait in every thing he deals in; they will take presently: when the heart is
thus bird-limed, then it cleaves to every thing it meets with. It is a sign
that the heart is not awake to righteousness as the Apostle speaks, but to sin
rather, when a little occasion awakeneth a lust, and rouzeth it; as when on the
contrary, if a great deal of jogging will not awaken a man's grace.

Ninthly, the more our lusts have power to disturb us in holy They are profane
(says God, Jer. 23. 11.) for in my house I have found their wickedness. If
the heart be carried away, and overcome with unclean and worldly thoughts
then, this argues much unmortifyednesse, and that the flesh is indeed much
above the spirit: For why, then a man is in Gods presence, and that should
overcome and overawe the unregenerate part, if it were not impudent and
outrageous; and besides, then the regenerate part has the advantage, for the
Word and the Ordinance is a stirring of it up, and provoking it to holiness:
And therefore that at such a time a man's lusts should be able to tempt and
seduce a man's heart, it argues sin has a great part in the heart, when it
affronts God in his throne, when grace is in Solio, where it would be; for the
Disciples then to be talking who should be greatest, when Christ had made so
long a Sermon to them, and had administered the Sacrament to them, this argued
much want of mortification in them; even as it were a sign that the orthodox
party were but a weak party in a Kingdom, if whilst they are at Sermons,
Papists durst come in and disturb them, and put them out.

Ezech. 23. 21. That she multiplied her whoredoms in calling to remembrance
the days of her youth, wherein she had played the harlot in the land of Egypt:
The remembrance of them was a snare to her, as appears by the 8. verse*. It is
a sign a man is deeply in love, when as he falls in love with the picture;
when the remembrance of whence he is fallen, should make him repent, that it
should on the contrary cause him to commit the same sin again, it is a sign
flesh has much the better. To have the mind stirred with new objects and new
temptations, may stand with far less corruption, and more grace, then to have
it stirred afresh with the remembrance of the old; to find sweetness in a lust
twice sod, which we have also often steept (as I may so speak) in godly sorrow
and hatred of it, and so boiled it in sour herbs; yet still to find
sweetness in the remembrance of such an act, this argues much corruption. As
the Apostle argues the sinfulness and strength of corrupt nature in him, that
the law which was holy and good, should stir up his lust whilst unregenerate:
So may we, when the thought of a sin which should stir up godly sorrow, should
provoke and tickle corrupt nature again. Indeed that the new scent of meat
should have moved the Israelites, would not have been so much; but that the
remembrance of their fleshpots should do it. That speech Romans 8. where we are
commanded to mortify the deeds of the flesh, may admit among other this
interpretation also, that not only the lusts, but even former deeds and acts
committed, which may prove an occasion of sin to us, and have a fresh verdure
in our eye, are to be mortifyed.

CHAP. IV.
Positive signs of Growth in Mortification, and Gods purging of us.
AND so now I come to the second sort of signs, namely, Positive signs of
growth in Mortification, and of Gods purging of us.

First, the more insight a man has into spiritual corruptions, together with
a conflict against them, the more growth he has attained unto in purging out
corruptions: So as that now the chiefest of his conflict is come to be with
spiritual lusts, not worldly lusts and gross evils; it is an evidence of his
progress in this work. These ordinarily are sure rules, that whilst a man's
conflict is with more outward gross evils, as uncleanness, worldly
mindnesse, etc. so long and so much he is kept from the sight of those inward,
hidden, close corruptions, which sit nighest to the heart: As also on the
contrary, the more a man is freed from, and has got victory over such more
outward evils, the more his thoughts and intentions are bent inward to the
discovery of the other more spiritual wickednesses. And the reason is, for
these spiritual lusts, as pride, carnal confidence in a man's own graces,
self-flattery, presumption, and the like, these corruptions lie (as I may so
express it,) more up in the heart of the country; but those other of worldly
lusts, lie as it were in the Frontiers, and skirts of it; and therefore, until
such time as a man has in some good measure overcome those that encounter him
at the Borders, he comes not to have so through a discovery, and constant
conflict with those that lie higher up in the heart; Let us cleanse our selves
from all pollution both of flesh and spirit, says the Apostle, ^ Cor. 7. Which
implies, that there are two sorts of corruptions, one of the flesh, or body;
the other, of the spirit, or soul: for so the opposition there is to be taken,
for else all lusts are lusts of the flesh, that is, of corrupt nature. Again,
such corruptions cause a blindness that a man cannot see afar off, as 2 Pet.
Chap. 1. Whilst a scholar that learnes a Tongue, has not learned to escape all
grosser faults in Grammatical construction, he cannot be supposed to have come
to know the Elegancies of the Tongue, nor see his errors therein; so nor do
men come to be Critiques indeed, and cunningly skillful in the more curious
Errataes of their hearts and spirits, till they have attained to such a degree
of mortification, as to be free from grosser evils. And indeed, those who are
grown in grace, have attained ordinarily some freedom from such sins;
therefore says John, 1 Epist. 2. 14. You young men are strong, and have
overcome that evil one: they have attained so much strength as to overcome the
grosser evils, those evils. So as to allude to what the Apostle says in
another case, they then come to conflict not so much with flesh and blood, and
outward evils, as with spiritual wickednesses within, (that is) with
affections and dispositions contrary to the work of grace, and therein lies
their chiefest exercise, which is not till they have some freedom and victory
over the other, and so are at leisure to view these.

fibrae, those stings of lusts that shoot into things, cut, it would be nothing
to us to part with them: this was in that great Apostle, how ready was he to
lay down his life? My life is not dear to me, so I may fulfill my
ministration with joy; and so when the time of his departure was at hand, says
he, I am ready to be offered, 2 Timothy 4. 6. He speaks it in the present tense,
(...), I am offered, it was done in his heart already: As in like phrase of
speech it is said, Heb. 11. that Abraham offered up his son, because in his
heart he fully purposed it. When men must be forced by terrors of conscience,
as Pharaoh with plagues, to let their credits or estates go by restitution, or
for God and good uses, etc. it is a sign of want of purging. The more loosned
a man is from the world, and the things of it, the more prepared that man is
for all works of self-denial, and the more purged. So when a man parts with
all without sticking or higling, as Abraham is said to believe without
staggering, it is a sign he has attained to a good degree: even as that
argued a strong faith, Romans 3. When a man has an open and a large heart to
God, (as a liberal man has an open hand to men) as Abraham had when he was
willing to let God have his only son, it was a sign he was much weaned;
when God can command any thing thou have at an hours warning, as we say;
Abraham stood not long deliberating, Shall I, Shall I, but went early in the
morning, even the next morning, God having called for his son that very
night, as it is likely by that in the 22. Genesis 3. For the night was the time
when God used to reveal himself by visions, and the next morning he went
forth early.

Thirdly, the more constancy there is in our hearts and ways, Purge your
hearts, ye double minded: That their hearts are of so unequal a temper,
sometimes in hot fits, sometimes in cold, and so suddenly altered, this cannot
be but from much corruption. This double mindedness comes from want of
purging. The Galatians were surely very weak, and foolish, as he tells them,
when they were so soon transported. He marvails not so much that they were
removed, as that so soon, (...), so suddenly, Gal. 1. 6. and brings it in as
an evidence of their weakness, that they who would have given him their eyes,
should now so much be altered and carried away: So much mortifiednesse, so much
constancy: therefore in the 5. Gal. 15. 16. when in the 15. ver. he had said,
Those that are Christ's have crucified the affections with the lusts, he adds
in the 16. ver. If we live in the spirit, let us walk in the spirit: the word
imports a being constant in the spirit. Then when lusts are crucified, then the
holy Spirit will rule us in our ways, and a holy frame of heart will be
discovered, in a constant tract of holiness we shall walk in the spirit, keep
our selves long in a spiritual frame and course, and not be biased aside: that
we step out so much, is from strong lusts unmortified.

Pet. 2. 1. Laying aside all malice, etc. as Babes desire the Word, that ye may
grow thereby, if so be ye have tasted: therefore the more corruption is laid
aside, the more we taste the Word, and God in it; the more we taste, the more
we desire it; the more we desire it, the more we grow.

When I was a child, I spoke as a child: He speaks it, applying it to his
growth of grace.

Romans 7. To do I am not able; so a man's weakness to sin, or strength
against it, is then also best discerned. The weakness or strength of a
Kingdom is best seen and discerned in time of war, when a^l forces are
mustered up. Now God sometimes appoints some more frequent assaults, and on
purpose suffers the law in the members to war, and to muster up all their
force, that (as it is said of Hezekiah) a man might know what is in his heart;
now if then a man finds that the motions of sin in his heart do every
temptation after other meet with an hotter encounter then they had wont; that
the resistance against sin grows quicker, and stronger; that sin cannot
advance, and carry on his army so far as formerly, but is still encountered and
met withal at the Frontiers, and there overthrown even at the first setting
out, so as it cannot carry it through the camp, (as Zimri did his mistress
Cosbi) as sometimes it had wont, when as Grace stood at the Tent door, as
Moses weeping, yet unable to resist it; and although assaults and temptations
do continue, that yet there is ground kept and won upon the encroachments of a
lust, in so much that at least the outward forts are kept by grace, that is,
outward acts are abstained from; Now so far as the lust is not fulfilled as it
had wont to be, and not only so, but the inrodes of it are confined and
contracted also to a narrower compass, and to have a lesser ground and space
in regard of inward acts; also so far it is purged more forth: As for instance,
be it a lust of fancy, when it cannot boil up to such gross fancies as it
had wont; be it a lust of pride, or uncleanness, or grosser acts, when it
falls from bringing forth fruit, to bring forth but blossoms, but inward
burnings, and from blossoms only to bring forth leaves, it is a sign then it
is withering more and more. When the intention of mind in the temptation (which
is as the fire that makes it to boil) grows less and less; when the
inordinate thirst is not so great in the time of the fit; when the inward acts
are grown in their requests more modest, the lustings themselves pitch upon
lower and inferior acts then it had wont; when their Armies depart with lesser
spoil, are content with them, when as before they flew at the first onset, to
the highest kinds of villainies and outrages; when thus the overflowings of a
man's lusts do abate, and fall short, the tides lessen, overflow less ground,
overspread less every day then another, this is another probable sign of a
growth herein.

Job, a man much mortified, made a covenant with his eyes not to behold a maid,
and kept to it, Job 31. 1. When a man hates the very garment spotted with the
flesh, it is a sign of a strong hatred; when a man cannot endure to come where
one he loves not, is; cannot endure the sight of him, any thing that may put
him in mind of him, not so much as to parley or to speak with him.

give, as we use to say, and grow danke; so a man that observes his heart, may
find before objects are presented, or actual thoughts arise, a giving of his
heart to such and such a lust, an inclination, a darkness, a moistness, a
sympathizing with such an object, that is a sign of unmortifiednesse. David
was as a weaned child, he had no thoughts of the dug, no longings after it, I
have no high thoughts after the Kingdom, says he, Psalm. 131. A child that
begins to be weaned, it may be at first cries after the dug, though he sees it
not; but afterward, though it may be when he sees it he cries after it, yet
not when absent. Objects present have a far greater force to draw, when absent
less; therefore this is a farther degree of mortification attainable: it was
in Joseph, when his Mistress tempted him from day to day, opportunity was
ready, the object present, but he denied her. So in Boaz, a woman lay at his
feet all night. So in David, when he had Saul in his lurch, might as easily
have cut off his head, as the lap of his garment; and was egged on to do it,
but he was then weaned indeed, and did it not; When a man can look upon
beauty, and preferment, and truly say they are no temptations to me. It is a
sign of an unsound temper, when upon eating such or such meats, a man is
presently put into the fit of an ague; a healthful man is not so. The Prophet
calls them, the stumbling block of their iniquity; When a man is going on his
way, and though he did not seek occasions of falling, yet meeting with them,
he cannot step over them, but is caught, and stumbleth, and falls, it is a
sign of unmortifiednesse.

CHAP. V.
Some Cautions to prevent misjudging by false Rules: This case resolved,
Whether growth in Mortification may be judged by the ordinary prevailings of
corruption, or actings of Grace.
BEsides these rules both these ways given, I will in the third place add
some cautionall considerations, to prevent misjudging of our growth in
Mortification, by such false rules as men are apt to be deceived, in judging
worse or better of our selves by, then the truth is, or then there is cause.
Which considerations will also further serve as directions to us, as well as
the former have done.

First, men may deceive themselves when they estimate their progress herein by
having overcome such lusts as their natures are not so prone unto; 1. Not to
judge by some sins, but the decay of thy bosom sin.
the surest way is to take a judgment of it from the decay of a man's bosom
sin, even as David did estimate his uprightness by his keeping himself from
[his iniquity,] Psalm. 18. 23. so a man of his growth in uprightness. When
Physicians would judge of a consumption of the whole, they do it not by the
falling away of any part what ever, as of the flesh in the face alone, or any
the like; such a particular abatement of flesh in some one part, may come from
some other cause; but they use to judge by the falling away of the brawne of
the hands, or arms, and thighs, etc. for these are the more solid parts: the
like judgments do Physicians make upon other diseases, and of the abatement of
them from the decrease in such symptoms as are Pathognomicall, and proper and
peculiar to them: In like manner also the estimate of the progress of the
victories of a Conqueror in an enemies Kingdom, is not taken from the taking
or burning of a few villages or dorps, but by taking in the Forts and strongest
Holds, and by what ground he has won upon the chief strength, and by what
forces he has cut off of the maine Army. Do the like in the decrease of, and
victory over your lusts.

Secondly, 2. Not judge by ex^raordinary assistances or temptations.
you must not judge of your Mortification, by extraordinary assistances or
temptations: As you do not judge of the strength of a Kingdom by auxiliary
foreign forces, that are at extraordinary times called in. A young Christian
shall for his encouragement even in the heat of the battle, when he is ready
to be overcome, and carried away captive, find the holy Ghost breaking in, and
rescuing of him, (as Jehoshaphat was, (to allude to it) when he cried to the
Lord) when as a Christian of much standing is left to fight it out hand to
hand: Now it does not follow that the other, because thus freed, has the more
strength. Again, on the other side, a man is not to judge of himself by his
weakness in some one extraordinary temptation. A man that is very sick, and
nigh unto death and dissolution, may through much heat, and stirring up of all
his spirits, have the strength of five men in him, and much greater then when
he was in health: And so a godly man, whose corruptions are weak, and more
near to dissolution, yet in a fit may have all the corruption that is within
him mustered up, and blown up by Satan, and so it may for the present appear
to have more strength then ever in all his life, and yet he may be much
mortified: Even as Sarah may by an extraordinary means have pleasure in her old
age, and bring forth a child, when she had left childbearing long, and yet her
womb was dead, Romans 4. 19. And as it may be true, that one of small grace may
have that little grace drawn out, and wound up to a higher strain, for one
fit, brunt and exercise; all the strings wound up to a higher note for some one
lesson, then one happily of more grace ever felt, to higher acts of love to God,
and of rejoicing in God, and purer strains of selfe-denyall; yet take the
constant strains of ones spirit that has more grace, and the strings will
ordinarily endure to stand higher, and continue so: So on the contrary, one of
much mortification, may have his lusts spurred on faster, and boild up higher
by Satan's fires, then one of less. The estimate of our growth must not
therefore be taken by a step or two, but by a constant course; for as a man's
sincerity is to be measured, so is his growth: even as a man's health is to be
measured by the constant tenor of his temper.

Only, This Caution explicated by three things. 1.
I will add three things to give further direction concerning such
extraordinary cases of temptation.

First, that it is certain, that so much corruption as at such a time and in
such a fit a man felt a stirring in him, so much indeed and in truth there is
of corruption in his heart; for the devil can put none in, but only acts, and
does improve what is there already: for as that speech of Christ implies, Satan
can work but according to the matter he finds in us: (He comes and finds
no matter in me) the wind adds no water to the sea, only can make the waves to
rise, and surge; the fire adds nothing to the water, when it is set upon it,
but attenuates it only, and causes it to boil. And so in Hezekiah when he
was cast into that fit of pride, the Text says, That it was that he might know
all that was in his heart, 2 Chronicles. 32. 31. It was in his heart before.

Secondly, 2.
I add, that yet hence it cannot be infallibly inferred, that a man has
comparatively either to himself more corruption in him then he had twenty
years before, because more is stirred up; or that comparatively to others he
has more corruption then they, because more is now for a fit drawn forth: So
that it follows not from hence, that others which are kept free from such a
temptation, that they have less mortification, because they were never cast
into so hot and burning a fit. One whose body is less full of humors, and
naturally of a more moderate temper for heat, may yet through some accident or
other, or disease, suppose the Plague, be cast into hotter fits of a burning
Fever, then one whose temper is more fiery, and humors more abounding in him.
To have recourse to the former instance. Hezekiah surely had more corruption
twenty years before his recovery out of his sickness, then at that time, and
yet it wrought not so, that we read of, as it did then; not that the barrel
was then fuller, but that now it was broached lower, and a greater vent given,
and so it came more gushing out, dregs and all. That a man after he is grown
up to his full strength, falls into so great a sickness, such an one as he
never had when he was a child, which makes him weaker then when he was ten or
twelve years old, does not argue but that he is a man grown for all that.
David after a long growth, had a time of great sickness, whereby he lost the
exercise, the lively vigorous use of his graces: enfeebled by that sickness,
he lost his taste in Gods Ordinances by it, and the joy of Gods salvation, as
appears by the 51. Psalm.

And the third thing I would add is this, that such an one as is indeed much
mortified, 3.
if it happens he falls into such a fit, yet the greater measure of his
mortification will apeare afterward, in that the lust will be weaker after his
recoverie again. It is in this, as with a man that is in a hot fiery fit of a
fever, though he have at that instant the strength of two men in him, (as was
said) yet afterward, when the spirits are ebbed and settled again, his body is
the weaker for it: so is the body of sin, upon the resurrection of grace, after
such a fall. Many grow more after sickness. For Gods end being but to discover
his weakness, (and what he is in himself) and to rouse him out of his
security, he then loves to manifest his power when once we have seen our
weakness; and so makes his strength perfect in our infirmities, when they are
not ordinary, but beyond the ordinary temper and dispositions of our spirits.

But then the Question may be concerning the more ordinary passages of a man's
life, Question. Whether an estimate may be taken from the ordinary passages of
our lives.
whether a man may measure and take a sure estimate of the inward root of
corruption left in him, by the ordinary risings and stirrings of it, and his
fallings into sin more or less. I speak not now of extraordinary fits, but of
ordinary qualms and weaknesses.

To this I answer, Resolved.
that ordinarily men may conclude from the more or less busy they find
corruption to be in them, that the more or less there is of corruption in
them; and so thereby measure their growth: for grace and corruption are as two
roots, (and therefore the actions of them both are called their fruits, Gal. 5.
17, 22.) Now Christ elsewhere gives us this rule of nature, to judge of the
tree by the fruits, to proceed by, in matters of grace also; And as by the
fruit we may know of what species and kind the tree is of, so likewise what
plenty of sap there is at the root, by the plenty, or bigness, or fairness
of the fruit it does bring forth: the more inward corruption at the root,
ordinarily the more fruit thereof appears in the life: and proportionably also
of the tender fruits of the the spirit. And therefore Christ here says, that
the Vine is to be purged, that it may bring forth more fruit; because the more
corruption is emptied, the more holiness will appear in your inward and
outward fruitfulness. And the reason hereof is, because ordinarily as a thing
is in being, so it is in working. Laesa principia habent laesas operationes.
Children, the weaker, the more falls they have in their ordinary walkings;
bodies, the more sickly, or the weaker and more unhealthy the (...) and
constitution is, the more qualmes; and as they recover strength more and more,
they find they outgrow such weaknesses: and therefore ordinarily according to
what activenesse a man finds of grace or sin in him, according to what
activenesse a man finds of grace or sin in him, according are the inward
principles of either of them more or less in him: for the soul of man, as it
is an active thing, so being left to its ordinary course, it acts according to
the sway, and bias, and inclination of the habits that are in it, which are
also active, as both grace and sin are. As a bowl, when the force of the
hand that threw it begins to decay, it is swayed by the bias, and lead that is
in it; and so the less grace, the less ordinarily it acts graciously, and the
weaklier; and then also the opposite corruption must needs be so much the more
active: for the soul being active, abates not of its mettle, but it will still
show it self one way or other. The flesh will lust against the spirit so much
the stronglier, as the spirit is weaker, for they are contrary; yea and thus
God judges of the principles of grace in us, according as they act in us; he
will judge of our mortification, by the fruits of it in our lives and hearts;
the more the fruits of sin grow on in us, the less morrified he will account
us; as he will judge of faith by the works, so of mortification by the fruits:
and therefore it is observeable, that he bids us mortify the deeds of the
body, as well as the body of sin, Romans 8. 13. for God will judge of the one
by the other. Therefore the objects of mortification are the deeds of the body,
as well as the inward principle of corruption, because the mortification of the
inward principle will be seen and appear in the deeds.

But it may be objected, Object.
that Grace is acted, or lusts do stir, accordingly as the Spirit of Christ,
who is a voluntary Agent, does act Grace, or will leave a man, so that if he be
pleased to stir that little grace in a weak Christian, he shall act it more,
and if he leave a strong Christian to himself, he shall fall more.

But to this it is answered, Answ. 1.


First, that though the holy Ghost be a voluntary Agent, and blows when and
where he pleases, for his times of working, yet ordinarily he acts grace in
us, (take our whole course) according to the proportion of grace given us, so
as he that has more habitual grace, shall be more assisted and enlivened,
which falls out according to that rule, which in this case will hold, Habenti
dabitur, Mat. 25. 29. To him that has shall be given, if it be a true talent:
Hence therefore he that had five talents, gained more then he that had but two;
for he gained his five more unto his two; the other but two more to his former
two: though he that had but one, is said to have gained none, because indeed it
was not a true talent, for he seemed but to have it, the Text says. And the
reason hereof is, because those habits of grace which God has infused, are his
own work, and are ordained by him to be acted, and he delights still to
crown his own works in us with more. And as he proportions glory to works, so
he promises to act according to the principles of grace infused, which else
would be in vain, they being ordained to that end: As the Apostle says of
gifts, that they are given to profit withal; so are graces to work, and
therefore ordinarily God draws them out, where he has bestowed them, as he
does gifts also, according to their proportion: and thus e contra it is for
leaving a man to sin; the more corruption a man has, the more ordinarily he
lets it vent and discover it self, that so men that have many corruptions in
them, might know what is in their hearts; and so when God does mortify them in
them to thank him the more, the grace of which else would be to them lost, if
God should mortify their lusts in them, without their seeing and bewailing
them, and crying to him, Oh miserable man that I am; and ordinarily see and
discern them, men would not, unless left to them. As in case of humbling a
man, though God sometimes does humble a man that has less sins, more then
one that has greater, to show that he can give a spiritual light to see more
sin in a little then others in much; yet ordinarily those are most humbled
that have been greatest sinners, as Manasses humbled himself greatly, and
Mary Magdalen loved much, and the Apostle thought himself the greatest of
sinners: And thus it is in acting grace, or letting forth corruptions, it is
according to their principles within.

And secondly, that very acting grace does increase habits: so as the increase
of habits and inward mortification is proportioned according to the acting of
grace by the holy Ghost; for every abstinence does mortify, as was said, and
every act of grace does through the blessing of the Spirit further sanctify
and increase the habit, Romans 6. You have your fruit in holiness. When they do
any duty, it makes the heart more inwardly holy: so as indeed the one cannot be
without the other; but the more a man does abstain out of right principles, by
the assistance of the Spirit, the more he grows: so as in the end all comes to
one; he whose holiness is acted most, has in the end most habitual grace,
and thereby often it comes to pass, that he that is first, comes to be last,
Two limitations.
and he that is last, first.

Yet there are two limitations to be put in about this.

First, I grant, for some times of men's lives, that God does Peter who in all
appearance had more grace then any of the twelve, yet God left him to deny
Christ more foulely and falsely then any of the other.

But then let the ends of God be considered why he does it.

First, in case of too much confidence upon inherent grace, and the strength of
it: When we trust to habitual grace received, then Christ, to show that it is
a new grace, to assist that grace, and to the end that it may be acknowledged
that he that gives one grace, is not bound to give another, may in this case
leave one that has indeed more grace to the prevailing of corruptions more. It
falls out sometimes that when men are young Christians, and newborn, God adds
much assistance, and this for their encouragement; and as you carry young
children in your arms, and so they are kept from falls more then some more
elderly that are let go alone. Thus Hos. 11. 3. God takes them by the arms
when a child, ver. 1. but then they acknowledge it not, as it follows there,
and are apt to think that that strength and life they have, is from themselves,
and so God afterward leaves them, when grown men more elderly. Those
Christians who walk most sensibly of their own weakness, and observe God his
keeping them from sin, and attribute this to him, such God delights to help,
though for the present they have less habitual grace: And so those Christians
that sooner come to the knowledge of that way of dependence upon Christ, (some
come to see it the first day, and make use of it; others not so clearly a long
while) they shall be more assisted then another. To many that way so soon is
not so clearly opened.

Again, secondly, sometimes God will magnify this his acting grace, (as I may
call it) more in one man then in another, seeing it is a grace. That one
Apostle of the Gentiles, Paul, did more then all the Apostles, shall we thereby
infallibly conclude he had more inherent grace then they all? but that he had
more assistance. As God sometimes uses men of weaker gifts to do more then
men of greater, so men of weaker graces, and less growth, to shame the other.
As there are diversities of gifts, so of operations and exercise of those
gifts, 1 Cor. 12. 6. the Spirit dividing as he will, ver. 11. God casts aside
one of eminent gifts into a place or condition wherein they are not useful,
and so he may one of much habitual grace.

Thirdly, he acts often according to actual preparation; the habitual
preparation lies in habits, and is more remote; as strings may be good, yet out
of tune, and so not played upon.

Again, fourthly, God may leave a Christian of more grace and growth, to more
stirring of corruptions, in case he means yet to bring him to a higher pitch of
humiliation, and that by sins. It is in this his dealing of leaving men to
corruptions, and the vigorous conflicts with them, as it is in his leaving his
people sometimes to those other evils of afflictions. God humbles his, either
by afflictions or by sins, and his manner in both is sometimes alike; you shall
see one who has attained to a great measure of grace already, and that by
affliction, and yet never to be out of the fire, but God still follows him
with one affliction or another; whereas one of less growth and grace, who in
that regard has more need, shall have fewer afflictions in his course: And
what is the reason of this difference? it is not that the grown Christian has
simply more need of affliction then the other, but because God intends to bring
him on yet to a further degree of grace. As refiners of sugar taking sugars out
of the same chest, some thereof they melt but once, and another part of it they
melt and refine again and again; not that that which they refine twice, has
more dross in it, but because they would have it more refined, double refined.
And as God deals thus in afflictions, so also in leaving of his people to the
stirring of corruptions, which of all afflictions is the greatest to humble a
holy heart. And thus in experience it is found, that he does sometimes leave a
grown Christian to conflict with corruptions more then a weaker Christian; not
that he has more in him, but because he means to bring on that grown Christian
to a further degree of humiliation, he is not humbled as he means to have him
yet. And whereas God humbles some men by afflictions, he humbles others by
sins; and nothing humbles more then sins, for crosses do but humble by
revealing sin, as the cause; and nothing will humble a grown Christian more
then to see such shameful foul corruptions still stirring in him, the
greatest aggravation of which to him will be in this, that after so long a
time, such lusts should be so lively in him, to have such gross faults in his
exercises after he has been so long at school, this shames him; For a grown
Christian to be disguised with a corruption; and when his hair is grown, to
have it shaven off, as David's messengers were ashamed of it; so how does it
shame him, and humble him? Thus Hezekiah, though he was much humbled by a
sickness to death, but because he was not humbled enough, and so far as God
meant to bring him: therefore God let loose Pride on him, and then he further
humbles himself and all Israel, as it is 2 Chronicles. 32. 26. Upon some men God
shows his free grace in keeping them from sin; upon others he spends it in
pardoning them: These are but two several ways he has of laying it out: And
so sometimes he shows his grace in keeping those of less grace, and again in
letting those of more to struggle with their lusts: and such sicknesses are not
to death, or to weaken them, but for the glory of God, and their further
growth; for this will be the effect and consequent of such stirrings in grown
Christians, that as their fits of corruptions stirring are great, so their
humblings will be greater: Grace being much in them, will show it self that
way; great fits of sinning have intermingled with them great exercises of
repentings; and the growth of their grace will show it self in them, and
appear in them; even as in men that are cheerful naturally, but sometimes
oppressed with melancholy; when those pressures are over, they are most merry,
their spirits breaking forth being at liberty, they show themselves as much on
the contrary in mirth: so is it here, when grace gets above again. As it is in
the body, when the spirits are not weak, but only are kept under by humors,
when they do once get up, they then show their strength in causing the body to
grow the more: as in many young men, after a sickness where strength of nature
is; and so thereby they become after often the better, and more lively; but if
the natural spirits be weak, it is not so.

A second limitation is, 2. Limitation.
that though one of less growth in mortification may sometimes by
watchfulness keep under his lusts more, and act that little grace he has,
more then happily he does, who has yet radically more grace: therefore says the
Apostle, Stir up the gift that is in thee: To Timothy he speaks it, and he
exhorts, Gal. 5. even young Christians to walk in the spirit: that is, to have
the spirit kept above the flesh, so as a man shall have great hand over his
corruptions, that they break not forth: Now I say, that this exhortation does
belong unto, and concerns the youngest Christians. For he speaks to all that
have spiritual life begun in them, ver. 25. If we live in the Spirit, let us,
says he, walk in the Spirit, and then we shall not fulfill the lusts of the
flesh, ver. 16. A weak body, thouh weak, yet if he uses care, may keep
himself from distempers, as much as some man who is strong, but grows
careless, and neglects his health. But yet though one of less grace be thus
actually more watchful, ye he may discern the want of growth by this:

First, that still his lusts rise oftener, and that with delight; and are apter
to catch fire presently, although they be smothered as fast as they catch; his
case then is as if there were an heap of straw in a room where fire is, where
sparks fly about still taking fire upon every occasion, but he that keeps the
straw, is careful still to put it out.

And secondly, in this case they shall find the strength of their corruptions
in privative working against grace, and distracting and disturbing them,
deading their hearts in duties: and therefore when the Apostle had exhorted
such to walk in the spirit, so as not to fulfill the lusts, mark what follows,
Yet, says he, the flesh will discover it self in lusting against the spirit.
Take what care you will; so as a man shall not be able to do what he would,
Gal. 5. 16, 17. and the more strong it is, the more it will show it self
strong in disturbing; so as Christians not grown up that are very watchful
over their hearts, do keep as it were but negative Sabbaths, and are therein
like unto those watchers and keepers of good rule in great Churches, where
there are many sleepers, they have so much to do to watch those boys that
sleep, and are idle at Church, as they cannot attend the Sermon. For though by
reason of watchfulness corruption may be kept from discovering it self in
open unrulinesse much, yet it can never by all the watchfulness in the world
be brought on to duties, but so much as is in the heart will discover it self
either in opposition to them, or an hypocritical joining in them: although the
Papists may be kept by a waking State from venting that malice of their hearts
in rebellion, yet they cannot be brought to join with us in holy duties; no
more will corruption, unless in hypocrisy, and therefore so much as is, does
still discover it self in them.

CHAP. VI.
Five Cautions more to prevent such mis-judgings.
A Third Caution to prevent mis-judging; if a man will not be mistaken in
judging his growth in Mortification comparatively with others, or with
himself, he must consider his occasions and opportunities to draw him out,
thus: A man when he had more corruption, yet less occasions and provocations
to sin, may have corruption less stirring in him, then when he is more grown
up in grace, if his temptations were then greater: The same tree standing in
the shade, where also the rain comes not to it, when transplanted, where both
sun and rain fall upon it, may be more fruitful then formerly. David, when
under afflictions in the wilderness, and wanting opportunities, how strict was
he, Psalm. 18.
and kept himself from his iniquity? but when he came to the delicacies of a
Kingdom, though he was grown up still more and more in grace, yet how did he
fall? As to aggravate the sin of not growing more, the proportion of means
every one has had is to be considered; and for one who has had much means to
grow much, for him is less, then one who has less means: So in the stirring
or declining of sin, opportunities and occasions are also to be considered;
as if a man be transplanted out of a full condition into an empty, if then many
of his lusts do not stir so much as before, no wonder. Even as if a man when
cast into a sweat by reason of multitude of clothes, it is no marvel, if
when clothes are taken off, he sweat less.

Peter was of a bold spirit, and so spoke often rashly, and vented corruption
more then the other Disciples, in so much as he once provoked Christ to call
him Satan, not that he had less grace, but a more active spirit; yea he might
have more grace, and less of corruption stirred in him, only a more forward
natural spirit, that was apt to put it self forth. As an angry man, whose
spirit is quick, may soon be stirred, and in the forwardness of his spirit to
action, give a man a blow, when one given to malice will scarce give you an ill
word, whose lusts of revenge yet burn inwardly more. Gunpowder will take and
fall into a blaze sooner then Lime, yet lime has more innate heat, and burns
more within; some have speeder vent. Those two brethren, John and James, sons
of Thunder, as Christ calls them, how soon was their choler up? They had quick
and hot spirits, as Christ tells them, Ye know not what spirit ye are of Luke 9.
55.

Fifthly, if we would judge aright, what measure of true mortification Moses so
meek; for at another time, when he was left, what a chafe was he in, when he
called them all Rebels and said in an heat, that he must fetch water out of the
rock for them? It was his temper and disposition of nature, helped to make him
so eminent in ruling that passion above any other, that he is said to be the
meekest man on earth. It was not simply, merely mortification, that made that
great Apostle Paul so eminently chaste; but over and besides what mortification
helped him in it, he had a peculiar gift, as he calls it, 1 Cor. 7. 7. he speaks
of it as of a gift, not a grace, such as might be in Reprobates; For, says he
there, Every one has his proper gift. So it was not mere mortification that
made Luther never troubled with covetousness, but the freeness and
generousnesse of his spirit that helped him in it.

Now if all these would have cast up what grace and mortification they had
attained to, they must have reckoned restraining grace by it self, (which may
be observed by what our virtues were before conversion) which though now
sanctified, that is helping forward Sanctification, and making the abstinence
easier, yet is not to be reckoned true Sanctification; as Goldsmiths mingle in
all the silver they work some other metals to make it more malleable; so are
those common graces mingled with true in this life, where Sanctification is
imperfect, which do help them and eeke them out. Grace set in a good nature,
seems a great deal more, and goes farther then in a bad. Wine that is of it
self somewhat pleasant, a little sugar will make it sweeter to the taste, then
a great deal of sugar will do sour wine. Therefore let every one consider,
what natural ingenuity, and modesty, and education did in him before
conversion; and let him know, that now he has true grace; these help him
still, and stand him in stead as much as ever, although he has a further new
principle of grace in him, beyond these. Grace in this life, and whilst
imperfect, takes not away such common gifts, but sanctifies and uses them as
the reasonable soul does a quick fancy or memory, which are sensitive
faculties, and do make his ability to abstain from such and such sins more
easy: indeed all such gifts will be swallowed up in glory: And therefore many
who have less grace, yet seem in many carriages more mortified then those who
have more grace; they will be less impatient in a cross, less stirred and
provoked with an injury. A man who has been less helped by restraining grace
before conversion, and had his lusts more outrageous, if he has them now
under, it is a sign he has much more mortification in him then one who was
naturally civil. And I appeal to every godly man's conscience, it is not only
simply mortification that makes him always to abstain from sins, but shame,
modesty, terrors of conscience strike in at a pinch, when strength of
mortification had failed him else; and many accidental things, ordered by Gods
providence, hinder and keep Gods people from sinning: and as David was feign
to make use of Goliahs sword, and take in discontented persons that had not the
same ends that he had to strengthen himself against Saul; so is grace feign to
take in fleshly dislikes and discontents against sin, to help it in a pinch,
till it has got the victory. For instance, it was not Judahs grace so much
kept him from killing Joseph, for then he would not have consented to sell him;
but nature wrought in him, and made him abhor the killing him: Is it not our
brother, and our flesh, and what profit is it to kill him? Genesis 37. 26. So God
prevented David in his murdering Nabals family by an external means, when as
his grace else had not kept him from revenging himself causelessly upon his
family, (for they were in no fault) his grace alone had not done it, for his
passion was up, and he in a rage, and fully resolved to do it; but God used
another means, and sent Abigail submissively to meet him; and her lowly
submission, and elegant oration, won him, and cooled him; though this David
acknowledges Gods hand in it, and was glad he was so kept (as a godly man
will, and has cause, when he is hindered of his purpose in sinning, as he
says, I rejoice that Christ is preached, though out of envy; so if sin be
abstained from, though by any means) yet God did rather by his means
restrain him, then by his fear of God, or the grace in his heart; but God
kept him by her coming: 1 Samuel 25. 34. For in very deed, says David, as the
Lord lives, which has kept me back from hurting thee, except thou had
hasted and met me, surely there had not been left a man unto Nabal. So shame
moved Judah; fear of being destroyed moved Jacob to reprove the sin of his
sons, and is all the argument he uses, Genesis 34. 30. So that in an evening,
when thou castest up thy abstinences of that day, think not how much thou have
abstained from sin, or denied thy self, but how much out of hatred of it, and
the spirit of mortification; how much of that there is in thy abstinence, and
accordingly measure thy growth in it.

Sixthly, another false rule is, when men judge of their mortification, and the
measure of it, by their present listlesnesse of the heart to sin; which though
it be true, that where true mortification is, there is a listlesnesse, and a
deadness; and so much mortification, so much deadness, Romans 6. 2. How shall
we that are dead to sin, live any longer therein? And indeed, to live in it,
is to take pleasure in it: But yet this you must know, there are many things
which in a godly man may add to his deadness to sin, besides true
mortification, and so make it seem greater then it is in truth: And therefore
it may be a false rule to judge by, if it be not warily considered and
distinguished. Sickness breeds a listlesnesse; when we are sick, our lusts are
sick together with us; and as we gather strength, they gather up their crumbs
again, Job 33. 19. 20. then his soul abhors dainty food. Suppose he be a
glutton: Old age brings a listlesnesse. Eccles. 12. 1. When the evil days
come, wherein a man says, he has no pleasure in them: as Barzillai had no
taste in his meat, by reason of old age. So when our expectations or desires
are crossed, or are like to be, and we begin to fail of those maine props of
the comfort of our lives, we are apt to have a listlesnesse to all other
pleasures: when some one thing that was a sauce to all the rest, is gone or
like to go, we then have no stomach to all the rest, and we are weary of
living, as David was when Absalom was gone, would I had dyed for thee. Some
great cross coming, may like thunder sour all our joys and delights, and
make them stale to us, and as dead drink to the stomach. Terror of conscience
may like an eclipse overspread our spirits, and then all things lose their
beauty and luster, as things in the dark use to do: as Job says of himself
in his desertion, that his soul had no more sweetness in all comforts, then
in white of an egg: For such occasions as these do draw the intention another
way, and do take the mind up about Gods wrath, or the afflictions we are in,
so as it cannot run out to sin; and intention, you know, is the cause of all
pleasure. As therefore when by study the spirits are drawn up to the head, a
man's stomach decays to that meat he most loved; so when terrors drink up the
spirits, as Job speaks: but when that heat is over, and intention dismissed, a
man recovers his stomach again; and so do men their appetites, to sin, when
they come forth of terrors. And this will help you to find out the true reason,
why that young Christians are often more dead to all pleasures of sin, then
those who are grown up, or then themselves are when grown up: they are often
then altogether dead to all mirth and other contentments, and yet they are not
more mortified then afterward: For then legal humiliation adds to their
deadness. And besides that first deadly blow which Christ gave their lusts
then in part, the Law also and the bitterness of sin did lay that part of
their lusts which remained unkilled, in a sw^^^e, that one would think all were
dead. Sin revived, says Paul, and I dyed, Romans 7. He speaks of that time when
he lay humbled for sin; during which time, we read in the Acts, he fasted:
He had no mind to meat nor drink, for three days, he forgot all. And again,
as then they are usually so taken up about pardon of sin, and the obtaining
thereof, that all the spirits retire to the heart to relieve it, and to
encourage it to seek out for pardon; and so sin is left in a swoune, and it
seems quite dead: but by degrees men come out of that swoune, and sin
revives, and then men think they decay in mortification. Again, young
Christians sometimes, and others afterward for some hony-moones of their
lives, are entertained with raptures, and ravishments, joy unspeakable and
glorious, and then they seem in a manner wholly dead to sin, and walk so, but
as the other are in a swoune, so they are in an ecstasy; but when they are out
of it, then sin comes to it self again: Those joys whilst they last, make
a man's actual present deadness to sin seem more then habitually and radically
it is indeed: As a man that has tasted some sweet thing, whilst the impression
upon his palate lasts, he has no relish of meat; so whilst the impressions
of spiritual joy: but when their mouths are washed once, and their sense of
that sweetness gone, they find their wonted relish of them. Thus spiritual
joys do, for the time they are upon the heart, much alter the taste; but yet
much of that alteration is adventitious and not wholly radical, or altering
the sinful faculty it self (though it does add much that way) yet not so
much as they seem to do at that present, the sense of that sweetness is
fresh in his heart.

Now therefore to give an help or two to difference what is real and true
Mortification, Two differences between Mortification, and a seeming deadness
or listlesnesse to sin.
from this seeming listlesnesse and deadness to it.

First, true mortification makes a man not only listlesse to sin, but to
have a quick hatred against it, a hatred aiming at the destruction of it; but
false listlesnesse takes but the heart off it, does not set it against it; how
often are these yoaked together in Psalm. 119. I hate sin, and every false
way, with this, Thy law do I love? the heart being quickened with love to God,
and to his Law, is carried out against sin, and not only taken off from it
to have no mind to it, but to have a mind against it, to destroy it. There is
the same difference between mortification and listlesnesse, that there is
between true patience and senslesnesse; senselessness is a dull, sullen, stupid
bearing pains, but patience is joined mith a quick sense of them, which arises
from strength of spirits, that being quick and vigorous, are the more sensible
of pain or pleasure; so true mortification is joined with an active hatred
that flies out against sin; which come from liveliness of affection to the
contrary.

Secondly, 2. Difference.
true mortification is joined with activenesse and life in the contrary duties,
Romans 6. 11. Reckon your selves dead unto sin, and alive unto God. That false
listlesnesse is but a dead palsy that does take these members of sin, but
true mortification is with a new life, a resurrection, strengthening a man to
walk so much the more nimbly in the ways of God. Romans 6. 4, 5. Young
Christians, and such as have a false listlesnesse and deadness, you shall find
them complain that their mortification is more then vivification, they will
find they are more dead to the world, then quickened to God. True mortification
does not dull the spirits, but sets them at liberty, as purging the humors out
does; it makes the body more light and nimble; whereas false listlesnesse
causes a deadness, a dullness to every thing else. Those false causes of
listlesnesse contract the mind, as a bladder that is clung, and dried, and hung
up in the smoke, (as David compared his condition in terrors of conscience)
but mortification empties it of the sin, and fills it with grace, so as the
mind is as full and wide as before, only filled with grace now in stead of
sin.

keenness of his affection against sin, though that is good and blessed, but
by his strength against it. As there is a fond love, which is not so strong and
solid, which will not do so much for one; or hold, if it come to the trial,
and be put to it, that yet has a more seeming edge in it; so there is a
keenness of hatred, that has not so much strength. A man that is angry seems
to have more keenness of affection against him he falls out with, and in his
rage vows never to be reconciled, and could eat him up; when as yet a malicious
man hates more strongly: So do young Christians their sins, having lately felt
the bitterness of them; and then many other inconveniences, besid^s the
cont^arietie of them to God, do egg on and provoke their spirits against
them; but like as a sharp knife that is weak, the edge is soon turned and
blunted, so in a temptation, they are for all their edge soon overcome: for
all those concurring inconveniences and apprehensions of their hurt by them,
makes their spleen indeed greater, but it adds not to their strength and
courage to resist them: like a stomachfull boy, that cries he cannot have the
victory, yet is weak, and easily laid on his back, his stomach is more then his
strength. The hurt that comes by sin to us at first lately felt, helps to
sharpen the edge, but adds no metal, and so our weapons are beaten to our
heads again, when we use them. What an edge of spirit had Peter raised up
against denying Christ? he would die rather; he spoke then as he thought; and
he would have dyed in the quarrel, for he draws his sword, but afterward he
wanted strength to his stomach, how easily was he overcome, being yet but weak
in grace? therefore judge of your growth herein, by your strength to resist.
Hence the Apostle prays, they may have strength in the inward man, Ephesians. 3. and
in Chap. 6. 13. he speaks of ability to stand in the evil day. Although this
let me add, that every man should keep up his heart in this continual
keenness and edge of spirit against sin, and whet his heart against it: For
that will cause a man to use his strength the more against it, and to put it
forth. A man that keeps his heart in a revengefull, vexed, spleenfull spirit
against sin, he will easier cut through a temptation; and though if a Christian
want metal, though he has an edge, he may be foiled; yet when edge and metal
both meet, a man walks above his lusts: if either be wanting, a man may be
foiled.

THE TRIAL OF A CHRISTIANS GROWTH.
THE THIRD PART.
Resolving some Questions concerning Growth in MORTIFICATION, VIVIFICATION.
CHAP. I.
Two Questions resolved concerning Growth in Mortification.
I Will now conclude this Discourse about Growth in Grace with answering some
Questions which may be made concerning this our growth, both about
Mortification, and about increase in positive Graces, which I did reserve to
this last place, that I might handle them together.

The first Question concerning the purging out of sin, Quest. 1.
is, Whether every new degree of Mortification, and purging out of sin, be
always universal, extending it self to every sin? So as the meaning of
this, that God goes on to purge, should be, not only that he goes on first to
purge forth one sin, then another, but that he goes on to purge out by every
new degree of mortification every sin together; so as when any one sin is
more weakened, all the rest in a proportion grow weak also.

To this I answer affirmatively, Answ.
that every new degree of mortification is universal.

First, because when the Scripture speaks of our growth therein, he speaks of
it as extending it self to every sin. So Ephesians. 4. 22. when he exhorts the
Ephesians (who were mortified already) to a farther progress in it, he exhorts
them to put off the old man, which is corrupt, according to the deceitful
lusts. It is not one lust that is the object of mortification, and the growth
of it (although he mentions particular lusts afterward) but the whole man that
is corrupt, and all its lusts: and this he there speaks of daily growth
therein: For of that he had spoken in the former verses, from the 12. verse,
and goes on to speak of it, and exhort to it. Thus in like manner, Gal. 5. 24.
it is called crucifying the flesh with the lusts: not one lust, but the flesh,
the whole bundle, the cluster of them all: and in that it is called crucifying,
it implys it also, for of all deaths that did work upon every part, it did
stretch every nerve, sinew, and veyn, and put all the parts to pain: and this
going on to mortify sin is called Romans 6. The destroying of the body of
sin; of the whole body: It is not the consumption of one member, of the
lungs, or liver, etc. but it is is consumptio totius, a consumption of the
whole body of sin, so as every new degree of mortification is the consuming
of the whole. And therefore also Colos. 3. where in like manner he exhorts to
his growth therein, he exhorts to mortify earthly members, every member. And
the reasons hereof are, because

First, true mortification strikes at the root, and so causes every branch to
wither: For all sinful dispositions are rooted in one, namely, in love of
pleasure more then of God: and all true imortification deads a man to the
pleasure of sin, by bringing the heart more into communion, and into love
with God; and therefore the deading to any sin must needs be general and
universal to every sin. It is as the dying of the heart, which causes all
the members to die with it; for that is the difference between restraining
Grace, which cuts off but branches, and so lops the tree, but true
mortification strikes every blow at the root.

Secondly, every new degree of true mortification purges out a sin, as it is
sin, and works against it under that consideration: and if against it as
sin, then the same power that works out any sin, works against every sin
in the heart also. Now that every new degree works against a sin, as it is
sin, is plain by this, because if it be purged out upon any other respect, it
is not mortification.

Thirdly, the Spirit, and the virtue that comes from Christ, which are the
efficient causes of this purging out a sin, do also work against every
sin, when they work against any one; and they have a contrariety to every
lust; they search into every vein, and draw from all parts. Physicians may
give elective purges, as they call them, which will purge out one humor, and
not another, but Christ's physic works generally, it takes away all sorts of
distempers.

And whereas the Objection against this may be, Object.
that then all lusts will come to be equally mortified.

I answer, Answ.
No, for all lusts were never equally alive in a man; some are stronger, some
weaker by custom, through disposition of body and spirit; and therefore though
mortification extends it self to all, yet there being an inequality in the
life and growth of these sins in us, hence some remain still more, some
less mortified; as when a flood of water is left to flow into a field, where
many hills are of differing height, though the water overflows all equally, yet
some are more above water then others, because they were higher before of
themselves. And hence it is that some sins, when the power of grace comes,
may be in a manner wholly subdued, namely, those which proceed out of the
abundance of naughtiness in the heart, as swearing, malice against the truth;
and these the children of God are usually wholly freed from, and they seem
wholly dead, being as the excrements of other members, and being as the nails,
and the hair, they are wholly pared off, as was the manner to a Proselyte
woman; the power of Grace takes them away, though other members continue
vigorous: And therefore of swearing Christ says, What is more then Yea, yea,
and Nay, nay, is (...), out of a profarie heart: As when a man is a dying, some
members are stiff and cold, and clean dead long before, as the feet, whilst
others continue to have some life and heat in them; so in the mortification of
a Christian, some lusts that are more remote, are wholly stiff and stark,
when others retain much life in them.

The second Question is, Quest. 2.
Whether when I apply Christ, and the Promise, with the virtue of Christ, for
the mortification of some one particular lust or other, and do use those right
means, as Prayer, Fasting, etc. for the special mortification of some one
lust, Whether that lust thereby does not become more mortified then other lusts
do?

I answer, Answ.
Yes, yet so as in a proportion, this work of mortification it runs through all
the rest: for as in washing out the great stains of a cloth, the lesser stains
are washed out also with the same labor, so it is here: Therefore the Apostle
in all his exhortations to mortification, both Ephesians. 4. and Gal. 5. and Col. 3.
though he exhorts to the putting off the old man, the whole body of sin, yet
instances in particular sins, because a man is particularly to endeavor the
mortification of particulars, as it were apart; and yet because in getting them
mortified the whole body of sin is destroyed, therefore he mentions both the
whole body, and particular members thereof apart, as the object of
mortification. And to that end also does God exercise his children, first with
one lust, then with another, that they may make trial of the virtue of Christ's
death upon every one: And therefore Christ bids us to pull out an eye, and cut
off an hand, if they offend us: for mortification is to be by us directed
against particular members; yet so as withal in a proportion all the rest
receive a farther degree of destruction. For as a particular act of sin, (be it
uncleannnesse, or the like) when committed, does increase a disposition to
every sin, yet so as it leaves a present greater disposition to that
particular sin then any other, and increases it most in potentia proxima,
though all the rest in potentia remota: so in every act of mortification,
though the common stock be increased, yet the particular lust we aimed at, has
a greater share in the mortification endeavored, as in ministering physic to
cure the head, the whole body is often purged; yet so as the head, the party
affected, is yet chiefly purged, and more then the rest.

CHAP. II.
Three Questions resolved concerning Positive Growth.
OTher Questions there are concerning that other part of our growth, namely, in
positive graces and the fruits thereof.

As first, Quest. 1.
whether every new degree of grace runs through all the faculties?

I answer, Answ.
Yes; For as every new degree of light in the air runs through the whole
Hemisphere, when the Sun shines clearer and clearer to the perfect day, which
is Solomon's comparison in the Proverbs; so every new degree of grace runs
through, and is diffused through the whole man. And therefore also 1 These. 5.
23. when the Apostle there prays for increase of grace, he prays they may be
sanctified wholly in body, soul and spirit. And every new degree, though it
begins at the spirit, the understanding, yet goes through all: for so Ephesians. 4.
23, 24. Be renewed in the spirit of your minds, and put on the new man: it runs
therefore through the whole man, having renewed the mind. As the work of grace
at first, so after still continually leaveneth the whole lump.

Whether one Grace may not grow more then another? Quest. 2.


I answer, Answ. 1.
first, that it is certain, that when a man grows up in one grace, he does
grow in all; they grow and thrive together. Therefore in Ephesians. 4. 15. we are
said to grow up into him [in all things.] Growth from Christ is general, as
true growth in the body is in every part, so this in every grace. Therefore 2
Cor. 3. ult. we are said to be changed into the same image from glory to glory.
Every increase stamps a farther degree of the whole Image of Christ upon the
heart. So the Thessalonians, Their faith and their love did both overflow, 2
These. 1. 3.

Yet secondly, 2.
so as one grace may grow more then some other.

1. Because some are more radical graces, as Faith and Love, therefore of the
Thessalonians Faith the Apostle says, 2. These. 1. 3. that it did grow
exceedingly; and then it follows, their love did overflow.

2. Some grace are more exercised, and if so, they abound more; as though both
arms do grow, yet that which a man uses is the stronger and the bigger, so
is it in graces; In birds, their wings which have been used most, are sweetest
to the taste. As in the body, though the exercise of one member makes the body
generally more healthful, yet so as that member which is exercised, will be
freest from humors it self, so it is here; so tribulation works patience,
patience experience, Romans 5. Many sufferings make patience the less difficult,
and much experience, many experiments make hope greater.

Again, thirdly, that some graces are more in some then others, appears
hence; for what is it makes the differing gifts that are in Christians, but a
several constitution of graces, though all have every grace in them? as now in
the body every member has all singular parts in it, as flesh, bones, sinews,
veins, blood, spirits in it, but yet so, some members have more of flesh,
less of sinews and veins, etc. whence arises a several office in every
member, according as such or such simular parts do more or less abound in a
member; the hand, because it has more nerves and joints in it then another
member, though less flesh, yet how strong is it, and fit for many offices? the
foot is not so: So in Christians, by reason of the several constitution of
graces, and the temper of them more or less, have they several offices in the
Church, and are fitted for several employments; some have more love, and fit
for offices of charity; some more knowledge, and are fit to instruct; some more
patience, and are fitter to suffer; some for self-denial, and accordingly do
grow in these more specially.

The third Question is, 3. Quest.
Whether this increase be only by radicating the same grace more, or by a new
addition?

I answer, Answ.
that by adding a new degree of grace, as in making candles, which is done by
addition, when a candle is put anew into the fat of boiled tallow, every time
it is put in, it comes out bigger, with a new addition; or as a cloth dipped in
the die, comes out upon every new dipping in with a deeper die. And this is
done by a new act of creation, put forth by God. Therefore when David being
fallen, prayed for increase of grace, he says, Create in me a new heart. And
therefore Ephesians. 4. 24. when the Apostle exhorts to further putting on the new
man, and speaks of growth, he adds, which is created; for every new degree is
created as well as the first infusion, which shows the difference between
natural growth and this: In natural growth there needs not a new creation,
but an ordinary concurrence; but it is not so in this, that God that begun the
work, by the same power perfects it: And therefore Ephesians. 1. 19. he prays that
the believing Ephesians might see that power that continued to work in them,
to be no less then that which raised up Christ; for though natural life may
with a natural concurrence increase it self, because the terminus a quo, the
term from whence it springs, is but from a less degree of life to a greater:
yet it is otherwise in this life, and our growth in this is from a greater
degree of death, to a further degree of life: And therefore Phil. 9. the
Apostle calls growing in grace, a going on to attain the resurrection from the
dead: And therefore the same power that raised up Christ, must go along to
work it. Hence also every new degree of grace is called a new conversion;
except ye be converted, says Christ to his Disciples converted already;
because the same power that wrought to conversion, goes still to this. And
therefore it is said that God gives the increase, 1 Cor. 3. 7. and it is called
the increasing of God, Colos. 2. 19. so Hos. 14. showing the ground why they
grow so fast; Thy fruit is found in me, says God, ver. 7. although this is to
be added by way of caution and difference, that therein God does proportion his
influence to our endeavors, which in conversion at first he does not.
Therefore we are said to be fellow workers with him, although it be he that
gives the increase, 1 Cor. 3. 6, 7, 8. the same you have also, Romans 8. We by
the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the flesh. We, as co-workers with the
Spirit.

FINIS.
A Table of the Contents of this Book.
The Introduction. THe sum and division of the words, and the subject of this
Discourse. Page 1 Some Observations premised of this Parable of the Vine:
1. Obser. How Christ is the Vine, and the only true Vine. 3 2. Obser. How God
the Father is the Husbandman. Declared in five things. 6 3. Obser. Two sorts of
Branches in the Vine, fruitful and unfruitful. 8 An interpretation of those
words, [Branches in me that bring not forth fruit.] By three things. 9 Three
several sorts of Branches that prove unfruitful. 11 Some differences between
true Branches and Temporary Branches, grounded on the Text. 12 1. Difference.
Temporary Believers bring not forth true fruit. And What it is that makes a
good work to be true fruit. ibid. 2. Difference. Temporary Branches bring not
forth fruit in Christ. 14 What it is to bring forth fruit in Christ, explained.
15 This Question, Whether in every act a Christian does all in Christ, by his
fetching virtue distinctly from him? Resolved by 3. things. 18 That every
Believer does five things, which are truly and interpretatively to bring forth
fruit in Christ. 19
4. Obser. In the most fruitful Branches there remain corruptions to be
purged out. The reasons of it. 22 5. Obser. That yet for their corruptions God
takes not such away. 28 6. Obser. Unfruitful Branches God in the end cuts off.
Four degrees of Gods cutting them off, founded on the Text. 34
The Trial of a Christians Growth. PART I. Of GROWTH in bringing forth more
fruit.
CHAP. I. That all true Branches in Christ do grow: Proved, 1. By Scriptures,
Reasons. 38 1. Reas. From Christ's relation to us as an Head, and we his
members. And herein, 1. From our conformity to him. 39 2. From his having
received all fullness to fill us. 40 3. From our growth making up his fullness,
as he is mystically considered one with us. ibid.
2. Reas. From God the Father, who 1. Has appointed every one their measure.
41 2. Has promised it. ibid. 3. Has appointed means for it. ibid.
3. Reas. From the Saints themselves, who cannot be saved unless they grow.
ibid.

CHAP. II. An explication how the Saints do grow. Many considerations to
satisfy the tentations of those that discern not their growth. 42 1. Consid.
more general, showing what sort of Christians this tentation does usually
befall. ibid. 2. Consid. more particular, As 1. That growing in grace is a
Mystery rather to be apprehended by faith, then by sense. 44 2. The eager
desire which many have to grow, and attain to more grace, hinders them from
discerning their growth. ibid. 3. The progress is not in many so discernable,
as the change at their first conversion is, or as their first growth. The
reasons of it. ibid. 4. To discern of growth there must be time allowed. 45 5.
There are several ways by which men are brought to that measure appointed
them, in which some have the advantage of others. ibid. 1. Some have a greater
stock of grace given them at first: which is done in two cases. 46 2. In the
manner of growing, God puts much difference, 1. Some grow without intermission.
2. Some God sooner ripens for heaven. ibid.



CHAP. III. What it is to bring forth more fruit, explicated negatively, by
removing many mistakes. 46 1. It is not to grow only or chiefly in gifts, as
abilities to pray, and preach, or in knowledge, but in graces. 47 Three
cautions herein. ibid. 2. Our bringing forth more fruit is not to be measured
by the success of our gifts, the fruits of our doings, but by the Doings
themselves. 48 3. It is not simply to be estimated by the largeness or
smalnesse of our opportunities of doing good, (which may vary) but by an heart
to do good. 50 4. It is not always to be measured by accessory graces, as
joy, spiritual ravishments, etc. ibid. 5. It is not be measured by increasing
in profession, and seeming forwardness, but by inward and substantial
godliness. 51 6. How in the largnesse of the affections to good, there may be
a decrease: And how young Christians may have more large affections; which yet
are not so genuine and spiritual. ibid. 7. We must not measure our growth, by
our growing in some kind or sort of duties, but in the universal extent of
godliness, and in duties both of our general and particular callings. 53 How
young Christians abound more often in holy duties for a time, and the necessity
of this for their condition. ibid.
CHAP. IV. What it is to bring forth more fruit, explicated positively: Wherein
many direct trials of such a growth are given. 55 1. Trial. If we go on to
the exercise of new graves. ibid. 2. Trial. If we find new degrees of the same
grace added. 56 3. Trial. If fruits and duties grow more ripe and spiritual,
though not more in bulk. 57 What it is that gives a spiritual relish to this
fruit. 4. Trial. If the heart grows more rooted into Christ. 58 5. Trial. If
we learn more to bring forth fruit in reason. 59 6. Trial. If we grow more
constant and eaven in a holy course. ibid. 7. Trial. If though our
difficulties and oppositions be more, and means less, yet we continue to bring
forth as well as when our means were more, and difficulties less. ibid. 8.
Trial. If though we do less, yet we grow more wise, and faithful to lay out
our abilities, and improve our opportunities to the greater advantages for Gods
glory and the good of others. 60

The Trial of a Christians Growth. PART II. Of Growth in purging our
corruption.
CHAP. I. The Observation out of the Text propounded, that God goes on to purge
out our corruptions. Bounds set to the Discourse about it. The reasons of the
point. 64
CHAP. II. The ways God uses to purge out corruption out of his children,
with the means by which he causes them to grow to a further measure therein.
65 1. Occasional. ibid. 2. Isntrumental. 66 3. Examples. 67 4. Inward
workings, which consists in five things. ibid.
CAAP. III. The Trial of Growth in Mortification. 1. By negative signs, or
such as argue much corruption remaining unpurged out. As 71 1. If a man does
magnify and set a high price upon worldly and carnal excellencies and
pleasures. ibid. 2. If our minds be carried out to superfluities, and more than
needs, and are discontented with our own condition. 73 3. If our minds be so
glewed to any thing, that we know not how to part with it. ibid. 4. If our
hearts be distempered under variety of conditions, and are very inordinate in
them all, whether they be prosperous, or adverse. 74 5. The more carnal
confidence we have in the creatures; and our spirits being up held by them. 75
6. The more full of envyings and heart-burnings against others, as to get the
credit from them, etc. ibid. 7. The less able we are to bear reproofs for the
breaking forth of our lusts. 76 8. The more quick and speedy the tentation is
in prevailing upon the heart. 77 9. The more power our lusts have to disturb us
in holy duties. ibid. 10. If the bare recalling former sins committed, prove a
new snare to entice the heart. 87

CHAP. IV. 2. The Trial of Mortification by positive signs, which argue a
good degree of that work in the heart: As 1. The more insight a man has into
spiritual corruptions, joined with a conflict against them. 79 2. The more we
grow up to a readiness, willingness, freeness, and cheerfulness of heart to
deny our selves. 80 3. The more stable, ^eaven, and constant we are in well
doing, and the more durable an holy frame of heart in us is. 81 4. The mnre
spiritual taste and relish of the spiritual part of the Word we have. 82 5.
The more ashamed we grow of former carriages, and sensible of former
weaknesses. ibid. 6. The weaker we find our lusts to be in the time of
tentation. ibid. 7. The more ability we have to abstain from occasions and
opportunities of satisfying our lusts. 84 8. If we linger not after the objects
of our lusts, when they are absent, but are weaned from them. ibid.

CHAP. V. Some Cautions to prevent mis-judging by false rules. As also This
Case resolved, Whether Growth in Grace may be judged by the ordinary prevailing
of corruption, or the ordinary acting of man's grace. 85 1. Caution. That men
are not to estimate their progress in grace, by having overcome such lusts as
their natures are not so prone unto: but that a judgment hereof is to be made
from the decay of the bosom sin. ibid. 2. Caution. We are not to judge by
extraordinary assistances, nor extraordinary temptations. 86 This Caution
explicated by three things. 87 This Question resolved, Whether we may certainly
judge of the degrees of our mortification to lusts, by the ordinary risings and
prevailings of them, or by the ordinary acting and exercise of our graces. 88
Answered affirmatively. ibid. An Objection, That the Spirit is a voluntary
Agent, who may act a less degree of grace more then a greater. Answered. 90 1.
That yet the holy Ghost ordinarily assists according to the proportion of grace
given. ibid. 2. That the acting of grace increases the habits more and so it
comes all to one. 91 Two limitations herein.
1. That God for some time of a man's life may leave a strong Christian to
greater corruption then a weak, and act a weak Christians grace more. ibid.
God may have four ends in such a dispensation. ibid. 2. Limitation. If a weak
Christian be more watchful over his lusts for a time, then a stronger
Christian: yet his weakness is discovered by two things. 94

CHAP. VI. Five Cautions more added to the two former, to prevent such
mis-judging. 3. Caut. To take into consideration our several occasions to draw
out corruptions, and means to draw forth graces. 96 4. Caut. To consider the
natural temper of a man's own spirit; whether it be quick and active, or slow.
ibid. 5. To consider what force restraining grace has in us, which often makes
mortification seem greater then it is. 97 6. Not to judge from our present
listlesnesse to sin; which may arise from other causes besides true
mortification; and so may make that seem to be much more at some times then in
truth it is. 99 The difference between listlesnesse to sin, and true
mortification, in two things. 101 7. Not to judge of the measure of
mortification simply by the sharpness and edge of our affections against sin,
but by our inward strength against it. A discovery how that edge of affection
against sin may deceive us, and how a young Christian may have a quicker
stirring against sin, when he has less strength. 102

The Trial of a Christians Growth. PART III. Resolving some Questions about
Growth in Mortification, Vivification.
1. About Growth in Mortification, two Questions: 1. Whether every new degree
of Mortification be always universal, extending it self to every sin. 104
Answer affirmative, and that for three reasons. 105 An Objection answered. 106
2. Quest. Whether in the endeavors of a believer to mortify some one
particular lust, that lust becomes not more mortified then others. Answered. 107
2. About Growth in Vivification three Questions: 1. Quest. Whether every new
degree of Grace runs through all the faculties. Answered affirmatively. 108 2.
Quest. Whether one grace may not grow more then another. Answered by two
Propositions. ibid. 3. Quest. (Concerning the manner of this Growth) Whether it
be a deeper radicating the same grace in the heart, or by a new addition.
Answered. 109

FINIS.

