A FAIR PROSPECT, Showing clearly The difference between things that are Seen,
and things that are not Seen. IN A SERMON Preached at the FUNERAL Of the
HONORABLE LADY JUDITH BARRINGTON; At KNEBWORTH in HERTFORDSHIRE.

By THO. GOODWIN, late Fellow of S. John's College in Cambridge. Now Minister of
the Gospel at Southweal, in Essex.

Unum mihi satis magnum cito moriendi pretium videtur, Poni extra omne
delinquendi periculum. Grot. Epist. ad Gall. LONDON, Printed by A. Maxey, for
John Rothwell, at the Fountain in Cheap Side. 1658.

To the Right Worshipful and Virtuous LADY, The Lady JANE CROFTS And To the
Worshipful. GOBERT BARRINGTON Esquire And Ms LVCY BARRINGTON His Pious Consort.
Much Honored,
I Was by your entreaties invited to Preach this Sermon, and by your
Importunities have been drawn to this Publication of it: whether this Apology
will be sufficient for its coming abroad, I know not; it is all I have, if not, I
must be content with what measure is meted to me The Providential occasion to
which it relates, was sad and grievous to many more then your selves: That
Honorable and Dear Relation of yours, at whose Funeral it was Delivered (and
for whose sake I doubt not of some Acceptance it will find with many, for all
its own unworthiness) being one, who for her singular virtues was Generally
beloved, and Honored; Her death cannot be lamented as Immature, for she lived
to a good old Age; It Is the Peculiar Privilege of the Godly, they cannot live
too long, nor dye too soon. It was my observation of her, that her declining
age of Nature seemed to be Her improving age of Grace; when her natural
strength, and Abilities began to run low, and on Tilt, as it were; Her
Spiritual affections seemed as if but fresh broached. This is rare, and so much
the more excellent, To see in natures Autumn, a second spring of Grace. O it is
sad to observe the many declining Professors of these days! many who had once
a very good complexion in Religion, how are they now tand by walking much
abroad without the Covering of close Communion with God in his Ordinances. The
Lord make you wise herein, and faithful to the eternal interests of your
Souls; by taking heed to your selves in these Perilous times, that you steer
a right course between the left hand of Profaness and Carnality, and the Right
hand of Schism, and Novelty. Look first with all Possible care to your
foundation, that it be well laid in Regeneration, and heart-renovation; then
build upwards, as high as you can in a holy life, and heavenly Conversation.
Make Religion your Business, and let the Exercises of it in Public, Private
and Secret have the Pre-eminence of all your Employments. Bestow the zeal of
your Affections on the Great, and weightier matters of Religion, Faith and
Godliness, and let it not evaporate or waste it self on the mint and Cummin
of Forms and opinions. Look on the world, and things of it, as this Sermon
gives you a Prospect of them, as being but for a while, the Fashion of them
Passing away; Estates, and Honors, Nobility, Gentry, Lords and Ladies are
things which shortly will be quite out of Fashion, and Christ will be All in
All. Keep Eternity in your thoughts, Christ in your hearts, Heaven in your
eyes, the world under your Feet, and in this posture march on daily to life
Eternal. For your Help and furtherance i^ these and all other christian
duties, you may comman^ the Assistance of His poo^ Prayers and Endeavors, wh^
is

Yours in all Christian observance
Brentwood October. 24 1657.
A SERMON Preached at the FUNERAL Of the Honorable Lady JUDITH BARRINGTON
2 Cor. 4. ver. 18. While we look not at the things which are seen, but at the
things which are not seen: for the things which are seen are Temporal, but the
things which are not seen are Eternal.
SOlomon tells us, Ecclesiastes 1. 2. To every thing there is a season, and a
time to every purpose under the Sun: A time to be born and a time to dye. It Is
worth our observing, that he says not a time to be born and a time to Live,
or, a time to live and a time to dye, But a time to be born and a time to dye;
Intimating thereby the duration of man's life to be so inconsiderable, that it
deserves not the Nam^ or Title of time, Orimur, Morimur we are born, and we
forthwith dye we step, as it were out of one Grave into another: out of the
Grave o^ our Mothers womb into the Grav^ of the Earth our Common Mother again.
But however man's first motion from the womb to the Grave be so short and
swift, yet his next from the Grave to Eternity is unmeasurabl^ and
incomprehensible. Man goet^ to his long home says Solomon, 12 Eccles. 5. the
state of man after thi^ life is called his Long home, (...), So the Septuagint
renders it: to his house of Eternity: house so long, that the line of timeselfe
is too short to measure it. (...) thought can imagine it, no expression can
declare it, Semper minus dicitur Drexelius de Aeternit.
quod de aeterno dicitur aut cogitatur.

To this long home Death conveye^ every man, death being that door which lets
man into his (...) his house of Eternity. A Christian should not look on this
world as his dwelling place or home, it is but his Tabernacle or Inn, we have
here no certain dwelling place: thy dwelling 1 Cor. 4. 11
house must be (...), an house Eternal, no such is to be had in this visible
world; for the things which are seen are temporal, but the things which are
not seen are Eternal.

A great part of this Epistle is Apologeticall: written for the vindication of
Paul's Person, Ministry, and the Gospel it self which he preached, The Gospel
and profession of it lay under a very great prejudice For above 300 years
together the Roman Bishops suffered Martyrdom one after another Jacobus Revius
Hist. pontif. Romans
in those days, by reason of the Cross and persecution that did every where
attend them; Tanquam Evangelij Genius: Christianus and Crucianus being almost
all one; especially this lot fell heaviest on the Apostles and Preachers of it,
scarce one of them for many years together, died a Natural Death, but were
buried out of the world in some fierce storm of persecution ver. 11 we which
live. i. e. we Apostles, an always delivered unto death for Jesus sake. q. d.
There is but a few of u^ now left alive, through the rage o^ our persecutors,
and we which do live we bear about in our bodies the dying (...) the Lord
Jesus. ver. 10. we are troubled on every side, perplexed, persecuted, we do
Mortaliter vivere and vitaliter mori. It Is scarce worthy to be called living,
Non est vivere sevalere vita: yet all this notwithstanding, we faint not, v.
16. w^ repent not of our engaging in the work of the Gospel; why? wha^ was it
supported and encourage^ them? see v. 17. For our light affliction which is but
for a moment, work for us a far more exceeding eternal weight of glory. No
translation ca^ reach the height of the Apostles Rhetoric Notandae sunt
elegantissimae Antitheses quovis etiam Demosthene non indignae. Beza in loc.
in those expressions; for Afflicton; there is glory; for ligh^ affliction a
weight of Glory, for Momentany affliction, an exceedin^ Eternal weight of
Glory. Concer^ing Paul's afflictions, we may read little Martyrology of them,
2. Cor^ 11. 23, 24, etc. In stripes above measure, in prisons frequent, in
Deaths often; of the Jews five times received I forty stripes save one. Thrice
was I beaten with rods, once was I stoned, thrice I suffered ship-wrake; anight
and a day have I been in the deep in journeying often, in peril of waters in
peril of Robbers, etc. One of these Gospel-chaines would feel very heavy to
us, yet Paul makes light of them all, setting against them, An exceeding
Eternal weight of Glory, which they work for him. A farther support in his
sufferings, he and his Fellowsufferers had from the Consideration En quid nobis
facil^s tole^atu faciat omnes mundi hujus miserias, n^mpe si cogitationes
nostras ad regni caelestis ^ternitatem transf^ramus, Calvin. in loc.
laid down in my Text, We look not at things which are seen, but at things
which are not seen. q. d. we set not much by the things of this world, we
reckon little upon them, we aim not at them, for they are all but Temporal.
The object of our desires, aims and endeavors are things not seen, which are
Eternal.

The Text may be called a pair of Scripture Scales or Balances, in which may be
observed,

1. The Commodities weighed, they are things which are seen and things which
are not seen.

2. The great Difference appearing betwixt them upon the weight of them; the
superpondinm of things not seen. Things that are seen being weighed are found
very light, very vanities, they are but (...) for a season, for a while, so the
Heb. 11. 35 Matthew. 13. 21.
word is elsewhere translated. Bu^ things that are not seen they weig^^ very
heavy, they are all Eternal. Eternity makes every thing weighty whether it be
Glory or Misery. (...) the verse foregoing my Text, w^ have (...). An Eternal
weight of Glory.

3. The right improvement to b^ made of this knowledge of the difference between
things that are see^ and things that are not seen, implye^ in that word (...),
which signifi^ so to look, as the Archer at the (...) he aims at: we make not
these worldly things that are seen our aim, (...) catch not at them, we linger
no^ after them, we trouble not our selve^ much about them, our aims ar^
higher, we look at things that are not seen, that are Eternal. Many profitable
Lessons might be learnt out of the words, as

Christian Religion teaches us to know and believe things that are not 1 Doct.
Heb. 1. 11
seen. Our Christian faith makes evident to us things not seen. Some things we
know by sense, as the Sun shining, and fire burning; others by reason, as the
Creation of the world: but our Christian Religion has revealed to our knowledge
such things, as neither the eye of sense, nor Reason have seen. Our lowstatured
dwarfe-understandings, by the help of Scripture-Revelation, have been advanced
to some Discovery of things Eternal. Christianity calls the mind off from
poring on those low trivial objects of perishing things that are seen, and
employes it, in the Contemplation and study of things Eternal.

Christianity puts men upon making it their great Business to look after 2 Doct.
things eternal; we Christians, we Believers look at things that are not seen;
it is not (...), but (...), we do not only look on them by intellectual
speculations, but we look at and after them affectionately and practically in
our daily endeavors and intentions. This is to be a Christian to purpose, to
be daily busy about things Eternal. This is indeed Christians calling:
Christians should be mainly skilful about things eternal, and mainly painful
about thing eternal. Things of this life, temporal things should be your (...)
your by-business, you should (...) them, as if you did them not, use (...)
world, as if you used it not; the wor^ 1 Cor. 7. 39. 30.
should be served only with God Leavings; it should have but the fragments of
thy time, and the fragments of thy affections; things eternal should in all
things have precedence and pre-eminence. He tha^ believes not things eternal is
an in fidel, but he that believes them, ye^ looks not after them, is worse the
an Infidel: yet alas, how full (...) all streets of such men, that arraking all
kennels, and scrapin^ Dunghils, turning over every ston^ for worldly pelf,
gathering things temporal, but scattering things eternal; eternal ^ad immortal
Souls. Think of it, Christians, things eternal are worth your looking after:
and if you would walk worthy of the Name whereby you are called, you must
sequester your selves from the world, leave the looking after it to men of this
world (of whom you shall hear more anon) whose calling it is, whose portion it
is; do you devote, and dedicate your selves chiefly to the care of things
eternal. But I come to a third Observation, which I chiefly intend to handle at
this time.

It is Eternity makes the great difference 3. Doct.
between things that are seen and things that are not seen. The things of this
life are but for a season, but the things of the life to come are eternal. If
the good things and evil things of this life and the life to come were to be
compared and weighed one against the other, many other differences would
appear, to give the things of the life to come precedence; But that which
mainly, infinitely, indeed, casts the Scale, makes the things of the life to
come to preponderate is this word Eternity: they are all eternal: eternally
good or eternally evil; you do but weigh a grain of sand against a huge
Mountain, a drop of water against the whole Ocean, or a pins head against the
whole globe of heaven and earth, that weigh a temporal good against an eternal
good; or a temporal evil against an eternal evil. I Will speak a little to three
particulars for the better clearing up this Doctrine.

1. What is meant here by things seen and things not seen? 2. What by Temporal
and Eternal? 3. What are those things not seen, eternal which Christians are to
look after?
1. Things seen and not seen what are they?

Man, you all know, Consists of two parts, a Carnal part and a Spiritual, a
Body and Soul, Flesh and Spirit, an Earthen vessel and a Spiritual Treasure, a
Candle and a Lanthorn, a plain Cabinet and a Rich Treasure: The Body one part
of Man is visible, the Soul being a Spirit is invisible: According to this
double part of man, one of which may be seen, the other cannot be seen, all
things which concern man may be divided either into suchthings as maybe seen,
or as may not be seen. The things which immediately concern the body, whether
good, as life, health, wealth, food, Raiment, liberty, Friends etc. or evil,
as, Sickness, Pains, Poverty, Nakedness, death, etc. are all Objecta sensibilia
things which may be seen, they do incurrere in sensum. Men that walk by sight
look much at them and are much affected with them: In this sense the Apostle 1
John 2. 16. calls wealth the lust of the eye. But the things which immediately
Concern the Soul, whether good, as Grace and Glory, or evil as Sin and
misery, guilt and wrath; as the soul it self is a thing not seen, eternal, so
are those concernments of it: therefore only regarded and looked after by men
that walk not by sight but by faith. So 2 Cor. 5. 7.
that upon the point, by things that are seen, and that are not seen, may be
meant the same which in 1 Timothy 4. 8. is expressed by the things of the life that
now is, and of that which is to come. The things of the life that now is, are
temporal, but the things of the life to come are eternal.

2. What is meant by Temporal and Eternal? It Is a very easy and a very hard
Question; what is Time? what is Eternity? The durations of all beings are
Philosophically divided into three kinds, Tempus, Aevum, and Aeternitas: But
Theologically into two only, Time and Eternity. Time in eneral in the Lump,
signifies the Duration or Continuance of things from the beginning of the world
to the end of it; Time being measured, as Philosophers say, per motum primi
mobilis, by the motions of the heavens extrinsecally: when the heavens
therefore shall be dissolved, Time shall be no more. Rev. 10. 6. Time in the
Nature of it including 1. a Beginning. 2. Succession. 3. An end. And by its
parts it is Differenced by past, Present, and Future. This is time in General
(...).

2. Time in particular called (...) of which the word (...) in my Text is
Compounded, is a part, portion or quantum of this Time, a little arm of this
Sea, a Page or two of this whole Book; (...) old Father Time it self is but an
Infant of a span long to this great Giant, Eternity: (...) season, is a limb
of this little Infant: Time it self is but a moment, a minute of Eternity; and
season is a Minutulum of this Minute, a very inconsiderable thing: yet it is by
this that all particular worldly things are measured; they are not said to be
(...) but (...) They are not measured by the whole yard, of time, but by the
inch of season, they are but for a while, for a season.

But what is Eternity? without blushing I may reply as an acute Di^putant once
did to a hard argument, Respondeo me non posse Respondere, My answer to this
Question is, that it is a question past my skill to answer: or as the
Philosopher Symonides did to King Hieron's question, What is God? he required
three days one after another to meditate an answer to it, and at last told him
he was farther from knowing what to Answer, then when the Question was first
propoundrd, for that Quo plus cogitaret, plus cogitandum occurreret, the deeper
we dig, the faste^ and higher will water rise upon us to drown our very
meditations. Many descriptions are given of it, which I will not spend time in
rehearsing: only Note a common Distinction of Eternity into Increated and
Created, Absoluta and Participata; a Complete perfect Eternity that is God's,
and an Incomplete inperfect eternity Communicated to some Creatures Gods Being
is every way infinite, S^ are all the Perfections of it: In wisdom, Omniscience
is his infinite Perfection, in power, Omnipotency, it Presence, Immensity, in
Duration Eternity. Gods Eternity includes four things; 1. That God was from
everlasting without any beginning Psalm. 90. 2. Before the mountains were
brought forth, or ever thou had formed the earth and the world: Even from
Everlasting to Everlasting thou art God. In Isaiah 57. 15. he is called the
High and Lofty One that Inhabiteth Eternity. In the beginning God created the
heaven and the earth; 1 Genesis ^
But God, the Creator of heaven and earth himself, was without beginning, from
everlasting.

2. That Gods Being has no ending; God did not begin to be, God cannot cease
to be, Rev. 10. 6. He lives for ever and ever 1 Timothy 6. 16. he only has
Immortality; God only has it Intrinsecally, Essentially, independently, some
Creatures have it by Communion, from Gods good will and pleasure, and in
subordination to Gods glory. God only is from Everlasting to everlasting, To be
eternal, A part ante and a part post, both is Gods incommunicably.

3. In Gods Eternity there is no succession, no prius and posterius, no
yesterday and to morrow, all things being equally present to God's Eternity.
One therefore calls it Duratio Drexelius.
semper praesens, unum perpetuum ^odie quod non transit in praeteri^um aut
^uturum. Gods knowledge comprehends things a thousand years distant one from
another more exactly the^ ours can do things of yesterday Psalm. 90. 4* Heri
nostrum cras, and pridem, Semper tibi nunc and idem: Tuum Deus, ^odiernum
Indivisum sempiternum. Hildeberti Hymnus. Vsser. D^ Symb.
Things come to our knowledge, some before, some after others; it is not so with
God's: This, some schoolmen have Illustrated by such a similitude, A man
standing on the to^ of some high mountain, or hill to se^ an army marching, he
sees the whole body of it at once, thoug^ possibly one part of it be many mile^
distant from another; another man standing on the ground sees but very little
at a time, first one ra^^ of men then another, one troo^ after another, one
Regiment afte^ another, some before, some behind some coming, others going,
other gone. Thus do we that stand (...) this low valley of time see an^ know
things successively, and compute by days and years, yesterda^ and to Morrow,
last and next year One Generation passes away and another comes: but the High
and Lo^ty Eccles. 1. 4.
One that inhabits Eternity know no yesterdayes nor to morrows, hi^ eternity
possesses altogether, all a^ once. God's Eternity is interminabil^^ vitae tota
simul possessione. If thou say thou can not conceive how Boethius
t^is should be; I only say to thee (...) the words of a Learned Philoso^^er,
Si scires quid Deus esset, Deus Cardanus
(...), None but God can comprehend God.

4. Gods Eternity is Causall: he dispences and measures out the duration and
Continuance of all other b^ings: he sets out their races, and stages, when they
shall begin, and when end. The times and seasons Eccles. 3. 1.
of every thing under the Sun are appointed by him: the Sun it self and Heavens
keep the Courses he appoints them: and when he will, Time shall be no more;
This is increated Eternity.

2. The Creatures eternity is Communicated and dependant, and it is Rev. 10. 6
but an half eternity: God is from everlasting to everlasting; the Creatures is
from such a time, when it began, To everlasting. Me thinks it makes my weak
understanding as it were giddy to stand a little and look either backward from
everlasting or forward to everlasting. One quarter of an hours deep meditation
of eternity makes head and heart fall Facilius toto ann^ solemn aestivu^
meridianum perf^ras oculis, quam homo temporis exi gui part aeternitatis Lucem
intellectu possie contemplari. Card.
an aching, as not able to bear it. As the eye can bear with ten or twenty or
thirty Candles all lighted at a time in a room and look on them without any
pain or trouble, but a little gazing on the Sun weakens and dazles it, being
Excellens Sensibile: so it is with the weak eye of man's understanding, if you
keep it within the Horison or compass of time (although at hundred and thousand
years distance) it will hold out with vigor and quickness; but if thy thoughts
approach a little near Eternity to Consider it seriously, thou will presently
be sensible of a great weakness in thy Intellectualls, thy head will scarce
hold out to serve thy hearts Necessity about the considerations of Eternity. So
much at present for that second particular what is meant by Temporal, and Eternal.

3. What are those unseen eternal things which Christians look after? I might
instance in many particulars Take these four.

1. The new Spiritual life of a Christian in his union to Christ began by
Regeneration. As natural life consists in the Conjunction of the body and Soul:
So does spiritual in the union of the soul to Christ. And as the body without
the soul is dead, so is the soul without Christ. Ephesians. 1. 12
This spiritual life of a Believer is a very secret hidden thing, Colos. 2. 3.
your life is hid with Christ in God, it is hid from the world, and hid
oftentimes from believers themselves, so that they are often in great fears
and troubles about their spiritual Condition: whether in Christ, or out of
Christ, they cannot tell. They are not to be numbered the many careful thoughts
that the hearts of true Christians are filled with, about this one thing, Their
Regeneration. This is a thing not seen, not regarded, nor understood by the
world, yet this is an eternal thing, your souls passing from death to life, its
first step toward that life that is eternal over this narrow bridge of
Regeneration. Oh Sirs, has this been looked after by you, your New Birth? many
talk much of their Birth, and Parentage, and Ancestors, you are but meanly
descended and base-born all of you, that are not born again of water and of the
Spirit. The differences of men by flesh and blood, and titles John 3. 5.
of honor, such as are Gentlemen, Esquires, Knights, Lords, etc. are but
temporal, for a while, but the differences of men by nature and the Spirits
regenerate and unregenerate these are Eternal.

2. Justification or the sense of sin pardoned, Thy person accepted, God
reconciled, these are things greatly looked after and labored for by good
Christians, yet things not seen nor discerned by the world, Rev. 2. 17. To him
that overcomes I will give to eat of the hidden manna, and will give him a
white stone, and in the stone a new name written, which no man knows saving
he that receives it. This hidden manna are the Comforts of the Spirit of God
in the hearts of believers upon the sense of their Reconciliation to God: The
white stone is their absolution and Justification. It being a manner used in
some Iudicatories to give a white stone in token of approbation and absolution,
and a black stone in token of Condemnation or rejection. O this white stone
Believers search and look and dig for as a Treasure!

Justification is an eternal thing Romans 8. 30: whom he justified, them he also
glorified,

3. Adoption, the Souls Relation to God in a state of Sonship, that is a thing
not seen, Relationes non incurrunt in sensus; this is a thing that Believers
are inquisitive after, to have the Spirit of God bearing witness with their
Spirits, that they are the Children of God, Romans 8. 16. God has a seed among
the children of men, whom having new-begotten by his Spirit he has certainly
adopted 1 John. 3. 1.
to be his children, his affection to them exceeds far yours, who are Natural
parents toward your Isa. 49. 15.
children: he has Paternal affections toward them, and they filial
dispositions toward him, he a paternal care and providence over them, they
filial Confidences and Mat. 25. 34. John. i4. 2
Dependences on him, as you parents lay up for your Children, so does God for
them. This Dignity indeed has no outward appearance to discover it self to the
world. It does not yet appear who are Gods sons, nor how such shall be
glorified: The heirs of eternal glory walk up and down the streets 1 John 3. 2
of the world in very contemptible appearances. Sometimes in Sheepskins, and
goat skins, being destitute, as having nothing, yet Heb. 11. 37. 2 Cor. 6. i0
possessing all things, two or three of them sometimes are crowded together
into one poor thatcht cottage, yet not one of these (though it be a thing not
seen of the world) stirs abroad without a guard of Angels and the Spirit of
glory and of God rests on them. Psalm. 91. 11. 1 Pet. 4. i4
The poor petty heirs of this world make a great show and noise where they go,
they are looked after, and pointed at, There goes such a Knights eldest son,
such a Lords heir, etc. only the sons of God and children of the Most High, who
shall every one of them inherit an Eternal Kingdom, their glory is a thing not
seen, therefore is not their condition valued by men of the world: but Blessed
is that Soul, who has received this New-name of a Son or daughter of the Lord
Almighties:

4. The last thing which I shall 2 Cor. 6. 1^.
name among things not seen which believers look after is an Inheritance in
heaven, uncorruptible, undefiled, 1 Pet. 1. 4.
that fades not away, while other men are busied wholly in laying up for
themselves treasures on earth, they are laying up for themselves treasures in
heaven. 1. Cor. 2. 9. Such things as eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither
have entered into the heart of man, for them that love him. God is preparing
heaven for them, and they are preparing themselves for heaven; They are
clearing up their evidences, and securing their titles to Glory, by making
their calling and Election sure, they observing wisely how slippery men's
present standings are on earthly possessions, are laying up in store for
themselves a good foundation against the time to come that they may lay hold on
eternal life, 1 Timothy 6. 19. O this heavenly inheritance is that, which a
Believer has his eye upon on all occasions! His short Commons on outward
Mercies he makes up often with the remembrance of the plentiful feast provided
for him in his fathers house, and Kingdom. His heavy afflictions are made
light by Considering that 2 Cor. 4. 27
exceeding eternal weight of Glory they work for him. The yoke of Duty and
service is made easy by having Respect unto the recompense of Reward; when ever
any thing troubles Heb. ii. 26
him, or goes amiss with him here among things temporal, the Consideration of
heaven and things eternal makes amends for all. Thus a believer looks at these
things which are not seen, which are eternal; I come to Application.

This Doctrine, that the things of this world are but for a season has a Use 1.
double aspect, as the Israelites cloud, a dark side and a light side, it Exo.
i4. 20.
looks very sadly upon all those whom the Scripture calls Men of this Psa. i7.
i4.
world; men in this world we are all, but not all, I hope; men of this world.
To men of this world I may call and say in the words of the Apostle James,
James 5. 1. 2. Go to now ye* men of the world, weep and howl for your miseries
that shall come upon you; your riches are corrupted, and your garments
moth-eaten. Here is the Canker and the rust, and the moth that is consuming all
your treasure, this one word (...) they are all but for a season. I'el give you
4 Characters of men of this world.

1. Men, all whose skill and dexterity is about things of this world; shrewd
men, very knowing about worldly affairs, but altogether ignorant about the
matters of Eternity. The world is the only book they study; Therein they are
soundly book-learned. As David did on Gods law, so do they herein, meditate 1
Isal. 2.
day and night; This book has three leaves 1 John 2. 16. Riches, Pleasures and
Honors.

1. The Covetous man's Genius or Lust carries him after wealth, this leaf he
is daily thumming, beating his brain and studying new ways to enlarge his
est^te, by adding house to house, and purchase to purchase, contriving new
engines to draw more of the Riches of the world into his possession: and to a
notable perfection, herein many of them attain, being verstin all the Topics
and Common places of profit and gain; having got in a readiness all sorts of
money-traps to catch it, wherever it is stirring and to be had: per fas and
nefas Rem, rem quocunque modo, rem.

The voluptuous man, his teeth water more after pleasures and sensual delights,
feasting and gaming, and riotous living; he gives his heart to seek and search
out all manner of mirths and pleasures; As Solomon describes his own Courses in
the time of his vanity. Eccles. 2. 1. 2. to the 10. v. Solomon shows there what
large provision he made to satisfy this lust, sumptuous diet; stately
buildings, orchards, Gardens, Forests, Parkes, Fishponds, Music vocal, and
isntrumental, he withheld not his heart from any joy that his eyes desired;
As a young prodigal Citizen of London I have See a memorable story in B^ards
Theater of Gods Judgment 2 part page 1^0.
read of, who had a great longing to give all his five senses a pleasure at
once, and allowed to the delight of every sense a several hundred pound: by
which and such like practices within the space of three years he wasted an
estate of thirty thousand pound in money left him by his father, besides Land,
Plate, Jewels, and houses furnished very richly to a great value. It Is not a
little cost and pains men of this lust are at, to maintain and give it
satisfaction.

3. The Ambitious man is of an aspiring mind, he is climbing higher and higher
after honors and preferments, his head is never without a plot to promote this
his design. These three, which one calls the worlds Trinity, in serving of
these, men of the world are wholly taken up: and many live under the Repute of
notable wise men, for the skill they have attained in these worldly businesses.
Poor Creatures! the subject of our skill are things that are but for a while,
therefore for a while you will go for wise men, wise for a time, but fools
Eternally. How will these wiser men of the world see themselves shortly
befooled! me thinks I hear the Noise of their cry at the day of Judgment in
the words of Saul. Behold we have played the fool and have erred exceedingly:
you have a 1 Samuel 26. 10.
Proverb, Penny wise and pound foolish, such are men of this world; wise in
temporalls, fools in Eternals. Look to it, Sirs, that none of you be such,
wise to buy and sell and make bargains, to Contrive ways of enlarging your
estates, and raising your families, but in the Mysteries of Godliness, and
matters of Salvation, such as Regeneration, union and Communion with Christ,
Living by faith, having our Conversation in heaven, etc. grossly ignorant and
void of understanding.

2. Men whose labor and activity is wholly or chiefly for things of this
world; men whose practice is directly opposite to our Saviors precept John. 6.
27. They labor for the meat that perishes, but they labor not for the meat
which endures unto everlasting life. Great weekday Laborers in gathering the
perishing things of this world; but Lord's Day loyterers when they should be
gathering heavenly Manna for life Eternal. Industry and diligence in an honest
Calling, though never so poor and mean in the Account of men is well-pleasing
to God: I would not be thought to reprove or reproach that: I wish heartily
many pretenders to Religion now a days would make more conscience of that
duty: I think it also one of the great sins and reproaches of our Nation that
it abounds with so many vagrant beggars and extravagant Gentlemen, living, the
one as if they were above, the other, beneath all honest calllngs: But the sin
I am now describing, and disgracing is, when men will toil and moil, run and
ride, rise early and sit up late, in pains-taking about the things of this
life; but will not be brought to like or practice any exercise in Religion, in
which pains must be taken, although the profit and advantage of it be an
Eternal good; When Estates and preferments in the wo^ld which are but ^or a
while, are sought with the hazard of eternal Souls; which are lost for (...)
of looking af^^r. O ye Sons of men how long will ye love varity and seek after
lea^^ng? Psalm. 4. 2* why labor you for that which (...) not? the days are
Coming when you will reflect on your (...) for these temporal things, with
Solomon's words Eccles. 1. 3. Isa. 55. 2.
what profit has a man of all his labors which he takes under the Sun? so
Eccles. 2. 11. you will look on all the works your hands have wrought; and on
the labor you have labored to do, and the Result of all will be vanity and
vexation of Spirit, there was no profit under the Sun. You that now are all for
profit and gain, to whom dulcis odor lucri ex re qualibet, you will be
miserably disappointed, you will find there was no profit under the Sun, pro^^t
will be found to be amongst things that are not seen, things eternal which you
looked not after. What a vain thing is it for a man to busy himself in drawing
curious images or letters in the sand or dust, which one blast of wind will
suddenly deface and spoil, and in a moment obliterate the pains of many hours
or days? O it might be happy for many men's souls, if one tenth part of that
time, labor, and pains which is spent about things temporal; were spent about
things eternal. Consider with what shame and torment of spirit you will stand
before God at the Day of Judgment: under this remembrance; what profit of all
my labor under the Sun? None, none at all, your labor was misplaced, it was
about perishing things; In stead of profit behold nothing but anguish and
vexation of Spirit.

3. Men of this world are such, all whose treasure, estate and portion lies in
this world: it is all visible, consisting only of things which are seen. As we
say of some men, they are great men in their own Country, their estate lies
altogether in one Country, there they have great Command, great interest and
Respect, many Tenants and retainers, great Alliance, they bear all the sway,
but out of their Country, they are No body, they pass to and fro unregarded: so
is it with many, who in this world bear a great sway through their worldly
greatness, by their purse and power they can have any thing, and do any thing
here below; But Alas, you see all, all lies on this side the Holy Land, here
lies all their estate, they have no treasure; nor inheritance in heaven, their
friends dwell all on earth: in heaven there is none cares for them: they have
much kindred and acquaintance on earth, but strangers to heaven, God ownes them
not, Abraham is ignorant of them, and Israel will not acknowledge them, one
stroke of death utterly undoes them, and bereaves them of all at once. In a
moment, in the twinkling of an eye they are thrown out of all, they are cast
down and shall not be able to rise. Psalm. 37. 35, 36. I have seen the wicked in
great power and Psalm. 36. ^2.
spreading himself like a green Baytree: yet he passed away and lo he was not,
I sought him but he could not be found. Death like a Bailey or Sergeant comes
with a writ of arrest, seizes upon all, and carries them away to prison, where
they must be for ever without any hope of Redemption. This will be the end of
men of this world. O Sirs, me thinks you should sit trembling under all your
enjoyments to see this one word (...) For a while, written upon the forehead of
them all; For a Soldier to have an honorable sword of Knighthood girt about
him (as one once had) and a piece of match of a few inches lie by him burning,
with which his life must extinguish and end also, where would his eye think you
be most? on his sword, or his burning match? would not this more dismay him
than that could rejoice him? This word (...) for a while lies like a piece of
match, burning by all your enjoyments; thy goodly Houses, rich Lands, Portions,
Jewels, pleasant Gardens, stately Parks, Dear Relations, are all within a few
inches of going out at once, and thou thy self shall be left in utter
darkness.

4. Lastly, men of this world are such, whose hearts are wholly set on things
of this world: Their projects and designs are all for the world, nothing goes
near their hearts to affect them or afflict them, but things of this world,
worldly losses and crosses, worldly gains and advantages: if they rejoice,
it is in corn or wine, or some worldly good, if they mourn and walk heavily,
it is under some worldly loss and disappointment. Me thinks this should be
heartbreaking News to you, to hear of all at once thus suddenly departing from
you: It goes to your hearts now, to part with a little of your wealth though to
cloth the naked, or feed the hungry, how will you bear the loss of all? how
painful is the plucking, out but of one tooth, that stands fast in the flesh?
To have all knocked out together is intolerable: you whose hearts stick so
fast, and cleave so close to the world, weep and houle for the miseries that
are coming upon you, who must have all at once rent and ^orn from you. It is
storied of Full. Holy State.
a German Prince that being admonished by Revelation to search for a writing in
an old w^ll: which should nearly concern him, he found one containing one^y
these two words; Post sex; After six, whereupon the Prince conceived his death
was foretold; that after six days it should ensue, which made him pass those
six days in Continual preparation for death; but those six days being past,
without the event he expected, he persevered in his Godly Resolution six weeks,
six months, six years, and on the first day of the seventh year the Prophecy
was fulfilled, but otherwise then he interpreted it; for thereupon he was chose
Emperor of Germany, having before gotten such a habit of Piety, that he
Continued in that Religious course for ever after. Brethren, that writing in
the wall did no more concern the Prince, then this in my text does you all,
whose hearts are set on the world; Ponder and meditate seriously on this word
(...) for a while, this estate is but for a while, these pleasures but for a
while, these treasures, this Husband, Wife, Children are but for a while; the
Princes while was Post sex, after six, Thine may be Ante sex. It may be as the
Rich fools in the Gospel was, Luke 12. 20. Hac Nocte, this night; so little
may the while be, that those things which are seen will abide with thee. Oh,
that you would take up some wise Resolutions from this Consideration; namely
these two.

1. Regulate and moderate your affections toward them; let this meditation
allay the heat of your affections toward worldly things: Let not things of so
short a duration, take so deep a rooting in thy affections. Love the world, and
the things of it, as thou do the good accommodations of an Inn, not as thy
home; Facilitate thy parting with them, Considering them often under this
Representation of being Temporal, but for a season, for a while. I have read of
a Roman Senator, that having a very curious Cupboard of Glasses, in which he
took much delight, they being all upon the occasion of a great feast he made,
brought forth and set upon a table; while he was pleasingly viewing of them, it
came into his thoughts what brittle Commodities they were, and how easily
broke, broke they would be, one by one servant, another by another, and the
breaking of one would more anger him then they were all worth; he to prevent
this evil, lays his hand on the cloth on which they stood, and by one pluck
himself breaks them all at once. Sirs, all our Creature-enjoyments consisting
of things which are seen, are like a Cupboard of glasses, fair to the eye, but
very brittle and fadeing. Inter peritura vivimus. A glass is not easier broken
then all worldly Inter peritura vivimus. Sen^ca.
things beside, and break they all will; Fire comes and breaks one, sick ness
another, violence another, death first one child, then another, one friend
after another, and if thy affections be not well regulated, there will be more
evil in thy immoderate grief for the loss of one, then ever there was good in
the enjoyment of all; to prevent this; break thy heart off from them all,
which cannot be better done, then by dwelling much in thy thoughts upon this
Notion of them: As being but for a while, for a season.

2. Resolve not to hazard the loss of invisible Eternal things, for things
which are but temporal, for a while. You know the fable of the dog, that lost
the meat he had in his mouth, by Catching at the shadow of it in the waters,
De te Fabula narratur, may it be said to every worldling. Suppose a man having
a purse of gold in his pocket, and coming into a market, where he finds men
scrambling for apples on the ground, amongst them he runs into a crowd, loses
his purse of gold, but gets an apple, which he falls of eating, but before he
had half eaten it, that is snatched out of his hands also; This egregious fool
hazarded his gold for an apple, and then loses gold and apple too: thus do
vain men, whose hearts are set upon the world; venture with eternal souls any
where, upon any desperate project, in scrambling for the things of the world,
Precious eternal souls are scattered and lost in men's busy gathering the dust
of the world; and within a few days death comes and snatches all that out of
thy hands also: This will be the Conclusion, you that will hazard things
Eternal for things temporal, will lose both temporal and Eternal, you have seen
the dark side of this Doctrine: with which it looks sadly upon men of this
world.

This Doctrine has a light side for 2.
true Israelites, a comfortable aspect on all true Believers; wicked men have
all their good things in this life; it is sad to them therefore to consider they
are all but for a season, but believers have all their evils in this life, it is
therefore their comfort that they are but for a while, their foul way lies all
here below, the shorter the better for them: whatever thou see here below,
that is at any time bitter or grievous to thee, Remember for thy comfort it is
but for a while.

1. Thy own sins, those are now great eye-sores to thee, and grievous to
behold; the hardness and deadness of thy heart, thy vain thoughts, earthly
affections, the wanderings of thy paths out of Gods ways; thou never look
upon thy heart or life, but thou sighest to see lusts and sin abounding and
superabounding: but be of good comfort these evils are but for a while, thy
heart ere long shall be perfectly renewed and totally purified, thou shall look
and shall not see all over the least matter for sighs and tears, not a spot nor
wrinkle shall be left all over thee: thy soul shall not be long as a bird tied
by the wing, it shall mount up, and be in the midst of things eternal; it shall
be soiled no more by conversing with things temporal, it shall deal only with
things Eternal: 2 Cor. 5. 6. 7. 1 These. 4. 17. 18.
while thou art present in the body, thou art absent from the Lord, but thou
shall after a little while be for ever with the Lord.

2. Other men's sins; they are great evils which thou ^eest under the Sun: and
they are great troubles and torments to gracious Souls. He that is not
troubled for other men's sins, is not troubled for his own. Lots righteous Soul
was vexed, wracked, tortured from day to day to see the ungodly conversation of
the Sodomites. Rivers of 2 Pet. 2. 7, 8.
water's run down mine eyes, says David. Psalm. 119. 130. Because men keep not
thy law. Psalm. 120. Psalm. 5, 6. Woe is me that I sojourn in M^sech, That I
dwell in the tents of Kedar: it is but for a while that thou shall see the
reeling drunkard, and hear the oaths of swearers, and the idle frothy talk of
vain men; The wickedness of the wicked shall be at an end; Thou shall not
always see the Psalm. 7. 9.
prosperity of the wicked to tempt, nor the adversity of the Godly to
discourage thee. Ps. 37. 35, 38. I have seen the wicked in great power, But the
transgressors shall be destroyed together, the end of the wicked shall be cut
off; while God exercises his patience in forbearing them, thou must exercise
thy zeal in reproving them, and thy repentance in mourning for them. 3. Thy own
sufferings and afflictions, of what Nature or kind soever, they are but for a
while, but for a moment, in the verse foregoing my Text; Remember this as a
lenitive to allay the smart of thy afflictions. Thy aching head, thy Palsy
hands, thy trembling heart, thy Gouty legs; all these are but for a while. Thy
slandred innocence, disgraced Name, impoverisht estate, all these are but for a
while. 1 Pet. 1. 6. there are two Cordialls together, ye are now in heaviness
for a season, if need be; For a season, If need be. The patient complains his
Physic makes him sick at the heatt, his Physician comforts him by telling him,
it is but for a little season, and it was needful, his strong disease needed
such strong Physic. Thou art apt to cry out in the bitterness of thy Soul, How
long Lord, how long, Holy and True? God answers thee in his word (...) be
patient, it is but for a season, for a moment Nubecula est, cito transibit. This
meditation is a soft Pillow for thee, to lay thy aching head and heart on, to
keep thee from fainting in the day of adversity. 4. The Calamity of God's
Church and people, Sions sufferings, Jerusalem's breaches: The true legitimate
sons of Sion cannot but grieve and mourn to see their Mothers distresses, many
a time do they sit down by the waters side weeping to Remember Sion Psalm. 137.
5. If I forget thee O Jerusalem, Let my right hand forget her cunning, To see
the potency and prevalency of the Churches Enemies, Gebal, Ammon, Amaleck,
Philistine, etc. all uniting their power against Sion; To see the paucity of
Sions friends, and they divided amongst themselves, to see her wall broken
down, her treasure profaned, her precious Cornerstone it self vilified and
made light of, his truths corrupted, ordinances despised, Ministers reproached,
and discipline mocked at; these are sad objects for gracious souls to look on,
yet these things are to be seen, and to be seen in our days, and in our own
Country, but our Comfort is, these things also are but for a season; as thou
see them, so Jesus Christ the Churches head and husband who sits in the
heavens, he sees them, Rsal. 102. 13.
and he will arise and have mercy on Sion, for the time to favor her, yea the
set time is come; Sion Militant shall be Sion Triumphant. The time is coming
when all those that mourned for her, shall rejoice for joy with her. Isa. 66. 13


Thus may this Doctrine, that these things that are seen are but temporal, be
improved to the Comfort of Believers.

I Will only add one use more which shall be of exhortation, from Use 2.
the latter part of the Doctrine, That the things which are not seen are
Eternal. There are, Christians, you hear things eternal, and you to whom I am
speaking of these things are all of you such as must live eternally amongst
things Eternal. The Continuances of your beings here among things seen, may be
different from each other, some may be longer, others shorter; but in the world
to come however in kind your beings may differ infinitely, as far as heaven
and hell, yet in duration they will all agree to be Eternal. Many of us live as
if they had never heard of things Eternal, most as if they did not believe any
such things, and truly even the best of us do not improve as we ought the
knowledge of things Eternal. Now my exhortation to you all is, that you would
seriously Consider and meditare on those things Eternal. I will direct my
exhortation of you to three particulars for your Meditation.

1. Meditate seriously on Eternity it self; which is the Interminable,
Infinite, endless duration of a being. Eternity makes good things infinitely
good, and evil things infinitely evil. The happiness of the Saints in heaven,
and the misery of the damned in hell, have both of them a vast Circumference;
but the very Center of both is this one thing Eternity; The Crowns of Glorified
Saints, and the Chains of tormented Sinners are both made so weighty by this
inclining of Eternity. The mind of man is a vessel too narrow indeed, to form
or contain a meditation which may bear any proportion to Eternity: yet some
Devout men have well improved their meditation, to help to affect us with the
thoughts of Eternity. One discoursing of the Eternal sufferings of the damned
in hell, thus represents them; if (says he) the whole world from the lowest
bottom of the earth, to the highest top of heaven, were filled with small
grains of sand as close as they could possibly lie together, and every
thousandth year an Angel should come and fetch away one of them, until the
whole heap were spent; if then the prison door of hell might be set open, and
the damned set at Liberty, it would be jowful News to them, yet those years,
although innumerable, are nothing to Eternity. Another thus, if God should make
this Motion to the damned, that every thousandth year they should shed one
single tear, all which should be kept together, until they amounted to the
quantity of a great Ocean, and, then with this sea of their tears he would
quench the fire of hell and their torments should be at an end; there would
(says he) be great joy in hell at this merciful motion, but the weight of
Eternity in their sufferings, presses them down every day lower and lower,
with inconceivable, unsupportable misery. O Eternity, My Brethren, if you could
make your thoughts but stick to it, if you would every day task them to some
solemn meditations of it, if you would breath them every day, by walking up
this high hill Eternity, and there be taking a prospect of things that are not
seen, you would find it exceeding healthful to your souls, I would commend it
to you as a (...) Physic to cure all soul-diseases and distempers. If I were
asked what were good to make a proud man humble; Let him meditate seriously on
Eternity; what will make a vain man serious, a covetous worldling heavenly
minded; a loose liver, strict and precise; a wicked man good, and a good man
better and better; let them all daily seriously think on Eternity. Your
hearts, it is likely, will be very averse from the practice of this duty, as a
foul stom^ck nausea^es all Physic; but you that tender the health of your
souls, en^orce it down, let it be part of thy daily Spiritual diet, some warm
draughts, some serious thoughts of Eternity. Many excellent advantages and
benefits might be shown you, would follow from this duty. This would make Jesus
Christ sweet and precious indeed, to you that have obtained him, whether you
look on Eternal good things, or eternal evil things; he being a Sun by which
are communicated Psalm. 84. 11.
to you all eternal good things; and a shield by which you are defended from
all Eternal evil things. And you that are yet out of Christ, how anxious and
industrious would this make you to obtain him. In this life thou can make a
shift without Christ, thou art well provided against the evils of this life,
and well furnished with the good things of it. Many friends thou have who
profess themselves thine till death, but Christ can only make good to a Soul,
Thine eternally. This would keep your hearts in awe of sin, for fear of after
claps and after-reckonings in Eternity; This would put you upon exact and
circumspect walking; This would make you like, and choose the ways of holiness.
I have read of a Profane loose witty Gentleman, being seriously asked what he
thought of the severe strict life of Religious men, and what of the voluptuous,
ungodly debauched courses of such as himself; he answered, Cum istis mallem
vivere, cum illis mallem mori, I had rather live with these, but I would be
glad to dye with those, said he, as Balaam, let me die the death of the
righteous; Serious frequent meditations of Eternal things would make you
willing to live with them, as well as to die with them; to fast and pray, and
sow in tears with them on earth; as well as to feast, and triumph, and reap
in joy with them in heaven. This would make you less earthly and more heavenly
minded, this would make you choose suffering before sinning, the reproaches of
Egypt before the pleasures and honors of Pharaohs court. This would make
Christ's yoke easy, because of Eternal pleasures; and sins yoke heavy, because
of Eternal wrath: this would make you fight the good fight of faith valiantly,
and hold out to the end without fainting; in hopes to obtain that
incorruptible Crown of Eternal Glory.

Having meditated on Eternity in General; let thy next step be to consider thy
Eternal things in particular; Having set before thy thoughts Eternal joys, and
eternal torments, eternal happiness, and eternal misery, a Heaven Eternal, and
an hell eternal; O my soul, which of these Eternals will be thine? for
temporals, thou art well enough, thy lot is fallen into a good ground, thou art
well situated, well accommodated with Wealth, Honors, Houses, Lands, Friends,
Relations; but these are thy temporals, thy Moment anea; What are thy Eternals?
this world is but thy Inn, where must thy home be, in Heaven or in hell? I do
but sojourn here, where must I dwell and abide? where will my Eternal mansion
be? who must be my Eternal Companions God and his Saints, or the Devil and his
Angels? must I dwell with Abraham, and Isaac and Jacob, with the innumerable
company of Angels, and Spirits of Just men made perfect, or with Cain, and
Pharaoh, and Judas, with the Devil and his Angels and Legions of unclean
Spirits? it is said Acts 1. 25. of Judas at his death he went to his own place.
Brethren, as sure as you have all places of abode here on earth, which you call
your own homes, so shall every one of us have either in heaven or hell a home
that shall be our own place. In this world neither the wicked nor the Righteous
are in their own places; here for the most part the wicked and the ungodly have
got the upper places, the Children of God sit lower-most, Dives sits at his
table feasting, and Lazarus lies at his Gate begging; Beltshazars place here is
a throne of Majesty, and righteous Daniel a prison and a Den of Lions. But it
shall be quite otherwise when all by death enter into their own proper places
in Eternity; The worst places in the world are too good for sinners, and the
best in heaven are prepared for Saints, who in Christ are blessed with all
Spiritual blessings in heavenly places. Me thinks this should be a very
affecting meditation, Ephesians. 1. 3.
O my Soul where will thou be when thou art gone to thy own place! when thou
art removed from hence, and shall have left Husband, and Wife and Children,
Neighbors and Friends, and all these things that are seen, where will thy
abiding place be? Where must I spend my Eternity, which can indeed never be
spent? certainly if men would but use all diligence, as the Apostle says, 2
Pet. 1 10.
they might come to know where their Eternal mansion shall be: every man in
this world may be said to choose his own place in the world to come: Joshua 24.
15. Choose you, says Joshuah to the Israelites, whom you will serve; but as for
me and my house we will serve the Lord. Psa. 119. 173. I have chosen thy
precepts, says David: he that chooses Christ for his Lord and King, to be ruled
by his word, to be Sanctified and guided by his Spirit; he consequently chooses
heaven for his future habitation. But you that here refuse to serve the Lord,
that will not let Jesus Christ reign over you; you that choose your lusts for
your Lords, and walk after the flesh as a servant after his Master; you that
choose Mammon for your Master, and the world for your portion; you turn your
back upon heaven, and run headlong to destruction; you make a Covenant with
death, and an agreement with hell. Isa. 28. 18.
That there shall be your habitation, what a gnawing worm will this be in the
Consciences of wicked men for ever in hell, to consider. This is a place of our
own choosing; here is the same Company we chose for our acquaintance on earth,
we cared not for Communion with Saints, nor fellowship with God on earth; here
we are sentenced to an everlasting separation from them; we are justly
miserable being made so by our own choice and consent; volenti non fit injuria?
O Israel, thou have destroyed Hos. 13. 9.
thy self! Lastly, proceed a little farther in thy meditations concerning
Eternity; what provision and preparation have thou made for Eternity? The fool
in the Gospel Luke 12. 19.
applauded himself in this, that he had much goods laid up for many years, but
nothing was laid up for Eternity: have thou been any wiser? Faelix, quem
faciunt, etc. has his woeful Example item'd thee into more Carefulness? what
art thou provided with for thy long home in Eternity? It is a commonly known
true saying, Ex hoc momento aeternitas, The great weight of Eternity hangs upon
this small wire of time: time has an influence on Eternity: a few drops of
blood will discolor a great quantity of water, the well or ill-spending of
this moment of time will color the great sea of Eternity into a white of
happiness or black of misery; Think seriously of it, Christians every
action, word or thought of thine will make thy Eternity better or worse. My
hours preaching and your hearing at this time will add either to both our
eternal happiness, or to both our eternal miseries. All that we now do will
rebound again upon us in Eternity; As when we put a lump of Sugar into a cup
of wine or water: it falls presently to the bottom out of sight, but there it
dissolves and diffuseth it self over the whole cup, and may be tasted in every
parcel of it, thus do all our actions sink as it were out of sight, and out of
memory into the bottom of Eternity; there they operate and effect either our
happiness or misery, which will be felt and tasted by us throughout all
Eternity. Every wound which thou now give thy Soul by sin, kept never so
secret now, will then fall on bleeding openly and smarting Eternally. O what
miserable abused Souls will then be to be seen: most cruelly hackt and hewn
with sin, all over full of bruises, and putrified sores! every good action and
holy duty will then be seen, blossoming forth Peace and Joy and Consolation.
Consider that place of the Apostle. Gal. 6. 7, 8. Be not deceived, God is not
mocked; for whatsoever a man sows, that shall he also reap; for he that
sows to his flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption: but he that sows to
the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting. Every man is a sower,
his actions are his seed, this life is his seed-time, Eternity is his harvest,
his reapingtime; The husbandman that sowes oats, does not expect to reap
wheat, his crop depends upon his seed.

Sirs, Whatever you do now, is but sowing to Eternity; when you are hearing and
praying, you are sowing; when buying and selling, you are sowing; when you are
swearing and lying you are sowing; and all these several sorts of seeds will
certainly come up in Eternity: do thou ravel out thy time in vanity and
sensuality, and sin, and yet look to be happy Eternally? This is to sow thy
field with oats or tare, and to look for a crop of wheat; If thy seed be sin,
thy crop will certainly be misery. O! what an encouragement should this be to
Saints, to be fruitful and abundant in good duties; in Praying, Fasting,
Repenting for sin, etc. Although no present difference appears between him that
prays and pray not; The good husbands ^a^d that is well sown, yields at
p^ese^^ no more profit then the sl^gga^ds that is unsown, and over (...) with
thi^^les and nettles; the Husbandman w^it^ (...)
until the time of (...) ^omes You Harvest ^s (...), then you (...) have been
^owing to the (...) shall reap life (...).

Be abundan^ (...) of the Lord; For (...) rally shall reap liberally, and he
that 2 Cor. 9. 6
sows sparingly shall reap sparingly: And because all will rise again in
Eternity, ^o what you do accurately. As that famous Painter Zeuxes, being asked
why he was so accurate in drawing all his pieces? answered, Pingo Aeternitati,
I Paint for Eternity. You Pray, and Hear, and Live for Eternity; do all
therefore accurately, walk circumspectly. As you would all enter upon Eternity
cheerfully, prepare and lay up good things toward it, Heb. 11 It Is said of
Noah, He being warned of God of things not seen, moved with fear prepared an
Ark, to the saving his house. The flood was a thing not seen at first, only by
Faith in Gods threatenings; Noah being warned and believing the threatening
prepared an Ark. Beloved, you have all this day been warned of God of things
not seen, of things Eternal: There is a great deluge of Eternity coming which
will drown and swallow up all those things which are seen, which are but
temporal, O let this be your preparation for Eternity! to be preparing an Ark
for saving your selves: I do not mean an Ark Literally, as Noah's was, but an
Ark Spiritually, and Analogically. In Noah's time some believed not, nor
regarded the threatening of a fl^od, but continued eating and drinking,
marrying, and giving in Luke 17. 27
marriage, until the flood came and destroyed them all: others it is likely
were not altogether without fearof it, yet made light of it, and reckoned upon
some means of saving themselves by Arks of their own devising, climbing the
tops of high trees and mountains, or such like. But all were destroyed that
were not in the Arc with Noah. Thus do many through an evil heart of unbelief
cashiere and abandon all thoughts of things Eternal, as if but fabulous; others
too too many reckon upon safety by falls Arks. Poor ignorant creaturs make their
good meaning their Arks, the profane man's Ark is his presumption on Gods
mercies, Deuteronomy. 29. 19. He blesses himself, saying, I shall have peace, though I
walk in the imagination of mine heart, adding drunkenness to thirst; but let
such mark what follows, ver. 20. The Lord will not spare him: but then the
anger of the Lord and his jealousy shall smoke against that man, and all the
curses that are written in this book shall lie upon him, and the Lord shall
blot out his name from under heaven. -- The Formal Professor makes his own
righteousness and external conformity to the Gospel his Ark; he thinks to be
saved by hanging outwardly on the Ark by profession, though he never enter into
it by a faith effectual. The Papists Arc is his good works, which he trusts to
for Salvation; but alas brethren! these are all Arks o^ Bullrushes, one small
wave of Gods wrath will overturn a thousand such as these. The only true Arc
is the Lord Jesus Christ, Act. 4. 12. Neither is there salvation in any other.
Romans 8. 1 There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus: You have
there the Ark, Jesus Christ, the entering into this ark by faith, being in Jesus
Christ, and the safety of those who are so entered in, There is no condemnation
to such: there may be trouble and tribulation here, but there is no
condemnation hereafter to them that are in Jesus Christ. Remember this,
Christians, Christ possessed by faith is the only Ark for your Eternal safety.
Riches, and Honors, and worldly greatness, these will be no Arks; things
temporal cannot make Arks for Eternal souls. Nothing in Religion which is but
external will be an Ark; outward clothes and garments will not keep the body
from dying, nor will outward duties and performances only, keep the soul from
perishing. The Name of the Lord Jesus Christ is a strong Tower, an A^k unto
which every soul that runs by faith shall be saved. O Believers, you who are
possessed of Christ how may you triumph in the words of that good dying man,
Salvus sum and sospes quia habito in vulneribus Christi, Ps. 91. 9, 10. no evil
shall befall thee, because thou have made the Lord thy Ark, even the most high
thy habitation: you that are yet unprovided of this Ark, be warned this day to
break off your sins by repentance, least this flood come unawares, and destroy
you all, in your unbelief. O tremble to think, how near those Eternal things
may be, which yet you have not looked after; how near Eternal good things of
being gone out of your reach irrecoverably, and eternal evils of falling upon
you unavoidably: venture not to stay any longer in that Condition, in which it
is a sin to live, and a misery to die; your living in the world hitherto has
been to worse, then no purpose: your Conversation must all be unravelled, at
the bottom of which you will find nothing but vanity and vexation of Spirit.
Get the impressions of Eternity upon your Souls and so live that the care of
Eternal things may be seen in your very Countenances; while you look not more
at things which are seen, which are temporal, but at the things which are not
seen which are Eternal.

I have done with my Text; But something more is expected in reference to the
Occasion of this sad meeting; which is the death and funeral of the truly
Honorable Lady Judith Barrington; never was it my practice (nor indeed my
Judgment) to exceed or be long on such Occasions: There being but little
Edification in the best, and great danger in the most funeral Commendations,
Funeral Encomiastickes of the Dead (says one) prove often Confections of
poison to the Living. It being too usual (as another sadly Complains) Vt
eorum vitae laudenter in terris, quorum animae cruciantur in inferno, yet I
think this Lady whose funeral we now solemnize: was a person of so much worth
and merit, that if I had prepared an Alablaster box of precious Spikenard to
pour upon her name, in the Memorial of her virtues, I need not fear to meet
with (as the good Woman in the Gospel did) any ones displeasure or indignation.
I could hold you long in a large discourse of her many accomplishments, whereof
I could show you very great variety, As in Solomon's Temple there were three
Courts; An Outward Court, an innerand the Holy of Holies.

First I could present you in the Outer Court with her rare Natural Endowments
of Understanding, Wit, Memory, Judgment, improved by acquired knowledge in
almost all things, wherein I believe she exceeded most of her Sex, and was in
the very upper Form of Female-Scholars, then might I lead you into the Inner
Court, and show you her Moral Excellencies rarely to be pattern'd, to be
admired? but scarce to be imitated. Her singular Prudence, Meekness, Sobriety,
Integrity; Affability mixed with much Gravity; Humility with great Eminency;
Temperance and Moderation in midst of great abundance, where can you show me so
many rich Stones in one Ring together again? But (3) I can, as the Apostle
says, show you a more excellent way. This is a Christians Holy of Holies, a
heart possessed of Christ, A Soul Beautified with Saving Grace, Parts and
Natural Edowments: Moral Habits and Virtues of themselves without Grace, are
but Splendida Peccata, Glittering Sins: Fulgent coram hominibus, coram Deo
sordent, In comparison of Christ, they are but dirt and dung. If Christ be not
in you, if he dwell not in your hearts by Faith, theremay be glittering, but no
Gold. Except Christ be in in you, you are Reprobates, Reprobate Silver shall
men call you, 2 Cor. 13. 5
because the Lord will reject you. A Christians treasure lies not in natural
Jer. 6. 30
and moral gifts, but supernatural Grace.

Here I might show you how God had enriched her with the knowledge of himself
and Jesus Christ, whom to know is life Eternal: with soundness in the Faith,
having preserved her from making shipwreck of Faith in these stormy tempestuous
times, with love to Jesus Christ, having heard her with tears bewailing the
deadness of her affections to Christ, and Spiritual things.

I cannot but mention an excellent speech of hers a few days before her
sickness, to a worthy person, and dear Relation, Let us (says she) love one
another more and more, and let us not love our selves in one another, but
Christ in one another; that love will be sure to last and abide. Her love to
the Ordinances and Saints might be remembered; she had, like God her Father, a
General (...), a sweet, loving Nature to all; and a Special (...) to the
houshord of Faith. Her Compassionatenesse to those in misery was eminent, and
her Charity even to her enemies; for such she wanted not altogether, though
altogether undeserved; making good thereby that old saying, Misera est fortuna
quae caret inimico; which I Will English in our Savior Christ's words, Woe be to you
when all men speak well of you; yet to her enemies Luke 6. 26
she would not render evil for evil, but sought to overcome their evil with
good. Though I be but a very dull Orator, yet having such plenty of precious
matter before me, I doubt not but with very little enlargement, I might draw
tears from the eyes of the greatest strangers to join with us in Lamenting the
Loss of this excellent person.

But give me leave to recall that word again, that word Loss; let us not say
that she is lost, Nemo perditus est quem Deus in custodiam Erasmus.
rapuit. As our Savior Christ said of the Maiden, She is not dead but
sleeps; so we of her, She is not lost but laid up: As in a house where
precious things, Plate, Vessels of Silver or Gold are suffered for a while to
go about the house for common uses, which afterward the Master of the house
taking and Locking them up out of sight; Servants missing them speak as if they
were lost: Thus did God suffer this Vessel of honor to go about this his house
even for common uses; we had leave to Converse with her, to eat with her, to
Drink with her, to Pray and Confer with her, but the Master of the house has
now removed her out of sight, she is laid up amongst those things which are not
seen, that are Eternal. She is not lost, we know where she is; I trust through
the mercies of God in Christ to her, we may say, She is ascended to her Father
and our Father, to her God and our God. From henceforth weep we no more for
her, but let us weep for our selves, our sins challenge all our tears; for them
weep and spare not: Grudge at every tear spent and laid out upon other
occasions, as waste, and of which no profit is to be made, only on this
account; What you sow in Tears, you shall reap in Joy: we have Eternal things
to look after, and our time is but short. Concerning Temporal things, when we
have them, we must rejoice as though we rejoiced not; and when we miss them,
we must weep as though we wept not. As Grotius in a Consolatory Letter, to a
great man in France, after the death of his wife, told him, He had so many
importaent businesses of State (Negotia Grot. Epist ad Maurerium. 25
tantae molis ac tanti laboris) incumbent on him, which called to him Hoc age
lugere tibi non vacat, that he had no leisure to be sad, no time for weeping.
Eternal things are always knocking at our doors, and crying in our ears, Hoc
agite, mind your Business.

Your business lies all in that Scripture which you have heard opened, with an
Item from which I will dismiss you, That you So live henceforth as those who
look not at the things which are seen, which are Temporal; But so live as
becomes those who look at things which are not seen, which are Eternal.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 15. for communion, r. communication. p. 17 for possessio, r. possessione.
p. 20. l. 12. r. nature and grace, by regenerate and unregenerate. dele the
spirits. p. 28. for wiser, r. wise. p. 45. for in-clining, r. in lining. p. 66.
l. 10. add, I might. l. 16. add she.


