SOME OBSERVATIONS UPON THE KEEPING THE Thirtieth of January, AND Twenty ninth
of MAY.

Gal. 4.10, 11. Ye observe Days, and Months, and Times, and Years. I am afraid
of you, least I have bestowed upon you labor in vain.

By J. G. G.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be Sold by Ric. Baldwin, at the Oxford-Arms in
Warwick Lane, 1694.

SOME OBSERVATIONS Upon the Keeping the Thirtieth of January and XXIXth of May.
EVERY Thirtieth of January does yearly renew my Thoughts upon the occasion of
the day: We say it has been appointed to be kept to mourn and humble the
Nation for the Death of King Charles I. The thing has two several Aspects, for
either it looks upon the Act of some Men against the Living, or upon what
others have done and do for the Dead; both which I take to be ill; the one,
because to me it seems Unlawful; and the other, as Contrary to True Religion.

I agree, the Fact was an Horrid Murder, Execrable, as Black as Words can make
it; neither am ignorant how Blood defiles the Land; what a loud and crying Sin
is Bloodguiltiness, according to other several strong Expressions in Holy
Scriptures: But when all is said, after Justice has been executed upon the
Guilty, after 45 Years there ought to be an end: It were better, more according
to Charity and Christian Prudence, to forget those things, than to renew the
Memory of them, which continues Divisions; for we know it is too usual on that
day to hear from the Pulpit about those who sold him, of others that brought
him to the Block, and of those who cut off his Head, which does not restore to
Life, nor remedy that which is past; and only Exasperates the Spirits of Men.
This is too like the Italian Custom, to keep and show Handkerchiefs dipped in
the Blood of those that were killed, or such like Tokens, only to infuse a
desire of Vengeance, and to make irreconcilable Enmities between Families and
Parties; after Acts of Oblivion for such things are passed, the Memory thereof
ought to be forgotten.

Such things do and must admit of a Prescription, neither can I find any sound
reason why such a Performance should be entailed upon us and our Posterity;
it is enough once for all, really and heartily to have done, after that it
degenerates into Formality and Bigoticism (if I may so call it) I know amongst
us we have Men Zealous without Knowledge, guided by Ignorance, and as
thorough-paced in their way as any Papist is in his, who know not how to keep
within bounds in many things they do: Every one knows the keeping of this day
was enacted after a Revolution, amidst Heats and Desires of Revengefulness, in
some who looked upon themselves as having been ill used by others.

The Order for keeping that day was brought forth with some other things, which
by and by I shall have occasion to mention; but because I do not intend to
insist upon the Civil but the Religious part of keeping that day, which is the
principal thing of it, and as the taking away of his Life was an ill thing, so
by the Grace of God I will show, that every Year keeping a day on that account
is as bad, if not worse, in as much as the Honor and Worship of God are
therein concerned.

What St. Paul says to the People of Athens in general, I may say to some
amongst us in particular, in this thing, Acts 17.22.
You are too Superstitious: For I am satisfied we cannot without Superstition
(whereof the very appearance ought to be avoided) keep an Anniversary, or a
certain day every Year upon any Man's account, and on the same day go to Church,
the place appointed only for God's Worship, there to hear a Sermon preached on
that Subject, and to have a Collect, Epistle and Gospel, yea such a part of
Gospel taken out of a Parable wherein our Blessed Savior foretells his Death,
and this must be applied to a Dead Man. Nay, in that Service we pray to God he
will be pleased to give us the Grace to follow that Man's Charity and Patience;
surely in this we are too Superstitious; now Time, Place and Service being
appointed, next thing for us to do, will be to Pray to him.

Heathens had their Apotheosis, of Men to make Gods after their Death; Papists
have their Canonizations or making of Saints, but I think our Church ought to
be free from such Errors and Abuses, without Kalenders and Legends; I am sure
the best Reformed Churches beyond Sea admit of no such things, let for
brevities sake the Testimony of one serve for all, Festa autem hominibus divis
instituta non probamus. Helvet. Confess. cap. 24. de feriis.
We approve not of days dedicated to Saints. Would to God we had not so many of
these Relics of Popery amongst us, such as the Purification of the Virgin, a
Jewish Ceremony, Annunciation, Conception, etc. All Saints, Michael and all
Angels, Innocents, etc. which, as the already quoted Confession says, Ibidem
habent absurda, inutilia minimeque toleranda.
have many things Absurd, Superstitious, and not to be endured. It may be made
a question, Whether God will ever forgive it those who so stiffly retain such
things, and oppose a thorough Reformation, keeping the Clogs of such
Superstitions and Fopperies upon our Holy Religion, whereof the Purity is
thereby defiled: What St. Paul says to the Galatians, You observe days, etc. I
am afraid of you, Gal. 4.10, 11.
least I have bestowed upon you labor in vain, may justly be applied to many
amongst us. I know this enlargement will not be thought to deviate from our
purpose.

But we are not satisfied of him to make a Saint, but a Martyr too, for that is
now the Name given him the Martyr by Excellency: I confess here I am somewhat
at a stand, to see such a Name so much misapplied; but before I proceed, I
declare I charitably believe God showed him Mercy, but withal it is not the
Manner but the Cause of Death makes one a Martyr; I know several kinds of
Persuasions have their Witnesses and Martyrs, but for us, the Martyr who
suffers for the Testimony of the Lord Jesus, he is the true Martyr, who loses
his Life for the sake of Christ, for his Person, for his Attributes, for his
Offices, for his Faith, such an one was Acts 7.
St. Stephen, such Acts 12.
St. James, such Rev. 2.13.
Antipas whom the Lord called his faithful Martyr, and many others after, for
the same Cause; and here by the bye, I must take notice how the Apostolical
Church appointed no day, nor Rubric, to remember or mourn for their Death, not
so much as for that of our Lord and Savior, nor of his Birth, only that of his
Resurrection the first day of the Week, which St. John calls the Rev. 1.10.
Lord's Day.

But for Charles I. he must be a Saint and a Martyr of a new Coining, but
rather no Martyr amongst true Christians, except it be made to appear, that he
suffered for the Testimony of the Lord Jesus, though otherwise never so
unjustly. Let those who took away his Life be as Wicked as can be imagined, yet
they were not professed Infidels; his being a Christian was not the Cause or
Pretense of his being put to Death, the Pretense was (how true or false I dive
not into it) his following Evil Council, encroaching upon the Liberties,
carrying on Designs for Arbitrariness, casting into Prison Men for refusing to
lend him Money, raising Money without Parliament, as in the case of Ship-Mony;
for designing to bring in Popery, and such other things as the whole Nation
knows, which (the last excepted) were all of a Worldly Concernment, and no ways
fit to qualify a Martyr him who suffers for them. As to this last I must say,
in his time (whether or not of his own Contrivance I cannot tell) a Design was
carrying on to reconcile us to the Church of Rome, whose Interest here did much
thrive through the Queens Favor; the Persecution of Puritans, the Prayer Book
sent into Scotland, bringing in Arminianism, setting up Crucifixes upon the
Communion-Tables, by them called Altars, as Ministers were and are still by the
name of Priests, thus promiscuously bringing in Names and Things; those and
many more were Evidences of the Project then in hand, which though it had been
true, and carried on by the King, yet can never justify the putting him to
Death, no more than his being put to Death can prove him a Martyr: Suppose they
were Murderers, must we be Blasphemers? If they were Villains, must we be
Idolaters or Superstitious? Is it a Warrant for us to do Evil, because they did
so? It Is very bad Logic, for after this we must follow evil Examples. After
the Light of the Gospel has since the Reformation so clearly shined amongst
us, it is very strange that some who might know better, have, as to the matter
in hand, carried things so far on in the way of Superstition.

A Medal of Bishop Laud, a Man so noted in his days, soon after King Charles's
Restoration, was coined in the Tower (and consequently by public Authority) of
which here are several and many beyond Sea with this Inscription, Sancti Caroli
Praecursor, the forerunner of St. Charles: Here the business is not minced, we
speak it out plainly, in England we have our St. Charles as Italians have
theirs, his name is entered into the List of Saints, he has his day, only we
have not builded him a Church, as is done for Charles Borromeo in Rome: But
instead of that, he is owned as such in every Church we have; let Men honor
his Memory, but not to such a length as to run into Superstition, if not worse,
for there is no less than Blasphemy in the case; in the Medal Bishop Laud is
compared to John the Baptist, and consequently King Charles is parallelled with
Christ, for John Baptist both in his Birth and Death was forerunner of the
Lord Jesus.

This Comparison is come not only out of a Stamp, but from Pulpits too, a place
very improper for such Doctrines; some now alive have carried on the Parallel
much beyond bounds; others have been heard to preach, that the Guilt of King
Charles's Blood lies upon the Nation never to be washed off. What? upon
Childrens Children, and from Generation to Generation, to the Worlds end; yet
God says by two of his Prophets, the Proverb shall no more be used, Jer.
31.29. Ezekiel. 18.2, 3.
The Fathers have eaten a Sour Grape, and the Childrens Teeth are set on edge:
To see the Blood of the Son of God lie as a Curse upon the Generality of the
Jews, is no wonder, they all cried Crucify, Crucify, they all said, Matt.
27.25.
Let his Blood be upon us and our Children. I hope our thorough-paced Papists
in this Point, will not have the Face to say, that the Blood of Charles I.
though never so Innocent, can be compared with that of our Lord and Savior,
though alas about the time of that Death, some were possessed with such
extravagant Fits of Superstition, as to dye Handkerchiefs in the Blood, to keep
and use it to Cure Diseases, work Miracles, and such other things as made an
Impression upon the Spirits of Credulous and Ignorant People; which true
Christians who make Profession of the Purity of the Gospel ought to be ashamed
of.

Others upon the occasion of the day, and that lately, said, Dr. Sherlock's
Sermon.
The Evils and Calamities which we have now more than Forty Years in some
degree or other, and sometimes very severely suffered under, are the natural
Effects or just Punishment of that Sin which we this day lament. Herein is a
great Exaggeration, but as to Cursing, Swearing, Perjury, Covenant Breaking,
Injustice, Shedding of Innocent Blood, as of late there was too much,
Drunkenness, Uncleanness, these are but trifling Sins, not worth God's taking
notice of, let such Preachers, as much as they please, exalt and commend their
Martyrs, for such Virtues as are rarely found in mean Persons, which in my weak
Apprehension is no great Commendation; for a King to say he had those Virtues
that are rarely found in mean Persons, as indeed it is rare for mean Persons to
be Conspicuous in great Virtues; to find such Virtues we must go into an
Hermit's Cell, we must needs be at a great loss, not to have where to search
for them, but those dark Holes or Places of Darkness; this is to have a great
Opinion of Hermits Lives, as well as of King Charles's great Virtues; we must
not be wanting also to attribute great Merits to Hermits in their Cells:
However one could bear with such Stuff, if the Preaching of the Gospel of Peace
was not turned into the sound of an Alarm. What mean these Expressions, There
is a Spirit of Zeal and Faction, the Principles of which if not restrained,
will ruin the best Princes, and overturn the best Governments. Again, The
horrid Fact committed on this Day, has poisoned the very Springs of
Government, and so deeply tinctured the Minds of Men, that I pray God we may
not still live to see and feel the miserable effects of it. These are Doctrines
of a New Gospel, to work Differences, and Cause, and keep up Division. But to
make our selves the more acceptable we must promise, That those who under the
late Reigns were for Passive Obedience, will be so under this.

Another in a late Sermon of his does screw up all his Wits, and spend his
whole Strength in making an unnecessary and improper Panegyric: I doubt very
much whether upon our Saviors Passion-day, he ever used Expressions so
pathetical, and delivered them with so much Zeal, as he did upon this last
Occasion. I confess, I never heard before, a Prince's (though never so good)
being called a Tyrant, to be Blasphemy; I thought to Blaspheme was against God,
and not against Man: Then he proceeds to unhandsome and uncharitable
Reflections upon the Dead as well as upon the Living. But we must not wonder,
that a Man who instead of a Sermon, (for though he uses some very few
Scripture-Phrases, yet one excepted, does quote no one place out of it but that
of his Text) makes a Declaration against Indulgence and Liberty of Conscience:
He, like another Saul, Acts 9.1.
yet breathing out threatenings and slaughter; and is sorry it is not now in his
power to persecute, I say, it is no wonder if he does so, seeing he makes bold
to say in some places, those things which may well be interpreted, not only as
Reflections, but Invectives against the present Government. Thus some who go up
into the Pulpit are not satisfied with Paul, 1 Cor. 2.2.
to know and Preach nothing save Jesus Christ, and him Crucified; but do set up
for Statesmen, and Teachers of Human Wisdom; and upon occasion, turn the
Preaching of the Gospel of Peace into blowing the Trumpet of War. This instead
of repairing our Breaches is to make them wider; instead of composing our
unhappy differences is to increase them, instead of reconciling the spirits of
Men is to exasperate them; it is to continue our Divisions, to propagate Hatred
and Animosities to Posterity: These are the likely means to divide and
subdivide us over and over again; for we shall never want some Boanerges, Sons
of Thunder to inflame our Wounds, to put all in a Confusion, and in a fair way
to Cut one another Throats.

Here indeed the thing is so obvious, that I cannot avoid taking notice of, how
that Tribe of Levi, as they call themselves, do for the most part (for some of
them wish things were better) mind the Interest of the World, not that of
Christ: Instead of taking Care of Souls, which is their Office, it is the least
of their thoughts; they would be governing the State, and make an Hierarchical
Monarchy, and it may be at last like the Roman Clergy, if they could turn
Monarchy into Hierarchy, and instead of a Pope have a Patriarch; for that
Spirit since the Reformation, run into the Blood of several of them, who in
some of the late Reigns took upon themselves the Administration of most
important Places in State; and in their Convocations made such Canons, as
caused one of their good Friends, the Lord Faulkland in his Speeches in
Parliament in 1641. highly to Complain, that they had taken upon them to do
such things as belonged to Parliaments, as to appoint Holidays, to define what
is Treason, and in some kind to raise Moneys upon Parishes, when they charged
Parishes to buy certain Books for the use of the Church: It Is sad that those
Attempts of theirs, and such ill Consequences thereof, should so soon be
forgotten. Do they take this to be a Nation that can be content to be
Priest-ridden? That now again they begin in a solemn manner to decide about the
Constitution of the Government, and make us a Conquered Nation, and as much as
in them lies, to lay the Foundation of Slavery for time to come: Cannot they be
satisfied with the share they have in the Legislative Power, but must also some
of them take upon themselves to alter the Nature of the Constitution of the
Government; it were more proper for them to betake themselves to their Books,
and to take care of the Souls committed to their Charge, and not to hazard
overturning all, to bring again their Diana upon the Stage, the Doctrine of
Passive Obedience.

Seeing they have such a mind to be doing, there is an occasion offered for
them so to be within their Sphere, now when Socinianism is coming in a pace:
And why should not there be some course taken, to find out means to prevent and
stop it, such as may be a Convocation; this is the proper Remedy against
Heresies practiced by the Primitive Church: Thus the first Council of Nice
assembled against Arrius upon this same account. Are the Orthodox Doctrines
about the Holy Trinity, about the Incarnation, Person and Offices of Christ,
not worthy to be asserted? Wherein is the Care of our Church Officers to keep
out this Damnable Heresy; are they pleased with it, or will they make
themselves Accessory to the Guilt of bringing of it in, through Neglect or
otherwise? We all, Church and State, are alarmed, when we hear of a Foreign
Army at our Doors, but neither does mind that Detestable Soul-murthering
Heresy which is gotten into some of our Bowels, and is hastening into our very
Vitals: What Is become of all our Watchmen, can no effectual course be taken to
stop it? If formerly any one had spoken or written against Church Government,
or its Dependencies, though one had quoted Scripture never so much, all took
Fire, punished, persecuted and stigmatized such a one: But now though this
abominable Error does come in with a bare Face, none but one or two of our
great Churchmen does bestir himself, but seem to be unconcerned. O ye that
upon this occasion are Dumb Dogs, and Idol-Shepherds, what account of this can
you give unto God?

What a Pother do Men keep about a Book, whether it be King Charles the First's
or Dr. Gauden's, as if it was an Article of their Faith; if it was a Book of
Holy Scripture, and the question whether Canonical or Apocripha, they could do
no more: How hot is D. H. upon it, Tooth and Nail, as much as for a
Gospel Truth; yet from the beginning of the Book's appearing in the World, it
was made a question, Whether or not that King was the Author? Well, let us not
believe what Milton says about it; but Dr. Walker has said enough to satisfy
any impartial and reasonable Man; but suppose he was not, would it not better
become D. H. as he is a Minister of the Gospel, to make use of his Pen against
Socinianism, and serve his Master, if he be Christ's Servant, than vainly to
spend his time and labor in a mere Complement to a dead Man, who whether the
Book be his or not, shall never be one jot the better or the worse for it. Thus
instead of hoc agere, to do his Duty, is aliud agere, that which does not
belong to it. And thus whilst the Antichristian Spirit of Socinianism does rage
abroad, and if I may so say, the Fundamentals of our Religion lie at stake;
whilst Ravenous Wolves are striving to get into the Sheepfold, that Man
trifleth away his Time and Pains, with throwing Flowers not upon the Coffin,
but rather the Ashes of a Carcass.

Here I solemnly declare, I have taken Pen in hand not in the least to detract
from King Charles's Memory, whose Name I am sorry to see made use of upon so
unwarrantable an account; but to make known an Abuse not only crept in, but
strongly settled, which I think tends to the Dishonor of God, and Disparagement
of our Holy Religion, to make a Mixture of a dead Man's Worship in the House of
God; for let Men say what they will, the thing comes to that, though palliated
under another Notion, to Pray to the Dead, for the Dead, or in such occasion as
this, to mention the Dead, is contrary to the Word of God, which commands us 1 Thessalonians. 3.22.
to abstain from all Appearance of Evil. Wherefore let that Thirtieth of
January go out of doors, and if we keep a day, let it be to God and not to Man;
let, upon occasion, days of Humiliation be kept very often too, to mourn and be
humbled, for Personal, as for the great, many and Epidemical Sins of the
Nation, whereof I named some before, and some are mentioned in Jer. 6.2, 3, 10.
Jeremiah, but no constant set day for any Man whatever, whether they be
Humiliation or Thanksgiving days. The Gun-powder-Treason-day, we keep it only
to God for such a Deliverance, no mention of Man in it: This did the Church of
the Jews after their Deliverance from the Wicked Designs of Haman, but not to
the Praise and Honor of Esther or Mordecai, though they had been God's
Instruments to prevent it.

To return to King Charles's Death, to mourn for it once had been enough: When
Joseph's Coat was brought to Jacob, he might unblameably have expressed, as he
did, a great Sorrow and Grief thereupon, even to have kissed it, to lament the
Death of so dear a Son; but if he had hanged it about his Bed, or any where
else in his Chamber, there every Evening and Morning, or at every Meal, given
it such Salutations, and done the like, as at the first time, thereby he might
have countenanced many Branches of Superstition; once, and no more, is
Diseretion, about those things whose continual use degenerates into Abuse.

Now here we have been so unhappy as to take wrong Measures, not only in
keeping a day of Humiliation, as I showed already, but also a Thanksgiving-day,
such as that of the Birth and Restoration of King Charles II. the 29th of May,
for the which we have also a set day once a Year to hear a Sermon preached, a
Collect, an Epistle and a Gospel upon the occasion, Gal. 3.1.
O foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you. This clearly shows the Humor of
those Times, when some People, almost distracted, kept no Moderation, but went
from one Extreme into another: After his Death, in King James's days, they
thought fit to continue keeping the day, but to put a new Face, and under
another Notion; but the thing was the same in Substance: So the Children of
Israel kept a Feast to the Golden Calf, which was proclaimed before, and the
Exodus 32.5, 6.
People sat down to eat and to drink, and rose up to play.

For such a Restoration we must be very glad, and make God concerned in our
Joy; his House must be the place, hitherto it is well, if we bring no Idol into
it, I mean nothing of Man's Merits, Worth and Perfection, no Inventions devised
of our own Heart, and things which God has not commanded: We read how after
the Rebellion and Death of Absalom, the 2 Samuel 9.14.
Men of Judah sent unto David, Return thou and all thy Servants. But though he
was as good a King as any, I do not find there was any set day appointed yearly
to be kept in any place of God's Worship, by way of Thanksgiving for his Birth
or Restoration, our Religion now is more Courtly and Flattering; I do not deny,
but that upon such an occasion a moderate Joy may be expressed for a while, but
to entail it upon Posterity, is such a piece of Flattery, Popery and Pageantry,
as cannot be warranted by any Laws of God or reasonable Christians. Defense of
Perkins, p. 886.
Dr. Abbot says, That Offerings yearly made for the Dead, and for Birth-days,
were first brought in by the Heretic Montanus, who thereby made gain of them:
Now this reaches our Case; for an Anniversary, or every Year keeping a set day
for a dead Man, is a kind of Offering made for the Dead; and keeping the 29th
of May in the same manner, is keeping a Birthday as a Restoration-day, for
upon this day Charles II. was born.

Now let us see how great a Cause we had to fall into so high and exceeding
Demonstration of Joy; Let the Event show, how great a Blessing this Restoration
proved to the Nation. Hos. 13.11.
We know sometimes God gives Kings in his Anger, and takes them away in his
Wrath: Plague, War and Fire came in with King Charles, but all little enough in
comparison of that Flood of Vice and Corruption in the way of Profaneness,
Impiety, Debauchery, etc. which, being encouraged by Example and Impunity,
followed him, and, like a mighty Stream, have so overflowed the Nation, that,
in all likelihood, it will require more Judgments, and many Years to come, to
purge the Land of it; it is overspread almost from the Child in the Cradle, to
the Old Man going down to his Grave: But I must break off, for it defiles my
Thoughts, my Tongue and my Pen, therefore no wonder if this took away our
Hearts, for Hos. 4.11.
Whoredom and Wine take away the Heart, and our Understanding too, which made
us grow an effeminate Nation, Contemptible to our Neighbors; and made us cast
away the Honor and Interest of the Country, and become Tools of the Ambition
and Greatness of those, whose growing Power we ought to have opposed; and which
since made Europe groan and labor to be delivered from that Bondage or Danger
we helped to bring it under: We slighted the Suits and Offers of many Princes
and States, and Addresses of Parliaments, who offered their Lives and Fortunes
to stop the growing Power of France, which had her Emissaries of both Sexes in
our Bosom: By whose Councils Parliaments were Adjourned, Prorogued and
Dissolved, whilst on the other side, in our most Solemn Assemblies, the
Fidelity of some was Corrupted to Betray their Trust and Country: In one we
have seen a List of no less than 212 Pensioners, to find Moneys to satisfy the
unsatiable Desires and Idle Expenses of Whores, Pimps, Bawds and Bastards,
whilst in less than two Years time, above 100000 Souls, for Religion sake,
forsook the Kingdom, to go into the Plantations, Holland and Germany.

These things, and many more which I omit, are known to the whole Nation; only
I must take notice how the Design of ruining Laws, Liberty and Religion was
driving on; and whilst Popery enjoyed Favor and Advantages, 'twas Treason to
say the King was a Papist or Popishly affected; though during the whole Course
of his Reign, he appeared, and there are grounds to believe he died such. All
these things are so recent and late, that it were in vain to enlarge upon it;
only I ask, Whether one who set some of the worst of Men upon the Benches in
Westminster, took away Charters, caused Innocent Blood to be shed, under
pretense of Justice, and had some Men to frame Mischief by a Law, Psalm. 94.20.
etc. was given in Mercy or Anger, I leave to every Sober and Impartial Man to
judge; and whether he was taken away in Wrath, I am not so positive as to
determine: Sure I am, after his Death, things were furiously carried on, till
they were overturned first, and then restored through God's Mercy. The two
Brothers were Papists, the one secretly, the other openly; yet both were prayed
for as Defenders of the Faith, and as our most Religious Kings, who had
undertaken to destroy our Religion, and openly lived in Notorious Sins: They
who in the Church pronounced such Lies, have no cause to be satisfied with
themselves for so doing. The Consideration of this engages me to speak of
something which is proper enough for my present purpose.

Almost in every Age it has been a Trick of State, for the Civil Power to
strengthen their Designs with putting on the Cloak of Religion; the Generality
of the People have a kind of Veneration for those who have the managing of Holy
Things: This Roman Emperors knew very well, which made them add to their
Dignity the Titles, not only of Consuls and Tribunes, but also of Pontifex
Maximus, High Priest, which Popes constantly take with the addition of Optimus,
most Good, one of his Names of Blasphemy.

Simeon and Levi are sometimes Brethren in Iniquity, Genesis 49.5.
Instruments of Cruelty; the Spiritual and Temporal Swords joined together, cut
very deep: Popes who pretend to both, think themselves for it the more
considerable; and thereby heretofore, especially before the Reformation, proved
the more dangerous: At first they were not in the same, but in two different
hands; for not to speak of Constantine's Donation, which now is out of doors,
and was long ago known for a Sham; it began in the days of Phocas and
Bonifacius III. Phocas had made away his Master, the Emperor Mauricius, whilst
he labored under a Fit of the Gout, and this to make him self Emperor: The
other was Bishop of Rome, earnestly desirous to be universal Bishop, which his
Predecessor Gregory the Great, had so much declaimed against: Phocas sent to
him, If you will but own me to be lawful Emperor, I will make you to be owned
universal Bishop within the Empire. Thus they agreed, to the Prejudice of those
on both sides concerned against them.

At first the People had Right of choosing their Ministers and Church Officers,
Acts 6.2, 3. and the manner was, with Acts 14.23. (...).
lifting up of their hands, as an Approbation of him, or those that were named:
Long time after, when Hierarchy was formed, Deans and Chapters eleced their
Bishops, as to this day it is continued amongst Papists in most parts of
Germany; but in France, after the Concordat or Agreement between Francis I. and
Pope Leo X. they deprived of that Right the Clergy of that Kingdom, the King
taking upon him the Nomination, and the Pope reserving for himself the
Confirmation by his Bulls: That here that was the manner, appears by the
remaining shadows of it called Conge d'Elire; for he must be elected who is
named by the King. The same Mockery (for it is no better if true as generally
said) is used on the part of the elected Bishop, who being asked Visne
Episcopari, though he has been sueing for it, and made what Interest he could
to get it, comes with a Lie in his Mouth Nolo: Thus Corruption being crept into
the Church, and amongst the Officers thereof, we must not wonder to see so many
ill Effects and Consequences of it: And I desire no Exceptions be taken against
what I am about to say, for no Man more than I, has greater Honor for true
and worthy Ministers of the Sanctuary, though none more grieved than I am, at
the Abuse therein committed; it is to my purpose, and I am going to make
Application of it.

Our late Courts, in order to carry on these ends of enlarging the Royal
Authority and Prerogative, went about to get on their side as many, especially
leading Men, of the I call them so according to Custom, for else it is an
Usurpation began amongst Papists, for the word Clergy, or Heritage, belongs to
all God's People. 1 Pet. 5.3.
Clergy as they could, the most ambitious and greedy of Preferment were the
fittest for their purpose, Preach (says the Court to them) Monarchy to be Jure
Divino; not the Gospel, but the Extent of Royal Prerogative: Preach
Non-resistance, Passive Obedience, the Sinfulness of not obeying, or opposing,
any thing commanded by Supreme Powers. These Doctrines began to ring out of the
Pulpits, and Obedience to Man, more than to God, was pressed; a Conformity to
the Canons of the Church, more than to the Word of God, because they had the
Stamp of Royal Authority: What does the Court do for this? One has a good
Benefice, another a Place in the University: One is made a Prebend, Archdeacon,
Dean and Bishop; they that were greedy of such Places, seeing this to be the
way to Preferment, fell into the same Road, and followed the steps of those
that went before; so that for the Generality, to be for Absolute Monarchy, was,
in a Subject, a better Qualification than Learning, Virtue and Piety. To such
Ministers as these, I say in the words of the Prophet Malachi, And now, O ye
Priests, this Commandment is for you. Mal. 2.5, 2.
If ye will not hear, and if ye will not lay it to heart, to give Glory unto my
Name, says the Lord of Hosts, I will even send a Curse upon you, and I will
curse your Blessings: Yea, I have cursed them already, because ye do not lay it
to heart. And so the Prophet goes on till Verse the ninth, which contains these
words, Therefore have I also made you contemptible and base before all the
People, according as ye have not kept my ways, but have been partial in the Law.

The Court, never to want such Men, went further; They would have Episcopacy to
be Jure Divino, though Bishops be the King's Creatures, they promised to
maintain the Church as by Law established, with all Annexes and Dependences,
Ruin to all Dissenters (but Papists) which was pretty well put in Execution: No
Moderation in the Minds of some, no opening the Mouth against Ignorant and
Scandalous Ministers, not an hairs breadth of any Ceremony to be dispensed
with, though to the overthrowing of all Rules of Christian Prudence and
Charity: Hence it is, that some of Corrupt Principles and Practices, were in
Church advanced to the highest Preferments, because Men-pleasers, though
otherwise unworthy of it; and so they were Ministers of the Court more than of
Christ; they were thought to be sufficiently qualified, if able but to promote
that Interest; and to be true Sons of the Church, though never so much Sons of
Belial, and Prodigal Sons: But in this, too much like Papists, we are pleased
with specious names more than with things; and are so doting upon Accidents and
Formalities, that we neglect the Substance, and often leave the Body for the
Shadow; like those Jews who trusted in lying words, Jer. 7.4.
saying, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord.

One of the chief remote Causes of this, is the Inconsiderateness of Parents;
which except it be removed, we can in reason have no great hopes of mending: If
they have one Son, they sometimes intend him for a Way which he is neither fit
for, nor inclined to: If they have many, then such an one must be a Soldier,
the other a Lawyer, and the third a Divine; when it may be he who is intended
for the Law, is fittest for a Soldier, and the Soldier for Divinity; when they
ought to consult with the Genius and Capacity of all, and observe that which is
more proper for every one: As for those who are appointed for the Study of
Divinity, there must be a farther regard than merely to put them in a way of
getting their Livelihood, as if they were put to a Trade: Such Thoughts do
often pass from Parents into the Minds of young Men, who do not examine
themselves, whether or not they have an inward Call, a Disposition and
Inclination of Soul to that high Trust: Whether they can in some degree answer
the Duty of the Place, take care of Souls which they are to give God an account
of. Ezekiel. 33.6, 8.
Whose Blood, if lost for want of warning, shall be required at their hands. 2
Cor. 4.1, 2.
They are Stewards of the Ministry of God, who ought to be found faithful; they
must prepare, some time Verse 9.
to be made a Spectacle unto the World, and to Angels, and to Men, and as it
were appointed to Death. They are Ephesians. 6.20.
God's Ambassadors, and consequently ought to be true to his Honor and
Interest, and punctually to follow their Commission: And says the same
Apostle, 2 Cor. 2.16.
Who is sufficient for these things: Hence for want of a due Consideration,
come our Zech. 11.17.
Idol-Shepherd and Isa 56.10, 11.
Dumb Dogs, as the Scripture calls them, Yea, greedy Dogs which can never have
enough.

Though to some this Discourse may prove like a Digression, yet it is not really
so, but to the purpose, for it leads us to one of the Springs whence does arise
the Disorders we speak against: If I allow a thing which it is my duty, and in
my power, in some degree to oppose, I thereby become guilty of, and accessory
to the Guilt that comes from it: Our great Clergymen ought at that time,
humbly to have addressed against appointing days on such occasions; and not
promoted it, and penned Rubricks as they did; they wanted Zeal for the Honor
of God. When King Vzziah would have come and sacrificed, the Priests withstood
him. 2 Chronicles. 26.18
So Ambrosius in Milan did shut the Church-doors upon Theodosius. I am very far
to have such Examples made Presidents, yet on such occasions the least that
could be expected from Men of that Character, was to lie still and not to act,
if Erastianism and Interest had not been their Fundamental Rule.

How ill soever it was, things were done, and it is not these words, Our Will
and Pleasure is, to have the Rubric for the Thirtieth of January and Twenty
ninth of May used, etc. C. R. which alone may stamp an Authority; as to the
Lawfulness of the same, in relation to Civil things, I shall not take upon me
to determine, though I thank God it is not here an usual style to say, Such is
Our Pleasure: But it does altogether lose its strength when it comes to the
Worship of God: And I say this for a Rule, That if all the Men in the World
were all together, under what Notion soever, neither their Authority nor their
Wit would make that be Good and Lawful, which is Bad and Unlawful; though I
know the difference how some things are such in their Nature, and others so by
Accident.

However that which was done, we cannot hinder from being done; there is no
remedy for that which is past, only for the future let it be prevented: That
which is due to God, must not be made over to the Creature. I hope unbiassed
Men, out of what has been said, will be convinced of the Unreasonableness and
Unlawfulness of keeping such days in such a manner, and upon such an account:
During the two last Reigns both Kings were concerned, so it was not to be
expected they would have been induced to discontinue the Observation thereof:
But now they are gone, and it is to be wished they have not left behind them so
much of that Spirit that possessed them, as to make People Obstinate in
retaining that Superstitious Custom. The late Happy Revolution, will, it is
hoped, make, in time, a Change in this, so as to have it laid aside, there
being now no Awe nor Temptation to induce Men to persist in it, but only
Ignorance, Blindness and Superstition.

It cannot be found in the Old or New Testament, that ever any Anniversary,
Holiday, Fasting or Feasting, was Instituted on the behalf of any Man dead or
alive, though God made use of several to work great Deliverances, or to suffer
and be Martyrs for his Truth. No set days for Moses, Joshua, Sampson, though
great Deliverers; nor for the Death of Isaiah, Zechariah, and so many other
Prophets and Apostles put to death: Holidays belong to God alone, him alone
they ought to regard, without any Squint-eye toward the Creature; the Lord is
a Jealous God, who will not have in his House, mixed with his Worship, any
thing that seems to look toward Man; the Practice of the contrary is a Branch
of Heathenish and Popish Superstition, if not Idolatry: Few words more I shall
add to show the Sinfulness of this, and then proceed in General to lay open the
Unlawfulness of all such Formalities, out of Scripture, Reason and Authority.

But before I proceed further, I must make a short stop to say something to
vindicate what in few lines before I asserted; and in answer to something that
is said to justify the Practice of the Thirtieth of January: I say nothing can
be found in the Word of God to ground this upon. First of all they must own,
there is nothing to countenance it in the New Testament, Newman in his Sermon,
P. 4, 5, 6.
or else they would let us hear of it: As to the Old, they would endeavor to
draw it out of three several cases; the first is, that of Saul, the second of
Josiah, and the third of Gedaliah.

As to the first, it seems they lay a great stress upon it; for two of them,
and may be more, for what I know, Dr. Burch and Mr. Newman.
on the last Thirtieth of January, took their Text out of it: The case is thus,
In the Battle in Mount Gilboa, between Israel and the Philistines, Saul and his
three Sons were killed; his Sons by the Philistines, and he killed himself with
his own Sword. The News of this Overthrow being brought to David by an
Amalakite, 1 Samuel 31.2.3, 4. and 2 Samuel 1.
who thought to bring David acceptable News of the Death of his Mortal Enemy,
in hopes of a Reward, told him a Lie, How at his desire he had killed him:
Whereupon David commanded him to be put to Death, which was effected; and then
made a Lamentation which was well and suitable with the present Occasion, the
loss of a Battle, whereof the King's death was one of the bad Concomitants: If
the young Amalekite had killed him, he had done that which Readiness Armor-bearer
would not, and therefore deserved to die for killing the King: The young Man's
Act we condemn; but what is that to the purpose? We do commend the Mourning
upon the Sad Accident at that time; but was an Anniversary appointed, entailed
upon Posterity, upon a set day every Year to meet in the place of Worship to
mourn for it? No such thing. David made at that time a Lamentation for the
public Loss, and for his own in particular; for it was not only over Saul, but
also over Jonathan his dear Friend, I am distressed for thee, 2 Samuel 1.17, 26.
my Brother Jonathan, whom he tenderly loved.

But it is pulled over head and ears, to say David appointed a Lamentation, or a
Mournful Ditty as he calls it, to be Sung by the Children of Judah in
succeeding Ages. Indeed it is said in the eighteenth Verse of the same Chapter,
That he bade them teach the Children of Judah the use of the Bow, and not to
sing a Lamentation: Herein lies a want of Sincerity, and something of a Design
to impose upon Hearers and Readers. Now I conceive the Parallel between Saul
and Charles the First, lies in being anointed, which we know was a Ceremony
used under the Law, to have Kings, Prophets and Priests anointed; which all
related to Jesus Christ, for those three Offices he was to exercise; and that
anointing signified the Oil of Gladness wherewith he was to be anointed above
all his Fellows, meaning the Graces of the Spirit of God represented by the
Anointing. Though the name of Anointed is given to those that were no Kings, no
Priests nor Prophets, as afterward explained, as Abraham, Isaac, Israel, and
Family; Touch not mine anointed, Psalm 105.10. for there the Prophet speaks of
them, not of Kings.

And under the Gospel the Holy Ghost is called the Unction, the Anointing which
God's People have received, 1 John 2.20, 27.
and which abides in us, and teaches us all things: In consequence of this,
the Lord Jesus, who, according to his Promise, has sent the John 16.7, 13.
Comforter, the Spirit of Truth, is said under the name of a Lamb, to Rev. 5.10.
have made us unto our God, Kings and Priests. So then all that have the Holy
Spirit of Christ, are the Anointed of the Lord: The God of Truth has said so,
and Men must not take upon themselves to teach him how to speak. Why do poor
silly Men go about, as much as in them lie, to deprive God's People of what he
has bestowed upon them? And if all true Believers be made Kings and Priests,
Why should Man restrain it to an Order of Man, and put asunder that which God
has joined together? Yet this I must say to those who so exceedingly are
Admirers of King Charles the First, that by what they do, I have really a
better Opinion of him, than they have themselves; for I hope he was a better
Man than Saul; therefore the Comparison they make between them, is not very
Judicious, nor favorable to their King; for the Parallel must run upon the
Persons as well as the Office; they both were Kings and anointed, but Saul was
not only chosen, but also rejected of God from being King; 1 Samuel 13.22, 23, 26.
who cared for Honor from Men, more than Favor from God; when he said to
Samuel, Honor me now, Verse 30.
I pray thee, before the Elders of my People, and before Israel. In a word,
Saul is in Scripture branded for a breaker of the Covenant between Joshua and
the Gibeonites, Josh. 9.15, 16.
and he cruelly slew some of them, for which God sent a Famine three Years
together; and being inquired, said, It was for Saul and his bloody House. He
was a wicked Man, 2 Samuel 21.1.
guilty, as Samuel upbraids him, of Disobedience, Rebellion, Witchcraft,
Stubbornness, Iniquity and Idolatry, 1 Chronicles. 10.4, 13.
a Self-murtherer, and who died for his Transgression; one whom God would not
have 1 Samuel 16.1.
Samuel to mourn for when alive; and when, as much as Man knew, there might be
hope of God's Mercy and Pardon to him. How likely is it then, that God would
have approved, after his Death, that David had appointed a Lamentation to be
Sung by the Children of Judah in succeeding Ages. Hence it appears, how
sometimes Comparisons and Parallels do not answer the end for which they be
made use of; but on the contrary, like one who blowing his Nose, presses it so
much, as to squeeze Blood out of it: Such Comparisons ought discreetly and
warily to be used, or else they will confute that which thereby was intended to
be proved: Thus the Candle being turned upside down, that which made it burn
will put it out.

The second President is that of Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 35.24, 25.
after whose Death all Judah and Jerusalem mourned for him; Jeremiah lamented
for him; all the Singing-men and Singing-women speak of Josiah in their
Lamentations to this day. All this very true and well, but not to their
purpose, except they can make it out, that there was a certain setday every
Year, upon which on the occasion of this Death People went into the Temple to
renew the Memory of, and mourn for it, had a Service appointed for the same
end, which I think none will say or affirm: This Comparison is much better
between Charles and Josiah, than between him and Saul, and would be more to the
purpose, if it might well be fastened. When we consider what manner of Man
Josiah was, 2 Kings 23. to verse 25.
what a Reformer, what an Enemy to Idolatry and Superstition, who put away all
the Abominations that were spied in the Land of Judah, purged the Worship of
God of all Abuses; of whom the Spirit of God bears this witness, Verse 25
And like unto him was there no King before him, that turned to the Lord with
all his Heart, and with all his Soul, and with all his Might, according to the
Law of Moses: neither after him arose any like him. A Prince, whose Birth, by
his name, God by 1 Kings 13.2.
a Prophet foretold so many years before it happened; the Death of such a
Prince as this could never enough be lamented, yet without Superstition: This
was in Man's Eye an irrepairable Loss, and I dare say this Nation has some
cause, upon occasion, to remember the Death of the young Prince, our Reformer,
Edward the Sixth, with Grief and Sorrow (though Heylin was of another mind) the
Death of so Pious a Prince, not without Suspicion of Poison, was a great loss
to Religion and the Nation; but yet such set days as the Thirtieth of January,
and Circumstances, must be avoided; such a Memory may to this day be well
continued by lawful Means, as his very Funeral Sermons, Epitaphs, and such
things remaining as were published in or about that time; as Jeremiah's
Lamentation upon that Subject might be read and sung in after-Ages: The Memory
of good Princes, and other pious Men, ought to be precious and dear to
Posterity; but we must not bestow any thing of Religious Relation upon them,
but strictly avoid every appearance of it. Readiness Death was a Judgment upon
him, but Josiah's Death was a Mercy to him. Because thine heart was tender, 2 Chronicles. 34.27, 28.
I will gather thee to thy Fathers, and to thy Grave in Peace, neither shall
thine eyes see all the Evil that I will bring upon this place, and upon the
Inhabitants of the same. Now Things and Persons being compared in the Reigns of
Josiah and Charles, to say no more, we shall find a vast Difference.

The third case is that of Gedaliah, whom, 2 Kings 25.25. and Jer. 41.2.
after the taking of Jerusalem, the King of Babylon made a Governor of the
Cities of Judah, which was treacherously killed by Ishmael the Son of
Nethaniah: This indeed was a sad Blow to the People that was left in the Land,
but in the two quoted places in the Margin, nor in the Book of Chronicles,
nothing is said of any public mourning of the People for it; yet some would,
if possible, upon the Opinion of the most Judicious Interpreters, as he calls
them, screw something out of Zech. 7.5. as if their Mourning there was an
Ordinance, for that lasted till the time of their return from their Captivity;
but it is easy to find the true cause of it, namely, Levit. 23.27, 29.
a positive order from God, On the tenth day of this seventh month, there shall
be a day of Atonement, it shall be an holy Convocation unto you, and ye shall
afflict your Souls, etc. And whatsoever Soul it be that shall not be afflicted
in that same day, he shall be cut off from amongst his People. This is the true
cause of the Mourning in the Seventh Month, and 'twere in vain to fancy any
other.

A very good Use may, by present and future Ages, be made of such sad Effects
of God's Providence; as to warn us of our Mortality, of the Uncertainty of
Life, of the Vanity of Honors, and to prepare us for Death; to show how our
Life is in the Hand of God, which he disposes of how and when he pleases: It
is good always to be Thankful to God for Mercies, always to be humbled, and to
Mourn for Sins; for as we do constantly Sin, so we must constantly repent; what
does befall others, as well as what happens to us, ought to work upon us: And
so we have cause enough to keep days of Humiliation both in Public and
Private; and this is to make a right use of such Occasions, and not to flatter,
and choose God's House to make Panegyricks of Dead Men, over and over every
Year, in such a Strain as Papists do for their Pretended Saints and Dead Men.
After this way Mr. Newman in his Sermon, Page 17, 18, 19, etc. makes King
Charles a great Poet, nay a Laureat one, a great Orator: He says, He was
Master of a Sublime Grandeur, of Language; and in Points of Controversy; and
in Cases of Conscience, so great a Divine, as he might have challenged the
Theological Chair, upon the account of mere Worth. If he had but attributed
some Miracles, then we might have said, as Jesuits use to speak of their
Ignatius, Franciscans of their Francis, and Dominicans of their Dominick, upon
their days. And all this he affirms upon hearsay, and by relation; if this be
not Flattery, it is too much like it; this is a studied Discourse, to make a
show of his Parts, to flatter the Dead, deceive the Living, but edify none.

To say the setting apart such days, is not intended, as if thereby they were
made Holier than others, but only to appoint them to an Holier Use, is not
enough to excuse the thing; we all know it is not in the power of Man, in that
kind, to make one day better than another, that is the Work of God alone; and of
all the days of the Week, the Seventh, his Sabbath Day, Genesis 2.3. and Exodus
20.11.
he sanctified it, blessed and hallowed it. Nay, the other Feasts which were
but Typical, and for a time, which we read of in the Book of Chap. 23.
Leviticus, were of God's own special Appointment: So that to Institute such
days, is an Act of Religion: And though we agree, that the Church may make
Rules for Order-sake, as to Circumstances; yet under the Gospel, no Man may,
upon Humane Account, Institute days, wherein is a Cessation of Work, God having
commanded Six days to labor and do our work. Thus there would be no end, one
day this Year, another or more the next, as we see it in the Church of Rome,
where every new Saint has a day allowed him every Year: By the same reason it
is done for one, it may be done for an hundred.

All Orthodox Divines do agree, That in the First and Second Commandment, not
only Idolatry, but also Superstition are forbidden; whereby the Fixedness of
the Minds of Men, which ought to be upon God, is tossed and distracted, here
and there, upon different Objects; Prayers of Mourning, Repentance or
Thanksgiving, must be directed to God, for they are part of his Worship,
without any Collateral regard to the Merits or Sufferings of any Man Dead or
Alive. And here by the by, I must take notice of a Clause, which some of our
Ministers use in their Prayers, to thank God for his Servants deceased, which
in my opinion is very Improper, for those who own we ought not to pray to or
for the Dead, the Gospel and God's other Mercies is, What we ought to thank God
for: And though a Minister may make mention of those Faithful Servants of his,
remembered in his Word, and exhort us to follow their Example, and Divine Rules
they were acted by, the Faith of Abraham, the Patience of Job, the Repentance
of Peter, yet the Case is different, when he is in Prayer; for then he is the
Mouth of the People to God; in that Condition of Supplicants, no Humane Rule or
Example is to be mentioned to God, especially now when so gross an Abuse about
it, is committed by Papists, whereof we ought to avoid the very Appearance.

The Dangers of bringing such things into the Church is very great, though at
first not perceptible; sometimes great Evils had but small beginnings; the
Devil is so subtle and cunning, that he engages Men but by degrees; and
naturally there is in Men a Propensity to Idolatry and Superstition, which he
improves too much to our Ruin; wherefore it concerns us the more to stand upon
our guards; for if a thing be good in its Nature, he can turn it to evil; as in
the case of the Brazen Serpent, which by God's Command was Numb. 21.9.
erected in the Wilderness, and attended with miraculous Effects on those who
looked upon it: Yet the Devil turned the Hearts of the People to commit
Idolatry about it, 2 Kings 18.4.
much more will he turn to Evil that which is Indifferent, and sometimes Evil,
by reason of some Circumstances, which is the least that must be granted in the
Case of the Thirtieth of January: To keep a set day once every Year in
remembrance of the Acting or Sufferings of a dead Man, is a Custom derived from
Heathens, followed by Papists, for whom we must not do as Peter did for the
Jews, when with his Compliance and Dissimulation, he confirmed them in that
Error and Obstinacy; and for this reason chiefly, St. Paul Gal. 2.12.
withstood him to the face: Now the keeping of such a day, cannot be denied to
be an Honor to the Man in whose remembrance it is kept; and this Honor being
rendered in the Church, with reading a Service on the occasion, makes it a kind
of Religious Worship, which is to be rendered to God alone, and to no Creature
whatsoever: What we say against Popish Feasts, may in part be said against
this; we condemn them, because they are upon set and certain Times always the
same, which is only to be upon extraordinary Causes and Occasions: Sure I am,
omitting such keeping of days can do no harm; but thorough some Accident or
Circumstance, the observing the same may happen to do hurt: Now is it not best
to take the surest? And it is Christian Prudence to avoid all unnecessary
Dangers: And I think this is to speak of the thing as favorably as may be.

Under the Law, one who had touched a Dead Body, Numb. 19.11, 12, 13, etc.
was unclean; and before he had been Purified, might not come to the Tabernacle
of the Lord, for thus he would have defiled it; and that Soul that did so was
to be cut off: God thereby signifying, how Holiness and Purity required in
those that come into his House, does partly consist in being free from the
Stains and Corruption of our dead and stinking Nature: God is the Living God,
the God of the Living; the Quick, and not the Dead, he will have to come near
him; Quickness he loves, but Deadness he abhors: He has forbidden to bring
him the Lame and the Blind, much more the Dead: Nay, he will not endure a
mixture in things of a much less Concernment than is his Service: Thus he
says, Thou shall not let thy Cattle gender with a diverse kind: Lev. 19.19.
Thou shall not sow thy Field with a mingled Seed: neither shall a garment
mingled of linen and woollen come upon thee. Much more is the Lord against
mingling and trimming Dead with Quick in his Worship: When Christians come to
Church, they must not touch, meddle or defile themselves, their Thoughts or
Hearts with any dead Corpse, for God does abhor it: This with Nadab and Abihu,
Levit. 10.1, 2.
is to bring in a strange Fire; and as their Sin is well known, Exodus 33.7.
so is their Punishment: The Tabernacle was without the Camp, afar off from the
Camp. So when we go to the House of God, we must leave the World behind us, let
the Dead bury their Dead, wean our Thoughts from the Creature, and disingage
our Souls from thinking upon it; we go to serve God alone, and him alone we
ought to look upon, mention and remember.

It is ill done to bring such things into the Church, to mix them with God's
Worship, and so make them part of it: It Is ill done to alter the Nature of
things Indifferent, to press them as Necessary, and to deprive Believers of
their Christian Liberty: No other Worship is lawful, Exodus 23.13.
but that whereof God is the Author. In all the things I have said unto you, be
circumspect; see thou make every thing, Heb. 8.5.
said God to Moses, according to the Pattern showed thee on the Mount; which
was effected, Exodus 39.43. and Chap. 40.16, 19, 21, 23, 25, 27, 29, 32.
no Addition, no Diminution, no Alteration, under any Pretense whatsoever, not
so much as a Pin, or the least thing in the Tabernacle, but what was of God's
special Appointment; for none but God himself, except it be revealed in his
Word, knows what is acceptable to him: None but God can give the Worship, the
Virtue, whereby it becomes effectual and profitable to us: We do not read that
God ever gave any one Power, wholly, or in part, to Institute a Worship
according to his Mind and Fancy: On the contrary, he does Fulminate against
Will Worship; under the Gospel it is allowed less than ever, for the Gospel is
not a Ceremonial Law: Some, to excuse their Additions, use an Idle Distinction
of Corrupting and Preserving, the last, say they, is not forbidden, only the
first: But every Addition, as well as Detraction, is expressly opposed to the
Observation of God's Precepts, as a Corruption of them. Of the like Nature is
that Evasion of theirs, when they say, An Addition of Essentials, but not of
Accidentals, is forbidden. But though there be some Accidents and Circumstances
belonging to the Worship, as Times, Places, Persons, yet no Worship may be
called Accidental, because it has in it self the very Essence of Worship. Then
as the least Commandments of God are Religiously to be observed, Matt. 5.18, 19.
to a very jot or tittle; so by the same reason the least Additions ought to be
rejected. Furthermore, Moses, Deuteronomy. 12.25, 28.
with the same Caution of not adding to or taking from, sealed those Laws
relating to the Place and Manner of Worship, of abstaining from Blood, and the
like, which belonged to the accidental Service (if we may so call it) which was
to last but for a time: And the Observation of this, is, for a special Reason,
called Obedience; because we do thereby that which seems right in God's Sight,
though some other things may seem to be more right in our Eyes: To this Lawful
Worship is opposed the Unlawful and Voluntary one, Matt. 15.9. and Col. 2.23.
otherwise called Will Worship, which is of a Man's Invention or Tradition: The
Sin committed in this Will Worship, is commonly called Superstition, when we
render God an unlawful Service; for in case of Superstition, God is always the
Object, but the Worship is unlawful. Thus Superstition is an Excess in
Religion, not in order to the formal Virtue of Religion; for thus no Man can be
too Religious, but in order to the outward Acts and Means of Religion. Thus in
relation to the Worship of God, we ought not to mind Humane Traditions, but
only the Word of God, wherein the Lord has prescribed us Rules to know and
Worship him.

What we said before about the Tabernacle, may now be observed concerning the
Altar; God takes care to declare how he would have it to be; either of Earth,
Exodus 20.24, 25.
or of Stone, but not out of hewn Stone; the reason is given, for if thou lift
up thy tool upon it, thou have polluted it. Man's Wits and Inventions do defile
the Worship of God, he will admit of no such things as Humane Workmanship;
wherefore he forbids it a second time, when he says, Thou shall build unto the
Lord thy God an Altar of Stones, Deuteronomy. 27.5, 6.
of whole Stones; as it is expressed in the next Verse, Thou shall not lift up
any Iron tool upon them. Indeed we must take notice of the extraordinary care
God had to regulate even to the least Ceremonies, that in the Acts of Religion
nothing might be left undetermined, and nothing wanting to take away all
Pretenses of Men for meddling in it. As to the Worship of God, Men sin in the
Object and Manner of it: The First Commandment is the Rule for the one, 1 Kings
16.32. 1 Kings 12.28, 29.
and the Second for the other: Ahab sinned against the First, he worshipped
False Gods: Jeroboam worshipped the true God, but in a false manner; for which,
both their Names became abominable: Evil Kings that came after them, were
branded for walking after the sins of Ahab, or after the sins of Jeroboam, 1
Kings 12.32, 33.
as odious for Worshipping in a false way, as Ahab for serving false Gods, hear
what Scripture says of him, for altering the Circumstances of Place and Time,
Bethel and Dan, he remembered still the deliverance out of Egypt, Behold thy God
that brought thee out of the Land of Egypt: But he changed the time, the First
day of the Eighth Month, even in the Month which he had devised of his own
Heart: Mark how hainously God takes that Change; surely this should be
awakening to all that bring into the Worship, the Devices of their own Heart.

Ecclesiastical Laws and Ordinances ought to aim at Edification, and to a
profitable Declaration and Use of the main revealed in Scripture; the Yoke and
Burden of too numerous Constitutions must be avoided in the Church, likewise
the Tyranny in strictly pressing the Observation thereof as things necessary,
and the obstinate Continuation of those Injunctions, which Time and Experience
made appear unprofitable or hurtful; it is unjust for such Ceremonies to make
Christian Liberty to suffer any prejudice, though they had been instituted upon
good grounds, and have been of good use; yet having by Papists been abused to
Superstition, they ought to be abolished. This is the Sense of true Christians,
who are acted by a Spirit of Meekness and Charity; but unhappily, some Men are
so fond of preserving their Legislative Authority, that they would prefer the
loss of 100000 Souls, to the Abrogation of an old Superstition. This is
properly the Spirit whereby the Church of Rome is acted; and it is to be wished,
there was not so much of it amongst us: Indeed, the Will of God ought to be the
Rule of every Man's Will; for it is the Ground and Spring of all Reason and
Justice. But it is very unreasonable for any Man or Men, especially in things
relating to Conscience, to lay down his own, or their own Will, which is so
fallible, to be a Rule for the Will of other Men; and as it were, to force it
upon others; because a Man differs from me, I must make him say as I say, and
do as I do, or else Cut his Throat; as well as if I should fall out with one,
because his Shape, Stature and Features are not altogether like mine: We know
in the Primitive Church, they sometimes had different Rites and Ceremonies; for
which, no Violence or Compulsion was offered by one to another; the Church must
not force or impose a Necessity; the Officers of it in indifferent things have
no such right; but to guide and direct not by constraint, 1. Pet. 5.2 --
but willingly, says Peter in another sense.

As about indifferent things there is danger of Superstition, so a liberty to
do, or not to do, ought to be allowed; or else that Liberty is taken away when
the Observation is imposed by any humane Power: This obliges the Body, and the
Body goes not alone; so the Mind not being content with what the Body goes
about, Conscience is not at rest. Hence arise Scruples, which become endless;
Colos. 2.16.
such are eating some kind of Meats, keeping of an Holiday; which is our first
question, using in the Church some sorts of Habits: Romans 14.6.
He that regards a day, does, or ought to keep it to the Lord. Yet in things
indifferent, we must have regard to our Brethren; 1 Cor. 10.24. Romans 14.13, 23
and have a Care that no Man put a stumbling block, or occasion to fall in his
Brothers way: If this had been well thought upon, so many stumbling blocks and
snares in Indifferent Things had not been laid in the way of others, the more
because the Apostle says in the same Chapter, and last Verse, Whatsoever is
not of Faith is Sin; if any one does such things, and is not fully persuaded,
than he doubts, so he is damned. These very things are of a greater Consequence
than some imagine; for when once the Conscience is fallen into the Snare, she
enters into a Labyrinth, whence the coming out is very difficult, as I could
instance in some things; new doubts, scruples and difficulties at the Heels one
of another: Upon Trifles, sometimes great debates arise, Whether or not God
will have us to use this or that? the Conscience becomes uneafie under the
Yoke, and growing restless, it runs sometimes into Confusion or Despair; so
that in few words, this is without necessity, and out of wilfulness and
uncharitableness, to lay the stumbling block before weak and tender
Consciences: God sometimes suffering the Devil with his suggestions to step in,
and their Natural Corruptions to work; Luke 17.1.
our Savior pronounces a Woe to those who do so. This may be said of
Ceremonies in general; for if St. Peter calls those which had been instituted
by Gods own Command and Appointment, a Yoke which neither our Fathers nor we
were able to bear; Acts 15.10.
and that imposing it upon the Neck of the Disciples was tempting of God, in a
time when the Christian Church was but newly Born; and that the Jews thereto
used, were to be Converted: It seems, it had raised difficulties to their
Conversion, and not been proper to change all at once, but by degrees, what
shall we say now who live so long after, under the Gospel, a Covenant of
Liberty, after the Light of it has so clearly shined, and we have declared
against, and left off-several of them, to see any Ceremonies imposed upon us,
though never so few; for that is imposed, which is enjoined by Civil or
Ecclesiastical Laws, under Penalties; which yet we all agree, do not per se,
and in their Nature bind Conscience: Hereby many Pious and Learned Men are kept
out, and the Church deprived of their Labors, the Hearts and Prayers of God's
People divided, and in the bottom, upon no other ground than sic Volo sic
Jubeo, such is our pleasure: At first God winked at such things, but now those
old things are, 2. Cor. 5.17.
or ought to be done away.

Amongst the Reasons we have in Print before the Common Prayer Book about
Ceremonies, why some are abolished, and others not? this is given for one, the
Gospel of Christ is not a Ceremonial Law. What is said there of many, we here
say of any; so that as it is confessed, there ought not to be many, we say,
there ought not to be any; we know some of our first Reformers were against
them; and if those that were for them had known the ill Consequences of
Imposing those Ceremonies, they had not wanted Charity or Moderation, as too
many have of late; the Dispute is not about the Number, but about the Nature of
them, even as we see in our Civil Government: Is it not true, that one who
would go about to raise a Penny without Act of Parliament, is as much a breaker
of the Law, as if he went about to raise a Pound? So is he guilty of
encroaching upon Christian Liberty, who imposes one Ceremony, as if he imposed
an hundred; for as he may not impose many, so he may not impose any: And
suppose the things imposed were lawful, (which is not granted) yet every
Christian must have respect, whether the things he uses or does, be
profitable, and will do him good; as well as to that, whether or not it be
lawful? Though Paul had Circumcised Timothy, yet seeing an abuse crept in, he
would not Circumcise Titus, and gives a good reason for it, Call. 2.4.
Because of false Brethren unawares brought in to spy out our Liberty which we
have in Christ Jesus, that they might bring us into Bondage. So that this very
Ceremony and Sacrament of the Law Circumcision he looked upon as a Bondage.

Stand fast therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, Gal.
5.1, 13.
and be not entangled again with the Yoke of Bondage. This by way of
Consequence he infers out of what he said in the foregoing Chapter, which is
expressed by the Word therefore; this he strengthens with a Reason in the 13th
Verse; for Brethren ye have been called unto liberty, only use not liberty for
an occasion to the Flesh; for a Cloak to Licentiousness. Our Christian Liberty
we are to defend against those who lay Snares for it; so we must not part with
it, especially when doing it confirms People in their Superstition and Error:
Men in Authority may not Command but what is good, nor forbid but that which is
Evil; and what is indifferent may not absolutely, and for ever be commanded or
forbidden, only as much it draws toward Good or Evil.

Among the several places of Scripture wherein St. Paul gives a Caution about
our Christian Liberty, not to be imposed upon by others, none is more
conspicuous than the Epistle to the Colossians, he warns us to take heed lest
any Man spoil us through Philosophy and vain deceit, Colos. 2.8, 16, 18, 20,
21, 22.23.
after the Tradition of Men, after the Rudiments of the World, and not after
Christ: What these vain Deceits, Traditions of Men, Rudiments of the World,
are, he says, Verse 16. Meat or Drink, respect of an Holiday, or of the New
Moon in a voluntary Humility, Worshipping of Angels, etc. Wherefore, if we be
dead with Christ (as we are) from the Rudiments of the World, why though living
in the World, are ye subject to Ordinances, touch not, handle not, taste not;
which are all to perish with the using, after the Doctrines of Men, etc. After
this clear Truth, it is to be admired how the following expressions can drop
from any Man's Pen. No Ceremony, no Religion. Sine Ceremonii, actum est de
Religione.
It must be a mere shadow of Religion, whereof Ceremonies are Soul and Life,
and the Quintescence of it. This is an Accident not a Substance, a Name not a
Power of Religion: Would to God there were not so many amongst us of that
Religion, who ought to know better; then we could hope things would go better
than they do.

Was there not Superstition from the beginning of Christian Religion? Would not
some have had the Ceremonies of Moses Law, concerning Meats, keeping of days,
etc. even of Circumcision, to be continued, as appears Acts 15. St. Paul was
taken up about rectifying those Abuses, as we see in his Epistle to the
Galatians, Colossians, and elsewhere. Those that are for our Ceremonies, do or
must own, how they who were for keeping up the Popish Ceremonies remaining
among us were in the wrong: To say, because Ceremonies are settled by Law, they
may not be removed or altered, is to afford Papists an Argument to hinder a
Reformation amongst them. And by the same reason they might have stopped the
Work of Reformation when it began: The Authority God has given the Church, is
not for Destruction but for Edification, it is abused when otherwise. St. Paul
had as much Authority as our Ecclesiastical Lawgivers, he says, 2 Cor. 8.10.
and Chap. 1.24. and 13.10.
For though I should boast somewhat more of our Authority, which the Lord has
given us for Edification, and not for your Destruction, I should not be
ashamed. And he plainly declares, Nor for that we have Dominion over your
Faith, but are helpers of your Joy. Now to go about to force People under
Penalties to say as they say, to do as they do, and to believe as they believe,
that the Ceremonies are Good, which we look upon to be Unlawful; Is not this to
pretend to have Dominion over our Faith? The same Apostle says, to give
Offenses, and lay a Stumbling Block before them that are weak, (such let them
account us to be) is to Sin against the Brethren: But says he, 1 Cor. 8.12.
When ye sin so against the Brethren, and wound their weak Conscience, ye sin
against Christ. And suppose such things as are imposed were lawful, yet all
things that are so are not expedient; he looks to the edifying, 1 Cor. 10.23,
29.
he will not use things lawful to him, because they edify not: And in the use
of such things, he will have Men not to do any thing to offend, yet to follow
the Dictates of ones Conscience: Conscience I say not their own, but of the
others; for why is my liberty judged by another Conscience: Men must not
presume to destroy Christian Liberty, 2 Cor. 3.17.
And where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is Liberty. As St. Paul would not
make use of Authority, so neither would St. Peter, Christ had certainly given
him Authority too; but he does not impose any thing upon, or command others,
but only exhorts, The Elders which are amongst you I exhort, 1 Pet. 5.2.
who am also an Elder, to pronounce Anathema and Curses upon those who will not
believe and do so, and so, is a Character of Antichrist which ought not to be
imitated: Though heretofore Poor Dissenters were not Cursed, but with several
Penalties Plagued. Indeed Ministers being deprived of the Exercise of their
Pastoral Office, and the People of the Fruit and Benefit of their Labors;
instead of keeping up Authority, or stretching it as they do, and stand too
much upon it, with Paul they should be chiefly for edifying, which he so much
presses in Romans 14.19. and 1 Cor. 14.12.

Though they should not strike at Religion, or take away Christian Liberty, yet
at last it might prove a Snare (which St. Paul avoids to cast upon the
Corinthians) to the Weak and Ignorant, who form such Notions in their Heads as
may happen to degenerate into Idolatry and Superstition: Wherefore let us cast
off these Dregs of Popery, these Relics of Superstition, and tend to a
Perfection, study after Soundness and Purity in Doctrine, Simplicity in
Worship, and Holiness of Life and Conversation; of which last we have excellent
Rules, 2 Cor. 7.1. Ephesians. 5.3, 4, 5. Coloss. 3.8, 9. and Chap. 4.6. take the
pains to read the words, and you will find most of the Epidemical Sins of the
Times. And though there be a great Difference of what now wants Reformation, to
what it was when we Reformed from Popery, it will be found there is still great
need of it: At that time the great Mountains of Errors in Doctrine were thrown
down; let us now level the Hills that remained, in Worship; or are grown again,
or come in since, in Doctrine.

No Man is to be blamed to desire to see a Warrant in the Word for whatsoever
he does as a Worship of God, or for being afraid to do that which he can see no
Warrant for in the Word of God; in nothing are we so precisely tied to the
Direction of Gods Word, as in the Matter of his Worship: The charge that is
given us, What things soever I command you, Deuteronomy. 12.32.
observe to do it; thou shall not add thereunto, nor diminish from it. That is,
neither more nor less than I commanded you; that charge I say, concerns
chiefly the Matters of God's Worship, and how highly this pleases God, when we
do nothing to Worship him by, but that only he has given us Directions for in
his Word, is evident by reason of the Second Commandment, where the Lord calls
them that will observe that Commandment, and worship him only according to his
own Directions, and not after the Will and Inventions of Men, which is indeed
the whole required in that Precept he calls them that love him, and promises
to show mercy unto them, Exodus 20.5, 6.
even unto the thousand generation. And on the other-side, he calls the
Transgressors of that Commandment, such as dote on Will Worship, and on that
Service done unto him according to the Inventions of Men; he calls them Such as
hate him, and threatens to visit that Sin of the Father upon the Children to
the third and fourth Generations.

I know it is usual with some, to Traduce and Asperse those who upon this
account make Conscience of their Ways; on this manner, It Is true, say they,
every man makes Conscience of the Thing he thinks to be amiss: But this is
their Hypocrisy, that they make more sins than God has made, they must be so
Precise and Scrupulous in Things Indifferent and Lawful, in such Things as
Godlier and Wiser Men than they, make no Scruple at all: This Judging and
Condemning by their Example the Practice of other Men, is the Thing that proves
them to be Hypocrites, and makes them odious to all Men.

To this I have these things to answer: First, The things they are so
scrupulous in, and which they dare not to do, may, in their Nature, not be
Indifferent but Sinful, and well known unto them to be so; though both thy self
and others, no whit inferior to them, but far beyond them in Knowledge and
Grace, do think otherwise of them: There may be difference in Judgment, even
between Godly and Good Men; and one may see that to be a Sin, which another as
good as he cannot be persuaded to be so: St. Paul, and those that joined with
him, Gal. 2.12, 13.
knew it was an unlawful and sinful thing, to withdraw and separate themselves
from eating and conversing with the Believing Gentiles in the Presence of the
Jews, for fear of offending them; though neither Peter nor Barnabas (Men no
whit inferior to them in Grace and Knowledge) could discern it to be so:
Christians must not Judge nor Condemn one another to be Hypocrites, for their
difference in Judgment in those smaller matters; Who art thou, says the
Apostle, Romans 14.4.
that judge another Man's Servant; to his own Master he stands or falls.
Secondly, It may well be, that some, even good Men, are (through want of
Knowledge, and weakness of Judgment) Righteous overmuch, and make scruple of
those things which no Law of God binds them to make scruple of; else Solomon
would never have said, Eccles. 7.16.
be not Righteous overmuch, neither make thy self over-wise: Such an one was
he of whom the Apostle spoke, Romans 14.2.
Another that is weak eats Herbs: As if he should say, it was his Ignorance and
Weakness of Judgment that made him so scrupulous and fearful to eat any thing,
which by the Ceremonial Law (now abrogated) had been forbidden. But no Man must
be despised or judged to be an Hypocrite because of this, for that is directly
against the Apostle's Rule, Romans 14.3.
Let not him that eats despise him that eats not. Thirdly, There is no just
cause, why we should judge or think the worse one of another, either for using
or not using our Liberty in this case; because the thing that is in its own
Nature Lawful, and also lawfully used by one Man, it may be in another Man a
damnable Sin to do it; and that upon these two Grounds: First, Because one is
persuaded of the Lawfulness of it, which the other is not, but doubts it to
be a Sin, Romans 14.14.
I know and am persuaded by the Lord Jesus, says St. Paul, that there is
nothing unclean of it self; but to him that esteems any thing to be unclean,
to him it is unclean. What? will you say, can the Opinion of one Man make any
thing Clean or Unclean, Lawful or Unlawful? No not in its own Nature, but to
himself it may; for a Man to do a thing that he doubts to be Unlawful, is a
damnable thing, Romans 14.23.
He that doubts, says the Apostle, is damned if he eat, because he eats
not of Faith: For whatsoever is not of Faith, is Sin. The Conscience of Man,
though it be deceived and Erroneous, yet has a binding Power, and it is a
matter of great Danger for any one to go against it; all Men must seek to
inform their Conscience aright by the Word of God, which is the only true Rule
to guide our Conscience by, Let every Man be fully persuaded in his own mind.
Romans 14.5.
But though it be a Sin for a Man, not to seek to have his Conscience rightly
informed by the Word of God; yet in him it is a double Sin to do any thing
against his Conscience. If, therefore, thou see a Man who is otherwise
Conscionable in all his ways, fearful to do that which thou know, and art
fully persuaded he may lawfully and ought to do; pity him, inform him, instruct
him, and with Arguments, and in a meek way, labor to bring him out of his
Errors; but Scorn, Hurt, and Condemn him not. The Second Ground is, The one is
able to use and do lawfully the thing he knows to be lawful, and take no hurt
by it: The other, though he knows the thing to be lawful, thorough his
weakness, finds he is not able to use it, but shall receive hurt by it; All
things, says St. Paul, 1 Cor. 6.12.
are lawful for me, but I will not be brought under the Power of any. And
certainly this is the thing that restrains many a good Man from the use of
several Recreations, which he does not doubt to be lawful in themselves;
because he finds his own Weakness to be such, as he cannot use them without
receiving much hurt thereby: And this should restrain many more from them, if
they had care of their own Souls as they ought to have.

This Tenderness of Conscience, which some sort of People want, they condemn it
in those who have it, and call it Trifles, Peevishness and Niceties; but if
they be grounded in the World, they are Truths of God, though some Truths be
comparatively greater than others, as our Savior says; yet is not any one
Truth of God to be accounted small, of little or no Moment, even of those
Points of the Law which he calls but Gnats in comparison of others. Our Savior
says, Matt. 23.24.
These ought ye to have done, Matt. 23.23.
and not to leave the other undone: They are all great things that God has
written and revealed in his Holy Word; all the Truths uttered by the Apostles
on the day of Pentecost, are called the great Things, Acts 2.11.
or the Wonderful Works of God; yea, the least Truth of God, that he has
revealed in his Holy Word, is to be esteemed of greater Moment than Heaven and
Earth; Luke 16.17.
It is easier for Heaven and Earth to pass, than that one tittle of the Law
should fail. It Is every ones Duty to seek after the Truth, and to stick to, and
not depart from it when it is found: He who like David, Psalm. 119.128.
does not hate every false way, every Error in Matters of Religion, Errors
about the smallest as well as the greatest thing, and does not value that which
God has taught in his Word, he has not that Esteem of God's Word as he ought
to have.

As a Man can make himself Abominable to God with the least Sin, such as eating
the least forbidden thing, as a creeping thing, Levit. 11.43.
as it was under the Law; so a Man does by willingly receiving the least Error,
or willingly forsaking the least known Truth: See how earnest the Apostle is,
in dissuading from receiving an Error, which of all Errors they could receive,
seemed the least Dangerous, 2 Thessalonians. 2.1, 2, 3.
as about the day of Christ's being at hand: To receive any thing as Divine
Truth which God has not taught us, though it carries never so good a show of
Piety and Devotion, is certainly a very dangerous thing, else the Apostle would
not have been in this case so earnest as he is, in that instanced already out
of the second of Galatians, about eating and drinking with Gentiles, we see how
steady is St. Paul, that he would give no place by subjection, no not for an
hour, Ver. 5. If some Politicians had then been to confer with him, they would
have said, alas Paul why art thou so Obstinate and Peevish in such a Trifle, 1
Cor. 7.19.
Circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing, as thou have taught.
But he gives this reason why he was so resolute in opposing an Error of that
Nature, That the Truth of the Gospel might continue with you.

These things being thus made out, is it not a sad thing? That we have amongst
us, Men that were, and now if they could, would as much as ever, be pressing
for the Execution of those Laws, whereby they may trouble any of their
Brethren: And as David says, Psalm. 35.20.
They devise deceitful matters against them that are quiet in the Land: They
are glad when they have the least color of Law to justify any of their
unwarrantable Practices against those who dissent from them; but they do not
regard good Laws for the Glory of God, as those we have for the due Observation
of the Sabbath, and against Swearing, Drunkenness and Uncleanness, etc. these
they look upon as not worth being taken notice of by them: That sort of Men,
far from advising and promoting a necessary Reformation of Abuses in Religion,
according to the Word of God (the only Rule for such things) though 'twas their
Duty; they hindered and opposed it, and persecuted them that were for it,
slandering them with the names of Fanatics, Schismatics, Obstinate, Factious:
And not satisfied with this, merely for Nonconformity, which is properly upon
the account of Conscience and Religion, they deprived Ministers not only of the
public Exercise of their Office, but also of doing it in private, as in the
Capacity of Chaplains, Schoolmasters, Tutors; and when they met in private to
serve God, though they prayed for the Government, they were Fined, turned into
Prison, where some died; and many more things of that nature were acted, whilst
Papists, our common Enemies, who by these means were since in a fair way to
have ruined us all, enjoyed Peace, and might hear Mass without Disturbance,
except some times for a show.

I am not so much out of Charity with all those who had an hand in the
Persecution at that time carried on, as to believe, but that some were not so
acted by an inconsiderate Zeal, but that they knew better than they seemed to
do; it did not consist with the Lights they had, to approve of every thing they
did or saw done; the former Principles of some of them were too much contrary
to their then present Practices, but that sometimes they must needs have had
Checks of Conscience: And now there are some alive, who once were against
offering Violence about Matters of Ceremonies, who if God had not by an Act of
Indulgence and Liberty provided against it, now they are upon the Stage of
another side, would be as forward as most to renew and prosecute former
Courses: So far does Interest sway with some Men, when overruled by it, they
know better than what they do, or would do: What else is this, Romans 1.18.
than to speak in St. Paul's words, To hold the Truth of God in Unrighteousness.

All such persecuting Men I may compare to some, who, being upon a Journey,
instead of mending and going on their way, fall out with, beat and abuse their
Fellow-travellers in words and deeds: And though I love not to renew the Memory
of these sad Divisions and Miscarriages, yet they cannot so soon be out of
mind: We meet from Brethren with the like Usage as the Children of Israel did
from Pharaoh, Exodus 5.17.
Ye are idle, ye are idle, therefore ye say, let us go and do Sacrifice to the
Lord: Ye talk of Reformation, go and Conform, not to the Gospel, but to the
Canon and Ceremonies of the Church as by Law established: How have they who
spoke for it been traduced as Innovators, Disturbers of, and Enemies to Church
and State: Such was the Lot of the first Reformers from Popery; there has been
and there still are those who hate the very name of Reformation; it has
commonly been the Custom of the Enemies of God's People, to pick out a ground
of Quarrel, and to engage the Superior Powers against them; the occasion is,
either Religion, or State, or both. 1 Kings 18.17.
The Prophet Elijah is by Ahab called he that troubles Israel, and his Enemy;
Chap. 21.20.
Has thou found me O mine Enemy, that is, to Kings: In the case of Daniel,
Dan. 6.5, 7.
We shall find no occasion against this Daniel, except we find it against him
concerning the Law of his God, said the Princes of Media: And then caused the
King to make this Decree mentioned in the place. Psalm. 94.20
Thus sometimes Mischief is framed by a Law: Wicked Men and Persecutors, do
prosecute their Designs under Notions different from the Truth: Thus the Jews
not only called our Blessed Savior a Friend to Sinners, a Samaritan who had a
Devil, but also accused him before Pilate, Luke 23.2.
of having by them been found a Fellow perverting the Nation, forbidding to
give Tribute to Caesar, and calling himself a King. And he was Crucified not as
the Son of God, but as an Enemy to Caesar, and as a Malefactor; John 17.20 Acts
23.1.
St. Paul was persecuted not as a Man who had lived in all good Conscience
before God until the day he was brought before the Council; Phil. 3.6. Acts
21.28
and not as touching the Righteousness which is in the Law, blameless, but as
one who taught all men every where against the people, against the Law, and the
Temple; and as a pestilent Fellow, a mover of Sedition amongst all the Jews
throughout the World; Acts 24.5, 6, 14.
one who had profaned the Temple: An odious Charge indeed, but false as that
of Heresy which he clears himself from.

Such false Aspersions and evil Practices should be left for the Father of
Lies, the Slanderer, and for his Children: But let those who profess themselves
Christians, study to be such indeed, and put on Bowels of Charity, laying aside
all Malice, Anger, Divisions, which so much discredit our Holy Religion, and
give our Adversaries very great Advantage. In God's Name, and for the sake of
the Lord Jesus, let all former Animosities and Miscarriages be forgotten and
forgiven; and let Men put to themselves this question, Romans 6.21.
What fruit had ye then in those things, whereof ye are now, or ought to be,
ashamed; and let all and every one in their Station join Hearts and Hands to
carry on a thorough Reformation where it is wanting; and therein let the Word
of God be our Rule, nothing of Humane Invention, Willfulness, Passion,
Prejudice or Self Ends, in the carrying it on.

To lay such a Stress upon their As by Law established, is no great
Commendation for a Church, and the Religion it does profess; it is not good to
stand too much upon it, the Stamp of any Humane Law makes it never the better:
Christian Religion was not a jot the worse for not being by Law established in
the Apostles time; nor afterward in the time of Persecution under the Roman
Emperors; neither was the Heathenish Religion, or rather Idolatry, the better
for being then by Law established: Neither is the Protestant Religion the
worse, in those Popish Countries, where it is not settled by Law; nor the Popish
the better for being so settled. This Argument used here against Dissenters, is
the same as was by Papists at the beginning of Reformation, and by Jews against
Primitive Christians: It Is not any Humane Authority that can make any Religion
either better or worse; and Dissenters may not be called Upstarts or
Innovators, for from the very beginning of Reformation, we found those who
wished for a thorough Reformation in Worship as well as Doctrine, according to
the Purity of the Gospel, whence they were called Puritans; and declared
against retaining of those Ceremonies, which ever since were the occasion of
Dispute and Division. I hope here we do not set up for a Catholic Infallible
Church, and that the words Church as by Law established, are not an equivalent
to it; such a Doctrine is proper for a Church of Rome, but not any Reformed
Church: We know this was the Exception against St. Paul, Acts 18.13.
This Fellow persuades Men to worship God contrary to the Law: Yet the Apostle
was in the right and they in the wrong, as well as those others who called him
and Silas Disturbers of the public Peace, Acts 17.6.
Those who have turned the World upside down come hither also.

Our Reformation at first was good, but in this World nothing so good, but it
may admit of some additional degree of Goodness and Perfection; commonly the
best things do not come all at once, but by degrees: As to our Reformation, we
may say as Jehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles. 20.32, 33.
He did that which was right in the sight of the Lord: Howbeit the high places
were not taken away; for the People had not yet prepared their Hearts unto the
God of their Fathers. Still something was wanting which was supplied by
Hezekiah, for then the high places were thrown down. 2 Chronicles. 31.1.
The like Brand was by the Spirit of God put upon Jehoshaphat's Father's Reign,
King Asa, who did many good things; and his Heart was perfect all his days, 2 Chronicles. 15.16, 17.
but the high places were not taken away: We ought at last to throw them down,
we are seriously and earnestly exhorted to remove that Idol of Jealousy set up
in the House of God, I mean particularly bringing a Dead Man into the Church
upon the Thirtieth of January: Jude 9.
We know Michael the Archangel contended with the Devil about the body of
Moses, which he would have set up to be worshipped, to have been an occasion of
Idolatry before the People, which Men, especially the Ignorant, are naturally
inclined to. We must Spiritualize things of Religion and of Worship; let that
saying of St. Paul be seriously considered and thought upon, 2 Cor. 5.16.
Wherefore henceforth know we no Man after the Flesh; yea, though we have known
Christ after the Flesh, yet now henceforth know we him no more; that is, in
that manner after the Flesh.

Many of the Ceremonies imposed upon the Jews, were, as we may say, a
Punishment inflicted upon them, for it was only after the Commission of the Sin
of the Golden Calf, that God laid upon them that heavy and troublesome Yoke. To
employ all their time thus, it seems not to have been at first God's
Intention, to lay upon them such a number of Ceremonies; and the Disputes that
in the Apostles time did arise about them, were all about Jewish Ceremonies,
which had been of Divine Institution; but those we contend against, have no
such thing to plead for, they are all Humane Inventions, abominably abused by
Papists, and some Heathenish Customs we still retain amongst us, which were
better left off than continued: As for us in General, we ought to purge that
old Leven of unnecessary Ceremonies, a Relick of Popery, which some of our
ancient Reformers wished had been laid aside, as appears by Letters to
Bullinger, still to be seen at Zurick, from Bishop Jewel and others. But the
Queen was, upon Suggestion, so bent upon retaining some, to draw Papists to our
Churches, that it could not be effected; so that it was but a mixed
Reformation, part Evangelical in Doctrine, and in part Politic in Worship and
Discipline. And that same Policy which was intended to bring Papists to us,
has been very near drawing us back to Popery. So little pleased is God, that
in Matters of Religion, and of his Service, we should bring Rules and Measures
of our Humane Wisdom, or rather Foolishness: Yet several amongst us, the more
the pity, are gone back so far toward Popery, that they hate not only the
thing, but the very name of Reformation, as I said before; and no
thorough-paced Papist can speak worse of Luther, Zwinglius, Calvin, Martyr,
Bucer, Beza, and others, than they do; though they were Eminent Instruments in
the Hand of God, whose Labors he blessed, to bring us out of the Ignorance,
Error, Darkness, Idolatry and Superstition of Rome. Nay, we shall have those
Protestants, or so called, and not few, who openly declare, they had rather
join with Popery, than with any other Reformed Church besides ours as by Law
established. But certainly they who talk on at that rate, do not know what
Popery is, and what other Reformed Churches are, or else all Religions are
indifferent to them. Some of our Clergy have been heard to express themselves
to be of that mind; but it is no wonder they are so well inclined toward Rome,
for being acted by an ambitious and domineering Spirit, that Religion suits
better with it, it tying People to an implicit Faith, and blind Obedience,
gives them a still and absolute Power over the Souls and Consciences of Men.
But let them not be mistaken, who not being content with a Ministerial are
aspiring to a Magisterial Power; God made the whole Man, and the whole Man he
will have: Have a care not to usurp upon God's Right: And to apply this to the
Subject in hand, as there is a twofold Worship of God, so there is a double
Idolatry and Superstition committed against it, the one inward, when we forge
in our Heads strange and corrupt Notions of God, such as we would have him to
be: The outward is, not only when we transfer the outward Worship upon the
Creature, but also when we defile it with our Lies and Inventions; both are
evil, both are to be avoided and extirpated out of any place they are crept
into: God complains Their fear toward me is taught by the Precepts of Men. And
in vain do they worship me, Isa. 29.13. Matt. 15.9.
teaching for Doctrines the Commandments fo Men.

We say we have given the Church of Rome a Bill of Divorce, and have broken all
Communication with her, since our Laws make it Treason to be reconciled to her:
We ought then to leave off any thing that can lead us back that way; we know
Idolatry and Superstition we charge them with, and this they are guilty of in
their exorbitant Honors they give to Creatures, especially Dead Men, who are
their Saints and Martyrs, at least they make them so. And we, with making
Saints and Martyrs, and appointing them Days and Service to be read, do not we
go to them? At least just upon their Borders: Let us not deceive our selves;
it is not enough to cut off the Blossoms, Fruits and Boughs, unless we also cut
off the Roots, for they will bud and grow again, and the sooner done the
better. If our Reformation had been altogether according to the Rules of the
Gospel, and nothing of Humane Policy mixed with it, it had gone farther and
lasted longer; we would not have seen new Imposthumes of the old Stock breaking
out; no Dignity or brightness of any Creature ought upon such an occasion to
dazzle our Eyes: Herein no Kings, no Fathers, no Councils, no Bishops must have
the Pre-eminence, that is, the Prerogative of Holy Scriptures: The Word of God
is the infallible Rule to go by, and good Kings, as Asa, Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah,
Josiah, raised of God to reform, ever began their Reigns with Reformation of
Abuses in Religion. This was to answer the end wherefore God had set them upon
the Throne; and it is to be hoped Their present Majesty's will remember, in due
time, by a Reformation, to promote the Honor and Service of the Great God,
Psalm. 75.7.
by whom Kings Reign, Who pulls down one and sets up another. Many a good
Soul has for these several Years been wishing for it, for the Glory of God,
the Good of his Church, Happiness of the Nation; and only according to the Rule
of his Holy Word. Now to effect it, all that Man can say is in vain, except God
be pleased to influence upon the Minds and Hearts of Men in Power to do it.
Now, as he did upon the good Kings but newly mentioned, we hope our new worthy
Prelates will lay it to Heart, and in their Station promote it.

Let this longed for Reformation be about Doctrine, where it needs in Worship
and Practice; let it begin at the House of God; let us have good Examples out
of it; Let his Priests be clothed with Righteousness; Psalm. 132.9.
let the Governors and all the People follow and reform in Life and
Conversation; 2 Timothy 2.19.
and Let every one that names the Name of Christ depart from Iniquity. After
this there will be good ground to hope for a good Success in War; and we shall
be a Nation in whom God will delight, when we are purged of our Dross; then
there will be Peace and Plenty within, Honor and Safety round about, and God
will humble our Enemies abroad.

To bring this good Work to an happy End, Prejudices about controverted Matters
must be laid aside, Stumbling Blocks removed, the Vail rent, the Partition Wall
pulled down, that we may go all together into the House of God, join in his
Worship, and make but one Sheepfold. And let this be taken notice of, That
amongst the Diffenters from the Church, who own and have a Ministry by way of
Office, who Administer both Sacraments, and are for Order and Government in the
Church, there is nothing whereby those who are called Churchmen may justly be
offended: But in the Church by Law established, there are several things which
Dissenters think they have cause to except against. So that the Ground of
Churchmen disliking Nonconformity is Negative, that is, They have not and do
not act that which they would have them to do and have: But the Ground of
Dissenters not liking Church-mens Practice is positive, that is, They do and
have things which they think they ought not to do nor to have. And this is the
State of the question between Protestants and Papists, for these do believe all
we do believe, but we do not believe all what they believe.

I shall not say much about the Matters in dispute, so many things having
already been said and written about it; only shall in few words modestly lay
down some reasonable Grounds of an Agreement and Union. First, As to the
Common Prayer Book under two Notions: Is It. As to the Matter of it: 2d. As to
the Manner of using it. As to the Matter, Out of it a good Liturgy could be
made, taking away many Superfluous Repetitions, and altering several
Expressions, Dubious, Dangerous, or otherwise liable to Just Exceptions: There
is some Gold, I mean Good things, but they must own there is also Dross, which
ought to be purged. What these things are, has been said and named at many and
several times; though we have some amongst us, who out of Ignorance or
Obstinacy, take the Prayer Book to be of an equal Authority with the Holy
Bible; and that to read, and hear it read at the appointed times, is sufficient
Performance of Christian Duty. Nay, Abbot against Church-forsakers.
one of some Note has written, That all the Wit of Angels and Men can find no
Fault with it. A bold Assertion, too positive for any Humane Book. Several
other things in that kind, which I omit, have been said by others, not willing
to press too far upon the Subject; and I think there is enough said by the by,
upon the Matter of the Common Prayer Book, only I add, That the Preference
therein given to the Apocrypha, before some places of the Canonical to be read
when the others are to be lest out, is not at all to be approved: Several
Exceptions are taken against the Order and Distribution of several parts of the
Book, out of several lame and maimed parcels of Scriptures, as three or four
Verses of one Chapter, as many of another; especially in most places the
leaving out that excellent and comfortable Clause of the Lords Prayer, For
thine is the Kingdom, the Power and the Glory, which in us raises Hopes and
Confidence of being heard, and that God will give us what we ask him in the six
Petitions: First, Because he is our King: Now a King grants the Just Petitions
of his Subjects: Secondly, Because he is able to give what we ask, according to
Christ's direction: And Thirdly, Because what we ask is for his Glory. Then
dividing the Matter of the Prayer Book into Gospels, Epistles, Collects or
Prayers, is after the Pattern of Popish Missals and Rituals, and clear out of
the way of Liturgies of all Reformed Churches. Secondly, Several things are
said against the Manner of using it, as in a certain Tone or Singing way (which
is the Popish) of the very Prayers in Cathedrals. Then as to the place, some at
the middle of the Church, others by the Altar; as if there was in the Church
one place Holier than the other; or that God will hear us there better than
here. Then as to the Posture, sometimes sitting, then standing, as if the
Epistle was not the Word of God, as much to be heard with a Reverence (if
standing be a more reverend Posture than sitting) as the Gospel being both the
Word of God: Nay, Gospel is made different from Gospel; for in the first
Lesson, a whole Chapter being read, People sit, but at the second Lesson, when
few Verses of a Chapter of the Gospel are read, then every one stands up:
Herein is too much of Formality, and I could almost say, too mimical for
Christian Reformed Churches. Thus the Liturgy ought to be mended, so to be
imposed, as not to exclude Extemporary Prayers of Ministers.

As to the formal Ties, called Church Ceremonies, they ought wholly to be
abolished, as introducing Superstition under the name of Decency, and being
contrary to Christian Liberty: Such is the use of Surpliss, so abominably
abused in the Church of Rome, where it is thought necessary, when they perform
their Idolatrous Worship of the Mass, at the very act of Idolatry; and some
amongst us, have been so Superstitiously inclined, as to say Angels have
appeared in it: But let them look how they can prove out of Scripture, that the
Matt. 28.3.
Angels Raiment as white as Snow; Mark 16.5.
that the long white Garment; Luke 24.4.
and the shining Garments of the two Men, were a Surpliss. And to say as some
do, that that color is a Sign of Purity and Candor, which is of it to make a
Sacrament. I would have those who are so much for the Surpliss, to remember,
how fine Linen, as well as Purple and Scarlet, is reckoned among the
Merchandise of Babylon, Rev. 18.12. As to the Sign of the Cross in Baptism, it
is an Addition to the Sacrament. None but he who has right to Institute
Sacraments, may make any Addition, Diminution or Alteration thereunto, without
Impiety, or committing Sacrilege: And it were to have a mean Opinion of the
Lord Jesus's Divine Wisdom, to think he left with his Church an Imperfect
Ordnance in the Institution; and none may institute Sacraments, but he that can
bestow the Graces thereby signified.

Bowing toward the Altar,] For so some call Improperly the Communion Table, as
the Minister (a Priest) is very unfit for Protestants and Reformed Christians,
when Papists, from whom it is derived, do it: It Is according to their Principle,
they believe Transubstantiation to be made upon such places, and therefore they
give them such Signs of Religious Worship: But it is very odd for us so to do,
who do not believe one place in the Church to be Holier than the other: And
what need, in Cathedrals, and some Chapels, of Candle-sticks and unlighted
Candles upon the Altars in the daytime. As for bowing at the Name of Jesus, it
is of the same Stamp: Sometimes God may happen to say to those who are so fond
of those Will Worship Ceremonies; who has required this at your hands: Isaiah
1.12.
And to uphold this Practice, they must pull it over Head and Shoulders out of
the Text of the Epistle to the Philippians. 6.2, 10.
I do not so much wonder, that Papists, who seldom make use of Scriptures, but
to wrest them, would make use of the place. But for Protestants who pretend and
ought to know better, I admire they would make use of it: It is plain the Text
is not literally to be understood, or else Men should bow at the Name of Jesus
Son of Nun, or of the Son of Sirach, or of Jesus called Justus; then it is said
the Knee not the Head: Then there is no Knees in Heaven, nor none that can bow
under the Earth: It Is there spoken of an Honor due to the Divinity, Person,
Attributes and Works; especially as he is our Redeemer and Savior, which is
signified by the name of Jesus; and if we must kneel or bow when we hear that
name, the like must be done when we see it written. The Apostle does not mean
the Letters of the name, but a most humble Submission and Obedience, with a
giving Praise and Glory to the Person and Commands of the Lord Jesus.

As to kneeling at the Sacrament: I know there must be a Posture, that of the
time of Institution, or as near it as may be, must be used; several Protestant
Churches have different Postures when they receive it; and a Care ought to be
had of avoiding Superstition, and keeping as far as we can from Appearances of
Idolatry. I confess, I would not for all the World, if ever beyond Seas, where
Papists are in a full Liberty, and where Protestants receive it not on their
Knees; I say I would not, because my Conscience would not give me leave,
receive it kneeling, which is a Posture of Adoration, for fear it were thought
I partake of their Idolatry in worshipping a piece of Bread for the true
natural Body, now sitting at the Right Hand of the Father, which thing I abhor
more than Death it self. But here, though with a safe and even Conscience I
could receive it kneeling, yet may be another could not: Must my Will and
Practice be the Rule of another Man's Will and Practice: Every one is bound to
seek for the best Information he can have; but when all is done, every ones
Conscience must be the Judge of what he does in indifferent things, that is,
which are neithe. commanded nor forbidden in the Word of God: And the true
Christian Prudence is, to leave such things at liberty, and administer it to
those sitting or standing, who make scruple to receive it kneeling; for it is no
Rule of Charity or Christianity, for the sake of Uniformity, to break Unity and
the Bond of Peace: And Ministers ought to have a great care, not to become
Instruments of Damnation to any; for they who receive kneeling, Romans 14.23.
and doubting, as St. Paul says, are Damned. Such Practices must be left for
the Wicked Communion of Rome, which with Fears, Threatenings, Sword, Fire, and
every violent way, forces People to do things contrary to their Conscience; as
of late in an high degree it was practiced in a Neighboring Nation; and for
what they did they gave this reason, We know they must be Damned, and as good
they should be so within our Church as out of it: Let them come in and believe
what they please.

Indeed a great Evil there is amongst us, That the Posture of receiving the
Holy Sacrament, an Ordnance of God to Seal the Pardon of our Sins, and
strengthen our Faith, is made use of for a Trial of those who are qualified for
Worldly Employments, to turn it to Temporal Ends, is an unaccountable
Profaneness of that Holy Institution: And though without such a by
Consideration I could receive it kneeling, I declare if I should receive in
that manner, upon the account of such a Trial, I could not avoid believing I
had eaten and drank my Damnation.

All foresaid Lets and Hindrances being laid aside, and a Blessed Reformation
of all Abuses set a-foot, and by every one in their several Stations carried
on, then upon good Grounds we might hope for Peace grounded upon Truth, and for
an Happy Success; especially if in our different Capacities we would propose to
our selves the Glory of God, the Salvation of Souls, and the Good and Advantage
of Church and Country: The good Laws we have to encourage Piety and Virtue, and
to discountenance and punish Ungodliness, Vice, and every unjust and sinful
Practice, being renewed, put in execution, and if any thing therein wanting,
supplied with new ones, good Instructions, good Examples, good Rules in
Families, and Care taken by Parents and Masters to see them well observed; this
would take away Evil and Cursed things from amongst us. The Prudence of
Officers in Church and State should remedy old Inconveniences, and as much as
it is possible endeavor to prevent new ones: Amongst the old ones I shall name
a very palpable one, which concerns both Church and State, and has been, and
is every day, cause of Grievance and great Inconveniences, and as much as any,
Destructive of common Society, it is Clandestine Marriages, stealing and
trappanning young People into Marriages, without Advice or Consent of Friends,
which as yet the Wisdom of our Lawgivers has found no effectual Course to
prevent, though daily Complaints have at several times put them upon consulting
about it. He who steals my Goods shall be Hanged, and he who steals my Child
shall go Free: And if once they be Married, according to the Practice of the
Church, though by reason of young Age, and other Considerations, unable to bind
themselves with such a Tie. What is in part or chiefly the cause of this, is
the Abuse of selling Bonds of Matrimony, the Dishonesty and Covetousness of a
Minister, to get some few Guinea's: And Privileged Places, by Law or Custom,
whereof there are too many in and about the City; there People are Married in
Secret, let the Disparity, Inconveniency, Tricks and Cheats be never so great,
so visible, or so many; which to prevent it, requires the Prudence, Study and
Authority of both Civil and Ecclesiastical Powers.

FINIS.

