A SERMON Preached at the PUBLIC FAST the ninth day of Aug. 1644. At St
Mary's OXFORD, BEFORE The honorable Members of the two Houses of PARLIAMENT,
There Assembled. By PAUL GOSNOLD Master of Arts. And published by Authority.

OXFORD, Printed by Henry Hall.

PSALM. 122. 6. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem.
TO tell ye that my text is pertinent, were to distrust your sense; for there
are but three words in it* and the first concerns the day, the second the
times, the third the state: Prayer, a principal end of Fasting, is proper to
the day: Peace is seasonable in these divided times: Jerusalem brings in the
State: But three words (I say) in the Original; (...) but they are all three
Verba Trojana, pregnant words, every one contains a catalogue: Pray, all
duties in one: Peace, all blessings in one: Jerusalem, all Cities and States in
one. Pray, etc.

Every word playing his part will divide the Text into a single act, and a
double object: or into an Act, an Object, and a Subject: the Act or duty; Pray:
the Object of prayer, Peace: the Subject of Peace, and yet the Object of Prayer
too, Jerusalem. But I will invert the order of the words: and because the
Object in nature is before the Act, and the Subject before them both, I will
first speak of Jerusalem, next of Peace, and conclude with Prayer.

These words were written for our instruction, and therefore, though Jerusalem
be only named, all Cities and States are meant; David for Jerusalem, We for
great Britain, every man intercede for his Country, and Christ for us all.

Pray for Jerusalem, for these reasons.

1. Homo est animal politicum, Man is a creature naturally both needing, and
desiring society, therefore it is not good for man to be alone, nor were it
safe for men to be together, but in Jerusalem, under some form and frame of
government: for homo homini lupus, nothing is more wild and cruel then man, if
he be not tamed by authority: out late confusion and violations of Political
order, have made England like the sea about it, where one fish hunts and preyes
upon another. Uncontrolled licentiousness, though to the gross conceited
vulgar it seems to be liberty, yet we find by dismal experience, that it
produces nothing but disorder, injustice, rapine, and insupportable slavery:
for now violence and the sword bear sway, every man does what he can, and the
strongest takes all: wherefore it was well and wisely spoken of Calvin, Polity
or government is of no less necessity, and of far greater dignity then bread
and water, I may add, then the air we breath in, or the Sun that gives us
hight: for indeed there is no living without it; at least men would be driven
to live solitary in woods and caves, like beasts, and salvages. Therefore it is
a fundamental duty to pray for Jerusalem.

2. We see in the great world, how all parts of it dispense with their
particular affections to their proper Elements, when their general duty to the
Universe requires it: Stones would forsake the earth, the place of their
private repose, and mount as high as Heaven to fill a vacuitie to heal a wound
in Nature. So also in the Microcosme, the little world of man's body, if the
heart, the mother of life be distressed, presently the spirits and blood flock
and flow from all parts to relieve her. Now if (as learned Hooker observes)
those voluntary actions are most agreeable to reason, which do most resemble
the necessary works of nature; then as it is in the natural, so in the
politic body it ought to be, every part should have a maine ear of the whole.
Therefore it is our natural duty to pray for Jerusalem.

3. If the Sun should draw the Ocean dry, or the Ocean swell to quench the
Sun; if Heaven put out his lights, or Earth keep in her fruits; the Winds
hold their breath, and the Clouds stop their Bottles, what would become of the
world? and if the world should perish, what would become of them? So if we, the
particular members of Jerusalem (for what is Jerusalem but our selves
incorporate?) should withdraw our duty, she could not subsist; and if she do
not, neither can we* if the whole be ruined, the parts must suffer; if the tree
fall, the branches wither; if the Kingdom be overrun, who sees not, who
feels not, that the substance, lives, and liberties of private men must needs
go to wrack? Therefore, though we have no care of the Public, but refer all
things to our selves, and our domestic commodities, yet because these are
enclosed in the happiness of the Universality, it is our necessary duty to
pray for Jerusalem.

4. Prayer is the expression of desire, the object of desire is Good, the
greater good is to be preferred before the less, the public good is
incomparably greater and worthyer then the private, by how much a whole
Society is more worth then one man. Therefore it is our principal duty to
pray for Jerusalem.

5. To these reasons I will add Gods commandment, which we cannot disobey,
unless first we will be unreasonable. Honor thy father and mother; if the
parents of our flesh, the authors of our generation and being, ought to be
honored, then our King and Country, to whom we owe our preservation and
well-being, are worthy of double honor: for it is better to be well or happy,
then simply to be; as it is worse to be miserable, then not to be at all.
Honor thy father and mother. Jerusalem is the mother of us all, etc. Our
Country (says the Orator) is major altera parens, our Grandmother; wherefore
we must do all we can to honor her; inwardly, with our judgments and
affections; outwardly, with our endeavors and devotions: the least we can do
is to pray for her. Therefore it is our bounden duty to pray for Jerusalem.

But because Jerusalem without peace were no right Jerusalem, that is, the
Scene of peace, or where peace is to be seen; but rather a very Babylon, a
City of confusion: Therefore in the second place pray for peace, the peace of
Jerusalem.

1. Many are of the mind, that, though men had persisted in their primogeneal
integrity, there should have been dominion and government amongst them: yet
(as profound Hooker notes) if Adam had not fallen, there is no impossibility
in nature, but they might have lived without it. But all agree in this, our
fall and corruption made it necessary: For when there were but four persons in
the world, (but four that we read of; howsoever, no great multitude) one
brother murdered the other; and, as their number, so their malice and mischiefs
increased; for restraint whereof, there was no way, but to come to composition,
and by common consent to authorize one, or more to superintend the quiet and
safety of the rest; to defend them, who were not able to defend themselves, to
curb the unruly, to distribute to every one his due, and so preserve the peace
and tranquillity of all. Seeing then an inclination to peace was the original
spring of civil communities, and the establishment of peace the very end,
whence they had their beginning; and seeing the end is bonum primae
intentionis, though obtained last, yet desired first; first in our purposes and
wishes, this is a duty, which has none before it, to pray for peace, the peace
of Jerusalem.

2. But if peace be not larded with prosperity, it is not worth the praying for:
for as prosperity without peace is but an uncertain felicity, so peace without
prosperity is but secure misery. Did we dwell in a barren desert, or a
pestilentiall air, in the Acherusian fens, or under the North Pole, we should
find cold comfort in our peace. But peace here, peace, in the language of the
Holy Ghost, does signify the confluence of all earthly blessings, the entire
mass of humane welfare. Some render it, Salutate Jerusalem, for the Jews
saluted them, to whom they wished all happiness, with this complement, Peace
be unto you. Peace then, according to the sacred idiome, is the Rendezvous or
Magazine of all that good is: For all that good is either honesium, jucundum,
utile, honest, pleasant, or profitable; as for decorum it is but a gloss set
upon the rest, or a reflection from them. 1. Peace is honest, for it is nothing
but a sweet resultance from the due observation of good Laws; She Is the
daughter of righteousness, says the Prophet, Isa. 32. 17. it is a fruit of the
holy spirit, says the Apostle, Gal. 5. 22. Righteousness and peace kiss each
other, Psalm. 84. 10.
as the Psalmist sings most sweetly; it is founded in charity, which is the
comprehension of all Christian virtues. 2. Whether peace be pleasant, or no, I
appeal to your now quickened experience. What is more wished, or would be more
welcome then peace? What is better or sweeter then peace? What is more splendid
and beautiful then peace? Peace is that fair Astraea that linketh men
together in the golden fetters of mutual amity, and makes them to live, as
if, their persons being many, their souls were but one. Peace is the harmony
of the world, the smile and serenity of the earth, the hansell and image of our
happiness in heaven, the tutelar Saint of Kings and Princes, the very form or
soul of a Commonwealth, the nursery of Arts, shortly, a Paradise where all
accommodations for this life and the next do grow. O how good and pleasant a
thing it is to see Brethren to dwell together in unity! If there were no
positive pleasure in peace, yet as it is the greatest torment to be deprived of
Heaven, so it is not the least of pleasures to be freed from Hell: (...). 1. 11.
(...), says the grand Philosopher: it is a pleasure to be rid of that which
displeases us; to be freed from this hell of ^^rre, the fire and brimstone,
storms and tempests, plagues and vexations of it; if for no other reason then
this, how pleasant a thing is peace? 3. Peace is profitable; for in that
encomiastick Psalm of Peace, it is not only compared to the fragrant ointment
of Aaron, but also to the prolifique dew of Hermon, fructifying the fields of
Sion; Pacis alumna Ceres, peace and abundance go together: therefore she is
emblem'd in a fair woman holding a Copia-Cornu, a horn full of flowers and
fruits in one hand, and leading Plutos the good of riches in the other, to
paint out unto us, that riches and plenty are the inseparable companions of
peace O what a blessed Trinity conspire in this Unity! Certainly they know not
what is good for themselves, who do not pray for peace, the peace of Jerusalem.

3. The greatest benefit of peace is, to improve it to that end, for which God
had given it; namely, the advancement of religion, and the exaltation of his
service. It Is a most unthankful alienation of his favors, to abuse them as as
we have done; turn his grace into wantonness, confume our fertile peace in
making provision for the flesh, to satisfy the lusts thereof, to make our
backs fine, and our bellies full: Better follow the wars, then thus to stain
our peace. God sends peace for holyer purposes, that we should lead quiet lives
in all godliness and honesty. 1 Timothy 2. 2. that we should sow the fruits of
righteousness in peace* Iam. 3. 17. that being delivered from the hands of our
enemies, we should serve him without fear: Luc. 1. 74. If Hannibal were at the
Ports, Rabshache upon the Walls, the Rebels now within our Works, what a wild
confusion would rout your attention? Put men into a bodily fear, and quite
mar their devotion. The Jews were thrice a year to worship God in
Jerusalem; now in the time of War 'twas ill travailing the Country, men were
then afraid to say, what David was so glad to hear, Let us go into the House
of the Lord. The Psalmist therefore being exceedingly delighted to behold these
meetings, and wishing in his heart they might never be interrupted, from the
desire of his soul breathed this flagrant ejaculation, O pray for the Peace of
Jerusalem. Indeed it is the very beauty of peace, a blessed spectacle to see
men trooping to Church; endearing themselves with the mutual offices of
piety, like those in the eighth of Zachary, lovingly inviting, calling, and
exciting one another, hear you neighbor, friend, brother, Let us go into the
House of the Lord. The free and solemn exercise of religion is so great an
happiness, as we can enjoy no greater, till we come in Heaven, and the
principal means to bring us thither. Therefore it is as much as our souls
are worth to pray for peace, the peace of Jerusalem.

But after we have been so cruelly swing'd with the iron flayle of war,
Nehem. 1. 3.
sure no man can be so merciless to himself, as not to be glad of peace. To
most of those, who were so forward at first to blow the coal of this terrible
conflagration, if S. Austin's question were now put, Vultis pacem? would ye
have peace? how greedily would they answer? Cupimus, amamus, volumus, yes, with
all our hearts. But how shall we repossesse our selves of it? Hic labor, hoc
opus est: for we are grown to desperate extremities; we have lost our selves
in a Labyrinth of most perplexed difficulties, and can find no clew to wind
us out of it; our breach is too wide to be healed, our wrongs too great either
to be suffered, or to be satisfied; our quarrels by mutual slaughters incensed
to implacable hatred, and our peace so ruined beyond all reparation, that a
temper now, reconciliation now may seem impossible. But what is impossible
with man, is possible with God, therefore Pray. He, he alone can recollect the
pieces of this shattered Kingdom, and join them together again in a firm
and lasting peace, therefore pray; do but ask and have, speak and speed.
Pray for the peace of Jerusalem.

1. God, the only object of prayer, is the author of peace and lover of
concord: his chiefest title in the New Testament, is, the God of peace; to
intimate this great states-matter is at his disposing. Knowing then from whence
peace does come, hereby we know whither to go; whither for peace, but to the
God of peace? at him we cannot come pedibus, sed precibus, not with the feet of
our body, but with the feet of our soul, our affections lifted up in prayer.
Prayer then being the only avenue to God, who is the only giver of peace, it is
the only means to procure it. There-pray. Pray for etc.

And here I may opportunely sally out upon the Epicurean and Judiciary
Astrologer; for if their doctrine be true, this of my text is false. The
Epicure makes God like Aesops Incuriosus, not caring how the world goes:
whatsoever befalls us, be it peace, be it war, it is not long of him who lets
all things run at random, to hap as hap may: as if it were an Indecorum, a
thing unworthy the sublimity of his state, to vouchsafe the cast of his eye
upon sublunary matters;

Scilicet is superis labor est, ea cura quietos Sollicitat.

But go to the beasts of the field, thou Epicure, and they shall teach thee;
to the fowls of the air, and they shall tell thee; to the flowers of thy
garden, and they shall instruct thee: for if God be careful to feed lions and
ravens, and to cloth lilies, how much more shall he regard men and humane
societies, O ye of little faith? Next, the Planetarian gravely tells us, that
for our long, almost miraculous former peace we may thank our stars* whose
kind aspect and propitious irradation was the cause thereof and that war has
since been kindled by the fiery influence of Mars, inflaming the choleric
humor of Potentates. If so, then the best Physician were the best Statesman:
and what needed so many consultations, overtures, propositions, and umpires of
peace, when a good Purge would have done the feat? Bishop Fotherby confuteth
these men by Psalm. 75. 6. Promotion comes neither from the East, nor from the
West, nor from the North, nor from the South: not from the East, whence the
Stars come in their diurnall motion; nor from the West, whence they go in
their natural motion; nor from South or North, whence they come and go in
their motion of Trepidation; from none of these motions does promotion come,
therefore the happiness of States does not hold of the Stars. But shall we
in good earnest confute these men, or shall we laugh at them? To confute them
were to answer a fool in his folly; therefore either pity their blindness, or
laugh at their madness, and so let them go.

2. I might by many Scripture Examples show the force or rather omnipotence of
prayer; what power it has over men, over devils, over the elements of the
world, over God himself. To cite a few proving the efficacy thereof for the
public good. When Pharaoh and his Egyptians were ready to cut him and his
Israelites to pieces, Moses by prayer divided the Sea, and escaped from them.
When Corah and his accomplices made an insurrection, and disturbed the peace; the
same Moses by prayer opened the mouth of the earth, and sent them quick to
hell. When God Exodus 32. would have dispatched all Israel at a blow, the self
same Moses held his hands by prayer so strongly, that God seems to ask Moses
leave to strike them; and like one struggling to get loose, but could not, cries
out, Let me alone: Let thee alone! Quis tenet te Domine (replies Saint
Augustine) Lord, who holds thee? Why, that does Moses here, that I cannot
have my will upon these rebels. Cannot? Not for want of strength, for who is
like to the Lord in power? but for the abundance of his clemency, which would
not suffer him to lift up his hand against that people, for whom his faithful
servant so earnestly besought him. I might name more, but these are enough to
show how effectual it is to pray, to pray for the peace of Jerusalem:

3. Take this for a rule. Prayer implies the use of all subordinate means
requisite for the obtaining of that we pray for. We must not stand wishing and
woulding and do just nothing: This very thing has undone us, like the Carter
in the fable, who when his Cart stuck fast in a slough, sets him down and
cries amain, Help Hercules, help: Hercules appearing chid the lubber; help
you (said he) and I will help. Our devotion must be seconded by our devoire.
To our prayers we must join our purses and our persons; not only pray, but
fight, and pay for the peace of Jerusalem. Pray and pay too? durus sermo, this
is no good Sermon, who can endure to hear it? Pray if you will, the whole
Liturgy over; outpray a false Pharisee, a babbling Papist, an extemporanean
Enthusiast, with all their orationes sine ratione, their endless senseless
effusions, yea and fast into the bargain, so we may escape Scot-free and pay
nothing. But no penny no Paternoster, as good neither the one nor the other,
as not both together; both these must meet, or no peace will be concluded. For
this deduction is obvious to every man's reason: Our peace we shall never
recover, if the rebels may have their will; their will they will have, if we be
not provided to break them of it; provision cannot be made without money,
money cannot be had without contribution, therefore out with your purses, and
pay for the peace of Jerusalem.

I may boldly speak it: He can neither be a good Subject, nor a right honest
man, who for the preservation of the King, Religion, Laws, Liberty, Learning,
the Churches and his Countries peace, would not think not only all the money
in his purse, but all the blood in his body well spent. Christ has commanded
us to give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's* and enforced the
commandment by his own example, who as Lord Verulam well observes, never
wrought miracle about money matter, but only to pay tribute unto Caesar. But
enough of this: for he is too much a stranger to these hard times, that thinks
to do any good by chargeable doctrines. Now for fighting, although the
perverseness and obstinacy of our enemies has left us no other way to raise
our collapsed peace; yet it is not so comely for us who are or ought to be
Angels of peace, out of this place to sound the Alarmes of war, and to whet
men's courages to cut throats. Only this I Will say, whosoever out of a
conscientious regard had to his duty, obliged by the laws of God and men,
shall loose his life in the service of the King, I dare not deny that man the
honor of a Martyr.

4. Prayer is for, or against: if we be friends to the peace of Jerusalem, we
must be enemies to the enemies of it; if we pray for that, we must pray against
these. Now if God be the author of peace, war and discord can have no
author but Gods adversary the Devil; and they that are the stirrers up and
fomenters of it, must needs be his instruments whosoever they be. If the
peacemakers be blessed, for they shall be called the sons of God; then
cursed are the warre-makers, cursed to the pit of hell, for they shall be
called you know what: if there be any devils upon earth, these are they; as
like their father, as if they had been spit out of his mouth, who was a liar,
and a murderer from the beginning. Therefore we need not make any scruple of
praying against such: against those Sanctimonious Incendiaries, who have
fetched fire from heaven to set their Country in combustion, have pretended
Religion to raise and maintain a most wicked rebellion: against those Nero's,
who have ripped up the womb of the mother that bare them, and wounded the
breasts that gave them suck: against those Cannibal's who feed upon the flesh
and are drunk with the blood of their own brethren: against those Catiline's
who seek their private ends in the public disturbance, and have set the
Kingdom on fire to roast their own eggs: against those tempests of the State,
those restless spirits who can no longer live, then be stickling and meddling;
who are stung with a perpetual itch of changing and innovating, transforming
our old Hierarchy into a new Presbytery, and this again into a newer
Independency; and our well-temperd Monarchy into a mad kind of Kakistocracy.
Good Lord! what wild irregular courses have these men run, since the reins
have layen loose upon them? I am afraid, they will never leave chopping and
changing, plotting and practicing, till in conclusion they bring all to
confusion, all to an Anarchy or savage Ataxie, Prayer, Peace, Jerusalem, and
all. Therefore it is no breach of charity to pray against these men. How long,
Lord, how long holy and just shall our blood and wrongs be unrevenged upon
them? how long shall the Devil and his instruments have place and power to
deface and defile thy Temples, to profane thy service, to persecute thy
ministers, to pursue the life and honor of thine Anointed, and to seduce the
silly people like sheep to the slaughter? How long shall they blaspheme thy
Name and Religion by making it an instrument of such hellish practices? How
long Lord, how long holy and just?

Thus have I run through the parts of my Text. I have showed ye, that our
chiefest care should be for Jerusalem; that the greatest blessing we can wish
Jerusalem, is peace; that the most effectual means to procure peace, is
prayer. Therefore, pray for the peace of Jerusalem.

Let naturall-hearted men, that wish the conservation of the world; Let loyal
Subjects, that are tender of the safety and reputation of their Prince; Let
true Patriots, that regard the flourishing condition of their Country; Let
devour Christians, that think it an happiness to enjoy the free use of
religion; Let whosoever desire to see good days, and the lives of them and
theirs prolonged and prospered upon earth; Let us all, that have been
tormented with the furies of a long War, join in a maine army of
Supplicants, and Pray for the peace of Jerusalem.

Before these causeless Wars began, (causeless, for though the meritorious
was too apparent, yet the next immediate cause is somewhat mystic and
wondrous:) Before (I say) these causeless Wars had cut asunder the Gordian
knot of our well-setled peace; God had advanced this Nation above all Nations
with so rare and continued course of prosperity, that all the world, and all
the ages in the world could hardly pattern it; for which so much we owed unto
his heavenly bounty, as we were never able sufficiently to pay: And therefore
if we did not give him an infinite number of thanks, and praised him with our
mouths, and magnified him in our hearts, and glorified him in our lives, and
did all we could to set forth and celebrate his matchless goodness and
indulgence toward us, we were the most ungrateful, and consequently the most
hateful people under heaven: For God in the first of Esaias summons all the
world with a tragical Prosopopeia, to wonder at such, as monsters, rather then
men. Hear O Heaven, give ear O Earth, and be astonished: I have nourished and
brought up children, and they have rebelled against me.

Doubtless this black sin of ingratitude, our unthankfulness in not
acknowledging, and our dissoluteness in abusing such singular favors made us
longer unworthy of them. For besides that War and Destruction having taken
their progress through the neighboring Countries, according to the ordinary
destiny of earthly things, our turn was likely to be next: Did not our ripe
sins expect the sickle? Did not their extreme enormity, leaving scarce any
fear, that we could be worse; and their brazen impudency, leaving as little
hope that we would be better, argue the measure of our iniquities to be
brim-full? has not our more then heathenish profaneness and impiety, our
exorbitant pride, and foppish gayetie, our rank voluptuousness, riot, luxury,
and most ungracious abuse of Gods innumerable mercies, provoked his Justice to
bring upon us the same or worse calamities, then have so long, and do still
afflict the wretched Territories of the dismembered Empire? Therefore it is high
time, now that we are at the pits mouth of utter undoing, ready to be tumbled
in, with penitent hearts and teary eyes, with all fervency and importunity to
pray uncessantly for the peace of Jerusalem.

When from this general, which is confessed on all sides, I descend to the
inquisition of more particular and nearer causes of our present misery, I am
struck silent with amazement; my thoughts are all confounded, I know not what
to say to it, unless I should ascribe the division of States to the
conjunction of Stars, unless men at certain periodicall times were carried
into it by a fatal sway; that such eager and mortal contention should flame
from little or no provocation.

Or if there be any cause other then fatal; was it, that we were come to the
desperate resolution of Aesops Ass, who made no haste to fly from the enemies,
presuming they could not load her with heavier burdens then her Master? It
cannot be denied but such Asses were numbers in the Kingdom, till sad
experience, the fools Mistrisse, made them find and feel to their cost the
little finger of the Rebels to be heavier, then was the hand, loins, and whole
body of the King.

Or shall I think Religion, that most specious pretext, the only sound
whereof (for, dull souls, they skill little of the substance of it) does so
mightily bewitch and inveigle the people? Shall I think this to have been the
true genuine cause? Nothing less. For our religion of old was (says
Lactantius) and still is to be defended, (especially against those whom God
has set over us) not by fighting, but by dying; not by cruelty, but by
patience; not by wickedness, but by faith; not by breaking out into rebellion,
but by constancy in suffering. And yet these men, with stupendous boldness,
have pretended religion for all their barbarous and bloody actions; and made
the doting multitude believe, That all this killing and staying is for the
glory of God. For the glory of the Devil, is it not? I am sure the Devils
glory in it, and make merry in hell, that we are so mad upon earth; they sit
clapping of their black hands to see us together by the ears; there, there,
so we would have it. It is no new art to dissemble, and to set a good face upon
a bad cause; but if there were the least affecting sense of religion in the
hearts of men, if they had any taste of Heaven or Hell, it would not, it could
not be thus. It Is impossible minds seasoned with the sweet doctrine of the
Gospel, which commands us to love our very enemies, should entertain thoughts
of deadly hostility against their friends and brethren. Certainly the Devil
has distilled the quintessence of his serpentine policy into this stratagem,
to convert religion, which God intended for the firmest bond of amity, and
which naturally conserves the peace and incolumity of States and Kingdoms,
into the maine cause of war and bloodshed. The Christian religion; that that
should draw men to disobedience, that that should make them* Thieves,
Murderers, Rebels, Traitors: O blasphemy! Why, our religion is all for peace,
the Author of it is styled. The Prince of Peace, the Lamb of God, who came
into the world on purpose to guide our feet into the ways of peace; therefore
the Angels at his coming proclaimed peace, and when he was come, the religion
that he taught us is called the Gospel of peace, and it consists of many
admirable precepts of meekness, patience; humility, innocence, subjection,
charity, etc. all the mothers and nurses of peace; nay it denounces damnation
to all that break the peace. Let not then turbulent spirits and the troublers
of Israel once offer to speak of religion, for if our religion, that is, if
the Gospel be true (as who dare say the contrary?) there is no religion in
them. Rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft: 1 Samuel 15. 23. Witches (they
say) when they first covenant with the Devil, renounce their Baptism, renege
their Christianity: So they, that follow or favor rebellious courses, had as
good renounce Christ, abjure his Gospel; for howsoever they may continue
formal Professors, they are real Apostates. When I steadfastly view the
palpable hypocrisy of these times; my mind leads me to think our greatest
Zealots, that personate Saints upon earth to be no better affected then
Machiavill, who esteemed it wisdom to profess, but weakness to believe any
religion. And indeed nothing does more strongly possess me with a fear of the
large reign of Atheism in these wretched days, than the general abusing and
profaning of religion, by making it the grand engine of practices, a vizour to
cover the face of all knavery and impiety, a mere legerdemaine to mock vulgar
eyes: For, mark it; if the design be to make a fortune, or to mend a broken
one, to satisfy some revengefull or ambitious humor, the only sure way to
effect it, is, to proclaim a Fast, to overlay it with the fair colors of
religion. Men now a days would seem out of mere devotion and conscience to
break all Gods Commandments in the highest degree. O times! what can be added
to the impudence of this age, wherein such foul and horrible villainies, all
manner of tyrannical outrages are persuaded, acted, and applauded, as singular
testimonies of our good affection to Christ and his religion?

But to give over this Scrutinie: whatsoever the cause was, listen to a
prodigy, by which, without the help of a prophetic spirit, you may easily
prognosticate, what the effect will be. Pliny writes of a Serpent, called
Amphisbaena, a Serpent with two heads, one where it should be, the other where
the tail should be, at each end a head: which two heads striving to go
contrary ways, do miserably strain and wring the body, and at last with
continual biting and fighting, woory and tear it all to pieces. To apply it
were to reproach ye with dullness; only, what can come of our unnatural and
virulent distractions, but such hopes to our enemies, such fear to our selves;
joy to our enemies, sorrow to our selves; encouragement to our enemies,
disheartning to our selves; and finally triumph to our enemies, unprofitable
repentance to our selves? These things considered, it concerns us to cry
mightily unto the Lord, and with ardencie more then ordinary, to pray for the
peace of Jerusalem.

Pray that Jerusalem may be as a City at unity in it self: pray also that she
may have peace in her borders, peace with her neighbors: The word in the text
is (...) Jerusalem in the duall number, that is pray for the peace of the two
Ierusalems, pray for the peace of England and Scotland: That as we have one
land, one language; one religion, one King, one God; so we may be of one mind.
I speak not this out of pusillanimity, or any base fear of that most insolent
and most unexcusable enemy, for he carries the heart of a leveret in the
bosom of a man, that being superior to his adversary in cause, should be
inferior in courage; but I speak it out of compassion to my bleeding Country,
and out of horror and detestation of the infinite mischiefs of civil war,
rapes, ravages, proscriptions, depopulations, sacking, burning, killing, and a
world of miseries. O cast your sorrowful eyes upon the present lamentable
condition of England, lately one of the most happy, potent, rich, resplendent,
renowned regions in the world; now nothing but a great slaughterhouse, the
true representation of all the cruel and cursed effects of discord, the lively
picture of all deadly calamities; behold in all places what harms and havocke
war has made, and then join your acclamations with mine, O blessed, thrice
blessed be the Peacemakers.

I will conclude with a brief admonition, that Jerusalem would not put a bar
between Prayer and Peace. If prayer and religious duties (for prayer (...)
contains them all) be the most sure preservatives of peace while we have it,
and the most sovereign restoratives when we have lost it; then, by the Law of
contraries, sin and impiety is most destructive and obstructive of it.
Therefore let us not, as our manner is, shift off and transfer the fault, for
unless we had no sin our selves, why should we throw stones at others? but
let every one call himself to a strict account, descend into his own breast,
and there like Jonas asleep in the sides of the ship, he shall find the cause
of all these stormy commotions, his own sin and transgression: upon this
discovery, let him sadly weigh and deeply consider what it is to be guilty of
the deaths of so many thousands, guilty of the desolation of a most glorious
Church, guilty of the subversion of a most flourishing Kingdom: for to all
these every man's sin does make him accessory. For, as it appears by that
famous Dialogue between God and Abraham, Genesis 18.
if a Land be supported and saved by the righteousness of the Inhabitants,
then it is lost and ruined by the wickedness of them that dwell therein.
Righteousness and peace may kiss each other, but wickedness and peace cannot
dwell long together. I might present ye with a cloud of examples out of ancient
and modern, profane and divine story. How often in the book of Judges do
we read, again Israel committed wickedness in the sight of the Lord? and
again Israel committed wickedness in the sight of the Lord: and again, and
again, and toties quoties, Israel smarted for it, and were delivered into the
hands of their enemies. But why should I fetch in foreign Precedents, our
selves at the present being a fearful example of this truth to all the world?
For though we had a wall of water, Nah. 3.
the Sea for our wall, as Alexandria had; though we had a wall of wood, a
mighty Fleet, as Athens had; though we had had a wall of brass, as (they say)
time was, when we might have had; and a mighty rampire of mountains, as
Jerusalem had; yet sin so abounding within, centuplex murus rebus servandis
parum est, an hundred walls would not have kept the enemies out: no, nor the
Horses and Chariots of Elisha, our prayers were not able to guard us: For if we
regard iniquity in our hearts, the Lord will not hear us, says David: Why
should he hear us, who will not hear Him? Why should he give us audience, who
deny him obedience? Why should be respect our prayers, who dis-respect his
precepts? Qui orat and peccat, non orat Deum, sed deludit Deum, to sin and
pray, and pray and sin, is not devotion but delusion: Nay, for us to pray for
peace, who have abused it to his dishonor, and will not be reclaimed by War,
is impudens postulatio, a very impudent request. We know (says the blind man
in the Gospel) we know, as if it had been an increated notion, Joh. 9.
we know that God hears not sinners. If them we come before him with our
sins unrepented, with foul and contaminated consciences, lifting up impure
hands; pray we never so earnestly, Isai. 1.
Give peace in our time, O Lord; Speak peace unto us, O most gracious God,
Pacem te poscimus omnes; what answer can we expect, but some such as the
furious Iehu made to Iehoram? What peace, so long as your sins and iniquities
are so many? and then let fly his arrow and kill us all. Therefore, as God
directs ye by his Prophet, VVash ye, and make ye clean; cease to do evil,
and learn to do well: and then we may go with boldness to the throne of
heavenly grace: then come, and let us join the desires of our minds, and the
requests of our mouths; Let us with one heart, and one voice, Pray for the
peace of Jerusalem, that peace within her walls, and prosperity within her
palaces for ever and ever may dwell. Which the God and Father of peace grant,
for Jesus Christ's sake, who is our peace, through the Holy Ghost the bond of
peace: To which undivided Trinity, the glorious pattern, and bright mirror of
all peace and unity, be praise and honor now and ever.

FINIS.

