NEVVS FROM The Jews, Or a True RELATION OF A Great Prophet, In the Southern
parts of TARTARIA, pretending himself to be sent to gather together the JEWS
from all parts: as well the Ten Tribes that have so long absconded themselves
from the World; as the known Tribes of Judah and Benjamin: promising to them
the Restoration of the Land of Canaan, and all that they formerly enjoyed in
the time of King SOLOMON. As it was communicated to Rabbi Josuah ben Eleazar,
Merchant in Amsterdam, by a Letter from Adrianople.

Faithfully translated into English, By Josephus Philo-Judaeus, Gent.

WITH ALLOWANCE.

LONDON, Printed for A. G. Anno (...), 1671.

To Rabbi Josuah ben Eleazar, and the rest of our Brethren the JEWS in
Amsterdam, GREETING:
THat which we shall now write to you, (my beloved Brethren) is concerning the
hope of the Seed of Jacob, which for many Years has been looked for, and
expected by us all; but now is the time near at hand, for the Great JEHOVA has
raised up a Great Prophet, one Shilo Sabathi, a man whose birth and education
has been hitherto unknown to the Jews. But for your further satisfaction I
have here sent you the Copy of the Two Letters I received from Aleppo
concerning him.

The First Letter to Rabbi Corion ben Syrach, at Adrianople.
WE have a great rumor concerning a Prophet lately discovering himself in South
Tartary at the head of a considerable number of People unarmed, whose manners,
habits and language, differs from the people inhabiting in or near those parts;
the name of this Prophet or Leader is Shilo Sabathi, he is of a very tall
stature, of a comely and majestic countenance, the hair of his head is as
white as snow, and long, reaching down to his wast, and parted on the crown
after the manner of the Nazarites; his beard of the same color covering all
his breast; he wears a purple loose Garment, a Coronet wreathed with boughs of
trees upon his head, and carries a white wand in his hand: in fine he is
adorned with all that comeliness, as due color, order and proportion of parts
can make, that his body might be a fit Palace for his divine soul. When an Army
of the Tartars came to oppose them as invaders of their Land, his majestic
countenance did strike such a terror into their hearts, that they immedi^tely
threw away their weapons, and fell down at his feet, crying out Jeru, Jeru
Tartari* which in their language signifies O Jerusalem, the Remnant of
Jerusalem! Then Rabbi Shilo held up his stick toward them, and commanded them
to rise: saying, My Brethren, you are of the seed of Jacob as well as we; and
though the Great JEHOVAH has dispersed us throughout almost all parts of the
habitable World, because our Fathers disobeyed his Commandments, and worshipped
other Gods: yet that you may be assured that his anger will not last for ever,
he has sent me, Shilo Sabathi, to be your Captain or Leader to conduct you to
the Land of promise, where you shall enjoy all those mercies and privileges as
was enjoyed by our Nation in the Reign of King Solomon. For I am that Shilo you
so long expected, and now is the fullness of time come, that I should appear to
you, be therefore of good courage and follow me, and I will bring you to the
Land of your Fathers, I will lay the Foundations, of Jerusalem, and raise the
Walls thereof, rebuild the Temple of the Lord and make it more glorious then
that of Solomon's, which was but a type or shadow of mine. Fear not your
enemies; none shall oppose you. He told them likewise that about seven years
since he had sent one Saba Sabathi to prepare his way, but he was inhumanely
murdered by the Turks; for which they must expect some severe Judgments to
fall upon that Nation. He travels very slowly, but he daily increases his
Company; and suffers none to wear any offensive weapon proclaiming to them
nothing but Love and Peace.

What the product of this will be we cannot tell, but hope for the best.
Communicate this News only to those of our own Tribes, and not to the Gentiles
least they deride and mock at us.

I am your Friend and Brother. Moses ben Manasseh.
From Aleppo.

The Second Letter. To Rabbi Gorion ben Syrach at Adrianople.
WE have further confirmation of the Story concerning Rabbi Shilo; he has put
out a Declaration, wherein he gives the world an account of h^s, Birth,
Education, and the several passages of his Life, which, I suppose will come
shortly to my hands, and then you shall be sure to have a Copy of it by the
next post; In the mean time take this short account of it, as I had it from a
very good hand. He tells the world, that his Birth was about the year of the
world, 5547. And that as soon as he came of age to travel, he wandered about all
the habitable world, seeking and inspiring after the Twelve Tribes, that were
carried into Captivity by Salmanasar but could not find them, till such time as
it was revealed to him in a Vision* how he should come to the knowledge of
them, and that he should conduct them to Jerusalem. The manner of it was as
follows. Rabbi Shilo wearied with his tedious and unsuccessful travels, being
in the Deserts of Arabia, resolved now to live an obscure and holy Life, and
not to converse any longer with Men, but with God and Angels, and to this end
sought out some convenient place to inhabit, which Divine providence soon
favored him with, for he had not gone far before he spied a a very handsome
Cave, paved with Stone, and arched with curious Workmanship: Into this place he
entered, fell asleep, and saw a Vision; An Angel stood before him, whose
countenance was brighter than the Sun; and said unto him, Rabbi Shilo, Beloved
of Jehovah, Arise and follow me; and immediately smote him with a white Wand;
at which Rabbi Shilo awaked, and followed this celestial Messenger, who led him
through many Countries, and at last brought him to the side of a hill, where
was a Cave, whose mouth was stopped with Stones of a very large size, cemented
together so fast, that one might more easily have entered a Rock than the Cave:
But the Angel gave him a white Wand, and bid him strike the stones with it,
which he did, and immediately the stones tumbled down, then they both entered
the Cave, and in the midst of it they found a marble Chest, the Angel bids
Rabbi Shilo strike the top of the Chest with his Wand, at which it immediately
flew open; then the Angel bid him peruse the Writing he found in the Chest, and
so left him. Rabbi Shilo being troubled at the Angels so sudden departure,
sat musing, considering what to do; but recalling himself, and remembering the
words of the Angel, read the Writings. He looked into the Chest, and there
found a Book, a large roll of very ancient Vellom, and two Tables of Stone;
the Book was the Cabal that was given to Moses, by which he was informed of all
things done from the Creation till his time; and by it he writ the Penteteuch,
but it was again lost, and brought again to Esdras, and then lost again, being
conveyed into this place, where it remained till this time: The roll of
Parchment contained the Genealogy and Succession of the Tribes to this present
time, and in what Countries they are, and how they are dispersed and mixed with
the Gentiles. The Tables of Stone were the same that Moses brought down from
the Mount: After he had perused these Writings, according to the Angels
command, the Angel again appeared to him; and told him that now he had seen the
Cabal, he might write a true History of all things done since the Creation: And
by the roll of Vellom he might write the Genealogy of all the Twelve Tribes of
Israel; and bid him go and gather together the Tribes of Israel from the four
Corners of the Earth, and bring them to the Land of their Fathers; He told him
that none should resist them, but they should have free passage to the Holy
Land, and King's should be assistant to them in their Journeys, and contribute
largely to the rebuilding of Jerusalem, and the Temple of the Lord. Having said
this, the Angel again left him. This is what I have hitherto heard of his
Declaration, Be of good cheer, we hope to see a jeyful time; In the mean while,
I am,

Your Friend and Brother, Moses Ben Manasseh.
From Aleppo.

BY these Two Letters confirming the Story, I cannot but really believe the
truth of it. We do in our Synagogues here put up public Prayers to God in
behalf of the Prophet, that he would be pleased to assist him with a mighty Arm
in this great Work; and that he would hasten the gathering together of his
ancient People the Jews, that we may again sit under our own Vines and
Fig Trees. We hope you will not be wanting in your Synagogues in Amsterdam, to
pray for his success; and we desire likewise that you will communicate this
joyful News to all the Jews that inhabit in the countries about you, giving
them charge to keep it to themselves, and not reveal it to the Gentiles. But
all prepare to meet this Prophet, who will in a short time lay the Foundations
of Jerusalem, raise the Walls of the Temple: so shall we enjoy our ancient
Liberties, and be no longer in Bondage and Captivity amongst the Gentiles, but
shall be a free People; and all people shall come to our City to worship. Our
Love to all our Brethren. I remain

Your Loving Friend and Brother, Gorion ben Syrach.
From Adrianople.
FINIS.

