An incorruptible Key Composed of the CX. PSALM, WHEREWITH You may open the
rest of the holy Scriptures: Turning it self only according to the composure
and art of that lock, of the closure and secrecy of that great mystery of God
manifest in the flesh, but justified only by the spirit, which it evidently
opens and reveals, out of Fall and resurrection, Sin and righteousness,
Ascension and descension, Height and depth, First and last, Beginning and
ending, Flesh and spirit Wisdom and foolishness, Strength and weakness,
Mortality and immortality, Jew and Gentile, Light and darkness, Unity and
multiplication, Fruitfulness and barrenness, Curse and blessing, Man and woman,
Kingdom and Priesthood, Heaven and earth, Life and death, All sufficiency and
deficiency, God and man.


And out of every unity made up of twain, it opens that great twoleafed
gate, which is the sole entry into the City of God, or new Jerusalem, into
which none but the king of glory can enter: and as that porter opens the
door of the sheepfold, by which whosoever enters is the shepherd of the
sheep, See Isa. 45. 1. Psalm. 24. 7, 8, 9, 10. John 10. 1, 2, 3. Or (according
to the signification of the word translated Psalm) it is a pruning-knife, to
lop off from the Church of Christ all superfluous twigs of earthly and carnal
commandments, Lev^ticall services or Ministry, and fading and vanishing
Priests, or Ministers, who are taken away and cease, and are not established
and confirmed by death, as holding no c^rrespondency with the princely dignity,
office, and ministry of our Melchisidek, who is the only Minister and
Ministry of the Sanctuary, and of that true Tabernacle which the Lord pitched,
and not man. For, it supplants the old man, and implants the new: abrogates the
old Test^ment or Covenant, and confirms the new, unto a thousand generations,
or in generati^ns for ever.

By Samuel Gorton, Gent. and at the time of the penning hereof, in the place of
Judicature (upon Aquethneck, alias Road Island) of Providence Plantations in
the Nanhyganset Bay New England.

Printed in the Year 1647.

To the worthies Acts 5. 41 Ruth 4. 11. Mat. 10. 13 Rev. 3. 4.
and much honored in the Gospel Rev. 5. 9, 10. 2 Samuel 17. 10. Can. 3. 7. Ephesians.
4. 20, 21. Heb. 11. 34. 1 King. 18. 7
, those who occasioned the penning of this Treatise, by Letters out of the
Massachusetts John 7. 41.
, together with all our indeered and longed-after society, that love and have
learned the truth as it is in JESUS, in Providence Plantations in the
Nanhyganset Bay, New England:
Grace, mercy, and peace be multiplied to you 1 Pet. 1. 1, 2. Jude 2. ver.
Psalm. 69. 35. 36. Psalm. 102. 28. Psalm. 89. 29
and your offspring for evere.
Dearly beloved in the Lord,
THough in the eye of the world you seem to be strangers, scattered abroad
throughout Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia 1 Pet. 1. 1.
, yet are you as those twelve Tribes scattered abroad, unto whom our great
Apostle and high Priest Heb. 3. 1.
daily sends greeting James 1. 1
, whereby you are with those twleve Tribes (under hope of the promise)
encouraged instantly to serve God day and night Act. 22. 7.
, and for which hopes sake, though you be often drawn before the rulers of this
world, and accused by such as say they are Jews but are not Rev. 2. 9. Rev. 3
9.
, yet is it for no other end, but that the Lord, by leading you through
Heathenish Nations, may thereby instruct you in the signification of all voices
that are in the world, that so you may utter in them all the praises of him
that has called you out of darkness into his mavelous light 1 Pet. 2. 9.
; for there are so many kinds of voices in the world, and none is without its
proper signification; so that if we knew not the meaning of the^ voice, we
should be as Barbarians one to another, in our expressions, and receptions of
the things of God 1 Cor. 14. 10, 11.
.

Observe therefore, that the changes the Saints pass through in this life, is
only to give them the knowledge of all voices and sounds, that so they may
speak by revelation, by knowledge, by prophesying, and by Doctrine 1 Cor, 13.
6.
for things without life give a sound unto us whether pipe or harp 1 Cor. 14. 7.
, even the courses the world holds with us in this life, who are dead in sins
and trespasses Ephe. 2. 1, 2
, and have no life of Christ in them at all Romans 1. 12. 12. John 6. 53.
, yet even these give a certain and distinct sound unto us, that we stand in
readiness prepared for the battle, and know very well what is piped and
harped 1 Cor. 14. 7, 8.
. So that when the world thinks it is confounding us by their Babilonish
conference and courses held with us, they are then contrary to their own
nature, ability and intentions, instructing and teaching us in the high things
of God Romans 8. 28
, and howsoever they are in a babilonish confusion Genesis 11. 7, 8, 9.
, yet does their voice or voices give a certain and distinct sound unto us 1
Cor. 14. 7, 8.
, so that we are not terrified by our adversaries in these their practices,
which is to them an evident token of perdition, but to us of salvation and that
of God Phil. 1. 28.
; for it is evident and apparent, that God is our salvation, and not the power
and policy of the world which does nothing else but seek our ruin Psalm. 137. 7,
8, 9.
.

But you know the hand of the Lord upon our adversaries, amongst whom he has
brought us in every place Act. 20. 21, 22.
, who have sought our hurt Psalm. 38. 12. Psalm. 41. 7.
, and wrested our words to effect their ends Psalm. 56. 5
, the more they have struck at us, the more they have broke themselves in
pieces in the ways of their Covenants and Combinations, in the ways of their
Assemblies and Associations in which they delighted to put such confidence and
trust, which appear in the eyes of all to be but as that broken reed of
Egypt, whereon if a man lean it will go into his hand and pierce it Isa. 36. 6.
.

So that you may sing with the Psalmist a hymn of praise, wherever the Lord
has led you, saying, there brake he the arrows of the bow, the shield and
the sword, and the battle, Selah: thou art more glorious and excellent then
the Mountains of prey, the stout-hearted are spoiled, they have slept their
sleep and none of the men of might have found their hands Psalm. 76. 3 4, 5.
.

Freely therefore can I make choice of you to patronize this small Treatise or
Epistolium, if now were the time that natural breath should no longer preserve
this present life Genesis 46. 33.
; for there are two things necessary in the patronage, defense, or Protection
of any thing.

First, that the Patron be wise and able to judge of the state and condition of
the thing patronized to give it its due respect, worth and usefulness,
according to its nature and relation.

Secondly, he must be furnished with ability to answer all objections that may
be made to invalid, weaken or innervate that which is committed unto him to
be patronaged, defended and spoken for: in both which respects it is joyfully
presented unto you, being very sensible and willingly acknowledging that God
has made you instruments not only to consent unto and conclude upon, but also
to teach and instruct me in these or such like principles from the Word of the
Lord unto my edification and comfort, therefore cannot but be able (through
God) to discern the nature, benefit, and use of them.

And for the answering of objections that might be made by any Adversary, I
doubt not, knowing very well, that when you have been in your solemn
exercises, gaine-sayers being present, and when you have been brought to
answer before worldly Governors, Church Assemblies, and Jewish Senedrions,
there has not appeared a spirit able to resist or gainsay that wisdom and
spirit by which you have spoken Act. 6. 10
, which spirit utters it self freely without respect of Persons Romans 2. 11.
Acts 10. 34 35.
in all the Congregations and Assemblies of Saints, giving words for
edification and comfort of the Church sometimes in one, and sometimes in
another, that all flesh may be silent before him Zach. 2. 12, 13.
, and only listen unto the Oracle of God by whom be is pleased to utter it 1
Pet. 4. 11.
; for ye may all prophecy one by one for the edification of the Church, but if
any thing be revealed to another that sits by, let the first hold his peace 1
Cor. 14. 29, 30, 31.
, and that is the order of the Churches of the Saints, or of that great Saint
or holy one of Israel, for God is not of confusion like that way of Babel To
speak every one a several language.
, but of peace, or as the word signifies, of unity, for every Saint is one
with, and has a like share in every particular grace uttered or exercised in
the Church; in case the lamps in the Temple be trimed Exodus 27. 20.
, and the boules of the golden candlesticks rightly filled by those two pipes
that empty themselves into them Zech. 4. 11, 12, 13, 14.
, otherwise if we find the Ministry of the Word so monopolized, that it is
tied unto one in the Church, more then to any other, or all the rest, (which
one cannot be justified to be the head of the Church, which is the prerogative
royal of the Son of God, that great heards-man, shepherd, and feeder of
Israel Psalm. 80. 1. Psalm. 23. 1. Ioh. 10. 11, 12, 13, 14. Genesis 49. 24.
) then may we know that in that place vision fails Isa. 28. 7. Ezekiel. 7. 26.
Ezekiel. 13. 6, 7.
, yea the light of the Sanctuary is gone out, for they have hewn out unto
themselves a Ministry, divination, and vision, by the art, wisdom, and will
of man, prostrating themselves thereunto, depending upon man, and not on the
Son of God, who utters himself in whom he pleases, choosing the foolish
things of the world to confound the wise 1 Cor. 1. 27, 28
, so that we may plainly discern, that in such ways of Ministry the people
sits in darkness, and under the shadow and regiment of death Ier. 6. 4. Mat.
4. 15. 16. Isa. 9. 1, 2.
, and are in that condition the Prophet speaks of, behold the people borrow
much, but they never pay again, whereas the righteous is merciful and gives
liberally Psalm. 37. 21.
like unto the two daughters of the Horse-leech, they cry give, give Prove. 30.
15.
, are always in want and necessity of hearing, but never bring forth any thing
to give again in publishing the riches of the Gospel to their brethren, they
never pay again, as though the word were not to be put forth unto the
exchangers Mat. 25. 27, 28, 29
, and binds them over to return it with increase and advantage. Of that sort
are these (that tie the Ministration of the Gospel to any particular man in
the Congregation) which our Apostle speaks of, that are ever learning and
never come to the knowledge of the truth 2 Timothy 3. 6, 7, 8.
, ever borrowing, but never found paying again Psalm. 37. 21.
.

These think and boast, they receive the Word with great joy, and
cheerfulness, and with no small engagements for the maintenance of him that
brings it, that he may live upon the Gospel that preaches it; but if it
should be brought by such as look to live on it indeed 1 Cor. 9. 13, 14.
, that is, when they preach unto a people, they expect that fruit, crop and
harvest of the grace of God to arise amongst them, and appear in that glorious
manifestation of that abundant and rich grace of God in Christ in every of the
Saints, which is the very life, comfort, and sole satisfaction of him that
speaks it, and the only tie and cause of his abode and stay amongst them: if
the Gospel from a spirit that looks only for livelihood in such things ( in
the matters of God) appear, then will these carnal framers and erecters of
Ministers and Ministries prove Jannes and Jambres to resist the truth, for then
is the time to manifest and show themselves 2 Timothy 3. 8, 9.
, as of old men of the same mind did in Egypt, and also in the wilderness
Exodus 7. 11, 12, 13. Numb. 16. 1, 2, 3, 4.
in their wresting of it.

But, Oh how happy a thing it is (as you know, for I appeal unto you herein)
for brethren to live together in unity Psalm. 13 3. 1.
! for so the word is, that is, to see themselves so united in the Sonship of
God, as to have an equal share, right and interest in every particular grace
of the Gospel, be it what it is or may be, otherwise they can never
acknowledge themselves to be equal sharers of death, and in every particular
misery thereof through the fall, which is to deny that by nature we are all
alike Ephesians. 2. 1, 2, 3.
and so overthrowes the grace and blessing of the Gospel: for, the one sets
forth the truth of Christ's death, and the other the glory of his resurrection,
and if we give not each of these its due, we spoil the Sonship that is of God,
both unto our selves and those that hear us 1 Cor. 8 11. Romans 14. 15
. But the unity of the Saints is through that holy unction upon the head, even
our spiritual Aaron Psalm. 45. 7
, and also upon his beard Psalm. 133. 1. 2.
, that is, it multiplies its self as the hairs upon the head Psalm. 40. 12.
Mat. 10. 30.
, yea, upon the border or collar of the garment, viz. strongly binding and
uniting the whole vestment together, that no rent nor schism can befall it, or
he found in it, else do we not hold the head which by joints and bonds tieth
and coupleth the whole body together to be one, and so it increases with the
augmentations of God Col. 2. 19.
; that word translated increase or augmentation, signifies to advance or to
grow together, so that we are increased, or advanced together with the Son of
God, and according to that fullness, growth, or advancement of the Son of God;
such does our Apostle reckon and account ours to be, for according to the
advancement and fullness of his death, such is ours 2 Cor. 1. 5
, and we know that he was lifted up, and triumphed upon the Cross Ioh. 3. 14.
Col. 2. 15.
, which death admits of no increase or diminution, for it is full according to
the fullness of him that fills all things Ephesians. 1. 2. 3
, so also according to the fullness of the advancement of his resurrection and
ascension, such is ours Romans 8. 17
, and we know, that our Mediator is made higher then the heavens Heb. 7 26
, so that they that teach degrees in the house of God, and in the grace of the
Gospel from such Scriptures as these, they teach perfection by the Law, by
which no flesh can be justified Gal. 2. 16.
, for if righteousness were by the Law then Christ died in vain Gal. 2. 21.
, such kind of Ministers neither know how sin is taken away by the Son of God,
nor how the righteousness of the Son of God is made that righteousness that
justifies sorry man; for he takes away our sin by becoming that in us that is
miserable unto the uttermost Heb. 7, 25.
, and not in way of any gradation at all, and we are blessed in him by becoming
one with that righteousness that is perfection in the height thereof Heb. 7. 26
, which knows nor can admit of any graduall distinction at all, being the
righteousness of him who is God over all, blessed from eternity to eternity
Romans 9. 5.
, and such righteousness and perfection can only give the spirit of man
content, for if he can comprehend it and go beyond either in looking forward or
backward, he makes an and of his happiness and is at a loss in himself.

So that the weights and measures of the Sanctuary Deuteronomy. 25. 13, 14, 15, 16.
Exodus 16, 36, Prove. 20. 10
, namely of that Sanctuary the Lord pitcheth and not man Heb. 8. 2.
, are upon terms of certainty for the truth of them, as also of fullness for
the perfection of them Joh. 1. 14. 16. Col. 1. 19. Col. 2. 9, 10
, for there is in the house of God stone and stone, Epha and Epha, as the words
are in the places quoted, that is, one bigger and heavier then another, and one
less and lighter then another, for there is not a greater measure of
humiliation and a lesser in this house, for there is but one humiliation of one
Son of God; so also there is not a greater and a lesser exaltation in this
house, for there is but one exaltation of that one Son of sorry man, there is
not a greater and lesser sanctity and holiness in this house, for it is but
one sanctity or holiness of that one Saint or holy one of Israel Psalm. 71. 22.
Psalm. 89. 18
, there is not a larger and more specious wisdom, and one of a narrower
scantling to be mentioned in this house, for it is that one only wisdom of
him that is only wise 1 Timothy 1. 17.
, that is to be the only word 1 Cor. 12. 8.
, and only to be justified in the house of the Lord Mat. 11. 19.
; there is not a more famous redemption and deliverance and one of a lesser and
more inferior nature to be heard of in this Assembly, for it is a ransom not
by any corruptible thing, but by the precious blood of that undefiled Son of
God 1 Pet. 1. 18 19, 20.
, for it is he who of God is made unto us or as the word is in us all these
things 1 Cor. 1. 30.
, that according as it is written, he that rejoices let him rejoice in the
Lord, or as the words are, he that praises himself, let him praise himself
in the Lord 1 Cor. 1. 31.
, that so the glory may be given to him and not unto our selves Psalm. 115. 1.
; if then the vision do appear unto us as to our spiritual Jacob, we see it
extended from heaven to earth, and from earth to heaven, from the highest
excellency of the Son of God to the lowest and deepest misery of the Sons of
men, and from the lowest misery of the sons of men to the highest glory and
dignity of that Son of God Genesis 28. 12, 13.
; such is the Ioh. 1. 51.
ascension and descention of the Angels upon that son of man, that is, the
message or Ministry of the Gospel is such in all the Revelation and Embassage
thereof, as descends from the highest to the lowest, and ascends from the
lowest unto the highest, and then only do we anoint the head stone as a
pillar, or stable and firm state and condition of holiness unto the Lord Genesis
28. 18
, and give it the name of Bethell, even the house and dwelling place of the
Lord for ever Genesis 28. 19.
, of such substance and certainty as to become pillars in the house of God
Revel. 3. 12.
, and to be made an habitation for God for ever Ephesians. 2. 21. 22.
are the matters of this Kingdom Romans 14. 17.
.

And in this point is the world much deceived, in our seeming high-flown
Professors or Phanaticks of these times, who think the Revelation of Christ
stands in some strange apparition, which is such a new thing unto the Spirit of
God in that man, that others that have the Spirit Romans 8. 9.
may not attain thereunto: But whatsoever is revealed unto the Saints of the
true knowledge of Jesus Christ, it is a thing familiarly known unto the
Spirit, who is acquainted with the deep things of God 1 Cor. 2. 10. Romans 8. 27.
, and in that respect all things in the Word of God are old Commandments given
unto us, which we have known from the beginning, and so there is no newness
in it at all 1 Ioh. 2. 7.
, neither is there any thing in the Word of God but to the spirit of man Romans
8. 16
is a new thing, strange and wonderful as though it had never appeared before
1 Cor. 2. 9, 10.
, and in that respect the whole Word of God in every particular thereof, is a
new Commandment given or written unto us, and so it is true in him, and also
in us 1 Ioh. 2. 8.
, for if darkness in us do not pass away, the light cannot be made manifest,
and so the truth consists in God and man, in light and darkness, the one
passing away that the other may appear and be made manifest.

Of such grace, truth, and certainty is the Gospel, that it is not without
man, which is the ballancing and setting the soul upon its true base and sure
foundation for ever 1 Cor. 3. 11.
; so that the Revelation of Christ in the Church is not as a phantasma or
uncertain vision that comes and goes upon dubious terms, lifting up to heaven
whilst it abides, but when it is gone no such matter, but the visions of God
are the manifestations of the Son of God upon grounds and terms of
infallability and certainty, as when we see the light to be light, and know it
to be so from the nature and operation of darkness, all the world cannot make
us think it is some other thing, nor can we approve of him that goes about to
persuade us thereunto; of such like certainty are the visions and revelations
of the Gospel, therefore do the Saints of God bear witness unto the things of
God as of that which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we
have seen with these our eyes, which we have looked upon, and these hands of
ours have handled of that word of life 1 John 1. 1.
, for that light was made manifest, and we have seen it, and bear witness,
and show unto you that eternal life which is with the Father, and is made
manifest unto us, or as the word is, in us 1 Ioh. 1. 2 Gal. 1. 16.
.

So that the goings up, the departures or going away of the visions of God is
not a leaving of the souls of the Saints at a loss for a time, or vacant and
destitute of his presence, it is but a distinct and gracious change of the
vision, administration, or apparition from one glory unto another 2 Cor. 3. 18.
, for the perpetual delight and refreshing of the Saints, so that when vision
seems to cease in one distinct and particular respect, the soul is filled in
another particular and distinct respect, which always keeps the heart of a
Christian in its approach unto and familliarity with his maker, and every
distinct way of Gods manifestation having the weight of heaven in it he finds a
glorious entrance into the Kingdom, and Regiment of a dear or only son 2 Pet.
1. 11. Col. 1. 13.
, and cannot be at a loss of the love of the Father, nor laid waste and
emptied of the blessing of his presence Isai. 63. 9. Isai. 43 2.
, no more then the Son of God can lose (for a moment) the light and luster of
that continuance which is one and the same with himself Ioh. 17. 22. Ioh. 14.
9. 10. Ioh. 15, 19, 20, 21.
.

These things I make bold to put you in remembrance of not as to inform you,
knowing you have them in that shore-house and treasury which is your own,
which the world knows not of, neither does it know you, nor can it acknowledge
the one, nor the other, for the abundant riches of this treasury is Christ, in
you the hope of glory Col. 7. 27. 2 Cor. 4: 6, 7:
, and we know that as he is so are we even in this world 1 Ioh. 11. 4. 17.
.

For we know that the Son of God is come, or sprung up, as the word signifies,
in his Saints, and has given us a mind to know him which is true, that is,
has set up a light 1 Cor. 4. 5
in our minds to acknowledge him only that is truth and substance and no vain
shadow nor ceremony at all Ioh. 1. 17.
, and we are in him that is true in that his Son Jesus Christ, that is, we are
of him that is truth, and of that his Son Jesus Christ, that is, of that
lineage, race, and offspring of him Act. 17. 28, 29.
, and so it answers to the former Verse, the whole world is of that wicked one,
for so the word is 1 Ioh. 5. 19.
, this is the true God or this is the verity of God, and everlasting life, in
that way of multiplying of himself by Jesus Christ, without whom no verity,
truth, nor certainty of God appears unto the creature Ioh. 14. 6. Mat. 11. 27
, little children, babes, or Idiots, as the word signifies, that is, children
in respect of any estimation or dependence you have of the things of this
present life; Idiots in regard of any knowledge or skill you have of the things
of God and matters of eternal life; (as of your selves) keep your selves from
Idols, that is, look diligently unto your selves that you esteem not of, nor
depend upon those false Christ's Mar. 13. 22. Ma. 24. 24.
and carnal worships which the world has vainly formed and molded up unto
themselves Ioh. 4. 22. 2 King. 17, 28, to 34.
; so are you hence forth no more children but are met together in the unity of
faith, and acknowledgement of the Son of God, in a perfect man, in the measure
of the age of the fullness of Christ, in whom all the body being coupled and
knit together in every joint for the furnishing of it self, according to that
effectual power in the measure of every part, receives increase of the body
in the edifying of it self in love 1 John 5. 19, 20. Ephe. 4. 13, 14, 16.
, AMEN.

Yours in that only and alone bond that lasts for ever in all services of
love, in life and death according to the faith of the Gospel. Samuel Gorton.

To the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
MY request is that two things may be observed in thy pursuing of this ensuing
Treatise.

First, the occasion of the penning of it.

Secondly, some cautions in the reading of it.

For the first, the Author having had to do with the men of the Massachusetts,
and other peoples and Collonies united in New England ( as a small Treatise
entitled, Simplicities Defense, does faithfully declare) shortly after his
return unto his family, in the Nanhyganset Bay, some of the most eminent and
approved Church Members among them of the Massachusetts, writ Letters to the
Author to this effect:

SIR,
SInce your departure from amongst us, M. John Cotton, Teacher of the Church of
Boston, has taken occasion to expound the hundred and tenth Psalm, in the
reading of it, we thought there were diverse glimpses of that light which
shines in our Lord Jesus, appeared unto us. But in his handling of it, and
glosses which he gave upon it, we thought the light and truth of Christ was
rather darkened and obscured by him, then any ways cleared and brought forth in
the Church.

We entreat you therefore, that as the Lord gave us no little satisfaction and
comfort in your opening of the Scriptures unto us both by word and writing,
whilst he was pleased, to keep you here amongst us, so you will now be pleased,
to take the pains to write unto us (with what speed you can) what your
thoughts may be of that Psalm, as God shall manifest unto you the sense and
meaning thereof; in the mean time we wait in a continued expectation,
earnestly desiring our hopes in this particular may not be deferred, blessing
the Lord that his good hand of providence brought you amongst us, though men
propounded other ends unto themselves, which God has prevented in the issue,
and beautified you through deliverance, bless we the Lord, Amen.

Your unfeigned friends, much indeered.


Their names are concealed of purpose to quench, or at the least keep under
heart-burnings, which otherwise might break out, for the divisions of Ruben,
that elder brother after the flesh, that always goes up unto his fathers bed
and defiles his couch, are great thoughts of heart Iug. 5. 15, 16. Genesis 49. 3. 4
. When ever Deborah, and Barack do appear Judge. 4. 6.
, that is, according to the signification of their names, when ever that Word
that comes as lightning Mat. 24. 26, 27.
, is revealed and made manifest in the world.

Upon the reading of the Letter above said, the Author took pen and paper and
immediately went about to answer the desires and expectations of his friends,
and when it was writ, it was much desired to be put in print, for ease in
reading, and view of all in those parts who had so lately proceeded against the
Author in point of conscience and worship of God, and laid things to his
charge which never man heard from him Psalm. 5. 11. Psalm. 56. 5.
, but in many things directly contrary to that which they affirmed, and
therefore was persuaded beyond his own thoughts in the writing of it, to let it
go to the press, being that he never desires to write any thing privately to
any in the matters of God, that he would not freely publish before any in the
world, knowing that the Word of God is as free, supereminent, and void of all
danger, to take hold of every heart in the world, as the Sun in the firmament
is in its course to take hold of every creature here below on the earth, and
manifest its operation upon the same Psalm. 19 4, 5 6. Romans 10. 18 Romans 13. 1, 2
, therefore the Apostle says, let every soul be subject to the supereminent
power, for so the word is rightly rendered, implying a power that depends upon
nothing for support, but has prerogative and privilege over and above all,
which is proper to that Word or Son of God, whom that Scripture teaches as all
others do, though applied according to the Letter 2 Cor. 3 6
to the Civil Magistrate, yet according to the life and spirit of the
Scripture it cannot have its proper scope and end in him, for Christ is the end
of all Law of relations in point of that righteousness that indures for ever,
which is in every one that believes Romans 10. 4
, so that the translators sometimes wrong the Text in that word translated
Magistrate, as in Titus the 3. Chap. Ver. 1. Put them in mind to be subject to
principalities and powers, to obey Magistrates, the word there translated
Magistrate, is truly read the Ruler in submission, which is properly appliable
unto Christ, of whose Kingdom and Rule there shall be no end Dan. 4 3.
in way of supereminency and submission, for as he is God he rules over all
things Psalm. 8 6, 7, 8, 9.
, and as he is man, he submits unto the will of the Father in all things Luke
22. 42.
, so that rule and submission is founded in one and the same substance and
being, and shall continue and abide so for ever in Christ: So that where ever
the Word of God is revealed, there is not only submission in the messenger
unto the will of God. in whatever befalls him for the name of Christ Luke 622,
23.
, but there is also in the Word of God a supereminency and authority to rule,
succeed well, and have dominion in whatsoever he submits and subjects himself
unto the Will of the Father Prove. 17 8. Psalm, 1. 3. Psalm. 122. 6, 7, 8.
; so that the work of the men of this world in dealing with the people of God
in matters of the Worship of God, is nothing else but to knock themselves in
pieces, and the faster they strive to stand, the more they stumble and fall
upon that stone of stumbling, and rock of offense Esa. 8. 14, 15. Romans 9. 33. 1
Pet. 2. 7, 8.
; for whosoever takes upon him to redress things between God and the
conscience any otherwise but by revealing of that light of the knowledge of
God, in the face of Jesus Christ 2 Cor. 4. 6, 7.
, even as the Sun lends his beams unto the earth for the well ordering and
growth of all things here below, he may as well interpose his own wisdom,
power and authority between the humane nature and divine in Christ, and ascribe
unto himself the glory of the work in the unity of them both, which glory God
will not give unto another Esa. 42. 8. Esa. 48. 11.
, therefore must it be irreligious and Antichristian, once to attribute it unto
the Sons of men; so long then as we know and hold the supereminency and
subjection in the things of God, yea that ruler in submission to be one, so
long we fear not to publish and proclaim unto the world what ever is revealed
unto us in the Word of God, which is according to godliness, and carries in it
the mind of the Lord, who knows how to maintain his own cause, and justify
wisdoms words in whomsoever spoken and made known Mat. 11. 19


The occasion then of penning of this Treatise, was M. John Cotton his
preaching, not giving satisfaction to all that heard him upon this Psalm: the
ground of the printing of it is an indifferent eye in the Author unto all men
in the things of God, who desires to manifest God to be true, and every man a
liar Romans 3. 4.
, not having men's persons in admiration for advantage Iud. 16.
knowing that there is not one that does good, no not one Romans 3. 8.
, nor fearing any that is not a lover of truth, for it is God that justifies,
who then shall condemn Romans 8. 33
? For, truth makes free in the publication of it Ioh. 8. 32, 34.
, for when the Sonship is declared, it makes free, and if the Son makes us
free, then are we free indeed Ioh. 8. 36.
: Therefore does this present it self unto thy view, and looks upon thee with
an eye that shall judge the secrets of thy heart, and duly observe thy
rejection or acceptance of it, according to the motions of thy mind, in all
the outgoings and operations thereof; and thus much for the occasion of
penning, and ground of printing of this ensuing Treatise.

Now for the cautions to be observed in reading of this Treatise, First,
consider of that great mistake in the Ministry of the world, in judging of the
state and differing condition of mankind in this world, teaching the works of
the Law for the righteousness of faith, and embracing the works and
operations of men in point of Religion accordingly, and so prefer the
firstborn after the flesh to be the only acceptable one in their societies
and Churches, etc. judging of all they receive and rejoice in, even as they
think of that elder brother after the flesh in that History, or rather Parable
of the prodigal Luke 15.
; for they think the elder brother kept himself in an excellent condition, in
comparison of the prodigal, whereas the truth is, the descention and
humiliation, as also the ascension and exaltation of Jesus Christ are taught in
the prodigal, and that pharisaicall righteousness of the Justiciaries of this
world, is set forth unto us in the condition and carriage of that elder
brother, and the employments of the Churches in these days so acceptable unto
many, according as they have composed themselves in several forms, is nothing
else but that honored field-labour of that firstborn after the flesh, which
ever ends in murmuring and grudging at the bounty of the Father, unto him that
has made himself of no reputation, to return in our nature into the wealth
and glory of the father Phil. 6. 7, 8, 9.
, which kind of Sonship that ends in the flesh, always keeps it self at home
in its own righteousness and performances, through his vain opinionated
keeping of the Commandments of the father Luke 15. 29.
, and that by his vilifying and disgracing of others Luke 15, 30.
, still being upon the terms of stand by thy self, I am holier then thou Esa.
65. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
, who cannot endure the return of him who was dead but is alive, that was lost
but is found Luke 15. 24. Revel. 1. 18 Rev. 2. 8. Mat. 18. 11.
, they being always such as anger and fill themselves with wrath Luke 15. 28.
, from that bounty and goodness of the Father, to him who has so descended
out of the bosom of the Father into that base and servile condition, which the
rich Citizens and farmers of this world put him unto Luke 15, 15.
; for he made his grave with the wicked and with the rich in his death Esa. 53
9.
, and therefore has be a portion with the great, and divides the spoil with
the strong Esa. 53. 12
, because he powered out his soul unto death in his return unto life in the
bosom of the Father Lu. 15. 17, 18, 19, 20.
: So that the elder brother is angry when he hears of that melody and dancing
in the house, and habitation of the Father and the Son Luke 15. 15.
, upon that joyful return of the Son or happy translation of death into life,
not being able to behold that rich robe of righteousness to be put upon him,
that has wasted and consumed that whole patrimony of man's own righteousness,
which that elder brother ever delights in and depends upon Luke 15. 29, 30.
Mat. 5. 20
, and thinks there is no righteousness that can exceed the righteousness of
the Scribes and Pharisees Luke 15. 9 10, 11, 12.
, and therefore will not put on the Lord Jesus Christ Romans 13. 14.
, that righteousness which is by faith in the Son of God Phil. 3. 9.
, only is wrath and irefull at them that have it, and takes care only how to
make provisions for the flesh Romans 13. 14.
, nor can they endure that upon that hand, or Ministry of the Son Psalm. 77. 20
, there should appear that Ring or ornament which is of such form as no end
thereof can be found Luke 15 22. Rev. 14. 6
, and for those shoes put upon his feet which is the preparation of the Gospel
of peace Ephesians: 6: 15:
, namely that courage and fortitude of the Sons of God, it is an offense unto
all such as wait for superiority in the way of the flesh, who are ever offended
if smooth and soft words be not spoken, and much crouching and cringing to any
thing that seems eminent to the flesh, or in the way of man's judgment Col. 2.
16. 17. 18.
, and therefore will needs set it up in the worship of their God Col. 2. 20,
21, 22, 23.
.

Neither can they abide the fat Calfe which is killed, the only refreshing and
mirth both of Father and Son Luke 15. 23, 24, 25.
, which is killed and crucified concerning the flesh 1 Pet. 3. 18
. So that nothing of the Spirit and livelihood of that is left at all. But so
full, lively, and fat of the life, spirit and power of God, that it gives
plenary satisfactioon, fullness of delight, mirth, and consolation to all those
that once have a true taste, and enjoyment thereof Joh. 1. 16. Ephesians. 3. 10. Col.
1. 19. Col. 2. 9. Psalm. 19. 10. Psalm. 119. 103.
. Now the Churches of New England, with all such as stand upon the like
foundation, and are in like relation unto the Father, as that elder brother
was, and ever is; laboring in the field of their own home-made covenants, and
performances, cannot endure to come into the house where such mirth, melody,
and fullness is; Nor can they communicate with any who keep such Festivities:
For it blasphemes, or strikes through their Pharisaical keeping of the
commandments Luke 18. 21 Luke 15. 29
, pierceing through all the glory and goodlinesse of man Isa. 40. 6. 7.
: That so the glory and grace of our God may spring up and appear Ephesians. 3. 19.
. And they can no more leave their own natural propensity, in desiring the
glory of a creature to be their excellency and dignity, nor desire or incline
after the other, then the earth can forsake its own natural and ponderous
condition to incline after, or lift up it self in such sort as to become one of
those glorious lights, and heavenly bodies.

Therefore it is their proper and natural delight to hold their feast with the
leven of maliciousness 2 Cor. 5.
: scandalizing and crying down all those that cannot hold that unjust length
and breadth together with themselves, as persons not only unworthy of their
society, in their hewn-out, formed, molded and self-polished covenants and
ordinances; but also do look upon them and act in their utmost endeavors
toward them, as such persons whom they cannot (in their hearts) afford a place
of residencie and abode upon the face of the earth Psalm. 83. 4. Psalm. 83. 4.
.

Observe therefore, that the whole scope of this Treatise declines the setting
of the crown and dignity, in the matters of God, upon the head of that brother,
who beautifies and enricheth himself with the things of man, such excellencies
which man by his skill and industry may attain unto, who will not only murmr
at the glory of another Luke 15. 28. Luke 15. 2. Matt. 20.
, but shed the blood of his innocent brother, in case he once get power and
authority into his hand, if he can but draw him aside into the field, where his
own superiority according to the things of man, appears, and the face of our
heavenly Father shines not, which is always in such a field, where the fruit
of the ground is offered in sacrifice; namely, earthly, momentany, corruptble
and fading things Genesis 4. 8. Genesis 4. 3. Genesis 4. 1 4 Col. 2. 20, 21, 22, 23.
.

But the drift of this Treatise is, to set the Diadem upon the head of that
contemned and despised one in the eyes of all flesh Isa. 53. 3.
, ( in all the ways of their carnal worships, contracts, and practices, which
are spotted with the flesh Jude 23.
:) but the chiefest of ten thousand in the eyes of the Father, the only
begotten of the Father, yea his delight and solace for ever Cant. 5. 10 John 1.
14. 18. John 3. 16. 18. Prove. 8. 30. 31.
.

Secondly, in perusing of this Book, walk by it as by a river, or fountain
running; in what point it pitcheth upon, and comprehend, and gather up together
in thy mind, both the beginning and conclusion of the matter it treats of, as
a silfull Mathematician brings the Heaven and the earth together, when he uses
his Art to know the height and latitude he is then in, by his observation; for
it is not Bucketted up in such particulars, as the Art of man uses to bring
things into, to take with the natural and artificial spirit of the reader and
auditor: which no doubt has been a great reason of dividing of Histories,
prophesies, and Epistles in the word of God, into so many chapters; whereas
indeed the whole matter of the History, Prophesies, or Epistle, ought to be
gathered up, and looked upon together, else the scope and drift, root and
branch, do not appear unto us as a true and infallible vision, and so we
become not Seers with the Prophet Samuel 1 Samuel 9. 9. 11. 18, 19.
, and the rest of the holy men of God 1 Chronicles. 33. 18. 19. Isai. 30. 2 Pet. 1.
20. 21.
, But rather utter that Spirit of Saul in that condition, when vision fails,
when he says, Seek me a woman that has a familiar Spirit 1 Samuel 28. 7.
. The words translated, woman having a familiar Spirit, are in the Original,
Baal Oboth, as if he should say, bring me hither Baal Oboth, that is, bring me
hither the Lord in a Bottle, or the Lord bottled up, that is, such a Ministry
as is not as a fountain of life Psalm. 6. 9.
, or as a well springing up unto, or (in) or by an everlasting life John 4. 14.
, declaring hereby what that Ministry of the Law is, or that artificial
worship that is acquired by that art and ability, the principles whereof man
naturaly has implanted in himself, which always buckets, or bottles up the
things of God; so as he can bring them forth at his pleasure, and so stores up
Sermons and prayers, to fit persons, times and seasons, so as to please and
give content to natural understanding and reason Isai. 5. 20. 21, 22. 23.
Mich. 3. 11.
, which always has an high estimation of the Traditions of its fathers Mat.
15. 3. 6 Col. 2. 8. Mark 7. 8. 9 Gal. 11. 14.
; and vilifies the command, streams and riveret of the City of God Psalm. 46. 4.
, and from this bottled up spirit, or bottled up she Lord; for the word is of
the feminine gender, noting the ways and works of the flesh; and hence
arises all your pocketed up Sermons, and composed and treasured up Academical
Comodies and Tragedies, which can be kept in store to bring out at their
pleasure, as though they could Lord it over the holy word and Spirit of God, in
its incommings and outgoings in the revelation of the mind of the Father 1
Ioh. 5. 7. 2 Timothy 2. 9. Mat. 10. 19. 20.
, through Jesus Christ. Whereas the Saints of God changed from the Spirit of
Saul Acts 9. 4.
, to the spirit of Paul Gal. 1. 11. 12, 15, 16, 17.
, which always forgets the things that are behind, and reaches out to those
things which are before Phil. 3. 13.
, that is, the things that have passed through my heart and hand, in way of the
ministry of the Gospel, they are forgotten, that is, they are to me as though
they had never been, in regard of any skill or ability that is in me to gather
them up, call them in, and bring them into use again, either for my own profit
and comfort, or for the fruit and benefit of the Church, but am wholly at the
good will and pleasure of him that gave them [in] at the first, to bring them
again, and to give them their proper measure, weight, operation and glory in
their return, according as they have their being in that way of Christ, without
which they are as things forgotten and as though they had never been Phil. 2.
12. 13. James 1. 18. Heb. 2. 4. Heb. 2. 4. John 5. 30.
, further then he as a continued fountain of life feeds them Psalm. 36. 9.
. They also reach out, or stretch out themselves to those things that are
before, or stand on tip-toe, to look at the furthest distance that possibly can
be, for that which is their present help and supply; yea, so far as God and man
are by nature separated one from the other Psalm. 346. 1
, who are in that way of Christ become one Ephesians. 2. 13, 14, 15. 16.
; and they know that no more then they can fetch things out of the bosom of
the father, at such a distance (which never yet appeared unto them) no more can
they of themselves call again any thing into present use, which has formerly
passed their hands. Whence it is that the comforter has that twofold office,
not only to teach and lead forth into all truth, but also to bring to our
remembrance the things that have been taught unto us Ioh, 14, 26.
which the common Ministry of the world is ignorant of, and loves that so it
should be Ierem. 5. 31.
.

Thirdly, observe diligently in this Treatise, that as it gives all power and
dominion unto the Son of God, both in heaven and in earth: so it also gives
(notwithstanding) due authority to all civil Magistrates, without which their
right cannot be given unto them, if their place and office be not bounded
within the compass and lists of civil things. For Christ's power and authority
is spiritual Ioh. 18. 36
; so that if once the Magistrate be engaged, by virtue of that his office, to
deal in the things of God, and to intermeddle between God and the consciences
of men; he is then also bound over in conscience, to subdue to the uttermost of
his power, all other civil States unto himself, and to engage them to serve
and worship the same God he serves, what ever Idol he has set up unto
himself, or his Leviticall Priests have framed and fashioned for him Dan. 3.
Exodus 32.
and so must of necessity greed and endeavor after the subjecting of all civil
States unto himself, else does he not deal faithfully with his God, which is
the very spirit that suggested the like temptation unto our Lord Mat. 4. 8. 9.
, which spirit Antichrist ever goes forth in, and so sets himself in the seat
of God, and proves opposite to our Lord Christ, in all things 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3, 4.
. But keep the office of the Magistracy, (according to sobriety) within the
compass of civil things, that is to have relation to what ever concerns the
relation between creature and creature simply as they stand in reference one
unto another in that respect; and then in that way only, it is the
preservation and honor of all States in their several ways of Rule and
Government: otherwise there could but one government in the world, and all the
rest must be cried own and ruinated; or if more stand, they must be altogether
dishonorable. For where God is concined to appear in the Magistracy, there the
glory must be, and all other Government under shame and contempt. Yea the glory
of that Prince that should subject all others to himself, is made more
dishonorable then otherwise it would be: For if he have not honorable Princes
and States, to converse and commerce and negotiate with, his own Crown,
Kingdom and People, cannot possibly bear that glory and luster which
otherwise it would do Psalm. 72, 10, 11. Isa. 43. 3, 4. Psalm. 45. 9.
. And we know, that in respect of outward privileges and glory that come by
temporary deliverances, the Lord has done to wicked and Heathenish Nations the
like things he did of old to Israel the people of God, and therefore convinces
them thereof by the Prophet Amos, when they would have the glory of Religion to
arise from such things Amos 9, 7.
, saying, Are ye not as the AEthyopian unto me, O children of Israel? Have not
I brought up Israel out of the Land of Egypt, says the Lord, and the
Philistines from Caphtor, and Aram from Kir?

So that by how much the civil Magistrate interests his office into the Gospel,
as an order thereof, by so much he does arrogate unto himself the glory of
God, if things succeed well: for unto Christ it cannot be given, but as a
general hand of providence, which reaches to all Creatures: For his Kingdom,
Rule, and Authority is not of this World Ioh. 18. 36.
; but is Spiritual, as he himself is spiritual Ioh. Ioh. 4.
.

Fourthly, if any thing in this Book seem dark, or doubtful, read it over and
over, and peruse the Scriptures alluded unto in the Margent; and the oftener
thou read it, (if thy eye be single) the more light shall break forth Mat.
6. 22.
, and the more shall the fruit appear Hos. 14. 9.
. Confer the matter propounded, and the Scriptures alluded unto, together,
and the more thou soundest the waters, the more they will arise, and the depth
of them appear Ezekiel. 47.
, to be waters of swimming, that none can pass over, but they shall slow
either in the way of life or death, in his conscience, even as the waters of
Noah did Isai. 11. 9.
; and shall appear to be strong and able to bear up the Ark of our
spiritual Noah, for the saving of that righteous one in every particular of
his Family Genesis 7. 17. to 24. 1 Pet. 3. 20,
.

Fifthly, again my advice unto thee is, that thou never go about to peruse
this, Book, but when thy spirit is retired, and drunk up by the grace of God 1
Cor. 12. 13.
, from the cares and employments of this life Mat. 13. 22. Luke 5. 14.
, as though thou had nothing else to do but attend upon him that speaks
peace to his people, and to his Saints, that they return not again to the folly
of the things of this pressent life Psalm. 85. 8.
. And when thou sees the hand of God upon thee so, as though thou were to
converse with him in prayer, thy heart being disposed to deal for the present
with nothing, but in an immediate and familiar conversing with him Exodus 33. 11.
, and the hand of his providence also making way thereunto, by setting the
creatures apart from being any interruption or obstruction in this present work
and employment: so shall the distillings of Him appear, who is as Deaw unto
Israel, and causes him to grow as a Lilly, casting forth his root and branches
abundantly Hos. 14. 6. 7
: and thy smell shall be as Lebanon, and others shall return and delight to
dwell under thy shadow; yea they, (through this means and Ministry that is by
Christ) shall revive as the corn, and flourish as the vine, and the sent
thereof shall be as the wine of Lebanon, Hos. 14. 8.
, and if this fruit be found upon thee Hos. 14. 9.
, my reward is given into my hand Mat. 10. 42. Mark 9. 41.
. For in desiring I have desired to see the life of the Lord Jesus in his
elect, in all the ways of his own administration, and how am I pained till it
be observed Luke 12. 50.
! For that (as I have respect unto this world) shall be the renewing of my
strength, before I go hence, and be no more Psa. 39. 13.
.

Thine in Christ Jesus, Samuel Gorton.

Here follows a Table of what particular points are handled in this Treatise,
or briefly touched upon, to give occasion to the Reader of further
consideration, with the particular page alluded unto by letters, according to
the order of the English Alphabet.
1. What the proper ground and reason is, why men do interpret some places of
Scripture, not to be properly meant of Christ, but of some other, page 1. at
A. 2. The Title or first verse in the Psalm opened, and expounded, page 1. at
B. 3. What the proper sum, scope, and subject matter of the Psalm is,
together with the nature of that question which Christ propounded to the
Pharisees in his time, from the words in the beginning of this Psalm. p. 4. at
C 4. How this Psalm manifests it self to be indeed the Oracle of God, and
cannot be the word of a mere man, nor appliable to any earthly state and
condition whatsoever. p. 5. at D. 5. The manner how the word of God takes our
nature into unity with it self. p. 6. at E 6 Of what continuation and duration
the death and humiliation of Jesus Christ is according to the true life,
spirit, virtue, intent and meaning of it. p. 7. 7. What operation the death and
humiliation of Christ has upon the men of the world. p. 9. 8 What the proper
enemies of the Priesthood of the Son of God are. p. 9 9 What the two
Cherubims are that cover the Mercy-seat, in the true signification of them. p.
16. at E 10 What is the only root and rise of the manifestation and exercise
of Gods power in the Church. p. 17. F. 11 What are the only enemies of Christ's
Kingly Office in the Church, and how overcome. p. 18. G 12 How men may be said
to deny the resurrection, authority or Kingly power of Jesus Christ. p. 20. at
H 13 What those Cherubims placed at the East of Eden, in their true intent and
meaning, are, and what their Office is to such as are in the way of sin, and of
the fall. p. 21. at I 14 The time and manner of the Saints assembling together,
when and what it is, according to the authority and operation of Gods call in
the Assembly. p. 28. at K 15 What the proper Ornaments of the Saints are in the
time of their holy assemblies. p. 30. at K 16 How John and Jesus are both truly
said to be forerunners, being so far different in office and quality. p. 30.
at L 17 The proper Rise, Nature, and Number of the Oblations and Offerings of
the Saints, according to the plenteous grace of the Gospel. p. 31. at M 18 What
the Oath of God is, by which our high Priest Jesus Christ was consecrated and
installed into his office. p. 38. at N 19 How the work of God though in it
self a creature compirsed in time and place, may truly be said to be insinit,
as God himself is infinite, and yet there is but one infinite. See p. 48.
above the letter O. 20 What that Plurality properly is, which is comprehended
in these words, Let [ us] make man in [ our] own Image. p. 49. at O 21 What is
meant by the Angels not keeping their first estate, opened and discovered. p.
52. at P. 22 What the Keys of the Kingdom of heaven are, or that Key of David
that opens and no man shuts, and shuts and no man opens, explained
and discovered. p. 56. at Q 23. What the life of man, (as he excells all other
creatures) properly is, and of what correspondency the life of Christ springing
out of death, and the death of Antichrist fading or consuming out of life, are,
in way of Antithesis, or opposition, p. 60. at R 24 What the sound of the last
Trumpet is, and how the change is made in the twinkling of an eye. p. 60. at S
25 Several verses opened and interpreted out of that first Epistle to the
Corinthians, the 15. Chapter, to declare the nature and certainty of that oath
of God, whereby our high Priest is installed into his office. p. 62. at T 26
What the difference is between the Spirit of God in its interpretation of the
Scriptures, and that which is truly called a private interpretation. p. 70. at
V 27 The nature of the fall of Man, what it is in eating of the forbidden tree,
and how both the Tree of life, and the Tree of the knowledge both of Good and
Evil, are said to be in the midst of the Garden, and what it is to eat of
the one, and of the other, p. 71. at W 29 What it is to be under the oath of
the Curse, and how it is brought to pass to be in force, and exercised in man,
who was made blessed. p. 75. at X 29 What is the ground of the translation,
imputation, or reckoning of the sin of man upon that holy and innocent Son
of God, p. 79. at Y 30 The time of the woman's being in the Wilderness, what it
is, Rev. 12. and how a true form cannot be given unto the Church of Christ,
without the knowledge of it, p. 80. at Z 31 What it is to fight with Beasts at
Ephesus after the manner of Men, expounded and opened. p. 88 32 How we are to
understand that body celestial, and that body terrestrial, which the Apostle
speaks of, and what is the true glory of the one, and of the other, p. 95. at
B 33 What that pattern is which Moses saw in the Mount, according to the
mystery, truth, and substance of it, and of what use and necessity the
knowledge of it is unto us, in case we ever intend to go up to re-edifie the
house of God. p. 96. at C 34 How we are to judge of the mortality and
immortality of the soul of man, and of the truth and verity both of the one
and of the other. p. 98. 35 That the resurrection spoken of, and principallly
intended in the Scriptures, is spiritual, perfected at once in one act through
Jesus Christ, and yet denies not, but confirms the resurrection of the body
out of the grave in due time. p. 102. at E 36 That the word of God is to be
held and maintained as absolute and glorious in the unity of it, as it is in
its multiplication, as in the whole circumference, so also in the center of it,
p. 108. at F. 37 What the Cross of Christ is, and how men dishonor the
Gospel, by teaching it to be that which it is not; in giving that to be the
share and portion of the sons of Adam, which the Son of GOD has taken as
his own proper share and portion, p. 110. 38 How we are to conceive and judge
of an Eldership in the Church and House of God, in case it be according to the
order of that Pristhood of our Melchisedec. p. 113. 39 How we are to understand
the Sacrifices, or that one Sacrifice, or Lamb, offered for, and in the Church
of Christ, p. 119. at I
Here follows a Table containing the heads of such points as are handled in
the second part of this Treatise, according to the order of the English
Alphabet.
40. WHAT the Baptism, or washing of the Church is, as it is the Laver of
Regeneration, and washing away of sin; without which a vanity in all
Baptismes. p. 10. at K 41 A difference most needful to be observed between
that which is properly the Cross of Christ, and that which Doctrinally
teaches what it is, without the knowledge where of true Baptism cannot be
understood. p. 15. at L 42 What agreement there is between the taking up of any
one act of Baptism, and making it the ordinance of washing in the Church, and
to tak up one of the ten words, or Commandments, and making it to be our only
Rule of obedience in the Church, with the nature of that Spirit which leads to
the one and to the other, p. 15. at M 43 How those manifold gifts and
operations of the Spirit, are rightly to be considered in the distribution and
exercise of them, in and among the Saints of God. p. 19. at N 44 What it is for
the seed of the woman to bruise the head of tho Serpent, as also what it is for
the Serpent to bruise his Heel. p. 23. at O 45 What we are to think of those
that seem to acknowledge things to be true, and that they see them to be
excellent in Christ, but want the peace, glory and comfort of them in
themselves. p. 25 at P 46 What it is for God to repent, or not to repent, p.
30. at Q 47 What is the peculiarity and universality of the Priesthood of
Christ in the Church, p. 34. at R. 48 How Christ our High Priest, as also his
Office are truly said to be without Father, and without Mother, and descent,
without beginning of days, or end of life. p. 37. at S 49 Who those Kings are
that are wounded in the day of Gods wrath, and the way and manner how it is to
be accomplished, p. 45. at T 50 What the cross of Chist is, further
explicated, opened, and made manifest. p. 52. at V. 51 How the word LORD is to
be understood, as it is used and brought in in the the fifth verse. of this Psalm
p. 55. at W 52 What it is to be at the rig^t hand, opened and explained, p. 57
at X 53 What it is to wound or strike through Kings at the right hand, opened
and explained. p. 58. at Y 54 What is meant by blaspheming the Son of Man, as
also what it is to blaspheme the Holy Ghost, and how the one is forgiven, and
the other can never be forgiven. p. 63. at Z 55 When the day of the
Manifestation of Gods wrath is, and how it comes to be exercised in the sons
of men, seeing that G^^ is love even in the abstract. p. 66. ^t A 56 How we are
mystically to unde^stand the two great (...) Parents of all the world, taught
and set out unto us (...) story of the Creation of the first man and woman,
(...) the birth and bringing forth of Cain and Abel. p. 70 at ^ 57 The cause
and ground of man's Alienation and Estrangement from God, and how it is extended
and continued still in the wicked, p. 72. at C 58 How men are mistaken in the
fall of Angels, yea such as hold themselves Doctors of the Law, and Teachers of
others; what it is, made manifest, and how we are to come to the knowledge of
them, as also what necessity and use the knowledge thereof is unto us. p. 74.
at D 59 How the Lord is truly said to rule among the Heathen, or such as are
alienated, yea, even in his Saints. p. 76. 60 What the calling of the Jews is,
and the bringing in of the fullness of the Gentiles, when and in what mnaner it
shall be, page 78. at F 60 How the fall of man, which is the very woe and
destruction of the wicked, comes to be the very inlet of the grace of God unto
salvation in the Saints by Jesus Christ p. 84. at G 62 What is the proper
ground of man's breach of covenant with God, and of all those disasters and
breaches that are betwixt man and man in the world, as also what is the only
proper and direct way of healing of them, p. 87. at H 63 How the man and the
woman are said to be naked in the beginning, and are not ashamed; as also how
it comes to pass, that they afterward are said to see themsedves naked, and
are ashamed, according to the true mystery and intent both of the one and the
other, p. 89 at I 64 The sin and fall of man cannot be seen and looked upon
with an eye of faith, but salvation must appear in it; as also that the
righteousness and resurrection of Jesus Christ cannot be seen and looked upon
with a carnal and unbeleeving eye, but death and destruction appears in it. p
91. at K 65 How sin and the righteousness of faith are neither of them hoth
any created thing, and how each of them comes (properly to be) by generation
and not else to be heard of, found or felt by the creature. p. 93 at L 66 What
that root is, of which the soune of perdition springs and grows up, as also
how it is caused to rot and wither, when Christ is made manifest in the Gospel.
p. 97. at M 67 What is the branch or top of that man of sin, and how Christ
causes that to decay and wither also, as well as the root, p. 98 at N 68 The
the trial of Gideons soldiers by drinking of water out of the river, opened
and interpreted, and how it agrees with, and teaches how the Son of God
drinks of the Brook in the way, in those only approved by him, that lap up
the water out of their hand, as a Dog laps it up with his tongue. p. 106. at
O 69 That in the very act of the humiliation of Jesus Christ, is his exaltation
also in the true Mystery of his incarnation, and how it comes to pass, that of
necessity so it must be, and cannot possibly be otherwise. p. 109. at P. 70
That as the Gospel is divulged, and comes from one that, is not simply and
only a creature: so ought it not to be preached unto any as being simply and
merely in the state and condition of a creature. p. 111. at Q 71 In what the
humiliation and exaltation of Jesus Christ do properly consist, and that it
must be so, and cannot be otherwise, p. 11 3. 72 How Death is truly said to
be the last enemy that is destroyed, p. 115. 73 Of what use the death and
resurrection of Jesus Christ are page 116. at T 74 How the Son of God is
subject unto, and delivers up the Kingdom to the Father, and yet rules and
governes himself also eternally, for of his Kingdom and Dominion there is no
end: for he shall reign for evermore. Amen. p. 118
Errors escaped in Printing in the first part of this Treatise.
Page 6. line 14. for beynod, read beyond, p. 9. l. 36. for hoest read holiest,
p. 14. l. 18. for all alike, read we are all alike, p. 15. l. 25 for ny read
any, p. 19. l. 24. for emencities read immensitie, l. 25. for seems, read
gives, l. 30. for righteous read righteousness, p. 21. l. 7. for no read not,
p. 22. l. 7. for shuttings read shutting. l. 22. for diving read divining, p.
23. l. 26. for head read heart, p. 25. l. 36. for crufied read crucified, p.
29. l. 12. for tion read nation, the first syllable being misplaced in the
former line, p. 33. l. 9. for fo read for, p. 39. l. 10. for ever read over, p.
49. l. 34, for Serpen read Serpentine, p. 50. l. 33. for become read becomes,
p. 51. l. 9. for heavens read the heavens, p. 55. l. 29. for vice read rise, p.
57. l. 9. for pofession read profession, p. 62. l. 9. for least read last. p.
63. 3. for m n read man, l. 15. for charge read change. p. 68. l. 17. for
manifest r. manifested, p. 70. l. 4. for a any r. at any, p. 73. l. 32: for
iall read fall, page 75. l. 3. for conrary read contrary, page 77. l. 21. for
if he shall, read if they shall, p. 88. line the last, for fighting, read
fightings, p. 99. l. 12. for intermssion, read intermission, l. 21. for dety r
Deity, l. 23. for n. ts, r. in its, p. 100. l. 3. for and viour, read, and
alone Savior, p. 102. l. 8. for reurection r. resurrection, l. 22. for over me
read overcome 106. l. 11. for cure read curse, p. 110. l. 13. for governs read
concerns, p. 111. l. 25. for sit at read sets at, line 27. the word him used
the second time, is superfluous, p. 113. l. 30. for any read an, p. 116. l. 15.
for mystery read Ministry, p. 117. line 23. for therewith read wherewith, l.
32. for other read either, p. 118. l. 10. for i read it. p. 119. line 1. for
duy, read duly. line 16. for was read goes, line 22. for 11 read all. p. 120.
line 14. for t read to, line 15,. for git read gilt, l. 18, for Laws read Law,
line 27, for Lamb spottle, read Lamb spotless.

Errors escaped in printing in the second part of this Treatise.
Page 6 line 21 of the Epist. Dedicatory, for there is in, read there is not
in, p. 10 line 3, for misery read mystery, p. 21 line 10, for not Spirit, read
not the Spirit, p. 23. line 14. for read read Head, p. 28 line 27, for Lord
Hosts, read Lord of Hosts, p. 40 line 7, for ministry read mystery, p. 49 line
30, for spoke read speaks, p: 61 line 1, for acts read act, line 8, for
prosperity, read and prosperity, line 19, for truth read tenth, p. 67. line 19.
for apoares read appears, p. 69 line 30, for life, read of life, p. 70 line
14, for acting read a thing, line 22, for you and goodness, read joy and
gladness, p. 91 line 36, for blood read bloody.

AN INCORRVPTIBLE KEY, Composed of the hundred and tenth Psalm. Wherewith you
may open the rest of the holy Scriptures.
HOwsoever men seek to evade and put off other Scriptures, Melchisedeck, or his
kingly power and authority, which is of that force and virtue, as to interest
into an office of such rise and duration as that is of the Priesthood.

Now that It concerns the Son of God, and sets forth him only, Title or
first clause of it, being said or affirmed to be a Psalm of David, which name
or title is given to our Lord himself, Hos. 3. 5. Esek. 34. 23. But also by
the testimony of the Apostle, Heb. 10. 12, 13. yea, our Lord assumeth it to
convince the Pharisees, as being spoken of himself, Matthew. 22. 42, 43, 44.

And whereas it is said to be a Psalm of David, it is evident that the
Scripture intends him only, and none other, in what ever it utters in way of
Kingdom or Priesthood, in Masculine or Feminine gender; in Singular or plural
number, in way of subsistence or anihilation, in preter, present, or future
tense: and for the original word Mizmor translated Psalm, it signifies a
cutting off of superfluous Branches or twigs, even as the curiosity, and
melodious ditty of a Song, cannot endure any needless or superfluous speech or
phrase.

So that if Christ be a sufficient King, and Ruler in his Church, all other
Authority and Government erected therein is superfluous, and as a branch to be
cut off, if he be complete in his Priesthood, then all other Priests brought in
and set up in his house, are superfluous, and to be, cut off; for so far: as
we aprise and set up such, so sar we vilify, and pull down Christ Jesus from his
Thron, and Altar, which is done; by whom, and whenever some in the Church are
professed, to be higher in place, and more noble and holy in office then the
rest, or then any other of the Brotherhood; for either the least of our
Brethren, are one with us in the greatest dignity that we receive by Christ,
or else we are not one with them in the greatest infirmity taken away by
Christ: and then in the one, and the other, we destroy that great salvation
unto our selves. For if the most honorable in the Church, receive his dignity
in Christ, the least in the house has the same honor, for whether male or
female ye, are all one in him; and if they receive it out of the way of
Christ, as indeed all do, who make difference of persons and places, and
offices in the things of God, they are then Superfluous, and by all them that
will ever, Sing the Psalm of David or song of Christ our Lord, so be lopped
and cut off, as we will clear our selves from sinning more and more, or adding
daily to our sins by making Molten Images and Idols, according to our own
understanding, for these things are the work of the crafts-men, even of old
Demetrius and his fellows for they that are sacrificers of men, that is, that
dedicate men unto God, holding one more holy, or standing nearer unto God, by
his Office and place, then another, they Kiss the Calves, that is, willingly
submit unto, and communicate with that spirit of Idolatry, that set up a Calfe
in the wilderness, and afterward, one at Dan and another at Bersheba; even
lovingly embrace Idols and Idolatry, as the glory of all their worship; See,
Hos, 13. 2. Read the margent from the Hebrew phrase.

Therefore the Apostle Peter having pronounced that all flesh is grass, and
the glory of man as the flower of the field, and that the word of the Lord
abides for ever; presently inferres, that there is no receiving of it, but as
Babes freed from the desire of pre-eminence, not mixing the milk of the word
with carnal preferments of men, which shall vanish as the grass, bidding them
lay aside all malice, guile, and hypocrisy, envy, and evil speaking, in
advancing men in the things of God; the word translated malice, signifies to
visiate or corrupt, to make sick, or to make to dye; even as superfluous
branches make a plant (as it were) sick, and unable to bear fruit, So is it
with the plant of Israel, wherever they, break forth, that prefer any in
the Kingdom of God before another: for they must either profess Christ not
complete, or else themselves so set up superfluous branches. 1 Pet. 2. 1. Col.
2. 10.

So the Apostle James, after he has concluded that every good and perfect gift
is from above, and coming down from the Father of lights, in whom is no
varying, no not so much as a shadow of change but is the same in one, that he
is in another; or else no gift nor light of his: nor is it from above, but from
below only; presently inferres a laying aside of all filthiness and
superfluity of naughtiness, which is that lust conceived in man, to advance
him self in the things of God, as that chapter and the whole Epistle
declares, Iam. 1. 21. wherefore he presently adds, receiving with meekness
or lowninesse the ingrafted word: the word ingrafted signifies an artificial
setting of one thing in another, which by nature are foreigners and strangers,
as the holy word of the Lord and all men's nature are, but we know that
difference of persons, offices, places, and degrees in the Churches, are no
strangers nor forreiners unto man's nature; witness the practice of all peoples
and Nations that are, or ever have been; who have had only nature to set them
a work, as at this day, we see in these Natives amongst whom we live. Avoid
therefore these things as filthy and unclean, in the things of God, that you
cannot touch but be defiled; and lop and out them off as superfluous branches,
not beseeming the Vineyard of God, nor any plant that is of our heavenly
Fathers planting; if ever you intend to utter a Psalm of David, or sing an
acceptable Song or Hymn unto Almighty God, who has made himself perfect and
durable, in all things by Christ, and so will remain and abide the same, when
these changeable fleeting, deceitful, and hypocritical things of that man of
sin, and Son of perdition, shall vanish; and in shame and ignominy go down
unto Sheoll, or that corrupting pit, for ever, Amen. So much for the Title.

The sum and scope of the Psalm contains a description of that transcendent
and co-equality of dignity that is in the Kingly and the Priestly offices of
the Son of God,

By which it evidently appears, that the Pharisees of our days are more
ignorantly audacious then those were in the days of Christ: For when they
profess him to be the Son of David, Christ knowing the blindness of their
minds in that point in respect of the spirit and life of it, asked them from
this. Psalm, Matthew. 22. If Christ be David's son, how does David in spirit
call him Lord? saying, The Lord said to my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand
until I make thy enemies thy. Footstool: which our Pharisees can presently
answer and say, He is David's Lord according to his Divinity, and David's son
according to his Humanity. But those Pharisees knew well enough, it was not an
answer to Christ his question, nor could it be the intent of that phrase in the
Psalem; therefore they have so much modesty as not to answer, though they could
not be ignorant of that answer which our Interpreters give; for it was the
thing they still looked for; yet they saw his question so far beyond them;
that they durst not ask him another question after that. For they saw very well
his question was, how he could be David's Lord as he was his son, and
descended out of his loins, as well as he was his Lord, as he made him to be
that which he was, namely a Lord and King himself. For they perceived his
question about his Sonship to be spiritual, in that he says, How does David
in Spirit call him Lord? For Christ as he is David's son, is his Lord: for he is
begotten, produced, and brought forth by David, (or else he could not be)
according to his death) which death of his has Lordship and Domination over
all flesh in the glory of it, to bring it to naught, destroy and discomfit it
for ever: For the Son of God could not die, but in and by becoming the seed of
David, by which death he overcomes him that had the power of death, that is the
Devil, Heb. 2. 14, If therefore the Pharisaicall Teachers of our times do as
far surpass (those) in cruelty, hardness of heart, and hypocrisy, as they
do in blindness, audacious boldness, and constancy therein: Let those only
that are ignorant of the Lord Jesus, look for comfort and benefit by their
society and ministry; for to others it yields none at all, but only laying
of snares, and practicing of treachery against the anointed of the Lord.

Verse. 1. The Lord said unto my Lord, etc.

In these words of the Psalm for order sake, note these particulars:

1. The manner of the Speech, or Phrase, The Lord said, or assuredly said.

2. Observe a twofold Lordship, or an interchangeable Domination, The Lord
said to my Lord.

3. The matter of the Speech, or Sentence, in these words, Sit thou.

4. The place, condition, or state to sit in, noted in these words, At my right
hand.

5. The time how long this Royalty shall remain, Till I have made thine enemies
thy footstool.

For the first, noted in these words, The Lord said, or the Lord avouched, or
faithfully and assuredly said;

It is a word peculiar to the Oracle or Speech of God, 1 Timothy 1. 15 the like
phrase is used, and it is proper unto God only to utter himself in such an
affirmation, because the thing uttered cannot comply with any earthly state or
condition whatsoever. That the Authority and Lordship of a King, and the Lordly
estate and condition of a Priest, should both consist in one and the same
person or subsistence, in such an extent as each of them takes the right hand
of allthings what so ever in heaven or in earth.

For Christ is Lord as he is David's son, descending out of his loins, and so
becoming one with the nature of man in all points; by which descension the
humiliation of his Priestly office is such, that it takes the right hand of
all: for it being the humiliation of the son of God, it must needs be of an
infinite worth and value; and there is but One Infinite: therefore it alone is
set aloft and reigns. So that he is a Kingly Priest, as Melchisedec was,
Hebr. 7. 1. and thence it is, that the Saints are a Kingdom of Priests, or a
Priesthoods of Kings, 1 Pet. 2.

For there is not any thing that can get beynod that which is infinite: and
therefore his humiliation is eternized and perpetuated;

But that which is of an eternal value, must also be eternal in respect of
time, and such is the Priesthood and humiliation of Jesus Christ: and that on
this wise.

Christ in taking our nature upon him, takes not unto himself any thing of
excellency whatsoever: For he in no case takes hold on Angels, in way of our
redemption, Heb. 2. 16. that is, on any excellency or dignity; for then he
could not be the Son of God (infinite in glory) if any excellency were added
unto him. But on the seed of Abraham he takes hold, that is, of a poor and
mean condition, one that had not the breadth of a foot in the holy land, Acts 7.
5. So that Christ in communicating with our Nature, takes unto himself only
baseness, ignominy, and reproach, and can no more receive any jot of glory in
us, then we can possibly receive any the least stain or blemish by him: only
that which man counts his honor, and is of highest esteem in his own eyes, is
that which is truly base and abominable before God, Luke 16. 15. and in that
does the humiliation of the Son of God consist. For the greatest baseness
before God, is, when man goes about to make himself excellent and honorable
by transitory and corruptible things; as by offices, places, gifts, riches and
relations to this present world; who by this means preferres and brings in the
excellencies of the Creature, above, and in stead of the glory and dignity of
the Creator, wherewith man was blessed at the first, and through the same
vicious desire to exalt the creature, vilifies, and so falls from his Creator:
for the dignity and glory of the creature, and the glory of God the Creator,
cannot subsist nor stand together.

For that which is infinite in it self admits not of any other in
co-partnership or fellowship with it self; that is, with any other in way of
the same kind, or respect: as, if it be glory, it is but one glory, or the
glory of one; if it be shame, it is but one shame, or the shame of one. So that
of necessity the Son of God assuming our nature, must burn up, waste, cause
to wither, destroy, and consume all the glory and goodlinesse of man, Isai. 40.
So that as dust and ashes, it falls into the ash-pans of the Altar for ever;
and by consuming of that, to wit, all the fat, the sweet, the firstlings,
chief and livelihood of the creature for ever:

He brings in that first begotten of the Father, yea, the Chiefty and
Excellency of the Son of God. as a Sacrifice, perfumatory, a sweet Savor, and
of an eternal acceptance with God, so long therefore as this one only
sacrifice, finds acceptance with God, so long is his humliation and
discention before God, for if he be exalted in the power and dignity of God as
he is the Sun of man, Joh. 5. 27.
so is he also humbled and debased, in regard, of all excellency of man, as he
is the Son of God Phil. 26. 7.
and so long as the one lasts, so long shall the other, for as Gods
excellencies shall for ever be exalted and set aloft, so shall the arm of
flesh (which is man's excellency) Jer. 17. 5. 6.
for ever be abased and kept under, Eze. 30. 21. 22.
which is most acceptable and well pleasing unto faith, to have this glorious
exchange change, ratified and confirmed unto, and in the Saints for ever, that
Gods glory may appear and be made manifest in man, Col. 1. 27.
and the things of man may be hid and covered in God, Psalm. 32. 1. Zep. 2. 3.
hence is that interchangeable, translative and relative sentence uttered viz.
The Lord said unto my Lord, or as the word will bear, The Lord said in my
Lord, that is the Kingly Lordship, and authority of Christ speaks, and
utters it self, in the Priestly; and the Priestly Lordship, and authority of
Christ, speaks and utters it self in the Kingly; so that each of them has
prehemenence, and is at the right hand of the other; for the Kingly Office and
dignity, speaks not, nor acts. but in, and by, the Lordship, and authoty of
the Priesthood; and the priestly office and dignity speaks not, nor acts, but
in, and by, the Lordship, and authority of the Kingdom, or of the Kingly
office; for they are the right hand of each other; by which, (and not
otherwise) they mutually, and interchangeably work, and make themselves
manifest to be, that which indeed they are, and ever will, for he lives for
ever to make intercession for the Saints. Heb: 7. 25.
This twofold Lordship and dignity then, is the very sum, substance, and
matter of the Gospel (even of all that good news that comes from Heaven, as
out of a far Country, into our nature in that way of Christ) Pro. 25. 25.
And therefore must needs be the whole scope and drift of this Psalm; Yea, the
very life and marrow of all the holy Scriptures, so that all the rest of this
psalm, is wrapped up in this first verse, even as the sap and life of the Tree
in the root, and as the Blossom and fruit in the Bud, which Bud has virtue in
it to produce and bring forth thousands, and ten thousands of Trees of the same
kind; which when our Sun of righteousness shines upon it, who has health and
virtue in his wings Mal. 4.
draws out, brings forth, and causes it to appear, in such a royal
Kingdom, and Priesthood, as is here made manifest in the rest of the Psalm,
which is perpetuated, and eternized, both in the one and in the other, for the
Kingdom and Priesthood of the Son of God, are co-existent in there rise
^race, and duration; yea, co-opperate, and co-apparant also, so that the one is
not, nor ever can be, without the other; for as he is King of Salem, Prince of
peace, and so rules in righteousness for ever Heb. 7. 2. Isay. 32. 1.
that of his Kingdom and Do^inion there is no end Dan. 4. 3.
. So also as he is Priest of the most high God Heb. 7.
, being made not after the carnal commandment, but according to the power of
an endless. life, abides a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec
Heb. 7. 16, 17, 21, 24.
For this man, because he continues ever, has an unchangeable Priesthood, and
therefore remains and abides the same for ever.

And this is that also that the men of our days, and unbeleevers in these
times, as well as in the times that are past, cry out against, and cannot
endure it, as a doctrine most pernicious and abominable, that the humiliation
or death of Christ should be eternal; they would not have that word to be made
good, which says, He was a Lamb slain from the beginning Rev. 13. 8.
; nor that he should in his death and Priesthood, as well as in any part of his
Mediatorship, be Jesus Christ, the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever
Heb. 13. 8.
: For if his death should appear unto them so, as to dye to the power,
wisdom, riches, and preferments of this world, (otherwise they cannot
communicate in any grace of God Matthew. 6. 24. James 4. 4.
) then is their heaven gone, their God is taken away from them Judge. 17. 5.
, so that they cannot but cry out against such doctrine Heb. 12. 24
, and are necessitated either to hold the death of Christ to be momentany, and
so past as that for the present it is not, and so the blood of sprinkling
speaks not at all Luke 17. 21. 2 Cor. 1. 5.
, (but only a-farre off, as they phantastically and vainly imagine through
their traditions; for the Kingdom of God, and the sufferings of Christ, are
ever at a like distance to us 1 Pet. 1. 24
) or else all their glory and power exercised in religion, must prove
Antichristian; being they consist of such things, which as the grass shall
fade, wither, and come to naught Luke 16. 15.
: For the death of Christ, as it concerns the elect of God, and the
livelihood, operations, and exaltations of men in the things of God, cannot
possibly stand together, being in direct opposition the one to the other. And
hence it is, that our Prophet adds these words:

Until I have made thine enemies the foot stool of thy feet.

Who then are the only enemies of that Princely dignity that is in the
Priesthood of Jesus Christ, by virtue of which Priesthood he enters within the
veil, into the Holy of Hoest, or into the Holiness of Holinesses, as the word
is Exodus 26. 33.
; yea, into heaven it self Heb. 1. 3. and 6. 19. 20.
: And sits down on the right hand of the Majesty on high: So that none can take
place of him Heb. 8. 1.
Now the utter and sole enemies of the dignity of this Royal Priesthood of the
Son of God, are all manner of virtues, and excellencies whatsoever, attainable
by man Gal. 1. 11. 12.
, that have not in them the rise and continuance of Melchisedec Heb. 1. 7. 15,
16, 17.
: For such things beseem not the Royalty of this Priesthood 1 Pet. 2. 9.
, that brings nothing unto God for acceptance, but what holds
correspondencie with him in, all points Heb. 1. 3.
. The adversaries therefore of this grace, are all things brought into the
worship of God, as things acceptable to God, that are temporary, momentany, and
of a fading condition Col. 2. 21, 22, 23.
. In a a word, what ever had beginning, or shall come to an end, is an enemy to
this Priesthood Heb. 7. 3.
. For it is not the humane Nature in Christ, that is the acceptable thing or
offering Act. 20. 28.
, but it is the glorious state and condition of the unity of both Natures,
consisting in one eternal Being, which no Man or Angel can ever find out a
time of their conjunction, and unity, no more then a time of their dis-uniting,
and separation can be found Mark 10. 6, 7, 8, 9.
: For if a time of conjunction can be found, without eternity, which has no
beginning; then may a time of their dis-junction be found without eternity that
has no end at all: For, Gods account and reckoning admits not so of time in
the way of Christ, as to permit a dis-junction in that one pure, simple,
single, and eternal act, in that workmanship of Christ. And therefore it is,
that when the mystery of God is finished, or perfected; that is, when the
perfection of it is revealed and made known unto us, then is this given in upon
oath by the Angel, that Time shall be no more Rev. 10. 6. 7.
. Then do we reckon and account according to God, with whom all times are
present, because he is the fullness thereof in us. For if he be all in all;
then is he all in time, as well as any other thing Ephesians. 1. 23. 1 Cor. 15. 28.
. So that we must reckon, and keep the Records of the House of God, according
to his account, and not according to the shallow register of a creature Isai.
55. 8. 9.
. With whom things are past, that shall not return again, and also to come,
that never yet were. But the account of God is, Yesterday and to day, and the
same for ever Heb. 13. 8.
. And, one day with the Lord is as a thousand years, and a thousand years as
one day 2 Pet. 3. 8.
. So are we to account, if we keep Records according to his wisdom, and not
after the wisdom of vain man in any thing, no more then, we are to speak or
preach in the enticing words of man's wisdom, but according to the wisdom and
power of God 1. Cor. 1 17. and 1 Cor. 2. 4, 5, 6, 7.
. The enemies therefore of Christ's Priesthood, (that keep without the veil,
and so from sitting down, or abiding at the right hand of Majesty, hindering
our Ministry, that it takes not place of all, and has not effect in all,
either as a savor of life, or as a savor of death, 2 Cor. 2. 15, 16, 17, 18.
) are all temporary things brought into the House of God, as things acceptable
to God, as places, offices, gifts of learning in Arts, in Tongues; yea, the
worlds created gifts of grace, which it propounds to it self in point of
salvation, bearing it self in hand, that there are created gifts of grace in a
Christian, which, are neither humane, nor yet divine; so as to be properly the
holy Spirit of God, which indeed is to annihilate the Son of God, by
destroying and bringing to naught the grace of his Kingdom, in setting another
form upon it, then ever the Father of Lights did James 1. 17.
, That gives a true form to every thing Job. 38. 22; 13, 14.
. For Christ is the only pattern and platform of all Christianity Heb. 8. 5.
. And to hold and teach something to be in Christ, beyond or besides the
reality of God and Man, Humane nature, and Divine, in one individual
subsistence, is no better then to Idolize the Son of God, and to set him up, as
a vain and empty thing in the world; and as our Apostle says, We know that an
Idol is nothing in the world 1 Cor. 8. 4.
: or to make him to be Belial; For there can be nothing but humane nature and
divine in the way of Christ, nor can there be any thing but humane nature and
sin in the way of Antichrist: So that to bring in a middle thing in the way of
Christ, is to bring in sin into that holy One of God; and to bring in a
middle thing in that way of Antichrist, is to make him to hold some
correspondency with the Son of God, whereas, the Scripture concludes there is
no agreement at all between Christ and Belial 1 Cor. 6. 1^.
; But stand in direct terms of opposisition, Antichrist being that wicked One
1 John 7. 1 18.
. So that if we give Christ his true form according to the holy Scriptures,
there appears an utter impossibility of finding such kind of grace in him, as
the men of the world, or your most refined Priests in the eyes of the world,
form unto themselves, and such as hear them. For take away the body of the Sun
from any part of the world, or from any horison, and the beams and rays of it
cease to be in that place and are not found at all, to give either heat or
light; but the place is in death and gross darkness.

Moreover if Christ should bt have a spark, (as they call it) beam or ray, or
certain influence of the spirit, or divine nature that being shed forth, or
infused into the humane, and not the reallity, and essentiality thereof; then
he were not God, as well as man; and then no Savior; for salvation is of the
Lord: Isdi. 12. 2.
and there is no other name given whereby men shall be saved, but our Lord
Jesus Christ. Acts 4 12.
.

But to form a grace in a Christian, otherwise, or besides, that which is in
Christ; is to set up another name or authority to be saved by, then him alone,
and that is the Antichrist, which has ever been found conversant amongst those
Jewish and Pharasaicall builders, who always set at naught and refuse the
truth, and verity of the chief corner stone.: Psalm. 118. 22. Acts 4. 11.
which notwithstanding, the malice of you builders, (as our Apostle speaks)
will be the head stone in the building of that house, not made after the device
and handicraft of man, but whose builder is the Lord, that will maintain and
uphold it for ever: 2 Cor. 5. 1. Heb. 11. 2. Psalm. 134. 13, 14.
though you have always labored, to pull down, and to demolish Gods building
( because it has another foundation then you can approve of) by haleing
(through your doctrine, and hipocriticall and selfe-seeking clamours) the
Saints of God, before your Elders, Synods, and judgment seats, for the
confession of that rich grace of God; and working that great work of God, in
curing the lame and impotent at the beautiful Gate of the Temple: Acts 3. 6.
by speaking a word in such away, as your selves can never find out; nor
purchase the glory of such a cure unto your selves: for Christ you cannot
endure to have the credit of it: Phil. 2. 21
and that is the reason why Tobya, and Snaballat, play their parts and bring
out the same spirit unto this day: Nehem. 4. 1, 2, 3.
we conclude then, of this point, in opposition to the doctrine of all false
and pernicious builders: That there is nothing in Christ Jesus, that is
created, which is simply divine, nor is there any thing in him, that is
increate, which is simply humane: the unity and conjunction therefore of these
twain in one, is that workmanship of God, created in Christ Jesus unto good
works Ephesians. 2. 10.
or as the word will bear, in a good work; that is, in that good work of God,
that remains and abides firm and stable for ever: being that one eternal and
good grace of God; and also that one eternal and good work of God, which
twain, can stand and agree together for ever, without confounding, but
gloriously harmonizing the one with the other, so as faith or grace shall ever
be made manifest, in this good work: and this good work shall ever appear in
that faith of Gods Elect; in whom so ever it is: (the denial whereof does
sufficiently declare a man to be vain, and empty of any thing that is of God;
for faith without works is dead: Iam. 2. 20.
) and this one work, in which consists all says, or this one grace, in which
consists all good works, and opperations of God; Has as many distinct
favoures or grace in it, as also works and opperations: as there are varieties
of works, and distinct favors, beauties, and splendant glories; in that
infinite and unsearchable word, or mind of God manifested in Christ.

If this be the created gift, or these the created graces, which the world
intends, then let them discribe, and delineate the Lord Jesus; in whatsoever
they speak of, or in what respect they hold him forth unto the souls of men;
that is, in what term of relation soever they propound him unto the world: let
them do it so, that the grace proposed, may appear to be such, as is ever
accompanied with this great work creation and making; that is, with the true
spiritual and mystical forming of the Son of God Gal. 4. 19.
who is made of a woman, made under the Law, and so under the curse: Gal. 4. 4.
Gal. 3. 13.
that so he might exalt our nature in the blessing and glory: of a Son; and
man of God: Acts 5. 30. 31.
and this is that created gift or those created graces, and only work of God
in Jesus Christ; which the world denies by teaching gifts, and graces of
another nature or kind.

Yea, furthermore, those that hold and teach a created gift; that is of, and
from the spirit; and yet not the spirit, neither dare they affirm that it is
humane, lest the bed prove too short, and the covering too narrow: Isai. 28. 20.
to rest upon, and to wrap themselves in; therefore they are driven to affirm
it is a spark, of divinity, a beam, or ray, of the nature divine, but not the
divinity it self; (which they say is in the Saints) But yet will affirm by
their traditions, that the reality of it is in Christ: for otherwise in the
truth of the thing, they know not how it is in him: but education in another
way, would have brought them to have spoken other things, especially if
preferment, had been intailed or annexed thereunto; these are so faithful in
their doctrine, that they must inevitably hold also, (and that by that
undeniable law and rule of contraries, according to the way of the first Adam
and the second: Romans 5. 18, 19. 1 Cor. 15. 22.
) that all men, save only the first man that fell, have but some beam, ray, or
certain spark of corruption in them; and that only Adam, the first man, he had
the whole body of sin death and corruption in him; so that all other men,
much less any particular of them; are not so engaged unto God; for the
revelation and manifestation of such an infinite, and unspeakable portion of
his grace and virtue, of that blood of sprinkling, as the first man was; and by
this means, they deny the plain testimony of the word of God, which affirms
that by nature we all a like: Ephesians. 2. 1, 2, 3.
So that if the first man had sin, both in the root and branch, so have we,
and if the second Adam had both the root and branch of righteousness in him,
so have we: Rev. 22. 16. 1 John 4. 17.
for what we are unto God, we are it in him, and not in our selves,

So that the doctrine and profession of the world in this point, takes away and
destroys unto men, the very virtue, authority, and extent of the royal
Priesthood of Jesus Christ our Lord.

Yea, all things of this nature are the only enemies of this Royalty and
dignity that is in the Priesthood of Christ; and therefore must all be made the
footstool of his feet: otherwise he has not the honor of the right hand of
God given unto him. For so far as we lift up these as helps and furtherances in
the House of God; as beautiful and comely in the House of God, considered
either in our selves, or among a multitude; so far we pull this Kingly Priest
from the Majesty of his Throne. For he were not a Priest if he were on the
earth Heb. 8. 4.
: that is, in that way of the order of Aaron: For no Priest suiting with the
wisdom of men, in their administrations, can exercise the authority of this
Lord: for so they cannot be Priests, but by maintaining the works and wisdom
of the flesh; and so they are enemies to this sacred order and ordinance of
God. For every such Priest, though he should not so far carnalize the Cospel,
as to uphold the civil Magistrate to be the defense of his Ministry in the
Church, by the civil Sword, (as the hypocrites ever do; for they will take up
no Tabernacle but the Tabernacle of Moloch, and bear the Booth of the Kings
Acts 7
) yet he must of necessity maintain his own place, to be a condition and state,
separate, and diverse from the place, office, and state of the rest of his
brethren; which is to maintain the flesh in upholding the dignity of one man
above, or beyond another in the House of God, which the Kingdom of God admits
not of: for they are either all Kings and Priests unto God Rev. 1. 18
, and all heirs, coheires, and first born in Christ Romans 8. 16, 17
Or else not at all of that Kingly Priesthood: for if Jesus Christ had made
himself a person or subsistence, separate, or diverse in any respect from the
rest of his brethren Hebr. 2. 11. 14. and v. 17. 18. Heb. 4. 15.
, we had never been saved: for to retain in, or to, himself, any part of his
excellency, in to retain and keep back all; even as if we should retain any
part of our sin that Christ took not upon him, it were enough to lay the whole
displeasure of God upon us for ever: for his seamlesse Coat cannot be divided
Joh. 19. 23, 24.
. And, he that is guilty of the breach of one of the Commandments, he is
guilty of the breach of all James 2. 9, 10, 11, 12.
. No, that single simplicity of his divine Being, cannot be given, or kept back
in part. Therefore the more curiously man works to adorn himself before God
with ny temporary thing whatsoever; the more diligently he labors to draw the
veil over the Holy Place, that neither himself not others can enter 2 Cor. 3.
14, 11.
; Whither the forerunner is gone, and is already entered for us Heb. 6. 9. 10.
. And so long as he holds the place into which he is entered, and keeps that
Throne of Majesty whereon he is said to sit, (to note unto us the duration of
it Heb. 1. 3.
:) So long shall all man's abilities and excellencies, be made the footstool of
his feet; that is, the basest things that are, therefore never to be presented
before him in any way of his worship Isa. 66.
, or in any submission or obedience unto him: For all our righteousnesses are
as a menstruous cloth Isa. 64. 6.
, And as the ^arly dew that passes away Hos. 6. 4.
; therefore is that word [ untill] brought in, to denote the everlasting
condition of man's abasement in respect of any excellencies of his own before
God.

[ Until.] That is, always, or for ever; as it was said of Micol, that the
should not have a child [ untill] the day of her death, 2 Samuel 6. 23.
that is, should be childlesse for everf. Or (as the word will bear) [ so
long] that is to say, so long as Christ sits upon the throne of Majesty, so
long shall man's abilities and excellencies be debased, and brought to naught
before him.

The dignity and Lordship therefore of our High Priest, can in no case admit of
any humane ordinance brought in, as appertaining to his administration and
service, Col. 2. 20, 1, 22, 23.
in the things of Godg: For that were to diminish the glory and complete
acceptance of the Son of God, what ever it were, or is, that is brought in,
that consists not in faithh, 1 Romans 14. 23.
which never fades, but is of the race, generation, confirmation and dignity of
that Melchisedec that abides a Priest for everi. Heb. 7. 21.
Man therefore is poor, miserable, and naked, stripped of all manner of
created excellencies, if he hold and maintain the virtue and dignity of our
high Priest, who is on the right hand of God, having subdued, consumed, and
brought under the exaltation of the creature in its own excellencies and
virtues in all things, And thence it is that our Prophet adds,

The Lord will send out of Sion the Red of thy Strength, verse. 2.

As in the former verse is declared, how Christ as. a Priest by offering up
himself unto death for our sins; rules and reigns as high Priest over all
things, that are properly the death and sin of man before God. For, as it was
in the beginning, even so it is nowk, Gal. 4. 29.
the creature going about to exalt it self, by some excellency in it self,
Apostatizeth and falls away from his Creater, Genesis 2. 6. 7,
, and becomes most wretched and miserable. So in this verse he declares how
Christ as King, reigns and rules in righteousness Isa. 32. 1.
, having over come and subdued in us Romans 8. 4.
, all that baseness, wretched, and miserable estate and condition that
naturally all flesh is captivated in, and lies under Isa. 61. 1, 2, 3. Heb. 2.
15.
, and in these two does the life and death of the Son of God appear, yea his
Kingly Priesthood, and his Priestly Kingdom; And so the Lord says to my Lord,
Sit thou as a victor at my right hand, interchangeably. In these two does
consist that twofold Lordship, as it is said, The Lord said to my Lord
(interchangeably) Sit thou on my right hand.

And these are the two Cherubims of glory Heb. 9. 5.
raised up, and standing on each end of the Mercy-seat, Exodus 25. 18, 19, 20.
covering it, and reaching each other with their wings, and are both alike
glorious; of which we say with our Apostle, we cannot now particularly speak,
only this, no further then these are set up and maintained amongst us, no
further is the Mercy-seat of Jesus Christ set up amongst us: for they are made
and beaten out of it, and of no other matter, both the one and the other, of
the same pure gold, beaten so with the hammer, as to leave neither excellency
of a creature, nor misery of a creature to be found in them; nor can the lively
Oracle, or that word of life, be uttered, so as to give life, but only from
between them Exodus 25. 21, 22.
, that is, from between the life and death, or from within the Priestly
Kingdom, Numb 7. 89.
and the Kingly Priesthood of our Lord Jesus, the one consuming all the glory
of the creature, by the brightness and splendent glory of that pure word of
God, descending into it: the other destroying all the misery and frailty of the
creature, by taking it into the dignity and blessing of that word of God, and
out of that infirmity to magnify its power and Princely authority for ever.
And this honor have all his Saints. Praise ye the Lord Psalm. 149. whole Psalm
.

Therefore it is That the Rod is sent out of Zion; Shebet, signifies, Rod,
Staff, Scepter, or Tribe. The signification of the word Zion is in this place
to be noted also, which is by interpretation, Dust, or Dryness; noting the
infirmity of man's nature, and impossibility (in respect of any thing that is in
man) to be fruitful, multiply, or increase in the things of God; yet even out
of that does our Lord spring, and exercise his Scepter, and power of his
Kingdom Isa. 53. 2.
, so that when the Kingdom and Dominion of Christ is prosiphesied of Isa. 11.
10.
, he is said to be a Root of Jesse, not mentioning the House of David, a King;
but the Family of Jesse, out of which it was so unlike that ever a King should
come, when as he of whom he came, was but a follower of the Ewes in it Psa. 78.
70, 71.
, yea the Ewes great with young; whereby he is subjected to such Offices in
their (bringing forth) which are below the spirit of a man; from such a
condition is he raised up to be the feeder of his people Israel, yea to be the
head of the Heathen, and Lord of all the earth Psalm. 18. 43, 44. Psa. 2. 8, 9.
Ier. 10. 7.
. And in the exaltation of his Kingdom, when the songs of Salvation are heard
in all the earth, it is said, Cry out and shout, thou inhabitant of Sion: for
great is the holy One of Israel in the midst of thee Isa. 12. 6.
. The word Inhabitant there used, is in the Feminine Gender, Inhabitresse as
being in regard of our nature, but a weak and frail woman, even then when the
Lord appears so mighty in it, and dwelles in the midst of her, even as a man
when he is at home in his own dewlling place, manifests all his power, wisdom
and authority, which he does not amongst strangers.

The Rod or Scepter, therefore of Gods Princely power and authority, springs
only out of man's weakness and insufficiency, yea this Staff, or Rod that
buddeth Number. 17. 8.
; and this Stock or Tribe that multiplies it self as fishes mulitiply without
diminution Genesis 49. 22.
, has no other predecessor, or progenitor, but only man's baseness and
infirmity to bring him forth, insomuch that the Honor, Riches, Genesis 48. 16.
or Power, of Man, shall never bring it forth: But arising out of man's
debility, and infirmity, so it becomes, a sent Rod, being there is no power nor
ability in the creature to produce it, God must needs be the Author of it: And
it is sent from as great a distance as is between heaven and earth Isa. 55. 8.
to 13.
: So as God is the Author of it only, and does authorize it in its work;
therefore it is said to be Thy Rod, implying that he is the owner of it, and
will acknowledge it in its work, to be of, and from, him alone; yea, it is said
to be The Rod or Government of his Power: And therefore though many may strive
against it, yet none can be, able, to prevail; yea, though many Archers shoot
at him, yet shall his Bow abide in strength, and the Arms of his hands are
made strong by the hands of the mighty God of Jacob. And thence is the Feeder,
or Shepherd the Stone of Israel Genesis 49. 23, 24.
: Therefore he says, in adding the next words: Rule thou in the midst of thine
enemies.

What then are the only enemies of the Throne, poverty being void of wealth
and riches, and folly being void of wisdom and Council; and in the midst of
these, or as the word signifies in the heart of these, does our Lord and King
Christ Rule and Reign, for he becomes, or makes himself powerful and able to
save to the uttermost, through our weakness Heb. 7. 25
, in which we come unto God, else can never be joined to the Lord to be one
spirit with him 1 Cor. 6. 17.
, for he being a God that hears Prayer, that is, has all sufficiency in
himself to supply, therefore, all flesh comes unto him, the meaning is, we
bring nothing but weakness to him, that he may be all in all Psalm. 65. 2 1
Cor. 15. 28.
, yea, he is made honorable, and renowned, through our shame and nakedness;
he is rich in Salvation through our poverty; and is made wisdom and Council
through our ignorance, and folly: yea, he is made, and puts on immortality
through our mortality 1 Cor. 15. 53. 54.
, becomes incorruptible, through our Corruptible condition; for whatsoever the
Son of God is, he is made to be such a one 1 Cor. 1. 30.
, which cannot be, Gal. 4. 4.
but with respect unto man, and that only, as he in himself is miserable, and
wretched in all points whasoever, otherwise Christ should be made excellent by
the glory of a Creature, which the Son of God cannot admit, that the Creature
should ad unto his Excellency in the least degree Job. 22. 2. 3. 4.
, The Creature therefore in this way of Christ, only gives demention unto
emencities, which otherwise could not appear yea it seems, height, depth,
length, and breadth, unto that which without it, cannot admit of any such
thing, and so could not be known, admired, or worshipped, by the creature at
all Romans 11. 32. to 36. Ephesians. 3. 16, 17, 18, 19.
, and hence he is made manifest to be the Son of God, by being life from
death, becoming the Lord our righteous Ier. 23. 6.
, by being made sin in us 2 Cor. 5. 21.
, yea the blessedness of the Father to us; by being made a curse in us, or we
the blessed of God in him, by his becoming a curse in us Romans 1. 4. Gal. 3. 13.
, For it is Gods property, work, and prerogative Royal, to make himself
honorable by infirmity; and it is man's work only, and all that he can
attain unto, to make himself honorable, by things that are exelent, at least
in appearance, Acts 12. 21, 22, 23.
, or in the corrrupt minds of those amongst whom he lives Acts 12. 21, 22, 23.
, But so far, as man is from making the Son of God, or from devising and
inventing, that great work of salvation, to lift him up through infirmity, and
purify him through Corruption, 1 Cor. 15. 42, 43, 44.
even so far, is he from justification and acquitting before the Throne of
God, by any thing that is in himself, and so far as any strive, to make
themselves, or the Son of God honorable, by fading things; so far they are
from acknowledging that Christ is become life unto us, through death, which the
Saints of God ever acknowledge, and confess themselves to be his death, as
absolutely, as he is their life, Genesis 6. 5. 2 Cor. 3. 5.
and as Christ cannot be without the one, nor the other, no more can they, for
he cannot become the Son of man but must dye to all man's exellencies and
glory, else his own, as he is God, were not full and complete, neither can we
be made the Sons of God, but we must rise from all wretchedness and
infirmity, or else his death is not full and complete, but he, is detained in
the grave, which is impossible that the Son of God should be held of death,
Gal. 2. 19. 20.
So then. a rod that is sent, as in the Text, exercised in us, or in our
nature, and not in himself, or his own nature, as he is God; for then it could
not be a sent Rod; as is affirmed, nor given, as in the second Psalm, namely,
that could neither be said to be given, that he rules over Psalm. 16. 10. Romans
6. 9. 14. Romans 8, 10, 11.
; if there were not a like interchangable gift, when we see our infirmities
therefore, we behold the resurrection of Christ in them, Psalm. 2. 8.
or else we deny that he has vanquished and overcome them; and so detain him
still in the grave, 2 Cor. 12. 9, 10. 2 Cor. 11. 30.
not confessing his rule in the midst of his enemirs: so also, if we perceive
the power and glory of this world, to come out, and muster up it self against
us, we see his death in it, and so it becomes livelesse unto us, that
acknowledge life to be only in him 1 Cor. 15. 12, 13, 14.
, and we perceive how he makes that even the Footestoole of his feate, and will
break and shatter them all to pieces Col. 3. 3, 4.
, as a potters Vessel, and before he shall want executioners, every man shall
sheath his Sword in his Brothers side Psalm. 2. 9. Revel. 2. 26, 27.
, not only in things that concerns this temporary life, but in things of a
spiritual and of an eternal nature also Exodus 32. 27.
: Wherefore whether we look upon our own infirmities, or the worlds glory, and
tyranny. Christ in this twofold respect (according to the Faith of the Gospel)
becomes, 1 Cor. 11. 18, 19.
, For these are those Cherubims, or Cherubs that are set at the East of Eden,
with the flame of a Sword shaken turning it self, to keep the way of the Tree
of Life Romans 4. 25 Revel. 11. 4, 5. Revel. 20. 9.
; namely this Kingly Priest, and this Priestly King: for Kings are Cverubbs, or
Cherubions Genesis 3. 24.
, And those that place the glory of the Kingdom, and Priesthood of Christ, in
things according to the ways of men, or attainable by man, that is in any
thing that may proceed out of the wisdom of a Creature, they fall from the
dignity and glory of the Son of God, in so doing: read diligently for proof
hereof, that of the prophet Ezekiel Ezekiel. 28. 14, 16.
, and those that find and place the things of the Kindoms, and Priesthood of
Jesus Christ, in such things, as are neither of man nor by man Ezekiel. 12. to 20.
, nor are they found in any but in the Son of God himself Gal. 1. 11. 12.
; They, and they only, rise from that base and miserable estate and condition
of all mankind, unto the glory, grace, and dignity of the Son of God Ephesians.
1. 22. 23.
: therefore these Cherubims are placed at the East of Eden Ephesians. 1. 18. to 22.
Romans 8. 16. 17.
, with the fl^me of a Sword turned, or changed, (as the word is) for the Hebrew
word Ceshaph, signifies turning or changing, or transforming of one thing into
another: the word also translated glistering or flaming as a fire, or Sword,
alluded unto, has the signification of secret, or close conveyance, as in
secret sleights of juggling, whereby men have their Senses so dazzled that they
cannot perceive nor find out the Gen 3. 24.
motion, or translating of things: for these, (namely the Kingly and Priestly
Offices of Christ) being the very glory of the Temple, and Kingdom of God, and
the only, and sose entry, and in-lets, into the Kingdom, or that garden of
God Ezekiel. 31. 8, 9 Cant. 5. 1.
, or way to eat of, or communicate in, and with, that Tree of life, are there
set forth unto us, under the name of Kings, or Cherubs, Shuttings Man out of
the gar den, declaring what work and operation they have, in the hearts and
minds of the men of this world, in that way of the fall and manner of their
apostacy from God, not giving credit unto the word of God, according as he
has expressed himself in the Gospel, for the not perceiving the way and
manner of conveyance, of this Kingly and Priestly Offices, as it is in Christ,
according to that glorious translation and mutual communication, betwixt God
and man in him; they devise, invent, conjecture, and search out, all ways and
means according to the art, and wisdom of man, in whatsover the imagination
of his own heart, after the cun^ing slights, and devices of Satan, can
possibly bring forth unto it self 2 Cor. 11. 3. Col. 2. 14. 2 Pet. 2. 14. 18.
2 Pet. 1. 16.
to dignifie and set up both the one, and the other unto himself: And hence
arises all that Enchantment, Conjuration, Sooth-saing, diveing, Necromancie,
and Witchcrafts, that are now in the world, so condemned by the Law of God, in
all places of those writings of Moses, which are properly meant, of those
spiritual juglings, to deceive, delude, and destroy the souls of men Deus.
18. 11. Deuteronomy. 2 27. Deuteronomy. 4. 7. Deuteronomy. 5. 7. Josu. 13. 22. Esa. 2. 6. Exodus 22.
18.
, according to that deceit, wherewith themselves are deceiv, ed, leading
unstable souls down, to the pit of corruption, by art, and humane learning
exercised in and about the word of God, after the manner of the entising words
of man's wisdom, being void and destitute of that wisdom and power of God 1
Cor. 2. 4. to 9.
, For the wisdom of God, does so elegantly translate our sins unto himself,
and his righteousness unto us, in this way of Christ 2 Cor. 5. 21.
, revealing and declaring it unto the world, by such phrases, and manner of
operations, as are frequently, conversant in every man's mouth, and heart Romans
10. 6, 7, 8.
, through which things those dazzle the eyes of their understanding, and by
their own subtle sleights do change and turn the things God exppresseth, into
the proper intent and operation of their own natural and brutish apprehension
Jude 10, 11, 12, 13.
. directly contrary to the truth, mind and meaning of the Lord. So that they
become the only Wizards and Juglers in the world, and the more seemingly
spiritual, the more dangerous and aborninable. For when our Lord speaks of
the power and glory, place and office of the Son of God, they translate and
transfer it to the Sons of mortal and vain man. So as, when God speaks of
sin, which Christ was made and yet knew no sin 2 Cor. 5. 21.
, and therefore must needs cleanse them from it. They find such curiosity
about this point, in their natural, and artificial understanding, that their
art, wit, and invention, is exercised to find out sin what it is, in its
nature agravations, and graduall operations, according to its proper and due
demensions; and accordingly to measure out punishments proportionable, even
unto death it self; And that in such devised ways for the terror of it, as
though they had undertaken to cleanse the World of sin themselves, and that in
a most curious, fit and proportionable way; as though the death of the Son of
God were of no force nor virtue. Dan. 3. 19. 20. Dan. 6. 7. Acts 7. 59. Heb.
11. 35. 36. 37.
Great art, and skill, is to be used herein, by the Divines, Soothsayers, or
Deviners of this World; else man could never have a heart, to thrust down into
Sheol, his brother made in the Image of God together with himself, as also both
alike and the same in that act of apostasy 1 Cor. 15. Romans 5. 17. 18, 19.
; nor could he have a head tolook for Gods approbation, and acceptance in such
acts (as our Savior Christ fore-tels he will) if it were not for this
divination Ioh. 16. 2.
. And as the persecuters of Steven when they stoned him, prayed for the
acceptance of their souls, in so doing: For if the words be well scanned, it
will prove to be their prayer made for themselves, and not his; for his prayer
is declared to be for them, that God would not lay it to their charge Act. 7. 59
, which was answered by God, and made effectual in bringing Saul to become a
Paul Act. 22. 20.
. Nor could he adventure to transfer unto himself those things that are proper
unto the Son of God, as to be a cleanser of the world from sin, were it not
for this Art, wherein great and secret slight is used in this kind of close
conveyance. So that when the Lord speaks of the Cross of Christ in that
humbled and dejected estate of the word of God Ioh. 1. 14. Isa. 53. 2. to 8.
, they well perceive there is great curiosity and skill therein, but they
cannot find it out to be in any place, but where there is an estate and
condition, for the present, encumbered with heaviness and sorrow; and therefore
their Art is used to see how to find out Religion in defending the oppressed,
fatherless, and widow, relieving, comforting and lifting such up, in their
outward estates and condition; and so by this carnal apprehension judging the
Kingdom of God to consist in these transitory things Romans 14. 17. John 18. 36.
; and hereby they always keep Christianity beneath, under, and below
themselves, and make Christ to stand in need of their help and relief, though
he be spiritual, and themselves never so carnal; and therefore cannot be
ministered unto by them: For he that gives to a Disciple must do it in the name
or authority of a Disciple: that is, in the place and office of a Learner, and
then he shall not lose the reward, or (as the word is) the end of a Disciple,
which is to be made a Teacher himself, as our Lord ever does, without whom a
Disciple is nothing Mat. 10. 42.
, nor is the Lord without a Disciple.

And this requires the same curiosity and skill in Soo^hsaying, or else they
could never make men to believe that they were the defense, and protection; the
relief and raisers up of the Son of God, as though he were held of death,
till sorry man puts forth the hand for his help. In this conveyance, or change,
their eyes are dazzled also: for the Cross of Christ consists not, nor can it
possibly have a Being, but in the Crown Act. 8 33, Heb. 2. 7. to 11.
, though they know it not. But thus their art, and, carnal skill, is exercised
in this point, in finding out multitudes of sins (though they know nor one in
truth) to be plagued and punished according to the way they understand it, and
persons in misery to be relieved and delivered only in the way of temporary
relief and redemption, and by this means keep the power and virtue of that
resurrection of the Son of God, that it cannot be heard of, nor known in the
world, by their metamorphosing and changing it into transitory and momentany
things, which has indeed vanquished, overcome, and put an end to all these
things; so as if so be it does but appear, and be made manifest, these can in
no case captivate, or keep us under 2 Cor. 16. 7, 8, 9, 10, Romans 8. 35. 36. 37.
, but we triumph and are victors over them all 1 Cor. 15. 55, 56, 57.
.

Again, when the word of God speaks of the power, place, office, and
operations of the Son of God, they perceive no little art and cunning skill
exercised thereabout; and therefore they exercise all man's wit, and abilities
with respect to the word of God, without which they cannot bewitch to
destruction Exo. 7. 9, 10, 11, 12.
, no more then the Spirit of Christ can Evangelize to salvation, but with
respect to our frailties and infirmities: Therefore they exercise their Art to
fit and furnish men with abilities, and to adopt and adorn particular persons
with Places, and Offices, which are proper and peculiar only to the Son of
God himself. For they know not (neither will they learn) the way of that
Common salvation, and faith, once delivered unto the Saints Jude 3 v.
: wherein God exercises his grace mutually, without any respect of persons at
all Act. 10. 34
. For as Christ takes all kind of infirmities in every one alike, we being by
nature the same that others are Ephesians. 2. 3.
: so does he dispense his grace to all alike, and is the same in all Ioh. 1.
16. Ephesians. 1. 23. and 4. 6.
. All the use of this turning and change of things from the Son of God to
Man, is this, it serves only to adorn and set up the creature, That flesh may
seem to have wherein to glory, and whereof to boast 2 Cor. 5. 12.
, by Offices and Excellencies given by Man, and acquired unto himself; hereby
destroying and disanulling the death of the Lord Jesus, as though he had never
died unto the things of this present world Romans 8. 10. 34.
; but as though his coming in the flesh had been only to set up the flesh,
that is to say, man's glory, rather then to pull it down Isa. 2. 17.
, and to bring in, rather then make an end of all things: For whatsoever he
brings in, endures for ever Dan. 9. 24.
, and it is his glory only that must appear in his House and Sanctuary 2
Chro. 5. 14.
. Great skill in Conjuration must needs be had, else the world could never be
borne in hand, that Christ is crufied in the flesh, or to the flesh, and
quickened in the Spirit 1 Pet. 3. 18.
, whilst they make it their daily work to set him up according to the flesh.
And if the spirituality of his Kingdom appear in any measure, they seek to
demolish and overthrow the same: for indeed otherwise their earthly and carnal
Priesthood cannot stand, no more then Dagon can stand before the Ark of God 1 Samuel 5. 2, 3 4.
; for Christ were not a Priest, if he were on the earth; or of any earthly
consticution: that is, after the Order of Aron Heb. 8. 4.
. For all such offer gifts according to the Law, that present unto God that
which shall have end, which is accounted by God a carnal Commandment Col. 2.
21. 22. Heb. 7. 16.
; For there cannot be a Priesthood Eldership, or any Office in the House of
God, held to be more exelent then all the rest of the Saints are also invested
into: but it is earthly and carnal: and cannot agree with the Kingdom and
Preisthood of Christ. For to maintain a greater Dignity and place, in one man
then in another, in the House of God, is nothing else but the Law of works, and
walking according to the carnal Commandment, according to which Christ was
never made a Priest Heb. 7. 13 14. 15. 16. 17.
: but in being Priest he abolisheth it Heb. 7. 18.
.

For if Christ had detained any office, or exelencie (what soever) in himself
Ephesians. 1. 23.
, and not conveyed the same unto, and communicated the same with his brethren,
our salvation had been made void, and overthrown. Eor if Christ detain in
himself, any excelencie or Office, in which the Saints Communicate not with
him; then must he of necessity detain all, and they communicate in none, else
he cannot be the Son of God, and so no Savior of the world. For where any part
of his office or exelencie is found, there is all, or else he were not God; nor
could he be indeviduall, if any part of his excelencie were communicated and
not the whole James 1. 5. 17. John 1. 16.
. Therefore to officiate men in the House of God, in such places as others of
their professed brethren, whom they account off as of Saints, are not capable
of together with them; is earthly and carnal, seting up the Leviticall
Preisthood of the Law, and not that of our Melchisedeck, and cannot stand with,
but utterly overthrows the Preisthood and Kingdom of Jesus Christ. For he has
obtained a more exelent Ministry, in as much as he is the Mediator of a better
Testament Heb. 7. 21, 22, 23, 24. Heb. 8. 6,
And in that Testament or Covenant: do the Saints Minister communicating with
their Head in that grace, having fellowship with him in his office of
Mediatourship as well as in any other grace, and may as well be called Mediators
in him. As Moses was said to be a Mediator Gal. 3. 19.
, or as Joshua, and the Judges of Israel were called Saviors Neb. 7. 27. Heb.
4. 8. Oba. 21. ver.
, if we do not Idolize the word, which is the very ground of all Idoletry in
the world; even as it is in the Name Jesus to bow at it, as yielding more
respect unto that, then to an other title given unto him Phil. 2. 10.
. So it is in this, and other expressions of the word of God; For to Mediate is
to come between, or to be an umpeere, or an arbitrator for so much the word
imports. That is, to Judge indifferently, and without partiallity of the things
of two, and so as to bring them to be one. For a Mediator is not a Mediator
of one, but God is one; Gal. 3. 20.
that is, to Judge rightly of the things of God, and of the things of man;
truly knowing and pertaking of the mind of the one, and of the other, which the
men of this world count blasphemy; that the Saints should communicate in such
an office. Although it be true, that without participation and communication
herein, No prayer can be made unto God, that can be fruitful unto us, or
acceptable unto him Romans 8. 26. 22.
; Yet does it blaspeme, strick, or pierce, thorough their way of Mediatourship;
who judge of all things according to the flesh, that is according to the will,
and natural understanding of a man, that perceives not the things of God 1
Cor. 2. 14.
. And so indeed their carnal Testament, is confirmed unto them by the death of
the Testatour Heb. 9. 6. 17.
; For they seting up Christ according to the flesh, do thereby put him to death
in the Spirit; And so are killers and Crucifiers of the Lord of glory unto
themselves, putting him to an open shame Heb. 6. 6.
, in the whole conrse of their Ministry. Without which, they cannot uphold
their places, and offices, unless they maintain the first borne, in Cain,
Esau, and in Egypt; namely the most exelent things that nature can bring forth,
preferring them before that virtue, and power of the Son of God Exo. 7. 11
. So that even as their Fathers did, so do they unto this day Act. 7. 51.
. But out Mediator gives man his proper right and due, who is weak, base, and
infirm in all things; in the matters of God, Yea concludes him in his best
estate to be altogether vanity, or emptiness Psalm. 39. 5.
; and gives God his due also who is ever Honorable, Wise, Powerful, and full
of goodness and truth Exodus 34. 6.
. So that wherever he appears, there is glory in the highest Luke 2. 14.
, and fullness unto perfection Luke 1. 53.
; yea so, as when he appears in the greatest weakness and infirmity of the
flesh, in this way of Christ, he is stronger then man; that is, then all the
power and policy in the world 1 Cor. 1. 25.
. And hence it is, that the Subjects of this Kingdom, or people assembled
together with this our Priest, are so described and set forth unto us. verse 3.

Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power.

The Hebrew word Nadaboth hear used, translated willing is an elegant phrase;
clothed, or adorned: with variety of excellencies, signifying willing
oblations, or free will offerings; and it is a word plural, as if he should
say wills, or volentatinesses, or liberalities, and it has the signification
of princely. or nobility, as if he should call them bountious princes, or
Kings, in their Ministry, and office, in the Priesthood, or offering of their
oblations to God, who are ever nobly consecrated, or have their hands filled
(as the word consecrate signifies) to minister most bountifully, liberally and
freely in the house of God 1 Chronicles. 29. 20. 21.
: not moved, or constrained by any extrinsicall thing whatsever; no more then a
fountain is moved by any thing out of it self, to send forth its streams; its
own fullness being sufficient for that purpose Psalm. 36. 8. 9.
: nor can they be vilified in any part of their office, or operations; this
princely power and authority being none of theirs, but the Lords, who cannot
admit of any vilification, or diminution of it, at all; no more then of
himself, or of his own power and glory; by any power or policy whatsoever
Psalm. 68. 26.
such is the dignity, and sovereignty of every person or subsistence in this
royal Priesthood and peculiar people Mal. 3. 6.
now the time when they are made manifest and to appear, ( is) in the day of
thy power, or in the day of thy Army, or in the day of thy great Army; as the
word will bear without any straining of it at all.

That is, when all these Kingly warriers, or priestly willing offerers; are
summoned, ordered, composed, and united together, in one point of time, as in a
day; for a thousand years, with the Lord, are as one day, and one day as a
thousand years, according to his reckoning and account 1 Pet. 2. 9.
and if we account not as he does; we cannot be Secretaries, nor recorders
in the house of the Lord 2 Pet. 3. 8.
: So then, when all power and glory, consisting in place, person, office or
excellency whatsoever, that has been, are, or ever shall; are summoned
together, and united in one subsistence, or being (as in one day) then does the
power of this princely Army make it self Namanifest, as in a day of muster (as
the word implies) a whole tion is brought into one body, so as every particular
one has the power, glory, charge, and courage of the whole; and the whole,
has the power, glory, charge, and courage of every particular x: so out of
that unity that is in Christ, is brought forth all, and al manner of virtues,
and excellencies whatsoever, that have been, are or ever shall be distributed
unto, or consisting in the whole Kingdom, and that equally unto all, and in
every particular member thereof alike, without any respect of persons at all
Isa. 36. 3.
in way of any addition, or diminution, preferring one before another, or
debasing of any one, as lower then another Isa. 66. 8.
; so that the whole glory; and grace takes in every particular; and every
particular takes in the whole Acts 10. 34. Iam. 2. 8. 9.
: otherwise it cannot be the grace and glory of God, but only a devised grace
and glory, evented by the creature, which shall come to naught Iam. 2. 1, 2, 3,
4.
for in this holy Army, that which is the power and glory of one, is the power
and glory of all; and that which is the glory and power of all, is the glory
and power of every one in particular; for in the Kingdom of God, the
multiplication of it can no ways detract or take away from that one out of
whom it grows; nor can the abridgment of it, or bringing of it into one
particular: suffer, or admit, of the least diminution or depravation, of the
power and glory exercised in the whole, from any particular, member of it; for
in the Kingdom of God, as one day is as a thousand years, and a thousand
years as one day John 17. 21, 22, 23. 1 John 4. 17.
; even so, one Esa. 4. 6. 7. 1 Pet. 1. 24.
2 Pet. 3. 8.
Esa. 6. 22. and 66. 8.
individual subsistence, is as a multiplied Nation, or Kingdom; yea, a complete
world Isa. 60. 22. and 16. 18.
and a complete world of Believers, glory, or grace, is as one individual
subsistence; in which respect it surpasses in glory all other Kingdoms, or
pollecies that are, or ever shall be, in this momentany, brittle, and fading
world; therefore Solomon himself sent ships to other Nations to fetch Gould,
Silver, Ivory, Apes, and Peacokes; which his own Land afforded not 1 John. 4.
14. Heb. 2. 5.
. Yea the Lord himself will have pre-eminence in point of Kingdom, do the
men of the world what they can 1 Kin. 10. 22. 2 Cor. 6. 21.
: For if this spiritual muster, or day of that powerful Army, be faithfully
brought forth; the world with all its fortrests, Battlements, and blockt up
condition; like unto that City of Jerico, to hold out the holy one of Israel
yet shall it not be able to stand before him Psalm. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
therefore their manner of assembling is noted to be;

In the comely honor of the Sanctuary, as the word will bear.

Wherein he declares (by an holy alusion, unto those beutifull and honorable
garments, which the Priest put on, when he entered into the holy place) that
every one in this assembly, is adorned with those royal ornaments, wherewith
the Son of God himself, was beautified and adorned, when he entered into
that holy place Josh. 6. the whole chapter
even Heaven it self Heb. 6. 19. 20.
; into those things which are within the veil; taking our nature into the
bosom of the Father, even as Lazarus was carried into the bosom of our Father
Abraham Heb. 9. 42.
So that what ever Christ was furnished with, when he entered into the holiness
of holinesses, as the word is Luke 16. 22. 23.
; through our nature, or the veil of his flesh Heb. 10. 20.
, which is the very way of that wonderful multiplication, Dew. 6. 4.
; and yet does as truly multiply and make himself many in us; though he be
one, as we are united, and made one in him, though we in our selves be many 1
Cor. 10. 16. 17. Joh. 17. 11. 21.
; so that with the very same things wherewithal himself is adorned, are the
people of this assembly, every one in particular, furnished and adorned with
all in like manner Joh. 1. 16. Joh. 17. 22. Romans 8. 11
For John, and Christ, are forerunners, and as John is his forerunner, on the
Earth, declaring what entertainment, Christ has ever in the world 1 John 15.
18 9. 23. 24. 25
; which is epitomized in that act of Herod's taking off his head Psalm. 22. 11.
to 18. Mat. 14 8. 9, 10, 11.
; and that for denying of Herod, liberty to satisfy himself in the works of
the flesh, though Herod pretends faithfulness to himself, and others in so
doing; being in Covenant, yea, under oath with it, as the world ever is unto
its own ways Isay. 28. 15.
; even so, as it is with John, in showing what entertainment Christ has with
the men of this world, so is Christ our forerunner, declaring what
entertainment we have with the Father in his Kingdom Heb. 4. 14.
; which is also summed up, and epitomized in the carriage of the Father unto
him, in that he has stated and plased him at his right hand, commiting his
whole power, authority, and glory anto him Mat. 26. 64. Mat 18. 18.
; such are the honorable ornaments of holiness wherewith every one of this
Assembly, or Army, are adorned and blessed with all Rev. 2. 26. 27. 28. Rev.
19. 11. 14.
; in this way of the Kingdom and Priesthood of Christ, therefore the natvre of
their offerings and oblations, are set forth and described in the next words;

Verse 3. Of the womb of the early morning, in thee the dew of thy youth,

The word used here (translated womb) is a relative phrase, and therefore
cannot be looked upon, or understood, but with respect unto seed, no more then
we can nominate or know, any husk, or hull of corn, or of any seed, without
having respect unto the grain, or seed, that is naturally contained in it;
therefore the barren, or the miscarrying womb, is said to be accursed Hos. 9.
14.
; because it is the disstruction of seed, which is taken for granted to be
communicated with it, by early morning is meant that spring of day, that is from
on high Lu. 1. 78.
; and is of the same rise, alike rare; and of none other antiquity then that
morning and early days which is specified by the Lord himself, for the
convincing of all flesh for assuming unto it self, any ability, to be an
assistant unto him, in any of his works Ioh. 38. 7.
; which by the scope and circomstances of the place, must be meant the morning
of eternity, compare therewith ver. the 4. for explication hereof.

The youth or the youngling here spoken of, is that momentany, frail, and
brittle estate of man's natural condition, for all flesh is grass Esa. 40. 6.
, and the word was made flesh John 1. 14.
; and this fleeting condition of mankind, never received being but in this womb
of eternity; for the word of eternity, in giving man his form, assumed the
nature, and in assuming, the nature it gives man his form, so that man in that
way of Christ, has no being but in the word of God; for if the humane nature
of the Son of God, had at any time subsisted out of the divine, it had ever
been so, for our Lord changes not Mal. 3. 6.
; nay, if our nature should subsist, out of the word, Christ then should have
two beings; and then he could not be a Savior; for God cannot give his glory
to another Esa. 42. 8.
: therefore all that communicate therein, or participate thereof, must become
one with him, in that glorious way of unit in Christ, otherwise it descends
not upon them John 16 13, 14, 15.
; for the grace of God can no more descend upon any, that are not of the faith
of Christ (or of this subsistence as the Apostle interprets faith to be, the
hupostasis, or subsistence Heb. 11. 1.
) then the sins of a wicked man, can be transferred or turned over unto God,
whilst the man himself is not in unity with him; or the hand, or any part of
the body can be light, without unity with the eye Mat. 22. 23.
. Nay, man in his first creation, was not, but as he was made and sprung up,
out of this womb of eternity; for he was made in the Image of God Genesis 1. 26.
27.
: and there is no Image of God, but only the wisdom of God in that way of
Christ; for he is the express Image of his subsistence Col. 1. 15. 2 Cor. 4.
4. Heb. 1. 3.
: Therefore the yongling,, youth or momentany nature of man, (as frail and
fruitless, as the dust) Genesis 2. 7. and 3. 19.
; cannot be found to have a being, but of, or in, the womb of this early
morning; hence it is that the wrath of God kindles it self upon wicked men;
burning down to the nethermost hell, for this their natural condition, being
made alive unto God, in that first act of their Creation as they were made in
that Image, and righteousness of God, which is found no where else but in the
Son of God, Jesus Christ Heb. 1. 3.
; is an occasion of their horror and vexation for ever, when they see
themselves fallen so infinite short of it, and have made themselves so contrary
and opposite unto it Romans 8. 6, 7, 8. Esa. 55. 7, 8, 9.
: Even as the joy, and salvation of the godly springs up, Ephesians. 2. 1.
and arises, out of this, that naturally they are dead in sins and
trespasses Ephesians. 2. 1
. For if it were not for our sins and trespasses, the Son of God had never
dyed 1 Timothy 1 15. Matthew. 9. 13.
: And if it were not for that righteousness and life that is in the Son of
God, the son of Earth, or Adam, had never made such a forfeiture, and brought
forth such a death upon himself and his posterity Isai. 24. 5, 6. John 15, 24,
24.
.

The womb of the early morning then, and the youth, or youngling, are one, time
and eternity, mortallity and immortallity, that which is momentany, and that
which endures fo ever 1 Cor. 15. 43, 44. Ioh. 1. 1, 2.
, are become one individual subsistence in Christ, so that without both the
one and the other, the Son of God is not Isai. 9. 6, 7. Luke 1. 31, 32, 33.
: Therefore he that can behold his own infirmities and frailties, and yet not
perceive how the Son of God ( that knows no infirmity) takes his Being from
them unto his humiliation and death Isai. 53. 4, 5, 6, 7. 2 Cor. 4. 10. 1 Pet.
3. 18.
that man can never behold the grace, and righteousness of God (who of
himself knows no grace nor righteousness) to see how the son of sorry man,
who is nothing but infirmity and frailty, takes his Being from that grace and
righteousness that is in God, unto justification and life 1 Cor. 5. ^ 21.
: Such men therefore that cannot rejoice in infirmities and tribulations, they
never knew the meaning of the righteousness of God through Faith in Christ 2
Cor. 12. 8, 9, 10.
: But shall weep and howl when ever it appears Rev. 1. 7. Joel 2. 1, 2, 3, 4,
5, 6.
. For he that cannot give glory to the humiliation of Christ, he can never give
glory to his exaltation. For the two Cherubims at each end of the Mercy-seat,
are alike beautiful and glorious, as is noted above. This Womb and Youngling
therefore, are never divided; for their separation is their uniting together.
For the fall or defection of man must be accounted according to the dignity of
the person, or subsistence of him that fell Genesis 1. 26. 27. Luke 3. 38.
. For as the death of Christ, was of an infinite extent, because it was the
death of him that was the Son of God Acts 20. 28. Heb. 6. 6. 1 Cor. 2. 8.
, though his humane nature was finite and momentany (in it self,) is, and ever
shall be, for nothing is infinite in it self but God alone 1 Timothy 1. 17.
. So he that fell, was made in the image of God Psalm. 8. 6, 7, 8.
; which image cannot be finite, but infinite: therefore the person or
subsistence falling, being in the dignity of Gods Image, his fall must needs be
of an infinite extent, though his soul and body was but a finite creature, as
the soul and body of Christ was Psalm. 39. 4, 5. Psalm. 22. 6.
. Man's fall therefore being of an infinite nature and extent, it unites him to
God: for there is but one Infinite: Therefore God and Man are thereby become one
Ephesians. 2. 10. to 22.
: So that the nearest unity is wrought through the greatest distance and
separation that ever was Isai. 43. 5, 6, 7.
. Such is the way of Faith in that mystery of God by Jesus Christ 1 Timothy 3. 6.
, that if it be declared according to the verity of it, there appears an utter
impossibility in the judgment of man, that any should be destroyed. but with
God and according to his judgment it is possible Mat. 19. 25, 26.
. And therefore has he found out a way also, that the greatest distance and
separation arises out of, and is wrought through the nearest unity that ever
was Isai. 14. 10.
, and that is, that Mystery Babel or the mystery of iniquity Rev. 17. 5. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7.
; which if it be rightly opened, according to the nature thereof, there
appears an utter impossibility in the judgment of man also, that any should
be saved; but with God, and according to his judgment, it is possible Mat. 19.
25, 26.
: And therefore out of the greatest distance and separation, the unity arises:
For the early Morning of eternity, and the Youngling of a moment of time, are
at an utter distance in nature: And from the unity of these two, all the
Oblations and Offerings of these bountious Princes, (exercised in this
Priesthood, or Kingdom) do arise 1 Cor. 3. 10. 11.
and appear in number, and for refreshment, even as the dew in the morning
upon the grass; for these two are like the Manna and the Quails; the Quails
come in the evening, or between the two evenings (as the word is Exodus 16 12.
: the flesh appears in the end of a twofold day; for there is a day of glory,
and a day of shame, ending in the flesh of Christ. For there is the glory of
man, which is as the flower of the field Isai. 40, 6, 7.
, and the shame of the Son of God, in taking that upon him, which is such a
deformity, That his visage is marred more then any man, and his form more then
the sons of men Isai. 52. 14. Isai 53. 3.
. These two are both ended, (even as the Evening ends the day, by virtue of
that Dayspring that visites our nature from on high Luke 1. 78
, and the rising of that Son of righteousness with health in his wings Mal.
4. 2.
, which affords a morning unto us, that discovers that heavenly Manna, even
the bread of life, whereof if a man eat, he shall never dye Joh. 6. 50
. And as the evening and the morning afforded sufficient food for Israel in the
wilderness: so does this early morning, and youth, or youngling, afford
sufficient store, and plenty of oblations and offerings to all such as are of
this Royal Priesthood and Kingdom, that as most free, bountious and liberal
Princes, they may offer abundantly before the Lord, even as Israel of old has
done 1 Chronicles. 29. 21.
. For their Royal conscration affords fullness of their hands for ever Ezekiel.
10. 2.
: Therefore their offerings are compared unto the Dew, for the abundance and
plenty of them Deuteronomy. 32. 2. and 33. 13.
. For according to the storehouse of man's frailties, and infirmities, and the
treasury of Gods grace and excellencies, so are their oblations and free will
off rings multiplied Ephesians 6. 18, Rev. 5. -- 8.
, which are here compared to the multiplicitie of the drops of dew upon the
grass in the early morning, which the men of the world going forth according
to man's day, or judgment 1 Cor. 4 3
, or rather in the night of their own understandings Ephesians. 4. 18,
, they cannot discern nor perceive the abundance thereof. And if the Sun of
righteousness arise unto them, through the publication of the Gospel by others,
the clearer it shines, and the more effectually it puts forth its heat, the
more is this heavenly Dew, or Manna exhausted and drawn up out of their reach
and view. For seeing they have not learned how to rise, come forth, and fill
their hands in the first looking forth and aspect of the Sun, they cannot
partake in this Manna or in these holy offerings, and free Oblations, but all
vanishes out of their sight: For he that goes not out of his Tent to gather,
with the Sun appearing is, his Tabernacle Exodus 16. 21. Psalm. 19. 4 5, 6.
, be cannot participate in these offering; either he must be with the first, or
not at all, in the things of this kingdom. If there be a Sonship before that by
which he becomes and is made a Son, he cannot receive a childhood in this
house, nor be kinded or aly'd unto God Romans 8 6 17.
. If there be a righteousness before that whereby he is made righteous, it is
not the righteousness of God by faith in Christ Jesus, he is yet in his sin 2
Cor. 5. 21.
.

If there be a Spirit before that by which he is illuminated, it is not the
Spirit of God, received by the hearing of faith Gal. 3. 2.
; but a spirit of delusion, arising from the works of the Law; if there be a
Church to be found before that whereof we acknowledge our selves to be members,
it is not the Church of Christ, nor the Assembly of the Sons of the living God;
But the Synagogue of Satan, and the Congregating of that Son of perdition,
to plot and contrive how to strengthen himself against the Son of God Psa.
2. 1, 2. 3, Rev. 20. 7, 8, 9. Ier. 5. 7.
; Making melody unto themselves from the works of their own hands Hab. 1. 15.
16. Job 31. 26, 27, 28.
, Triumphing and dancing about a Calfe of their own device and framing Exo.
32. 3, 4, 5, 6. 1 Cor. 10. 7.
. For the Stars of the Morning, that sing together in that one, and alone
bright Morning Starr Jesus Christ, and those Sons of God that shout for joy,
at the laying of that first Corner Stone of this new Creation or Building, are
not only of the Offspring, but of that root of David also: who takes his
being from the Womb of this early Morning. So as eternity becomes time in us,
and time in us becomes eternity in him Rev. 22. 16. Job. 36. 4, 5, 6, 7. Zack.
4. 7.
: Therefore it is that the Poole of Bethesda, or house of efusion and heavenly
washing John 5. 1, 7.
never puts forth virtue, but only upon him that steppeth first in when the
waters are moved; So that, if ever God open our eyes, through the Revelation of
Jesus Christ we shall see ourselves first in that Poole of heavenly washing, or
effusion of his grace through his beloved Son, the first in Church fellowship
and Communion, through that Unity we have in our Head Ephesians. 4. 15, 16.
. The first in espousall, through that mutual Contract that is in Christ; for
we are betrothed in that Righteousness that has the same glory in respect of
beginning, that it has in respect of ending. For as impossible as it is, for
it to have an end, alike impossibility there is, that ever it should have
beginning Hosea 2. 19, 20.
: And that man that cannot acknowledge himself to be eternized through that
spirit, that is in Christ Jesus proceeding from the Father Ephesians. 12. 18, 19,
20. 21, 22.
, he can never acknowledge the Son of God to be made momentany and subject unto
death, in time, through that flesh assumed in the womb of the Uirgin 1 Cor. 12.
12, 13. John 1. 14.
. For such as the death of the Son of God is, such is the true life of a
Christian, or of the Son of man; they hold correspondencie in in all Points,
in way of antithesis, or diameter-wise 1 Pet. 3. 18.
, to deny the one therefore, is to deny the other in the true intent and
meaning thereof, and in this point the hippocrites of our days, in their
preaching and professing, do nothing else but take up Arms, and all their
Religion is but a continued Act of striving against their maker Esa. 45 9.
. If the death of Christ Jesus therefore have an end, the life and state of a
Christian is come to naught, and vanishes. Woe unto the World then, for their
falsifying of this point; For the dew of this early Morning, and of this Youth
or Youngling is such, that if it should not descend, and that continually, it
could never ascend, or be exhausted and drawn up into heaven, by that Sun of
righteousness perpetually; and if it should be exhausted and drawn up only,
it could never descend nor fall upon the things below Ephesians. 4. 9, 10.
; But jointly in the one and in the other, the earth is made abundantly
fruitful, and serviceable in all the store and plentious varieties thereof:
Devt. 11, 14, 15.
and the Heavens become glorious, and full of Dominion and Lordship in all
their several aspects, and opperations, thereupon Hosea 2. 21. 22 Psa. 19. 1,
to 6.
. Yea, who ever he be that can find a Priesthood, receiving power and taking
its Dominion before that, by virtue of which, he himself ministers in the
things of God; that party so officiated, is no Minister of the most high God,
in the holy things of God, and House of the Lord Heb. 7, 16, 17.
: but a Priest of Baal exercised in an Idols Temple, for unto him the people
bow, and not unto Christ Romans 11. 4.
; For that Congregation cannot be orderly in their own estimation, unless
they give honor unto him, or unto them so officiated John. 5. 44.
, that can neither uphold nor continue their Office, nor their own lives to
minister therein Heb. 7. 23.
; nor is the comfort and salvation of all those that depend upon them, of any
more stabilitie, or certainty Psa 97. 7. Psa. 110. 4, 5. 6, 7, 8.
. Therefore it is, that our high Priest only is consecrated by an Oath Heb. 7.
28.
; and all other are after, or according to the Law of works, signified and
taught, in opposing the Priesthood of Aaron unto the Priesthood of Christ Heb.
7. 6.
; By which Law of works salvation cannot be. And hence it is that our Prophet
says, ver. 4.

The Lord has sworn and will not repent, thou art a Priest for ever after the
Order of MELCHISEDEC.
Wherein observe for Order sake,

First, the Lord has sworn.

Secondly, and will not repent.

Thirdly, after the Order of Melchised^c

Fourthly, thou art a Priest for ever.

For the first, two things are to be observed in the Oath of God; because God
cannot swear by a greater he swears by Himself, for men verrily swear by the
greater Heb. 6. 13 16.
; Therefore God must of necessity sweat by Himself Esa. 49. 18.
, because there is nto a greater; The Lord has sworn. That is by Himself,
that is to say, that he is not, nor will be God, but with respect unto this
Priesthood; if his being cannot fail, no more can the Priesthood fail, for he
cannot be the Father of all, nor the Father of glory, but with respect unto a
Son, nor can the Son be a Savior but with respect unto his death Ephesians. 4. 6.
, nor can it be the death of the Son of God but with respect unto this
Priesthood; For it being of an infinite and an eternal value, cannot find
place in the Leviticall Priesthood that vanishes and passes away 1 Ioh, 1. 7.
Romans 5. 10. Heb. 2. 9, to, 15. 16, 17.
For a Lamb slain from the Beginning (in Sacrifice,) Heb. 7. 15, 16, 17.
and a Priest or Sacrificer, raised up, and obtained in time, can never comply
and agree together in the Temple of God; no not if all the hands in the world
were laid upon him in his ordination, or a thousand Rivers of Oil brought in
for his Unction Rev. 13. 8.
; For the same antiquity that is in the Sacrifice, must also be in the Priest
the Sacrificer: else it cannot be an acceptable work before the Lord Mica 6. 7
. So that all those that ordain a temporary Priest, they also depend upon
temporary Services, and Sacrifices, and as certainly as the Priest fails in
his Office by death; so shall the Sacrifice loose its virtue, when they come to
stand in most need of it Prove. 1. 26. 27, 28 29, 30.
. Our High Priest therefore, and Sacrifice are of the same dignity and of like
time, for he is not a Priest, but with respect unto such a Sacrifice; nor is it
a Sacrifice, but with respect to such a Priest or Sacrificer, which do jointly
make and give being to this Priesthood, which can in no case be; but with
respect unto the Son of God; nor can the Son of God have being, but with
respect unto this Priesthood.

Therefore it is, Heb. 7. 21.
that the Lord has sworn by himself, for if he be, then it is also, and
ever shall be John 17. John 14.
so that whatsoever is in this ministration, springs from the Son of God,
who is not but with respect unto the Father, neither is the Father but with
respect unto the Son Psalm. 81. 5.
, and upon this Base stands the whole administration of the Gospel, so that
if any thing be propounded, in the House of God, that can have its being,
without God in Christ, it is not of this Priesthood, nor can it standwith the
administration of this oath in any thing whatsoever we come before God for
acceptance in: and if we propose any thing in God, that has being without
respect unto the office of this Priesthood, it is not the realaction of him,
that administered this oath, in that way of salvation by Jesus Christ, but the
immaginations and notions of the Heathenish Nations, whom the holy Isralite
knows not Mica 6. 7. 1 Kings 18. 26.
, so that whatsoever is propounded unto us in point of divine worship, if God
in Christ can have his being without it, it is an earthly, and carnal
Priesthood, and not an holy administration; but of an earthly and carnal
Priesthood; and sensual Sacrifice, be it offered with never so great decency,
and zeal in the eyes of the Sons of men Ephesians. 2. 12.
, If therefore you propound a Church in the way of the Gospel, that the
constitution, and being thereof is such, and at such time, that God can have
his being in Christ without it, that Church in its constitution and being, is
without God in the world 1 Cor. 11. 24. 25.
if you propound water to wash in, in the Church, that God may have his being
in Christ without such washing, that water in its use in so doing is without
God in the world.

If you will have Bread and wine in the Church, as holy signs, and Seals. of
the body and blood of Christ, that God can have his being in Christ without any
such body and blood, those signs and seals so used are without God in their
use and service Esa. 5 8. 5, 6, 7.
, if you will conclude a fast to be a holy thing, without which abstinance, God
can have his being in Christ, that fast so held is kept without the true
knowledge of God in the world Ephesians. 2. 11. 12.
, and if you conclude a Sabbath to be such, in the truth and extent of it, as
God may have his being in Christ without any such rest, that Sabbath is
silibrated with out God in the world Heb. 4. 3. to 12.
; and is not the rest of God Col. 16. to 23.
, but is, together with the rest of these things, and such like, a mere
deluding, and deceiving of the Sons of men, by meats, and drinks; new
moons, Sabboths, and holy days; being vainly puffed up with a fleshly mind,
which all vanish in their use: but the body is Christ Heb. 6. 17.
.

The second thing considerable in an oath, is that which our Apostle notes Heb.
7. 16.
, where it is said, that God interposeth himself by an oath, the Lords
swearing therefore, which gives being unto this priestly office, is, the
interposition of himself betwixt it, (viz. this Priestly Office) and any, or
all things, whatsoever, that may come out, or rise up to oppose it, make a
nullitie of it, or take away the glory, effect and operation of it Heb. 7. 21.
; so that what ever stands in contention against it, must first make an assault
upon the Lord, and also overcome the Almighty, before it can enter the lists,
in the ruin and overthrow of it Heb. 2. 10.
: again he enterposeth this office betwixt him, and his own being, for he
takes not his being as a Savior, in the way of his Son Jesus Christ, but
through this Priestly Office Romans 11. 15.
, for he lives not but through death Heb. 7. 24. 25.
; therefore the Lord himself is not maintained nor stood for in the world,
further then this Priestly Office and dignity is testified and witnessed unto
by us 1 Samuel 8. 6, 7, and 10. 19.
, so far therefore as the Office place, dignity, and glory of man, is an
acceptable thing unto us in the House of God, so far is the Lord himself
rejected and villified by us Judge. 6. 30, 31, 32.
, and the House of Baall maintained, and set upi; for he is not that anointed,
but through this Office which consumes, and burns up all the glory of the
creature, that the glory of the Creator may appear, to be that only
acceptable thing for ever Isa. 60. 1.
; Which is of that extent, that it fills all things, yea it is all in all.
Ephesians. 1. 23. 1 Cor. 15. 28.
So that he that assumeth a place or dignity in the Church above or before
others, or any of his brethren, he is so far from exalting, that he vilifies
and disgraceth this Priestly Office Jam. 2. 9.
, and in so doing he does it to the Lord himself 1 Samuel 8. 7.
, who is not in any account or esteem with us, but in and through it Heb. 7.
1. 2.
; For he has interposed it betwixt himself, and his own being in Christ; So
that all that are beloved of him, and washed from their sins in his blood, they
are made Kings, and Priests Rev. 1. 5. 6.
. Whosoever therefore excludes any of the Saints from Rule, and Priesthood in
the House of God, they do in like manner exclude them from the love of God;
and from the washing away of sin by the blood of Christ Rev. 5. 9. 10.
; Yea, they deny them to have part in that first Resurrection, or any freedom
from the power of that second death Rev. 20. 6.
. So that in seting up men, and ordaining Officers to make themselves glorious,
they thrust down themselves into the nethermost hell; Goeing on as a fool to
the stocks Pro. 7. 22.
glorying in their own shame, minding earthly things Phil. 3. 19.
. But through this Oath, or interposission: wherein it is impossible that God
should lie; we have strong consolation, and that by two imutable things Heb. 6.
18.
; That is, the Son of God is become man, The word was made flesh John 1. 14.
; Yea a man of sorrows and acquainted with infirmity Isa. 50. 33.
; And in this God cannot lie, counterfeit, or desemble a thing that is not
really so; as the word imports (to counterfit writing) So that the realitie of
all the impressions, of man's natural infirmity, were upon him who is the Son
of God, and these being the frailties and infirmities of the Son of God, they
must of necessity be immutable and unchangeable; even as the virtue of his
death and suffering is. For in him is not a shadow of change Iam. 1. 17. Mal.
3. 6.
, and in him is man's nature which is the same, wherever, or upon whomsoever,
it is found simply considered in itself Ephesians. 2. 3. John 5. 17. 20. 36.
: And this frail and weak nature, is also made and become the Son of God; and
has upon it the true nature and properties of God, by virtue of its unity with
him in Christ John 4 7, 8, 9, 10.
. And in this also God cannot lie, desemble or counterfeit a thing that is not
really so; and therefore there is in it, all that power, glory, virtue and
excellency that is in the Lord himself Col. 2. 2, 3. 9.
; This also must of necessity be immutable and unchangeable: So that the Son
of God is become weak, and frail; yea dead to the counsel and devices of man's
natural heart for ever,; Genesis 6. 6.
So also the Son of man is become strong and potent, yea alive unto God in the
wisdom and Counsels of his Law and Spirit for ever Gal. 2. 19. 20. Romans 8. 2.
11.
.

The Consolation therefore of a Christian arises only from this Oath of
interposition, for God has interposed this frailty, and infirmity of man,
betwixt himself and his own being in Christ; For he is not Jesus the Son of
God, but through death; For by his death he saves. So that all the Wisdom,
Power, and Goodness of God, is only made manifest and exercises it self
through man's weakness and infirmity Heb. 2 14
, and otherwise it has not the use, exercise and enjoyment of it self, no more
then the Father injoyes himself without his beloved Son 2 Cor. 11. 9. 10.
.

Secondly, God has interposed himself betwixt sorry and weak man, and all
those frailties and imperfections that naturally we are subjected unto. So that
no misery can come unto us in point of salvation, and our comfort and Faith in
God, but it first encounters with God himself, before it can take hold of him
that is in Christ; And what impossibility there is, to overcome and vanquish
the Son of God the Almighty, yea God blessed for ever Pro. 8. 21, to 31.
; the same impossibility there is, that a Christian should be vanquished or
overcome; of such security and safety, is this Oath of interposition, in the
ordination of our Kingly Priest; For as the frailties and infirmities of man,
through that wonderful and unspeakable Wisdom of God in Christ, serve for no
other end, nor are of other use but to give Being, unto the humiliation and
descension of the Son of God in us Romans 9. 5. Psalm 119. 122.
, so also his power and dignity, is of no other use in this salvation and
Priesthood, but to give Being unto the Resurrection, and Assention of the Son
of man in him Romans 8. 3. 4.
. Ioh. 3. 13. Ephesians. 4. 8. 10.
for Christ can neither descend, nor ascend, as he is simply God; any
possibility of that, in either respect, may not be admitted, in any case: For,
as he is God, he can neither be lower, nor higher, then God; for so he is not;
Nor can he be subject to motion, mutation, or change, Mal. 3. 6.
. But his humiliation, is a motion, or change, from height to depth, Ephesians. 4.
8, 9.
. From blessedness, to a curse in the abstract. Gal. 3. 13.
, And so God becomes low in us, or in our nature, Ephesians. 2. 8.
, His resurrection, or ascension, is a change or motion, also, from the depths
into the heights, from being a curs, to become the blessed, yea, the Son of the
living God, Ephesians. 2. 9, 10. Luke 1. 35.
, And so we, or our nature. is exalted or lifted up, in the power and dignity
of the Word of God, which made all things in the beginning, and without it is
nothing made John 1. 1, 2, 3.
. Indeed nothing in this Kingdom and Priesthood takes its true form, or
retains its being aright, but only as it has its rise, form, virtue,
operation, and glory, in this unity, and communication of, and between God and
Man, in the way of Jesus Christ John 1. 4, 5. Psalm. 139. 15, 16.
. Therefore, in him only do all things consist, Col. 1. 17. Col. 1. 16 20.
are reconciled, harmonized, and become one, and that one is become all
thingsr. So that without faith in him, we have not the form and substance of
things, but a mere Shadow, and rude heap in whatsoever concerns the glory,
and being of this Kingdom and Priesthood Heb. 11. 1^.
. So that the Word of God that gives form to all things in this Kingdom, is
but a riddle unto us, (if we be unbeleevers) in whatsoever it expresses Mat.
13. 34, 35.
, So also the work of God, receiving form and being by it in Christ, is also
an uncomely, dark, doubtful and dangerous thing, in the esteem and value of
the men of this world, that are ignorant of Christ Act. 5. 11, 12, 13. Mat. 41.
26. Mat. 27. 54
. Let us remember then, that strong consolation stands in those two Immutable
things, which not being seen, and kept entire, and distinct, we wander, and are
unstable, as a Wave of the Sea, tossed too and fro, with every wind of
doctrine, or operation in the world, Iam. 1. 6, 7, 8.
. For, the Son of God cannot become one of no reputation, but in our nature
Phil. 2. 6, 7,
, that is, (as the word signifies) vain, empty, nothing; he cannot be debased
and annihilated but in us, nor can our nature be dignified, filled with ability
to do all things, but in the Word of God Phil. 4. 12. 13.
, the nature of Man is Immutable, in that it is ever debased, and humbled in
the power and glory of the Word of God: the Word of God is Immutable, in that
it is for ever exalted in the weakness and infirmity of Man, Cor. 12. 9. 10.
, So that without the weakness and infirmity of man, the Word of God is not,
that being the humiliation of Jesus Christ, and without the power and authority
of God, the nature of man is not; that being the lifting up, and exaltation of
the same Lord Jesus Christ, ignorance therefore of this Oath of interposition,
standing in these two immutable things, wherein it is impossible for God to
lie, is the grand discouragement, and discomfort of all the world.

For it consists of the Kingdom and Priesthood of Jesus Christ, his exaltation
and humiliation, his strength, and his weakness, his immortality, and his
mortality, his life, and his death, his riches, and his poverty, his
supereminencie, and his subjection, his eternity, and being in time, his
wisdom and his foolishness, 1 Cor. 1. 25, 26, 27, 28. 1 Cor. 15. 42, 43, 44.
, all which being skilfully couched and concluded, in one individual
subsistence, is the joy, peace, and quiet of all that believe.

For so the Oath of God is made one, though it consists of two natures, alike
immutable, and has a like power to affiance, and bind over in the conscience
of man, as it has in the Bosom of the Almighty, and can no sooner fail in
the one, then in the other; for it is of the same possibility and certainty,
for strength to be constant, firm and immovable in weakness, Prove. 8. 30. 31.
, as weakness to be constant, firm, and immovable in strength Psalm. 102. 11.
12.
, so that the nature of this oath, binds each un other perpetually in Christ,
who is King of Salem, Prince of Peace, and Priest of the most high God, Heb. 7.
1.
, in whom we have peace though in the world, we find trouble, John 16. 33.
, which trouble and tumult of the world, arises from this, that they seek
these things, in diverse and several persons, or subsistances, to find the
life, glory, and power to appear in that way viz. one to be rich in himself
but another (not only distinct, but diverse from himself) to be poor, one
noble, but another several, and divided from himself ignoble, Jam. 2. 1. to
10.
, This has been the toil, trouble, and travel of the world from the
beginning thereof, 1 John 3. 12.
, to get rest and peace, but could never gain it to this day; nor ever shall
attain its end herein; but when it looks for peace, behold trouble, 1 Samuel 17.
28.
, and when it stands in most need of help, then shall all stays shrink and
start aside, and leave him destitute, as one having lost his God, Ier. 14. 19.
Esa. 8. 22.
, whom he had cunningly framed, and fashioned unto himself, Judge. 18. 24.
, being ignorant of this Oath and Covenant of God, by which only the Lord Jesus
is made a Minister of holy things, the World having only the Oath or Covenant
of Man upon them, Esa. 44. 10. 11, 12, 13.
, not the Bond of the Spirit, which is by the hearing of Faith, 1 John 5. 9.
, but the Spirit of Bondage, which is by the works of the Law, and therefore
ingendreth unto Bondage in all the Conceptions. Forms, and Productions thereof
Acts 20. 22. Gal. 3. 2.
. But this Oath of interposition, which never interposeth the Curse betwixt God
and Man, but only betwixt God, and his being a Savior in his Son, whereby
the Curse is devoured, and brought to naught, Romans 8. 15. Gal. 4. 24. 25.
, for the curse cannot tarry on the Son of God, no more then Iniquity can stay
upon him, Gal. 3. 13.
, or guile be found in his mouth, Psalm. 5 4.
, so that Death is swallowed up in victory, Esa. 53. 9.
, yea, the curse is made a blessing in him, 1 Cor. 15. 54.
: So that this Oath, that is according to the Religion and Worship of God, is
the Oath of God, and God cannot swear by a greater then himself; therefore
his Oath cannot go beyond or above himself; that is, cannot have its form and
being out of that subsistence of Jesus Christ: so that as certainly, as he
remains to be himself, and abides a God of Truth, so certainly shall this
oath be performed, and kept in all ages in his Elect, and chosen in Christ Gal.
3. 13. 14.
: But the oath of Man; that is, all swearing, or covenanting according to Psalm.
89. 33, 34, 35, 36 37. Esa. 53. 10.
the wisdom, art, and skill of the Creature, always interposeth the Curse
betwixt God and himself, for the natural and guilty Conscience of a man, ever
propounds God unto it self, in a way out of, and besides its own being and
subsistence (as at the first, so is it now, Genesis 3. 5.
,) which is always out of the way of Jesus Christ, for the humane nature of
Christ had never being, or for a moment could subsist, out of the Word of God
Mat. 1. 20 Luke 1. 35.
. So that a natural conscience binds it self over unto God, by interposing a
Curse between God and it self, and according to the motions and operations of
and in himself, looks for the application, or the abolishion thereof Genesis 20.
8. Romans 2. 14, 15. Genesis 4. 14.
. But the Conscience of a Christian interposeth the Son of God, between it
self and the Curse, and according to the motion and operation of that
Wisdom, Spirit, and power, that is in Christ, translates the Curse unto the
Son of God Deuteronomy. 21. 23. Gal 3. 13.
, who takes it away at once, and for ever, Heb. 9. 12.
, and also translates the blessing or blessedness, Genesis 22. 16, 17, 18. 1 Pet.
2. 9.
: This Oath of interposition therefore, infallibly binds over God unto man;
as also, Man over unto God; for God is not, but as he is light, Iam. 1. 17. 1
John 1. 5.
, and light cannot be light, but it must be manifest, Ioh. 3. 20, 21.
nor can he be made manifest, but in his Son; and the Son is not manifest to
be of God, but by his resurrection from the dead, Romans 1. 4.
, for by death he overcame him who had the power of death, Heb. 2. 14.
, which is a work of none, but of God alone; for by dying in himself to all
humane excellencies, the glory and pomp of this present world, Mat. 8. 20
Psalm. 22. 6, 7
, he lives in himself through humane frailty, unto God in the life and power
of the world to come, 1 Cor. 13. 4.
1 Cor. 13. 4.
, So that by death of the excellencies, and wisdom of the flesh, he slayes the
enmity in himself, Ephesians. 2. 15, 16.
, which is indeed the spirit of that wicked one; the wisdom of the Serpent,
which has ever come out and contended with God Genesis 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Rev. ^
12. 7. 17. Gal. 4. 29.
. From the beginning, even until now, to give that unto Man, which God cannot
give to another; no, not to any besides himself. Isai 42. 8.
. Satan would have glory given to another; that is, to another individual
Subsistence.

Therefore, he says, Ye shall be as Gods, knowing good and evil, Genesis 3. 5.
. But God in his way, only gives to another nature in that way of Christ; but
the same individual subsistence, in, and with himself.

So then, Christ slayes the emnity; that is, the vicious desires, pride, and
ambition of the flesh, at no further distance from himself; then a wicked man
slayes, crucifies, and kills that Spirit of the Lord of Glory, unto himself
Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6.
. For however he kills it in, and unto himself yet it lives, and works
effectually in the chosen and beloved of God: so also however, Christ kills and
crucifies in himself, the flesh, with all the lusts and affections of it, Gal
5. 24.
; that is, in all that are made one with him by Faith: yet does that spirit of
uncleanness work effectually in the Children of disobedience, and ever shall
Ephesians. 2. 2.
, God therefore has bound himself ever unto man, by no less a tie and
obligation, then that great work of the death and humiliation of Jesus Christ
does consist of, which is impossible to be known or heard of, but only in the
nature and wretched condition of Mankind Heb. 2. 16 17.
: the ground of it is this, the humiliation of Jesus Christ is of the same
extent, that his exaltation is, they holds correspondencie in all points, else
it could not be the humiliation of the Son of God, for that cannot admit of any
bounds or limitation whatsoever; For Christ as he is Man, is exalted through
his unity with the Word of God, above the state and condition of any created
nature whatsoever Romans 9. 5.
. So is the Word, or that Son of God John 1. 14. Heb. 1. 5.
, being made flesh, vilified and abased below the state and condition of any
thing that is simply a creature whatsoever, for all Creatures are by nature
good Genesis 1. 31,
, as the work of that one, only, and good God.

Now the work of God cannot be perfected but in man, who is an abridgement, or
an epittomy of all the Creatures, who are therefore said to be good in the
Creation, production, or bringing forth of them being said to be so, as they
had refrence unto man, Genesis 2. 18. Psalm. 8. 6, 7, 8.
Being made for his use, benefit, and honor, and suiting with his nature and
disposition, all being made before him, to declare that all-tended, and had
respect unto him, he being the Fullness and whole accomplisence of them all:
For in him only is the Work of God perfect; without which, no rest nor
Sabbath can be found, Genesis ^ 1, 2 3.
. For as God and his Word are one, and so alike infinite and perfect, the one
as the other: so the Word and his Work are one; and alike infinite and perfect,
the one, as the other; and such a work can be found in none, but only in man
alone.

And therefore the humiliation of Christ must of necessity have its being in
man, or rather the anihiliation of the Son of God, is only in that Enosh; that
is, in sorry man, as the word signifies.

Now the work of God only in the Creation of Man, is an infinite work; which in
any other, or in all other Creatures it cannot be; for however they be the
work of an infinite God, yet the work is but a Creature, and therefore finit
for a Creature, simply considered, is a finit thing; but Man was not, nor had
his being for a moment, but in the Image of God Genesis 1. 26, 27.
; For in that Image be was created, and had his being at the first, and that is
the proper image, similitude, and likeness of man: Therefore Adam is said, to
beget a Son in his own Image; not when he begets Cain, but when he begets
Seth, Genesis 5. 3.
Or that stable and set one, who is the Father of our Lord Luke 3. 38
, in whom this glorious Image is preserved and kept alive for ever, Heb. 1. 3.
Now that this work of God. namely, the Creation, frame, and being of Man, is
only an infinite work, it is evident and plain, for as certainly as the dust,
or slime of the earth Genesis 2. 7.
, that is, that Spaun, or Seed of the Earth, that has all earthly, transitory,
corruptible, fading, and vanishing things in it, was made in the Image,
Wisdom, or Word of the eternal God: So certainly was that Image, Wisdom, or
Word of God (which is the perfection and fullness of all divine and heavenly
excellencies) made of, or in the dust or slime of the Earth: So that it is not
the proper work of God, looked upon in man, but as it consists of the unity of
the Creator, and the Creature, being become one, Ephesians. 2. 14. 15, 16 John 17.
21, 22.
: So that this work has in it, not only that which is truly and really a
creature, but also the Image and Dignity of the Creator: therefore must be a
work of an infinite and unfathomed extent, being the Image of the Creator is
considered in it, 1 Bing. 8. 27. Psalm. 78. 41.
. Therefore, it is that God says, Let us make man in our own Image, Genesis 1. 1
Dev. 30. 19. Gal. 4, 4.
; the dust and the Image of God, to be one entire and glorious workmanship. So
that Adam in this respect, is truly called the Son of God Luke 3. 38.
, not only by Creation (as men think) but by Adoption also, yea and the Son of
God by nature; For he is the Son of God by nature, because the Image of God
which is the Wisdom of God, and God himself, are of the same nature, and so is
he the Son of God by nature.

He is also a Son by Adoption, or taken out of the house of a stranger, for as
he is earth, and so bears the Image of the earthly 1 Cor, 1. 5.
, he is a stranger, and forreyner from that heavenly glory, and excelency that
is in God, and so is he the Son of God by Adoption. And he is also a Son by
Creation, and that is, the making and framing of these two together in one
glorious work; which is indeed the New Creature, or the Creation of God Rev. 3.
14.
, and so is he the Son of God by Creation, which work is not nor can be truly
considered, without God himself being brought into it, without any
interposission, of time, place, action, demeanor, or comportment of the
Creature whatsoever. For the interposission of any thing between God and the
Creature, was the fall, and is the sin of man unto this day Genesis 3. 5. Heb. 10.
39. 39.
; for as the operation of our hearts work for the interposing of somewhat
betwixt our selves; and our full satisfaction and happiness in God through
Christ, by so much do our hearts work to put somewhat between the happiness of
the human nature of Christ in the divine, and so destroy the faith or
subsistence of Christ, unto our selves. For as God said let there be light, and
it was so, so did he say of the dust and himself, let us make man in our own
Image, and it was so. But man, through that serpenten like subtility in that
way of the woman, or of that w^aker, and earthen vessel, (namely) the wisdom of
a Creature, working toward and about the things of the Creator, which is not
admire to spark in the Church 1 Timothy 2 12
, said no, but if we ear. We shall be turning that truth which God had spoken
into a lie Romans 1. 25
, which sin and fall from his Creator Genesis 3. 6.
, even so God says that he has made us heirs, first, borne, and Coheares
with Christ, Kings, Priests, able to do all things through Christ, that
strenghtens us Romans 8. 16. 17. Rev. 5. 10. Phil. 4. 13.
; But earthly man says no, but if we do this, or that, or come to this or that
period or point of time, if we suffer, if we wait, if we reform, and conform,
then we shall be so, this is that apostate backslyder, and faller of from the
living God, namely of those that draw back unto perdition, and not of them that
believe, to the saving of the soul Heb. 10. 38. 39.
.

Now the breach of this Oath, Bond, Covenant, Contract, or unity, that is
betwixt God and man, in which God is a party, must needs be of an infinite
nature, and therefore that, and that only gives length, and latitude, to the
death, and humiliation of Jesus Christ.

Now whereas we say, that God is a party in this bond, it is so to be
understood, as a party in the Oath, or Contract, but no party in the breach;
for the breach and forfeiture, arises only from man, and is his sole and
proper work; even as man also, is a party, or one nature, in the keeping of
the Oath and Covenant, and fulfilling of the whole Law of God Romans 8. 3. 4.
; But the whole and entire work thereof, depends solely upon God, and nothing
can be attributed, or ascribed unto man at all 1 Cor. 17, 28, 29. 1 Cor. 4. 7.
; So then man's breach of oath, and Covenant in his defection and failing from
God, being of an infinite nature and extent, God being a party in the Oath,
work or Covenant, that, and that only, can sufficiently extend, the death and
humiliation of Jesus Christ, to be such, as is compatable, and agreeable, to
the Son of God. Therefore we must either deny the death, and humiliation of
Jesus Christ to be such as becomes the Son of God, or else conf^sse man, to
be a consociate with, united unto, and become one, with the Son of God, who
can depart from, or be deprived of his death; no more then he can depart from;
or be deprived of his life; for in that he dyed unto the things of this
present: world, he can never live unto them again, and in that he lives unto
God, and the things of God, he can never dye unto them again, and these do not
only stand together to make him complete, but are comprised in one, and the
same, for he dyed according to the flesh, and never lived unto the lusts of it
for a moment, and was quickoned in the Spirit, and never dyed unto the Father,
and the things of him, no not for a moment Esa. 53. 9.
: Therefore as the Son, offspring, or nature of man is exaulted infinitely
above a Creature, and so made higher then the heavens 1 Pet. 3. 18. Psalm. 5. 4.
; for heavens in their own nature are high, or heights, but to be made heaven
through hell, yea the heights in the depthes Aeb. 7. 26.
, that is to be higher then heaven, so also the Son of God is made infinitely
lower then a Creature, for the humiliation of Christ is through death sin, the
curse of the Law Psalm. 16. 10.
, which is lower then hell it self, for the corrupting pit may be low, and
miserable by nature, in it self, but to become low, wretched, and miserable,
through height, happiness, and blessedness, that is lower then hell it self,
for that is hell enlarged Psalm. 34 6. Ephesians. 4. 9. 10.
; so as it can never be satisfied, nor say I have enough, so then the breach of
Covenant, Contract, or Oath, in point of Creation, by the sin of man, is of the
same extent with that keeping of Covenant Oath and Contract which is through
the faith and righteousness of Jesus Christ; for this is to be observed, that
the difference disparrity and Antipothy, between the first Adam and the second,
stands not in one being nearer to God then the other, in point of Creation, and
incarnation, for as God set himself at the first, or in one entire act of
relation to man, so he stands for ever, else the holy one should change, which
is a thing impossible 2 Cor. 5. 21. Romans 8. 34. Gal. 3. 13.
; for the first Adam cannot be known but with respect unto the second, nor can
the second be known but with respect unto the first; for as the second cannot
be known or acknowledged to be a Savior, without respect unto sin, from which
he saves Esa. 5 14. Prove. 27. 20.
, no more can the first Adam be known, or acknowledged, but with respect unto
that real righteousness, Image, and blessedness from which he falls, and by
which he destroys, and overthrows himself Mal. 3. 6. James. 1 17.
, so that the difference stands in this, that the one in the way of the mystery
of iniquity and death, takes 2 Cor. 5. 21. Mat. 1. 21.
Ezekiel. 18. 24. Genesis 2. 17.
occasion by righteousness to become sin, by life to become death, by blessing
to become a curse, the other in the way of the wisdom and mystery of God,
takes occasion, by sin, to be righteousness, by death to become life, by the
curse to become a blessing, or the blessed for ever, and as near as the Elect
of God are unto the curse by nature, who are the Children of wrath, as well as
others, and the very curse it self indeed Ephesians. 2. 152, 3. 8.
, in the obstract; so near are the wicked unto the blessing, and
righteousness of God by creation; who are thereby the very blessing and
righteousness of God indeed.

So that as the Saints of God, beholding themselves in the light of Gods
wisdom 2 Cor. 4. 6. 7.
, can say (and that truly) we were such by nature Ephesians. 2. 3.
: But we are so by grace in the Son of God 1 John 4. 17. Col. 3. 4.
, in which ascent, and gathering up unto him, from that low and forlorn
condition, is their joy and happiness for ever Ephesians. 5. 8. 9.
, even so, the wicked, beholding themselves in the wisdom of man, and light of
a Creature, viewing the things of God Genesis 3. 5. 6.
, shall as truly conclude, we were such by the grace of God, as were made
higher then Angels Heb. 1. 4, 5, 6.
, having in Christ obtained a more excellent name, then they; but now we are
thrust down into Hades, that place of the damned by our sin, and unbelief,
and this miserable descent shall be their pain, and torment eternally thence
it is said, that the Angels which kept not their first estate, or as the word
is, their principality, that is, the Messengers that brought such great tidings
of God into the world, as to have his very mind and Image upon them, (as man in
his creation at the first had (kept not their Lordship; as having the authority
and power of the Lord upon them, are reserved in Chains unto the judgment of
the great day Jude 6. 2 Pet. 2. 4.
, implying, that so long as that great day of Gods power and glory lasts, so
long shall their thraldom, bondage, and sentence of death remain upon them.

It remains therefore, in the records of the house of God, that Christ was
made sin 2 Cor. 5. 21.
, and became a curse Gal. 3. 13.
, even as dust was made in the Image of God, yea, in righteousness and
holiness of Truth Genesis 1. 27. Ephesians. 4. 24.
; no more a shadow or a semblance, without the truth, and substance of it, in
the one, then is in the other, they are both of one, and the same realty, and
certainty, and stand in absolute and perpetual terms, of relation in all
points, diamiterwise, or in way of antitheses or opposition Romans 5. 17, 18, 19.
, note therefore that the Son of God is so made a curse and sin, that in
the very act of so being or becoming such a one, he destroys sin, and the
curse, and takes them away for ever, in that way of faith Hosea. 13. 14. Heb.
2. 14.
; for evil cannot so journe with him, no not for a moment 1 John 5. 5. Psalm.
5. 4.
, neither was guile ever found in his mouth Esa. 53. 9.
, yet from this glorious act of his, springs up an eternal curse, in the
wicked in that way of unbelief, and that sin that shall abide upon them for
ever Psa. 58 3. Job 20. 11.
; This happy and blessed act of unity between the word of God and our nature,
being the occasion of it, without which it could not be; but it is altogether
impossible, that it should be any, no not the lest tittle or jot of cause of it
at all; for had not the breach been such, as the composition, or form of the
Covenant, or oath is, (having the height, depth, length, and breadth of him that
is God in it) sin and death, had never else received their form (if we may so
call it) or rather their formlesse figure and shape Rev. 9. 2, 3.
, no more then righteousness and life could appear unto perfection, and
satisfaction Psa. 36. 5. 6. Psa. 63. 5. Psa. 19, 11. 3.
, yet it is as impossible for a Curse to spring out of blessing, or sin out of
righteousness (as the proper Root and Fountain thereof as it is for filthy
water to issue out of a pure Fountain Iam. 3. 11. 12. Mat. 7. 17. 18.
; for the frail brittle and momentany nature and condition of the Creature, is
the proper root Fonntaine, and cause of sin, and death, but takes occasion
thereof, from that firm durable, and unchangeable state of the most high,
without which it could not be so, yet is the Lord clean, pure, and undefiled,
in all the inclinations, Motions, and operations of the Creature, in that kind,
even as the Saints are free from at tributing unto themselves, any jot of that
great work of redemption, but ascribe it wholly to that wisdom and power of
God 1 Cor. 1. 27. 28. 29. 8. 3. Job. 30. 11
, even as the proper cause of the springing up, and growth of a rush is the
mire, for can a rush grow without mire says the holy man Job. 8. 11.
, yet is the heat of the Sun, the occasion of it, without which it grows not
all, so also, the rain falls down from heaven, its own weight, being the
proper cause of its fall.

But the Sun is the occasion that it falls from thence, for had not it
exhausted, and drawn it up into the air, it could never have fallen from
thence.

The sum of all is this, the Son of God became a curse and yet was and is the
blessed of the Father, from everlasting to everlasting Romans 9. 5.
, he was made sin and yet never knew sin Psalm. 90. 2.
, but is the Saint or holy one of Israel 1 Cor. 5. 21.
, the holy one of God Psalm. 71. 22.
; yea, God blessed for ever amen Luke 4. 34
, even so, the dust or slime of the earth, yea the very spaune of all budding,
blossoming, fading, and dying things, vanishing, and becoming vain as the
flower of grass which withers in a moment Romans 9. 5.
; this was made in the Image, holiness, and righteousness of God, and yet
knew no holiness, nor righteousness at all, no more then the Son of God
knew sin, but in the very act, of so being made in the Image of God, or earth
becoming heaven, the wisdom of man transformes unto it self, holiness into
defilement, righteousness into sin, the Image of God into the Image of Satan;
for there is in this wonderful workmanship of God, the wisdom of a Creature,
as truly as there is the wisdom of a Creator, even as sure as there is in
Christ, the truth of humanity, as well as there is the truth of the nature
divine, yet out of this wonderful and unheard of Corruptibility: man, defiling
himself from that which is purity it self, even as the Son of God purifies
himself through our infermity, in cleansing himself from our sin, that no
guilt or stain could once take hold or rest upon that holy one of God 1 Pet. 1
24. Esa. 40. 6. 7, 8.
, being thus composed and made in the wisdom of God John 14. 30. Heb. 4. 15.
, yea, being the wisdom of the Father it self 1 Cor. 1. 30. and 23. 24.
, so man by his own wisdom, as he has the wisdom of a Creature, defiles
forms, and corrupts, himself from that, and by that, which is purity, glory,
and incorruption it self, so that no holiness nor righteousness once takes
hold or rests upon him at all, but he is wholly corrupted and defiled, from
the first, yea estranged from the womb Prove. 8. from 14. to 31. John 14. 7, 8,
9, 10.
; even as Christ is holy, and wholly sanctified from the first act, or time of
his conception or bringing forth Mat. 18. 20.
.

So that a wicked man is a sinner from the beginning, yea as ancient as that
liar, who is not only the lie but also the Father thereof making himself so
Ioh. 8. 44.
, from the power and glory of God, appearing and making it self known in way
of unity with him; Judging according to man's day 1 Cor. 4. 3.
by arguments reasonings, and consultations merely humane, and proper to a
created nature: Even so also is the Son of God righteous, and holy from the
beginning, making himself so, by the appearing of our infirmities and sorry
estate, in unity with himself, judging according to the Wisdom of God, by
arguments, consultations, and determinations, ever suting and complying, with
an infinite, gracious, compassionate, and al sufficient God 1 Cor. 2. 15. 16.
; who is one in this contract, and must ever be brought into the account and
reckoning; he having undertaken, and is become surety for us Psa. 11^. 122.
, and according to his worth and dignity, power and virtue, wisdom and
knowledge, mercy and compassion, truth and faithfulness; the product must ever
be aprized, and valued, and concluded upon, in case we sum and cast up, what
we are, what we have, and what we do, or may be put upon: the sum, result, or
total of all; and of every particular; what it amounts unto must be cast up.
reckoned, and valued in him; For in him it has its proper value price and
worth.

This distinction, both of the ground and vice of sin, and of the
righteousness also, of God by faith in Jesus Christ; if we be ignorant of one
of these, we are ignorant of both, and if we be ignorant of both, we are
ignorant of the opening and shutting of the Kingdom of heaven; As also, of the
opening and shutting of the bottomless pit, and so we err, not knowing the
Scriptures, nor the power of God Mat. 22. 29.
in any part of the Scriptures; For under this Seal, has lain hid from the
world, the way of she tree of life, even since the foundation thereof Cel. 1.
26. Mat. 13. 35. 2 Cor. 4. 3,
: If ever God open it unto us, it will appear and make it self evident
throughout the holy writings; For as the whole scope of Scripture, sets before
us life and death, cursing and blessing Dev. 30.
: So does every particular pert thereof, (to speak after the manner of men)
which is indeed a certain a breviary or compendium of the whole, and in this
point, is the skill of the Key of David exercised Rev. 3. 7.
, that opens and no man shuteth, and shuteth and no man openneth; For the
opening of the word of God, a bubble Job 4. 9. Iam. 4. 14.
, a blast, a vapor, a shadow, a span as a Weavers shuttle, or a Post that
tarries not) to set it (we say) or bring it into, the liberty of the Son of God
Psa. 102. 11. and 109. 24.
; even into the Kingdom, power, glory, virtue, and dignity of him that is the
Son of eternity, to be able to comprehend with all Saints, what are those
dementions of the grace and love of God in Christ. Ephesians. 3. 18, 19.
, in the hight, depth, length, and breadth thereof, which passes knowledge of
any, or of all the creatures in the world, simply considered as creatures: this
is the opening of the word of the Kingdom, or the Kingdom consisting in the
word Mat. 13. 19.
: when the creature is brought into the true and full extention, blesing and
state of the Son of God 1 John 3. 1. 2. Romans 8. 29. Ephesians. 1. 3. Ephesians, 2. 6.
; which no man can shut, or make of less comprehention, then eternal, immence
infinite and incomprehensible Isa. 9. 6. 7. Romans 9. 5.
. This Key opens from the narrow Scantling of a moment, into such height,
depth, length, and breadth, as is compatible to the Son of the eternal God.
The skill which this Key exercises in shutting also, is of no less devine
Art, sublimity and dignity, and of the same difficulty and device to be
opened; For it being the eternal and immense power, the unsearchable love and
incomprehensible Wisdom of God, to be comprised in one act, sentred in one
point of time, composed in one indeviduall being, and subsistence in Christ;
For how ever God is one simple being in himself, from everlasting, yet he is
not one in point of salvation, nor can be known of the creature: but in way of
unity, in the participation of our nature; by which he conveys unto us his own
light, in which only we selight Psa. 36. 9. Psa. 118. 27. John 1. 4. 5,
without which we have no divine or heavenly light at all; but are mere
darkness in that respect Ephesians. 5. 8.
; even as the soul conveyes life and light unto the body, by means of its
unity with it, without which it is nothing but darkness in it self, as
appears in the departure of the soul out of it: For our knowledge of that
simplicity and unity that is in God, in point of faith, is to know him as he
is made one, Yea of twain makes one new man in himself, so making peace Ephesians.
2. 14, 15, 16.
. All other knowledge and profession of the one-nesse that is in God, is no
more then the worst of men may attain unto, and abide still in their evil and
sin James 2. 19. 20.
. For if we groap after God in any particular out of Christ, then are we out of
that way which he has founded or appointed, to come unto him, either in the
theorick or practical course of Religion or Christianity: For as he is the
Truth and the Life, so is he, and he only, the way also Ioh. 14. 6.
into the light, knowledge, and bosom of the Father, the power and authority
of this Key, or Keys, (for if we cannot bring it either to be singular or
plural, we know it not, and so can neither open nor shut by it in the things
of God. So that his authority in shutting is, to bring eternity into one point
of time, the Almighty and immense power to become that which is weakness in it
self: for he became death in us, and so subject unto all things, as also,
less then any thing Phil. 2. 7. Isai. 52. 14. Isai. 53. 8. Psalm. 22. 6.
: For of such nature is the Being and subsistence of Christ, as to take his
Being in that, which of it self has no Being; for the humane Nature subsists
not but in the word, such also are his operations and effectual workings as to
raise up his power and authority out of the poor weakling, as the Word is
truly rendered. Psalm. 41. 1.
Blessed is the man that prudently considers the poor weakling. Such is the
time or manner of his life, that he prolongs and preserves it, in that, which
in it self has no time nor life at all. Hence it is, that the Angel
proclaiming and publishing this oath of interposition, affirms, That time
shall be no more Rev. 10. 6.
; that is, no time of the things of man Romans 14. 17. Mat. 22. 29. 30.
, nor according to the account and reckoning of man, but all things shall be of
God in that Kingdom, according to his judgment and account 1 Cor. 6. 2. 3.
Psalm. 8. 9. 14. Romans 2. 1. 2.
. For as the Son of God has nothing in account and reckoning in point of his
death and humiliation, but what he has in us Heb. 2. 14. 1 Pet. 3. 18.
: so also the Son of Man has nothing in account and reckoning, but what is
in the divine power and grace of an eternal God Col. 3. 3. 11. Ephesians. 1. 23.
Romans 11. 35. 36.
. No time therefore in the House and Kingdom of God, according to the
creature, which are nothing but vain genealogies, so reckoned and rested in 1 Timothy 1. 4. Titus 3. 9.
. But according to the account of the Creator, who accounts of things that are
not, to bring to naught things that are 1 Cor. 1. 28.
, that is, things that are not in man's (account and esteem, to bring to naught
things that are, the only excellent and weighty things in his estimation and
judgment, according to this account and record, We are light in the Lord Ephesians.
5. 8.
, and our life is hid with Christ in God Col. 3. 3.
: so that he is our light and our life; so also our salvation is in him, (or he
is our salvation Psalm. 68. 18, 19, 30.
) and it is only to be reckoned for ever in him, and not in the creature. Even
so is our time also in him, and therefore as we are light, life, health and
salvation in the Lord, and not in our selves, no more then he was death,
darkness, sorrow, sickness, destruction, and a curse in himself Gal. 3. 13.
, but soly in us; even so also is our time in him, and so is man eternized, and
lives for ever, even as certainly as the Son of God was made time, and
subject to death in us, which in himself, as God; he could not be. Therefore
time in the creatures account, is no more in this House and Kingdom, or upon
that Sea and Land whereupon this Angel stands, of such closure and shutting
is this Key of David, to bring eternity into one point of time, into a moment
and twinkling of an eye; for such is the nature of the operation and glory of
God, that it composeth it self into that, which is as a moment, or twinkling
of an eye: For such is man, whose breath is in his Nostrils; Psalm. 39, 5 Psalm.
94. 11. Psalm. 49 12. Job. 7. 6.
, no more then the Son of God can be held of death, or be a sinner for a
moment of time. The shortness of man's life therefore is such, as is the time
he can preserve himself in that life and image wherein he was made, which is no
longer then the Son of God can permit himself to be a sinner, which is not
for a moment, for he knew no sin 2 Cor, 5. 21.
. The change then of the Son of God, from sin unto righteousness, and the
change of the son of perdition from righteousness unto sin, are of like
time and eternity, that is, in the twinkling of an eye, it is done; and for
eternity it abides and remains: for the Son of God is made sin, but
changed into righteousness in the twinkling of an eye; and the son of
perdition is made righteous, but changed into sin in a moment, even in the
twinkling of an eye: and we know that the time of the twinkling of an eye is
such, as the eye never loses its object. So is the time of the Son of God
being made sin, and death, that he never loses the fight-and being of
righteousness and life; and the time of the son of perdition being made
righteousness, is such, as he never loses the sight, and being of that man
of sin, and death, into such a narrow point, (in the power of shutting) does
this Key bring that immense and unfadomed power and glory of God into, in that
way of Christ: for of such nature as this opening and shutting, are all the
actions of the Son of God; for in him eternity becomes a moment of time: for
of further extent then a moment of time, the life and glory of man cannot be
extended, and a point of time is opened into eternity; and into a narower
compass then that, none can abridge nor contract the Son of God Isai. 9. 6.
John 1. 1. 23. Joh. 8. 53. Prove. 8. 22. to 31.
. So that as they are actions performed in a creature, they are momentany,
transient, and pass away in the twinkling of an eye: But as they have their
rice, original and fountain in the word of God, they are of an eternal
virtue, weight and value, and remain and abide for ever. So, that however he
tabernacles in time in our nature, yet his time and age abides for ever Ioh. 1.
14. Heb. 7. 17, 21. Heb. 7. 3. Psalm. 102. 11, 12.
. For in the one consists the liberty of the creature; and in the other, the
power of God: for in the one, the creature is brought into the state and
condition of the Son of God, which is its liberty and freedom indeed Ioh. 8.
36.
, in all excellencies whatsoever: and in the other consists the power of God,
which is brought into a particular creature, action and point of time,
gathering it self together into so narrow a compass in us (which in it self
is incomprehe^sible) so that it works most effectually, even as the vast beams
of the sun, contracted into one narrow point in a Sun-glasse, burns most
fervently, which cannot be seen, felt, or known so, in any other way; so that
the true liberty or freedom of Christians, and the powerful and effectual
operation of God, are never dis-joyned, separated, dispersed, or scattered the
one from the other 2 Cor. 3. 17. 2 Cor. 12. 9.
. Observe therefore that as these Keys of the Kingdom Mat. 16. 19.
, or this Key of David Rev. 3. 7.
, opens unto eternity, and also shuts into one point of time: Isai. 44. 6
Isai. 41. 4.
. For this wonderful and speedy change is made in the sound of the last
Trumpet Rev. 1. 17. 18.
, which cannot be known but by the first that ever sounded or uttered it self,
which is an opening unto the utmost distance: For it is the manner of Gods
explicating and opening of his Word and Works, to declare the last things from
the beginning, or from the first, or the least things from the chiefest, and
things of old, or the most ancient and honorable from things that are not yet
done, or in themselves have not any being Isai. 46. 9. 10.
, nor are in any account or reckoning with man at all 1 Cor. 1. 28.
. The first Trumpet then that ever sounded as an Alarm of this change, was
this, And he breathed into his nostrils the breath of lives; for so the word
is plural, and man became a living soul, or soulie soul; or animal soul or
life, that is the Word, Spirit, Breath, Wisdom, or Image of God, became such
a thing or nature, that could not support it self, as of, or by it self, in
that image, breath, or life given unto it, no not for a moment, so that if our
nature be not animated, quickened, and revived every moment, it is not possible
to live that life or breath, which at the first was given unto it. Hence
arises that sudden change in the twinkling of an eye, both in the way of the
son of perdition, and also in the way of the Son of God. For God and Man
being one, not by any change of nature, or property, that the nature of God
becomes the nature of Man, or the nature of man is become the nature of God;
nor is the nature of man infinite, omnipotent, or omniscient, or the like, no
more then the nature of God can be finit, impotent, or defective in the least,
for then he were not God Exodus 3. 14 15.
. But there is a unity of the two natures in this wonderful workmanship of
Man: so that the Image of God is not, but with respect to the dust, or our
nature; nor is the dust, or our nature (in this work) but with respect to the
image, breath, or life, and spirit of God.

Therefore, it is said of those two ( Let Us make Man) Genesis 1. 26.
, even as it is said of the Man and the Woman, in the Image of God created he
( Him) singularly, Male and Female, created he (Them) expressing it in the
plural number, and called their name Adam, Genesis 5. 2.
, they have both one name in that place given unto them, to declare their
unity, and are also expressed by a word plural, to note the difference in Sex:
Even so are these two natures in this wonderful Composition of God and Man,
comprised under this Name, Adam, or the Son of God, Luke 3. 38
. So that if we cannot proceed in the Genealogy of Christ, from Jesus to
Adam, in the way of Sonship, and find all Sons in one Sonship: yea, lengthen
it to the utmost point of so many Ages, and Generations, as the Spirit of God
by Luke does, Luke 3. 22 to 38.
, and also bring them into that unity, as to be one; we are unskilful in the
Word of Righteousness, Heb. 5: 12, 13 14.
, for without Adam Jesus is not, for he saves by his death, Heb. 2. 14 Heb, 9.
22.
, but no death can be found, for the Son of God, but in us, or in our nature,
in that way of Adam: So that the sin of Man does not only give denomination,
but being, and demension, unto the death of the Son of God, Mat. 8. 16, 17. 2
Cor. 5. 21. Isa 53. 4, 5, 6.
, for the wisdom of God knows how to bring glory out of shame, and unity out
of that vast distance, that is (in nature) between God and Man, which is no
less then sin and righteousness, each in the abstract; even as the Serpent
knew, or knows, how to bring shame out of that glory, and that vast distance
between God and Man (which sin has made) out of that unity that was in that
first act of Creation: So that all are made Sons in one Sonship, if they be
Sons of God, even as all the Elect are chosen, or choice ones, in that one only
Elect, and choice one of God, Isa 42. 1. Mat. 3. 17.
, our Apostle sounding that first, yea, and last Trumpet also, 1 These. 4. 16. 1
Cor. 15. 51, 52.
says, the first Man Adam was made a living soul; and the last Man Adam was
made a quickening Spirit.

He does not only here extend his speech from the first Man that was made
unto Christ, borne of the Virgin; but he also unites, contracts, and compleates
Christ in each of them: otherwise, the Trumpet gives an uncertain sound, and
then who can prepare himself to the Battle, 1 Cor. 14. 7, 8.
q, and who dares to handle the Trumpe of God, to give a false alarm: his
meaning then is, by the first Man Adam; that is, the first, the chief, the
most excellent, that ever was; for the Word sometimes given for Man, signifies
Nobility, or Dignity.

So that he means, the chiefest; yea, the beginning and author of all things,
is made, and becomes a Creature; yea, is made a souly Soul, or annimall life,
such a thing as cannot live; that proper life that is given unto it, for a
moment, but as it is animated, enlightened, and inlivened, by him that is the
Creator: yea, light, and life it self: for the proper life of Man, Acts. 17.
25, 26, 27, 28.
is the life of the Son of God, Gal. 2. 20. Col. 3. 3, 4.
, to live after the Spirit: For to live to the flesh, or to be carnally minded
about the things of God, is death, Romans 8. 6.
, as all men by nature are, and in the sound of this first trumpet, is the
death of Christ completed, in that the wisdom or word of God, that makes all
things, is made that, which by nature is such a thing as man is in himself,
which is altogether vanity, Phil. 2. 7. 8 Psalm. 39. 5. Psalm. 22. 6.


And therefore the sound of the least Trumpet says, the last man Adam was made
or is made a quickening Spirit (that is,) that which is least, the last or
lowest of all things, as man by nature is, that cannot preserve himself as of
himself, in the life of the Spirit, or breath of the Almighty for a moment,
this is made a quickening or a livemaking Spirit, yea is made a Spirit that
gives life, or makes alive others Psalm. 39. 5.
, and in this is the life of the Lord Jesus completed, so that however he
sustain a nature, that by nature is subject to that infirmity that no other
Creature is, or can be, and so is called the last, or the least man, that is
the basest man (as the word given for man sometimes signifies base or sorry
man, as is before noted) yet this is made such in the word of God as gives
life, yea is the very Fountain of life to others Psalm. 36. 9 68, 26 Rev. 1.
11. 17. and 2. 8. Mat. 11. 11,
; thus like unto the key of David, is the Trumpet of the camp of God, which
sounds so shrill to reach from the first unto the last, from the greatest to
the least in this Host of Israel, and yet, collects and summons both into one
body, or being, and perfecteth one, in, and by another, that death and life are
of like length and latitude; for if the Host of Israel have not always the
slain before him, Exodus 14. 30, 31. Exodus 15. 1. 10, 21.
, he cannot always triumph, as in the only day of victory: But if this Key of
David be mistaken in its office, or the sellerity of this charge, upon the
sound of the trumpet, not understood in the root, then do men groape for the
door of Lot, Genesis 19. 11. Genesis 19. 4 10. 9.
(in going about to open the Scriptures, with like corrupt and carnal minds,
as the men of Sodom had) but find it not; but rather climb up to the window,
to rob and steal in the house of God, John 9. 10
, that is to gain some glory, excellency, or profit unto themselves in their
exercises and give, not unto that one and alone shepherd and Feeder of Israel,
Psalm. 23. 1, 2, 3. Genesis 49. 24.
, the whole glory and praise of all things in the house, which of right belongs
and appertains unto him alone, Psalm. 115. 1. 2 Cor. 4. 7.
, and also in sounding of the trumpet, they cannot avoid to give a false alarm
unto the Camp of God, Rev. 1. 11. Reve. 22. 13.
, if it extend not from the first unto the last, from the front, even unto the
rear of Israel, and in each of them, bring both into one individual
subsistence or being, in such sort; that it is more possible to divide the
least thing; yea,a more in the Sun; than to separate or divide these twain,
the one from the other, no more then Christ can be divided, in, or separated
from himself, 1 Cor. 1. 13 2 Timothy 2. 13 Psalm. 139. 7. to 13.
. For he is both the one, and the other, that alpha, and that omega, that
first, and that last, Rev. 22. 13. 1 Cor. 15. 47.
. Therefore, says our Apostle, the first, or the chiefest (as the word is) is
of the earth earthie; that is, becomes the basest in us, and so he unites both
in one, and the second, or the last, or lowest (as the word will bear) which
is this Earth, is the Lord from Heaven; that is, is made the chief, supreme,
and ruler over all, and so in that also, unites them in one again, Ephesians. 2.
13, 14, 15
: yea, observe this, that, that which is first, or chief, is not spiritual,
but natural (that is) the Son of God, as he is God, is not made spiritual (for
so he is in himself, from everlasting) but natural, or that which in it self
is corruptible, by taking our infirmities, which are reckoned and accounted
only upon that first and chiefest one ( or being) then afterward (as our
Apostle says 1 Cor. 15. 46. Ephesians. 3. 7. Ephesians. 4. 16.
, or that which follows, and inevitably succeeds hereupon) that which is
spiritual, that is, the spirit and power of God is reckoned upon, and becomes
one with our nature; and so we that are natural and corruptible in our selves,
in him are made life, spirit, and power, in all Christian operations, Ephesians. 2.
1 Col. 2. 13. Phil. 4. 12, 13 1 These. 2. 13.
. And hence it is, that there are celestial bodies, or in the singular number
(as the word will also bear) a celestial body, 1 Cor. 15. 40.
, and a body terrestrial, yet these two are one, there is a celestial body,
as our nature is made one with the word of God, and there is a terrestrial
body, as the word was made flesh, and tabernacles in us, or in our nature, John
1. 14.
. Yet the glory of the celestial is one, and the glory of the terrestrial is
another, 1 Cor. 15. 40.
; that is, the glory of the celestial, is the glory of the resurrection of
Christ, and the glory of the terrestrial is the glory of the humiliation of
Christ; and these cannot be divided, for they are one: for Christ was ever
dead unto sin; never living unto the lust of the flesh, and is ever alive
unto the spirit, and always lives unto the motion and operation thereof, 1
Cor. 15. 35, 36 1 Pet. 3. 18, 19. Romans 6. 11. Rev. 1. 18. Rev. 2. 8.
: So that the life and death of Jesus Christ, must in the root and Rice of
things, of necessity be one entire act, as our Apostle concludes them, when he
declares what that glorious end of this unity is; namely, That the Son of
God, may live unto the Father, through that death that is naturally in us; and
that we may dye unto our selves through that life that is naturally in the
Son of God, Romans 6. 11 Gal. 2. 20. Col. 3. 3, 4
; by which life power and authority is given unto the Son, to overcome and
destroy all enemies, 1 Cor. 15. 24, 25.
, being he has the power and authority of him, that puts them under his feet,
1 Cor. 15. 27.
, and by which death unto the flesh, in all the desires thereof, he submits
unto the Father, as he is Man, and yields over all power and authority to be of
him, and to rise and spring out of that nature, which is of God; that so God
may be all in all, 1 Cor. 12. 6 Ephesians. 1. 23
, and man silenced from boasting, or ascribing any power or authority, or any
of that great work unto himself for ever, 1 Cor. 1. 29, 30, 31. 2 Cor. 10. 17,
18, Ier. 9. 23. 24.
, as he is man; nor can he ever desire it, no more then he can admit of any
(the least) cessation, authority, operation, and power, as he is God, 1 Timothy 1.
17. Isa 52. 7. Rev. 19. 6.
. Therefore, the Apostle presently adds, else what should they do; 1 Cor. 15.
29.
or else what should he do (as the word will also bear) for such as the root
is, such are the branches; that is, such as one is, so are many,w Therefore,
the reading may be either singular or plural) that is baptized, for, or with
death, Romans 11. 16.
. If that death be not the resurrection, how can he at all be baptized for, or
drenched with, or plunged in death. 1 Cor, 15. 29
. If that death should not be the resurrection, from the dead; then should the
life of the Son of God be extinct for some time; for now is Christ dead, and
risen again, Romans 8. 33 34. Revel. 2. 8.
and if these two should not be in one act, and point of time, there should be
some time of ceslation of the life of the Son of God, which the thought of
man may not permit for a moment, z Luke 12. 50, Mark 10. 38, 39.
that he should cease, in whom all things are and do consist, Col. 16. 17.
. So that as the Son of God becomes death in Man, the Son of Man becomes
life in God, in the very same act, and the one and the other is the completing
of Christ, Col. 2. 10. Col. 4. 12.
, who cannot be the anointed, but as he sustaines both natures; therefore the
death is the resurrection, of such scope is that place of the Apostle; and of
such force the argument there used: however the words differ in the
translation, for more ease in reading: therefore he adds, and wherefore are we
in jeopardy every hour, or every moment, as the word signifies, 1 Cor. 15. 30.
, that is, why do you think (for I appeal to your Conscience) we should give
up our selves to all dangers, perils, losses; yea, and to death every moment,
and not evade, and wave those things, as the men of the world do, if we found
not safety strength, and stability in them: yea, if this death were not life it
self unto us: For, by how much the more our jeopardies are doubled and
redoubled, even so is our life augmented or multiplied in the several motions,
operations, and outgoings thereof: and this the Apostle confirms by that
great affirmation, or asseveration, protest by your rejoicing which I have in
Christ Jesus our Lord, I dye daily 1 Cor. 15. 31
, which affirmation has the form of an oath, in declaring, that as death has
the resurrection in it, or is the resurrection it self; even so also, the
resurrection, the dominion or Lordship of Christ has death in it, or is death
it self, and is in substance, this oath of interposition proclaimed in the name
of the Lord, showing the same necessity and infallibillity of the unity and
one-nesse of the Saints of God in Christ, in respect of every particular Saint,
(or son in whom the seed of life and immortallity is expressed) 1 Ioh. 5. 18.
1 John 3 9. 1 John 2. 29. James 1. 18.
as it does of the unity of that common nature, or condition of man with the
word of God, whereof by nature they are all alike partakers: for the Word of
God cannot unite it self to a part of man's nature or condition, whereinto man
is plunged, no more then our nature in Christ can be united unto a part of the
word, or a part of the condition and state of the Son of God, and not to the
whole; which indeed were to divide Christ. For the humiliation of the Son of
God is of an infinite extent, and therefore may not, nor can be abridged in
point of descension of any misery or wretchedness, the nature of man (in the
utmost extent) was ever subjected unto.

Therefore it is said, He was heard in that which he feared Heb. 5. 7.
. The word in our translation rendered fear, signifies such a fear as is to
utter despair, which indeed is the very state of the damned; therefore his
descension was to the lowest and uttermost parts of anguish and misery, or else
could not his ascension be to the sitting on the right hand of the power Mark
14. 62. Mat. 26. 64. Heb. 1, 3.
, or to the highest perfection of the glory and majesty of Godh But as in being
made sin, he for ever destroyed sin 2 Cor. 5. 21
, and brought in an everlasting righteousness into our nature Dan. 9. 24.
, so in becoming that which was the very condition of the damned Heb. 5. 7.
Psalm. 16. 10. Psalm. 116. 3.
, he for ever destroyed and brought to naught, death and condemnation, and
established victory, prowish and courage in all his Saints everlastingly 1 Cor.
15. 54. to 58.
.

So then this oath brings in the unity of every particular and distinct Saint,
or son of God Psalm. 89. 35, 36. Psalm. 132. 11 12. John 17. 20. 21, 22, 23.
, or first borne in the Kingdom of heaven, every one in that house or family
being a first born in Christ; For he is the first born among, or in many
brethren, or (as the word will bear) in all brethren Romans 8. 29.
; or in every particular brother, which in the house of Israel after the flesh,
can no ways be admitted, but makes a confusion in the whole house, and in the
mind of every natural man Acts 7. 35. Luke 9. 46. 47, 48. Mark. 11. 27. 28.
Mat. 21. 23. John 9. 28. 29 Genesis 19 9.
, yet in this house of God, they are all first bornes, heirs, yea, co-heires
with Christ Romans 8. 17.
; yet every one distinct and complete in himself, though not one divided from
another: For Paul is not Apollo, nor Apollo, Cephas, nor is any of them Christ,
no more then in the three witnesses in heaven, it cannot be said the Father is
the Word; or the Word is the holy Ghost, yet these three are one; nor can it be
said of the three witnesses on earth 1 John 5. 7. 8.
, that the Water is the Blood, or the Blood the Spirit, yet these three are
one; for so the word will bear (and is in some of our translations) as well as
agree in one, and so it is truly to be understood, else we wander from the
scope and sense of that place, and it is not known unto us. But let us remember
this, for the clearing of that is said of late, that however the Word of God
unites it self to the whole nature, state, or condition of man; so that the
whole and complete nature in all points, and in all respects is perfected,
sanctified and saved, else the salvation of our Lord Christ, were not full Heb.
7. 25. Psalm. 130. 7. 8.
, nor could the Son of God be found a complete Savior, lik unto himself
(who is fullness it self) to save them from all sin and wretchedness
whatsoever Psalm. 34. 18. 19, 20. Col. 1. 13. 14.
; yet notwithstanding it follows not, that every particular and distinct
person, (to speak after the manner of men) must then be saved; no more then it
can be said, that in regard the nature of man fell from the perfect and
complete image, wisdom, grace and favor of God, and so from all the holiness
and perfection of Godu, that therefore every particular and distinct creature,
that has alike share in this Apostasiex, must for ever be excluded and
debarred from the presence and perfections of that nature, u Col. 1. 15. Heb.
1. 3. Romans 3. 10, 11. 12, Psalm. 14. 1. 2. 3. Romans 3. 23.
from which he has made such a defection; x Ephesians. 2. 3.
(and yet) the whole nature of man in all points and terms of relation,
states and conditions whatsoever, is condemned, perishes, and comes to utter
perdition for ever. For there is as truly a whole world of that wicked one, as
the word is truly read 1 John 5. 19.
, as there is a world of the elect and chosen of God John 1. 29. Mark 10. 30.
: Therefore it is, that the Apostle brings in worlds in the plural number Heb.
1. 2.
. Otherwise the state of destruction and death, could not be full, to stand in
direct opposition diameter-wise, in terms of antipothy, to the Son and
salvation of God for ever: Genesis 15. 16
, as well as of the righteousness that is of the Israel of God Ephesians. 1. 22. 23.
Gal. 6. 16.
: In the one is the mystery of God manifested in the flesh 1 Timothy 3. ^ 16.
, but never lived unto, or after the flesh, but after the Spirit, which is life
and peace Romans 8. 1. 2. 6.
, and in the other is the mystery of iniquity manifest in the Spirit, or
through that spiritual estate wherein man at the first was made Genesis 1. 27.
Eccles. 7. 29.
, and yet never lived unto the spirit, but unto the flesh, which if a man does
he dies for ever Romans 8. 6. Genesis 2. 17.
, if we be ignorant of the nature, rice, and manner of workings of these two,
we are unskilful in the weights and measures of the Sanctuary, and whatsoever
we speak from the word of God, we cannot give it its due weight, nor set it
upon its right Base, or proper principle, and so at the last shall be weighed
in the Balance our selves, and be found too light in our doctrine and whole
course of life Dan. 5. 27. Ier. 10. 8 Math. t. 15. 7, 8, 9.
.

But our Apostle, yea our great Apostle, by the mouth of Paul, concludes the
distinct and particular Saints in one; and that upon this point of joy and
triumph (as the word signifies) 1 Cor. 15. 31.
, saying, by your rejoicing, speaking as to all the Saints ( which I have)
speaking as of one, or, by our joy, that I have in Christ Jesus our Lord,
implying that the joy, or triumph of all the Saints, is the joy and triumph of
one; and the joy and triumph of one, is the very rejoicing and triumph of all:
otherwise, it could not spring out of one Saint, or holy one of Israel, and
defuse it self into all the Saints of God, nor could it in all the Saints of
God gather and contract it self in one Lord Jesus.

So that Christ is not only all, but he is all in all, 1 Cor. 12. 6 1 Cor. 15.
28.
, and therefore, is both the branch, yea, and root of David also, Revel. 22. 16.
, So that the victory, joy and triumph of one, is the victory joy and triumph
of all; and the victory, joy, and triumph of all, is the victory, joy, and
triumph of every one, and they can no more be without the rejoicing and triumph
of one another (in regard of the nature and manner of this victory and Lordship
in Christ) then the Son of God could be without the infirmities of us all,
in becoming our salvation Esa. 53. 6 11. Mat. 1. 21.
; for as he was a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief, by all the
infirmities that are naturally in us, so are we Saints, or men of God,
rejoicing and triumphing in, and by all those excellencies, and virtues that
are in him 1 Pet. 2. 9. 1 Cor. 12. 25, 26, 27. Phil. 2. 17. 18. 1 These. 2. 19.
20.
, and hence he urges that argument, that the resurrection is death, to show
that our nature never departs from the word of God, in any condition, no not
for a moment, for by, or in this mutual rejoicing (victory triumph, yea
dignity authority and dominion) we have in our Lord, I dye daily, or we dye
daily, 1 Cor. 15. 31.
that is, this our Lordship and triumph in Christ, is a continued act of death
in us, unto all servile, fear, base, flattery, or slavish subjection, even in
the midst of the corrupt wills, caridges, courses, and behaviors of men in
this world, the victory, and triumph of our Lordship by Christ, is a continued
act of death in us unto them all, so that the afflictions of this present time
Romans 8. 18.
, cannot take hold on us, to make us lament, and bewail, as a people miserable
indeed (though in the eye of the world we appear so) no more then perils,
dangers, and fears, can take hold of a dead man, such is our condition with
respect unto the troubles, and molestations of this life, by virtue of that
rejoicing triumph, and lordly Authority, we have in our Lord Christ, which the
Apostle binds upon himself, together with all the Saints in Christ, upon no
weaker ground nor less certainty, then the verity, and authority of an oath,
yea the virtue of this oath of interposition, binding the things of God over
unto man, and the things of man, over unto God in Christ, in which holy tie it
runs through the whole Scriptures.

Nor is this Priestly Office, a^ any time, or in any Ministry exercised, but
under the authority, and by virtue of the instalment of this oath; for if we be
not consecrated hereby p, our hands are never filled as Priests of the most
high God, to serve at that Alter whereunto they have no right, that serve in
the way of an earthly Tabernacle Heb. 7. 12. to 25.
; for none can speak as the oracle, or word of God, in the Courts of the Lords
house Heb. 7. 1. Heb. 13. 10.
, but only such as give evidence and bear witness, in matters that concern
the right ordering and Government thereof, for the honor of their Lord, but
under the power, and upon the certainty of this oath; for that which was from
the beginning which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we
have looked upon, and our hands have handled of the word of life 1 Pet. 4. 11
Psalm. 116. 18. 19. Psalm. 135. 1, 2, 3.
, such things, and upon grounds of no less certainty, are the witnesses of
Jesus Christ, to speak in the audience of such, as wait and attend in the
house of the Lord, or at the gates of wisdom 1 John 1. 1, 2, 3.
; for no Scripture is of any private interpretation, but holy men of God spoke
as they were moved by the holy Ghost Psalm. 123. 1. 2. Psalm. 130. 5, 6, 7. Prove.
5. 1. Prove. 7. 24. Prove. 8. 33. 34.
, so that by the same spirit (and therefore upon like certainty) that the word
was spoken from the beginning, it is also to be interpreted, and opened for
ever, for prophesies of old, or prophesies ( at any time) as the word will
bear, and may be read, came not by the will of man; for the will of man is a
private spirit, yea if all the men in the world should consent and agree in one
thing, it were a private spirit, in case they spoke not by the Spirit of God;
for the spirit of man, (and so by the Law of nature corrupted; the spirit of
all men) ever aims at it self, 2 Pet. 1. 20. 21.
in all its Counsels and actions Phil. 2. 21 Psalm. 4. 6.
, and therefore a private spirit, though trained up in the greatest school the
world affords, or furnished with the greatest consent of library, but the
spirit of God ever aims at, and propounds another, in all its Councels and
consultations, therefore it is a public spirit, though in one holy man of God,
else had the Son of God never appeared in our nature, if he had not
propounded the good of another John 17. 19. John 10. 1 Romans 5. 6 to 10.
, nor could we ever give glory to God in all things if the spirit it self
helped not our infirmities Romans 8. 26. Ephesians. 5. 18. 19. 20.
; who only inables us thereunto, and by virtue of that we propound the honor
of our Lord, and not our selves in all our Counsels and ways 1 Cor. 10. 31.
Col. 3. 17. 1 Cor. 10. 24
, and therein have a public spirit, and all other spirits, are private
self-seekers, and not interpreters of the word of God at all John 2. 16, 2 Pet.
2. 3. 2 Cor. 11. 13 2 Cor. 4. 2. Mat. 23. 13, 14, 15. 2 Cor. 2. 17.
; But we see upon what terms of certainty, the Apostle affirms this, that in
the true way of the Gospel, life is a continued act of death, in that
authority, and Lordship we have in Christ, we dye unto that baseness and
subjection that naturally is in every man, whether it appear in tirannicall
rule, or dejected slavery, all is but the same spirit, namely a living unto the
lusts of the flesh, for there is the same spirit in that which the woman says
in the beginning, ( we must not eat least we dye) that there is in that which
the Serpent says, if ye eat ye shall be as Gods) they both use the word of
truth, but in a false sense, and so turn it into alye unto themselves, the one
in way of false fear, the other in way of false courage and confidence Genesis 3.
3, 4, 5.
, even as Satan used the words of Truth, in tempting of Christ but in a false
sense Mat. 4. 6.
, as our Savior well perceived, although it consist not in the altering of
some phrases; in the places alleiged, as the world, vainly thinks, for there is
no Scripture uttered, that is brought in again by the spirit of God, upon any
occasion that is alleged precisely in the same terms, phrases, or
circumstances, that it was before.

But Satan's falsity stands in this, that he takes these words, ye shall be
like unto God, in a wrong sense Genesis 3. 5.
, or this word ( to live) and the woman's falsity stands in this, that she takes
dying in a wrong sense, and so the one, and the other, become evil, and are
expressions, which are included in the way of the fall, and the way of the
fall in them; for Satan is a liar from the beginning, and the Father thereof
Ioh. 8. 44.
; For it is possible, to eat of, or communicate in; that Tree in the midst of
the garden, and live for ever Genesis 3. 22. 23.
, and also to eat of, and communicate in that Tree in the midst of the Garden,
and dye for ever Genesis 2. 17.
; yea death and life are in the one, and in the other; yet in the one, life
only appears, and no death at all; for they are both said to be in the midst
of the Garden Revel. 22. 2, 3, 4.
, which must be made good precisely according to the Truth of that unerring
rule, of Gods circumference and senter, not to fail, so much as in a tittle,
in the one, or in the other, and therefore must teach us one, and the same
thing, which is, the true state of mankind represented unto us therein,
according to that glorious device of Gods workmanship, who is the very midst
heart, spirit, or life of all his works, who was made as a Tree of
righteousness Genesis 2 9.
, consisting of root and branch, even as that Son of David does Psalm. 1. 3.
Esa. 61. 3.
, whom he taught, and represented unto us; a root, as he is the Image of God
Revel. 22 16. Genesis 1. 27.
, who is the Fountain of all things, and so gives being unto the man, as the
root gives being unto the Tree, he is also a branch as he is made of the dust
of the earth Genesis 2. 7.
, and so springs up into the glory of God 2 Cor. 3. 18.
, to communicate therefore in this work, or to eat of this Tree according to
the mind and wisdom of God, is to be dead unto the flesh, but alive unto God,
which is life indeed, and abides for ever in them, that eat of that Tree of
life in the midst of the Paradise of God, Revel. 2. 7.
that is, to conclude the one, and the other, to be as really present, as they
are to come, and to be in present, being, and use, as they shall for ever be,
as a living Fountain, still to spring up in us, and to us John 4. 14.
, which is nothing else, but to believe the record that God has given unto us
of his Son 1 John 5. 10. 11.
, and put our seal unto it that he is come, and to communicate in the work of
God, or eat of the Tree in the midst of the Garden, as it is the Tree of the
knowledge of good and evil, or acknowledgment of pleasing, and displeasing,
(as the word signifies) is to communicate in it, according to the will of the
flesh, or the wisdom, and reasonings, of a Creature, seen in the mind of the
woman, and spirit of the Serpent, which is to turre the glory of God into
shime, Psalm. 4. 2. Psalm. 106. 20.
the truth of God into a lie, Romans 1. 25.
. Concluding, that we are not so yet, as God has said we are, in regard of
our life in him.

But if we eat in a pleasing or good way, we shall be such as he has said,
and also that we are not so bad, in respect of death, or in being base and vile
in our selves, as he has said.

But if we eat (exercise or communicate) in displeasing or bad ways; we shall
be, Genesis 3. 3.
: the one of these has beer the way of unbelief, a lie, and falling away
from God in Christ; from the beginning, even until now: and the other is the
way of faith, truth, and life, uniting us unto God, in that way of Jesus Christ
even until now.

The world has still something to eat, to please, or displease God, before it
enjoy, or be possessed, either with life, or death (according to the word and
speech of God;) that is, it has still some Fast to keep, some Sabbath to
sanctify, some Sermon to preach or here, some Battle to fight, some Church to
constitute, some Officers to raise up, or Orders to reform and re-edifie,
before it can take God upon his word, that we are complete in Christ, Col. 2.
10. Ephesians. 5. 27.
. And if it will eat of none of these, yet it must comunicate with time; that
is, yet some more time, and reformation will be made; yet some more time and
the state will alter; yet some more time, and Jews and Gentiles will be
called; yet some more time, and Antichrist will be overthrown; yet some more
time, and then Christ will come to reign upon the Earth for a thousand years;
yet some time must be eaten up, either in way of pleasing or displeasing of
God, and then natural death will either put us into life, or death eternal:
this has been the way of the fall, and drawing back of the soul from God
unto pardition, Heb. 10. 39.
, from the beginning to this day, in all those in whom God takes no pleasure
Heb. 10. 38.
, even as the other is the way of Faith coming unto God; and being made one
with him, in all those, in whom his soul delights, 4 Esa. 2. 1.
, as in his Elect, or choice Ones; the one has life and death in it: In such
sort, as they are both considered in the Son of God.

And therefore the glory of them both, is given to him alone. Romans 8. 33. 34.
, and in that death is swallowed up in victory, 1 Cor. 15. 54.
, so as nothing but life and peace appears, 1 Cor. 15. 57. 1 John 5. 4, 5.
: the other has life and death in it, as considered in the son of perdition,
who will needs have them in himself; and therefore must needs expect them in a
humane, or conjectured way, where there is no life nor spirit of God at all,
but only a living unto the flesh; which is nothing else at all but only death,
Romans 8. 13
, and as these two trees declare unto us one estate that man is made in, and
yet issues out into such differing, and distant operations: So this state of
God and Man being made one, declares also our first Parents what they are, in
respect of spiritual and mystical operations in the world, even as the Man
and the Woman (who were one at the first) Genesis 2. 20, 21, 22.
, are the original and fountain of all natural Birthes and Posterities in
the world.

For out of this condition of Man, being made in the Image of God, judged of,
embraced, and acknowledged; according to the spirit and wisdom of God,
proceeds the Generation and Offspring of the Son of God, Genesis 3. 15. Acts
17. 28. Esa. 53. 10.
, who is God over all blessed, for ever, Amen, Romans 9. 5
or so be it (as the word imports) or so it shall be, having the virtue of this
oath of interposission in it, that ever concludes upon terms of certainty and
present being.

For, according to the judgment or wisdom of God, it cannot be otherwise in
him.

So also out of the same composition or condition judged of, looked upon, and
acknowledged, according to the wisdom, reasoning, Genesis 2. 7.
as truly, as is the Image and wisdom of God.

Out of this does also arise that Man of sin, and Son of perdition, that
Antichrist whom God destroys with the breath of his mouth, and abolisheth with
the brightness of his coming, 2 These. 2. 3. 8.
and as surely as that wicked Caine, and righteous Abel came of the Man and the
Woman, who were at the first made good; yea, vehemently good; Genesis 1. 31.
: So also, do these contrary (though both mystical and spiritual
Generations) spring out of that composition, and wonderful workmanship of God:

And if we understand not our first Parents, according to the bringing forth of
these several and contrary Seeds, of Posterities (namely) the Seed of the
Woman, and the Seed of the Serpent, Genesis 3. 15 3. Jude 10
as well as we understand them; namely, the Man and the Woman, to be the first
original of our natural being, we understand and them to (...) fruit, nor
profit at all; but rather like bruit beasts made to be taken and destroyed, for
ever 2. Pet. 2. 12.
.

For there is a being under the Oath of the Curse of that Man of sin, 2 These.
2. 3. Psalm. 119. 21. Dewt. 27. 15.
, as well as a being, in, or under the Oath of the blessing of that
Melchi^adeck, Genesis 14. 18, 19, 20 Heb. 7. 21.
, under which; the resurrection and death are the same act or thing. And so it
is in the way of sin and the curse, the resurrection or lifting up of the
flesh, 2 Pet. 2. 10. Romans 8 13. Col. 2. 18.
, is the death of the Spirit, the operation and raising of wrath, is the
cessation and disanulling of peace for ever.

And this great distance and contrariety comes to pass by that differing
light, which one, and the same thing is beheld and looked upon withal: the one
sees by the light, and revelation of the Spirit, * according to that wisdom
that is in the Son of God.

And therefore reasons or argues not, nor concludes upon any thing, but as it
is congruous, and stands with the present subsistence, and being, power, work,
authority, wisdom, honor, and peace of the Son of God: for that which i^ no
ways inferior unto God, is in the Lord Jesus Christ; yea, he is God, blessed
for ever, Ephesians. 1. 17. Heb. 11. 1. Romans 9. 5. John. 1. 14. Revel. 22. 13.
and that bears sway, and prevails in a Christian, in all his actions and
consultations; and that not without respect unto humane frailty, and infirmity:
So also the other looks upon the same thing, and sees by the light of a
Creature, according to humane reason are, science, edicts, and abilities
acquitted, and gamed by the power of nature, and therefore argues, concludes,
enterpriseth, and undertaketh nothing, but according to the instinct, reason,
authority, and abillity, of a momentany vain, and changeable Creature, that
cannot promise it self, to be the next moment, that which it is at present
Prove. 27. 1. James 4. 13, 14, 15, 16.
, and that with respect unto an eternal and infinite God, and therefore
ingenders wrath, in that it can never judge it self to be equal, agreeable,
correspondant, or suitable unto him in any thing Esa. 55. 8. 9. Esa. 46. 5. 6.
Ezekiel. 18. 25
, but fales short and is contrary to him in all things Levit. 26. 40. 41. Gal.
5. 17. Romans 8. 7.
, and from that, the motions of the flesh, bearing, sway in him, he terrifies
and destroys himself, yea becomes an adversary unto himself, seeking all
advantages from that holiness, righteousness, power, Truth, and justice, that
it in God, to torment, disquiet, and vex himself; therefore the word in the
Hebrew, sometimes translated Devil Deuteronomy. 32. 17
, is Seighnirim, that is, roughness, or horror, and fear, and in the Caldean
tongue, Shedin, that is a destroyer, such is man unto himself, in his own
proper light and ability, in all that he can attain unto, as he is simply a
Creature, Job. 5. 13. 1 Cor. 3. 19
and therefore it is said of Israel, thy destruction is of thy self Hos. 13. 9.
, and whosoever he is, that ascribes any thing unto God, as being a cause of
sin, or of the destruction of the Creature, he also ascribes something unto man,
as a cause of righteousness and salvation, and so gives somewhat, into the
hands of flesh to boast Job. 24. to 28. 1 Cor. 1. 29.
, which is not only deragatory, but also contradictory unto the faith of Gods
Elect Ephesians. 2. 8, 9, 10. Romans 11. 5, 6, 7.
:

Note here that wide difference that is between the oath of the blessing, which
is this oath of interposition, binding over, and uniting together in one, God
and man, in that way of Christ, so that humane nature is a party in this oath
or Covenant; for it must concern more then one, or else it cannot be taken or
made; for a contract cannot be of one, but it makes one, so that here is two
natures in one subsistence or being, and yet notwithstanding the complete power
of the oath, and the whole mannaging of the work, depends solely upon the
divine nature; for the humanity can no more be any concurrant cause herein,
then the earth at the first could rise up to heaven, and put upon, and cloth
it self with the Image of God, and make it self higher then the Heavens, Genesis
2. 7. Heb. 7. 26.
which we know by its own natural propensity, it hasts from it, as forcibly
and as far as possible it can, pressing unto the Center, to make it self at
the utmost distance, from all points of the heavens that may be attained, nay
it cannot be any cause of this Contract and agreement, no more then the womb of
a silly virgin, in time; could fetch down the word of eternity, and frame, or
make in her self, that which is the maker and framer of her, and of all
Creatures John 2. 3. Col. 1. 16.
, even so the oath of the curse, is that great divorse and separation of God
and man, to that infinite distance from, and opposition against one another, to
stand upon terms of wrath, emnity, and irreconsiliation for ever.

Therefore he says to those Rebels, that put off the rest from themselves in
the wilderness, judging God to be one in Canaan, and another in the
wilderness, even as all those do, that think the glory can never appear till
the woman come out of the Wilderness, unto whom he swear, yea still, as a
continued act swears, in his wrath if he shall enter into my rest Psa. 95. 11
Heb. 43.
, a short phrase, if they shall enter into my rest; signifying then will I
cease to be God, laying an utter impossibility upon it, and in this devorse,
emnity and wrath, the divine power is a party; for it is God and man, that are
separated, and stand upon terms of discord for ever, and yet it is as
impossible that God should be any cause of this emnity and wrath, as a
Fountain, from whence it flows, or proper subject wherein it consists, or
subsists, as it is impossible for God to remove himself from his work, and
not to be omnipresent with it 1 Kings 8. 27. Ier. 12. 2. Psalm. 139. 7. 10 12.
, or to be wrath with, or hate his own workmanship and device, when he had made
all things very good, Genesis 1, 31
or vehemently good, as the word signifies, for the Creation of man in the
Image of goodness, Mat. 19. 17.
as also his restoration in the same engraven form of his subsistence, Heb. 1.
3.
is a work vehemently good, or goodness in the utmost extent and most forcible
height of excellency that ever was, and we look not upon the works of God with
a spiritual eye, or light, no further then we know how to center them all in
Jesus Christ, and know how all things are made, reconciled together, and
brought into one in him, Col. 1. 19. 20.
things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth Phil. 2. 10.
.

Therefore utterly impossible, that God should be wrath with, or hate so
glorious a work, so that however it is true, and undeniable, that God is a
party in this breach, or devorse, yet it is as true, that the whole work, or
rather the nullity of the work; for God is the maker of all things, but
anihilates nothing, nor can this breach or devorse, be called a work, in any
other sense, but only a work of darkness, which cannot come to the light, or
spring out of light Ioh. 3. 20. 1 John 3. 5. John 8. 12.
, nor can that which is light it self have any such operation.

Therefore how ever God is a party in the breach, yet the whole disolving of
the Contract, in gendring of wrath and exercise of emnity, arises only out of
the nature of man, as the proper root, cause, and fountain thereof, looking
after, and judging of the things of God, according to the dictate,
argumentation, and consultation of the light and spirit of a creature, which in
it self is good; but the more curiously and diligently it searches after the
Creator by its own light, the more difference it finds, and the greater
distance and disproportion, between it self, and that infinite and blessed
Being of the Creator Genesis 3. 6. to 10.
; and is so far from ability and skill to make it self one with, and
correspondent unto him in all things, that he thereby ingenders wrath, breeds
emnity, and makes a greater discord betwixt himself and his Maker Gal. 4. 24.
25.
, drawing out and enlarging the bounds, or rather boundless estate of his
destruction and misery, according to that unfadomed and illimited nature of the
Creator, both in point of weight and duration Isai. 5. 14. Job. 6. 2. 3. Genesis
4. 13. 14. Job, 4. 19. 20. Job. 14. 19. 20 Deuteronomy. 23. 2. 3
, as also the various and changeable operation, and executions thereof,
according to that manifest, Truth, Holiness, Justice, and Equity that is in
God, and must of necessity work toward his Creator, through the wisdom of the
flesh, to his downfall and ruin, by reason of that first act of his Being, and
of that first form given unto him in his creation, even as the Spirit of Christ
must of necessity work toward, or in and by the infirmities of man, through
the wisdom of the Father, in that advancement of himself in the Kingdom of God
Heb. 2. 9. to 15. Heb. 2. 7. 8
; and if the Lord do not open our eyes, to see into the nature of this oath, in
the confirmation and certainty of it in the elect, by Jesus Christ, as also in
the disanulling and breach of it in the wicked, through that way of Antichrist;
we cannot have sound knowledge in the word of God: but our reasonings,
consultations, and conclusions thereabout, and therefrom, are merely of, and
from man, and not of, and from the Spirit of God; And it is handled by us as
the word of Man, and not as it is indeed the the word of that ever-living and
ever-being God 1 Thessalonians. 2. 13. 2 Cor. 2. 17. 2 Cor. 4. 2.
. And whereas in any thing; men have learned by the tradition of their Fathers,
things that the wisdom of a creature reaches not; as, the incarnation of the
Son of God, that he that is God should be made a creature; or that the
creature should be made that which is God; or that one should be made
righteous, to hold weight in the sight of God, by that which is not in
himself, but in another; or that the soul of man is immortal; whereas there
can be no more immortals then there is infinite; for the creature can as well
be infinite as immortal. When men seem to go into these or the like points,
that are so necessary for a Christian to know, as that they give being unto
Christianity, they walk, or rather wander and groap in the dark, speaking from
Tradition, as they have taken it at the second hand from others (which
tradition ever does, and has not any thing immediately from God, according to
that way of the Son receiving all things immediately from his Father John 10.
John. 17. 7. 8. John 13. 20. 1 Cor. 11. 23
, but merely conjecturall, as false Prophets use to do Deuteronomy. 13. to 5 Jerem.
27. 9. 10. Jude 8.
, wandering they know not whither Jude 13.
, neither did they ever learn from the Lord, whosoever they be, that are such
Scholars and accountants, as cannot bring life and death into one and the same
act; yea the contract and the divorce to be the same thing. our sins to be
that which indeed they are, yea, the divorce in its own nature and distance,
then must we of necessity reckon and account our sins upon the Son, of
God, who is the Lord our righteousness Ierem. 23. 6. Ier. 33. 16.
. For the divorce is of an infinite distance, because he that is infinite is a
party in the contract, and there can be but one infinite; therefore our sins
must of necssity be reckoned and accounted upon that one only and infinite
son of God, and so are done away Esa. 63. 9. Esa. 53. 10. 11. Lev. 16. 7. to
22. Heb. 8. 12. Heb. 8. 11. 1 These. 4. 9.
. Nay further, without the true knowledge of this point, (which none can teach
but God alone) John 21. 25.
, Let men use study, experience, Learning in tongues, or arts, reading of
books, if it were possible, that the whole world could not contain, as it
cannot the things that concern, or might be written of Christ Exodus 7. 11, 12,
13. 2 Timothy 3. 8. Acts 8. 17. to 21.
. Yea, observe the changes of States, times, and things, as men use to do for
their help, in opening those wonderful Revelations of Jesus Christ, which is
much like your men, that use spells, and cast figures, to bring out some
strange thing to affect others withal Revel. 12. 14.
, that so their hire, or reward, may not be grudged but come off, the more
easy, whether it be profit, pleasure, preferrment, or shelter, under some
great man or State, out of base and servile fear of man, as commonly
accompanies such spirits, yet can they never calculate, or make manifest, the
time of the woman's being in the Wilderness Mat. 17. 10, 11, 12. 13:
, which some so earnestly seem to gape after, Messiah, and that Eliah, that
was to come, when as both the one and the other was conversing with them; Mat.
11. 14.
nor can they indeed bring forth the truth of any other part of the word of
God, no more then they can do that and such like, which their own consciences
must of necessity speak, in the behalf of God against them; for they know
they cannot prefix any certain time of it, and if the Trumpat give an
uncertain sound, who can prepare himself to Battle 1 Cor. 14. 7. 8.
; for indeed that uncertain sounding is the chief cause of all the Slain,
and wounded, both in soul and body, in our native Country at this day; for if
the root and rice of things be not seen, but lie hid and are not known, the
body and branch can never been delineated nor brought forth, neither in
substance, nor true circumstance whatsoever: And therefore, not in this of the
time of the Woman's being brought out of the Wilderness, which is affirmed to
be for a time, times, and half a time, Rev. 12. 14
. So that they know not the Church; no, not in respect of this circumstance of
time (if we may call any thing circumstantiall) in the Church of Christ: For
the truth is there is nothing in the Church which is not substantial and
fundamental; without which, the Church cannot have a being, we speak what we
know, 2 Timothy 2 7 Ioh. 4. 21, 22 23, 24. 2 King. 17. 29.
, For if we have learned the truth as it is in Jesus, Ephesians. 4 21
, then we know that as the truth is in Jesus; so also, it is in the Church, and
no otherwise.

For, the Church is nothing in any respect, as acceptable to God, but only as
it is in Jesus Christ, x, and Christ we know has nothing in him, that is not
substantial and fundamental, without which he is not a perfect and complete
Savior.

For take away any thing that is in Christ, and you make an Idol, or a nullity
of Him unto the souls of men: for, an Idol, we know, is nothing in the
world, 1 Cor. 12. 12, 27. Ephesians. 1. 5. 6.
.

So also it is in the Church of Christ; for take away any thing that is of the
Church, or in the Church, and you make an Idol, 1 Cor. 8. 4
and a nullity of it, if we know Christ in substance, then we know Him to be
God and Man, 1 Timothy 3. 16. John 1. 14. Romans 9. 5. Act. 20. 28. John 8. 58. John
8. 58. compared with Luke, 24. 37, 38, 39, 40,
, or else he is no Christ.

So that take away his Godhead and he is no Christ; though acknowledged the
Son of Man. Take away his Manhood, and he is no Christ, though acknowledged to
be the Son of God.

So is it also, in regard of those things we call circumstantiall, as time,
place, and person. Take away any of these from Christ, and he is denied to be
that anointed: for take away person from Christ, and he cannot be Christ,
without having person or subsistence.

Take away his being annihilated, and made nothing (or such a thing as has no
subsistence at all in it self) from Christ, and he is denied to be Christ.

Take away his being, circumscribed within a place; from him, and he is no
Christ: for then his humanity is denied.

Take from him, his incomprehensiblenesse, and his not being contained in any
place, and then we deny him to be GOD, and so to be the Savior of the world.

Take away Eternity from Him, and Christ is made of none effect.

Take away His being in time, and we disanull His coming in our nature, which
cannot but be in time.

Even so it is in regard of a true Church, as it is in regard of a true Christ:
for the same term or title given to the one, is also given to the other, 1
Cor. 12. 12.
.

So that as there are many false Christ's, Mat. 24. 5. Mat, 24. 24 22. Mark 13.
22, 23.
, so also there are many false Churches; and if we take away any thing from
Christ, that is in him, we propound a false Christ unto the world.

So also, if we take away from the Church, any thing that is to be sound in the
Church, we propound a false Church; yea, set up the Synagogue of Satan in the
world, Rev. 2. 9. Revel. 3. 9.
.

And as for that distinction, of being, and well-being of a Church as if the
Church might have a being and yet want a well-being it is merely devised, and
humane in the things of God, and no arguing according to godliness.

For as the Son of God never had being without well being also; for the
humane nature never had being, but in the divine: So the Church of God never
has being, without a well-being: For what it is in any respect whatsoever, it
is that in Christ, and Christ cannot be divided; for of his fullness we all
receive, and grace for grace, Col. 1. 19. Col. 2. 9. compared with John 1. 16.
.

So that if we know not how to give the woman her due time, of being in the
wilderness, we know not the Chruch of Christ; for it concerns her being and
her well-being also.

Yea, this circumstance of time is fundamental; for we know not how the Church
has her being without it; that is, without that her being in the wilderness:
for the woman's flight into the wilderness, instructs us in the weak frail,
and brittle vessel of our earthly nature, and the Man-child caught up to GOD,
and His Throne, to rule the Nations, Rev. 12. 5, 6.
, instructs us in that power and authority of the Word of God; in such sort, as
the Man is not without the Woman; nor the Woman without the Man in the Lord, 1
Cor. 11. 11.
; no more then the divine nature is without the humane, or humane nature
without the divine in that way of Jesus Christ: So that in the Woman's appearing
in Heaven, having in her a Man-child, is taught the descension of the word in
our nature, and the ascension of our nature in the Word of God, even as it was
taught, in the making of the first man, having the woman taken out of him: the
one declaring the way of death, and subjection of our nature unto sin, when
the woman is brought forth and prevails with her arguments, and reasonings,
according to humane frailty, in those suggestions of the Serpent, or wisdom of
the flesh Gen, 3. 4, 5, 6.
: And the other declares the ascension of our nature, when the Man is brought
forth of the Woman, and taken up into the Throne to rule over all the ways,
and arguments of the Heathen, or devises suggested by the flesh, Rev. 12. 5.
Mat. 4. 10. 11.
.

So then the Woman in the Wilderness, is the Word of God descended into our
nature, that waylesse, and vast Wilderness utterly void, wast and destitute,
of the foot steps of God; through the panges pains and travels whereof, it
brings forth it self, Rev. 12. 2.
, in that glorious descension and humiliation of the Son of God, and the Man
child caught up to God, and to his Throne, Rev. 12. 5.
, is our nature taken up into the Unity of that Word of God, ruling the
Nations, in, and by the authority of God, in whose seat or throne it is set,
Heb. 1. 3.
. So that if we look into the Wilderness, there is Christ complete in his
humiliation; and if we look into Heaven, there is Christ complete in his
exaltation: and these two can never be the one, without the other; for they are
one as Christ is one. Hear, O Israel, the Lord thy God is one Lord, Deuteronomy. 4. 6
.

The Woman then is in the Wilderness for a time; that is, Eternity is become
that which is contained in a point, or period of time: and one period, or point
of time, is become that which is eternal: Eternity is become time, and time is
become eternity, in that act of the creation, or incarnation of the Word of
God, and without communication with time in this respect, thus extended, and
thus abridged, the Church of God cannot subsist, nor have a being.

She is also said to be there for times, in the plural number; for it is
multiplied into the time of death, and the time of life, the time of
descension, and the time of ascension: yea into a time of wrath, and a time of
reconciliation and peace.

For there was ever a time of Antichrist, for he comes out of the bottomless
pit, Rev. 9. 23 Rev. 11. 7. Rev. 17. 7.
; in which condition and state Christ has no time at all, and there was ever a
time of Christ also, who comes out of the bosom of the Father, Mat. 3. 17 Col.
1. 13. 2 Pet. 1. 16, 17. John 1. 18.
, in which state and condition, Antichrist has no time at all; therefore a
plurality of times: yea, Christ himself never lived unto the flesh, and he
ever lives unto the spirit, which is a two fold time, ever, and never, and
without the communication of these times, the Church of God can have no being.

Again she is in the wilderness for half a time, or for the division of times
as the Prophet Daniel has it, Dan. 7. 25
, whence our Apostle brings it, that is, in that very point and moment of time,
of the incarnation, or of making the word flesh John. 1. 14.
is divided into a time of life, and a time of death; in such sort, as the one
is not, nor can it be, so much as the twinkling of an eye, before or after the
other: no more then God to become Man can be sooner or later, then Man becomes
the Son of God: and so is the very moment, or point of time, divided in such
sort, that it could never be said: Now this is, and the other is not yet; no,
not with the quickest eye, that ever cast it self upon an object. Nay this
division of time is such a parting halfing, or dividing of it that it holds
correspondency and proportion, both in respect of the time of life, as also in
the time of death in all points: for they stand in direct oppositions and
counterpoise each other, in as much as the Son of God, to dye the death of Man;
and the Son of Man to live the life of God, are of equal extent; yea, of the
same difficulty and ease, possibility and impossibility; the one as the other,
and so are all other things in this division: for these are the two great wings
given unto the woman, wherewith she takes her flight, Rev. 12. 14.
which are not according to nature (as in the things trimly alluded unto:
namely the wings of a Foul) in their first institution and ordination, if they
hold not presize proportion in all respects; so that her descension into the
wilderness, is her mounting aloft unto Heaven, as an Eagle does, and her
mounting up to Heaven, is her descension into the wilderness after the prey,
as an Eagle does; yea, her descension is her ascension, and her ascension is
her descension.

For she appears in heaven (as the Man did first in the Garden) and from
thence the Son flies in her womb into the wilderness, as an Eagle after the
prey, to swallow up death in victory, and the Son being brought forth by her in
the Wilderness, in him she is caught up into the Throne of God, to rule over
the Nations, Rev. 12. 5.
and to overcome the Devil and his Angels, even as the woman was made in the
man at the first Creation, Ruler, and Lord, over all the Works of Gods hand,
Genesis 1. 27, 28.
. We conclude then, that the woman is in a solitary, waylesse, uncomely, and
uncomfortable condition in the Wilderness (as men conceive) so long as the
humiliation of the Son of God, in our nature, and the exaltation of our nature,
in being united with the word, can be divided and separated, and not a jot
longer, which is impossible to find, know, understand, or apprehend, the one
without the other, in the truth or operation thereof, no not for a moment of
time: only men's carnal Speculations carry and hurry them after mere pictures,
shadows, and Idols that are empty and vain, Ier. 10. 8, 9, 10. Psalm. 97. 7
1 Cor. 8. 4. Psalm. 96. 4. 5. Psalm. 115. 4, to 8.
, not knowing the truth, certainty, and subsistence of that Word of grace,
given unto us upon such infallible grounds, and gladsome terms, as the Gospel
of God brings it, and commends it unto us, in; Those therefore that make a time
of the Woman's being in the Wilderness, and a time of the destruction of
Antichrist.

A time also, of the calling of the Jews, etc. before the Church of GOD can
attain its peace, beauty, power, authority, excellency, and ornaments in this
World.

They also make a time between the humiliation and exaltation of Jesus Christ,
between his living to the spirit, and dying in and to the flesh, 1 Pet. 3. 18
2 Cor. 13. 4.
, and so destroy and make a nullity of Christ unto themselves, and to all them
that hear such doctrine with approbation; for, they preach Christ in the
enticing words of man's wisdom, and natural conjectures, and operations of
men's hearts, and not Christ, the only wisdom and power of God, 1 Cor. 2. 4 5,
6, 7. 1 Cor. 1. 17. 2 Pet. 1. 16. 2 Cor. 1. 12. Col. 2. 4. 1 Cor. 1. 24, 25.
, who is seen by no other light but his own, and therefore a Name is given unto
him, that none can know but himself, and He is called the Word of God, Rev. 6.
12 13.
, which according to humane reason, and the common custom of men's alleging
of Scriptures, in their proof of Doctrine, the wickednest man that lives, or
the weakest child that can but read may know it, being so plainly manifested,
as there it is; and yet he affirms that none can know it but himself: which
therefore must have more in it then any in the world that is not made one with
Christ by Faith (and so said to be himself) can possibly know or see:

And so it is in all other words of holy Writ, what ever the world may think or
judge of it.

Those also that think to bring the woman out of the wilderness, by
institutions, ordinances, baptismes, eldership, confessio^s, receptions,
expulsions, rearing up Fabrics, reformatory as preparations; or rather parts,
and piece meals of that glory they look for and expect, when the time comes,
of the woman's coming out of the wilderness, these kind of people have ever
brought the woman out of the wilderness; but it is that woman which John sees
in the wilderness, sitting upon a scarlet colored beast. full of names of
blasphemy, having seven heads, and ten horns arrayed in purple and scarlet
color, decked with gold, precious stones and pearls, having a golden cup in
her hand, full of abominations, and filthiness of her fornication, Rev. 17. 3
4, 5, 6.
, which is the very portraiture of the policies, power, pomp, and excellencies
of the Churches or synagogues of this world brought out by the wisdom, art,
authority and endeavors of men to present a new service, or sacrifices to
please God and to compose, compile, and contract the bulk and body of the
people together, to make strong the arm of flesh,z in which the cross of our
Lord, is never found, nor does his Kingdom consist in any such things, Ier.
17. 5.
and therefore our Apostle protests, by the Victory and Lordship he has in
Christ, that he is in a continued act of death unto them all, Ioh. 18. 36 Romans
14. 17, 18.
.

Therefore, it is that he adds to his protestation, and affirmation (if says
he) I have fought with Beasts at Ephesus, 1 Cor. 15. 31.
, meaning such Beasts, as bear up that beautified woman, 1 Cor. 15. 32.
, clothed in purple, which he compriseth in the state of that City of Ephesus,
calling them Beasts in the plural number; that is, if I have sought with
States, Policies, d Rev. 17. 3, 4, 5.
Corporations, Cities, Soldiers, Synods, Ecclesiastical Assemblies, and Jewish
Synedrions; yea, Captains and Troops, fighting with the arm of flesh for an
earthly and carnal temple and sanctuary, which all use their heads, and horns;
together with those several Crowns or Authorities that are put upon them, for
the preservation of that woman brought forth by them, and maintained, upheld,
and born upon them, Rev. 17. 9. to 14.
(if says he) I have fought with such after the manner of men, what advantage
is it to me, if the dead rise not that is, if I have done it after the course,
custom, and ordinary way of all flesh, or of man that is all mankind, it
avails nothing at all unto the resurrection of the dead, but merely to the
setting up of the flesh, which is a quenching, killing, or putting to death of
the spirit, 1 These. 5. 19. 1 Cor. 2, 8. Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6.
, For the manner of humane fighting, is this, namely, in the preservation of
its own life, to take away and destroy the life of another, in the setting up
of himself to pull down another, in the healing of him self to putrify
another; in the strengthening of himself to weaken another; in the honoring of
himself, to vilify and disgrace another: For if there were none to be
vilified and disgraced, there were no place for the grace, and honor of this
present world: Such are the fighting and combats of men, who ever they
incumbant but the manner of the warring of the Son of God, and of all the
Saints in him, even of that Michael and his Angels, that sight against the
Dragon and his Angels Revel. 12. 7
, which our Apostle (according to that work of faith) assumeth unto himself.

Therefore says, if I have fought, even as he says, according to my Gospel
Tim. 2. 8.
, which fight is after the manner of that Marshall, and heavenly discipline,
taught from an high, descending from this our High Priest, and Captain of our
Salvation Heb. 2. 10.
, which is far otherwise, yea contrary unto it, standing in flat opposition,
to that of the world; yea it is Christ, and Antichrist, when matter of, and for
Religion, are ascribed and given thereunto, it is Christ in that way of the
sword of the Spirit, and spiritual combat in his strift to save the Souls of
men, from a spiritual death and to instate them in a life spiritual and
eternal John 2. 25. Romans 6. 23. Romans 5. 21. Mar. 10. 30. John 3. 15. John 6.
54.
, and it is Antichrist, in that way of the Arm of flesh, and strength of the
reason and understanding of man, who ever strives to settle men in a Church
way; for life and salvation in such ways, institutions, and Ordinances, as
must of necessity leave them at the time of their death at the furthest Heb. 7.
22, 23, 24. Col. 2. 20, 21, 22, 23. Prove. 23. 4. 5 Psalm. 102. 26
:

Which Bellows are so infident unto the Priests of our times to blow, and they
are no less diligent, and frequent therein, then those Paiests were, in the
time of the Jews to stir up and kindle a fire, in Herod, Pontious Pilate, the
Soldiers and the rest of the people of the Jews to put our Lord to death Mat.
26. 59 Mark 14, 55, 56. John 11. 46, 47, 48. Mark. 15. 1, 2. 3. Luke 23. 1. 2.
23. 24.
; for the reformation, honor, and peace of their state Luke 23. 2 John 11. 48,
49, 50, 51. Acts 24. 5. 6.
, into which they expect Christ to come, according to the flesh, or so, as to
suit their brutish and natural apprehensions and apitites, for such a Christ
and Christianity, the world has ever looked for Mat. 20. 21, 22, 23. John 4.
11. 12. John 7. 25, 26 27. 47. 48. 49.
:

And therefore judge it most meet, to rid the world of him, in case his
doctrine be heavenly and spiritual, yea if the words he speaks be spirit and
life, the proper act, order, and discipline of the world, Ioh. 6. 36.
is to destroy and take away that life or spirit, to preserve and maintain its
own, that walks not in the Spirit, but according to the carnal desires and
immaginations of the flesh Romans 5, 6, 7, 8. Genesis 6. 5. Gal. 5. 17.
, the fight therefore of the Son of God, and of all Sons in him, is on this
wise, namely in the taking away of his own life to begin; and beget life in
another John 10. 11. 15, 16, 17. Esa. 40. 11. John 6 51.
; in the laying down and humbling of himself to raise and lift up another 2
Cor. 8. 9. Phil. 2 5. 10 11.
, in the purifying of himself (though he knows no putrifacation Psalm. 16. 10.
2 Cor. 5 21.
, to purify and heal another, for this seed of immortality, is sown in
Corruption, but it rises in Incorruption 1 Cor. 15. 42.
, in the weakness of himself to give strength and power to another; for that
seed of life is sown in weakness in us (or in our nature) but it rises in
power, as our nature is raised in it 1 Cor. 15. 43
, yea in the dishonor and villification of himself, he honors and puts
grace upon another for ever, for the seed of God is sown in dishonor, but it
rises in glory 1 Cor. 15. 43.
, it is sown in that dishonorable state of silly man, but it is raised in the
glory and dignity of the Son of God; who is not nor can be otherwise made
manifest, or appear to be what he indeed is, unto, or in the Creature in any
other way, but through our infirmity, no more then the Excellencies of the
Soul of man can appear to a natural eye, when it is separated from the body,
and not in union, or oneness with it, fighting therefore with unreasonable
men, or beasts 1 Cor. 15. 32.
, for all men have not faith, 2 These. 3. 2.
and then they are as far from knowing, and walking according to the Law rules
(or reason) as the word given for Law sometimes signifies Heb. 2. 2.
, of that Jerusalem, that comes down from heaven, or Israel that is of God
Revel. 21. 2. Gal. 4. 26. Gal. 6. 16.
, as a bruit beast is far of, and estranged from the art, skill, and rules
that a man walks by.

And the Apostle says, that none knows the things of a man, but the spirit of
a man, that is, no other Creature but his own kind, can reach them 1 Cor. 2. 11.
; Even so none knows the things of God, but the Spirit of God 1 Cor. 2. 11.
; for no unbeliever that is not led by that spirit, can possibly reach them no
more then a beast can be taught to cast an Account, or learn the art of
Music, though they have all the outward senses a man has, even as all the
outward or visible Characters of the word of God, according to the Letter, are
naturally engraven in man's spirit Deuteronomy. 30. 11, 12, 13, 14. Romans 10. 6, 7, 8. 2
Cor. 3. 6. 7.
, though he know not the mind and meaning of it, no more can any man teach
another the things of God; for it is his own mighty handiwork alone, for the
hearing ear, and the seeing eye, are both alike of the Lord Heb. 8. 11. Prove.
20. 12. Gal. 1. 12. 1 These. 4. 9. Ephesians. 4. 21. 1 John 2. 27.
, fighting therefore with, and opposing these, after the manner of the Son of
God, avails much to the resurrection, nay it is the resurrection it self,
that is, when we lay down our own life, to preserve the like of another in the
world, (that is, when we lay down all our own livelihood in our selves) to
preserve the life, spirit, doctrine, power, and authority of the Son of God
amongst, and against, all that oppose that life, spirit, power, and authority
of his in the world.

Now the laying down of a man's life, for the preservation of the life of the
Son of God, is not properly to lay down this natural life, as it is a
separation of soul and body, though it does not exclude that, also in its
season; for the life of man is properly to live to himself, as all earthly
Creatures, by nature do, and as all earthly men do Phil. 2. 21. Phil. 3. 18. 19.
, that institute, and gather Churches, ordain Officers, multiply Members,
study, preach, pray, fast, feast, baptize, and minister, in outward, and
earthly Elements, and rudements to bind over the consciences of the people, to
aford them means, to maintain them, in riches, honor, and ease, as also, the
civil Magistrate to defend, and protect them, in what they speak and do Exodus
32. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Acts. 7. 39. to 43.
:

Now whilst Moses is in the Mount, or rather Christ ascended on high Psalm. 68.
18. Ephesians. 4. 8.
, and they know not how to fetch protection, and defense from him, nor do they
indeed know what is become of him, in regard of the exercise of his royal
Offices, no more then carnal Israel, knew Moses employment with God in the
Mount, but if we lay down our own life, that the life of Jesus may be made
manifest and abound in us, that so in him, we may live to our brethreng, in
any, or in all servises of love 2 Cor. 8. 9. 2 Timothy 2. 10 2 Cor. 1. 5. 6.
, then are we dead unto all the things of this present life, and cannot hunt,
or seek after any man's honor, place, Office, riches, preferrment, credit,
reputation, or respect whatsoever, that another man injoyes in the things of
this present life.

But all our war is, to have these things crucified unto man, and man unto
these things Gal. 5 13. Romans 12. 10. Col. 3. 1, 2, 3.
, both in our selves, and likewise in others, that the life of the Lord Jesus
might appear, and exercise it self in us all Col. 2. 20.
; that is, all the hurt we do, or may wish to any, and the proper end of our
combat in this world, and this manner of fight at Ephesus, and so in any
state, Corporation, or condition in this world, does not exclude, but include,
the laying down of this natural life, in the separation of soul and body, in
witnessing the nature, end, and use of the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ,
whereby the world is crucified unto us, and we unto the world Gal. 61. 4. Col.
3. 5.
:

It is become as a Crucified thing, or Carior, that is, mean, base, yea
abominable in comparison of the life, and resurrection of Jesus Christ, even as
we are unto it (in our spiritual Course of walking and worships) in comparison
of the works and livelihood of the flesh, which the world not tasting of
plentifully in us, they count us as men that have nothing but ill savor in us,
and we are as a crucified thing unto them, Gal. 6. 14. Esa. 53. 3.
:

Nor make we any question, but a Saint may truly preach in his death, for the
conviction, and confusion of the wicked Col. 3. 3. 4 Gal. 2. 18. 19. 20. 2 Cor.
4. 10. 11.
, and also for the great encouragement, comfort, and instruction of the just
John 10. 15. Ephesians. 5. 2. 1 John 3. 16. John 15. 12.
, and let his light shine unto them in that for their glorifying of their
Father which is in Heaven Acts. 7. 54. to 57.
, as in their works done in the rest of their life time, yea and may as
freely, comfortably, and bouldly through Christ that strengthens them Phil. 2.
17. 18.
, make a surrender of themselves unto God in that service, to fall a sleep in
it Mat. 5. 16. Acts 5. 41. 1 Pet. 4. 14.
, (if it be suitable to the death of that witness Stephen) as in any sermon he
has preached unto the world, in any part of his life time, for God can ripen
his Saints, to fall off, as the first ripe fruits Mica. 7. 1. Job. 5. 26.
, willingly, seasonably, and fruitfully in that way, as well as in any other,
for it is the testimony that we give unto the world, of the truth, life,
spirit, and power of God, that is our consolation, in what way soever he makes
good, and testifies the same unto the sons of men, in our selves, and in
others, this dying unto our selves is our resurrection in all things, for as
the sufferings of Christ abound in ust, (which is to dye to the flesh) even so
do his consolations, much more abound in us, our hope in this is steadfast, 2
Cor. 1. 5. 2 Cor. 1. 7.
that as we are partakers of the suffering, so also, of the consolation 2 Cor.
1. 5.
; for the death is the resurrection, that which is the sorrow in the eye of all
flesh, is the consolation in the sight, and revelation of the spirit, and of
that unfeigned faith Ephesians. 1. 17. 1. Tim. 1. 5. 2 Timothy 1. 5.
, but those men that know not the word of God, in the mystery of it, but only
according to the letter 2 Cor. 3. 6.
, they cannot know how this can be, for the letter is the very way, and
Caractour of all flesh, as it makes use of the favor, grace, or work of God,
according to its own natural principles and abillities, changing it into
another thing, unto himself then by nature it is, or ever can be Romans 1 18. 25.
Romans 2. 1, 2, 3. Romans 2 17. to 23.
: and the mystery is the very way and true Caracter of that engraven form of
the subsistence of the Son of God, as he makes use of our infirmities, to
change them into another thing in himself, then by nature in themselves they
are or ever could be 2 Cor. 5. 21. 1 Crr. 26. to 31. Romans 3. 5, 6, 7. 8.
:

And therefore it is, that man being merely natural, can better desire to be
transformed into the basest Creature that is on the earth, or in the waters
under the earth, then to be transformed into the Image of the Son of God and
accordingly desires to transform the Son of God into the likeness of any
Creature, foorefooted beast, or creeping thing on the earth Romans 1. 23.
, rather then to take him according to that Caractor of the Father, and
engraven form of his subsistence Heb. 1. 3.
.

Such is man's living unto the flesh, and being dead unto the spirit Romans 8. 5.
6.
; so that all that ever he does in eating and drinking, that is, in
communicating with any Creature, it is to preserve his own life for the
present, and thereby put off death till after time, therefore he says, let us
eat and drink for to morrow we shall dyed; that is, the conflict and strift of
man, c Esa. 22. 13. 1 Cor. 15. 32.
in the whole progress of his fighting after the manner of men, which our
Apostle denies, to be the manner of his fight, for that fight or warrfare that
is according to the Son of God, is, that death may have a real and present
being in all things, for that is the true resurrection of life, and in
whatsoever we communicate within the death of the flesh, all conduces unto the
life and resurrection of Jesus Christ, that howsoever the life is one, even as
he is one, yet is it as variously multiplied, as the death is.

Therefore our Apostle says, all flesh is not the same flesh, but there is one
flesh of men, another flesh of beasta, another of fishes, and another of birds
1 Cor. 15. 39. Esa. 31. 3.
, that is, all weakness and death, is not the same weakness for flesh
sometimes in Scripture signifies weakness, so says the Prophet, the Egiptions
horses are flesh and not spirit Genesis 32. 28 Psalm. 84. 5. Psalm. 138. 3.
, that is, they are weakness, and have not the strength of Israel so all
weakness is not the same weakness, for there is one weakness of the flesh,
which is indeed flesh in our Apostles acceptance, and truth of interpretation,
in that it is subject unto corruption, not able to sustain it self; there is
another weakness, in that it is impotent, not able to conceive of, or to
perform the things of God 1 Cor. 2. 14.
.

Another weakness of dishonor because that in it is not the dignity of that
blood royal, in that Generation and offspring of the most high Acts 17. 28,
29. Revel. 22. 16.
.

Another weakness, in that it is natural, carnal, or sensual, because the
very bent, end, and scope of all the operations of the flesh, tend unto that
which is earthly, momentany, and of a fadeing and vanishing nature and
condition.

And so are the ways and motions of the flesh multiplied into that vast and
illimited gulf, of man's infirmities and imperfections, which amount unto that
account, and reckoning, that can never be numbered, no more then we can number
the several kinds of grass, grain, seed flowers, herbs, plants, and Trees
that are upon the face of the Earth.

Therefore it is said, as was noted before, that man was made of the dust,
slime, or seed of the earth Genesis 2. 7.
, to note unto us, that infinite variety, and illimited multiplicity of earthly
and corruptible fruit, for there is a body terrestrial that is complete, unto
which no addition can be made (no more then the influence of the heavens, add
unto the Creation of things on the earth which God made at the first) to
increase the kinds of them, only the influence of the heavens does generate,
and bring them forth; So also there is a body celestial which is absolute and
complete, that no addition can be admitted of in it, no more then the motion,
and operation of things here below, can either add or deminish, those heavenly
bodies that are above, only in their changes operations, and generations, they
show forth and make manifest the several virtues and powers which are in those
heavenly bodies, yet each has his propper and distinct glory; for the one is
the way and glory of the humiliation of Jesus Christ, unto which nothing can be
added or deminished, and the other is the way and glory of his resurrection and
exaltation, which admits not of a jot less impossibility of any addition, or
deminution; but as the weaknesses, and frailties are multiplied in the one
respect, so also are the glories, and perfections multiplied in the other
respect.

Therefore it is said, there is one Glory of the Son, another Glory of the
Moon, another of the Stars, yea Star differs from Star in Glory; so
also is the Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15. 41, 42, 43.
that is, according to the various infirmity of the body terrestrial, and the
infinite and heavenly perfection of that Body celestial, so is the resurrection
that is in Jesus Christ.

The Lord has wonderfully proportioned those infinite and heavenly excellencies
and perfections that are in himself unto that world of infirmity and frailty
that is in us Iam. 3. 6.
, and of the one and the other, does that death and resurrection consist, and
that is the pattern and Platform that Moses saw in the Mount. Numb. 8. 4. Heb.
8. 5.
.

Without the knowledge of which no direction can in the least be given, how
that Tabernacle of David should be reared, rectified us set up, though it be
the only errant that Christ had in the world, to perform and do that work
Amos. 9. 11.
, and so it is of them that are Christ's at his coming. Acts 15. 16.
.

The work therefore neglected, or unskilfully handled, Christ is not come unto
us, this body therefore, grain, or seed of Immortality; is sown in
Corruption, but it rises in Incorruption 1 Cor. 15. 23. Esa. 61. 3. 4.
; it is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory; it is sown inweaknesse, but
it is raised in power; it is sown a natural body, it rises a spiritual
body; so that without the unity of two; there can be no resurrection, for the
wheat Corn must dye, before it rise to multiplycation; so that however bare
Grain be sown; it rises again with a multiplied body, yea and God gives to
every seed its own body, whether it be wheat or any other Grain. 1 Cor. 15.
36, 37, 38.
.

So that the word of God sown in our nature; if in our mortality; it is raised
in immortality; for these two become one body, or subsistence, they consist in
one, even as the seed sown in the earth, and the earth become one body, else
it cannot grow.

For as that one grain multiplies it self in the earth, in so many several
small conveyances, in its taking root; so does the earth multiply it self, in
the ear, and full Corn in the ear Mark 4. 28.
, else it were impossible, that so many should come of one; so also if it be
sown, in that dishonorable condition of our nature, it is raised in glory,
for dishonor, and honor, become one body, the one is the descention of the
divine nature, the other is the exaltation of the humane,

The descension of the divine nature, is into our estate and condition,, John
1. 14. 1 Timothy 3. 16.
, which is humane and frail.

The exaltation of the humane nature, is into the state, condition, and
authority of the word, Phil. 2, 8, 9, 10. John 5. 26, 27. Ioh. 17. 2.
, which is divine and potent, and these two become one: And as impossible as it
is, for that pure and honorable Word, or Son of the Father, to be mortal or
dishonorable in himself; but solely and wholly in us, he is made mortal and
dishonorable.

So also it is impossible that we should be immortal or glorious in our
selves, but solely and wholly in that word, we are made immortal and glorious.

So that his becoming mortal, and subject to death, is our becoming
immortal, and living for ever; or else the seed of life is not sown in death,
the Son of GOD has not suffered and dyed for our sins; and his being
dishonorable, and being debased, is our becoming honorable, and being
exalted; or else the Son of Man is not exalted and risen again, we are yet
in our sins and nakedness, 1 Cor. 15. 17 Xev. 16. 15.
.

So that Christ his humiliation, is not without our exaltation; nor is our
exaltation without his humiliation, for they are one.

So that if we separate or divide these, we make a nullity of Jesus Christ: for
the Word cannot be lowern it self, then naturally it is in it self, for then it
should cease to be GOD, in whom is not so much as a shadow of change or
alteration, James 1. 17
.

So that his humiliation; as also his exaltation, must both be in us, Romans 8.
4. 2 Cor. 1. 5.
.

And therefore to deny either of these in our selves, is to deny that Christ is
dead; yea, rather that he is risen again from the dead, Romans 8. 34
. For if we deny these things in the nature of any, we deny them in the nature
of all men, 1 Cor. 15. 21, 22.
. For every man sustains the whole and complete nature of man.

Therefore it is, that by nature we are all alike, Ephesians. 2. 1, 2, 3.
. And thence it is, that as the seed of the Virgin became one with the whole
and complete divine nature, and being of the Word: even so did the Word become
one with the whole nature, and disposition, state or condition of Mankind,
without any limitation or restrict on at all, Heb. 2. 9. Romans 5. 19, 20, 21.
else had not his humiliation been absolute and perfect, such as becomes, and
is compatible to the Son of an infinite God: such is the authority and force of
the oath of interposition, whereby our High Priest is installed into his Office
and Ministry, as so to tie, and unite God and Man together, in such relation,
that without the one, the other is not, nor can be expressed or made known: If
this point were understood, it would bring to naught that gross, sensual and
more then Heathenish Opinion, that we hear is now so audaciously broached in
our native Country; concerning the mortality of man's soul, affirming that it
dies with the body, and sleeps or corrupts together with it in the grave,
and for the time of the bodies being there cease together with it; in all its
motions and operation; and in that, they deny the death and resurrection on of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and ascribe unto man no higher, nor better estate and
condition, than that of a bruit Beast upon the face of the Earth: For Christ
did become mortal, as the soul of Man become, immortal; and the one is as
possible, either to be so, or to be known to be so, as is the other.

For as the Word cannot be mortal but only in us: so we cannot be immortal,
but only in it.

So that if the eternal Word, the Son of God, may cease to dye unto the
flesh (unto which he cannot dye, unless he continue, and abide to be one with
it) then may the son of sorry man cease to live to the spirit; which he
cannot do, unless he cease to be one with it; and to affirm the one or the
other, is to make void that unity that is in Christ; and to disanull that
Covenant and Contract between God and Man, and make of none effect that oath of
interposition, whereby our High Priest is installed into his Office; and by
virtue whereof he is made, a minister of the Sanctuary, Heb. 7. 21 Heb. 8. 1, 2.
, and ever lives to make intercession for us, Heb. 7. 25.


Yea, if that eternal word should cease to be, that which is in time, so much
as for a moment (which it must do, if the soul dye with the body, at such
time as the body of Christ lay dead in the grave) then must the Son of God
cease to be Christ, And for so long lays aside the sweet savor of his
ointment, Psalm. 45. 7, 8. Acts 10. 38. Acts 4. 27. 1 Ioh. 2. 27
.

And so there must be an intermission of his being Jesus a Savior; yea, and
for so long is swallowed up of Death; and then is his death void, we are yet in
our sin. Act. 2. 24. 1 Cor. 15. 17
. For if the eternal cease to be that which is in time, he cannot be Christ:
for eternity and time must ever be in Christ, else he cease to be God and
Man, that Emanuel, Isa 7. 14. Mat. 1. 23.
and so is not that beginning and ending, which is in that Christ of God, Rev.
22. 23 Luke 9. 20.
.

So that if we deny eternity to the humanity, we likewise deny, that the Deity
was in time, and so destroy Christ unto our selves, the faith of such persons
is vain, 1 Cor. 15 14.
. Yet is the Deity or the Word in its own nature, simply, eternal, and our
nature or the humanity is in it self, and of its own nature simply momentany,
and fading; but the unity of them both is Christ, whose humanity is eternized
in the Word, and his divinity is as truly momentized in our nature.

So as take away the life of humane nature (so as the Creature is extinct) for
a moment, and take away the life of the Son of God; yea, the very life of
eternity: for he never lived as a Savior, but through death (nay, as has been
said) his death is his life: So that take away that nature for a moment,
wherein his death does consist, and you make a nullity of our Lord Jesus: So
that the doctrine of Christ, and the mortality of the soul, are utterly
inconsistent, they cannot stand together.

They therefore, that hold the mortality of the soul, they must of necessity
deny the resurrection, the appearing and coming of our Lord Jesus, it is in
this case, as our Apostle speaks of the man and the wife; the man has not
power of his own body, but the wife; and the wife has not power of her own
body, but the husband, 1 Cor. 7. 4


Even so it is here God has not power of that body of excellency, grace and
virtue, that is in himself, but has made it over unto us, for man's use and
benefit.

Otherwise, we could not live unto him, conceive and bring forth fruit
acceptable and pleasing unto him, being of his own begetting, and of his own
nature, as it is in Christ, Iam. 1. 18. 1 Ioh. 5. 1. 18 1 Pet. 1. 3. 2 Pet. 1.
14.
.

Neither have we power of our own body, of infirmity and frailty, but the Lord
has taken it unto himself for his own use: otherwise, he could never dye,
nor could he without it generate, beget, and multiply himself, as he does in
Christ, Isa. 53. 10. Heb. 2. 10. Romans 8. 16, 17.
, for he is the first begotten of death, Rov. 1. 5. Col. 1. 18.
, and he can have no death in himself, but as he has it in us.

So that if we dissolve this unity and contract for a moment, we dissolve that
heavenly Marriage, that is between the Creator, and the Creature in Christ,
Hosea 2. 16, 20. Isa. 24. 5.
, making a nullity of it, and so make void our salvation, Psalm. 119. 126. Romans
4. 140
; for if either of the parties cease to be, so much as for a moment, the
contract is ended, our salvation is void, for then the Son of God cease to be
a Savior, if he cease to be found in the Creature whom he saves, and the Son
of sorry man cease to be saved, if at any time he cease to be found in the
CREATOR, who is his only, and viour, Romans 8. 33 Romans 4. 5. Psalm. 3. 8. Psalm.
68. 19, 20.
.

So that those that hold the mortallity of the soul of man, which gives him
his form to be a man, and no other Creature, they do as absolutely and
resolutely deny that glorious, happy, and fruitful intercourse, of life and
death that is between God and Man in Jesus Christ; for that which is the death
of the Son of God, is the life of the Son of sorry man; and that which is
the death of the Son of sorry man, is the life of the Son of God.

For the Son of GOD is made that in our nature, that by nature has no life
of God in it, and so becomes dead; or, is made that which is dead unto the
things of God.

The Son of man is made that in the word, which by nature has no life of man
(or life of a Creature in it) and so becomes dead to the things of Man and of
the one and the other, does Christ our Savior consist; and without the one and
the other, he is not Christ, nor Jesus at all; for the mortality of man's
soul, is nothing else but the death and infirmity of the Son of God, and the
death and infirmity of the Son of God, is nothing else but the life,
perfection, and immortality of the Son of Man: and no longer then the word of
eternity (which admits of no intermission of time) can be held or swallowed up
of death, Act. 2. 24. Psalm. 16. 10.
, no longer can the soul or nature of man, (which is nothing but momentany or
brittlenesse it self) lay aside that spirit of life and immortality, where by
it lives and endures for ever, Gal. 2. 20. Romans 8. 9, 10, 11.
, in and by that Word of God, Col. 3. 16.
. For the son of God has no life as a Savior, but only in, and through
death; nor the son of Man has no death unto sin and sorrow, as saved, but
in and through that life of the son of God, which is impossible to cease for
a moment; and so is that also, that once lives thereby, and enjoyes it.
Therefore, to preach the cessation of the life of the soul, in laying aside
for atime the life of the body, is no less then to preach the cessation of the
life of the son of GOD for a season; that is, so long as the soul is
deprived of life and immortality.

But these brutish, barbarous, and more then Atheistical fabulous fantasies,
we leave unto those; left and forsaken spirits, who have seired themselves with
a hot Iron, 1 Timothy 4. 1 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4 Acts. 28. 27,
, least the force and virtue of the Word of God, should take hold of them, and
appear upon them.

But least any should mistake our meaning in this point of the resurrection; as
though we too much neglected, or slighted the resurrection of the body;

We are to understand therefore, that where ever the holy Scriptures speak, of
the resurrection of the Saints; the thing principally, and chiefly intended, is
the resurrection of our Lord Jesus, together with all his Saints in him; and
therefore, they are said, to be set down together with him in heavenly places,
Ephesians. 1. 3. Ephesians. 2. 6.
, and that resurrection in the first place, the Scripture intends; namely, his
rising from that eternal death, which by nature we are all guilty of, and
plunged into, which is that victory over sin, death, hell, and the grave,
which none but the Son of God could overcome, nor rescue from; for he only
purchases that renown and glory unto himself alone, which otherwise had
never appeared unto the Creature, which resurrection from death and hell,
sin, sorrow, and the grave, or from Sheoll, Psalm. 16. 10, 11.
, that corrupting pit is in him most absolute and perfect; yea, it is perfected
at once for ever, Heb. 7. 27 Heb. 9. 26. Heb. 10. 10. Psalm. 112. 9.
, in one simple, eternal, and incomprehensible act, which comprehends all
those various, and infinitely multiplied perfections, wherewith his Church is
adorned, beautified, and lifted up for ever, Psalm. 110 3. Romans 6. to 6. 16. 1
Pet. 4. 10. 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6 6, 8. 1 Cor. 12. 4, 5, 6. Ephesians. 4. 7, 8.
, insomuch as the whole glory of the resurrection of the Saints, is seated in
this resurrection of the Son of God out of Sheoll, or Hades, that corrupting
pit, wherein man is by nature drowned and overwhelmed.

So that the resurrection of the body out of the grave, at the last day in the
re-uniting of it with the spirit or soul, adds nothing at all unto this
glorious resurrection of the Son of God (which comprehends, and involves the
resurrection of all the Saints) no more then the separation of soul and body,
and the dissolution of the body in the grave (for a season) can add any thing
unto that death of the Son of God, which includes and comprehends the death of
all the Saints, unto all sin and sorrow, whatsoever by nature they were
liable unto, and to hold either the one, or the other, is nothing else, but to
set up flesh to boast, by arrogating unto our selves, the privileges peculiar
to the Son of God, Romans 3. 23 to 28. 1 Cor. 1. 28, 29, 30, 31 Col. 3. 11.
, in holding, that either in the rising of our bodies, or the dissolution of
them, should either add or detract, to, or from that eternal weight of glory
and virtue, that is in the life and death of the Son of God.

And yet does not this fullness that is in the resurrection of Christ Jesus,
hinder the rising of the body in due time out of the grave; no more then that
plenary deliverance and redemption that is in the death of Christ, hinders the
body from death and dissolution in the grave.

See Heb. 9. 21 Act 2. 29. Psalm. 86. 48.
this more plainly in the matching of contraries as thus, the plenary and full
curse of God seized upon man in the very day, point of time, or act of eating
that forbidden fruit: otherwise, the Word of God were not fulfilled, in that it
says, in the day thou eats thereof, thou shall surely dye, Genesis 2. 17.
, (or as the word is) in dying, thou shall dye; that is, in that one act of
death, is comprised and comprehended all those innumerable ways of destruction
and corruption that man naturally is subjected unto.

So that under that one act of death, all acts of death are contained,
otherwise the Curse could not be full; and yet that fullness of the Curse
hinders not, but rather is a way for the separation of soul and body, and the
dissolution of the body in the grave, in its time and season: but this
dissolution and separation adds nothing unto the Curse; for then the Curse
should not be perfect before: and in case the Curse were not perfect before the
dissolution of the body, then man stood not in need of a perfect blessing in
the Savior, until the time of the separation of his soul and body. And then
it would follow, that perfection were not in that promise made of the Messia,
the seed of the woman shall crush the head of the Serpent, Genesis 3. 15.
, because man had not a perfect curse or death upon him to be saved and
delivered from which is most deragatory unto the nature of the Savior, in that
rich and bounteous grace of the Gospel Romans 5. 15 20. Romans 15. 13. 2 Cor. 8. 7.
2 Cir. 9. 8.
.

Nor could Enoch participate in a grace that saved him from a plenary curse,
whereof all men are alike guilty by nature, Ephesians. 2. 3. Romans 3. 10, 11, 12.
Romans 3. 23.
, if that the death of the body were any addition unto the Curse, or
augmentation thereof, for he was translated, and never saw death* Ephesians. 2. 3.
Romans 3. 10, 11, 12. Romans 3. 23.
and then he was never saved from a perfect Curse, if the death of the body
were any part thereof; nor can we tell how to free any of the Saints, from
remaining under the Curse, whilst they lie in the grave, Heb. 11. 5. Genesis 5.
24.
if the separation of the soul and body were any part of it.

For, Gal. 3. 10. Deuteronomy. 27. 26.
it is with the Curse, as it is with the breach of the Law; for cursed is he
that con^ not in all things written in the Book of the Law to do them, and he
that is guilty of the breach of one, is guilty of all, Iam. 2. 10.
.

So he that is under any one part of the Curse, is under the whole Curse, Gal.
3. 10.
.

Therefore, the separation of soul and body, is no part of it: for however, it
is an accursed thing in the eyes of man to hang upon a material tree, to the
separation of soul and body, Deu. 27. 26 Gal. 3. 13.
. Yet it is a higher thing that makes accursed in the sight of God, separating
the soul from God, and so is he accursed that hangs on a tree, or that
depends or relyeth upon a tree, as the word signifies, as man did, when he
laid his whole weight (as the word will bear;) that is, his life and his
death, to be good or to be evil, by eating or not eating of that forbidden
tree, Genesis 3. 3. 4 5.
i, as all do unto this day, that depend upon, and lay the weight of their
salvation upon, doing, or not doing (in themselves) things that are pleasing or
displeasing unto the Almighty; and in the mean time neglecting and vilifying
that glorious work of God, at once for ever perfected in Christ, Heb. 1. 3.
Heb. 7. 27.
. Even as man at the first neglected and vilified that glorious image of God,
wherein he was created, Genesis 1. 27
, depending and relying upon his eating of the tree, to attain thereby to be
like unto his Maker, 1 Ioh. 5. 10 11. Genesis 5. 1. Genesis 1. 27.
whereas he was already made in his likeness, and image, and so denied that
record that God had given unto him (concerning his Word and Work) namelp, that
he had made him in his own image, 1 Ioh. 5. 10. 11.
and thereby denied the glory of that work of God; for as no man ever came unto
God, but by believing the record that God has given of his Son, Ioh. 1. 12.
Act. 13. 39. Heb. 11. 6.
; namely, that we have eternal life, and that this life is in his Son, Gal. 4.
29. Heb. 11. 4. Genesis 3. 9, 7, 8.
and he being the way, the truth and the life, Ioh. 14. 16
: Never did, nor shall, any come unto the Father, but only by him; in him
therefore is, and ever was, man's approach and coming near unto God; and
without him, no unity nor peace with God: even so also, never did, nor shall
any decline and fall from God but by denying, that record and testimony that
God has given of his Son, denying our life to be in him, and seeking it in our
selves, by our own Works; for as it was in the beginning, even so it is
now,* both in point of faith, and of the fall, for to call in question that
Work of God whereby he has created us in Christ Jesus, unto good works,
Ephesians. 2. 10
, or, in a good Work, as the word will bear, for it is a Work of God and not
of Man and therefore absolute and good. Now to call this in question, as though
the Work were not yet perfect, adding our endeavors to accomplish and perfect
the same: this proceeds from that ancient spirit, that has been a liar from
the beginning and abode, not in the truth, Ioh. 8. 44.
, whose works his children follow, Ioh. 8. 41, 42, 44.
, for all the ways of administrations practiced, and with all care, diligence,
and frequencie observed by the Saints of God in the world, are not at all to
perfect any thing, in that great work of God by Jesus Christ, but only to
declare and make manifest the absolute fullness and perfection of it, which
whosoever sets his seal unto, Ioh. 3. 33. Romans 3. 4.
, does by the grace of God communicate therein unto life eternal. Ioh. 6. 54.
Ich. 17. 3. Ioh. 10. 28. 1 Ioh. 5. 11.
. We conclude, therefore, that the curse is full and absolute before the
separation of soul and body which was in Adam, so many hundred years after
the Curse was perfected, or fully upon our nature in him, Genesis 2. 17. Genesis 5. 5.
and therefore that the separation of soul and body cannot be any part of it:
For the Curse is of a more higher and more spiritual nature, then is the
separation of soul and body, being it is a separation of God, even from his
own work, and an eternal emnity between the Creature and the Creator; and yet
this Curse is a means and way of the separation of the soul and the body, and
of the bodies lying down for a time in the dust: But the principal and main
thing the Scripture intends, when it speaks of death, is that spiritual and
eternal death, Genesis 2. 17. Romans 8. 13. 1 Cor. 15. 22
yet not excluding the other (namely the separation of soul and body, unto
which it alludes: So also is the resurrection that is by Christ of a more
spiritual and heavenly nature, then the rising of the body out of the grave,
or re-uniting of soul and body in one again; for it is that wonderful union
and conjunction that is between God and Man in Christ, who are made one out of
such an infinite distance, as Man by nature is removed, and made remote by
sin and corruption, from his Creator, in that his desertion from him at the
first: therefore, where ever the resurrection is spoken of in the Scripture, it
chiefly intends this spiritual resurrection that is by Jesus Christ, not
excluding the Resurrection of the body unto which it alludeth, and elegantly
points at: nor do we deny that this spiritual resurrection from sin,
sorrow, and eternal death by Jesus Christ, is the way and means of the
resurrection of the body out of the grave, and re-uniting of the soul unto it:
the last day. But let us remember, that the work of our Salvation by Christ is
spiritual, And therefore take heed how we ascribe any thing of the glory of the
resurrection, unto the rising again of our bodies out of the grave, or to
detract, or take away from it, by the laying down of our bodies in the dust,
knowing that all that the Lord Jesus has in us, is nothing but death and
deformity, Isa 52. 14. Isa. 53. 6, 7, 8, 9.
, and that all our life and conformity unto God our Father, is only in him Col.
3. 3, 4. 2 Cor. 3. 18. Romans 8. 29. Phil. 3. 10.
. So that those that ascribe unto the Saints infirmity and weakness, because
of the laying aside these natural and corruptible bodies for a season, or
conclude them then, to be more noble and powerful when the body is raised,
then before they were, in the time of its being in the grave: This is but a
mere device, and subtle invention, to magnify the flesh, by ascribing
somewhat unto it hereafter, which for the present, they dare not do, whereby
they judge of our Salvation according to the judgment and things of men, and
not according to the judgment and things of God, Romans 2. 2. Ioh. 7. 24. Psalm.
72. 2. Ioh. 8. 15, 16 Ioh. 5. 30.
, and in this point our Interpreters contradict themselves, who affirm, that
our Sanctification is perfected only at the time of the death of this natural
and corporeal body, and that the perfection of Sanctification, is
Glorification; and yet notwithstanding, hold that our glorification is not
perfect and full, till our bodies arise out of the grave: this is through that
great mistake of confounding that natural death, and that spiritual death
together, not giving to each its proper right and due, and so ascribe more unto
the resurrection of the body, then God has put upon it; for Christ has
nothing in, and by us, but merely infirmity and weakness; and therefore,
whatsoever is properly ours, or of our selves, can add nothing unto our glory;
for all that we have of our selves as creatures, amounts to no more, but the
complete cross of the Son of God: So that all our glory is in him, who never
saw corruption, Psalm. 16. 10.
, which great mistake, the Lord may seem to correct, knowing the operation of
man's heart in this point, in that we read not in the Scriptures, of such whose
bodies were raised out of the grave, of any wonderful work which afterward
they did, or more heavenly word that at any time they spoke more then formerly
they had done; nay, our Lord himself appeared alike, unto his Disciples after
his resurrection as he had done before Luke 24. 13. to 32. Joh. 20. 19, 20, 26,
27, 28.
nay to beat down that natural, carnal, and fond opinion, of putting off the
day of the Lord, Hag. 1. 2, to 9. Joh. 4. 25.
, and the good things of his Kingdom till hereafter: he denied to express in
his humane body after his resurrection that glory which he had manifested unto
them, in his transfiguration before his death, Mat. 17. 1, 2.
; yea further, we are carefully and prudently to consider, of this oath of
interposition or installment, and confirmation of this our high Priest, that
the Word of God in all points and parts of the holy Scripture, is to be looked
upon, held, rofessed, and maintained to be as absolute in the unity thereof, as
it is in its multiplication: for as it doubletly, and redoubleth it self in way
of multiplication, of words, action; ordinances, relations, and things: So
also, all these words, actions ordinances, relations, and things are obreviated
into one: so that there is but one expression of the mind of the Father only in
him, who is called the Word of God, Rev. 19. 13
, there is but one act, or operation, the incarnation of the Son of God at once
for ever; but one ordinance or distribution, the giving or dispensation, of
that one good thing the Spirit of God, Mat. 7. 11 ^empared with Luke 11 13.
but one relation, which is that bond of faith between Gob and Man in Christ,
comprehending that common salvation, and was at once given unto the Saints,
Jude 3. v.
But one thing which is, that glorious composition of the heaven and earth in
Jesus Christi, Joh. 1. 14. 2 Cor. 15. 44, to 49.
. So that the multiplication, visititude, and changes of things, is but as the
circumference, and spacious act of all the workmanship, and glorious fabric,
of that wonderful device of God in our salvation by Christ, and that ebreviary
or abridgment of all into one is as that center, or prick in the middle, in
which all the lines, from all parts of the circumference meet together in one,
for our support, sustentation, edification, and comfort: Therefore our Apostle
says, which he takes from the Psalm^st that one day with the Lord is as a
thousand years and a thousand years are as one day, 2 Pet. 3. 8. Psalm. 90. 4.
, that is, one word action or ordinance of God is multiplied into thousands and
ten thousands; yea, ad infinitum looking unto time past, present; and to come,
and that infinite and spacious multiplication: likewise, of his words works,
and grace by Christ, is united and contracted into one, Joh. 17. 21 22, 23.
Romans 13. 8, 9, 10.
.

Thus it is with our Lord, as our Apostle there speaks, who is, that prick, or
point of eternity, in whom all things consist, are reconciled, and made one,
Col. 1. 17, 18, 19, 20
, who is at an equal distance, to all times, places or persons, and things in
Christ; with whom if we be made one by faith, Ephesians. 4. 13. Ephesians. 4. 3. Psalm.
133. 1.
, then do all things in him meet together, and present themselves for our use,
benefit, fruit, and profit, all having received commission, to be ways means,
and instruments, Psalm. 119. 89, 90 91 Psalm. 87. 6, 7 Eccles. 3. 11.
, of the conveyance of the consolations of God unto us, Isa. 12. 2 3. Isa. 66.
11. Job. 15. 11.
: yea, into every unite, that is a Saint by calling Romans 1. 7. 1 Cor. 1. 2.
Col. 2. 2.
of the most high, and also makes and inables every such a one, to be an
instrument recipprocally to declare, set forth, and divulge the high praises of
God in all points and parts of the Circumference, in things that have been,
are, or ever shall. For if we dwell in Christ, and he in us by faith, Ephesians. 3.
17 2 Cor. 6. 16. Romans 8. 9, 11 Col. 3. 16.
then of neaessity (as all grace meets and centers in us through him) so also,
must all virtue and praise by him proceed and break forth from us, Act. 13. 31,
32. Act 17. 23. Act 20. 27. 1 Cor. 15, 1. 1 Pet. 2. 9.
. For as in case of an oath amongst men, the witness brings that to be
present, (he being an eye, or ear-witnesse of it) that was done long since, in
regard of time; and far remote, in regard of place: yet is it so made present
as the Judge scruples not to give sentence accordingly: even so it is and much
more true and certain) in this oath, concerning our Priesthood and Kingdom in
Christ, that the witness and testimony of the spirit (if we see with the eye
and hear with the ear, of the revelation thereof) that it brings things (that
by nature are as far remote and distant, as heaven and earth to be present; in
such sort as we are not afraid to conclude, and give sentence accordingly,
whether it concern the power and allsufficiency of God, or our own weakness
and deficiency and without both the one and the other of these twain, the
spirit of GOD never witnesses unto the soul and conscience of any.

For there is no use of witness, where distance of actions and operations are
not. Therefore the spirit ever testifies, an infinite distance betwixt our
operations by nature, and the operations of the Son of God; and sentence being
given accordingly to condemn and silence the guilty, and clear and open the
mouth of that innocent one: sin is taken away from our gate, it is our
salvation, that this distance is made one in Christ, Ephesians. 2. 12 13, 14
, in whom we rejoice, with joy unspeakable, and full of glory, 1 Pet. 1. 8.
, and have no confidence in the flesh, Phil. 3. 3.
. But in this point, let us not forget, that large and spacious Commentary; and
also that short abreviary of things contained in that holy Word of God, and
that in all points particularly and distinctly, that governes our salvation.

When the Scripture speaks of death, it makes a large Comment thereof, in such
a multitude of persons, ways, degrees and several kinds of death, all setting
forth those particular crosses or deaths, that man by nature is subjected unto;
all which it is impossible to find upon any one particular person or
subsistence, that is made merely and simply a mortal and momentary Creature.
Now if God enlighten our minds, and extend them unto that large Comment and
Volume of the Cross, or of death, according to that spacious continent
expressed in his Word. Then does he equaly instruct us, how to abreviate and
bring them all into one, and to know how one cross, or one act of death
comprehends and compriseth them all. And so it can be found upon none, but only
upon him that is the Son of God, Act. 20. 28. Ioh. 3. 16. Romans 8. 33, 34. Rev.
13. 8. 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19, 20
, that one cross, or one act of death should contain all crosses and kinds of
the terrors of death, Psalm. 40. 12 Psalm. 69. 4 Psalm. 38. 4 Psalm. 42. 7 Isa
53. 6. Amos 2. 13.
, that are expressed in the Scriptures; and that the sons of men by nature are
liable and subject unto, and if death be so contracted, that it can be found
upon none, but only upon him that is the Son of God (for he only can
comprehend, comprize, and bear away all the terrors thereof) then are the sons
of men freed and delivered from death in all the terrors of it, only in the
way of faith, whereby we are made one with him, and so communicate in that one,
and alone death of his, without the communication and participation whereof,
there never was, is, nor shall be salvation, Rev. 13. 8. Heb. 9. 22. 1 Ioh. 1.
7.
, for his death is our life, his weakness is our strength, and his cross is
our only crown: thence it is, that we rejoice in nothing but in our
infirmities, for when we are weak then are we strong, and can freely deprecate,
or earnestly wish it, to be far from us, to rejoice in any thing but in the
cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, whereby the world is crucified, or is as a
dead carrion unto us, and we also unto the world, Gal. 6. 14.
. So that every one that will be a follower of Christ, must take up his Cross,
Heb. 12. 5, 6, 7. Job. 31. 35, 36. 2 Cor. 12. 10 15. 2 Cor. 12. 9. Romans 8. 35,
36, 37.
* that is, must elevate and lift up that particular weakness, whereunto he
sees himself naturally inclined or danger he is, or may be liable unto, and set
it in that height and dignity that the Son of God has brought it unto, Heb. 2.
6, 7 8, 9. Ephesians. 4. 8, 9, 10.
, who has taken our weakness, only that he may become our strength, 1 Cor.
1. 25
he has taken our foolishness, that he may be made our wisdom; and our
sorrow, that he may become our joy for ever, Isa 53. 4. Psalm. 16. 11. Psalm.
43. 4.
, and in that very way of our own emptiness, we are replenished with his
fullness, who fills all in all, Ioh. 1. 16. Ephesians. 1. 23. Col. 1. 19. Col. 3.
11.
. For he endured the cross, and despised the shame; that is, he sustained or
nourished the cross, as the word signifies, he nourishes a death unto the
flesh, in his Saints for ever, and despises the shame; that is, contemned,
rejected, or cast it off for ever, in that the life of the spirit takes place
through the death of the flesh, Romans 8. 10 11, 12, 13 1 Pet. 3. 18.
, the power of the Creator in the weakness of the Creature, and that sits at
the right hand of God, in such sort, as the Father will do nothing without him,
Mat. 26. 64 Mat. 2. 18. Ioh. 17. 2. Heb. 1. 2. Ps. 118 15, 16. Psalm. 17. 7.
Psalm. 80. 17.
. no more then a man will show him his art, power, and skill, but with his
right hand,* So that they that teach the Cross of Christ, to be a terrible,
dreadful, sorrowful, uncomfortable, and an afflicted state and condition, they
utterly mistake the cross of Christ, for it is the peace, joy, crown, diadem,
and glory of the Saints for ever, in that, that through their infirmities, the
power of God exercises it self, appears, and is made manifest in them, and
they that hold the cross of Christ otherwise, as to consist in such things as
are common to all men; yea, some of them unto the very bruit creatures
themselves: these offer great indignity to that great grace of the Gospel, as
when they state it in wars robberies, banishments, imprisonments, poverty,
sickness, aches, weakness of body, and pains which are innumerable all these
things considered, as troubles and vexations of the creature, they are no cross
of Christ, but only such things as the natural minds of menlead the^ to inslict
one upon another, and the bodies of all men one as well as another are insident
unto, 1 cor. 10. 13 Eccles. 9. 1, 2, 3
, yet do the Saints of God alone pass through such like ways of infirmity in
this world, wherein they communicate in the cross, or in the death of their
Lord; God exercising them under, or lead^ng them through such ways, to this
very end and purpose, that therein he may make himself more apparently known,
Psalm. 9 16 Psalm. 79. 1 2, 3, 4, 5 Romans 9. 17. Exodus 9. 15, 16, 17.
, either that in themselves they may see more clearly and visibly him that is
invisible, Heb. 11. 24, 25, 26, 27.
, when he makes his power apparent in them, Romans 6. 17.
, by supporting, sustaining, and delivering of them, Romans 4. 15 16. Exodus 14.
30 31. Exodus 15.
, or else to make it appear to others, that God was in them that so suffer,
though they were not aware of it, Psalm. 50. 2. Psalm. 80. 1, 2 1 Cor. 14 24, 25.
Genesis 28, 16, 17.
, and in the one and the other, the consolations of God abound 2 Cor. 1. 5.
Psalm. 94. 17 18, 19. Romans 5. 20.
, which is the proper cross of Christ, that great grace of the Gospel; for
without the crown and dignity of the creature, the cross and indignity of the
Son of God is never made known; so that the natural infirmities and
distempratures of the Creature are no cross of Christ, further then the power
and authority of God, in that blessed and heavenly temprature of his own son
appears in them, 2 Cor. 7. 8. 9, 10, 11 2 Cor. 1 2. 8, 9 10, 11 2 Cor. 6. 3 to
10.
: there is a further mistake in the cross of Christ, that goes beyond these
heathenish and brutish infirmities (that men are so apt by nature to centere
it in) when it is held to consist in troubles of mind, terrors of c^nscience,
fears and tremblings of heart, anxiaty and bitterness of spirit, doubts,
scruples, sorrows, reasonings, questionings and jeal^usies, concerning Gods
approbation of us, presence with us suretiship to carty us through all;
covenant and oath to make all things good unto us, what ever he has said of
his son his disposition and compassions not to be infinitely more to us, then of
any earthly father to his only begotten one, in a word, to centere the cross
of Christ; in any thought or fear of contradiction, or distance between God
and Man is tocenre it in the terrors, tremblings, Jealousies, and suspicions of
Satan * himself, and not in that death and humiliation of Jesus Christ; for it
was never the work, power, nor spirit of God to breed a difference and
distance between God and Man, but the only and proper work of that Serpentto
begot jealousies and suspicions hereof, from the beginning even until now.
Genesis 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
, in the hearts of earthly minded men: for the son of God was as truly made
earthly, as he was heavenly at the first, and yet without sin, Genesis 1. 27.
compared with Genesis 2. 7. 1 Cor. 15. 49. Luke 3. 38.
, or any fault or blemish at all, to be imputed unto him; even as the son of
Man was made upright and heavenly at the first, and yet can by nature hold no
plea for himself before the, judgment seat of God, of any righteousness or
holiness at all, that he can any ways bring before God, to answer unto him,
for the obtaining of the least part of payment or acquittance, but is every way
a transgressor, even from the womb of that early morning, of an eternal, and
infinite account Psalm. 58. 3
, for the womb, of that bottomless pit, or the Curse, Revel. 9. 1. 2.
, is of no less extent, then is the womb of that blessed promise that God
gave before the foundations of the world were laid, Titus 1. 1. 2. 2 Timothy 1. 9.
10. 1 Cor. 2. 7.
, and made it manifest in due time through preaching: the Cross therefore is
to be extended unto all several and particular mis^ries; and also contracted
and shut up in one; out of which all glory, excellency, comfort, and peace
arises, Gal. 6. 14. Ephesians. 2. 13. to 18. James 1, 2, 3, 4. Romans 5. 3, 4. 4.
, or else we know it not, nor can we partake of the fruit and benefit of it, no
more then the body can partake of the excellencies of the soul, whilst it has
not unity or oneness with it: the like may be said of all the ordinancies,
excellencies, and ways of dispensation of the Son of God, they are to be
extended to the utmost distance, and contracted in the nearest unity that
possibly can be, otherwise they carry not in them the substance, strength, and
virtue of our salvation by Christ, take any instance breefely in three things.

Viz. 1. In Elders ordained in the Church.

2. Sacrifices offered for the Church.

3. Baptismes and washings of the Church; For Elders ordained in the Church,
eldership is to be extended, according to the various dispensation revealed,
and exercised by the Son of God, in holy Scripture, that is.

1. To such as are Elders, by the privilege and right of the first borne, in
the Family, as in the days of the Fathers Genesis 48. 18.
.

2. To such as was a Priest according to the time of Melchizedeck in the days
of Abraham Genesis 49. 3.
.

3. To such as are chosen and called by God himself as was Aaron Genesis 14. 18,
19, 20.
.

4. To such as are chosen by Moses, upon whom the spirit of God cum as in those
seventy of the senedrian Heb. 5. 4.
.

5. To such as served by course, in their order in the house of God in the
days of David, and Solomon Numb. 11. 24. 25.
.

6. To such as the Prophets anointed to be such, as in the days of Eliah 2 Chronicles. 5. 11. 1 Chronicles. 16. 7. Esa. 3. 11. Luke 1. 5.
.

7. To such as Christ breathes upon, and bids them receive the Holy Ghost, in
the days of Jesus our Savior 1 King. 19. 16.
.

8. To such as Christ healed of that unclean, sollitary, merciless, and
multiplied spirit, in the Country of the Gaderons whom he sent to preach to
Decapolis, or unto ten Cities as the word signifies John 20. 21. 22.
.

9. Yea to such as upon whom, one Apostle lays his hands as in the days of
Paul Mark 5. 19. 20.
.

10. Also to such as the whole Presbytery or Eldership lay their hands on Acts
19. 6.
.

11. Yea unto such as are Elders, by their placing about the Throne of God 1 Timothy 4. 14.
, and many the like, all these are written for our understanding and
instruction (in this one point or ordinance of Eldership in the Church) upon
whom the ends of the world are come Revel. 4. 4.
, that is all worldly and carnal spirits, are shut up from any sight or
ability to frame unto themselves a way of imitation, of such an Eldership
acceptibly to practice, or exercise themselves in any one of them, so that they
are as truly all ended as any one of them is ended, unto the abilities and
practice of all the men of the world, and yet do they all as truly live, and
abide in the house of God, as any one of them, in that way of the ministry of
the spirit, and power of God 1 Cor. 10. 11.
, and are frequently to be maintained and practiced in the house and Kingdom
of God; therefore has our Lord over reached all natural spirits, 2 Cor. 3. 6.
and immitaters in the sight of all men, in that book of the Revelation, in
making Angels Ministers, to sound the Trumpets, power out the viails; to fly
through the midst of heaven, preaching an everlasting Gospel Revel. 14. 6.
; yea he that is both a Lamb, and a Lion to open that seven sealed book Revel.
5. 5. compared with Revel. 6. 1.
, and four beasts to minister before the Throne which are both in the mid^^ of
the Throne, and round about the Throne Revel. 4. 6.
, and many the like, which passes man's skill to invent, and devise a worship
that may present it self to the eyes of carnal minds, as a like figure
thereunto, and as truly as God goes beyond, all the device of man, in any one
way of administration in his house, so does he also in all the ways of
administration, wherein he has at any time, app^ared in it, to, his Saints;
for as we are to extend the Eldership or ministration of the Gospel; to all the
ways wherein the Lord has showed, and set forth himself, or else we deny to
give unto it that latitude, that God has given in his word, so also we are to
contract, and involve them all in one, and center them in one person, or
individual subsstance, and so the ministration and Eldership of the Gospel can
be found in none that is a mere Creature, in heaven or in earth, but is only
proper unto, and found in the Son of God, he is that High Priest of our
Profession Heb. 3. 1.
, whose lips alons preserve knowledge, and at whose mouth the Saints have
saught the Law in all ages Mal. 2. 7.
, and therefore he is said to be Jesus Christ yesterday, and to day, and the
same for ever, Heb. 13. 8.
, for he borrowed not of these times to make himself perfect, in the
beginning, for then he had not been a Lamb, ^^uine from the beginning Revel.
13. 8.
, nor does he borrow of the last times to make himself perfect in the midst or
fullness of time, for then his death had not been complete in the fullness of
time Gal. 4. 4.
when it is also said he dyed for us, because that one act of his death
comprehends all times, nor does he borrow of the first, or of the fullness of
time, to make himself perfect in the last days, for then could he not be said
to suffer in the end of the world Heb. 9. 25.
; for he is made perfect, only through sufferings Heb. 2. 10.
, so that he abides a Priest, or Elder in the Church, you the same for ever,
after the order of Melchizedeck Heb. 7. 21. 22. 23. 24. Act. 1. 20. Psalm. 109.
8.
, and that Eldership, or ministry only, that is extended, and multiplied as
also, so united and contracted, that carries the power of God along in it, and
none else, and it may be said of the faithful, and holy ones of God in their
embracing this Bishopprick, or Ministry w, as it is said of the Fathers, in
their embracing of the promises, viz. all these dyed in Faith and received not
the promises, but saw them far off, or remit Heb. 11. 13.
, and received them thankefully, which is a contradiction in the things of men,
but made good, and a holy order in the things of God, according to the
Ministry and order of the Gospel; so it may be said of the Saints, in their
embracing of this Eldership and Ministry; for all the ways of it are dead unto
them through Faith, as well as any one way, wherein it has been revealed and
made known, and they themselves also are dead by Faith unto them all, that is,
they are dead one unto the other, and removed a far off, one from another, in
regard of the letter of them in all the ways of administration, and
ordination, and that outward and perfunctory Immitation which the world takes
up to deceive it self, which is nothingelse but the mystery of the letter that
kills, and puts the spirit to death, Wherever it comes, for this we are ever to
observe, that those that cast godliness into a form, they ever deny the
power of it, from which the Saints and true Ministers of the Gospel, ever turn
away ^ Tim. 3. 5.
; for they profess themselves by their works, that they are leaders of the
spirit of God, and not the spirit of them Romans 8. 1. Romans 8. 14. (...) 5. 18.
, (as it ought to be) whilst they appoint him his times, and seasons, persons,
actions, and instruments, when and by whom, as also in what way and manner, he
shall work, operate, and appear amongst them, unto such things are the Saints
dead, and by faith, kept from the embracing of them; but they receive and
embrace most thankfully, through faith all these ways of ordination, and
administration according to the Ministry of the spirit Cor. 3. 6. Cor. 14. 29
30, 31. 1 Pet. 4. 11.
, which gives life unto them all amongst the Saints, who are through the same
spirit and power of faith, exercised, in and about them all, in the house of
God, being well content, that he shall appoint the time and place, make choice
of the instruments, means, and manner, how, where, when, and by whom he shall
please to make himself manifest amongst them ^om 12. 6, 7. 8.
; according to the diverse ways, and infinite variety of the dispensation of
his grace by Jesus Christ Psalm. 65. 1. Psalm. 23, 1.
; for the public and solemn solemnization whereof, praise silently, wayteth
for God continually in Sion (...) 77. 19. 20.
, and in him is the vow or Covenant, in this ministration performed, according
to that bond, or obligation, or various relations wherein soever he pleases to
exercise them, or lead them forth e; if as a Lamb before the shearer, they
are dumb, and open not their mouth Esa. 5 3. 7.
, if as a Lion of the Tribe of Judah, they roar in Sion, to the astonishment
of the Nations Psalm. 24. 11. 22. Romans 8. 36.
; if as a ^perd they lead forth to green pastures, to make fat and flourishing
in the house of God, and cause to return by the waters of quietness Genesis 49.
9. Joel. 3. 16.
; where those waves and surges of a troubled conscience, are alayd and abated
Psalm. 23. 1. 2. Psalm. 92. 12. 13.
, yea they are more ready to lay down their lives, to feed and confirm the
flock of God, then to engage them to part with any of their fleece, to obtain
their residence, and aboade amongst them Psalm. 23.
; for as freely as they have received, so freely they give Psalm. 40. 7. Genesis 8.
3. 8. 11
, even as those that preach for hire, unto a people, expecting somewhat for
their pains, they ever bring somewhat in their hand, in their performances, to
give unto God, in exchange for their abilities, as some fastings, prayers,
readings, learning, observation, studies, and the like 1 John 3 16 2 Cor. 12.
14. 15.
, whereby they think they engage God, even as they do the people, to be
benificiall unto them, not knowing the meaning of that speech; freely have you
received, freely do you give Mat. 10. 8
, if he lead them forth as Fathers Romans 11. 39 Esa. 13. to
, they have in store laid up for their Children Mat. 10.
, and with the care, compassion, diligence, tenderness, and love of a Father,
minister unto them cheerfully, not looking for ought again 1 Cor. 4. 15
; more then the prosperity, success, and thriving condition of the Children,
if God lead them out as husbands, they have words therewith to edify and
comfort the Spouse 2 Cor. 1 1
, and are enabled, to walk before her as men of knowledge Luke 6. 3. 3
, that is, as men composed of knowledge, never to be exhausted or drawn dry,
in the things of God by Christ; for they are become the wells of the Savior,
as Esaias calls them 2 Cor. 2. Esa. 40. 1.
, for so the word ought to be translated, if he lead them forth as a bride,
they know how with all comeliness, in that honorable ornament of modesty to
submit unto their Lord 2 Pet. 3.
, in all the ways of his administrations, and expressing of himself unto them
by eithers, without other wantonness, or gain saying at all Esa. John 3. 29.
Revel. 21. 1 Pet. 3. 1. 5. 1 Pet. 3.
; but we may not go into particulars in these things, in a word, it is so with
the Saints, in all those relations, wherein God has set them to himself, and
one toward another, by faith in Christ which are infinitely expressed, and made
manifest in the word of God, and for all those thread bare compositions,
institutions, and overworne tracts of men following one another by tradition,
like the horse in a mill, faith cannot but contemn, and reject them all, for
the Commandment given by our Lord is ever new Ioh 2. 8.
; so that we must either extend the ministry of the Gospel, the Priestly Office
of Jesus Christ, unto all those unto whom God vouchsafes, the spirit of Faith,
or else we diminish, and vilify that great and wonderful grace, for as it was
in days of old, with our spiritual David, taught in his figure, he believed,
and therefore he spoke Psalm. 116. 10.
, that is, he subsisted in the bosom of the Father, and therefore could not
but divulge, and declare the mind of his Father, unto his Brethren, so will it
be in the present time, if we also believe, we cannot but also speak 2 Cor. 4.
13.
that is, if we have our subsistence and being in Christ, we cannot but
declare, and set forth the mind of Christ, 1 Cor. 2. 16.
and we know that except we abide in Christ, and he in us, we have no life in
u^ John 15. 4.
, and if any have not the spirit of Christ, the same is none of his Romans 8. 9.
, therefore the Priesthood of Christ must be extended, and multiplied,
according to the true latitude of it, else we derogate, and detract from it,
pulling down it, and setting up men, having men's persons in admiration Jude 16.
, and may as well deny any of the faithful, any other grace that comes by
Jesus Christ, as to deny them, the grace of Eldership, prophecy, or
administration in the house of God, yea the peace of conscience, remission of
their sins, as well as this grace of Priesthood or Eldership in the Church, we
must also abreviate, and bring it all into one, that the whole administration,
and every part or particular thereof, depends solely upon the Son of God,
or else we give unto men that glory, that God never gave unto them, (but has
made it the peculiar honor of his Son) and so set up Idols unto our selves,
in the house of God; James 1. 6. 27. Tim. 3. 9.
instead of that pure and undefiled worship of God, yea, that man Idolizeth
himself, that attributes unto himself a greater necessity to teach, then to
learn from others, Psalm. 19. 9. 44. Psalm. 78. 41.
in the house and ways of the worship of God, whatever he may think of
himself, in that point, for he limits the holy one of Israelc, tying him to
speak by him, and not leaving it to his own grace and wisdom, who is free,
and ever has been, Co. 14. 26. 6 31.
either to speak or hear by whom he pleases, for the hearing care, and the
seeing eye, are both alike of the Lord.d.

But concerning the second thing propounded, Prove. 20. 12.
, that is the Sacrifices offered for the Church, let us instance in one for
all, namely the offering of the Lamb, Genesis 22. 7 8 Exodus 12. 3, 4, 5. Levit.
3. 7. Levit. 4. 32. Exodus 13. 13 Exodus 29. 39 Deuteronomy. 9. 3. Levit. 14. 10. 12. 13.
, or else in regard of some other act, or adjunct, in or about the offering of
it; now if we will know what the offering of a Lamb is, we must consider it in
all the circumstances that concerns it in the variety, and several
multiplications thereof, as being a Lamb slain from the beginning Revel. 13.
8.
, a Lamb slain in Egypt Exodus 12. 3.
, a Lamb slain in Israel 1 Samuel 7. 9. 10.
, with many other circumstances, adjuncts, and exercises in and about the
offering thereof, but in all, not twice in the same manner, in all and every
respect, all which we must bring into the sacrificing of one Lamb, which can
never be found in any, but only in that Lamb of God which takes away the
sins of the world John 1. 29. 1 Pet. 1. 19. 1 Cor. 5. 7.
; so that he that was about to sacrifice a Lamb, in any one particular way
mentioned, in the Law of the sacrificing thereof, he dis^nulled the Law, and
makes it void and of none effect to himself, if it do not comprehend all the
ways, of offering, the Lamb, and he that goes about to sacrifice, in all the
ways of offering the Lamb, he disanulles the Law also unto himself, unless
he can bring them all into one entire act of offering up of one Lamb, that
comprehends all the rest of the Sacrifices, and Lambs offered, and of such
unity and multiplication are all other Sacrifices, Offerings, and Oblations, in
that leviticall, and mosaicall Law, otherwise Jesus Christ is not taught in
them, but they are made merely historical, and traditionall, and of none
effect to those that are trained up and taught in such points of doctrine, as
multiplies not one into many and comprehends many in one, for it is the voice
of the spous, with respect to her unity, with her Lord to say, ( draw me) in
the singular number, and with respect to the multiplication of her seed, we
will run after thee in the plural Cant. 1. 4
, So says the Prophet Esaias of Christ, he shall see his seed, and they shall
prolong his d^yes Esa. 53. 10.
, his life and days are multiplied in them, and their life and days are made
one in him, and so does the pleasure or good will of the Lord prosper, take
effect, or is succesfull in his hand, that is, in his ministry Psalm. 77.
; for the grace of God is a bundle of life, in our Lord Jesus, so that he that
has right and interest in one, has right and interest in all, and whatever
the Saints have right unto, and interest in, from the Lord, they make use of;
putting it to the Exchangers Mat. 25. 27.
, and so many not be deburied from any way of administration in the house of
God, they have right, but unto one grace, that one salvation by Christ, and so
he is our strength and Salvation f they have right also, Psalm. 18 32. 39. Psalm.
27. 1. Ps. 84. 5.
to a multitude of Salvations, even as many as there are several ways of
destruction, and so he is called the God of Salvations, for the word is
plural, in that place of the Psalmeg even so it is with our sines that the
Lamb of God takes away h; there is but one sin, because there is but one
infinite, eternal, and divine act, and being, against which and against whom;
sin is committed, yet this one sin is multiplied Psalm. 68. 20. John 1.
, adinfinitum; because that one sin opposes; Psalm. 140. 7.
and contradicts all those infinite perfections that are in that one divine
act, and being; therefore it is, that we cannot acknowledge any sin to he
venial, because it becomes not the strength of the Son of God, to stoop
under a small burden, nor the virtue of that blood of sprinkling to utter it
self to any little or small effect Heb. 29 12. 24.
, nor can any sin as it is a sin against God, possibly be without an infinite
and an eternal gi^t in it, crossing and standing at enmity, and indirect
opposition against the mind and will of an infinite God, which cannot admit of
any graduall distinctions; therefore the Apostle says, that sin is the
transgression of the Laws, or as the Greek word there sounds, the withoutnesse
of a rule, so that every sin is the withoutnes of a rule, that is, it has not
one jot or tittle of the Law, mind, rule, or of the true reason of the Almighty
in it; for sometimes the phrase used for word or Law, signifies reason 1 Ioh 3.
4.
, so that according to Gods wisdom, in the orderly course of things, in the
production of them, it has not anything at all thereof in it, but as the Law
or wisdom of God is nothing else but instructive, so is sin, or the wisdom of
the Serpent, nothing else but destructive; for a^ the wisdom of God in all the
productions of it self in Christ, expungeth all sin and corruption out of our
nature, so that never guile was found in his mouth, but as a I am spoil and
undefiled Heb. 2. 2
, in so much that however it be but a Creature that is properly saved, yet this
work of Salvation, state and condition, which the Creature is set in; does
infinitely surmount and transcend the condition of a Creature; for as the
wisdom and the work is properly of God, so is the state and condition godly,
and holy, and so of an infinite, and an eternal value, even so it is with the
wisdom of the flesh, that is not subject to this will and law of God, neither
indeed can be Esa. 53. 9. 1 Pet. 1. 19.
, or that wisdom of the Serpent, in all its operations, and productions of it
self, expungeth all holiness and righteousness, yea that complete law of
the spirit and life that is in Christ Jesus To. 8. 7.
, in every tittle of it, out of it self, leaving it self an unclean spirit,
having a garment in every one part of it, spotted with the flesh To. 8 2 Ecl.
7. 29 Genesis 7. 5
, and is become altogether ungodly and defiled, so that as Christ was tempted
in all things like unto us, yet without sin; so is Antichrist by his creation,
as also in that redemption of mankind, in all things made like unto the Son
of God, and yet without righteousness, yea so free, as the son of God is
from sin Mat. 12 43. 5.
, though tempted, so free is the Son of perdition from righteousness, though
furnished at the first with it, being made in it Lu. 11. 24. Jude 23. Heb. 4 15
Ioh. 14. 30.
, So that howsoever it is proper to a finite Creature, to decline, and fall
away from God, yet that work of darkness, stare, and condition, into which it
brings the Creature, is of an infinite nature, and extent, because it is an
annihilation, and destruction of that whole work and fabric, of which the
Son of God himself, is the only and chief corner stone in the building
Genesis 1. 27. Genesis 5. 1. Genesis 2. 7. Ecl. 7. 29 Job. 38. 6 Psalm. 118. 22. Esa. 28.
16.
, or in expunging, and blotting out of that law, of the spirit which holds
correspondency with the son of God, in all points, every breach of which
infinite law, must needs be, of an infinite and eternal gi^t, and in our
pretended opening of the Scripture, to fall short of this latitude, and extent
in any particular sin, is the proper prevarication Law, or play the part of a
false Lawyer at the Bar, as the word signifies, that in pleading his Clients
cause, neglects the chief point in the Law that should principally be brought
in, and puts it into his Adversaries hand secretly, to cast the cause against
his Client, of such use are they to the souls of their hearers, that neglect,
or fall short of this principal point of the Law, in the infinite extent of
man's sin; for finite and infinite being made one, the proper act of sin is the
dis-junction and separation of them, which is the proper work of the flesh, or
natural reasonings of the mind of a creature Genesis 3. 1, 6 Romans 7. 9, 10, 11.
between it self, and the Creator: so also finite and infinite being
dis-joyned, and separated by sin, namely God and man, made one at the first, it
is the proper work of the Grace and Spirit of God (by faith) to unite and make
these twain to be one, and both these are of the same extent; the validity
and substance of the one is not more exalted, lifted up, and made permanent
then the vanity and emptiness of the other is vilified and debased, becoming
corrupted, and putrified for ever, without the love and distinct knowledge
whereof, we can neither understand the fall of man, nor yet his restoration by
Christ, of such use and concernment is the knowledge of the multiplication of
the offering of the Lamb, together with the unity of it, without which our
speeches and thoughts of the taking away of the sins of the world, John 1. 29.
are mere blind conjectures, and the certain knowledge and faith thereof, we
have not yet attained unto Pro. 19. 2.
, we are yet dead in our sins 1 Cor. 15. 17.
, and do not participate, in the life of the Lord Jesus 1 John. 5. 10, 11.
, unto the first Resurrection Rev. 20. 6.
: for till we know how the death of Christ in our nature answers in all
points diametrically unto our life in that Word of God, or nature divine, we
cannot have the comfort of that life of Jesus Christ, for man's fall can be of
no less extent then that Resurrection of the Son of God is, therefore as he
that prays or prophecieth with his head covered, dishonors his head 1 Cor.
11. 4.
; that is, if he do not discover, make bare and manifest, the extent of that
righteousness that is by Christ, to be no less then the righteousness of God
through faith in him Romans 10. 3, 4.
, he dishonours and shames his head; now we know, that the head of every man
is Christ 1 Cor. 11. 3.
, even so also, he that hides his sins shall not prosper, that is, shall not
pass through, or succeed well, as the word signifies Pro. 28. 13
; but that man hides his sin, whatever he be, that gives it not its proper
weight, guilt and extent, which is not less then the death of the Son of God
Romans 4. 24 25. Isa. 53. 4, 5
, what sin soever it be, and if we make it not to be that which it is, we hide
it, and shall never prosper, succeed, or go through the difficulty and power
thereof, for if we hide it, it rests upon our selves Ioh. 9. 41. 2 Cor. 3. 14
, and is the death of Christ in us, according to the Spirit, for we thereby
crucify the Son of God unto our selves Heb. 6. 6.
, in the spirit, by treading under foot Heb. 10. 29.
, that is, by vilifying and undervaluing his blood, not giving it its due
proportion, we reckon it upon our selves to our own destruction, for he is
thereby dead in us in respect of the Spirit, or of that spiritual state and
condition of which he consists 2 Cor. 5. 16. Heb. 10. 29.
, but if we confess and forsake them Pro. 28. 13.
, that is, if we preach, confess or profess them, according to their extent,
then we also forsake them, that is, we reckon and account them upon another,
namely the Son of God Isa. 53. 4 John 1. 29.
, for elsewhere they cannot be found, when they are confessed and judged of
according to the judgment of God in their extention, and so they are this
death of Christ also, that is, he is dead in us unto all the lusts and
distempers of the flesh Gal. 5. 24. Gal. 6. 14.
, and we are alive unto God in him Romans 6. 11.
; so truly and absolutely then, as the Son of God was made sin 2 Cor. 5. 21.
, not in a shadow or a figure, or vain imagination, or took some part of our
infirmity, and not the whole; but he really and absolutely descended into the
depth of our misery, and was made a curse for us, yea even in the abstract Gal.
3. 13.
, and yet notwithstanding the curse could never tarry upon him Psalm. 5. 4.
, nor he receive the least stain or blemish thereby 1 Pet. 1. 19.
, even so was man made in the Image of God, not as a shadow, or in some
certain resemblance, of a thing which he was not, but was really and
absolutely made in that highest degree of perfection, that the Creator of all
things could ever put upon him Genesis 5. 1, 2
, and if his fall be made a less thing, then a defection from, a vilification
of, and a lie made against, or slander laid upon the highest work, and greatest
grace that ever was made or given, then is not sin known, without which the
Savior is never conceived nor brought forth in the world, in that way of the
salvation of the sons of men Psalm. 5 1. 5 6, 7, 8.
, in this point lies the very key of the knowledge of, and entrance into the
word of life, how elegantly does the Prophet speak of that state and condition
of Antichrist, under the person and State of that proud King of Tyrus,
declaring of what nature and kind his state and condition was that he fell
from Ezekiel. 28. 12. to 15.
, without any fraud or collusion, telling us, (in the truth and verdict of the
Spirit of the Prophets) That he was that anointed and covering Cherub, one
that had the holy unction, that teaches all things 1 John 2. 20, 27.
, as also a holy office to cover the arc and the mercy seat, where the Law
was, and the lively Oracle spoke, yea the called of God, and the covering
Cherub, yea that he had been in Eden, the Garden of God, where nothing but
delight and pleasure could be found, decked with all precious stones, costly
and most delightful things in that day of his creation and bringing forth:
nay, he affirms him to have been in the Mount of God, making one in the
building of that Temple, not made with hands, or one that talked with the Lord
face to face, even as Moses did in that Mount, all this is affirmed (by a trim
allusion) to the glory that was manifested in the days of Moses and Aaron in
the exercises of the Law, which was life to some, but death to others, to be
true even of that man of sin in his first creation, and according to that
glorious workmanship of God in mankind at the first, and yet affirms him to
be most wicked, proud, and in a state and condition for ever to be lamented,
in whom the very body, bulk, and sum of all wickedness and cruelty was sealed
up: these things may as truly be said of that Man of Sin, that he was
anointed, made beautiful and glorious, yea with no less dignity, honor and
power, then that which is proper to the Son of God himself, and unto none else
but he alone, and yet is he that man of sin, and son of perdition, even as it
is truly said, that the Son of God was made sin 2 Cor. 5. 21.
, a curse Gal. 3. 13
, death Romans 8. 34
, and hell Psalm. 16. 10.
, and yet none of these things could ever be found in him, but he abides that
holy and unspotted Lamb of God 1 Pet. 1. 19.
, and Son of the Father for ever 2 Pet. 1. 17
: So that, as he that is our Savior took upon him the state of the son of
perdition, else had he never redeemed from death and hell Psa. 86. 13.
, and yet ever remained to be the blessed and beloved of God Mat. 3. 17
; even so he that is that son of perdition, was as absolutely made the son
of God, and that in the highest dignity that heaven it self affords, and yet
ever remains to be that accursed and forsaken of God John 8. 44
, the one in being made sin expungeth and takes it away, and becomes thereby a
Savior 1 Ioh. 3. 5
, and the other in being made the righteousness of God, expungeth it and blots
it out, and so becomes that wicked one and destroyer 1 Ioh. 5. 19. 1 Pet. 5. 8.
Psalm. 17. 4. 1 Cor. 10. 10
; therefore it is said, that the Angels that kept not their first estate, (or,
as the word is, their principality) are reserved in chains: that is, those
which were in the state of Elohim, or Gods, they kept not that estate, or that
principality; for, the word sometimes used for Angels, in the Hebrew is
Elohim, as in the eighth Psalm Psalm. 8. 5.
, which our Apostle translates Angels in his writing unto the Hebrews Heb. 2. 7.
, therefore they were such that fell, as were (by that act of their creation) in
the state and condition of the Son of God; and that was the state that was
fallen from, which if it be minced or diminished, sin is covered and hid by us
Pro. 28. 13
, and so no success in the things of God: for, he that hides his sin, as
Adam Job 31. 33
, shall not prosper, who went about to lessen it, by making another the cause
of it Genesis 3. 12
; as men do in these days, that lessen the sin of man, in that he was tempted
thereunto by another, which they call wicked Angels, that fell before man,
whose nature they say the Son of God never took upon him, and would father
their opinion upon the Apostle, who intends no such thing Heb. 2. 16
: For, if there were any creature worse then man, or state and condition below
his, then did not the Son of God take into unity the worst nature, nor
descend into the lowest state of death in his humiliation; and then it will
follow, according to the rule of contraries, that man is not made one with the
most pure and holy nature of God in Christ, neither was our nature exalted to
the highest and most glorious state of Majesty in him Acts 5. 30 31. Phil. 2.
8, 9, 10.
; for, if his exaltation be of infinite and illimited glory and dignity, then
is his humiliation also of infinite and illimited shame and infamy: and if so,
then the worst estate and condition, or the worst creature, and greatest
enmity, can in no wise be exempted from being the way of the death of the Son
of God: so that, that ayrie doctrine of the fall of Angels, not knowing how it
and they, namely the fall and the creature, is comprised in man, is nothing
else but merely vain speculation, and carnal and empty conceits and reasoning,
tending to nothing else but to make void the salvation wrought by the Son of
God, holding men's minds in admiration in things they know not Col. 2. 18.
, neither will they understand Acts 13. 40 41. H^b. 1. 5.
: For, in the way of salvation in all the elect and choice ones, God ^^^selfe
is all in all, which must presuppose an infinite vacu^^^ and emptiness in
themselves, in case that infinite and divine grace be their fullness in Christ
John 1. 16.
, and in the way of the wicked also, sin and enmity has its fullness Genesis 15.
16
, which must presuppose a vacnity and emptiness of that alone, and divine
grace and Majesty, which is infinite; and the state of the one is in all points
as vast as the other. For, as the Son of God is the Savior of the world
without limitation or restraint; even so does the whole world lie in
wickedness, or as the word is, is of that wicked one, meaning that son of
perdition, without limitation or restraint 1 Ioh. 5. 19
: so that by the Son of God the worlds are made, in the plural number, the
worlds Heb. 1. 2.
, so as that world of righteousness is made by the Son of God 2 Pet. 3 13
, where all things are filled with his blessing and presence Psalm. 16. 11.
, yea all things, even death it self, becomes life unto us in him; so that
life and peace spring up in all things, and the blood of sprinkling utters it
self in the voice of purity Heb. 12. 24.
and reconciliation of all things Col. 1. 20 21.
. Again, the world of death and of sin is also made by the Son of God, that
is, occasionally, or accidentally: for if he had not come and spoken unto the
world, it had not had sin, but now there is no cloak nor covering for it John
15. 22
; and this is done by his being slain, and expelled the world by the wicked,
even as Abel was at the beginning Genesis 4. 8. 1 John 3. 12
; and this blood so spilt by that wicked one, and all of his generation Mat.
23. 34, 35, 36.
, speaks from the ground unto this day Genesis 4. 10. Heb. 11. 4.
, even from those earthly, carnal, and cruel reasonings of men, who will have
the firstborn after the flesh (and not of God) to reign, which speaks
nothing but guilt and horror Genesis 4. 14
, from such an act done in so near a fraternity Genesis 4. 13
: and hence arises nothing but horror and fear, yea all things, even life it
self which is the Son of God, becomes death and destruction unto them Rev.
6. 15 16, 17.
: and here is a world of horror and fear; for the expulsion of the Son of
God admits not of any bounds, no more then his presence does Ephesians. 4. 9, 10.
Psalm. 139. 7 to 12.
, yea that vast distance that is between God and man in that way of Antichrist
for ever, springs from as near a unity between God and man in the beginning,
as that vast distance that is between God and man by sin and wickedness
comes into unity in that way and oneness that is between God and man in Jesus
Christ Luke 3. 38
, which if we see not, our sin appears not, neither does our Savior appear,
and make manifest himself unto us unto life and godliness Ephesians. 2. 13. to 16.
: Whatever we profess in words, our deeds shall deny him Titus 1. 16
; we seeking our own things, and not the things that are his Phil. 2. 21.
; and out of this fountain spring those expressions of the Word of Truth, that
cannot lie, saying, I have said ye are Gods, and the children of the most high
Psalm. 82. 6 7.
, which is not spoken only of Princes, and Rulers of this world, but of all
that wicked race of mankind that goes on in the ways of Antichrist,
therefore he adds, but ye shall die as Adam, for so the word is, that is, in
seeking to be excellent you corrupt your selves for ever, and in the way ye
expect life, nothing but death ensues, and overtakes you; for that word (as) is
not always to be taken comparatively (as somewhat like) but sometimes in
Scripture it signifies verily, or the very same thing, as in that place in John
John 1. 14
, And we saw his glory (as) the glory of the only begotten Son of God, that
is, the very same glory of that only begotten Son of God, full of grace and
truth, so it is here, you shall die (as) Adam, that is, the very same manner
and kind of death that he died, therefore he adds, that they shall fall like
Kings, that sought after great things, yea made war to take into possession the
fair houses of God Psalm. 83. 12.
, like Zeb and Oreb, Jabin and Sisara, Zeba and Zalmunna, the Princes of Midian
Psalm. 83. 11.
, so that as it may truly be said, of the saved of the Lord, ye were dead in
sins and trespasses, but now ye are alive unto God through Jesus Christ Romans 6.
11
: so it may as truly be said of the wicked of the world, you were alive unto
God Romans 7. 9.
, in righteousness and holiness of truth Ephesians. 4. 24
, but ye are now dead in sins and wickedness through that spirit of the old
Man, and Antichrist, that spirit of the Prince of the power of the air, that
now works effectually in the children of disobedience or unbeleefe, as the
word is Ephesians. 2. 2.
, in that place: again it is said, that there shall be false Teachers, even
denying the Lord that bought them, and shall bring upon themselves swift
destruction 2 Pet. 2. 1
, which none can open to satisfy the consciences, unless he enter into the
Word by this door, to declare how they can be bought by our Lord Christ, and
yet be destroyed; for it is also said as truly by that Word of truth, that some
read under foot the blood of the new Covenant (whereby they were sanctified)
and count it an unholy thing. So that it is no less true and certain, that
those which are destroyed, and prove contemners of the grace of God in the
Gospel, are sanctified and bought by the blood of Jesus Christ (and yet
partake in no salvation, nor in any jot of sanctity at all) then it is true and
certain, that those which are saved are by nature lost and sold under sin,
and yet in our Lord Jesus they are not at any loss in any thing, nor under any
slavery or bondage of sin at all Romans 8 15 John 8. 35, 36.
: and however we have traditionally received one of these as truth, and seem to
approve it, yet have we no more certainty of the truth of it, then God makes
known the truth of the other, but our thoughts are merely conjecturall, as
will appear, When God sits as a Refiners fire, to purge and try the house of
Levi Mal. 3. 2, 3.
: yea unless God open this mystery unto us, we fail in the root of things,
and all our contention and strife is but about superfluous branches, and we
abide united in the fountain of that Original pollution, and savor all of
one and the same stock and root, some violently contending, (being dark in
this point) that men may attain to true grace, and be exercised in it for a
time, and yet fall away from it, and so can in this life have no certainty of
salvation; others, that if true grace be once abtained, that they can never
fall away from it totally, but that they may have the comfort and assurance of
it, they must wisely distinguish between certain common graces of the Spirit
that are the good gifts of God, and yet fall short of salvation, and those
that are peculiar and special graces of the Spirit that attain unto the end,
which is salvation, whereas the truth is, in the mean time there is but one
good Spirit or grace of God possessing the Elect, and leading the Sons of God
Romans 8. 14
into all truth Ioh. 16. 13.
, which one Spirit multiplies it self into those various and sevenfold
operations, that non can number the doubled and redoubled particulars, or
distinct kinds thereof, and yet but that one good thing Revel. 4 5 Revel. 1. 4.
Mat. 7. 11.
, or spirit of sanctity and holiness, which our Father knows how to give to
them that ask it, as also one spirit of that Prince of the power of the air
Ephesians. 2. 2
, which enters into every heart and mind that is empty and vacant of that good
spirit of grace from God our Father, even as the air cannot be kept out of any
empty and void thing, but it presently fills it with it self, and this spirit
only now works in the children of disobedience, or unbeleefe, and this in like
manner though but one, yet can call it self Legion, because of the multitude
thereof Mark 5. 9 Luke 8. 30. Mat. 12. 45
, which does also double and redouble it self in operations for number, and
several kinds that cannot be reckoned up, but is the very same unclean
spirit, when it is transformed into an Angel of light 2 Cor. 11. 14, 15.
, that he is in the dismal fears and terrors in the men of this world; Isa.
33. 14
; so that he that makes a common grace or spirit that is good, but yet brings
not to salvation, and a special one that is good also, and leads unto
salvation, that is indeed to make no spirit of God, nor of Satan at all, but a
mere sophistical coupling of light and darkness, Christ and Beliall together
in one 2 Cor. ^. 15.
, to the utter deluding and deceiving of the world, as the Magicians of old did
Pharaoh, and his servants Exodus 7. 11, 12.
, when by their sophistry they resisted Moses, even as Jannes and Jambres at
this day resist light, and stir up a mighty smoke to hide and cover the truth 2 Timothy 3. 8
, promising unto others liberty, when they themselves are the servants of
corruption 2 Pet. 2. 18, 19.
, in which place the Apostle speaks of some that have escaped the filthiness
and pollution of the world, through the acknowledgement of the Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, and yet are entangled again in corruption and overcome, so as
they never recover: For this latter end is worse then their beginning, also
they are such as have known the way of the Lord, and turned from the holy
Commandment as the dog to his vomit, and 2 Pet. 2. 21, 22.
, as the sow that was washed, to her wallowing in the mire. So that wicked men,
yea that son of perdition is as clearly escaped all the lusts of the flesh, by
that work of God in the Creation, or redemption of mankind, as though there
were not any corruption or putrefaction at all, and yet notwithstanding is
entangled in them, altogether void of any purity at all, and that by the work
of his own mind and understanding, operating upon that holy and glorious act
of his Creator, judging of it according to the imaginations of his own heart,
even as the Saints of God are really and wholly putrified and corrupted by
their own work in the fall of man, and yet in that way of Christ Jesus have
no spot or wrinckle Ephesians. 5. 27.
, no more then as if there had never been any such thing at all: The one has
as truly the knowledge of the Commandment by nature, according to the work of
his Creation, and yet drowned in ignorance, and walloweth in it as the sow in
the mire 2 Pet. 2. 20.
; even as the other has taken upon himself the state of an Idiot, in that
work of his humiliation, and yet impossible that he should err Isa. 35. 8.
, or fall short of holding correspondency with the Father, of lights in the
least particle, of the understanding of his will; the one has it by nature, in
respect of his unity in the creation with that nature that is nothing but
purity and knowledge: the other has it by nature also, in respect of that
which he takes into unity with himself, which in it self is nothing but
impurity and gross darkness Ephesians. 5. 8. Col. 1. 12, 13
, without the knowledge of this misery, we may speak things of certain
knowledge in the way of man, and so preach the word of a man, and not of God 1
Cor. 2. 4, 5. Col. 2. 4.
, but we can never speak spiritual things in a spiritual manner, 1 Cor. 2.
13.
as that phrase of the Apostle sounds, and so speak as the Oracle of God 1 Pet.
4. 11.
, without the knowledge of this mystery, we may utter a spiritual thing in
respect of terms and phrases Numb. 24. 3. to 9.
, but we cannot know the ground and reason of it, according to God, and so we
know not whence it comes, or how it arises, nor whither it tends, and what
will be the issue of it, and so can never communicate in the truth, life,
power, and benefit thereof: But thus much at this time for the offering of the
Lamb, which concerns both the eating and roasting of his flesh, as also the
preservation of his bones, that one of them shall never be broken Psa. 34. 20
Ioh. 19. 33. 36.
, as also the multiplication and unity of it. Molech, Chion, and exercised in
the Tabernacle which belonged unto them Amos 5. 26.
, unto which our Apostle alludes, declaring that Idolatry committed by the
Fathers in the wilderness, perceiving it to be the same with that among the
heathen, and altogether as heathenish, or alienated a thing from the true
worshippers Acts 7 43
: yea Stephen applies it to that natural and carnal worship which the Jews
so stiffly maintained Acts 7. 57 58, 59.
, so that rather then it should fall, the Lords faithful Martyr or Witness
should be put to death, yea that holy man Stephen Acts 7. 60
; even so also the offering of a sacrifice to God, nature does bring forth
according to its own though several devices and inventions: and hence it is,
that so many ways of worship are found in the world; so the heathen they
sacrificed, but the Prophet said, it was to Devils, and not unto God Deuteronomy. 32.
17.
, yea, they offered their children to Molech, for what will not a man give for
the sin of his soul, the cattle of a thousand mountains, with ten thousand
rivers of oil, yea the first borne of his body, to be released from the sin of
his soul Mica 6. 7.
, so also it is with Baptisms and Washings, nature produces such and adornes
it self with them, as it did by eating of the forbidden tree at the first,
that it might become amiable, and be made thereby like unto God, and therefore
the Apostle bids us lay aside, or to cease from (as the word will bear) the
Word, or the Doctrine, or Preaching of the beginnings of Christ Heb. 6. 1, 2.
: now the Word of the beginnings of Christ, is that which is properly preached
in that wherein Christ had a beginning, and that is only in our nature as he
was the Son of Man, for as he is God, he has no beginning at all, but is from
all eternity: so that those things we are to cease from, are such Doctrines as
that nature wherein Christ has a beginning, does naturally of it self
produce, preach, or bring forth, which were in Christ, are and ever shall be in
that way of Christ left and censed from, which are things imperfect and
defective, and therefore cannot stand before God Isa. 28. 20
; but our Apostle leads us from those unto things of perfection, which are
only found in that Son of God, which are things that God only admits, or
certainly approves of, and not to lay again that foundation that is naturally
laid in the hearts of all men, as repentance from, or as the word may be read,
repentance out of dead works, that is, such a repentance as arises out of the
dead works of the Law naturally in man's heart Romans 7. 4, 6.
, which has no life of God in it, but is ever to be repented of wherever it
appears, of such nature also is that faith toward God, that there he would
have us leave and cease from; or faith besides or against God, as the word
there used will also bear; as well as to read it, toward God, therefore the
Apostle says, thou beleevest that there is one God, thou do well, the
Devils also believe it, and tremble James 2. 19.
; for there is nothing in the Devils but what stands in opposition against
God, and is at enmity with his Creator, and therefore is his trembling, because
his faith presents God, standing in terms of opposition unto him, for this
faith that nature brings forth presents one God unto us, but not one God as in
his Son, consisting of two natures, and in whom or in what particular that
kind of faith is, he is vain and empty that so believes Iam. 2. 20.
, and it is the very way that the Prince of the power of the air, as was above
noted, enters into the soul, and ever has done even from the beginning, for
the Son of God is not the life, and fullness of that faith, or any particular
act or opperation of it, where our nature is not reckoned up together with him
as one, thence it is, that it is called a dead faith Iam. 2. 20.
, not having the life of Christ in it, but the works of the Law, by which no
flesh can be justified Romans 3. 20
, and by which works the Apostle says, salvation cannot be Gal. 2. 16.
, for then man might boast Ephesians. 2. 8, 9.
, which he cannot in any case do, but where Christ is the life and fulness
of the creature there are the works and operations of the Son of God Ephesians. 1,
19, 20, 22, 23.
, and without these works neither Abraham in offering Isaac nor any of his
posterity can ever be saved and justified before God Iam. 2. 14. 21. to 26.
, therefore he says, that Abraham was justified by works, for faith without
works (says he) is dead Iam. 2. 20
, because it is alone, or as the word is, by it self Iam. 2. 17
: that is to say, is not the faith of union which always looks at God and
man, as one in Christ, so that however some may say I have faith, and thou have
works Iam. 2. 18
, yet there is no faith without works, or works without faith; for if there be
faith which is merely natural, yea, that the Devils have, it is never exempted
from the works or operations of the Devil and of the flesh, and and if there
be the works of the Son of God, and of the Spirit, they are never exempted
from the faith of union of God and man in one subsistence. So also there is a
Baptism and Washing that is natural, which men adorn themselves withal in
the Worship of God, which is manifold, therefore put in the plural number
Baptisms Heb. 6. 2.
, as men's minds vary, this we see in the practice of these Indians amongst
whom we live, that in their Worship and Services used for the recovery of the
sick, the Priest sprinckles the diseased person with clean water, many times
in the act of their worship: this is seen also in those wicked Jews, that had
nothing but natural operations to draw or to drive them (rather) to John's
Baptism, whom he calls a generation of vipers, whom he upbraideth with their
forewarned, or forestalled opinion Mat. 3. 7. Luke 3. 7.
, that such a dipping or washing should save them from wrath to come, as he
performed it, being that all that he did was but to show what a turbulent
Jordan and Deluge of wrath the Son of God descended into (which was already in
their hearts) and for no other end, but that we might in him ascend into that
fountain and overflowing stream of Gods grace, compassion, and tender mercy
for ever, in the virtuous and glorious actions of the Son of God, for John's
Ministry and dipping, shows what Christ has in our nature, and the Ministry
of Christ in his coming up, or ascending out of the waters, with the Spirit of
God lighting, residing, or abiding upon him, declares what we are in that
divine nature of the Word, or Son of God: Now these Jews would be playing the
part, and presuming to perform the Office of the Son of God, (who descends
down into the depth of the wrath of his Father) hoping thereby to escape
wrath, even as our first Parents entered into the way of death, in hope to
escape it, and to attain life thereby, and in the mean time neglect, contemn
and despise that glory of the Son, which he in that dipping or descention of
his, does so freely tender, and offer unto them, for it is only his part to
descend and be dipped in the waters of our weakness, that have by nature no
life nor Spirit of God in us at all, or into that troubled Jordan of Gods
wrath, which naturally burns in every man's soul, and it is only our
privilege to ascend and come out of that wrath and weakness in that
descending and residing of that life, and Dove-like Spirit of God upon us for
ever Mat. 3. 16
: the first of these is natural, and incident unto all men, to dip, to dive,
to sprinckle and wash with material water, or to plunge themselves into some
infirmity or weakness of the flesh, as fasting, mourning, afflicting of
themselves, or the like, hoping thereby to please God, for the appeasing of his
wrath, and so do undertake the Office of the Son of God, to undergo the Cross
in themselves, which is the very spirit of Antichrist, and in the mean time
neglect and contemn the other, namely that glorious resurrection of our nature
through that residency of the Spirit upon it, whereby we are made able to give
Satan the foil in all his temptations, even as our Lord did by the power of
his might Mat. 4. 1. -- 11. Col. 1. 11. Phil. 4. 13. Rev. 2. 26, 27.
; Therefore in all Baptisms and Washings practiced in the holy Scripture we
must know, that there is not any two performed alike, all circumstances
considered, therefore that Church which takes up the way of any particular of
them alone, and of it self, cannot practice nor perform the true Baptism,
when the whole Administration thereof (which the Holy Ghost has been pleased
to declare the right of it in so many differing ways) is not brought in;
therefore if we will profess and practice the perfect Baptism unto which our
Apostle leads us, when he says, let us go on unto perfection Heb. 6. 1.
, then we must unite and contract them all into one, and so shall we find the
Ordinance of Baptism to be found faulty in all Churches under heaven, unless
they have learned to center them all in one, and if they do so, it will not be
found in any but only in the Son of God, whose dipping or washing comprehends
them all, and so has in it all spiritual and holy dippings and washings
whatsoever, therefore if we set up another besides that which is perfected in
him, we make an Idol of it, and so subject our selves unto wrath 1 Cor. 10. 1,
to 7.
, for it is in this point of Baptism as it is in the death of Christ, if we
profess another death (that is spiritual) besides that which Christ has
undergone, we make an Idol of it, and subject our selves thereby to the
undergoing of that eternal death to come, by usurping and arrogating unto our
selves the death of Christ, which he at once for ever perfected Heb. 7. 27 Heb.
10. 10.
, for the water of that Baptism that now is saves us, even as Noah was saved
in the Arc by waters 1 Pet. 3. 20, 21.
, that he perished not with the rest of the world; even so does the Baptism of
Christ (which is his Cross) save us, and lift us up from perishing in those
waters, or in that wrath that naturally ingenders, breeds, and breaks forth in
every man's heart, both from things below, and also from things above, as those
waters of Noah did Gal. 4. 24, 25. Genesis 7. 11, 12.
, for he appearing in the similitude of sinful flesh, by sin, or by becoming
sin in us, condemned sin in the flesh Romans 8. 3.
, passed sentence upon it, that it should never live in us, nor have dominion
over us any more Romans 6. 14
, for he made a plaster of our sins to heal us of, and save us from our sins
for ever, and so by death overcame him that had the power of death Heb. 2. 14.
, even as the Arc by the waters overcame the waters, and yet the same waters
stifled and choked the world, so by being made sin, Christ overcomes sin, and
yet the same sin destroys and condemns the world Psalm. 34. 21.
: For as the waters of Noah lifted up the Arc to heaven out of all danger,
that otherwise might have befallen it, and the very same waters also drowned
and destroyed the rest of the world, so does the Baptism of Christ (which is
his Cross) save us, and lift us up unto God, and yet the very same thing,
which is his Cross or Death, does also destroy and overthrow the wicked, for
the Son of God taking our nature into unity with himself, he thereby
sustaining our infirmities Isa. 53. 4.
, and so in one act for ever perfecteth our salvation Heb. 10. 14
, and all those things that Jesus Christ suffered upon the earth, in so many
acts, places, and by so many persons, and ways, is his Cross Doctrinally, and
all those things do set forth and declare what that one entire act of the Son
of God is, in taking our nature into unity with the Word, which act indeed is
the proper Baptism, Cross or Death of Christ that saves us 1 Pet. 3. 21.
, and all other Baptismes performed in the holy Scriptures at all times amongst
the Saints, are only the teaching and setting forth of that one, unto which
they all look with an equal and indifferent eye, so that if we take up one of
them more or less then another, we wrong both it, and all the rest, and do
nothing else but make an Idol of it, for if we go about to form and fashion
another Baptism (but what is already perfected in Christ) we may as well go
about to form and frame unto our selves another Cross then that which Christ
has already undergone, and that were to arrogate unto our selves the proper
and sole work of the Son of God 1 Cor. 4 7
, therefore he says, I must be baptized with a Baptism, and how am I pained,
or kept in, or pressed and gathered together? as the word signifies Luke 12. 50.
, showing that all Baptismes are gathered together into that one act of his,
which is the ending and consummation of them all, even as all death is
comprised in that one and alone act of death of the Son of God, which puts an
end unto all death spiritual, that tends to the separation of God and man
whatever it be Hos. 13. 14 Romans 8. 34.
, so that the proper portion and inheritance of the Saints is nothing else but
light and life, for all death and darkness, is in Christ done away Ephesians. 5. 8
, so that we may as well go about to frame unto our selves another spiritual
death, that has not been already undergone and perfected for ever, as to frame
another Baptism or Washing that is spiritual, that is not yet performed and
already perfected, so that if ever we communicate in that one only death of
Jesus Christ, unto solid and sound satisfaction, then shall we also participate
in his only and alone Baptism, to our full edification and consolation Heb.
10. 22, 23.
, which Baptism is not a putting away of the filth of the flesh 1 Pet. 3. 21.
, or as the word may be read, the low and base esteem of the flesh, as to be
low and base in respect not be such a thing in it self, as to be low and base
in respect of it self, but it is the stipulation or answering again of a good
conscience toward God in the Resurrection of Jesus Christ; that is, there is
an answering of all those particulars wherein our natural infirmity and
weakness does divulge and utter it self in us, there is an answering again
(I say) unto them all, in that Resurrection of Jesus Christ, through the
testimony of a good conscience, that is to say, to fill with plenty every thing
in want, to strengthen and give power to every thing that is weak, yea, there
is in him a salve to heal every sore that is in us, a comfort for every
sorrow, a cover for every part of our nakedness, and glory, to make honorable
every dishonorable thing, such a thing is the Baptism of the Gospel, that by
how much the more our infirmities are multiplied, as being that which is the
death of the Son of God, by so much the more is our righteousness and peace
made manifest in us 2 Cor. 1. 4 5, 6.
, through his Resurrection, which is the life of the Son of God, so that as sin
has abounded, so also does grace abound much more; and the more we catch at
any other Baptism, the more we show our selves to be carnal, and ignorant of
this answering again of a good conscience through that Resurrection of Jesus
Christ, even as in water face answers to face: If we will profess our selves
rightly to understand, embrace, and practice that Baptism which is according
to the grace of the Gospel, that is according to Principles springing out of
the Son of God, and not according to that shallow and short scantling of the
apprehensions and operations of man's heart, which all men are apt and ready to
bring forth, according to the way of their education and training up: then must
we know, through the light of that Spirit Ephesians. 1. 17.
, and Law that can only make wise the simple Psalm. 19. 7 Psalm. 119. 130
, and cause the Idiot so to walk as he cannot err Isa. 35. 8.
, how to extend and multiply this Ordinance of Baptism, and how to abridge and
contract all those several ways of it into one entire act; as that of the
peoples, being baptized unto Moses in the Cloud and in the Sea 1 Cor. 10. 1, 2.
, also John's baptizing in Jordan Mat. 3. 13
, and in Enon, or in the cloud, or many waters, as the word signifies John 3. 23
, his baptism of Christ the Son of God Mat. 3. 15, 16.
, his baptizing of the Jews and Generation of vipers Mat. 3. 5, 6, 7.
, his baptizing of Publicans Luke 3. 12
, and the like, so also baptizing with the Holy Ghost and with fire Luke 3. 16
, the baptizing of repentance and remission of sins Mark 1. 4
, the Baptism to be administered only upon believing Act. 8. 36, 37.
, the Baptism of the Eunuch, Philip going down into the water with him Acts
8. 38
, the Baptism of the house of Cornelius, where no such thing as going down
into the water is practiced Act. 10. 47
, the Baptism of good men, such as the said Cornelius was Acts 10. 22.
, the Baptism of wicked men, such as Simon Magus was Acts 8. 13
, with many the like several sorts of Baptism, this we say, that Baptism is
not known, (in that extent which God has given it unto us in) unless it be
truly and in a holy manner extended unto all those several ways, together
with all circumstances which the Lord has commended it unto us in, and thereby
bring that true laver and fountain of Baptism to diffuse it self in a most
godly manner into them all, as also we must know, how every stream of it does
return and center it self in that one only fountain, and this is the
multiplication, as also the abbreviation of that Ordinance, without which it
cannot be fruitful unto us: But in what one particular way soever we practice
it, it will prove unto us a mere way of man, and so a work of the flesh, and
of the flesh, we shall not reap but only corruption Gdl. 6. 8.
, but if God declare it unto us, diffusively and distributively into all the
actions of it, and also summarily in one only act, then can we find it in
none but Christ alone, who only is that great and weighty Ordinance of
Baptism in the house of God, as well as he is that of Priesthood, out of which
it springs, and that of offering up the Lamb, and whilst we are ordering this
Ordinance of Baptism, or any other, to please our selves and others, in a way
of the Religion of God, trimming and adorning our selves with one particular
way of it, and lay aside all the rest as things either out of date, as that of
Baptizing unto Moses in the Cloud and in the Sea 1 Cor. 10. 2.
, or else as extraordinary acts, as that of baptizing with the Holy Ghost, and
with fire, in the descending of the Spirit upon us, to fit us for all offices
and occasions Mat. 3. 16. Mat. 4. 1.
, or else as things impossible to be attained, as that all should go into
Jordan Mat. 5. 6.
, or things not agreeable unto the Country, as to go down with all the body
into the water, because of the cold Act. 8. 38
, or as things not concluded by the gravest Synods, and most judicious Divines,
I say, we may as well (as to reason and practice thus in our way of Baptism)
take up one of the Commandments, walk by, and lay aside all the rest, for the
Law of God is multiplied, we see, in all other points as well as in this of
Baptism; for it is not only laid down in those ten words given unto Moses in
the Mount Exodus 34. 27. Deuteronomy. 10. 4.
, but infinitely in the holy Scriptures, and it is also contracted and brought
into one, insomuch, that he that breaks one Commandment is guilty of all Iam.
2. 10, 11.
, therefore it is said, I have written unto them the great things of my Law
Hos. 8. 12.
: but the word is, I have written unto them the multitudes of my Law, it is
great for multitude, so that the Law is multiplied, yea it is innumerable, and
it is also abridged into one, therefore it is said, and if there be any other
Commandment it is all contained in this one word, love thy neighbor as thy
self, and is said to be the fulfilling of the Law Romans 13. 8, 9, 10. 1 Timothy 1.
5.
; So that if we will have one way of Baptism, and lay aside all the rest, when
as God has diffused it in his Word into so many ways, then let us also (on
the like ground) take one of the Laws of God, to be our rule to walk by, and
lay aside all the rest, the one of these will prove only the spirit of a
Libertine to pick out one Law which he (according to the wisdom and judgment
of the flesh) can best suit himself unto, and neglect and despise whatsoever
crosses his carnal appetite in all the rest; and the other is that great and
cruel Spirit of bondage that prepares a yoke that all men's necks must bow
under, and be subjected unto, or else undergo the penalty whatever it is Mat.
23. 4. 1 King. 12. 11. 14. Acts 9. 14.
. A like Doctrine also is that of the gifts of the Spirit, that if all were an
eye, then where were the hearing? and if all were an ear, then where were the
smelling 1 Cor. 12 17.
? from such places as these concluding, that one man has one gift, and
another man has another gift, we confess the argument to be true in nature,
that one man has not every gift: but as true as that is in nature, so certain
and true is it in this also, that such arguing in the things of God proceeds
from natural reason only Jude 10.
; for we grant in the things of men, that he that is a father, is not the son,
and she that is a wife is not the husband, nor is he that is the master the
servant: But if men will analize spiritual things with natural, we have no
such custom, neither the Churches of God, as the Apostle speaks in a like case
1 Cor. 11. 16.
, yet this we know, that the members of the body, unto which our Apostle
alludes, in their several and distinct offices, it is presupposed that every
body is endued with them all, else it were not a complete body to be alluded
unto Mat. 6. 22 23.
, so also is it in the gifts of the spirit, every Christian that is complete in
Christ is blessed with them both in their multiplication, and also in their
concatenation in their harmonious relations one to another, and orderly
operations distinct one from another; otherwise there would always be strange
and unknown tongues in the house of God 1 Cor. 14. 1, 2, to 19.
, in case that one should utter himself in a gift that all the rest of the
Church were not endued with; for, that new name written in that white stone
none can know but he that has it Rev. 2. 17.
: So that, if any utter the mystery of the Gospel, according to any particular
gift given in the Church, all the rest must either have the same gift, or else
they cannot know what is uttered, But he that speaks is unto them a Barbarian,
and they to him 1 Cor. 14. 11.
: for, what gifts, offices, or abilities are distributed unto the whole body of
the Church, are also proper unto (yea the very portion of) every particular
member in it, or else Christ were divided, if he were not that to every one
that he is to any one, or to all: and we may as well deny all grace to any
member, as one grace; for, if one, then any one; as the grace of justification,
pardon of sin, faith, or the like; which to be without, we know, makes a
nullity of a Christian; for, he cannot be a Christian without such grace.
Again, if every one share not alike in all grace, then Christ cannot be all in
all Col. 3. Ephesians. 4. 6. Ephesians. 5. 9.
, (which honor the word gives unto him) which he cannot be, if he were part in
one member, and part in another; therefore you have the spirit multiplied, for
the seven spirits of God are before the throne Rev. 1. 4.
: you have it also contracted; for it is but one Spirit Ephesians. 4. 3, 4.
: so that it is seven which implies the perfections of it, or fullness of its
going forth in all its operations, as that number seven in Scripture signifies:
and it is but one, to show the unity and necessity of it, in all its works to
be the same 1 Cor. 12 4. to 11.
, which one if any man have not, the same is none of Christ's Romans 8. 9.
; for if any man have not Spirit of Christ he is none of his: yea that number
seven in Scripture sometimes signifies weeks, as where the Law appoints the
feast of weeks or of sevens Exodus 34. 22. Deuteronomy. 16. 10 16. 2 Chronicles. 8. 3.
, as the world may rightly be rendered: which number is given to the Spirit of
God before the throne, to declare, that as the word went out at the first, in
the framing of heaven and earth, in the whole, and every particular creature,
and operation in the Universe, within the compass of seven days; so also does
the Spirit of God go forth, wherever, or in whomsoever it is, in the whole,
and every particular work and operation in the new creature, or in that
creation of God Rev. 3. 14
, in that sevenfold operation which is given to every particular Saint, as
well as unto the whole body of the Church; for if any man be in Christ he is a
new creature 2 Cor. 5. 17.
: And as there are multitudes of creatures in heaven and earth, whence it is
said, that every creature groaneth and travelleth in pain Romans 8. 22
; so also the whole is but one creature, and therefore he says, The creature
it self (speaking as of one) shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption
into the glorious liberty of the sons of God Romans 8. 21
, or in the singular number, into the glorious liberty of the Son of God: it
is every creature (in the plural number) as one creation consists of so many;
and it is but one, as so many creatures make but one work of the creation: and
if God teach us not this art of multiplication and abbreviation in the word of
God, and in every Ordinance in the opening of it, we can never attain to that
of the Apostle (the duty of all skillful and faithful Ministers) to declare
unto the flock of God the whole mind and counsel of God Acts 20. 27.
; for if we preach not whole Christ out of every Scripture, we open not the
Scripture, to run clear unto the flock, but puddle the waters, and such as
puddle the waters, will also push with the horn at the sheep of Christ Ezekiel.
34. 18. to 25.
: for, every word of God, that is, every Scripture, composed into one proper
head, whether in way of History, Prophecy, Proverb, Parable, or the like,
proposes whole Christ unto us; and so also does every Ordinance, exercise or
gift of the Spirit, truly understood, published or practiced in the house of
God: and if we set forth Jesus Christ, we declare the whole counsel of God;
for he is the mind and will of the Father, not in part, but wholly and complete
in the whole, as also in every part: for, in his incarnation whole Christ is
comprised therein, as also in his divulging and opening of the mind of the
Father, whole Christ is composing in that his preaching, in his death, whole
Christ, in his resurrection whole Christ, in his intercession whole Christ, in
his Kingly Office whole Christ, in his Priestly office whole Christ, in his
Prophetical Office no less then whole Christ, in prayer whole Christ, in his
fasting whole Christ, in his temptations whole Christ; yea thus it is in every
point that concerns Christ; and all things in the religion, ways and worship
of God have no less reference and respect unto Christ, that word of life, in
their ordination, consecration, publication, dispensation, exercise and
practice of them, then all the creatures in heaven and earth have respect unto
that word of God in their creation, conservation, and orderly gubernation unto
this day Psalm. 33. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Psalm. 119. 89, 90, 91.
, which made, sustaines, and upholds them all: and as it is in the art of
Philosophy, that in the full and accurate discussing of any particular
creature, in its nature, operation, and office, relations and respects, we must
bring in the whole creation, to set it forth to perfection: so is it in the
things of God; there is no particular in that new creature, that can be
discussed unto edification and comfort; but whole Christ is brought in, who is
the perfection and brightness of the Fathers glory Heb. 1. 3.
, else is not the mystery of God declared, the word of God interpreted, nor the
kingdom of heaven opened unto believers, and the beloved of God. So also in
the opening of the mystery of iniquity 2 These. 2. 7.
, every point and particular therein skilfully handled by him that has the key
of that bottomless pit Rev. 9. 1, 2.
, is the very inlet of Satan, yea the proper power and kingdom of darkness,
and compriseth that whole brood and generation of that man of sin, and is that
way of annullity, vastation, and emptiness of the Son of God: For, as
certainly as Satan found nothing of himself in Christ John 14. 30.
our Savior, so is nothing of Christ found in that Son of perdition, neither
in the whole, nor in any particular of him: so that in every point his sin is
as capital, and of no less headship, then is the putting to death of the
Son of God, is to crush the aead of the Serpent Genesis 3. 15
, so that he never goes out in his true office of ministry, but he strikes
at the very head of Antichrist; for there is no sin that reigns in any of the
sons of men, that has not in it the headship and domination of Antichrist;
for it is of no less guilt and crime, then is the putting of the Lord of
heaven and of earth unto death 1 Cor. 2. 8
: So that those that strive and contend against sins that are not capital,
yea the very force and head of Satan in that man of sin, they never go forth in
that Office and Ministry of the Son of God; for the seed of the woman is
only assigned by his Father to break or crush the head of the serpent Isa. 51
9. Psalm. 74. 14
; and at less he never strikes, then at the ringleaders to death and
destruction, yea at such as destroy, and crucify the Son of the living God
Heb. 6. 6.
: and yet notwithstanding, it cannot properly be said that Satan foiles or
overcomes the Son of God, but is foiled and overcome himself, for Michael
and his Angels overcome the Dragon and his Angels Rev. 12. 7, to 11.
; therefore he is said to bruise the heel of Christ, or as the word signifies,
to crush the print of the foot-sole, that is, he denies unto himself that
headship, power, and authority that is peculiar and proper to the Son of God,
whose Kingdom and power is not of this world John 18. 36.
, and in denying that, he denies all the grace of the Son of God; for no man
can any more receive or apply that righteousness of God in Christ, by faith to
his justification, then he can attribute and apply the power, and authority of
God unto himself, for his headship and domination, and so he crusheth the
print of his foot-sole, that is to say, he brings to naught that thing that at
the first had the very print, image, and character of the Son of God upon it,
for his heart confesses, and his words and actions declare it, that the
Lordship and dominion of the Son of God is another thing, then for the present
he is conversant in and about, and this negation or denial of the headship of
Christ, sets him in direct opposition against Christ, seeking by all means to
exalt himself in the power and ways of the flesh, which is according to the
letter that kills 2 Cor. 3. 6.
, written in all men's hearts which is the very print of the foot-sole of
Christ, declaring the extent and depth of his humiliation, the form whereof
Satan crusheth, and brings to naught in himself, by deminishing of it in
himself, making it of less extent then indeed it is, and so makes the
headship of Christ of no other use unto himself, but to give dimension unto
his sin, which kindles wrath in himself for ever Romans 2. 4, 5, 6. Gal. 4. 24.
; for he that confesses himself to be really and indeed that only bottomless
gulf of Christ his humiliation, cannot but acknowledge Christ to be really and
indeed that only and alone height of his exaltation, and therefore it is, that
Christ crusheth the Serpents head, that is, extends the flesh unto its height
and headship which cannot rest, unless by eating it may be like God Genesis 3. 6.
, which disposition or condition Christ takes into unity with himself in us,
which is the very depth and state of his humiliation, and hereby destroys it,
which act is his great victory and exaltation for ever Acts 8. 33
, making it to be of no other use, but merely to give dimension unto his
exaltation and glory for ever, that it may appear unto the creature of what
eminency, height, and dignity it is, which otherwise could not appear.

But some will say, what though things be thus in Jesus Christ, which we
willingly acknowledge, yet what is that to me for my present comfort and
peace? how may I know that these things belong to my self? Thou fool 1 Cor.
15. 36.
; can thou give Christ a true form and being in man's nature, and yet there
is but one nature of man, which thou have and art, ( for by nature we are all
alike Ephesians. 2. 3 Romans 3. 10. 11. 12.
) and yet can not give him a form in thy self? it is impossible so to be:
So that, the forming of Christ without us, being in our selves destitute of his
life, love, spirit, and power, is merely imaginary, historical, traditionall,
and and that will vanish in time of need; and not real, according to the
dictate of the spirit, in the power of faith, through which the Saints are kept
unto, or in salvation 1 Pet. 1. 5.
, for he has a name given unto him that none can know but himself Rev. 19.
12.
; and to affirm that we are able to give Christ a true form and being, out of
our selves doctrinally, and yet that he is not in our selves, operating and
working effectually, is as much as to affirm, we can give Christ a true form
and being without man's nature, which the word of God knows not, nor ever did;
for he is that only and alone way unto the Father John 14. 6.
, yea he had never the relation of a Son unto the Father, but through death;
for if ever he had closed with the Father in any other way, he had never tasted
death for us Heb. 2. 9.
, for the Lord our righteousness cannot change Ier. 23. 6. Mal. 3. 6.
in any thing, then not in his relation unto the Father; so that it was ever
through death, and he never had death but in us, which once granted, is the
very inlet of life unto us for ever. Nay to conclude, we give Christ a true
form and being as he was framed in our nature in the womb of the Virgin Luke
1. 35
, and yet are destitute of his being framed and fashioned in our hearts and
conversations Gal. 4. 19.
by faith, to our comfort in the edification of others, is all one, as if a man
should affirm himself to be able to frame a place for the safety of a man in a
rock impregnable, and yet himself could not be in safety thereby; for Christ
is that rock of ages Deuteronomy. 32. 18. 31.
: where ever faith gives him his true proportion: further, to give Christ his
true form without us, and yet to be without the comfort and fruit of his
dwelling, and being resident in us by his grace (and that apparently) is as if
a man should affirm, that the eye is of use, and only sees for it self, but
not for the body in which it is, nor is of that use, as to be the light of it
Mat. 6. 22 Luke 11. 34
, for the eyes sees properly for the body, rather then for it self; for, If
the eye be single, the whole body is light; yea the hand sees to work, and the
foot to walk, as apparently, as if such a member were the eye it self, because
it is in the body. Now Christ is that eye, and that fountain of life and
light; and in his light only it is that we see light Psalm. 36. 9
: even as in this natural Sun, we cannot see it but by its own light, and if
we see it so, we cannot but see it for, and upon our selves; so that if we see
Christ in any respect, in his own light, we cannot but see him for our own
consolation, (even in that respect, whatever it may be) yea and that in, and
upon our selves; for the eye sees not, nor has that life and sense of sight,
but as it has confluence with the body; even so, our Lord never manifested
that life and spirit of his, which is the light and revelation of himself, but
as he has confluence with that body given unto him, or ear bored thorough
Psalm. 40. 6 Heb. 10. 5.
, by which he lives through death, and becomes light out of darkness, which
none but the Son of God himself can either be, or perform: and thence it
is, that darkness covering the face of the deep, in that great morning and
early day in the beginning of the world Genesis 1. 2. Job 38. 4. to 15.
teaches us what it is; for the Spirit of God to brood upon those vast waters
of our nature, being in our selves no less then that deep mystery of iniquity;
so that, as that word of command at the first, brought out light even out of
that darkness, saying, Let there be light, and it was so, or rather by that
oath of interposition (which is taught therein, even from the beginning) which
gives light in our Lord for ever; for the word translated [ let] signifies so
be it, or so it is, or shall be, or amon, or verily it is so, having in it the
virtue of an oath, binding over the creature, in the virtue and power of the
word of God, to be obedient and subject thereunto for ever; even so that
spirit, that gives life by Jesus Christ, broods upon our nature, which in it
self is corruptible (and in the depth of death through our fall) brooding
therein, and bringing forth that light of life that is by Jesus Christ 2 Cor.
4. 6 Ioh. 1. 4, 5
whereby we are given to understand how to judge of that unity, and of those
distinctions that are proper to that new creation of God, whereof Christ is the
beginning, or head Rev. 3. 14
, even as light gives ability to judge rightly of the form and figure of all
things in this present world; therefore the Apostle elegantly alludes unto that
first work in the creation of the world, in teaching of this doctrine, saying,
God who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has shined in our
hearts, the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus
Christ 2 Cor. 4. 6
: So that the confluence of darkness is the very production or propagation of
light, the Son of God becoming that in us, which according to our light, is
nothing but darkness, we become that in him that is nothing but light;
therefore the Apostle says, Ye were darkness (or as the word will bear, ye
are darkness) but ye are made light in the Lord, walk therefore as children
of light Ephesians. 5. 8.
. Yea this questioning, whether Christ be ours or no, at present, is nothing
else but that grand question propounded in the beginning, whether we have the
image of God (making us correspondent unto his will in all things) or no, but
must seek out some tree and fruit to make us wise, that we may attain it, yet
our Apostle affirms our Lord Jesus to be the image of God Col. 1. 15
, and that he was made so in our nature, yea in and for us Col. 3. 10. 2 Cor.
3. 18.
; therefore the question is the same that ever it was, and also the demurres
and debates about it, and how to attain it, are those proper reasonings of the
woman and the serpent even to this day Genesis 3. 1. 6 2 Cor. 11. 3
; as also the issues thereof are the same Genesis 3. 7, 8. Rev. 3. 17, 18.
and that is always the subject matter of his doctrine, the way of his
instruction and counsel, when the woman, the weaker vessel 1 Pet. 3. 7
, yea that wisdom of man, and not of God 1 Cor. 2. 4 5. 13. 2 Cor. 1. 12
holds dispute and discourse in point of religion, but when the manchild is
brought forth, so as the woman holds no dispute with the Serpent, no more then
a woman can hold dispute with any whether her travel be near or no, but apply
her self to the present work, in the height and greatest pang of her labor
Rev. 12. 2.
, then that instructing and teaching (though shie and subtle serpent 2 Cor.
11. 3.
) becomes a fierce, bloody, red persecuting Dragon Rev. 12. 3, 4.
to her and her seed wheresover they go Rev. 12. 17.
; and so his doctrine is changed into discipline, seeking by that means to
regulate and make perfect the world: see this point for the conclusion of it,
in the similitude of the operation of the mind of a wife to her husband that
is faithful and true unto him, and also of one that has broken the marriage
bond; in case we conceive, we think we conceive and esteem highly of Christ,
but question whether his dignity and excellency be ours yea or no; for, a
faithful wife, hearing the praises of her husband, and his prowess and
virtues set forth, she rejoices, and it pleases her better, then if she were
commended her self, because his praises are hers, which in her self could not
possibly be so eminent, she being the weaker vessel, as also true love ever
gives honor unto the party beloved, and not to it self, which shows that
matrimonial and conjugall tie and bond to be upon her; even so it is in the
spouse, in every particular believing soul, when Christ is praised in the
Church, set forth and commended to be the chiefest of ten thousand Cant. 5. 10
, that only and alone interpreter, that declares unto man his righteousnese
Job 33. 23
, that King of Saints Deu. 3. 2
, Prince of peace Heb. 7. 2.
, Bishop of our souls 1 Pet, 2. 25
, that joy of the Lord, or that joy the Lord, (as the word is Neh. 2. 10
) which is our strength, that beloved and delighted in of the father Pro. 8.
30, 31.
, that Lord our righteousness Ier. 23. 6.
, that captain and high Priest of our profession Heb. 3. 1.
, yea the Lord hosts or armies Psalm. 46. 7 11.
. When these things are given and ascribed unto the Son of God alone, in the
Church, and unto none else whatsoever, then does the heart of the Spouse
delight it self in him, and it is more quickening and reviving to her, the (if
it had been possible) these things might have been ascribed and attributed unto
her self; for the very nature of this contract, faith, or conjugall love is
such, that if John Baptist be but yet in the womb of Elizabeth, an alliance or
consin unto the Virgin, he cannot but spring in the womb at the voice of the
mother of our Lord Luke 1. 41. 44,
, speaking in commendation of that Son of God conceived in her womb; yea this
conjugall love takes not delight but in the praises of the party beloved Can.
4. Can. 5. 10. 16.
, so that it is only the work of the Spouse to set forth the practices of
Christ in her own weakness, imbecility, and submission unto him in all
things, and it is that part and work that the Son of God has taken upon
himself to give testimony of his own glory, works and operations of himself
in her, in all the ways wherein he leads her Isa. 43. 1, 2, 3.
, therefore it is, that our Lord affirms, they that honor me, I will honor
them 1 Samuel 2. 30.
: but the hearts of such as have broke the Covenant of God Pro. 2. 16, 17.
and the faith of Marriage; whatever may be said of her husband it does her no
good, unless some commendation be given to her self, or to her harlot: thence
it is, that the titles, offices, virtues and operations, that are in Jesus
Christ are nothing unto us according to our own natural and carnal thoughts,
unless we can have them of our own creation, forming, fashioning, pollishing,
and setting up in our selves, and others besides himself, and when we have
adulterated, and given that to another which is peculiar unto himself alone,
then we can delight in, and make merry with them, and never think too much of
their praises, as the spirit of every Adultresse does, which was the ground of
apostatizing Israel of old, his dancing about the calfe when it was of that
form which the Leviticall Priest had set upon it Exodus 32. 4, 5, 6.
, who was of that order of Aaron Heb. 7. 11.
, and not of this order of our Melchizedeck Heb. 5. 10.
, who is only instaled by this oath of interpossition, and never Ministers but
by virtue of it Heb. 7. 21, 22, 23, 24.
, which does infallibly and undeniably (according to the grounds of faith)
bind God and man together through Christ, in whomsoever it speaks according to
the testimony thereof, or else no judgment is passed in the house of God,
according to the mystery of godliness, and thus much for the present, in way
of explanation of the oath of interposition: the next thing noted in the Text,
is the unchangeable nature of his oath of interposition, laid down in these
words:

And will not repent.
That is to say, for he cannot swear by a greater, therefore he swears by
himself Heb. 6. 13 14. 15.
, it is true also, and shall never change, that it is never ministered but in
diverse, and therefore it is an Oath of Confirmation Heb. 6. 16
, which implies that to be within the bounds of it, which by nature (in it
self) is not sure and settled Heb. 6. 17
, as also it is an end of all strife Heb. 6. 16.
, which cannot be but with respect to more then one, so that it, is one in
subsistence in respect of the being of it, and it is also diverse in the
composition or natures found therein in the administration of it, so that
whereas he is God, it is not without being made man, and if he be Spirit 2 Cor.
3. 17.
, it is not without his being made flesh John 1. 14
, if he be heavenly, it is not without his becoming earthly 1 Cor. 15 49.
, if he be immortal, it is not without his being made mortal 1 Cor. 15. 43,
44.
, if he be strength, it is not without his becoming weakness 1 Cor. 1. 25.
, if he be life John 1. 4.
, it is not without death Rev. 13. 8.
, so that it is ever one in respect of subsistence, and of this he he never
repents, or turns from it, and he is diverse in respect of Administration, for
if he set forth his Kingly Authority, we are all submissive and objedient
Subjects; if he appear as a Lord, we are all as servants, if as a Priest, we
all bring unto him that which is sacrificed and slain, if as a Shepherd, we
all hear his voice as a floke John 10. 3, 4, 5.
, if as a Prophet, we all are found sitting in silence to learn Psalm. 65. 1
, if as a Lawgiver, we meekly sit at his feet to receive the word at his mouth
Deu. 33. 3
, if as one that hears prayers, then all flesh comes unto him Psalm. 65. 2
for we bring unto him nothing but our own infirmities and weaknesses, and this
(being diverse) in the Administration of this Priesthood he never changes,
repents, nor in the least turns form it, in any age, in any person, or in any
manner of thing that concerns it Heb. 7. 24 25.
, whatever he may by any, or in any age take up and use for the conveyance of
the knowledge and faith of this unto our souls, by acting in, or alluding unto
things obvious, and apt to take hold of these outward senses of ours, and
whosoever takes upon him to Minister unto the flock of God Act. 20. 28
, as another person, thing, office, calling or estate, then is freely given
unto, or put upon every one of the Saints by Jesus Christ, he never ministers
by virtue of this unrepentant Oath that abides for ever, but intrudes himself
into that which is proper and peculiar to the Son of God alone, according to
that usurping spirit and power of Antichrist 2 These. 2. 4.
, in what place or age soever he ministers Ioh. 38. 45
, nor can he propose himself unto God in his private studies as a learner of
him, or in his prayers as one in absolute want and necessity, to be only
supplied by him, or in any of his deliverances, as weak and frail in himself
to give the glory to God alone further the in all his Administrations in the
house of God, he can reckon and account of himself, the very same in all
respects with any of the flock of God, without which he cannto give the Son of
God his due respect and glory, and as it is in the breach of the Law, he that
transgresses in one breaks all Iam. 2. 10
, so is it in this point of glory, if we detain it in one point, we detain it
in all: from this ground it is, that our Apostle affirms, that he is all
things in all men, for so the word is rightly rendered 1 Cor. 9. 22.
, that by all means or in all ways I might propose salvation, so as to take
hold of one or other in every thing delivered, and this (says he) I do for the
Gospells sake, that I might partake of it together with you 1 Cor. 9. 23.
; so as that whatever you are, or have, I am and have the same with you, and
whatever I have or am, you are and have the like; for they that run in a race
run all, but one only receives the price 1 Cor. 9. 24.
: so that we are all runners alike in our selves, by nature infinitely short of
that gone, but one only has the glory of winning the gole, and that is Christ
alone, and deserves and has obtained like praise in all the Saints that he
has in any one and like in any one, that he has done in all Ephesians. 1. 22, 23.
Ephesians. 4. 14, 15.
, therefore says, the Apostle, so fight I, not as one beating the air 1 Cor.
9. 26.
, as though I struck at things upon uncertainties, as though I knew not that it
is so with you as it is, as absolutely as I know what is in my self: But says
he, I beat down (not another) but my body 1 Cor. 9. 27.
, intimating, that whatever he touched in them, he touched also in himself, inso
much as by nature he was the same, least says he, whilst I preach to others,
I my self should be a reprobate 1 Cor. 9. 27.
, that is, rejected from, or excluded out of that grace which is propounded
unto you, which I must necessarily be in some thing, and then in all things, if
I be not the same with you, and you with me in all things that concern the
grace of the Gospel; such is that body which the Saints or Ministers of Christ
do beat down, which gives to every one the same image and form by nature
that it gives to any one, namely, that body of sin and of death which our
Apostle complains of Romans 7. 24.
, but in so complaining, sees it adorned with the glory and Lordship of Jesus
Christ Romans 7. 25
, for without this body of infirmity, the ornaments of the Son of God, could
never be put upon us, for if we were not sin by nature, there could be no
appearing of his righteousness 2 Cor. 5. 21.
, no more then a garment can be worn for ornament without a material body,
yea, if we were not folly in our selves 1 Cor. 3. 18. 19.
, no way could be for that fullness of the manifold wisdom of God, to be
exercised in us Ephesians. 3. 10.
, if we were not weakness, no appearance of his power upon us 2 Cor. 21. 10.
, if we were not sorrow in our selves, the joys of salvation could not find
place in our hearts, it we were not shame by nature, his glory and honor could
not be lifted up and advanced in us Isa. 61. 2.
, if we were not death, no place for the life of the Son of God to make it
self manifest 2 Cor. 6. 9, 10.
, so that if any deny himself, any of those infirmities which man's nature is
by sin subjected unto, he denies unto himself likewise, that long and
beautiful white robe which is put upon all the Saints by Jesus Christ Rev. 7.
9, 10, 13, 14.
, and if we deny unto any of the Saints any office, excellency, or dignity in
the house of God, that others are sharers of, and exercised in, then do we also
deny unto such that complete body of infirmities, that all by nature are
wrapped up in Ephesians. 2. 3.
, which is the very way of putting on all the precious ornaments and exercises
of the Lord Jesus Romans 13. 14.
, therefore it is, that in the dissolution of this earthly Tabernacle, we have
a building not made with hands, but eternal in or of the heavens 2 Cor. 5. 1
, nor do we desire to be unclothed, but clothed upon, that mortality may be
swallowed up of life: that is, we do not desire our weaknesses and infirmities
to be so anihilated as not to be, for then there were no body whereupon the
heavenly ornaments are to be put, out we desire to be so clothed upon, that
nothing but the truth, power, holiness, life and glory of the Kingdom of
heaven may appear upon us, which is the swallowing up, devouring, or
destruction of mortality by life 2 Cor. 5. 4
, of such nature is the ministration, that is unrepentant, being exercised
according the office of our high Priest, entered within the veil, yea into very
heaven it self Heb. 9. 24 Heb. 6. 20.
, which is after the order of Melchizedeck, and all other ways of Priesthood
and Ministration will find a time of repentance and change, being only after
the order of Aaron Heb. 7. 11.
, making difference in the creature of the dignity and office of the Son of God
in the Church, and so indeed speaks evil of dignities, or deny and vilify
the one dignity that is not found but in the Son of God alone Jude 8.
, which is only made manifest and multiplied in our nature 1 Pet. 1. 1, 2.
, which being lessened, or vilified in any one is so in all, for his seamlesse
coat admits of no division, but according to lot, or proper and peculiar
inheritance, goes whole and entire, without the least fraction, to whomsoever
it falls Psalm. 22. 18 John 19. 24.
; and hence it comes to pass, that the Lord can never repent of, change or
alter this Priesthood and Ministry, because his whole mind and will is fully
completed and perfected, for ever in his Son, in whom or in what point soever
this oath, office or Ministry appears Mat. 3. 16, 17. John 17 18 2 Cor. 3 1,
2 3, 4, 5, 6.
, for the Son holds correspondency with the Father in all things Ioh. 17. 21
22, 23.
, insomuch that the Father may as well repent or change from being that which
he is, as to repent of, or change this Oath and Ministry, therefore our
Savior says unto Philip, I and my Father are one John 14. 9, 10.
, which this oath of interposition only comprizeth, who are never without the
product and bringing forth of the spirit 1 Ioh. 5. 7.
: But to conclude this point, when it is said, that God repents Genesis 6. 6.
, we are to understand, that he who by nature according to his creation, was
made in the Image, yea, was made the Son of God Lu. 3. 38
, insomuch that he that was the Son of God, Child of peace Luk, 10. 6
, and Heir and Inheriter of life Mut. 19. 29
, is now changed; yea that person that by creation was the Son of God Luke 3. 38
, is now become the son of perdition 2 These. 2. 3
, child of wrath Ephesians. 2. 3.
, and inheriter of death Romans 8 6.
, and thus turning from God, yea thus changing from righteousness unto sin
Eze. 18. 24.
, from life to death Romans 7. 9.
, from the image of God unto Satan Isa. 14. 12 13, 14.
, making himself the very wickedness and abomination of all the earth, as
those were in the days of Noah, in whom this point of Gods repenting is taught
and declared unto the world, which indeed is the wickedness and destruction of
that old world Genesis 6. 4, 5
. This repentance of change is really true, not only in change of action, but
of mind and will also, and is in all points ever to be repented of, in the way
of that son of perdition, even as it is also really true, in that way of
faith in the Son of God, that he was made of no reputation Phil. 2. 7.
, a curse Gal. 3. 13.
, sin 2 Cor. 5. 21
, death Ps. 22. 15.
, a man of sorrows Isa. 53. 3.
, a scorn Ps. 22. 6. 7
, a proverb Ps. 69. 11.
, a byword Ps. 44. 14.
, a hissing Lam. 2. 15, 16.
, putting out of the lip, a nodding of the head Psalm. 22. 7.
, an abject Psalm. 22. 6
, a derision and shame of the people Psalm. 119. 51.
, even he is changed or turned from that estate, into all the glory Ioh. 1 14
, righteousness 1 Cor. 1. 30
, wealth Col. 2. 3.
, peace Ephesians. 2. 14
, honor Heb. 7. 26
, and dignity of heaven John 1. 14
, yea the glory of the only begotten Son of God, full of grace and truth 2
Cor. 7. 10
, and this turning and change is also as absolute, real and true, and is that
change, or repentance never to be repented of; yea it is the very oath and
covenant that instals into this office and Priesthood, which can never be
altered, changed, or turned from; and therefore the form of this oath is
uttered in these words,

Thou art a Priest for ever.
Wherein are two things considerable: Thou art a Priest: Secondly, the
continuation, or duration of it, that is, for ever. In the first, note the
peculiarity of the phrase, Thou art a Priest, which is as peculiar as this, the
only begotten of the Father John 1. 14.
, the firstborn Romans 8. 29
, the heir of all things Col. 1. 18. Heb. 1. 2.
, or the like; and therefore can be given unto none but unto the Son of God
alone. Again, note the universality of it also; for it has a like scope and
universality in it, that such phrases have, as these, viz. Thou shall have none
other Gods before me, Thou shall not make a graven image, Thou shall not take
the name of God in vain Exodus 20, 3. to 17.
, and the like; which phrase implies every one that will worship God aright: so
is it here in this phrase, Thou art a Priest, for it is peculiar, and proper
only to Christ alone, and can be given to no other, no more then the keeping
of every Law of God can be given to any but him alone: it is also common, and
universally to be given to him, in whomsoever the faith of the Son of God is
found, without any restriction, exception or limitation, more then the
Commandment has, to take hold of all that will be true worshippers, wherein
we may admit of none at all, upon pain of prevarication of the Law of God: so
that the whole office of Priesthood ( that is not according to the carnal
Comamndement, but according to the power of an endless life Heb. 7. 16
) depends solely upon the faith of the Son of God: And as none can take this
Office upon himself, but he that is called of God, as Aaron Heb. 5. 4.
, even so none can reject, nor put this office from himself, that has the
faith, subsistence, or calling of the Son of God, wherein he himself
commerceth, or is of the same calling, which is 2 Timothy 1. 9 Heb. 3. 1.
ever found in whomsoever Jesus is found as a Savior; therefore the Apostle by
an holy and trim allusion unto David (noting thereby our spiritual David in
his loins,) declares what the proper ground of the Ministry of the Gospel
is, and how the son of man, subject to death, infirmities and sore troubles
(as David was) comes to make manifest that word of life, and mind of the
Father of eternity, which is only by faith or subsistence in the word of God,
whereby that which is temporary, makes known the mind and will of Eternity;
and therefore he says, as it is written 2 Cor. 4. 13.
, He believed, and therefore he spoke; that is, as it is translated, for so
much the word, written signifies, to translate a thing from one to another,
that is, Eternity is translated, and made over unto that which is temporary and
that which is temporary is translated and made over unto that which is
eternal, so as the Son of Man believed, or had his being or subsistence in the
word of God, by virtue whereof he spoke in such sort as being truly temporary,
and in time, yet did he publish and make known the mind of eternity unto the
world, which is before and after all time, whereupon our Apostle gathers and
concludes assuming the same prerogative and privilege unto himself, and the
rest of the Apostles or Leaders of Christ in his members, we also believe,
speaking in the plural number, and therefore we speak, so that the
singularity and also plurality that is in the faith of the Son of God, is one
and the same in whomsoever it is Jude 3. Ephesians. 4 5, 6.
, and therefore must necessarily work into the same office, operation, dignity
and revelation of the same Son of God Heb. 13. 8.
, for we must either have the office, operation, dignity, and revellation of
that which is in Christ Jesus the Son of God, or else we cannot be subjects,
and injoyers of the Kingdom, blessedness, and happiness of God, no more then
he could undergo the curse without taking unto himself, and being possessed of
all that evil and misery that naturally is in us, in which act of taking our
evils he overcomes and destroys for ever, what naturally is in us, and in our
being possessed of his blessedness, we deny our selves and live unto
whatsoever is in him, so that there is one thing overcome in this Priesthood,
that is our selves, and one thing revived and lived unto, which is God, which
must of necessity be effected wherever Christ appears, and therefore the
Priesthood is the same in every particular, (that it is in any one) that is of
the faith of Jesus, in whom he makes himself manifest; and so much for the
peculiarity and generality of this office, noted in that phrase, Thou art a
Priest: The second is the duration and continuation of it, noted in these
words, a Priest for ever, or a sacrificer for ages, generations, as the words
will bear, noting in the word the nature of his office, that is, to sacrifice
and slay the flesh in all the lusts and affections thereof Gal. 5. 24.
, that so the Spirit may be saved in that day of the Lord Jesus 1 Cor. 5. 5
, namely, that that spiritual frame and fabric of the house of God may be
preserved, and maintained not after the lusts of men, but according to the good
will of God 1 Pet. 4. 1, 2.
, and this is upon oath to endure for ever, or in all ages and generations, for
this manner of Sacrifice and Priesthood has ever had the pre-eminence in the
house of God, and amongst the Sons of God, in whomsoever have been of the race
and generation, age or pilgrimage, of that beloved of the Father in this world
through faith in his blood Psalm. 24. the whole Psalm.
, and therefore it is, that he brings in the orderly course and disposition of
it to be according to the order of Melchizedeck noted in these words:

After the order of Melchizedeck.
Which words are taken out of the book of Genesis Genesis 14. 18
, Abraham, which our Prophet applies to his own times, prophesying also of the
days of Jesus Christ, living upon the earth in the days of Herod, and Pontius
Pilate; and the Apostle unto the Hebrews Heb. 7.
Comments both upon the History in Genesis, and upon the Prophecy in this
Psalm, applying all to live, and to be extant in his own days, times and
Ministry, describing and setting out the true Ministry of Christ, from the
condition or manner of his Person or being, which he says, is without father,
without mother, and without descent, having neither beginning of days, nor end
of life, but made like unto the Son of God, abides a Priest for ever, or
continually, so that according to the times, ages, and generations that the Son
of God abides or remains, whether past, present, or to come, of such duration
has this Priesthood been, and ever shall, for never was, nor shall be any other
acceptable unto the Father, whatever men according to their own natural
reason and wisdom of the flesh, seem to think, and embolden themselves in, to
speak of the changes and alterations of it, which God himself by our Apostle
affirms as well as by this Prophet to be perpetual, or without any
intermission at all, (as the word signifies) so that such as the person or
being of Christ is, such also is his Office and Ministry; but the Person or
being of Christ ( our Melchizedek) is without father and mother, so also is his
office and Ministry: now the person or subsistence of Christ, is without
father, (on this wise) for the holy and pure God never begot or produced any
thing of the flesh, which the Word was made Ioh. 1. 14
, and took it into unity with it solfe, without which Christ is not, that is,
the father never produced or propagated any weakness, infirmity, or frailty
which is properly that flesh that the word took into unity, for he bare our
sins, and carried our sorrows Isa. 53. 4.
, and was made subject to our frailties and infirmities which are not without,
but in these material souls and bodies of ours Mat. 26 38 Luke 24. 39 40.
Psalm. 22. 16
, which heartsores, sicknesses, and sorrows Mat. 8. 17
, God could never produce, who is the fountain of life Psalm. 36. 9 Jer. 2. 13.
, no more then a pure fountain can send out unclean and corrupt waters Iam.
11. 12.
; therefore as he sustained our infirmities and weaknesses, he was without
father; for he was never produced, propagated, or generated after the flesh,
nor received the least spirit or livelihood according to the flesh, but
altogether according to the spirit, For he was borne not of blood, nor of the
flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God John 3 6. John 1. 13. John 1. 14.
: and therefore in regard of the flesh, which indeed he became, he was without
father; for he never lived after it, nor was begotten nor brought forth
according to the lusts and desires thereof. Now such as he is, such also is his
Office and Ministry; for any thing that may receive form and being,
preservation and continuation amongst men, by study, art, humane learning,
tradition, or the like, it can be nothing of this Office and Ministry, it is
a higher seed, or generative virtue, that must produce and bring it forth Iam.
1. 18
, or else no Office nor Ministry of our high Priest at all Luke 1. 35
. He is also without mother, for he was made flesh, and yet that which he truly
was, never did nor eve can conceive, cherish, or bring forth the Son of the
living God; For, the flesh, or the natural man, conceives not the things that
are of God, for they are spiritually to be conceived, discerneall and brought
forth 1 Cor. 2. 14
, which the flesh is not, neither can it do it; so that the word of God
ministers nothing, in the being or subsistence of Christ, to add any thing
unto the flesh, or unto that weakness which he took upon him; for then
weakness should naturally flow out of strength, as out of its proper fountain,
which it cannot do; nor does the flesh minister any thing unto the Word of God,
in this bringing forth of Christ, in the conception or cherishing thereof, for
then should it be a fountain and cause of that, which is the fountain and
cause of all things: God then in the begetting of his Son adds nothing at all
in ministering unto the flesh, nor the Spouse in conceiving of Christ adds
nothing in ministering unto the spirit, nor in the diminution or annihilating of
the flesh; so that the great skill of the work is, to bring forth the one and
the other, in direct opposition in all points, and that is the true form of
that infinite and eternal Son of God, which can never be done, but by the
light of the Spirit: for nature cannot conceive the Creator to be at an
infinite distance and disproportion with his own work, nor can this be seen,
but the unity of them both is concluded; for the condition of the one, having
lost the image of God, is of infinite emptiness and vastness, because the
loss is of an infinite nature and value, and that royal perfection of the
other (that ever abides the same, and knows how to bring gain and profit out of
all things 1 Timothy 6. 6
) is of infinite fullness and validity, so that these two become the very
proper centers, receptacles, dwelling, and abiding places of one another for
ever John 17. 21, 23.
, which is the swallowing up of mortality by life 2 Cor. 5. 4
, and that victory of faith that overcomes the world 1 Ioh. 5. 4
, and that wherein death is swallowed up for ever 1 Cor. 15 54. 55, 56, 57.
, and of such nature is the office and ministry of Christ in the house of God,
otherwise it is not of the nature of this Priesthood, that is after the order
of Melchizedek; for Christ and his Priesthood, Christ and his Ministry, Christ
and his worship, and Christ and his Gospel are of such near affinity and
alliance, that if we take away the one, the other cease, and therefore it is
said, that he is without descent also, so Heb. 7. 3.
, or without pedigree, kindred, stock or race, because one can describe a
Priest, Office or Ministry of the Gospel, but it is properly a description of
Christ himself, nor can any describe or delineate Christ Jesus, but in so
doing he describes the Priesthood, Office, and Ministry of the Gospel, they
being inseparably involved each in another, therefore the Apostle describing
the grace or Ministry of the Gospel, says, It is Christ in you, the hope of
glory Col. 1. 27.
; so that we cannot describe another of the same kin, stock, or pedigree, but
we describe the same grace in case we speak according to the faith of Gods
Elect Titus 1. 1.
, therefore he is without stock or kindred, in regard it is not any other but
one and the same that is ever, even in all ages set forth and proposed unto the
world, therefore the word translated pedigree, or kindred, signifies as well
the begetting of an Ancestor or Predecessor, as the begetting or bringing forth
of a Successor, for Christ is brought forth in us (that are but of yesterdaies
continuance Job 8. 9. Psalm. 90. 4.
) in respect of his infirmity and frailty, and we are brought forth in him that
is that great Ancestor from all eternity Dan. 7. 9 13. 22.
, in respect of his wisdom, goodness, power, and glory, therefore it is, that
Abraham that great Ancestor and Father of the faithful Romans 4. 11
, in whom the very top or head of the generation of that Son of God takes its
beginning Mat. 1. 12.
, yet this Father Abraham who had the Promises or Covenant Genesis 12. Romans 9. 4.
5.
, as being the head and fountain of it, yet even he himself paid Tithes unto
this Melchizedek Heb. 7. 9.
, and was blessed of him, and without all contradiction the less is blessed of
the greater Heb. 7. 6, 7.
, so that in our Father Ahraham Acts 7. 2.
, or in our everlasting Father Isa. 9. 6.
, Jesus Christ, preached unto us in him, is considered both this Predecessor
and Successor, yea he that is the lesser or the least, and also the greatest,
of yesterday, and also of eternity, even that beginning and ending, that first
and last Rev. 22. 13.
, declared unto us in holy Scripture, and besides him there is none; so of no
kindred, lineage, or descent, therefore this office and Ministry is far
greater then the Leviticall Priesthood which is by Levi, who in the loins of
Abraham paid tithes himself, that is, any Priest or Priesthood that is after
the carnal commandment, and not after the power of an endless life Heb. 7.
16.
, or such Priests as are taken away by death Heb. 7. 23
, and such Ministries unto which a period must be put, and an end of it come
Heb. 7. 16
: these are not that Ministry or Ministers, according to this order, and
therefore in such the grace of our Lord Jesus is not advanced nor set up, for
he can in no wise be reckoned up, nor accounted among those kind of Priests who
received tithes of him that is the father of them Heb. 7. 6.
; nor can he be reckoned up or accounted without his Office and Ministry,
therefore cannot be of their kin and pedigree, neither in the one, nor in the
other; therefore their Office and Ministry must also be reckoned up, and
accounted to be of another kind and stock, then he and his Ministry is, and
therefore must needs be barren, empty, destitute, and altogether void of him,
who abides a Priest for ever Heb. 7. 24.
; so that a Priest and a Ministry that will end both in the one, and in the
other; yea a Priest and a Ministry that one may have a being without the use
and exercise of the other, is not after the manner, nor according to the order
of this our Melchizedek, but after the manner of man, and according to his art,
skill, device and invention, which the wisdom of the Son of God permits not,
nor approves of; neither can it be had in account, reckoning, genealogy,
kindred, stock, pedigree; or in the least to be according to the descent, or
proceed of it; but contrarily, as it is of man, so does it tend unto man;
breeding, or rather bringing forth mere humane principles, tending to the
crucifying of the Son of God 1 Cor. 2. 6 7, 8, 9.
, even as that Jewish Priesthood ever did Psalm. 2. 1, 2, 3. Mat. 26. 3, 4. John
12. 9, 10, 11.
, yea all Ministeries being of that kind in the root, bear the same fruit
unto this day; nor can they do otherwise, For men cannot gather grapes of
thorns, nor figgs of thistles 1 Mat. 7. 16
, therefore is the Ministry of Christ further distinguished from them all,
being the Priest, as also the Office are such, who neither have beginning of
days, nor end of life; he has no beginning of days, that is, though the word
was made flesh, yet he never began, nor proposed a platform unto himself, to
live, or give light unto the world after the flesh, although the Son of God was
made the Son of man, yet did, he never breath as to live after the will of
man, for if that had in the least been, then had the Prince of this world found
something in him Ioh. 14. 30
, whereupon to fasten and kindle his temptations, which is impossible to be
found in the Son of God 1 Pet. 1. 19
: therefore is he truly said to be without beginning of days, because however
he was a man, yet did never live for a moment after the will and natural
desires of man Luke 22. 42. Ioh. 1. 13.
, who always lives unto himself, but always lived according to the will and
good pleasure of his Father Mat. 26. 34. 42. Mat. 6. 10.
, giving up himself wholly for the good of others Ioh. 17. 19 Ioh. 10. 15. 17.
: and of such nature is his Office and Ministry, that however it is exercised
in and by men, yet has it not the least form, Embrion, or beginning according
to man Ps. 139. 15, 16.
, that can come within the skill, art, or comprehension of any natural man in
the world Isa. 64. 4. 1 Cor. 2. 9.
: therefore is it, that he says by the Prophet David, when I was formlesse,
that is, void of form in the natural understanding of all men Ps. 139. 16.
, (like unto that Chaos in the beginning Genesis 1. 2.
, although all that treasury and curious workmanship of heaven and earth were
in it) yet says he, thine eye did see me Ps. 139. 16.
, that is, the light of the Spirit ever gives a form and being unto our Lord,
and spiritual David Ezekiel. 34. 23.
in the Church: therefore says he, In thy register were all my members
written, which were fashioned after the manner of curious needle-worke, or
embroyderie (as the word signifies Ps. 45. 14
) whilst as yet there was none of them: that is, none of them according to the
flesh, or in such sort as the natural art or understanding of man can give any
form or being unto them at all. And hence arise all those contentions that are
about Christ in the world: for he is not in the least to be found, living, or
giving light unto men for a day, no not for one moment, according to the flesh.
And hence it is, that all are in contention in giving several forms and
figures for his production and bringing forth in the world: nor can any think
or imagine, that any power and glory of his can greatly appear in the Church,
according to the apprehension of these contentious spirits, either till an
ancient People called Jews, be raised up, and revived again, whose parts they
are playing, as those did to Christ, whilst they so eagerly look after them,
as the Jews looked after him, or else that Christ must come, and live and
reign on the earth for a thousand years, in that person borne of the Virgin
Mary; so that as they have given him an earthly and humane form, so also they
are looking for an earthly and carnal kingdom, or else they look for the glory
only in that last day of judgment, not knowing nor discerning in themselves,
how the Prince of this world is judged already Ioh. 14. 30
. Out of these distinctions of times and Peoples in the worship of God (whilst
God respects no place Ioh. 4. 19. to 24.
, time Gal. 4. 9, 10, 11.
, nor person Act. 10. 34, 35.
) and out of these several forms and prescriptions, of the manner of Gods
worship, the men of the world make it too too manifest, what manner of Gods
they worship: for, having carnallized the Son of God unto themselves, they
look after, and greatly contend for earthly and carnal forms and
administrations in their worship; as for change of peoples and times, to
perfect it and to bring it forth, even as though Israel of old should never
have looked for familiarity with their God, his great wisdom, noble acts of
power and glory to have appeared, and been made manifest amongst them, until
such time as there was a literal and historical calling of the Nations, as
also the incarnation of the Son of God in that womb of the Virgin Mary;
which had been all one, as to deny their own salvation, until such times as
such things appeared, as those did that knew not the presence and power of them
Act. 3. 13, 14. 1 Cor. 10. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Psa. 78. 29, 30, 31.
, and is most evident in all ages, that those that stand upon forms, persons,
times, and places, ever do 2 Timothy 3. 5.
: therefore when the Apostle saw that inscription written upon the Altar at
Athens, he beheld their devotion, or as the word is Act. 17. 22, 23.
, he knew the Gods which they served, insomuch that outward rites, forms, and
figures, and carnal ordinances described and brought in, which may be
comprehended within the mind of, and practiced by a carnal and natural man,
ever declare, that such ignorantly serve and worship a God whom they know not,
whom they have carnallized unto themselves, in all the ways and manner of his
Worship, and so are ever learning, but never able to come to the knowledge of
the truth 2 Timothy 3. 5, 6, 7.
; but as this order of Priesthood is without beginning of days, so is it also
without end of life, that is, as Christ lives being a man, yet never lived
according to the mind and will of man, but according to the will of God, so
he also dies being true God, but never dies unto the Spirit and Life of God,
but only dies unto that which is the proper Spirit and reasoning of that which
is merely carnal and humane in man 1 Pet. 3. 18. Ephesians. 2. 15, 16.
, which naturally is man's only life, Christ dies then (being the Son of God
John 3. 16 1 Cor. 2. 8.
) in that he becomes, that which is death it self, having no life of God in it
at all Ephesians. 2. 1.
, yet it is as impossible that the life of the Son of God should be extinct for
a moment, as it is for God to cease to be, who gives being unto all things
John 1. 1, 2, 3. Acts 17. 27, 28.
, therefore must of necessity be without end of life: So Christ lives being a
man, but as impossible to live after the will of man, or desires of the flesh,
as it is that one only Son of God should have two subsistences or beings Deuteronomy.
6. 4. Gal. 3. 20. 1 Timothy 2. 5.
, or that one fountain should send forth both sweet water and bitter James 3.
11, 12.
; or that the Son of God should admit of such an emptiness in himself, as that
something besides himself must fill up and replenish: so that the death of the
Son of God is properly in man, (but yet accorcording to that interchangeable
Covenant, mutual act and intercourse of the operation of faith) is translated
and transferred unto God, otherwise death and sin could never be overcome,
destroyed and swallowed up Hos. 13. 14 1 Cor. 15. 54, 55.
. The life also of the Son of mortal man is properly in God, but according to
that forenamed mutual act and operation of faith, is translated and transferred
even unto the Son of sorry man Col. 3. 3, 4 Phil. 3. 20, 21.
, otherwise could righteousness and peace never have gotten victory, nor the
creature have attained an everlasting life and being with its Creator John 4.
14. Romans 6. 22, 23. John 3. 36. John 6. 40.
: So that as he never has beginning, in respect of the works, ways, and
devices of the flesh, so also he never has end, in the operations and
Ordinances, according to the wisdom of the Spirit, in which the mystery of the
Gospel appears to be this, that the very act of destruction is the very act of
restoration by Jesus Christ; for the death and destruction of the Son of God,
according to the flesh in us, is our life and restoration in the Spirit
through him, and this mystery lying hid, the very name of the Cross of Christ
becomes a fear, a terror, a reproach and a stumbling stone unto all the
world, which comes to pass, by that being taught for the Cross of Christ, which
is nothing else properly, but the jealousies, suspicions, fears, and terrors
of Satan, concluding the Cross to be a hard, heavy, shameful and uncomfortable
thing, which is indeed the most glorious act or thing that ever was, or shall
be done, or brought forth by the Son of the eternal God to the glory of the
Father for ever: therefore the Apostle further describes him to be like the Son
of God Heb. 7. 3.
, or made like the Son of God, or reckoned unto, or made to be the Son of God.
Now as he is naturally the love and bosom of the Father, who is God, so he
cannot be said, to be made, or reckoned, or accounted unto such a state, or
thing, but in and by his cross, or taking our nature into unity with himself;
he is made to be such a one, of that which by nature is a son of sorrow, a
child of death, and so through the cross becomes triumphant over all
principalities and powers, and has made a show of them openly Col. 2. 14, 15.
, which otherwise could never have appeared, and so continues a Priest for
ever; and therefore the Psalmist gives him that regal power and authority that
pertains and belongs unto his Kingly Office also, laid down in these words:

5. Verse. The Lord at thy right hand shall wound (or strike through) Kings in
the day of his wrath.
The Kingly power to execute vengeance, without the defense, maintenance, and
protection of the Magistrate: and this place the Psalmist takes also, out of
the fourteenth of Genesis Genesis 14. 1.
, and here we must remember, that as there is a Kingly Priest, and a Priestly
King sitting at the right hand of each other in honor, (as in the beginning of
this Psalm) although in a diverse acceptance, so also there are Kings in the
plural number, that are subjected unto wrath, though in a diverse manner,
being the Objects or Subjects of it, which are to be wounded, or struck through
in the day thereof, as we see in that forenamed place in Genesis, for there is
Amraphel King of Shiner, which is Babylon, or that confusion, as the word
signifies, which is the proper seat or base of all wickedness Zech. 5. 9, 10,
11.
, and he is not without great Associates and Confederates Genesis 14. 1. 2 Rev.
12. 7.
; and there is also Bera King of Sodom, that pleasant plain, fruitful and
commodious in situation Genesis 13. 10
of all delights and pleasures, which naturally the mind of man is taken up
withal in this life, which is like the Garden of Eden, before it is destroyed
Ezekiel. 28. 13, 17, 18.
; and this King of Sodom is not without great allies and Confederates also,
and these make war one against another: sometimes one being servant and in
subjection, and sometimes the other, yea even to the captivating of Lot so near
an allie to Abraham Genesis 13. 8.
, and indeed are all against the father of the faithful, or that high Father,
as his name signifies, or Prince of many Nations, or Peoples, as also to that
good Melchizedek, Priest of the most high God, that King of Salem, or Prince of
peace Genesis 14. 18 Heb. 7. 1. 2.
, who rules in righteousness, and of his Kingdom there is no end Dan. 4. 3.
, who meets Abraham coming from the slaughter of the forenamed Kings,
refreshing him with bread and wine, and blesses him, unto whom Abraham gives
tithes of all that he possesses, showing themselves to be equal sharers in
the glory of the slaughter, and rescue now made Genesis 14. 18, 19, 20. Heb. 7. 1,
2.
, therefore Melchizedek refreshes, recovereth and renews Abraham's strength,
which was weakened and lost in the Battle, and blesses him with the blessing
or blessedness of the most high God Genesis 14. 18. 19.
, possessor of heaven and earth, yea with the same blessing wherewith God
himself is blessed: therefore says Melchizedek (as one that substaines the
person and office of them both) blessed Abraham and blessed God Genesis 14. 19, 20.
, teaching that the state and condition of twain are made one blessing, or
blessed condition in Christ; therefore as God has delivered into Abraham's
hand, so Abraham also gives Tithes of all that ever he possesses, namely the
tenth of every ten Genesis 14. 20. Heb. 7. 2.
, that is to say, all in all, and for ever is given unto the Lord Col. 3. 11.
, for so the word ten is taken in Scripture, as when the Lord will visit a
people by famine, he says, that ten women shall bake their bread in one oven,
that is, all the women in that City Levit. 26. 26.
, it is taken for ever also, as when a bastard is not to enter into the
Congregation of Israel, unto the tenth generation Deu. 23. 2
, it is immediately expounded, that he shall not enter for ever Deu. 23. 3
; so that God gives all unto Abraham, in and by that good Melchizedek, by whose
strength the enemies are given into his hand, in that rescue of that lost
portion or inheritance of God Ps. 16 5, 6
, and Abraham also gives all unto God, in the same Melchizedek, Priest of the
most high God, and Prince of peace, in whom he acknowledges God to be all in
all in the victory; and so is said, to give him the tenth of all, or gives him
to be all in all in the work for ever Ephesians. 1. 23.
. Our Prophet here declaring the Kingly and Priestly office of Christ, from
this History does also allude unto it, to make it manifest by these forenamed
Kings warring one against another, namely four Kings against five, and all
against the Lord, and against his anointed Psalm. 2. 2.
; declares hereby that there is a twofold condition, and state of mankind upon
the earth, which is in continual opposition in it self, making continual
war one against the other with all their force and confederacy, each of them
having a Kingly and Princely power, or rather many being joined together in one
on both sides, which are all Kingly, and yet both of them, or altogether in
each party, stand in direct opposition against the Kingdom and Priesthood of
our Lord Jesus Christ, exercised amongst the Saints, or those trained and armed
Soldiers, who have the armor of God put upon them Genesis 14. 14. Ephesians. 6. 11. to
18.
, or that Catechized and instructed people which are home borne, and brought up
in the house or family of that one father of all the faithful Ephesians. 3. 14. 15.
; and these two adversaries which our Prophet tells us, that the Lord strikes
through, are the prosperity and adversity that man is subject to attain unto,
and liable to undergo in this present life, together with all those several
heads, or headships proper unto them both, which are at war in themselves in
the men of this world; for sometimes a wicked prosperity gets the upper-hand
with its confederates and several headships therein combined together in one
Genesis 14. 3, 4.
: and sometimes also, a wicked, wretched, low and miserable state and
condition, with its confederates and headships all conspiring together in one
to make the condition full Genesis 14. 4, 5.
, which things are Historically taught unto us in that twelve years subjection
unto Chederlaomer, and in that thirteenth years rebellion, and his going out in
the fourteenth year and smiting so many of them, insomuch that they do not only
make one another prosperous and proud, as also wretched and miserable, but the
very slime-pits Ge. 14. 10
, yea and the taking of Lot also Genesis 14. 2 13, 14.
, conspire together for such purposes; with Abraham's refusing and rejecting the
receipt of the spoils of the King of Sodom Genesis 14. 21 22, 23.
, declaring thereby, that the Saints have greater riches and treasures Heb. 11.
24, 25, 26.
then any, or all wicked men can afford unto them. These two adversaries to the
Kingdom and Priesthood of Jesus Christ stand in direct opposition unto his
Crown, as also unto his Cross, which are never separated nor divided the one
from the other, in any person, place, or time, but harmonize and lovingly
consent and agree together in him who is the only fullness and perfection both
of the one and of the other in all his, in whatsoever time or place: But these
two opposites hereunto, that is to say, a carnal and worldly prosperity and
also adversity, can never be at concord, peace, or any agreement at all, yet
both alike opposite to Christ, this our Prince of peace, who has of twain
made one new man Ephesians. 2. 15
, slaying that enmity in himself; hunting therefore after a worldly
prosperity, as riches, honors, pleasures, carnal friends, humane learning,
and the like, as things whereby to beautify and adorn Religion, defend and
preserve the faith of Christ, or as after such things, wherein any part of the
glory and power of the Kingdom of God consists, this stands in opposition to
the Kingdom of Christ Ioh. 18. 36 Romans 14. 17.
, taking his Kingdom to be of this world, or to consist of things momentany
and vanishing, which it does not, and therefore his Soldiers do not contend
nor strive for them Ioh. 18. 36
, but only those who instead of spirituallizing the things of man in the Son of
God Mal. 4. 2, 3.
, have carnallized the things of God into the fading and corruptible things of
vain man Romans 1. 21, 22, 23.
, and accordingly set up themselves in temporary things to advance an eternal
Kingdom, laboring by as many means and ways of headship (to take the office)
of Christ out of his hand) as there are infinite ways in the heart of man to
lift up and advance it self against his Creator, which is a depth and height of
that deceit that none but God can know or find out Ier. 17. 9, 10.
, therefore the Dragon is said to have seven heads, to declare that fullness,
or innumerable ways and beginnings of gathering head against Christ Rev. 12.
3. Rev. 16. 14.
that are found in the pride and policy of man, who ever is ready to look upon
the Sun in his strength, and the Moon in her brightness Job 31. 24, 25, 26.
, to kiss his hand if any thing prosper in it Job 31. 27
, to sacrifice unto his own net, and burn incense unto his yearne or drag
Hab. 1. 16
, to advance himself and say, Is not this great Babell which I have built? and
unto me the honor and majesty thereof belongs Dan. 4. 30
. Thus does a mis-conceived glory in humane excellencies oppose the Crown of
Jesus Christ, by denying him sole Power, Presence, Wisdom and Authority to
maintain, uphold, teach, rectify, and order all things whatsoever pertain
unto this Kingdom which is spiritual John 4. 23, 24. John 18. 26
, and therefore none but he alone who spoke words only that are spirit and
life John 6. 63
, can put forth a hand for the help, support, supply, comfort, and edification
of the same 1 Cor. 14. 3.
; and this opposition of Christ, is that Sodomiticall power, that vexes the
righteous soul of Lot from day to day 2 Pet. 2. 7, 8.
, and reigns in all such (of what rank, quality, sex, age or office soever
they be) that by reason of any thing that is momentany and must be laid aside
one day, as either parts, place, office, or relation whatsoever, do lift up
themselves thereby above others, as they stand in relation to God, as being
nearer unto him, or more acceptable to him, or useful for him because thereof;
and in this we rob our Priestly King of his dignity, taking up us the place of
the Mediator to come between God and the creature Hos. 13. 2.
; for if we hold our selves more acceptable to God, or useful for God, by the
enjoyment of any human excellency, then any other human creature whatsoever is,
then do we intrude our selves into that office and place of the Mediator, who
is that only useful and acceptable one, to and for the Father Mat. 3. 17
, without whom he has not, nor does any thing Ioh. 1. 3, 4
; For all things are of him, and through him, and for him, to whom be glory for
ever, Amen Romans 11. 36.
. The other adversary is the adversities and miseries that man is naturally
subjected unto in this present life; which miseries felt, heard of, or
understood in a natural, sensual, and carnal manner, stand in direct
opposition unto the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, which is absolutely and
really another thing, then the natural mind of man can comprehend or conceive
of: for we naturally conceive, that those things which are penal, and
troublesome unto man, vexations, griefs, perturbations, and anguishes felt, and
painfully and burdensomly undergone, are the cross of Christ, yea sorrows and
fears, and pinching and painful repentance, we naturally extol, as the only
suffering that brings deliverance and joy unto us, which is the worlds great
mistake of the cross of Christ, from the beginning ever until now. True it is,
that all these things, and innumerably more are in repentance; but repentance
is ever a change, wherein the Son of God is found, or else it cannot be
repentance never to be repented of 1 Cor. 7. 10.
: and if the Son of God be in the change, then does he change and translate (as
our sins, so also our griefs, sorrows, fears, pains, troubles, doubts,
distrusts, and anguishes whatsoever man by nature is subjected under) unto
himself, who being the Son of God, cannot but bear them all away Mat. 8. 17
Ier. 50. 20.
, else should he not continue to be himself, who is being it self; and
therefore cannot but remain the same: but this is the portion which he takes
unto himself, for the utter destruction of it, in that work of our salvation
Hos. 13. 14
; even so also does he give and transfer unto us (in this exchange or turning
from one condition unto another) his own righteousness, peace, ease, life,
courage, confidence, joy, freedom, and liberty, out of all straits,
difficulties, servitudes and intanglements whatsoever, setting us in his own
wisdom, and authority, inheritance and sonship Romans 8. 16. 17. Gal. 4. 6.
, therefore is it said, As he is, so are we even in this world 1 Ioh. 4. 17
, which state and condition being put upon us, who are in our selves but finite
creatures, must of necessity fill us, and replenish us with all consolations,
having in it the fullness of him who is the Son of God, and therefore fills
all in all Ephesians. 4. 23
, so that no place can be left void in any way of Christ, for the works, fears,
and terrors of the Law to take place in 1 Ioh. 4. 18
, which naturally all men press upon the conscience, in the way of their
Ministry Mat. 23. 4 Luke 11. 46, 47.
, but they may as well testify of the Son of God, that he never became a man
of sorrows, nor was ever acquainted with infirmity Isa. 53. 4, 5, 6.
, (which is no less then to deny the Lord Jesus Christ in his death) as to
proclaim unto the sons and daughters of men, that they ought so to be
exercised, as to be perplexed with any such things in themselves, as being
troubles, necessary sorrows, and terrors unto them, which is also to deny the
Lord Christ in that victorious and triumphant way of his resurrection. They
then that will have the pain, trouble, loss, shame and sorrow of the creature
(as it is to it self a penalty, and takes hold of us unto hurt, damage, fear
and disquiet) to be the cross of Christ, they set themselves in the place of
the Son of God 2 These. 2, 3, 4.
, as sufferers for sin, and so usurp the place of our high Priest, that only
and alone sacrificer, yea that only and alone sacrifice, and offering made once
for all those that come unto him 1 Heb. 7. 27. Heb. 9. 28.
, and be they never so poor, mean, seemingly humble and meek, pleading for
never so much liberty of conscience, and immunity from persecution, but yet
hold the fores and sorrows of soul, and desolate place in the wilderness, not
being inhabitants in, nor heirs of the house of God in present possession, to
be the exercise of Christianity, they do no less hereby, but sit down in the
very chair and seat of Antichrist, assuming that great work of the suffering
of the Son of God unto themselves, that could not be overcome of death Act. 2,
24
, and the whole and full release belongs only unto the creature, for nothing
else had any need thereof, nor could be released, but only that which was in
fear and bondage in it self, subject to death Heb. 2. 14 15.
, but by that death of the Son of God, and in the very same act, it is stated
in his life and peace for ever Col. 3. 3. John 16. 33 Ephesians. 2. 14.
; and yet we do not deny in this point the sensible, or rather sensual
penalties and pinings of the creature, which man is subjected unto, with the
rest of the animal parts of the creation, as being subject in this life to
some things which other creatures are, even as to eat, drink, sleep, procreate,
and the like; so also to have bodily aches, sickness, sores, famine, weakness,
and the like, which are troubles and disturbances to one creature, as well as
to another (both of man and beast) till it come to death it self of the body,
which things are natural, or sensual, yet in the Saints of God ordered so by
God, as he has use of them to preach and proclaim his praises here in this
world 2 Cor. 11. 23. to 33. 2 Cor. 6. 7. to 10.
; therefore so prevents them, extenuates, or brings a quite contrary thing out
of them, ( as in the throwing of Daniels friends into the furnace of fire Dor.
3. 20 to 28.
, and putting the people of Israel into the red Sea Exodus 14. 20. to 31.
, and the like) as the sees good, for the safety and encouragement of his
people Psalm. 74. 14
, or the destruction and hardening of his enemies Mat. 27. 43.
: so that these things that properly have relation and passage betwixt creature
and creature, do accidentally prove the cross of Christ, and that so far as
they become joy, courage and consolation unto the Saints Gal. 6 14 James 1. 2.
, which in themselves to all flesh is grief, anguish, and sorrow Heb. 11. 12.
Psalm. 116. 3
, even as the very comforts of this life, that the unreasonable creature tastes
of, as well as man, are a trouble unto the wicked, and become the terrors of
hell when they see themselves foiled, overcome and subjected unto sin and death
by them Iam. 5. 2, 3 Luke 16. 19, 23, 24, 25. Luke 17. 32
, though in themselves simply considered they are naturally no such things Genesis
1. 31. 1 Timothy 4. 4.
; so that the Cross of Christ is of a more eminent and transcendent nature then
these temporary and fading things can reach unto; for that which is of an
eternal nature, extent and value, cannot consist in temporal things, although
it may be exercise and made known in that which in it self is temporary: the
proper Cross of Christ then is that in man, which is peculiar and proper unto
man alone, and cannot be found in any other creature whatsoever, and makes man
to be that which by nature he is, which no other creature can be such, that is,
all that emnity and wrath, defection from God, and rebellion against him, which
arises from the breach of that unity, covenant, and agreement that was between
the Creator, and the creature in the first act of its creation; for none of the
creatures being made in the Image of God but man alone, it was not possible
that any could make a breach, or deprive it self of such an Image and being,
but only he; and therefore man only acquires and attracts such an enmity and
wrath unto himself, as no other creature could ever do but he alone: So that
which arises properly from a breach, that has in it that which is eternal,
is the Cross of Christ, but man only has an enmity and wrath naturally, that
arises from a breach that is eternal, therefore none but man can participate
in that which is properly the Cross of Christ, and he only and alone can do it,
for in this breach God himself is the party fallen from, cast off, and by
adulterating the state and condition of the contract, utterly rejected;
therefore whatever arises hence, must needs be of an eternal nature, because
it has ever respect unto him who is eternal, and of such nature is the Cross
of Christ, in what point or particular soever it is taught unto us, or to be
considered of by us in, which if that Son of eternity had not taken upon
himself, never could any have extended himself therein, so as to have been a
plenary satisfaction to God, or to the conscience of the creature Act. 20. 28 1
Ioh. 2. 1, 2
, but he having taken it upon himself, who is infinite and eternal, must of
necessity reach unto, and take in the utmost bounds of it in every point and
tittle thereof, otherwise there would not be a place sufficient for that
infinite love and garment of salvation Isa. 61. 10
to reside in, and put it self upon us, and take up an habitation for it self
with us for ever Psalm. 68. 16, 18. Romans 8. 9, 11. 2 Cor. 6. 16 Ephesians. 3. 17
; therefore to preach any jot of the penalty of the Cross, as in grief,
sorrow, or perturbation, arising hence to be the proper portion of any
creature, or at any time to have the soul oppressed with the displeasure and
angry face of God, so much as for a moment, such persons offer no less
indignity to the Son of God then to teach the proper terrors of Satan to be
the Cross of our Lord Christ, and so do nullify and make void the Cross of
Christ unto the souls of men, teaching or apprehending it to be a quite
contrary thing to that which indeed it is, and if the Cross have not its right
form given unto it in the preaching of the Gospel, it has never its right
and proper operations and workings in us, and so is the veil never rent in our
hearts, but we are still kept out of the holy place (having the veil upon our
hearts) when Moses is read unto this day 2 Cor. 3. 14, 15. Mat. 27. 51
; so that the sorrows of soul that men undergo in this mortal flesh,
conceived to be the Cross of Christ, are the very King of Shyner Genesis 10. 8, 9,
10.
, or of Babylon Genesis 14. 1. Ier. 20. 4.
, with his Associates, and Confederates, that are as many as there are kinds of
anguish of soul and trouble, and every one is a head or beginning of his
Kingdom, whether it be Babell, Erech, Accad or Calney, they are all in the
Land of Shyner Genesis 10. 10
, who is at perpetual emnity with our holy King of Israel on the hill of Sion
Psalm. 2. 1. to 6.
, laboring to demolish that spiritual house and Temple, ( not made by the
hands devise, or skill of man Acts 4. 11 Psalm. 118. 22.
, but is of an eternal and heavenly frame in Christ 2 Cor. 5. 1.
) and to lay it wast of all its boules, office, ornaments, and instruments,
unto this day, as ever it was with those Kings of old Ier. 52. 17, 18, 19.
: as the excellencies therefore of the creature, so also the deformities and
miseries of the creature are both alike enemies unto the Kingdom of Jesus
Christ, and yet strive one against another, and would feign rid and lay wast
the world one of another, and yet both alike against the Cross and Crown of
Christ, and are both alike prevalent and Kingly to captivate the soul, and to
keep under one another according as either of them does prevail and bear sway
wherever they come: 1 King. 21. 25. 26. 27.
so that the great humiliations of the world for fear of the wrath of God Isa.
58. 4. Ier. 14. 12. Zech. 7. 5. Ier. 7. 6.
, and the great exaltations and executions of it, to put away, abate or keep
back wrath Mark 6. 21. to 28.
, are both alike Kingly, which the Lord will strike through or wound in the day
of his wrath; and so much for the allusion unto the story in Genesis, which our
Prophet brings up, and gives it a being in his own times, prophesying of the
life and being of it also in times and ages to come: Now for the order and
method of the words of this fifth Verse, For God is a God of order, and not of
confusion 1 Cor. 14. 33.
, yea is composed in the Lord Christ, of nothing else; but the order of God in
and about the things of man, exercised in his word, works and ways, ever
springs from such Principles as hold correspodency, and are compatible to the
nature and being of the Son of God, and all tend to his exaltation, but the
order of man, or of the world in and about the things of God, ever springs from
principles seated naturally in the creature, and hold correspondency with its
nature and being, and therefore ever tends to the exaltation and lifting up of
man, and this distinction is warily to be had in remembrance in all our orderly
courses propounded unto the sons of men in and about the things of God. Now the
sum of these words, Verse 5. is a noble act of God, executed and done upon the
forenamed mighties of nobles of the world, in which we may observe,

First, his title, the Lord; Secondly, the place where it is done, in these
words, at the right hand; Thirdly, the work it self, on thing done, shall
strike through Kings: Fourthly, the time when, that is, in the day of his wrath.

For the first, the Lord, or Jehovah, the wond has in it the force of that
title given to Christ Rev. 1. 4. Rev. 4. 8.
, that was that is, that is to come, or will be the same for ever; and
signifies unto us, that the Lord was at the right hand of Abraham in those
slaughters and victories (in the rescue of Lot in his day) of and over those
great ones of the earth beforementioned: the Lord is also at the right hand of
David in his victories, whereupon this Psalm was penned for the use and
benefit of the Church Psalm. 109. 31.
; and the Lord will also be at the right hand of the poor for ever, as in the
Verse going immediately before this Psalm, to save him from those forenamed
Kings that would condemn his soul; so that he was, he is, and ever will be at
the right hand of the poor for his deliverance, therefore the Psalmist
prophesying of Christ, says, (according to the words as they are truly rendered
Psalm. 41. 1
) O blessed is that man that prudently considers the poor weakling, who is
ever poor and weak in respect of any thing of the help of man, for the Lord
is ever and altogether his help of and safety, as there it is expressed Psalm.
41. 2 3.
, which being prudently looked upon, according to the wisdom of the Word of
God, it is plainly seen, that the weakness of man is of no other use, but the
very inlet of the almighty power and authority of the Son of God 2 Cor. 12.
10. Romans 8. 35, 36, 37.
, who is that only blessed man indeed, and happy state and condition wherever
it is prudently seen and perceived; the word Lord therefore in this place, is
interchangeably to be taken and understood, (as in the first Verse of this
Psalm is declared) for this Lordly Priest stands at the right hand of the
King, who is that poor one, who without this Priestly sacrifice and death, had
never appeared in his glory; nor could he have been made manifest by being
shaped or made in the lowermost parts of the earth Psalm. 139. 15. Ephesians. 4. 9.
, nor had he brought forth those Riches and Treasures of his love only made
manifest in his Saints through death, but by this Priestly Sacrifice: Even so
also this Lordly King stands at the right hand of the Priest who is that poor
weakling also, who being found in death 1 Cor. 5. 7 1 Cor. 15. 3
and sacrificed, could never raise up himself from under such a curse Gal. 3.
13. Deuteronomy. 21. 23
, and out of such destruction Psalm. 88. 11. Psalm. 90. 3. Psalm. 103. 4
, but only through that Spirit and Power, life and authority of such a royal
and potent King Psa, 47, 1. Psa, 48. 2. Psa. 95. 3. Rev, 17. 14:
; and in the one of these, and in the other, there is full and sufficiency of
supply, for the Lord is enriched in that it is made manifest what a glorious
use himself can make of such an accursed thing, or condition, whereby he
appears to be God alone, which otherwise had lien hid as it does to all other
creatures 1 Cor, 2. 9. 1 Cor, 2, 14.
; and man also is enriched in that, that in the death and absence of all his
own glory and excellencies (that are humane and proper to a creature) the
dignity and power of God becomes his 2 Cor, 4. 6, to 11.
; and thus is the word Lord interchangeably taken, Psa, 118, 15, 16.
: therefore is the word by the Evangelists and Apostles so varyed, as, at the
right hand of God Mark 16. 19. Acts 5, 31.
; so also, at the right hand of majesty Heb, 1, 3.
: the right hand of the power, and the like Mark 14, 62
: and sometimes it signifies skill and cunning usually exercised in arts, made
manifest and brought forth by the right hand as the proper instrument;
therefore it is said, If I forget thee. O Jerusalem, then let my right hand
forget her cunning; that is, in all musical and artificial administrations in
the house of the Sanctuary Psae, 137. 5.
: Again, It sometimes signifies ratification and confirmation of what passes
from one to another, and so it is taken, when the Lord swears by his right hand
Isa, 62. 8.
, and in that he says, If Jeconiah were as the signet on my right hand, yet
would I pluck him thence Jer, 22. 24.
; as if he should say, though it be so near unto me that I pass nothing under
seal, or perform any thing without it, and many the like, But these may serve
to manifest what is meant by being at the right hand in this place, (when it is
said, the Lord at thy right hand,) that is, the Lord, as King, is the power and
authority of the Priest; the Lord also, as King, is the wisdom and skill of the
Priest; the Lord, as King, is the ratification and confirmation of the Priest,
in the rescue and deliverance of him from all humane frailties and infirmities
Rom, 1. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
. Again translatively, the Lord, as Priest, is the power and authority of the
King; the Lord, as Priest also, is the wisdom and skill of the King; the Lord,
as Priest, is the ratification and confirmation of the King, in sacrificing all
human abilities and excellencies, that the Princely power and excellency of God
only may appear: So as, that without the one the other is not, nor can be known
or found according to the way of the faith of Jesus Christ; insomuch that
whatsoever the King does in his regal authority, he does it by the Priest, that
is, by that power, and authority, wisdom, and curious device, and skill, as also
by that seal and confirmation that is in that death and suffering of the Son of
God Heb. 2, 14, 2 Cor. 1. 5. 1 Pet. 1, 2. Col. 2. 14, 15.
. Again, whatsoever the Priest does in his office and ministry, he does it by
the King, that is, by the power, and authority, wisdom, curiosity, and skill;
yea, and by that seal and confirmation that is in the life and resurrection of
that Son of man the Lord Jesus Christ Rom 8, 33. 34 John 11, 25, 26 1 Pet. 1.
3. 1 Pet. 3. 21.
: So that if the Word of God be opened to set forth the life of Christ, it sets
it forth in and through his death Isa. 26. 19. Ephesians. 2. 1, 5, 1 Pet. 3. 18, 19
: and also if it be opened to set forth the death of Christ, it sets it forth
only in his life Romans 6, 9. 10. 11. Romans 6. 1, to 8.
: For the one is not nor can be made known out of the other Romans 8. 34. 2 Cor.
13. 4.
: and they that go about to work any other way concerning the Kingdom and
Priesthood of Christ in the Church, future tense, shall wound, may also be read
in the preter, has wounded, or in the present tense, does wound, to denote an
act of continuation: We are here then to mind the action performed as a work
extending to all times, for God is never out of the like operation, his work
being one, even as his will is but one; so that wherever he, as King and Lord,
sets forth his Lordship and Principality in his life and resurrection, he does
it in and by the death and sacrifice of the Priest, that man of his right hand
Psalm. ^0. 17.
; that is, according to the multitudes of the operations and ways of the
workings of death, hell, and sin in the natural heart of man (are) manifesting
and bringing in his sorrow and wretchedness on every side Genesis 6. 4. Gal. 4.
24. Romans 2, 5.
, which the Son of God having taken upon himself Mat. 8. 17.
; must needs be without number, reckoning, or account Psalm. 40, 12.
; and therefore for weight intolerable Psalm. 98, 4. Ioh 6, 2,
, being none could stand under them, but he who is God himself Romans 9, 5, Acts
20, 28.
: even such are those supplies, fulfilments, revivals, and operations that are
in the life and resurrection of the Lord Jesus Christ, which do fulfill and
replenish all and every of those ways and workings of death whatsoever; for if
all this wretchedness and misery were contracted into one (as it was) and laid
upon that one and only Son of the Father Psalm. 42, 7, Heb, 7, 27, John 3, 16.
, which was indeed his death Isa. 53, 5, 6,
; then must it of necessity be such a death as is never vacant of life; so that
the life, spirit, and power of God is in the very same act; for if it were not
so, then should the life of the Son of God admit of a cessation, for some time,
which can in no wise be granted, no not so much as for a moment James 1, 17,
Psalm, 90, 1, 2,
, therefore his life and death are both of them complete in the same act; and
thus does the Lord through the death of the Son that man at his right hand,
bring life to light, expelling all the ways of darkness and death whatsoever
Ephesians, 5, 8, Mat, 6, 22, Psalm, 97, 11,
, that they cannot fasten themselves nor take hold of that Saint of Israel, who
is our life, and light, and by whom our darkness and death is done away 1 Ioh,
5, 11, Mal, 4, 2, Isa 60, 1, 2,
: And thus does our Lord wound or strike through that King, or those Kings, of
the miseries and wretched condition of mankind, which through infidelity do
prevail and reign over so many in this world, having captivated them under
themselves Isa 61, 1, Luk 4, 18,
, which our Lord in all that are his strikes through, which word (strikes
through) has affinity with that translated blaspheme) that is, to pierce or
strike through so as to make liveless, and void of operation, that they cannot
take hold, operate, nor have the least power over him, so are the sins and
sorrows which man by nature is subject unto, slain unto that Saint or holy One
of Israel, in all that are his, even as the blasphemer is said to pierce or
strike through the Lord Levit, 24, 11
, that is, makes him liveless and void of all operations of his grace in and
upon himself, and so is no other but a dead man in sins and trespasses,
signified by his being stoned to death even as the Saints are dead to the sins
and miseries of man Rom, 6. 1, 2, 3, 4.
, but alive to grace, peace, and righteousness in the blessing or bessedness of
the Son of God Rom, 9, 5 Psa, 115, 15. Psa, 1, 1. Psa, 32, 1, 2.
; and thereby is that other King, or Kings (in the plural number) pierced,
blasphemed, or struck through by our Lord, in that man of his right hand, which
is the pride, prosperity, ostentation, and arrogance of the sons of men,
attributing unto themselves that which is the right and due of the Son of God
in the house and kingdom of God, and that is on this wise, our high Priest, or
Sacrificer, makes manifest his death in the slaying and sacrificing of all the
fat and the sweet, that is in the beauty, glory, excellency, and goodliness of
man, no otherwise but in the King that son of his right hand; namely, in that
life and resurrection of that Son of man, unto whom all power in heaven and in
earth is given, because he is the Son of man John 5, 27.
(else could it not be given, for as he is God he has it, or is it from
everlasting); and therefore is he over all God blessed for ever Romans 9, 5.
: So that according to that variety of life, spirit, principality,
supereminency and excellency that is in the Son of man, even such is the death,
shame, and dejection of the excellency and glory of man; therefore as the
excellency and glory of him that is the Son of God must needs be infinite and
boundless, even so must it necessarily follow, that the pride, glory, and
goodliness of man must be in all points and at all times dried up and
altogether expunged that it appear not in this way of life and resurrection of
our King Christ: Therefore it is said, That all flesh is grass, and the
goodliness of man as the flower of the field, the grass is withered and the
flower faded, because the Spirit of the Lord has blown or breathed upon it
Isa, 40. 6, 7. Pet, 1. 23, 24
: So that the death and humiliation of our high Priest, in all that are his, is
curiously wrought out and made manifest no other way but in the life,
authority, and exaltation of the King, and according to the curiosity of that
Regiment and Government, such is that noble death and sacrifice of our high
Priest: So that the death and life are one and the same acts and must needs be
so, else had the Son of God enjoyed life for a time without, death, which if
once he had done so, he had then ever done so, for the Lord our righteousness
changes not Jer, 23, 6: Mal. 3. 6.
, and then had he never dyed for our sins, we had yet remained in them 1 Cor,
15. 16, 17.
, which far be it from us, or as it is translated, God forbid Rom, 6, 15
, that we should ever think; and thus does our Lord strike through, pierce, or
blaspheme the pride, prosperity, that the earthly excellency and goodliness of
man leaving it altogether liveless and void of any power to lay hold or to
operate upon him who is the Son of God, as to move him in the least to speak
great things in himself according to the arm of flesh: therefore it is that our
Savior repelled all those temptations, suggested by that great enemy of our
salvation Luke 4, 13.
, so that none of them could in the least take hold of him; in which power and
victory we only stand: and this is the work of our Lord and high Father Abraham
in the slaughter of the Kings, together with our good Melchisedech, who has
the truth of all; and it is a work that is done, and is ever in doing, for the
work of God is ever the same, as truly as Christ both was, and is and is to
come Exodus, 3, 14. Rev, 1, 4.
: and howsoever unto a natural eye and ear it seems to lay waste the house of
God, of any actions or operations of the Saints at all, because it denies man
his natural excellencies and abilities of the flesh (according to natural and
humane wisdom to work by,) yet it is nothing else but an exchange of the things
of man for the things and operations of the Son of God, in case we do but know
how to put our talent into the bankery or to the exchangers Mat, 25, 27.
, and not do as that unprofitable servant did, to hide it in a napkin: for the
talent given is the mind, wisdom, or will of the Son of God unto mankind, and
so is a gift which man, by art and natural wisdom, finely wraps up, even as in
a napkin, hiding it or keeping it apart by it self in those earthly thoughts
and counsels of his own mind and understanding and puts it not into the bankery
(which is) that unity of God and man in Jesus Christ; and so it does not
increase by exchange, namely, of the things of man translated and made over
unto God, as also the things of God translated and made over unto man, which is
that abundant increase and multiplication of those great riches of our Lord
that are found in the life and death of Jesus Christ (which is all one to do)
namely to make one, to become many, by bringing it into the bankery, or putting
it to the exchangers, which are diverse, and yet it is but one (in respect of
unity) or else it cannot increase, even as to bring diverse, or two, five, or
ten into one bankery, or else if they be not made one, they cannot multiply and
increase; so that one talent is made known what it is in all the rest, in
respect of its grace and riches, in multiplication and increase, and all the
rest are made known in that one, in respect of that unity, and sum total they
all amount unto; And unto whomsoever this mystery is not opened they cannot be
fruitful nor profitable servants in the house of God. So that the operations,
gifts, and offices in the Church unto a seeing eye are no less various,
fruitful, beautiful, comely, costly, and glorious, then were of old those
hangings, imbroideries, curtains, curious carvings, ingravings, offices, and
officers in that Temple and Tabernacle of God in the comely honor of the
Sanctuary, whenever, or wheresoever it appears: and also to a hearing ear,
those edicts, expressions, and revelations of Jesus Christ are infinitely
sweeter and more melodious then was all that music in those many and sundry
sorts of instruments, or could be in that material Temple, which indeed were
nothing but carnal, further, then truly understood and considered in him,
otherwise the music of Nebuchadnezzar Dan, 3, 4, 5, 6
is as good and as harmonious as is the best music and melody that can be made
by backsliding Israel Ier, 3, 6, 8, Exodus, 32, 6, 1 Cor, 10, 7,
: yea the things of God, broke up in the house and temple of God like that box
of ointment or spiknard Luk 7, 37, 38 John 12, 3,
are as pleasant and fragrant to the sent of him that is spiritualas 1 Cor, 2,
15,
as ever that was of old; yea all his garments smell of mirrhe, alloes and
cashia, when he comes in and out of that Ivory palace Psalm, 45, 7, 8 Can, 1,
13,
: yea this great work of God in blaspheming or piercing these Kings, is like
that mountain of mirrhe and hills of spices, where those united and contracted
espousals give each other their loves Can, 7, 12,
, which is loves in the plural number so multiplied that it cannot be numbered,
so strong, as death overcomes not Can, ^, 6,
; so servent, as floods drown not; so deer and precious, as all substance
cannot buy it out Can 1, 6, 7,
: but to a natural mind these things cannot be so, no more then Christ can be
the same to the wicked Jews that he is to his Disciples John 8, 44, John 17,
23, 24
: For our Lord pierces or blasphemeth the Kings, that is, leaves without
breath, and makes liveless all the glorious and acceptable things of man,
wherein naturally man delights and takes pleasure, not permitting the workings,
glory, or operations of any of them to appear, or to be of use in his house and
sanctuary, whether they be his abilities to exercise himself in knowing,
declaring, or practicing any thing that concerns either the Cross or the Crown
of Christ, the mystery whereof no natural man can possibly conceive; for the
laying down of himself is death unto him; therefore that which tends to the
setting up of the life, spirit, power, and order of the Son of God, seems unto
him most vacant, and to have no order nor comeliness in it, therefore it is,
that he hides himself, as it were, from Christ Esaias 53, 2, 3
, looking upon him as a formless thing Isa 52, 14,
, for never had any his countenance so marred, in the eye of an unregenerate
man, as Christ had Isa, 52, 14,
, no though he be smitten and afflicted, so as to take away all stripes from
us, yet he esteems him not Isa, 53, 3, 4,
; for to have the natural workings and operations of man's mind to be pierced
and left liveless he can in no wise endure, that he that blasphemes the Son of
man, that is, leaves him void or makes him liveless in all his own operations
(which are all summed up in this, to seek himself in all things,) that man shall
be forgiven, nay that is forgiveness it self Mat, 12, 32.
: because it cannot be done but by the life, and spirit, wisdom, and power of
the Almighty himself; therefore our Savior says, whether is it easier to say
thy sins are forgiven, or to say rise up and walk Luk 5, 23,
, showing that the operations of God, in our walking and acting, are no less
then is his mercy, and goodness in pardoning and forgiving our sins, they are
both of like worth, value and grace in the house of God, so that where sins
remain there pardon is excluded John 3 36. Exodus, 34, 7. 1 John 5, 16.
; and so also where the operations of our own minds abide in the things of God,
there also is the power and workings of God excluded; therefore it is, that he
that blasphemes the holy Ghost shall not be forgiven, neither in this world, nor
in the world to come Mat, 12, 31, 32.
; that is, he that pierces or strikes through that holy and spiritual frame
and composition that is in our Lord Jesus, leaving it without life and
operation in himself, his sin remains and abides upon him, both in that instant
opportunity of his so acting, intimated in that phrase (in this world) or this
present world, that is in that present time or season, nor shall it be forgiven
in the world to come Mat, 12 32
; that is, in the succession and continuation of such operations for ever,
which do succeed in the hearts of all wicked men, and are ever coming on as
truly as they are also present. Now to speak against this spiritual state of
Christ, cannot have pardon in it; it is not meant of speaking against the Holy
ghost as a spirit abstracted from the Son of man, but in that Son of man, so
that to speak of Christ aright is to speak of him spiritually, or else we
pierce him and strike through the Spirit, that is, we leave that blessed
operation of the Spirit (which is all one with pardon of sin) liveless unto our
selves; therefore when sins are forgiven we rise up and walk Luk, 5, 23, 24
, as having both pardon and power bestowed upon and given unto us: And here we
must note, that we speak not of Christ spiritually (but in way of piercing)
when we speak of him as God, and that in the most acute and sublime manner that
possibly art may bring forth, and yet debate upon him as a thing abstracted
from humane nature, and do not declare distinctly in all points how this God
was made man, and dwelt, or tabernacled amongst us, or in us, as the word is,
that is, in our nature: So also if we speak of him in his humane nature, if we
had the skill of all Philosophers, or the most curious naturalists that ever
were, to delineate and lay out the nature and constitution of that nature which
the word was made John 1, 14.
, or became in us; and yet not declare in all points how it is made one with,
or becomes the Son of the living God; we speak not spiritually of Jesus Christ,
for nature does afford most curious apprehensions and distinctions of
attributes and operations, so be it they may be kept a part, separated and
divided from the creature; so as to have his subsistence and being, as that
which is another thing, apart from humane nature; so also man may attain to
excellent knowledge of the creature to apprehend, and freely consent unto the
nature of man, disposition, parts, faculties, properties, and operations, so be
it, he may center the proper subsistence and being of them in the creature, and
not in the Son of God; but this is not the wounding of Kings here spoken of,
but to pierce the spiritual and holy composition that is in Jesus Christ; for
the divine nature is never spoken of, according to that spirit of faith 2 Cor,
4, 13. 1 Cor, 6, 17, Rom, 10, 8. 1 Cor, 12, 3.
, but as it has respect unto our nature, comprehended in that Son of man; so
as that, whatsoever it is, it is it in that our nature; nor is humanity ever
spoken of according to that life of faith, but as it has respect in all things
to that divine nature, comprehended, or considered in that Son of God, in whom
it is, whatsoever it is, that is good and acceptable unto God; therefore to
preach the way of the Gospel, the Cross of Christ, is a piercing, striking
through, and leaving destitute of life all the things that seem glorious in the
eyes of man naturally, in the ways of God 1 Pet, 23, 24, 25. 1 Cor, 29, 30, 31.
, whether they be things, that according to the judgment of man, recommend us
unto God, in making us conformable; unto him Gen, 3, 5, 6.
, or things of penalty, vexation, and sorrow, that according to humane
apprehension serve to fit and prepare us, and make way for that which will be
approved of by him, for the Gospel leaves not any thing of the one nor of the
other for man to shroud himself under, or to boast of, or to terrify, or
torment himself about; for the miseries of man being the humiliation of the Son
of God, must needs be done away; nor can the excellency, or the goodliness of
man take place, because the glory of the Son of God in his exaltation must, and
does appear 2 These, 2, ^ John 1, 14. 2 Cor, 3, 18, Isa, 4. 5.
: and therefore the more distinct a Pharisee is in the letter of the law, the
more he thinks his God is blasphemed, when ever the Cross of Christ is preached
Mark 14, 61, 62, 63, 64, Joh. 10, 32, 33. Mark 2, 6, 7. Luke 5, 21.
, not understanding the spirituality of it: for when men's doings and sufferings
are nullified in point of salvation, by the doings and sufferings of the Son of
God, they hold themselves undone, yea the god whom they serve is pierced, which
is the lord Baal Rom, 11, 4. 1 Kings 19, 18. 1 Kings 18, 26 27, 28.
, and not the Lord Jehovah Deuteronomy, 6, 4.
: And hence it is that those men that have attained to greatest human learning,
exercising it in the way of the Scriptures, not understanding the spirit and
life of them, but are only Ministers of the Letter, but not of the Spirit;
which ministry of the Letter kills and works death, and wrath in the souls of
men; so also do they kill and work the death of men's bodies whenever they get
power into their hands, and become the greatest persecutors in matter of
conscience, and worship of God that are in the world; yea it is they that in
killing the Disciples and Apostles of our Lord, think they do God good service
John 16, 1, 2
: for all principles in nature and art, that human learning attaineth unto, is
to give God and man not only a nature diverse, but also each of them a several
subsistence and being, and what it may profess more is merely had by tradition,
not being acquainted with the true grounds and principles thereof in the least,
but are as a house built upon the sand in whatever they say Mat, 7, 26, 27.
; for flesh and blood cannot revail the things of the Kingdom unto them Mat,
16, 17.
: so that the unity (through his blood) of God and man, in the preaching of the
Cross, is piercing or wounding unto them, and does indeed incur wrath;
therefore the time of the execution of this noble act is noted to be

In the day of his wrath.
Now the day of Gods wrath, 2 Cor. 2, 15, 16, 17, Luk, 2^, 25, 26, 27, 28,
, and that is the day of the revelation and manifestation of Jesus Christ, and
it must needs be so; for the proper subject of wrath is man and not God Psa,
76, 10. James 1, 20, Isa, 27, 4. Eccl, 7, 9.
: as also the proper subject of the love and peace of the Elect is God and not
man Joh. 16, 33. Ephesians, 2. 14.
: Yet neither the one nor the other can be said to be without its relative, in
this way of salvation, as also in the way of destruction; for man is included,
and not excluded, in this famous work of wounding of Kings, yet not any thing
can be attributed unto man Ephesians, 2, 9. Rom, 3, 27. 1 Cor, 1, 29, 30, 31.
, but all unto God in that noble work; so also God is included, and not
excluded, in this point of wrath, and yet nothing of the nature of wrath or
anger can be attributed unto God Isa, 27, 4.
, but all the displeasure and wrath is properly in man, who is the proper
fountain, seat, and original of it Eccles, 7, 9.
: for as the love of God in our salvation is defused, shed abroad, and
springing up in our nature through that his Son, though in our selves we have
nothing of Gods love in us, which love takes hold and kindles it self upon no
other thing then only our baseness, low estate, and infirmity Ezekiel, 16, 3, to 8.
, which we behold in the day of the publication of the Cross of Christ Job 40,
4. Job, 42, 5, 6. Mat, 24, 14, 15
, when as he communicates his wisdom with us therein; for in his light we see
light Psa, 36, 9.
, and seeing by the spirit of the Son, we are transformed into the image and
glory of the Son; for when Christ, which is our life, appears, then do we also
appear with him in glory Col, 3, 4.
: Though in our selves we have no life nor glory, nor any such thing at all;
but the wisdom of God makes use of our death, baseness, and infirmity to raise
us up unto the glory and dignity of his only beloved Son, in whom we behold our
selves having faith or subsistence in him Col 2, 10. Col, 4. 12. Ephesians, 1, 3.
unto life and glory; and so are set down in heavenly places together with him
Ephesians, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7.
: even so also there is wrath in man, which is not without respect and relation
unto God, and yet no wrath or displeasure in God at all: For Christ Jesus being
declared, then the discension of the Son of God into our nature is made
manifest, in which he cannot appear, but he becomes the full and complete glory
and dignity of it, insomuch that the glory of the creature must needs fall and
vanish away, which man beholding with a natural eye, that is, according to that
wisdom of a creature which gives him his proper distinction and denomination
from all other earthly creatures in the world, so as to have the glory of a man
upon him, which none else had, he is as loath to have this blasted and come to
naught, or to become that which indeed is foolishness with God Rom, 8, 6.
; yea he is by the light of his own understanding so far from it as he is from
desiring his own ruin and destruction, and we know that every creature
naturally desires and endeavors the preservation of it self: and hence arises
an enmity in his heart against that glory and grace that is in the death and
resurrection of the Son of God; yet the glory of God he coveteth after in
himself, but would have it spring up and flow out of this wisdom and device
that naturally is in the creature, which is no less then to covet and seek
after, that he himself, as he is a creature, should be God, which is the proper
seat and state of Antichrist 2 These, 2, 4.
, and the more he computes himself with, and compares himself unto God by this
subtle and sly wisdom of his own, the more he must needs find a vast and
infinite distance from, and difference with his Creator, which ingendreth
wrath and horror in his soul, which is the proper place and seat of it, (and
not God, who is only goodness and love); and by his own wisdom he makes such
use of Gods grace and excellencies that they kindle and instant wrath in his
soul; although in God there is no more wrath nor anger, then there is or can be
peace and joy in our sins Psa, 32, 3, 4. Gen, 4, 6, 7. Rom, 6, 23.
, which the wisdom of God in like manner makes use of for the exaltation of his
Son for ever: even so does man make use of the grace of God, through his own
wisdom, to anger, torment and cast down himself for ever Gen, 4, 13, 14. Rev,
1, 7.
: So that if we take away the wisdom of man in what he sets up to himself, as
outward forms, figures, ways, and degrees of suffering, and humiliations, to
prepare himself for, or to give some satisfaction unto God; as also the ways
and means which his own wisdom devises for his exaltation and agreement with
God, and then you strike through or pierce the Kings, that are so potent and
puissant in the hearts of men, in all the world, which indeed ingenders wrath
and enmity in the hearts of all them who cleave unto them, as to their God, and
will not accept of the Cross of Jesus Christ, who was taken from prison, and
from judgment, or as the Hebrew word (min) signifies (to) as well as (from) so
was he taken, to prison, and to judgment, that is, his imprisonment, as also
his lifting up unto the throne or seat of judgment are one and the same act
Isa, 53, 8. Acts 8, 33.
; for the act of imprisoning of the word in our nature is the very act of
lifting up of our nature into the judgment and authority of the throne:
therefore he says, and who can declare his age Isa, 53, 8.
, that is, no wisdom of man can ever conceive how eternity should become time,
and how time should become eternity in one and the same act; yea he is cut off
from the land of the living Isa, ibid.
, and also stated in an everlasting possession in the same act; therefore is
his Cross his triumph, as it is said, he triumphed upon the Cross Col, 2, 15.
, which the wisdom of the creature knows not how to yield or consent unto, and
so dare never commit it self to a way that it knows not, but stands in
perpetual enmity with it, and opposition against it; and so does make it a day
of wrath unto himself, for that two such contrary things should be in the same
act, the wisdom and deepest policy that is in man can never yield unto or find
out, namely, that death should become life, and that life should be death; the
revelation whereof is the day of his wrath, or of his nostril, as the word
signifies, alluding unto that act in the Creation of man at the first, where it
is said, that God breathed into his face, or nostrils the breath of lives Gen,
2, 7.
: For so the word is plural, to signify aplurallitie of lives, included and
comprised in that one act, not noly, in regard that all men that were to live
upon the face of the earth, were originally in that man, nor only in respect of
that plurallitie of lives, that are multiplied in Jesus Christ, signified in
that, But also to declare that there was, two different, ways of life, and
generation, included in that one act, (as certainly, as there was both a man,
and a woman included in it) the one direct in opposition unto the other, that
is, there is a way life in that act, that has nothing but death in it, and
that is to live after the flesh, which has nothing but the death of the spirit
in it, Rom, 8, 13.
, which is simply the way, of wrath signified by the Nostrills, aluding unto
such fierce and angry creatures, that manifest the same by snuffings, or
snorting in the nose, for so the word may be translated nostrills, there is
also in that act an other way of life, in death, which is nothing but life, and
that is The dying to the flesh, and a living unto the spirit Romans 8. 13. 14.
, which is also signified, in that the word may also be translated, face, as he
breathed into his face showing, that sweet agreement, and answerable condition,
( even as in water, face Prove. 27. 19.
answers to face) between the creator, and the creature, so that there is in
this one act, that which conduces unto several lives and that, the one, in
direct opposition to the other, so that the way of the first Adam, and also the
way of the second, are propounded unto us in this Scripture 1 Cor. 15. 22.
, the way of earth, and the way of heaven 1 Cor. 15. 45.
, and therefore the, spirit of God by the Apostle, teaches both from this
place, saying, the first man Adam, was made a souly soul, that is, nothing, but
mortality and weakness Gen 2. 7. 1 Cor. 15. 45. 2 Cor. 3. 6.
, yea such acting as corrupts and destroys in himself, the wisdom, and image
of God, and the second is made alive making, or quickening Spirit, namely such
a one, as gives spirit and life in himself, even, unto the dust or slime of the
earth, 2 Cor. 2. 15. 16. Mat. 25. 31. 46.
, so that whenever the grace, countenance, or face of God appears, in Christ,
by that publishing of the Gospel, in the very same act, does this day of his
Nostrills, or day of his wrath, make it self manifest in the world, in the
Saints it is the day of peace, good news, of you and goodness Luke 4. 18, 19
20. 21.
. But in the wicked that very same thing, is the day of wrath, evil tidings,
horror and anguish Mat. 8. 29. Luke 8. 28. Mark. 5. 7.
, So that the Cross of Christ, is the only wrath and blasphemy, in the eyes of
the world Mat. 26. 65. Acts 6, 11, 12, 13, 14
, For the Saints, are of God, and the world is of that wicked one, 1 John, 5, 19
, and both these estates, and conditions thus oposite, do spring out of that,
which at the first was made one, (even, as the man and the woman were at the
first made one, and both of them had but one name) Gen, 5, 2,
, namely the wisdom or image of God and the dust, or slime of the earth, Gen,
2, 7, Gen, 1, 27,
, which are the two great, grand, and proper parents, of all the world (taught
in that first man, and woman) out of whom comes the mystery of God, and the
mystery of iniquity, but, out of one and the same act, even, as that righteous
Abell, and that wicked Cain, came out of the man, and the woman, in one, and
the same act, of lawful copulation, and therefore no mention is made, of the
knowing of his wife, betwixt the bringing forth of them both Genesis 4. 1. 2.
, and until we perceive, that we are the same unto the son of God by nature,
that Cain was to his, so near a Brother, Abell, that is, that we are his proper
death, who only can dye in us, otherwise we can never come to acknowledge our,
unity with, and life in him, Col. 3. 3, 4. 1 Ioh 4, 17,
. For the day of the Captivity of Lot, or of that inheritance, or purchassed
possession, that falls unto every one by Lot, without any devision, of or
respect unto, any ones person, either for his doing of good or evil, Psalm. 16,
5, Col. 3, 25,
, more or less then any other, Romans 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.
, which our Father Abraham rescueth and redeemeth, which day of his rescue, and
deliverance, and the day of his thraldom, and Captivity, being made one point
of time, (according to the unity, and simplicity, of that entire, and eternal
act, of the word of God,) that is the day of Gods wrath, and execution of
vengeance, which is only done, in the manifestation, and revelation of the
Cross of Christ, upon which, not only the slaughter of his enemies depends,
but also, that glorious rule and authority of his, exercised and executed, both
in his house, and also in all the world Psalm. 59, 13, Psalm. 103, 19, Psalm. 2,
18, 9, Rev, 2, 26, 27.
. which is laid down in the latter part at this psalm, wherein we are to
observe these particulers following.

1. First, in whom his authority is expressed, contained in these words, he
shall Judge among or in the heathen.

2. Secondly, by what, this his rule, and authority takes place, laid down in
these words, he shall fill the places with dead bodies.

3. Thirdly, the extent, of this his Government and judgment, In these words,
he shall wound the heads over many Countries.

4. Fourthly, the way and manner of his repast in his persuits, and exercise of
authority over his enemies, contained in these words, he shall drink of the
Brook in the way.

5. Fifthly, the issue event, sum, or result of all, in these words, Therefore
shall be Lift up his head. Briefly of each of these in order, and first of
that, in whom this his rule and authority is exercised, and expressed, and that
is in the heathen.

The word here translated heathen, signifies an Alien, namely, Ruth. 4. 1.
. he that should have bought the parcel of land or possession, that was
Ebimeleches, which he was willing to enjoy of it self, (as all men would
inherit the privileges that came by our Lord Jesus) But when he saw he must
also have Ruth the Moabitish, to raise up seed to his dead Brother, which were
to be called by his name, that so the name of the dead might only abide upon
and live in the inheritance, Ruth. 4. 4. 5.
. then he forsakes possession and all, and that before, and in the judgment of
the Elders, of Israel, Ruth 4. 6.
. degenerating and cutting himself off, from his true ancestour, and so from
the line, and generation of Jesus Christ, who was begotten by Boas, of Ruth the
Moabitish, Mat. 1. 5.
even so it is with all the wicked of the world, they would consent to have the
possessions, and privileges that came by Christ, Mark 10. 17. 23.
but when they must be one, with the Moabite, begotten in an act, of incest
Genesis 19, 32. to 37.
, and that all the seed of life, and immortality, must serve only to memorize
the name of Christ, yea, in, and upon all the glory, upon which he only is the
defense, Isa. 4. 5. 6.
and may not raise up their own name, and glory thereby, but only the name of
the dead, namely of him that dyed for our sins, Romans 4. 25. 1 Cor, 15, 3,
then do they neglect, and reject all, both possession, and posterity, and
alianate, and cut off themselves from God, who is that ancestour, and fountain
of all mankind, and therefore is the first man called the son of God Luk, 3,
38,
who was not made but in the life wisdom and image of God Gen, 1. 27, Gen, 2,
7,
and therefore the cutting off becomes such an estrangment, and alianation,
which must have an extent proportionable unto him, that was the alye, and
ancestour which, is of an infinite nature, though the Ancestor is no proper
cause nor fountain thereof, yet such an affinity is broken, in which God is a
party, even as a faithful husband having an adulterous wife, the Contract is
wholly broken, though he be no means nor cause of the breach, but is
altogether against it; even so the whole Covenant is broken between God and
Man, but God is nothing in the furtherance or in any approbation of the breach,
but his whole will is against it, therefore it is, that his oath is firm and
holy, when he says, as I live I desire not the death of him that dies, turn
ye, turn ye from your evil ways, for why will you die O house of Israel
Ezekiel. 33. 11.
, intimating yea and plainly declaring by Protestation upon Oath, that it is
their will to die, and not his, and as he is nothing in the breach, no nor can
be no more then the holy and righteous one can be a Sinner, no more is he
any thing in the continuation of this breach, which is the hoarding up and
exercise of wrath in all unbeleevers Romans 2. 5.
; for the continuation is extended according to the duration of him from whom
the alienation is, and therefore must needs be an eternal wrath, God himself
being the Ancestor alienated from, from whom man had life, breath and being at
the first Genesis 2. 7.
, and without whom he was not Acts 17. 28
, for of him and through him are all things Romans 11. 36.
, so that God reigns ever the wicked or Heathen, in wrath and displeasure, in
their captivating under sin and Satan for ever; and yet no wrath nor
displeasure in him at all, but it is merely in the wicked themselves, who most
voluntarily and willingly subject themselves thereunto, without any cause or
default in the Son of God at all, and thus he exercises rule and authority
over the wicked, who are no part of his kingdom, jurisdiction, or people, unto
whom he gives his royal Law, and heavenly Edicts James 2. 8 Psalm. 147. 19. 20.
, but are of the kingdom of Satan, and under the power and dominion of
darkness, subject only unto that Law of sin and death John 8. 44. Luke 22.
53. Romans 7. 25.
, utterly estranged from that law of the spirit and life, which is by Jesus
Christ Romans 8. 2.
, man therefore in this rule and authority is alienated from God, his first
original, predecessor, and ancestour, even so far as eternal death and
destruction, is from eternal life and salvation; and therefore the state of
the wicked is truly said to be a bottomless pit Rev. 9. 2.
, which the Angel that came down from God (or is a messenger taught from the
Kingdom of God) has the key thereof in his hand Rev. 20. 1.
, or ministry, knowing how to shut it, and how to open it, to keep out the
faithful so, as there they cannot enter Luke 16. 26.
, and let in unbelievers so, as out of which they cannot escape Jude 6. ver.
: and we know that there can be nothing without banks or bottom, but only the
Lord himself; and therefore it is not but with respect unto him, which the
world knows not of, neither will they understand; 2 These. 2. 7
, which the world has so many conjectures, and divining cups to drink in, to
come to the knowledge of it, and that they might find it out, and yet know not
the time of the creation of him, whom they say was first in sin, nor the manner
of it, that is, whether all fell in one, or whether such a multitude were in
the same mind in one act, or moment of time: nor know they the place where
they fell, whether in heaven, being that sin cannot be admitted there, no not
for a moment, though but in the very conception of it Psalm. 5. 4 Isa. 53. 9
; and to cast him out before could not stand with justice, and to say they fell
(being out of heaven) in the garden as Ministers unto man, it is all one as to
affirm they fell, being out of their Creator, in whom all things consist, not
having their being and subsistence in him Col. 1. 16, 17. Acts 17. 28
, and if some of the Angels had their being out of him considered in Christ,
then all had, and if once the good Angels had being out of Christ, then they
ever have their being out of Christ; for his mystical body cannot change Iam.
1. 16 17
: and if they be not in him, then is not he the reconciler of all things in
heaven and in earth Col. 1. 20
; therefore the world conjectures and gropes in these things (namely in this
point of the fall of Angels) only in the dark: for the Scripture says, the
Angels that kept not their first estate, or principality ( as the word is Jude
6. verse.
) are reserved in chains of darkness unto the judgment of the great day. So
that if in case they had principality, as the Spirit of God affirms, then was
there none above nor before that person, or being that first fell, no more then
there was any ever below, or more deep in descention then that person or
subsistence that is the first and prime in Resurrection and exaltation, and as
that nature in the Son of God, wherein he had his descention, and depth of his
humiliation, has no cause of boasting or attributing unto it self any thing
in that state of life and salvation 1 Cor. 28, 29
, so also that nature, wherein Satan or that Son of perdition had at the first
his principality and domination (wherein he was in the beginning that Lucifer,
son of the morning or day star Isa. 14. 11 12, 13, 14, 15
, a title given unto the Son of God himself Rev. 22. 16 Rev. 2. 28.
) has no cause of guilt or stain in the least, in that fall of destruction
and desolation, and therefore the knowledge of the Angels is another thing
far beyond that which our conjecturers or dreamers do dream of or
understand; therefore it is that it is said, that he has not put in subjection
unto the Angels the world to come, whereof we speak, or are Ministers Heb. 2.
5.
to prove that the Son of God is not only an Angel or Messenger of the
Covenant Mal. 3. 1.
(which notwithstanding he is) but also the Lord and giver of the Covenant,
whom none has power to question or contradict, and if the first fruits of his
Ministry and Kingdom be such, so is the whole lump and Administration of it
also Romans 10. 15. Romans 11. 16
; for it has not only an Angelical Message or Embassage in it as coming from
another Mal. 3. 1.
, but it has also in it a Lordly edict and principality as from the Spirit and
Person Royal himself Ioh. 3. 31, 32, 33, 34, 35. Heb. 1 Chap.
, unto all others; and of this Argument in that first Chapter of the Epistle to
the Hebrews, our Apostle does wholly insist, proving that Christ is not only
an Angel or Messenger of the Covenant, but also the Lord and giver of it: So
that as truly as Christ is a true Lord and giver of that Law of the Spirit Isa.
33. 22 Iam. 4. 12.
, so is he also a true Messenger or Minister of the Spirit Luke 4. 17 18, 19.
Isa. 61. 1, 2, 3.
; so that if we will ever measure the Temple, House, or City of God with the
true measuring line, or that golden reed appointed, and given by the Angel for
that purpose; so as to give every thing its due proportion, then as it is true,
that if we will give the Man of God his due proportion in the House of the Lord
Rev. 11. 1. Rev. 21. 15.
, we must not find it elsewhere but in that Son of man Jesus Christ Ioh. 5.
27. Ezekiel. 2. 1. 3
, for further then we hold proportion with him, we are not of God, for what we
are to God we are in him, for he is that pattern revealed only in the Mount
Ezekiel. 42. 10. 11. Heb. 8. 5. Exodus 25. 9.
: even so also, if we will describe an Angel of God by the same golden reed,
we must have them hold proportion with that only Angel of the Covenant, and
further then we can declare how they do agree, we set forth no Angel or
Messenger of God, for he is the true pattern in that also; so that if we give
the good Angels a nature, Ministry, and office besides, or otherwise then is
found in the Angel of the Covenant, we wander from the rule, we have not the
golden reed given unto us, nor have we been with Moses in that Mount of God to
see, nor can we do according to that pattern there given Heb. 8. 5. Numb. 8.
4.
; for without the knowledge and faith of this point of the Angels, we can
never understand and believe what it is for Michael and his Angels to fight
against the Dragon and his Angels Rev. 12. 7.
: nor indeed can the rest of the holy Scriptures be known or believed by us;
for indeed the very forming of good Angels and bad, and their very appearance
and bringing forth is the very root of the holy Scriptures, whereof (if we be
dark) we err, not knowing our way in any of those several branches that
spring up, and are to be found written in the volumne of the the book, or Word
of God Psalm. 40. 7 Heb. 10. 5, 6, 7.
. What ever men may think or seem to profess they know of that good Word of God
2 Kin. 20. 19. Isa. 39. 8.
, we know what we say, and the Lord give us understanding in all things 2 Timothy
2. 7
.

Again, our Lord reigns and governs also in the Heathen in that way of his
grace, and favor, which is peculiar unto his people Psalm. 47. 8, 9. Psalm. 93.
1. Psalm. 97. 1.
, for they also are alienated, estranged and cut off from their proper
Ancestor, even as Ruth was estranged and cut off from her Ancestors the
Moabites, and became the Mother of our Lord Psalm. 83. 8. Mat. 1. 5. Ruth 1. 4.
, and (as it is said of Pharoah's daughter in the person of the whole Church)
the Spouse of our spiritual Solomon, that she was to forget her kindred and
her fathers house, and so the King delights greatly in her beauty Psalm. 45. 10,
11.
. For as it is true, that there was of the sons of men that were true and real
Progenitors of that body of Christ, who is the Son of God Romans 9. 4. 5
, and therefore the Psalmist says in the person of Christ, our Fathers trusted
in thee, and they were delivered Psalm. 22. 4
; even so there is in man that which is a true Progenitor and Ancestor to the
Son of God, that gives him his beginning, even from the beginning of the world,
from which time he is said to be a Lamb slain Rev. 13. 8.
, not as a transient act, but as an act of eternity that reaches and
continues even until now, without the which Christ is not, nor can he take
place in the soul of any without it, and that is the frailty, infirmity, and
weakness of man, which only gives being or realty unto his death and
suffering, without which he is not Jesus Christ 2 Cor. 13. 3. 4.
, which death he vanquisheth even in the very encounter, and is alienated,
estranged, and cut off from being any such thing as death is John 1. 4 1 Ioh.
1. 2. to 5.
, even as far as the life of God is separated from being dead in sins and
sorrows, betwixt which there is an infinite distance and disproportion. And as
the Son of God reigns and governes by estranging himself from all the
desires and inclinations of the flesh Gal. 5. 24. John 1. 12, 13.
, which by nature the whole lump of mankind is subjected unto; For, We have
all sinned, and are deprived of the glory of God Romans 3. 23.
, in our selves, and there is not one that does good, no not one Romans 3. 12.
: so also in the doing of it away, triumphing over it, mortifying and killing
it, he turns it to a use, quite contrary to the nature of it, raising up
righteousness from sin, love out of enmity, yea joy out of sorrow, strength
out of weakness, wisdom out of foolishness, glory out of shame, immortality
out of mortality, and life out of death: this is that government, rule,
authority, judgment, and discerning that our Lord exercises amongst all that
are his, which is, that everlasting righteousness which he has brought into
the world, to be made manifest only in his holy temple Dan. 9. 24.
, which the Lord builds, and not man 1 Cor. 3. 9. 2 Cor. 5. 1,
: for the Saints by nature being all of that common parent and ancestor, the
corruption and lust of the flesh Isa. 64. 6, 7.
, they through this grace of God, are alienated and estranged there from, as
far as the ways of that holy Spirit are from the lusts and desires thereof
Gal. 5. 17, 18, 22, 23. 1 Pet. 1. 2.
; and of such subjects, and none but such, consists the Kingdom and regiment
of our Lord Christ, therefore it is said, Ye who were sometimes afar off, are
made near by the blood of Christ Ephesians. 2. 13
; and you has he quickened who were dead in trespasses and sins Ephesians. 2. 1.
, and ye were darkness, but now ye are light in the Lord Ephesians. 5. 8.
; and now therefore ye are no more strangers and forraigners, but
fellow-citizens with the Saints, (or with that Holy One) evon of that household
of God Ep. 2. 19.
; so that God reigns over the heathen, and in them, he sits upon the throne
of his holiness Psalm. 47. 7, 8.
; the Princes of the people (or of the Nations or Strangers) are gathered
together; yea it is they that are become the people of the God of Abraham Psalm.
47. 9
; for the shields of the earth, or fortress and guard of it is only in God
Psalm. 47 9
: For, no government and protection of the world is proper to the house and
kingdom of God, but only in the Lord, of which all other governments are but
characters drawn out by several ways of administration, according to
principles founded in nature; therefore in his rule, government, and judgment,
is he vehemently to be exalted Psalm. 47. 9
; for, he alone it is, that judges, rules and governs in the heathen, even
in such as are estranged and alienated, and none else Rev. 2. 26 27. Rev. 3. 21
. And here we may not neglect to speak a word of that great mistake that is in
the world, in looking for some time of reformation in the Church of God, which
is such, as for the present is not, nor may be thought to be yet time to build
in so glorious and excellent manner, as afterward it may be, which is ever the
spirit of such as love to dwell in seiled houses in Babylon Hag. 1. 3, 4 5, 6
rather then to return, for the re-edifying of the Temple Nehem. 2. 5.
, and that time (they say) is at the calling of the Jews, and the coming in of
the fullness of the Gentiles, when all Israel shall be saved Romans 11. 25, 26
: in which place is taught this alienated, and Ancestour, we have here spoken
of: But this they gather, with no little confidence of the fulfillment thereof
(according to their way,) understanding only according to the letter, all the
writings of the Apostles, who allude frequently unto those ancient distinctions
and separations of other Nations from Israel of old, declaring the state and
condition of peoples to be so diverse and opposite, as those ancient records of
the carriage, nature, and dispositions, and separations in former times, by the
ancient histories of Scripture, are set forth Deuteronomy. 7. 1, 2, 3 Deuteronomy. 2. 25.
Deuteronomy. 4. 6. 27 Deuteronomy. 18. 9 Zech. 7. 14 Zech. 12. 9, 10
, which being a doctrine in those days, by the differences of peoples and
nations, to teach the mystery of Christ, even as in differences of meats,
drinks, washings, leprosies, outward impurities, and the like, which are
innumerable; the Apostles in their writings allude unto them, for the opening
of them, as to the Arc Heb. 9. 4 Mat. 24. 38 Rev. 11. 19
, Tabernacle Heb. 8. 2
, Cloud in the Wilderness 1 Cor. 10. 1, 2. Heb. 12. 1.
, Temple 1 Cor. 3. 16, 17 2 Cor. 6. 16
, and all outward forms and figures, set up, and used in former ages, that the
glory of the Son of God might appear John 3. 14, 15
, and show it self to be the glory and substance of them all John 6. 31, 32,
33, 34, 35
, so that to look again for the Jews and Gentiles as a differing people kept
both entire unto this day, as that people properly, by whom then God taught the
world, as in that outward figure of clean and unclean, separated, or united,
and that they must come to build, re-edifie, and set up that holy Worship,
before we can look for it in the perfect purity, and glory thereof; we may as
well conclude, that all things according to the Letter and Histories of the
Scriptures alluded unto by Christ, and his Apostles, must again appear in
that work, for the Apostle affirms in as plain terms (as of any other of
these ancient things that are already past, and seem to be at present laid
aside) that Christ came to build up the Tabernacle of David Act. 15. 15. 16.
: but this is always that ancient error of the piercing and persecuting Jew,
that because Elia must come before that great and dreadful day of the Lord
Mal. 4, 5. Mat. 11. 14.
, they look for the same man to come again that had lived in former times
Luke 9. 11.
, or else they think no great work can be looked for or seen even as at this
day some look for Christ to come to reign as a great Monarch upon the earth,
before they can enjoy or find peace, and true Religion together, which declares
that it is a carnal peace, and an earthly Religion and Kingdom they so much
adore and look after: but we know that Christ told them, that Elias was then
present, (according to the mind and sense of the Prophet) if they could have
received it, Mar. 9. 13 Mat. 11. 14.
, but it was a Mystery hid from them, because the God of this world had
blinded their eyes, least they should believe the glorious Gospel, and the
light of it should shine unto them 2 Cor: 4: 4
. Such is the History, carriage, and practice of the Jew and Gentile, (in the
true sense and scope of holy Scriptures) as that it is a Doctrine containing
such a mystery as is ever present and evidently appears where ever Christ,
that holy one of God, is declared, set forth, and opened what he is in our
nature, which is from its first Original (in him) alienated and estranged from
what naturally it is, therefore the Apostle teaching the very same Doctrine of
the Jew and the Gentile, tells us, he would in no case have us ignorant of this
Mystery Romans 11. 24, 25.
, least we be proud and arrogate somewhat unto our selves Romans 11. 25.
; so that the Doctrine of the Jew and the Gentile is a mystery or hidden thing,
which is only truly opened in the Revelation of Jesus Christ, and not in
seeing people with a bodily eye to travel from one part of the world into
another, in whom they are reconciled and made one, (even God and man, who by
nature are at the greatest distance and separation) yea in him all are Israel
and saved ones Romans 11, 26.
who by nature are all concluded under sin, and children of wrath and of
destruction Ephesians. 2. 1. 2 Romans 3, 9.
, therefore he says, that the Redeemer comes out of Sion and turns away
ungodliness, not only from the Gentiles, and not from the holy people, but it
is said from Jacob Romans 11. 26. Isa. 59. 20.
, mentioning the Father of the twelve Tribes, as the fountain of that iniquity
that the Redeemer does turn away: So that the breaking down of the partition
wall Ephesians. 2. 13 14.
which separated Jew and Gentile, is that abolishing of that enmity in our
flesh by Jesus Christ Ephesians. 2, 15, 16,
, even that Law of carnal Commandments and Ordinances, and reconciled both
unto God in one body by his Cross Ephesians. 2, 15, 16.
, making in himself of twain one new man, so making peace Ephesians. 2. 15, 16,
between Jew and Gentile, that is, between that holy one of God and our nature,
which in it self is estranged from, and at enmity with him, but being one in
him, we bear the name of Israel, even of one, that as a Prince prevails with
God Genesis 32, 28.
, as Jacob bears the name of all iniquity, which the Redeemer turns away, yea
even at that time when the Apostle is in the declaration of the holiness of the
Jew, and profaneness of the Gentile, all which amounts unto this sum, namely,
to declare what the Son of God is made in us, and what we are made in him, for
he is made sin in us, as we are made righteousness in him 2 Cor: 5: 21:
, they hold correspondency in all points, and being declared accordingly, it is
the making of, two to become one in all things whatsoever, yea even the
greatest stranger to become the nearest home-born, even the only begotten of
the father, and son of his love Ioh: 1: 14: Mat: 3: 17:
. So that whilst we are looking with stretched-out necks into the peoples of
the world, expecting some great work and Reformation to appear, we do in the
mean time neglect and reject those kind offers of mercy and solicitations of
our souls which God (in that way of Christ) offers unto us only through the
knowledge and faith of him, the ignorance of whom deprives us of all his
comforts and operations Ephesians. 4. 18.
; but we must wander unto, look after the calling of Jews, and coming in of a
fullness of Gentiles, to the fall of the Pope, and Christ his reign upon the
earth as a great Monarch, when as all these are in our hearts and in our mouths
Romans 10. 8.
, and yet through that unbeleefe which is in us, we see them not, but are
climbing up to seek Christ, as though Elia was to come again Mark 9. 11.
, as also descending down into the deep, as though Moses and Jonah were to
appear in like form to the outward senses again Iona^ ^. 17.
, when as God shows the same works, yet as differing in the manner of them,
to carnal reason, as far as there was difference between Jonah in the Whales
belly, and the Son of God in the heart of the earth, and yet that was the sign
of the Prophet Jonah Mat. 12. 40.
, and as there was in the peoples coming from Bashan and out of the depth of
the Sea with Moses Psalm. 68. 22.
, and the peoples carrying of the Ark out of the house of Obed-Edom up into
Jerusalem in David's days, which he memorizeth as the same thing being then
done again Psalm. 68. 1, 2.
: if they had stood gazing after the same acts to bedone in the view of a
natural and carnal eye in the same manner and form, they had before been
manifested and made known in, or else to acknowledge no divine power, or
heavenly evidence of the operation of God therein in the present dispensation,
then had they never acknowledged God aright in his wonderful works, but had
denied his power and handy-worke amongst them, even as the Jews did in the
days of our Lord; so in like manner if we stand gazing after an old people of
the Jews to bring us truth, and the fullness of the Gentiles to bring us
peace, in calling of the Nations so as to settle an earthly and temporary
peace, and in the mean time neglect the mystery of the one and of the other,
yea, the very truth and substance of them all, though secret and hidden from
the world in that way of Christ, as all our life and light is Col. 3. 3, 4.
John 1. 4. to 9.
we shall prove such, as upon whom the virtue and power of that Son of God does
not appear, nor make it self manifest, but shall be opposers of his gracious
and spiritual presence, when ever he is truly revealed and opened among us,
though in the mean time we are puffed up by a fleshly mind Col. 2. 18.
through carnal speculations of things that are past, and vain hopes and
expectations of things to come, which serve to no other use but merely to
flatter our selves in a loose and licentious liberty, bearing our selves and
others in hand with such things as shall never in that form (which we propound
them unto our selves in) nor in that sense which we understand and take them
in, appear nor manifest themselves neither unto our selves nor unto others;
therefore it is, that God has so varied the outward form of the expressing of
himself in his Word from first to last, till at the length he has so
propounded himself unto us, that all the men in the world cannot give the
outward form of it to resemble it in the least, but a mere carnal eye can see
it is deceit, and cannot be the same, as in that Book of the Revelations it
does so evidently appear, or else we had had (by the deceivers of this world)
all the seven Trumpets sounded long ago, as also that new Jerusalem erected and
set up, which now we fall short of, and according to their understanding of
the Word of God ever must, and so must ever drive it some certain years
before them, as so long they have done to the deceiving and deluding of so many
that are gone down in the mean time into Hades: nor shall these persons or
Spectators, looking after things at such a distance of time, from them, attain
their hopes, no more then the Jews did in having Elia appear again unto them
in that form, or in that sense which they understood the Prophet in; so that
such waiters and expectors for great things in after times, (but lay the Saints
wast of them at the present) they do ever wait with the same Spirit which the
Jews did, and whilst they are looking for other Jews, are performing that
ancient office of the Jewe; themselves, and of the Gentiles also Psalm. 2. 1, 2,
3. Acts 4. 23. to 27.
, who both of them went in that hot pursuit of the hind of the morning when he
appeared Psalm. 22. see the title.
, even as so many dogs compassing him to pierce his hands and his feet Psalm.
22. 16.
; So that in this point of Gods Government, Dominion, and Rule in his Saints
which are said here to be the Heathen or the Aliens, there is that which in it
self is death, darkness, slavery and subjection unto the least and worst
things in the world, yet is it alienated, estranged, and cut off therefrom, and
has nothing exercised in it but life, light, liberty and dominion over all
Principalities and Powers of the Prince and God of this world Ephesians. 2. 2. 2 Cor.
4. 4.
, and are nothing at all of such a thing as by nature in themselves they are;
so that as God is nothing to the wicked but what he is only in and by them,
and therefore he is nothing in them, for God is not in all their thoughts
Psalm. 10. 4
, even so the Saints are nothing to God, but only what they are in him which
is all things, and therefore in the multitude of their thoughts within them,
they are all his comforts which delights their souls Psalm. 94. 19.
. So that in Gods Rule and Domination, in the wicked there is nothing of him
but what springs and comes of themselves, who are nothing of God at all, and
in Gods rule and domination, in the godly there is nothing in them but what is
of him who is nothing in himself, that is in respect of his own nature, that
is any thing of them at all, this therefore is that great Mystery of the
Gospel which has lain hidden from the world in Ages that are past, that God
who in his own nature cannot be more excellent and glorious in one place,
person, or action, then in another, yet in his wisdom has so provided in
Christ, that the place wherein he has appointed to meet with his people, and
to speak with them in, does far excel in glory all other places, persons
and actions in the world Exodus 29. 42. Psalm. 87. 1, 2. Exodus 25. 22. Exodus 30.
6. 36.
, whose goings and comely honor in the Sanctuary are not elsewhere to be seen
or met with Psalm. 63. 1, 2. Psalm. 68. 24, 25, 26.
, but only in that place, or Sanctuary wherein his honor dwells Psalm. 26. 8
, which only is sanctified and set apart from the rest of the world Isa. 28.
5. 1 Cor. 3. 16 17. 1 Cor. 6. 19
, even as the place of his only residence, and the aparition and manifestation
of his presence, power, and glory Exodus 9. 6. Levit. 16. 2 Psalm. 102. 16
, so likewise that God who in his own nature, cannot be absent from, or leave
destitute of his presence one place or thing more then another, yet through his
wisdom in Christ, has so provided that the men and operations of this world
are altogether vacant, void, and laid empty and wast of him, not enjoying the
least jot of his presence at all Psalm. 10. 4 Mat. 25. 4. Psalm. 58. 3.
, which is a Mystery not considered nor looked into, it being of the same
secrecy and also as conspicuous as Christ himself is, and of no other
ambiguity or certainty the one then is the other unto us 2 These. 2. 7 1 Timothy 3.
16
, and hence is that other particular in his rule and authority brought in by
our Prophet, that is by what he judges, which is said to be this:

By filling the places with dead bodies, or (as some translate it) he shall
fill up with ruins.
The Word translated fill, all other things must be expunged, expended, and
put out or passed away, or an end must be made of them, as the word will
bear, and therefore so much is in the words, as perfectly to plead a cause so
as to put an end to all hopes of ever impleading to the contrary, with any
advantage, and so does give life unto him, in whose behalf it is impleaded, for
it comes of a word that signifies to live, the word translated dead bodies, or
ruins, destruction, loss or misery, comes of a word that signifies to fall, or
to be dead, or come into extreme decay, that is decay even unto the uttermost,
so that the sense runs thus: he shall fill up with ruins, or he shall
perfectly plead, to recover with loss; or he shall cause to live by death, or
to rise by the fall, or to restore all things by an utter decay of them; and in
this the Prophet alludes unto that death, destruction, and way of the fall of
man in the beginning, without which, man had never lived the life of God in
Jesus Christ Ger. 3. 3. Genesis 3. 9 to 19. 2 Cor. 5. 21
; nor had he been saved and restored from an utter destruction and decay: nay
without which fall He had never been raised and lifted up unto the glory of
the Father Ephesians. 4. 9, 10.
: So that we cannot look upon the fall with an eye of faith in the wisdom of
God, but we must of necessity behold Christ the image and wisdom of the
Father in it, from which man fell, no more then we can behold the resurrection
by faith in the SON OF GOD; but we must behold the fall in it, from which
man is delivered, raised up, and restored Isa. 26. 19 Isa. 60. 1, 2.
: So that however the fall is properly taught in the first man that was, yet
not without respect unto the death and resurrection of JESUS CHRIST; so also
the resurrection is properly taught in the Lord JESUS, yet not without respect
unto that aspiring spirit of man at the first, which is his destruction Genesis 3.
5, 6. Psalm. 82. 6, 7.
, as is declared in those several temptations, wherewith the SON OF GOD was
assaulted Mat. 4. 1. to 10.
: So that in the fall of man, the humiliation and life of the SON OF GOD is
involved, so as death is swallowed up of victory, and in the exaltation of the
Son of God, that aspiring spirit and life of man is involved, whereby man by
nature corrupts and destroys himself Genesis 3. 5, 6 Hos. 13. 9.
: Now the fall of man is the death and humiliation of the Son of God on this
wise, the Son of God according to the wisdom of God, (which he is) cannot
admit of any thing into unity with himself that has in it self any life or
excellency besides that which is in the very nature and being of the Son of
God, therefore he consisting of God and Man, must needs take unto himself that
which is humbled, and in it self accursed, vain, sinful, and made void and
empty of that which is all things 2 Cor. 5. 21. Phil. 2. 7, 8. Psalm. 22. 6, 7.
; which is the very fall and defection of man it self, otherwise he could not
be the righteousness, resurrection, life, blessing, and fullness of it, for he
must be all, or else not any thing in that which is made one with him, as man
was at the first, even so the exaltation and life of the Son of man, according
to the life, light, and wisdom of a creature, made one with God, cannot admit
of any thing into unity with it self whose life and excellency is not the same
with that which is in it self, for the nature of man being made one with the
Image or Son of God Genesis 1. 27. Genesis 4. 1, 2.
, cannot propose it self unto it self in its native excellency below, or
inferior unto God, for the nature of man being made one with God, according to
the best perfections and wisdom of a creature, wherein he was as truly made as
in the wisdom and perfections of God, and according to that humane wisdom of
his, he cannot admit of any thing in, himself (that is in his own nature) to
be less then the excellencies of the Creator, being he was made in his Image,
and so he sets himself in the place and seat of God, for the excellencies of
God cannot be in the nature of the creature, but the creature must be God,
which it can never be. And therefore by this means he makes a nullity of God,
and so in himself becomes the God of this world 2 Cor. 4. 4.
or that Antichrist 1 Ioh. 2. 18 22. 1 John 4. 3. 2 John 7.
, and where he finds his own nature to fall short of the excellencies and
glory of God, in wisdom, power, authority, peace, and the like, being
restrained from some particular thee or other, in that kind, or that one tree
in general, so that he cannot eat in that manner that he would, then all his
wisdom, art and skill, is put forth to eat, or communicate in the things of
this life, or in the things of that life of man, to make himself in his own
nature, like unto God Genesis 3. 5.
made one flesh, and in a child they twain are made one individual Ephesians. 5. 31
32, 33.
: Hence it is that man not being contented with excellency in way of union,
that all those conspiracies, wars, controversies, and enmity break out, and
are seen in the world among the sons of men; for King and Subject have each
others perfections in respect of unity, but when any excellency appears in one
that the other has not in himself, where the fear of God and the knowledge of
the excellency of unity in Christ is not, they never rest till they either pull
it down, or in some way or other transplant and assume it unto themselves, so
it was in the people toward Moses, who was King in Jeshurun Deuteronomy. 33. 4. 5.
, for they would have leaders of their own device and making, like unto other
Nations Exodus 32. 1 Acts 7. 39. 40, 41.
, to go before them into Canaan: so it was in the days of Samuel, they would
have a Saul to rule over them 1 Samuel 8. 5 6. 7.
; and so it is now in the Ministry betwixt Priest and people, as it was in
that Corah and his company toward Aaron Numb. 16. 1, 2, 3.
, and so it is between man and man of all sorts and degrees, though they be one
by union being all of one flesh Acts 17. 26.
, yet where any excellency appears in one that another has not in himself,
that is, in his own personal condition, presently enmity appears if (by his
industry, or eating of one tree or other) he cannot attain it Genesis 4. 3, 4. 5.
; nothing therefore but the excellency that comes by union can unite truly man
and man together in any estate, that is, when he can count and reckon upon the
excellencies of another as his own, but especially this is the way, and no
other, that unites and brings together. God and the creature John 17. 20, 21.
, even so nothing but selfexcellency breeds debate, and separates man and man
in all relations, but that and nothing else breeds debate and enmity,
especially between God and man, which is the root, original, and fountain of
al other debates, separations, controversies, enmity and hatred, which moves
that wicked one (in all ages) to kill and murder his brother 1 John 3. 12.
, not acknowledging that excellency that is in unity to be such, as one is the
keeper and preservation of another Genesis 4 9, 10. Acts 20. 28. John 2. 2. Rev.
13. 8.
the superior preserves the inferior; for, without a superior an inferior
could not be: and the inferior preserves the superior; for, without an
inferior a superior could not be: the nature of man preserves, and gives
being unto the death of Christ; for, without the nature of man united unto God,
a death of an eternal race and virtue could never be: the nature of the Son
of God preserves, and gives being unto the life of the son of man: for
without the nature of the Son of God being united unto man, a life of an
eternal race and virtue could never be in man, or in a creature John 17. 3
Romans 6. 23. 1 Ioh. 5. 11. Titus 3. 7.
; the death and fall of man therefore, according to the wisdom of God, is the
very way of transmitting of the life and excellencies of God over unto another,
in whom there is, otherwise, no such life and dignity 1 John 5. 11, 12.
, and the exaltation of the son of man, by and in that life and dignity,
according to the wisdom of man, or of a creature, is the way of arrogating
that unto himself, which is proper and peculiar unto God alone, in whom there
can be no such corruptible, momentanie, and fading life and dignity, as the
mind and wisdom of man so valueth and apprizeth of; and these two being the
grand parents of all the world, were both in perfection in man in the first act
of his creation, and that without any fault, defect, or imperfection at all:
nay the work in it self was vehemently good Eccles. 7. 29. Genesis 1. 31.
But no longer then the wisdom of God can be without manifestation in making
of such a wonderful work, in giving glory to the Creator, whose word has made
it, and given being unto it, which must needs be in the very act, of the making
and being of it, no longer can the wisdom of man, wherein the weakness of man
(signified in the woman being in the transgression, and not the man 1 Pet. 3. 1 Timothy 2. 14
, as also the very subtilty of the Serpent appears) can be without the
manifestation of it self in questioning (and so denying) the nature and glory
of the work Genesis 3. 1.
, which is all one to deny the Creator, whose wisdom and image is in it, even
as the Jews denying Christ to be the Son of God, did in so doing deny God
himself John 14. 7. to 11.
, and so crucified the Lord of glory 1 Cor. 2. 8.
. These two then are the two great Parents of all the world (namely the wisdom
of God, and the wisdom of the flesh) at the first made upright and innocent
Eccles. 7. 29.
, and the one cannot appear glorious but as it has respect unto shame and
infirmity, nor can the other appear shameful and weak, but as it has
respect unto honor and dignity, yet neither of them the cause but only the
occasion of each other, they are both naked and are not ashamed Genesis 2. 25.
: For in the man (simply considered) there is no cause of shame in him to have
such a wife, and there is no cause in such a wife (simply considered) to be
ashamed of such a husband, there is no cause in such a God to be ashamed of
such work, nor is there any cause in such a work to be ashamed of such a
worker, no cause that such a creature should be ashamed of such a creature, no
cause that such a creature should be ashamed of such a Creator; thus it is, as
the work is simply considered, the work and the worker being made one. But
when they have recourse each to other, and converse one with the other in that
way of the woman, or wisdom of man, (taught therein as it has relation to
God) wherein is included the wisdom of the Serpent, teaching, that such a
thing as the fall is, comes not to pass but by having recourse to another who
is the wisest of the beasts of the field, and is called the Serpent Genesis 3. 1.
; the Hebrew word Nacash, translated there Serpent, signifies to know by
experience, as though man expostulating with God by his own wisdom, thingking
to find out the deep things of God, and by that his own wisdom to know and to
feel them in himself as of himself, and in his own nature, and so
maintains his own abilities in this his recourse unto and conversing with the
Word of God; but in so doing transformes the Word of God into such subtilty
unto himself, that it has the voice, sting, death, horror and fear of a
Serpent in it unto him, even as the wisdom of God conversing with our
infirmity (in that way of Christ) as sin, srrow, and shame, turns them into
strength, righteousness, joy and honor in himself: and when man thus
converseth with the Word of God in his own wisdom, namely in that wisdom
which such a creature does afford and none other, then do they both become
naked, as having respect one unto the other, and are both now ashamed Genesis 3. 7.
. For the wisdom and act of man makes the Son of God ashamed, stripping him of
that robe of our infirmities and frailties, not knowing how to put them rightly
upon him, which is the nakedness and only shame of the Son of God, for they
are the only robes which he honors and dignifies himself by, they being the
only sufferings whereby the Captain of our salvation is made perfect Heb. 2.
10.
, it also makes the son of man ashamed, (signified in the woman) who through
his own wisdom denies our nature, that glory and dignity which God has put
upon it, not knowing how to make the glory of God to be the only and alone
dignity of the creature, and to deprive the creature of, and deny it the glory
of the Creator in all things by this its unity with him in Christ is also the
very nakedness and shame of man, who never had any other ornament or robe to
cover and adorn himself with in any way of acceptance or comeliness before
God but only that, and not standing in that according to the way of faith, and
work of creation, he cannot possibly have an eye unto God, but in the way of
shame, even as he puts the Lord Jesus to shame by denying unto him his
infirmities, through which is declared that victory, triumph, and glory of his
death 1 Cor. 15. 54, 55, 56, 57. Heb. 6. 6.
. Man therefore in his own wisdom cannot have recourse unto the dignity and
glory of his estate in the Son of God, but in the way of shame and confusion
brought upon himself, (which is and ever has been that spiritual Babylon,
mother of whoredoms, City and seat of all wickedness even until now Rev. 17.
5 Zech. 5. 7. 8. 9, 10, 11.
) nor can the Son of God according to the wisdom of God, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13,
14.
) but we hide them in our selves and others under lying lips Pro. 10. 18. Pro.
12. 22.
; for if we take death in its extent to say rightly (as Christ did) it is
finished, then do we see the fullness of the curse which his hanging on the
tree does teach unto us Gal. 3. 13. Deuteronomy. 21. 23
, which is according to that which God has revealed (in that his not only
expostulating with the man and the woman in the beginning Genesis 3. 16, 17.
) but also he descends down unto the Serpent, the deepest of that subtilty
that transformed the truth of God into a lie Romans 1. 25
, showing how the curse is upon him for that destruction of the world Genesis 3.
14, 15.
, which curse does never appear as it is, but the blessing and safety of the
world is in it, and therefore if the curse of the Serpent appear, his head is
broken, the seed of the woman comes forth, yea salvation is attained Gal. 3.
13, 14.
, which appears in (and neither before nor after) the depth of the curse upon
the Serpent, even then and there is his head broken Genesis 3. 13, 14.
, and then sing Moses and Miriam and all the Host of God Exodus 15. 1, to 21.
, for when the head of Leviathan is broken, then is Israel Gods firstborn,
even his only son called out of Egypt Hos. 11. 1.
, for then Herod is dead Mat. 2. 19, 20.
, who gloriously and victoriously comes up out of the red Sea, or as the word
is rightly rendered, according to the Hebrew phrase, out of Edomes Sea, that is,
out of all blood and wrathful displeasure (or Esau that firstborn after the
flesh) whatsoever Exodus 15. 4, 22.
; who then appeared and played his part in Pharaoh, and after had the same name
given unto him that is given to this raging Sea Genesis 25. 30. Genesis 36. 1.
which swallowed up Pharaoh and all his host, but delivered Israel, Selah. Yea,
when the curse appears, signified by those customs of the Law, when Christ
was brought into the Temple to have them performed upon him Luke 2. 27 to 32.
, showing thereby that he was made a curse for us, even then does the promised
seed the child Jesus appear also, and then sing old Simeon and Hanna the
Prophetess with great satisfaction and consolation Luke 2. 34 to 38.
, yea the Angels and all those heavenly Armies sing and rejoice exceedingly,
when the curse and the blessing, sin and righteousness meet and are brought
together in that Child Jesus, that only begotten of God in the world Luke 2. 13
14. John 3. 16.
, for then is sin devoured and swallowed up 1 Cor. 15. 54, 55, 56, 57.
, and righteousness shows forth her pleasant face from on high Psalm. 85. 10,
11, 12, 13
, yea then is the curse turned into blessedness it self, which loses and
sets at liberty all hearts and tongues to rejoice and sing Luke 4. 18, 19.
; but the wisdom of man not reaching the nature and extent of the curse can
never find out nor taste of the blessing, not knowing the way of sin he can
never know the way of righteousness: these two then (namely the wisdom of the
flesh and the wisdom of the spirit) are those two great roots from which all
the several branches of life (as also of death) do spring, even those two
great parents that bring forth all the world divided into two sorts, namely the
seed of the woman and the seed of the Serpent Genesis 3. 15
, and yet neither produces his generation but with respect unto both; for the
wisdom of God bringing sin and righteousness together, there is nothing but
righteousness and peace kissing each other Psalm. 85. 10. Romans 2. 10.
, rejoicing the heart of him in whom they are Psalm. 32. 11.
, but the wisdom of man bringing sin and righteousness together there is
nothing but sin and death at an utter variance, troubling and tormenting the
heart of him in whom they are Tit. 1. 15. Romans 2. 8, 9. Genesis 4. 6, 13 14.
, and according to these two roots and generations is the act of our Lord in
his way of Judgment and Government exercised, in that it is said, that he
fills up with ruins, for there is a fullness of sin in that man of sin Genesis
15. 16.
who is composed of nothing else: which filling up is by nothing else but by
the ruin and destruction of the Son of God in that man in whom no life, nor
spirit, nor power of Christ appears, for his filling up is the desolation and
laying of himself wast of all heavenly virtues and excellencies that come from
God, and are of him Heb. 6. 6. Genesis 6. 5.
: there is also a filling up or fullness of righteousness in that Son of God,
which is by the ruin and destruction of all sin and wickedness in that man
of God or righteous man Jesus Christ Col. 1. 19. Col. 2. 9. Ephesians. 2. 15. 16.
, who cleanses and purifieth himself of all guilt, stain, pollution, or
filthiness of the flesh whatsoever, that is and comes of the Devil, in whom
Satan finds nothing of himself Heb. 9. 14 1 Pet. 1. 19. Ioh. 14. 30.
, and therefore can lay no claim nor title to him at all, for he never found
any thing in him nor ever shall, so that here is a fullness also or filling up
by an utter ruin and desolation of the Devil, the world, sin, the works of
the flesh, and all carnal Commandments whatsoever Col. 2. 14, 15, 16. Col. 2.
20, 21, 22, 23.
. Observe here therefore, that sin and righteousness are manifested in their
fullness no other way but in the utter ruin and destruction of each other, in
whomsoever the one or the other dwells, and that out of that one act or great
work of God in the creation of mankind the one in that way of the fall made
manifest in that first man, the other in the way of the resurrection declared
and made manifest in Jesus Christ; we are to consider therefore that sin and
righteousness are neither of them any created thing, yet both of them made
manifest by generation, in which generation that which is eternal in it self
becomes temporary through or in another, and that which is temporary in it
self becomes eternal in or by another: sin is no created thing, for God made
all things good, yea, vehemently good, as the word is, and even so was that
workmanship of mankind created in Adam, in whom was both the wisdom of a
creature being made of the earth Genesis 2. 7.
, as also the wisdom of God in whose Image he was likewise made Gen 1. 27.
: Now this work of God in the wisdom and understanding of a creature was able
to judge of and find out the nature of any creature, over whom he was set as
Lord Genesis 2. 19, 20, 23.
, and therefore their names were as the man called them, who knew the nature of
them, and for whom they were created Genesis 1. 29, 30.
, but amonst them all, he finds not a help proportionable unto himself Genesis 2.
20.
, and therefore consulting with God in this temporary and created wisdom, and
measuring himself with God, as he had done with all the works of Gods hand,
(besides that workmanship of himself in whom the woman was Genesis 2. 21. 22.
Genesis 5. 1, 2.
) falls infinitely short of holding proportion with God, even as the rest of
the creatures fell short of holding proportion with himself, and hereby
degenerating from God propagates and begets sin, wrath, death and hell in his
soul, and thereby becomes a son of death and perdition Ioh. 17. 12 1 Timothy 6.
9. 2 These. 2, 3.
, made and filled up by the ruin and destruction of that Image of God in
himself, in which he was so happily made, and generates and begets sin in
himself as he is a creature, no other way but through that righteousness and
holiness that is in his Creator, that being the occasion, (as has been said)
but no proper cause at all, no not in the least: so that sin is not but as it
is propagated in and by a creature, and yet not without respect unto that
righteousness that is in the Creator, consulting with and about it according
to the capacity and principles of a creature, and not according to the light
and revelation, wisdom and principles of the Creator, even that holy word or
mind of the Lord made manifest in the flesh Genesis 3. 3, 4 5. 1 Cor. 2. 11, 12.
1 Cor. 2. 4. to 11. 1 Timothy 3. 16
. Righteousness also is no created thing, for it is that blessed and increat
being that gives being unto all things and this also propagates, begets and
generates it self in the way of the Son of God, Jesus Christ our Lord, who
was made in the similitude of sinful flesh, and by that which is sin in it
self, condemns sin in the flesh Iam. 1. 17, 13. 1 John 5. 18, 19. Romans 8. 3, 4.
, yea he was made sin in us, that knew no sin in himself 2 Cor. 5. 21.
; that is, he was made that which in it self is nothing but si, if by it self,
it intermeddle with the righteousness of God, and hereby does righteousness
generate and propagate it self in and with respect unto us, for righteousness
consulting with our infirmities by those principles, and according to that
wisdom that is in God, thereby begets and generates that holy and innocent Son
of God Luke 1. 34 35. Iam 1. 21. Genesis 18 9. to 15.
, who otherwise could never be made known nor manifested unto us; but hereby
he makes himself righteous in time (for all creatures are in time) who is also
from eternity, else time and eternity could not be propagated in that one act
of our salvation: even so also the creature that is in time, making it self
sin, by that righteousness that is in God makes it self an eternal sinner,
who otherwise could not bring forth sin and death of such a race, and in the
one and the other there is a filling of the places with dead bodies, or a
filling up by ruins, and these ruins are multiplied both in the one and in
the other, according to the diversities of glory that appears in the Revelation
of the Son of God, and hence the extence of his Government and Judgment is
brought in, in these words:

He shall wound the heads over many Countries, or he does wound the head over
or in a great Country. --
The word here translated wound, signifies to wound to death, till, blast,
cause to wither and bring to naught: the word head is read either in the
singlar or plural number, and signifies the chief or principle, the life or
beginning of a thing, as the head or beginning of a Fountain which is the life
of the streams, or the top or head of any thing that springs up, as also the
root of any things that grows in the earth; the word great signifies either
great in quantity or great in multitude: great in quantity comprizing all
things in one, and so there is one Prince of the power of the air Ephesians. 2. 2.
, one God of this world who blinds the eyes of such as believe not 2. Cor. 4. 4.
, and great in multitude also, an one being transfused into all, and so his
name is Legion for he is many Mark 5. 9. Luke 8. 30.
, and so the word translated Country signifies either the whole world or any
particular Nation, Country, confine, parcel or tract of ground, circumscribed
and bounded within it self; our Lord therefore wounds or causes to wither
that head or heads, yea root and branch of that great and multiplied one that
is in the world in general, and in every particular of it, and here our
Prophet alludes unto all those Kings of Canaan, situate in that one Nation,
discomfited and overcome by Josua even as one, as also to all the heads of the
Nations round about them, into whom the very same spirit was diffused, by which
they became enemies unto Israel, for when the most high divided unto the
Nations their inheritance, when he separated the Sons of Adam he set the bounds
of the people, according to the number of the children of Israel Deuteronomy, 32. 8.
: So that in whatsoever the Son of God is honored, lifted up and advanced by,
in the very same thing appears the dishonor shame and confusion of the
Nations, even the men of this world: For, if the inheritance of the Saints in
the Son of God be made manifest, and rightfully distributed and given unto
them, then do the Nations, and men of this world appear to be intruders and
usurpers in all that ever they do or may possess, in any thing wherein they
seem to stand in relation unto, or to have any respect unto God therein, but
for the several relations betwixt creature and creature, the Saints of God do
in no case disregard nor neglect, and hence it is, that their warfare is
spiritual 2. Cor. 10. 14.
, only seeking to advance the Son of God in the Kingdom of God, and not to
deprive any man of his orderly interest of whatsoever he enjoyes of the things
that appertain unto this life Psalm. 115. 16. Mat. 22. 18. to 22.
, yea the division of tongues in that confusion of languages, or in the
beginning of the Kingdom of that mighty hunter which is Babell, Erech, Acad,
and Calney, in the land of Shyner Genesis 10. 10.
is nothing else but the advancement of this Kingdom of our Lord, when those
cloven or those dividing, distributing and fiery tongues sit upon our Apostle
and high Priest of our porfession, speaking unto every man in his own
language, uttering the very same speech that himself speaks in his own
heart Romans 10. 6. 7, 8. Deuteronomy. 30. 11, 12, 13, 14.
, condescending and coming down, yea taking up the very lip or language which
we naturally speak in our selves, the reby to open and interpret that one
heavenly language and speech of the Father unto the Son in the variety and
several ways, wherein it has infinitely expressed it self unto us,
therefore is the Spirit expressed in that place in the plural number, cloven
and fiery tongues, and in the singular also, and it sat upon every one of
them, to declare that all of them are of one lip and language, as all the earth
was before the division Acts 2. 2, 3, 4. Genesis 11. 1.
, yea, even that division that was made in Adam at the first Genesis 3. 12, 13.
, and that every one of them has all, so as to be able to speak to all sorts,
estates and conditions of men, and is made able to preach the Gospel to Mark
16. 15.
, or as the word may be read ( in) every creature, so that it shall become
either a savor of life or else a savor of death unto all, and therefore must
either find a voluntary submission unto it self in the forsaking of all the
ways of sinful flesh Gal. 5. 24, 25, 26. Luke 14. 33
, or else they will appear mockers, maliciously dispiting, and casting gross
aspersions upon that Spirit of Grace, by which it speaks and utters it
self unto them Mat. 12. 24 to 28
, though they judge themselves unworthy or discern themselves unmeet for the
Kingdom of God Act. 17. 32. Act. 13. 45, 46.
.

Our Lord therefore wounds the Dragon Isa. 51. 9.
, and breaks the bead of Leviathan Psalm. 74. 14.
in a two fold respect; looking upon that tree (so rooted) to be pleasant,
desirable and fit to make one wise Genesis 3. 6.
, that is, to beget and bring forth a wisdom whereby the creature may have
another wisdom in the things of God besides that which is in God himself, and
this root (when our Lord appears) must needs be blasted, wither and come to
naught; for, there is nothing in the creature that can cause to grow or spring
up unto God, for nothing can go beyond that which it is in it self, and that
proper sphere wherein it naturally works, and therefore the creature not
being in its own nature the Creator Isi. 55. 8, 9 Ezekiel. 28. 9. Isa. 31. 3.
, it is impossible that ever it should work it self or any other unto God
Isa. 2. 22. Ier. 10. 23. John 6. 44.
, who is in himself infinitely beyond and above the reach of it Job 38. the
whole chapt. 1 Cor. 2. 9. 1 Cor. 2. 14.
, and therefore it is, that when that unclean spirit goes out of the man
whoever interposeth somewhat between God and himself that he may grow up to
God by it, ever walks abroad and wandreth through dry places, namely such as
have no moisture or unction found in them to effect his ends in making himself
to be at ease and excellent, but is seeking rest and finds none, only returns
multiplied into his own house again worse then he went out, for the end of
that man is worse then his beginning Iok. 12. 43
; and this is the very root of that man of sin, who at the first rise of him
interposed somewhat between God and himself, to make himself thereby
excellent and acceptable to God, besides that which properly flows from God
himself Genesis 3. 5, 6
, which root takes place in all natural men's hearts unto this day, and is that
root of bitterness that where ever it springs up has trouble Heb. 12. 15
, yea pierces through with many sorrows 1 Timothy 6. 10.
, and this Christ causes to wither or dries up, so as it grows not, nor has
place in his Kingdom Isa. 35. 10 Isa. 51. 11.
.

Again, the top or branch of this man of sin is this, namely, hereby he would
grow up to be like, 2 These. 2. 4
, but when he by these things comes to measure himself by, and to compare
himself with God, then does it serve for no other end but to kindle wrath in
himself, and God becomes a consuming fire unto him Heb. 12. 29.
, even so as both root and branch are burned up Mal. 4. 1. Isa. 5. 24.
, and this office does Christ as he is a Priest, offering up (burning and
consuming) all the fat and the sweet, the beauty, glory, and excellency of the
creature Levit, 3. 3 4. 5. Levit. 9. 10. Isa. 40. 6, 7, 8.
, which is a thing most acceptable unto the Spirit of God in the hearts of all
the Saints 2 Cor. 4. 7
, who have their eyes opened to see their glory to consist in another and not
in themselves Col. 3. 3, 4
which is a far transcendent and above the glory of a creature as the
Creator is above the work of his hand, the builder of the house above the
house that is built Heb. 3. 3, 4
: But it is most miserable, and a thing not tolerable to behold by any carnal
or corrupt heart and mind, who judge of all things according to the flesh and
the principles of a creature, for the life and glory of the Son of God must
needs be death and destruction unto the flesh, yea to all carnal conceptions
and practices which in themselves would be the glory and excellency; for take
away the beauty and glory of a creature unto the eye and view of a creature,
and nothing but fear, sorrow, shame and sin implanteth it self in the soul,
looking upon it self so stripped, laid wast, and bereaved of his own proper
excellencies, even as he is a creature in the very own and proper nature
thereof Genesis 3. 10. Genesis 4. 5. 14
; and this our Lord does

In many Countries or in all Continents, as the word will bear.
That is, in whatsoever the glory of man (as he is properly a creature) may
appear, or in what it might be contained or circumscribed, the glory of the
Son of God blasts it, and brings it to naught: if his excellency might appear
in power, it is withered and becomes weakness when God appears Dan. 5. 1. to
6.
; if in righteousness Pharasaicall it is blasted and becomes sin when Christ
appears Mat. 5. 20 Luke 15. 16
; if in wisdom, it is wounded and becomes foolishness when that wisdom of
the Son of God is brought forth 1 Cor. 3. 18.
, and so in all things that appertains unto man, and every one of these heads
in their several Continents is so wounded, as having all the rest in it, and
all of them are so vanquished and overcome, as they do but only bring down
that one head of that one man of sin and son of perdition 2 These. 2, 3.
; and hence arises that wonder in corrupted Israel, that every one does sheath
his sword in his brothers side Exodus 32. 27.
: The several ways of headship in the going forth and exercise of that man of
sin, works strife, debate, and dissension even in himself, for as he is
multiplied in headships, even so is he in opposition within himself, and that
unto the devouring and destruction within himself in and by each other Genesis
14. 1. to 11.
, whilst Israel the firstborn of God, stands still and only appears in
fight Exodus 14. 13
, standing on the Seashore singing triumphantly unto the overthrow Exodus 14.
30, 31. Exodus 15. 1.
: Again, the Lord Christ wounds and causes to wither both root and branch,
even the head or heads in many or in all Countries, or Continents, as he is
King of Saints Rev. 15. 3
, as well as he does as he is Priest of the most high; for when the fat and
the sweet is burned up and consumed in the creature, as he is a creature,
nothing but misery and wretchedness can appear unto the sight and view of any
natural eye, and this wretchedness has its head or heads also, yea its top
and its bottom, its root and branch: the root of it is this, namely, that the
creature has no bottom, being or subsistence in it self Col. 1. 17. Act. 17.
25, 28.
, which in the eye of a creature is most miserable, for in a natural eye and
according to natural principles, man is hereby made more miserable then any
other creature whatsoever; for all other creatures may (in a sense) be truly
said, to have their motion, life and being in themselves and not in God, though
God give it unto them, yet so as unto things abstracted from that life and
being, which is in himself and is himself John 1. 1, 2 3, 4.
, even as we see a man gives form and being unto a watch, and winds up the
springs to move to such a period, so that the watch all that time is in motion,
but it can in no wise be affirmed to be the motion of that man, although his
art and skill have given unto it that motition, even so the sun, moon, and
stars have their motion, but it cannot be said, that their moving is the motion
of the Son of God, so also the plants, beasts, and fowls of the air have
their being, life, and motion to a certain period given unto them by God, but
it cannot be said that that is the life, being, and motion of the Son of God,
for then it were a like sin violently to take away the life and motion of them,
as it was in Herod, Pontius Pilate, and the Jews to take away the life and
motion of Jesus Christ Act. 4. 25, 26, 27.
: But there cannot be any creature in heaven or earth, or under the earth found
in the life, being and motion of the Son of God, but only man, no more then
there is any found created in the image of God but man alone, for it is
impossible that there should be any more Images of God then one, for there can
be no more images of a thing then there is of substances and beings in that
thing, therefore God being one Deuteronomy. 6. 4 1 Timothy 2. 5.
, his Image is only one; there cannot be more shadows then there are
substances, but the substance is one, therefore the shadow is but one, and
only to be found in man alone, who is the model, epitomy, or breviary of all
other creatures, and in him only God is truly said to be one with all his
works Col. 1. 17.
, and that all things are reconciled together, both things in heaven and in the
earth Col. 1. 20.
; added further, that there is no image or similitude of God proposed unto the
creature consisting of any thing that is excellent besides himself, for his
image is his wisdom Pro. 8. 12. to 31. compared with Col. 1. 15.
, and his wisdom is himself, so is Christ said to be the brightness of his
glory, and the engraven or express form, fashion, or face of his subsistence
or being Heb. 1. 3.
, and of that can no resemblance be framed or made, but it is an Idol whatever
it be, or in what age of the world soever brought forth, erected or set up,
therefore it is said, take heed unto your selves for ye saw no image when the
Lord spoke unto you in Horeb out of the midest of the fire Deuteronomy. 4. 15
, and tells them, that if any manner of similitude be made, it is the
corrupting of themselves Deuteronomy. 4. 16 to 19.
, for God himself is the cause, matter, subject and manner of his own Image,
and out of him, or abstracted from him, can none be made nor ever was, (that
can be pleasing unto him) no more then the Son of God can be propagated out of
or abstracted from the Father John 1. 1, 2, 3. John 17. 21.
, which if he should he could not then be God John 14. 7. 8, 9.
, as he is; so that God is the matter and subject of his own Image, even as
man is the matter, cause and subject of his own sin, yet neither of them are
made known in their operations but with respect unto the other, for sin has
not its operation but with respect unto, God, nor do Gods operations appear
to be but with respect unto sinful man: So that there is nothing in man (that
is in his own nature) that is any jot of image, or similitude, shadow, type,
or resemblance of God, no further then as it stands in direct opposition unto
God, and so becomes a direct dissimilitude unto him, which can be proper unto
no other creature but unto man alone, because he judges of nothing concerning
himself but with respect unto God, unto whom he naturally tends, even as the
sparks fly upward Job 5. 7. Isa. 50. 11.
through that secret propensity that is in his nature, by virtue of that first
act of his creation, wherein God was made the proper center of his soul, yea
even he in whom he had his being in that glorious work of his creation, and
therefore must look unto him in all actions, and for all happiness, even as
the earth inclines after the heavens for heat and moisture to make her self
fruitful, though so far remote in nature and diverse from them Hos. 2. 21.
Ier. 14. 4. Psalm. 65. 9. to 13. Psalm. 143. 6.
, and hereby judging of God and of the things of God, according to the eye or
sight of a natural mind 1 Cor. 2. 14.
, brings himself into opposition against God in all things, for there is no
excellency in the creature, unto which the heart of man can go forth, but he
in the pursuit of it (if grace prevent not) sets it in the place and room of
God, expecting some excellency from it whereby to commend himself unto God, and
so worships the creature and idolizeth it, attributing some excellency unto it,
as it (with himself) has relation and respect unto God, therefore it is, that
we must not only leave and forsake, but even hate father and mother, and wife
and children for Christ's sake, if we will be his Disciples Luke 14. 26
, that is, we are to hate them in respect of the height of that love and
affection which naturally runs out unto them, which is never to stay till it
idolize and set them in the place of God unto our selves, so that as we must
hate Idolatry, so also them and all other things in that respect, and if we
look at the creatures as to be a type or image of God in their operations and
excellencies, as they have respect unto each other, so as that we are prevented
by grace from the pursuit of them, in climbing up unto that which the mind of
man naturally leads unto, then by a Christian and enlightened mind they are
brought into competition with that which is the truth and durable substance it
self, else they do not appear as a type or shadow, 1 Pet. 1. 23. 24. Romans
14. 17
and if so we behold them, then does their glory and beauty fade, even as the
flower of the field, yea they wither like grass, and perish in the Kingdom of
our God is and prove vain, yea lighter then vanity, only the word of the Lord
that abides for ever 1 Pet. 1. 25.
taking its form and figure, yea raising up it self in its own image and
operatitions out of nothing in our nature, but only from that which in it
self is in direct opposition unto that Image and durable Word of God, that so
the Kingdom, power and glory may be of him Mat. 6. 13.
, and through him, and to him for ever, Amen Romans 11. 33, 34, 35, 36.
, Therefore the proper types, figures and characters that are found in our
nature in the way of the Kingdom of God, are no better then such as were found
in those Fathers after the flesh, who fell in the wilderness 1 Cor. 10. 1. to
11.
, which our Apostle tells us, that they are written for our admonition or
instruction, upon whom the ends or finishings, or dyings of the world (that is
in all its glory) are come: The word come signifies to come from high to low,
yea to fall down as a thing brought to naught, when ever the glory of God
appears in his Saints; hence it is that our Prophet David sees an end of all
perfection whatsoever (proper unto the nature of a creature Psalm. 119. 96.
) only the Commandment or that Law of the Spirit that is in Jesus Christ Romans
8. 2.
is exceeding broad Psalm. 119. 96.
, large, and extensive in all its dimentions, reaching unto all times and
places, which the mind of a creature (not being able to comprehend that glory
and extent that is in the word of God) always propounds God unto it self as
another thing then that which inded he is, in that way of Christ, and so falls
short in all things of that which is the proper being of the creature, and
thence he makes himself miserable and restless, even as a thing that has no
stay or substance to rest upon, and in it self is ponderous, even like unto a
man upon a steep and high place proposes a thing unto himself to stand upon
as a substance, adventuring his whole weight thereon and it proves but a mere
shadow, so that it comes to pass he tumbleth himself down in such sort as
he is ever falling, and this is the branch that springs out of the above
named root in this miserable state and condition of man, namely, a defection,
fall or motion from God, even unto the utmost point of despair, and that
irrecoverably in or with respect unto any thing that is in or of himself, or
in any or in all the creatures, which makes his misery to be such as being
ever in the terror of the fall, so as he never comes unto any bottom, for it
is become a bottomless pit which only the Angel that descends down from
heaven having a key in his hand, can open or shut Rev. 9. 1, 2. Rev. 20. 1.
, yea he can open it so as that wicked one, ye a all the wicked of the world
shall go down into it, even all Nations that forget God Psalm. 9. 16 17.
, and he can so shut it that they can never come out again, neither can any of
the sons of God enter thereinto, who are redeemed by the blood of the Lamb Luke
16, 23, 24, 25, 26.
, who has overcome it 1 Cor. 15. 55.
: This miserable state and condition of man in the head or in the root and
branch, our King Christ withers and vanquisheth when he appears, yea when
that princely Champion Psalm. 19. 4 5, 6.
or son of righteousness arises, who has healings in his wings or in all his
motions in us Mal. 4. 2, 3
, communicating his light with us John 1. 4. Psalm. 36. 9.
, then do we behold things as he beholds them, that is, we see them then to be
such as they are, and as he has made them to be, and then must we behold the
glory of man's subsistence or being to be in his Creator in that way of Christ,
and not to be in himself as abstracted from God as the rest of the creatures,
who were never made in that image of his, nor had their proper being and
subsistence in him, so as to be but one entire work Ephesians. 2. 10. Rev. 3. 14.
; and thus we see the root of this misery withered, and blasted, ( yea dried up
like unto that great river Euphrates Rev. 16. 12.
) when we perceive our selves to be set in that heavenly and steadfast place or
places in our God through Christ Ephesians. 1. 3. Ephesians. 2. 6.
, so that as our life is hid with Christ in God, even so are all things in and
of a Christian, which he may be said to have, or to be from the eyes of the
world; for hereby our King Christ gathers us up into unity and community with
himself, which is the only glory of this Kingdom, namely, to loose the
prisoners and let the oppressed and captives go free, to feed the hungry, and
refresh and comfort the feeble and mournful soul Isa. 61. 1, 2, 3. Luke 4.
18, 19.
, and herein is that branch of our misery also withered and dried up, as well
as the root, for out of our defection and depth of such a fall we grow up into
perfection in that glory, dignity, and perfection of the Son of God, or of Sons
of God Gal. 4. 5, 6 Heb. 2. 10.
, so that our glory, Resurrection and exaltation in the things of God can never
be fathmed or found out Romans 11. 31, 32, 33, 34, 35.
, but are of like extent with the fall into that bottomless pit, for this
exaltation of the Son of God, is a making of him higher then the heavens Heb.
7. 26.
, which could not be but from this ground, for the heavens are highness or
heights in themselves, but he is made height out of a bottomless gulf, to
the praise of the riches of his grace for ever, even as the state of the wicked
is made or becomes a bottomless pit by falling from such a height of majesty
and infinite glory, which by his creation he was made in, so that we can cry
out with admiration, Romans 11. 33.
oh the height yea and the depth also of that love of God in us through Jesus
Christ Romans 5. 5. Romans 8. 39. 1 John 2. 5.
! Man's misery therefore by Christ our King, is wounded or caused to wither both
in root and branch, and that in many or in all Countries, or Continents, that
is, even in all things wherein the misery of man is contained, or can any way
appear, for he being that wherein the creature has its subsistence, who is
infinite in himself in all excellencies and glory, must needs gather it up and
fetch it out of all its infirmities and frailties, for being infinite he cannot
but extend himself unto them, and accordingly exercise his Power, Kingdom,
headship and domination, in the deliverance and release (of that which is
become himself) from them all, man's nature having no other being or
subsistence, but what it has in him alone Acts 17. 28.
, neither has the Son of God any motin or operation either in respect of
ascension or descention, but what he has in man's nature alone; and hence is
the manner of his repast, brought in by our Prophet in his pursuit of and
exercise of authority over his enemies, laid down in these words:

He shall drink of the brook in the way, as also the issue and event, the sum
and result of all in these words, therefore shall he lift up his head, or
therefore shall he lift up heads, for the word is plural, and answers to those
heads that are spoken of before, which are wounded or killed, or withered.

But this or these are revived or lifted up; these words therefore by atrim or
elegant allusion unto Gideon and his Soldiers going out against that great
Army of the Midianites Judges 7. the whole chapt.
, do set Forth and declare the way of the humiliation and exaltation of Jesus
Christ the Son of God, that Judge of Israel Psalm. 72. 1 2, 3, 4.
yea that high Priest and Captain of our salvation Heb. 2. 10.
, in his vanquishing and destruction of all the enemies thereof in Gideon and
his soldiers set out plurally, as in many, even in three hundred, and here set
out as in that one only begotten of the Father the Son of God, who treads the
wine press alone, and none but he to help John 3. 16 John 1. 14. Isa. 63. 3.
; Gideons soldiers drink of the water to declare the weakness of that
whereby they are tried, or of that wherein their trial lies, as they descend
down into the valley, where the Army of the Midianites lay even as grasshoppers
Judges 6. 5 Judges 7. 12
, not only in a low descent as in a valley, but fortified with the hills and
mountains of this present world against Israel, as the word valley signifies
not only a low place, but fortification also, even as a valley is fortified
with hills: Now we know that water is weak in it self Ezekiel. 7. 17 Lam. 2. 19.
, and therefore our Apostle advises Timothy to drink no longer water but a
little wine, because of his stomachs often infirmities 1 Timothy 5. 23.
showing thereby (by an allusion unto water, and a weak stomach) what he ought
to do in the course of his Ministry, that is, that weakness and infirmity is
not to be applied unto weakness and infirmity, but strength (signified by
wine) is to be applied unto infirmity, and so comes the cure of it, that is,
the weak things of man are not to be applied unto man, but unto the Son of
God, whereby they receive strength and cure: So says the Baptist, I indeed
baptize with water, that is, my Baptism has no life nor spirit in it at all,
teaching what our nature is that the Word of God comes down into, but the
life, spirit and power is in the Baptism of him that comes after me, that is
greater then I, whose shoe latchet I am not worthy to loose John 1. 26, 27.
, teaching thereby the authority, power and strength that our nature is taken
into, and ascends up unto in that Word and Spirit descending upon it, and
uttering it self unto it Mat. 3. 16 17.
; so also the Prophet Ezekiel telling of the weakness of all flesh, says,
that all knees shall be feeble or fail as water Ezekiel. 7. 17
: So that Gideons Soldiers are to drink of weakness for their trial, may be
made manifest. By brook here signifying the same thing that those waters do
which Gideons soldiers drink of, only the word used here for brook,
signifies a stream that runs swift and abundantly, occasioned by some great
fall of snow or rain from an high, even so as the brook of our infirmities
arising from our fall, from that happy condition man was made in at the first.

In this point, three sorts of Gideons soldiers are to be noted, First, such
as out of fear turned back, and of them were two and twenty thousand, these
were such as conceived their own weaknesses would be their fall and ruin
Judges 7. 3
, for the adversaries had nothing but the arm of flesh to come against them
with; so that in their own fears they exalted and set up the arm of flesh,
which power their adversaries only had and no more, which to fear is a like
sin as to trust in it, and so equally shares in the curse Ier. 17. 5. Rev.
21. 8.
. The second sort were such as would go on, but they conceived and concluded
that weakness in themselves (intimated in those waters) was a defect and
hindrance unto them, in that work of the pursuit and overcoming of the
adversary, and so they make use of it, bowing and kneeling down to it, to make
use of it, as in its natural place as it runs in the river, and must of
necessity break that method and order in march which our Gideon had and has
set his soldiers in, and by that were discarded seven thousand. The third sort
were such as lapt up the water with their hands as they passed along, as no
breach of ranks nor any hindrance in their march at all, that is, they took or
do take up this water or weakness out of its natural place, lapping it up
with their hands even as a dog does water with his tongue, that is, they take
it up into unity according to that art, skill, device or Ministry, (signified
by the hand Psalm. 77. 20. Psalm. 137. 5. Isa. 53. 10.
) wherein or whereby the Son of God has taken our infirmities into unity with
himself, even so as by taking it he devoures and destroys it as these
soldiers devouring the water by their hand, taking it out of its natural
place so as it becomes no hindrance but a refreshment and an encouragement in
their pursuit of the adversary, yea so as it gives them intelligence of the
certainty of the overthrow of them, even as that dream of that poor and weak
barley cake discovered unto them the spirit of fear and terror that was in
that mighty host of the Midianites Judge. 7. 13 14.
, even so does the frailty and infirmity of man's nature (taken away by Christ)
discover the strength or rather the weakness, fears and troubles that are in
all such (be they never so many) who have not the strength, courage, and
consolations of the God of Israel amongst them Psalm. 29. 11. Psalm. 68 34. Psalm.
46. 1 Psalm. 8^ 5
, for he only knows how to carry his people out against all adversaries, so
as they shall never fail in success Isa. 41. 1. to 14. Isa. 43. 1, 2 3.
, but are like unto Joseph, who though the archers have sorely grieved him, and
shot at him, and hated him, yet his how abides in strength and the arms of his
hands are made strong by the hands of the mighty God of Jacob, from thence is
the Shepherd or feeder the stone of Israel Genesis 49. 23, 24.
: Thus does our Prophet here in looking back at an act formerly done in the
view of men, declare and foretell what is and shall come to pass, as that
which is the very life and spirit of that former act concerning our Lord Jesus,
how he drinks of the brook in the way, that is, the Son of God descending
into our nature takes our weaknesses and infirmities upon himself, even out of
that stream and current and from that proper place wherein by nature they run,
(so taking them up in his hand, that is, by his wisdom, skill, ordination,
office and Ministry, as he is a Priest for ever for that purpose) as that they
become the infirmities of the Son of God, even as truly and really as his power
and righteousness is made ours, and becomes the righteousness and power of
the Saints, and therefore of necessity must be devoured, destroyed, and caused
to vanish away for ever, for no frailty or infirmity can possibly abide upon
that holy and harmless one, but are disposed of for the benefit and
encouragement of all his in the pursuit of the adversary, for by death he
overcomes him that has the power of death Heb. 2. 14
, and by sin condemns sin in the flesh Romans 8. 3.
, casting it so in its cause by its own arguments, that it can never implead
against us any more Romans 8. 33, 34. ^ Cor. 15. 55, 56. Romans 6. 17, 18. Romans 6.
14.
; and this is as natural and proper for that hand, laid on in his ordination
and Ministry, as it is for the tongue of a dog to lap or take up water out of
its proper place unto himself, and this is done in the way, that is, in the
way of his humiliation without any stay, stop or hindrance of his exaltation at
all in the destruction of his enemies: The word translated way, signifies such
a way wherein is order and method, as to march in rank, so that the Son of God
our high Priest in this his way of humiliation keeps his rank, order, and
method with the Father, not failing to hold correspondency with him in wisdom,
power, glory, eternity, emensity and all manner of dignities, no not for a
moment, for then he should cease to be God, and so to be a Savior, for
salvation belongs only to the Lord Psalm. 3. 8. Psalm. 68. 19 20. Psalm. 144. ^0
, so as to save, and the creature is only the saved of him, once and for ever
Heb. 10. 10. Heb. 7. 27. Heb. 9. 25, 26. 27. 28.
; the way then of the humiliation of the Son of God is his descent into our
nature, which is the going down of our spiritual Gideon into the valley to
vanquish all Isreal's adversaries, in which he drinks of that great brook or
stream of our weaknesses and infirmities, whereby he refreshes himself in
the devouring and taking of them away, are taken and carried away Isa. 53. 4.
Ier. 50. 20.
in the abolishing of them Ephesians. 2. 15.
, removing them Psalm. 103. 3.
, and purgation of our nature Heb. 1. 3.
from all sin and uncleanness, putrefaction and corruption whatsoever Ephesians. 5.
27
, and that at once in one offering of himself for ever Heb 10. 10
, and hence it is, that he sits down at the right hand of God Heb. 10. 12, 13.
, which is the lifting up of his head in this place, or in the plural number
heads, noting hereby that various and multiplied way of exercise of his
authority and headship in all the world, both in the subduing of his enemies,
and wonderful advancement of his Saints, and thus the humiliation of our Lord
Christ becomes no less then his exaltation and lifting up for ever, for in the
very same act of the Son of God his descention into our nature, and becoming a
poor and frail man, yea a creature in us, who in himself is the Creator, in
that very act reciprocally and interchangeably is the nature of poor, silly and
weak man advanced and raised up into the state and dignity of that holy and
eternal Son of God, therefore the Prophet says, he was taken from prison and
from judgment Isa. 53. 8.
, or as the word is in the Hebrew, from a narrow strait, or to an narrow
strait, for the word min signifies either to or from, therefore that which the
Prophet reads to, the Apostle reads From, the Redeemer shall come to Sion,
says our Prophet Isa. 59. 20
; and to them that turn from iniquity in Jacob, which our Apostle alleging
says, the redeemer shall come from Sion and turn ungodliness from Jacob Romans
11. 26.
so that to a narrow strait of infringement from all dignity and glory is he
taken, as he assumeth our nature and condition: but in this is he also taken to
judgment, or into a large place of dominion, or of discerning of all things,
as our nature is made one with that potent and all-seing eye of the Word of
God, and so our Apostle expounds that place of the Prophet, saying, in his
humiliation his judgment is exalted Acts 8. 33
, or in this strait and narrow place is the place of his freedom and
enlargement, or in his humiliation is his exaltation; for as he makes himself
strong through our weakness, so does he enlarge himself through our narrow
and straight condition, and exalts himself through our baseness, and in that
shows himself to be the Son of God, for man cannot perform works of that
nature, man only can honor himself by things which in the esteem of man are
honorable, but out of things that are base and vile he cannot do it, and upon
this ground our Apostle affirms of him, saying, thou made him a little lower
then the Angels, crownedst, or in the present tence, crowning him with glory
and greatness Heb. 2. 7.
as a continued and perpetuated act, or as the word will bear, without
straining it, thou diminishing him make him great, therefore the Prophet
Psalm. 8. 5.
(whence our Apostle takes the phrase) says, thou made him a little lower
then God, for the word there is Elohim, so that to make the Son of God less
then God, is to diminish him, and make him to be that which in it self is
nothing of God, so that by how much the son of sorry man is made higher and
above the condition of a mere creature in Christ Jesus, being stated in the
dignity of the Son of God in his exaltation, even by so much is that glorious
Son or Word of God, debased below the condition of a creature, in that way of
his humiliation, for all creatures in the act of creation are vehemently good
Genesis 1. 31.
, but he becomes in us, sin 2 Cor. 5. 21.
, sorrow Isa. 53. 3.
, death Hos. 13. 14
, hell Psalm. 16 10
and a curse Gal. 3. 13.
, in his redeeming and delivering of us from that state of our degeneration,
and therefore that which is properly the humiliation of the Son of God must be
the glory and exaltation of the Son of man, the nature divine considered in the
one, and the nature humane in the other, without unity of which two no Christ
that ever was, nor that ever shall, therefore when ever the virtue and power of
our sin takes hold on him in this unity (without which unity our sin cannot
become his) in that very same act and moment the virtue and power of God takes
hold on us, and the spirit of grace and glory rests upon us 2 Cor. 12. 9. 1
Pet. 4. 14.
or abides in our nature John 14. 16
in that his suffering, without which his dignity cannot become or be made
ours Heb. 2 9, 10, 11.
, therefore his drinking of the brook in the way is the exaltation and lifting
up of his head. it is the Gospel of God 1 These. 2. 2.
, which is neither received from man, nor yet by man Gal. 1. 11, 12.
, therefore those are much mistaken in that Scripture which says, go and
preach the Gospel to every creature Mark 16. 15.
; supposes from thence that the Gospel brings every creature alike unto God
in the same happy estate, (according to their capacity,) for the word is, go
and preach the Gospel in every creature, that is in every creature, as in the
life and spirit of it it centreth in man, for as every creature was made for
man, and with respect to man, so also every creature centers in man, according
to the scope, drift, aim, life and spirit of it, as it is eternized and shall
endure and abide for ever; but the drift, scope, life, and spirit of man
centreth not nor resumeth unto it self all, no nor any of them to rest
satisfied in, therefore in naming of and seeing into the nature of every one of
them at the creation, he finds not a help amongst them all fit or meet for him
Genesis 2. 19. 20.
: So that the scope, drift, life and spirit of man, only centreth in God, in
whom he must have rest, strength, stay and steadfastness Psalm. 27. 1 Psalm. 46.
1. Joel 3. 16. Psalm. 140. 7.
, or else he wandreth in weakness and is unstable, and full of tumult and
trouble for ever Iam. 1. 6. 7. 8.
, the Gospel then is preached in every creature, as all of them are centered
and considered in man, who is the end of them all, and has in him the very
nature and virtue or that which sympathizeth and holds a correspondency with
them all and every particular, so that as to his well being he cannot think of
an utter anihilation of any one of them, for so even in man God assumeth and
uniteth himself unto his whole work, as it is considered in him alone and no
other wise, for in man is the perfection of all Gods work and labor, as also
the cessation of it, and perfection of rest, for God cease from his work
Heb. 4. 10
, in that he becomes poor, weak, and silly son of man, or dust of the earth
Genesis 2. 7. Genesis 5. 1, 2.
, which is far from performing and doing the work of an eternal God Psalm.
30. 9 Isa. 40. 6, 7, 8.
, man also cease from his own works Heb. 4 10.
, as he is made in the Image of God, yea the Son of the living God Luke 3. 38
, who can do nothing after the will of man, or frailty of the flesh John 3. 13
, but according to the will and power of God works effectually in all manner
of works and operations, suting and agreeing with the life and dignity of the
Son of God John. 9. 3, 4 John 10 37, 38.
, in whom both labor and rest are fully consummated and perfected once and for
ever Heb. 9. 12. Heb. 1. 27.
even as labor and rest were in the creation of the world at the beginning
Genesis 2. 1, 2
) therefore as the Ministry of the Gospel has not its root and original in
any that is a mere creature, but in him who is the Son of the eternal God,
yea God himself blessed for ever Romans 1. 6 Romans 9. 5.
, and therefore is it called the Gospel of God 1 These. 2. 2
, and is not from man but from God, even so the proper object of this Ministry
(to whom it goes forth) is not a mere creature upon whom it works and has
its effect, in whomsoever it becomes a Savior unto 2 Cor. 2. 14, 16.
, for the object of it in the chosen of God, to whom it gives intelligence, and
upon whom it naturally and effectually works, are only such as are innobled
with a state and condition above a mere creature, being made the Sons of God
through Jesus Christ Gal. 4. 6. Romans 8. 15, 16, 17.
, so that it finds and discovers a spirit in them of reception,
correspondent unto, yea even the same with that which does declare and divulge
it, which must be the same which at the first inspired them, that spoke it 2
Pet. 1. 20.
, which is a spirit surpassing the spirit of a mere creature, for it is the
Spirit of God, for holy men spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost 2 Pet.
1. 21
, and in such only it is savor of life unto life 2 Cor. 2. 16
, and such only are the distributers and dispensers of it as go forth to
preach in and by that Spirit which raised up Jesus from the dead, and in which
he was quickened and went and preached also to the spirits that are in prison,
who were disobedient when once the long-suffering of God abode in the days of
Noah 1 Pet. 3. 18 19, 20.
; so that the object of the Ministry of the Gospel in those to whom it is a
savor of death unto death 2 Cor. 2. 16.
, upon whom it also works effectually though not naturally, as from it self,
as a proper cause but accidentally or occasionally, the true and proper cause,
of death being in and from themselves Hos. 13. 9 Mat. 15. 11 Mar. 7. 21, 22, 23.
, unto whom it becomes such and not in the Gospel, so that it does also
discover a spirit in such, that is as far below a creature as the spirit of the
Saint and holy one of God is above a creature Mar. 13. 11 Luke 11. 13
, that being the spirit of God 1 Cor. 3. 16
, and the other the spirit of Satan 2 Cor. 4. 4
, the one the spirit of Christ Romans 8. 9.
, the other the spirit of Antichrist Ephesians. 2. 2.
, the one the wisdom of God 1 John 4. 3. 1 Cor. 2. 7.
, the other the wisdom of the Serpent 2 Cor. 11. 3.
, for the wisdom, art and skill of man in looking upon and judging of the
things of God in its own light, is so subtle and guilefull that it turns
truth into a lie unto it self Romans 1. 25
, righteousness into sin Romans 7. 8. to 14.
, and so is not only a Serpent to beguile it self and others 2 Cor. 11. 3
, but also a Dragon to destroy and devour both it self and others Rev. 12. 3,
4. 1 Pet. 5. 8.
, for it was never the ordination and appointment of God (in the way of Christ)
that man should behold and judge of the matters of God by the light and wisdom
of a creature, but by the light and wisdom of the Creator Isa. 64. 4. 1 Cor.
2. 9, 10.
, no more then John was appointed or sent of God to be the light of the world,
but came only to bear witness of that light John 1. 6, 7, 8, 9.
, or then the hand was appointed to see for the body, and yet it is of the body
1 Cor. 12 15, 16.
, or for it self by virtue of any thing that is in it self, but only by that
virtue that is in the eye, with which it has union, and by which it perfectly
sees, though in it felfe it is not an eye nor has any light at all but only
by virtue of the confluence of that which is properly in the eye it self Mat.
6. 22.
. The Son of God thererefore descending into this low estate, yea, lower then
simply to be made a creature, for he was made a curse Gal. 3. 13.
, which no creature in its creation is Genesis 1. 31.
, hereby overcomes and takes away the curse, else could it never have been
taken away from us, no more then we can be blessed but only by having unity
with him through faith Heb. 10. 39. Heb. 11. 2.
, who is blessedness it self Romans 9. 5.
, and in this act of humiliation, he says, thou will not leave my soul in
hell, or in Sheol, that corrupting pit Psalm. 16. 10
, neither will thou suffer thy holy one to see corruption, but wilt teach me
the way of life, that is, death or this humbled condition could not hold him,
no not for a moment of time, but in that very way or act (wherein he becomes
subject to be taught, as under a tutor or governor Gal. 4. 1, 2
) he sees life, and is set at the right hand of God, where are pleasures for
ever more Psalm. 16. 11
, and so does he drink of the brook in the way, and in that he does lift up his
head or is exalted for ever, far above all principalities and powers, and
has a name, or authority given unto him in or at the which every knee shall
bow Phil. 2. 9, 10.
, both of things in heaven and in the earth, yea and under the earth, yea even
such as are made lower then properly the earthly or natural condition of a
creature is Jude 10. verse. 2 Pet. 2. 12.
, and hence it is, that our Apostle reason from that eighth Psalm, thou have
put all things in subjection under his feet Psalm. 8. 6.
: now in that he says, all things are put under, he left nothing, or nothing
was exempted that was not put under him Heb. 2. 7, 8
; so that the exaltation of Christ is that wherewith the Son of man or the
humane nature is dignified, otherwise it could not be a putting of things under
him, if in case they were so by nature; for all things are under him by nature,
as he is God John 1. 1, 2, 3. Romans 9. 5. Genesis 1. 1.
, and therefore in that respect cannot admit of an action of putting them or
making them to be so, for it is impossible that the Creator should be otherwise
in himself but above the works of his hand Isa. 45. 11 12.
, as our Apostle reasons from Moses and Christ, that as he that builds the
house is greater and more honorable then that which is built Heb. 3. 3, 4
, so is it in this case, for nothing can be said to be put under Christ as he
is God, seeing all things are so (without gain saying) by nature, therefore the
exaltation is properly of the humanity and not of the Divinity which indeed is
height it self Heb. 7. 26.
, though it be exalted only in and by the Divinity, even as the humiliation is
properly of the divine nature and not of the humane, for the humane nature
cannot be lower then it is by nature in it self, being in the fall become a
curse Gal. 3. 13. 2 Cor. 15. 22.
, but the divine nature is only humbled and made low in and by the humane
nature, for in it self it can admit of no such thing Mal. 3. 6.
, and therefore the humiliation is of an infinite value and extent, which makes
our Apostle to add those words, and yet we see not all things put under him
Heb. 2. 8.
, which to a natural eye or ear seems a plain contradiction, the words are,
we see not all things, or we see not any particular thing whatsoever under or
below him, for it being the humiliation of the Son of God it was to the
greatest and utmost degree of debasement, so that nothing was or could be lower
then that condition was, which he took upon him, for if there had, then had he
fallen short of a perfect and absolute overcoming and vanquishing of sin and
death, and then had our salvation failed, therefore says our Apostle, Christ
was made a little lower then the Angels, and in suffering of death crowned
with glory and honor Heb. 2. 9.
, that he by the grace, favor, or mutual imbracings of God, as the word
signifies, might in man, that is, in our nature taste and feel death in all, or
in every particular part, way, or kind of it Heb. 2. 9.
, being made so low as nothing can be lower, therefore he adds, that the
Captain of our salvation is made perfect through sufferings Heb. 2. 10.
: Such and so many and great as the glory of his exaltation is in bringing sons
to glory answerable to that is his debasement in that condition, out of which
he fetches and takes them, therefore in the way of his humiliation does he
lift up his head, and is exalted for ever. To this comes that of the Apostle,
when he says then or henceforth the end, finishing, accomplishment or
perfection (as the word translated end signifies and denotes unto us) when he
shall deliver up the Kingdom to God even the father 1 Cor. 15. 24.
, or when he has given up or put into the hands, put into trust or yielded all
regallity and Sovereignty to be in and only belong unto him, who is the father
of all dignity, excellency, and power, at which time or in that very act of
yielding or giving all unto God, he does evacuate, empty, or make void the
creature of all rule, authority, and power in all things whatsoever that
concerns the glory and dignity of the Kingdom of God, for he must or it is
expedient and needful, yea he does reign still, or 1 Cor. 15. 25.
to the end to put down all his enemies under his feet, this is the very end
of his reign to put all Gods enemies under foot, now whatsoever is in man by
nature, is an adversary, yea is in hostility, as the word signifies, against
God, therefore the reign of Christ must of necessity bring under, or else he
were not a perfect victor, overcomer, and conqueror over all, and then could
not he obtain the glory of the Son of God, therefore he adds, that the last
enemy that shall be destroyed is death 1 Cor. 15. 26.
; by this word last is meant the basest or the lowest of enemies, and it is the
lowest and basest in that it destroys, ruinates and utterly spoils it self,
therefore the word translated destroy, signifies unthriftinesse, to the undoing
and loss of it self, for the Son of God is made so low by the suffering of
death, as that the death comes into competition and engagement with the life of
the Son of God, and so must of necessity consume, waste, ruinate, and loose it
self, being that the Son of God must live eternally, else he were not God, and
so death is swallowed up in victory 1 Cor. 15. 54.
, hence it is that the Psalmist speaks so elegantly, thou have put all things
under his feet, all sheep and oxen, yea and the beast of the field, fowls of
the air, and fish in the sea, that pass through the paths of it Psalm. 8. 6,
7, 8.
, this is man's Lordship, and according to the natural workings of his mind and
understanding he perceives his dominion as he is a man, when he comes into
competiton with the inferior, sensual and terrene creatures, they serving to
this end, namely to give dimention, and to manifest the nobility and excellency
of that spirit which the Creator had endued him withal, by which he saw that
Lordship, and dominion which he had over them all, being they were all made in
subjection unto him, and far under and beneath him, therefore could he not
find a fit companion or consociate for himself amongst them all Genesis 2. 20.
; this man can do by that natural and common understanding which he has
implanted in him, even as he is a creature, and in this death does not properly
consist, therefore no speech of death whilst he is said to be conversant in and
about these things, that is simply to respect the creature in his thoughts,
words, or actions: but when this natural understanding (proper unto man simply
as he is a creature) works upon and is conversant in and about the things of
the Creator, then by how much the more he would be like his Creator which so
far transcends and is above all the creatures in the world, by so much is he
debased, and made under and below all creatures in the world, and this is that
death which is destroyed Hos. 13. 14 1 Cor. 15. 54, 55, 56, 57.
, for being a death of that nature, when ever we look upon it by that light
and revelation of the Spirit, that comes only from that Father of lights, then
is it in this, as in that former way of nature, so now in this way of grace,
for this death, serves to no other end, as with a metwand or measuring line
Rev. 11. 1.
, to give dimension unto that life that is in the Son of God, whereby by he
sees the height of his Sovereignty, dominion and Lordship for ever, which
without it could never appear, nor be made manifest in a creature, but must
of necessity have been hid and lodged in himself for ever; and then had not
his goodness appeared Tit. 2. 11. Psalm. 39. 19. 19.
; and if not his goodness, then not his light 1 Ioh. 1. 5.
, and that light which appears not is darkness Mat. 6. 23.
; and if God should not be light, he were no God at all 1 Ioh. 2. 9, 10, 11.
: and thus uncontrouleable, and without all controversy, doubt or scruple,
does God convince our hearts of that breaking forth, and revelation of himself
unto us in the face of Jesus Christ 2 Cor. 4. 6
: and hereby does death, being made so low, extinguish, put out, vanquish, and
destroy it self for ever, in that it sets out that life and light, which is in
that faith of the Son of God, which otherwise could not appear to, or in the
Saints: and of such use is that unto the Saints, and chosen of God, as to lift
them up unto life, and light, of comfort for ever, through that wisdom which
is in God, which is nothing else but the King of terror to all the men of the
world, who look upon the things of God with a natural and carnal eye Job. 18.
5. to 21.
; for Christ by drinking of the brook in the way, is exalted as head,
governor and ruler over all, which thing the world is not aware of, neither
will it know and understand, and therefore can never give Christ the honor of
his death, nor confess the excellency, glory, fruit, profit and comfort of the
cross of our Lord Gal 6. 14 Iam. 1. 2, 3, 4. 2 Cor. 12 9 10. Romans 8. 35, 36,
37.
. The exaltation then of the Son of God is the beholding of himself, from the
depth of that low estate of his humiliation, which he has only in man, which
gives dimension unto it, in its height, for ever; and the humiliation of the
Son of man is the beholding of himself, in or from the height and dignity
which he has in God, and that gives dimension to his low estate, out of which
he rises, and silenceth the flesh from uttering or conceiving of the least
cause of boasting for ever 1 Cor. 1. 27. to 31.
: Therefore the Psalmist when he beholds the heavens, the work of the finger
of God, the moon and the stars, which thou have created Psalm. 8. 3.
; from the consideration of the heavenly bodies, and works of God for him, or
in him; thence does arise his humiliation and abasements, therefore he says,
what is man, (or, what is it man) in way of admiration, that thou considerest
him, or remembrest him Psalm. 8. 4.
? For the word signifies to memorize, or begin again: as if he should say,
do thou that art so high and glorious, yea so full of varieties of
excellencies, and glory, even as the Moon and the Stars are in themselves 1
Cor. 15. 41.
: Do thou remember, or take thy beginning in man? for as the Son of God is
eternal, and so without beginning, or time, as he is God, so is he also in
time, and takes a beginning as he is man, and this puts man to silence, for
ever opening his mouth in any excellencies of the creature, in the things of
God, when once he sees how the Eternal takes a beginning in him Psalm. 8. 4.
; and so (as the word will bear) memorizeth and eternizeth himself in such a
frail and momentany thing as man is, even as the heavens are monumentized in
the earth, without which their virtue, glory and operation, could never be
seen, nor made known Hos. 2. 21, 22. Psalm. 65. 9. to 13.
; therefore he adds those words, visitest him, or make him the object of thy
constant act, of sight, and aspect, even as the Sun looks forth upon the earth,
for the continual revivall, refreshment, fruitfulness, and glory of it,
without which it were altogether barren and undone. Yea the Apostle adds
further, He has put all things under his feet Heb. 2. 8.
: Now if all things be put under him, it is evident that he is excepted, that
did subject them, and put them under: yea, he must be such a one, that does
subject them, who is over all: so that all things in that lost estate by
mankind, are infinitely below, and beneath Christ as he is God, and all things
as they are in God, are infinitely above Christ Jesus as he is man, and so
sustaines the nature of that lost condition: and therefore both the humiliation
and exaltation are complete and perfect in him alone: For when all things are
made subject unto, and subdued under him, as he is man, by another, which is
God, blessed for ever Romans 9. 5.
; that is, by another, in nature, not in subsistence and being. Now he that
subjects and brings all things under, must needs in himself be above all
things, and so above him, unto whom they are subjected, as he is man; and
therefore cannot in the least (as he is man) subject, or subdue, no more then
God himself can be brought low or under, in respect of himself, or his own
nature: no more can the nature of man subdue the enemies of our salvation, by
any thing that is in, or of himself, that is, in, or of his own nature: As a
creature therefore must needs be subject in himself, unto him that subdues all
things; and so the Son himself, as he is man, is subject unto the Father as he
is God 1 Cor. 17 27, 28.
; and yet the submission, or subjection of the Son is not, but in the Father;
nor is the authority and rule of the Father, but only in the Son; so that the
submission and authority are not found elsewhere, but only in one and the same
subsistence and being, and hence it is, that God is all in all in every one of
the Saints, and they only passive in themselves or in their own nature Isa.
30. 7. Phil. 2. 13.
, but powerful and operative in their Lord, or in and through that nature
divine for ever, even as he is only active in himself and his own nature, but
became passive in them or in their nature, and subject to death, which in
himself could never be, and yet is the one and the other real and true, the
operation, life, and resurrection that is in that Word and Son of the Father,
is as really and truly ours, and we work and live, and rise from the dead by
it Col. 2. 13. Romans 8. 11. Romans 4. 17.
; as or weakness, death, and low estate is really his, so as he suffered death
and descended in and by it, and therefore our Apostle affirms, that he that
ascends is the same that descends into the lowermost parts of the earth Ephesians.
4. 9
, and this is the humiliation and exaltation of our Lord made one, no less
absolute and true then that the divine and humane nature are one Christ, or one
subsistence and Son of God the Savior of the world, and therefore the Apostle
says, else what shall they do, or (as the word may be read) what shall he do
that is baptized for dead, if the dead rise not 1 Cor. 15 29.
, or as the meaning is, if death be not life, the descention the resurrection,
what shall he do? or how can he be the Son of God? for if death be not made
life in the very act of it, in that way of Christ, otherwise the Son could
never be baptized with the baptism of death Luke 12. 50.
, if that death were not in that very act transformed into life, he could not
be the Son of God, for he cannot be held of death no not for a moment Acts 2. 24
, for then he were not God, therefore does our spiritual Gideon and all his
soldiers in him or with him, yea our King Christ, as in this Text, and all
that he has made Kings to God the Father with him Rev. 1. 5, 6
or in him, do drink of this brook in the way of the humiliation, and in that
very act is his exaltation, yea the lifting up of his head, or of their heads
for ever, in the sight and knowledge of which, shall all sing Halalujah Psalm.
15 1, 6.
, that is, being interpreted, praise ye Jah, or praise we the Lord.

AMEN.
FINIS.

