The Gossips Meeting, Or The merry Market-Women of Taunton.
The Gossips being in a merry vein,
Each one does of her Husband sore complain,
Declaring how they can them neatly cousen,
And drink off Pots of Nappy Ale a Dozen.
Tune of, The Parliament of Women: Or, Digby's Farewell.


COme all my kind neighbors, and hear me a while,
I Will sing you a song that will make you to smile;
Of a parcel of Women of late I did hear,
In an Alehouse a drinking good Ale and strong beer,
They talked of their Husbands an ain every one,
Both Marget and Sarah, Rebecka, and Jone;
And they were resolved to have 'tother pot,
Concluding their Husbands at home should not know it.
Quoth one, I will tell you the thing I do fear,
My child it does cry at home whilst I am here;
But if that my husband does give me a blow,
Be sure he shall find me no less then a Shrow:
To compass my ends I will bring it about,
And tell him my money it would not hold out,
For all things so dear in the Market row be,
Let him go himself and the same he shall see.
I needs must confess of my husband, said Jone,
That he is a man who loves to stay at home,
And hard he does work for to maintain his charge,
And seldom does chide me, although I spend large;
But if that he knew of the Pots I do drink,
He would keep me sho^ter of money I think:
But I will be cunni^ng enough for him still,
For I will be sure of a groat at my will.
Quoth the Widow if I match as I do intend,
My husband shall never know what money I spend;
There be many ways for to cousen a man,
Though he watch his Wise even as close as he can.
If he gives me money to buy meat to roast,
Be sure I will reckon him more then it cost;
And so you may live with your husbands most brave
And they never the wiser what money you have.
The Second Part,
To the same Tune.


Says Sarah my husband is of such a mind,
He calls me to reckon what money's behind;
When I bring it home, he will take it in his hand,
And then he will ask me in what it does stand:
Then I make a lie, and tell him something more,
Or else this cross Knave would beat me out of door
For he I not allow me a penny to spend,
But I care not for two pence if I meet a friend.
Why should we be curbed so, hang care, let us drink,
We Will have the other pot what e're our husbands think
If when we come home they upon us do frown,
we will give them good words and bring their anger down
Pretending our Burdens has tired us sore,
As if we were ready to fall on the Flore:
And so by that means they will patient remain,
And pity us too, when they hear us complain.
Quoth Margret your simple to think of such fears,
If my husband scold I will pull him by the ears,
I am no such fool as to cringe to a man,
If that he strikes me, I will strike him again;
Besides i am with child, which to me is a joy,
If that I do box him he thinks I but toy;
Poor fool he is fearful to breed any brall,
For fear I should wrong that I go withal.
Then quoth. Mother prittle prattle, with all my hear(...)
We Will have 'tother Tankard before we five part;
Come let us sit down and we will talk of our woes,
We Will have a full glass in despite of our foes;
Do not fear your Husbands what ever they be,
For I my own self have been married to three;
Although we at noon have had a scolding bout,
At night I have pleased him when as he came too(...)
Methinks Gossip Jone you have a lusty man,
I hope he does give you content now and than,
I Will warrant you are merry enough when I Am sad,
I Am sure that I want what I formerly had:
My husband does sit like a Mome all the day,
And at night in the bed he is cold as the clay;
I had rather he would go and drink a Pot or two,
And come home at night and do what he should do
But now Gossips all it is time to be gone,
For I must haste home to my silly old man,
And then I will tell him a tale in his ear,
That every thing in the Market is dear;
How ofsten I traveled about and about,
And all for to find some good pennyworth out;
He Will never mistrust I his money did spend,
And so farewell Gossips, for I Will make an end.
Printed for F. Coals, T. Vere, J. Wright, and J. Clarke.


