THE DECLARATION OF COLONEL GORING Upon his Examination, touching the late
intended CONSPIRACY against the State. With the Report of that worthy
Gentleman Mr. FYNES to the House of Commons from the Committee upon the
Examination of several Gentlemen concerning the same. June 1641.

Printed in the year 1641.

The Examination and Declaration of Colonel Goring, touching the late
Conspiracy.
HAving been told there was an intention to unite the Forces of our Army, and
to put it into a posture of being able, if not of purpose of being willing, to
interpose in the proceedings of Parliament: I hearkened to the propositions of
soliciting a redress for the miseries of the Soldiers, being the first step
to this, in respect of the present necessities of it, not any future
consequence of trouble to those that were to procure our relief.

But, lest the manner of asking this, or the effects of it being obtained,
might be less just then the thing it self which was desired, and I might be
involved in their crimes, that had further ends perhaps then merely the
redress of our Armies grievances: I thought it not unsafe, to take some
witnesses of mine integrity along with me, and spoke to a noble Lord the very
same day, when I assured him, there were some Officers of the Army that were
less thought on, that had greatest zeal to the proceedings of this House, And
I thought there would be an occasion to let him know more of it.

Within few days after this, M. Iermyn and I were admitted into a
consultation, where we were tied to secrecy by an Oath, in the company of
those Gentlemen I have named in my Depositions, where their purpose was
declared to us in some propositions, which were to this effect.

1. Putting an Army into a Posture to serve the King.

2. Sending a Declaration to the Parliament, containing, That no Act of
Parliament should be made contrary to any former Act which was expressed, That
the Episcopacie should be kept up as it is now.

3. And that the Kings revenue should be established.

This I thought unlawful for our undertakings; since I thought they intended
to interpose the determinations of this House; and, it belongs to an Army, to
maintain, not to contrive Acts of State.

I objected therefore against the propositions, and pressed more the Follies
and Difficulties, then the illegalities of them; not only because I thought
Reason, a greater Argument with them, then Conscience, but because I am so
unhappy of the two, to be thought a worse Commonwealths man, then a Soldier,
and in that quality, could procure most credit to my words: And I endeavored
to show them, that as the Design would be impious, if their most Desperate
Counsel had been followed, so it would have been the weakest that ever was
undertaken, if it were admitted.

And whereas I am said to have a part in this violent Counsel; till the day
before this meeting, I never heard word of it: I knew not when I came to the
Room, whether theirs were not the same with the other; this they may witness
for me; and that I declared, that I would have to do with neither, And that I
expressed a Contempt of our meeting in that manner.

But I rely upon the Testimony of some Noble Lords of his Majesty's Council,
and others, how I protested against all those violent Counsels, even in the
birth of them, and with what pity I looked toward the person of his Majesty,
and the whole Kingdom, in this business.

I appeal also to them, and to some members of this House, what my carriage
was toward these Gentlemen that were embarked in these undertakings,
intending rather to prevent a mischief by abandoning their Counsels, then to
ruin them, by disclosing them.

But mistake me not, for had I known of any former plot proceeded in, that
would endanger, or disturb the quiet of his Majesty, or the peace of this
Kingdom, I should not have been contented with declaring mine own
Innocence, nor have stayed till the Command of this House, or an Oath,
extorted from me a Discovery; But by a hasty, open Declaration, have broken
the Laws of Amity, and Friendship, and all former ties, to preserve the duty
of a subject; and as freely exposed the Knowledge of All, to the view of the
world, as I have been tender in publishing these purposes, even to my nearest
friends, which had weight enough to crush nothing but the undertakers of it.
And certainly, if they had stayed where I left them, there was no conclusion at
all.

It appears, there were two several Intentions, digested by others before
they were communicated to me, and I knew not, whether my harkening to them were
a fault, but I am sure it was a misfortune.

FINIS.
June 19. 1641.
The Report of Mr. Fynes, with the examinations of several Gentlemen,
concerning the late intended Conspiracy against the State.
MAster Fynes made a Report from the Committee, to the House of Commons, that
the Conspirators in the new Treason had a threefold Design.

First, concerning the Tower of London.

Secondly, the French Army, to deliver Portsmouth into their hands.

Thirdly, a Design against the Parliament, by working the Army against it.

Billingsleys Examination was read by Master Hambden, which shows, That Sir
John Suckling invited him to the employment.

M. Nutts Examination was likewise read by the said Master Hambden, which
shows, The Earl of Straffords Escape was practiced.

Then the Examination of the Lieutenant of the Tower was read, which shows
plainly, That the Earl of Strafford endeavored an escape, promising him
22000 pounds in marriage with his Daughter to the Lievtenants son, and to
have made her one of the richest matches in the Kingdom.

Concerning the Army, Lieutenant Colonel Ballards Examination was read by Sir
Philip Stapleton; which shows, That Captain Chidley, brought down to the
Army many propositions: viz. That Colonel Goring should be Lieutenant of the
Army, and that the Prince, and the Earl of Newcastle would meet in
Nottinghamshire with 1000 Horse; all which propositions came from Master Henry
Iermyn, and were dispersed by Sergeant Major Wallis, and Captain Chidley.

Wallis upon his Examination says, That the French would have assisted them,
and that the Clergy would at their own Charge have sent 2000 Horse to the
aid of the Army; And that the Earl of Newcastle should be General of the
Army; and that the Prince would come down with him.

The Examination of Colonel Goring was read by Sir John Clotworthy, In which
he says, That he was tied up by an Oath of Secrecy, and therefore durst not
answer to all the Interrogatories; and then mentioning the Oath, which was
given him by M. Percie in his own Chamber at Whitehall, in presence of M. H.
Percie, Willmot, Colonel Ashburnham, M. Hugh Pollard, and others, who then
said, they had all of them taken this Oath; and that he was the last of the
Company that had taken the Oath that M. Iermyn had passed under the Lievtenants
own hand.

Mistress Plumwell said, That a French man, Carver to the Queen, brought Arms
to her House, and desired her to keep them, for that the House of Commons had
made an Order, that no Papists should have Arms in their Custody, and that he
fetched them away again, about the time that the Earl of Straffords Escape was
practiced.

Many Examinations were read, to show the practices of the French, and a Canon
of Burdeux.

Then a Letter from Master Iermyn to Master Mountague was read, wherein he
writes, That he hopes that the horse-leeches will be starved for want of food.

And then another letter from Mountague to Iermyn was read, which shows, That
they expected the Earl of Strafford shortly with them.

And after that, the Examination of Master Bland was read, which shows the
desire that M. Iermyn had to get Portsmouth into his hands.

And also two letters were read, sent from one Roberts a Priest, to the Bishop
of Calcedon, in recommendation of two English Priests.

And then M. Allens and M. Thorralds, which do contradict one another.

FINIS.

