PATIENCE AND ITS Perfect Work, UNDER SUDDEN and SORE TRIALS.

LONDON, Printed by S. Simmons, for Rob. Duncomb, to be sold at his Shop in
Duck-lane, 1666.

PATIENCE AND ITS PERFECT WORK: Meditated, and Written that Week the Deplorable
Fire was at London, and upon That Occasion, Upon this Scripture
Chap. 1. James a servant of God, and of the Lord Jesus Christ, to the twelve
Tribes which are scattered abroad, Greeting.

My Brethren, count it all joy when ye fall into diverse temptations,

Knowing this, that the trying of your faith works Patience.

But let Patience have HE^ perfect work, that ye may b^ perfect and entire,
wanting n^thing.

If any of you lack wisdom, (...) him ask of God, that gives all men
Liberally, and up^^^^ not: and it shall (...) him.


CHristian Patience is m^ Subject: and the Pe^fect work of Patience (...) 4.
But as an Introduct^on thereunto, I must first open some things of the words in
(...) 1, 2.

. 1 As to the PERSONS (...) writes to, they were [the Twelve Tribes scattered]
that had bee^ and were bereft of their inheritance, in their native Country
and quitting that, had betak^^ themselves to banishment; mu^titudes of them, (I
do not sa^ all) as appears Acts 8. 1. And at that time there was a great
Persecution against the Church which was at Jerusalem, and they were [all
scattered] abroad thorowout all the Regions of Judea and Samaria, except the
Apostles. And Acts (...). We find them traveled as far as Phaenice, Cyprus,
Antioch; who went from thence afterward into other Countries. The other
Apostle who wrote to the same Persons comforts them with this: (1 Epistle 1. v.
4.) That they were begotten again to a better Inheritance, then that of Canaan,
which now they were deprived of.

2. I observe, that though these had been made, thus sufficiently destitute,
and desolate already, and driven from house and home, to seek their
livelyhoods, with their families, in foreign countries, that yet still, great
and pressing troubles and miseries did follow them, as one wave does after
another; they were continually falling into diverse and sundry tentations of all
sorts. God tryes us every moment, as in Job; we are chastned every morning, Job
7. 18. Psalm. 37. 13. Ps. 44. 22.
and killed, (that is, in danger of death) all day long, as Romans 8. God had not
yet done with these.

3. He utters the strongest Paradox upon this occasion that ever was, or can be
uttered. And begins with it v. 2. My Brethren, Count it all joy when ye fall
into diverse temptations. Thus bluntly and abruptly without any mollifying
preface, or sweetning Introduction (unless that of [My Brethren]) to make way
for it. The fore part [Count it all joy] seems to carry a moral contradiction
in the face of it unto the latter part [When ye fall into diverse tentations.]
And this latter seems to put an impossibility upon the former; which is the
duty exhorted unto.

Let us consider every word of each.

. 1. Were it simply, that they are called upon to REJOICE: how uncouth is this
to men in that posture and Circumstance they are supposed fallen into! Well,
but yet Count it joy (says he): not only moderate, keep in, and smother your
contrary passions; which was the highest lesson, that Philosophy, and the
Stoics, the best of Philosophers, had taught. But the Gospel calls upon us
Therefore etc. or [for] and upon these [Tentations] to rejoice. [Count it joy]
that is the First.

2. All joy. The highest joy: for so all joy must needs be supposed to be.

3. And this, not when they should see by experience, the glorious issue and
event these tentations do produce: But to Account it all joy, before hand; as
if they were possessed of what God promises shall be the assured and expected
end; and to be Jer. 29. 11.
aforehand as sure of it, as if they had it already.

4. It Is not when they are Assaulted with troubles, but when tentations are
actually broken in upon them, and they lie under them.

5. Nor yet, when they are led into them by steps; or had met with them as in
their way: But when they fall into them. It Is a downfall he speaks of, and that
suddenly; at once; and utterly unexpected, by them.

6. Not when you fall into one or Two, but into Many Tentations: (...). The
same word here, and there.
as elsewhere, the word [divers] here, is Translated, 1 Pet. 1. 7. Manifold:
And Many is imported in Manifold.

7. And those not of one sort, or kind, but [Divers] and so of several sorts,
As in Good name, reproach, Revilements: Diverse also asto their Bodies, Souls:
their relations, and families, Friends, wives, children: Inward, outward man.

8. When you fall into them: (...)
as into a Pit and snare, and so they falling round about you; so as you have
nothing to stand or lean upon, but all about you, falls with you, and under
you, so as in all outward appearance, ye are sunk, and overwhelmed with the
ruins.

In this case to Count. IT ALL JOY, to shout as men in harvest, or that have
gotten great spoils: when their miseries are so great, that they cannot be
endured, that yet their joy must be so great, as more cannot be expressed. This
is the hardest duty, that ever was required of the distressed hearts of men.
And yet God would not require it, if it were not attainable; and it is
attainable by no other principles, but of Christianity. And argues, that our
Christian Religion (which is the only true wisdom, v. 5.) has so Spiritfull
and Sovereign a virtue in it, that it is able to raise Spirits up, unto Thus
high and glorious a pitch, and perfection in this life.

. But they might say, you have propounded this hard and strange duty to us:
what ground is there, that may rationally, and effectually persuade, and bring
our hearts to it? what considerations, that may procure us this joy; and how
may we be wrought up to it? For God never gave any commandment, but there was a
full and sufficient ground, and reason to enforce it.

He gives them two Grounds: One at the 3. and 4. v. Knowing this that the
trying of your faith works patience. But let Patience have it is perfect Work,
that ye may be perfect and entire, wanting Nothing. This is a Ground, from
what, in this life. The other is at the 12. v. Blessed is the man that endures
tentation: for when he is tried he shall receive the Crown of life. This is the
reward that follows in the life to come. In the hope, and expectation of which,
you may count it all joy, that Now you are tried: for the end and issue of them
is a Crown of Glory, which these do work, as 2 Cor. 4. 17. For our light
affliction, which is but for a moment, works for us, a far more exceeding and
eternal weight of Glory.

. I Begin with the first, what ground there is in this life, to cause us to
rejoice in such tentations. This, in the. 3. and 4. verses. [Knowing] that is
deeply considering and weighing this principle, of our Christian profession,
that the trying of your faith works Patience. That Is one and the first. In
which, the Apostle tacitly supposes this maxim, and builds upon the
supposition of it; it lies at the bottom, and yet is enough employed. It is
this: That to have our Graces, especially to have our Faith and Patience,
tried, and drawn forth and exercised in us, to the glory of God, is the
greatest blessedness of a Christian in this life.

That this is the bottom Ground, is evident: For why else should he propose and
hold forth this, of all other, with a [For] or Particle that gives the reason,
of what he had now said? That seeing their Faith and other Graces, as Patience
etc. would be tried thereby, That therefore they should count it all joy. (My
Brethren) If we had eyes to see, and to consider it, we might know, that as to
have grace that accompanies salvation, is the greatest mercy can befall any one
in the world: so to have that Grace tried and exercised, and drawn forth to the
utmost, is a thing of the greatest moment, the greatest spiritual privilege
that can come to us, after that we have that Grace. And therefore when Trials
come, we are to think with our selves, now, will my graces be tried; now, is
that befal'n me which will do it: this ought to be matter of the greatest joy
to me. For from this Ground, and reason it is, that the Apostle bids them Count
it all joy. And hereupon it is, (for no other does he mention here) this alone
being the greatest advantage, that a Christian is capable of, in this life: And
in this life, only it is, that Grace is exercised.

And the Reason of it lies in this, that for Grace to approve it self to God in
a way of the greatest well-pleasing to him; and so as to come to be approved of
by God. And for a man's sincerity, to have Gods approbation and testimonial, as
to Abraham, now I know thou fear me; This is the greatest privilege, a
Saint can have: and this ought to be matter of the greatest comfort. And is our
greatest Glory, according unto that, 2 Cor. 10. 17. He that glories, let him
glory in the Lord, which he there speaks in reference unto what follows in v.
18. For not he that commends himself is approved, but whom the Lord
commends. Both which the Apostle spoke, as that which he comforted himself,
withal, yea and gloried in, even the Lords approving of him. Job also
comforted himself with this: Chap. 23. 10. When he has tried me I shall come
forth as gold. The Apostle says, the trial of your Faith is more precious then
Gold: and he speaks it of the very instrument, or means, by which, your
Graces are tried; the very Chalcining (...) est id per quod sit explaratio,
Grotius in Verba: and so it differs from (...) which notes the issue, the
experiment, or fruit upon trial (see the same Grotius on Rom 5. 4.) even as
(...) from (...).
Pot, or the Fire, whereby it is tried ((...) his word is) Even that is more
precious then gold. Then much more the Graces that are tried. And therefore the
Apostle by his (...) intends, and means, these very afflictions, and
tentations, by which we are tried: They are the Refiners Pot, and Fire. You
would rejoice, if you had so much gold given you: Then rejoice, that you have
so much affliction, to try your Gold. That your graces are so highly valued by
God, is the reason, why he tryes them; he would not be at the pains and cost of
it, else. And they being tried, and holding to be right, and true gold indeed,
they have thereupon his approbation upon that trial; and he sets his Royal
Tower Stamp, and mark upon them; secretly in this life, and the same will
openly appear, to all the world, at latter day, so in 1 Pet. chap. 1. 6, 7.
Wherein ye greatly rejoice, though now for a season (if need be) ye are in
heaviness through manifold temptations. That the trial of your faith, being
much more precious then of Gold, that perishes, though it be tried with Fire,
might be found unto [praise, and honor, and glory,] at the appearing of Jesus
Christ. It will be found unto praise, then: but it is unto praise, before God,
now, as much as it will be, then.

He mentions Faith [For the trial of your Faith] in the first and chief place,
as that grace, which is the most tried; and as that, which being tried, sets
all the rest on work. (I need not much insist on it) It is Faith, that shall be
counted for honor and glory at that day, having been tried. It is Faith which
bears, and by which we bear the stress of all tentations. It is Faith, by which
we overcome, 1 John 5. This is the victory which we have over the world, v. 4.
even our Faith. Who is he that overcomes the World? He that believes, etc. v.
5.

. A second and more particular Principle, or Maxim (which concerns this life,
and should cause us to rejoice) is, that Faith, being tried, works PATIENCE,
and that if Patience have its perfect work, it will make us perfect Christians.
[But let Patience have her perfect work, that (...) may be perfect and entire
wanting nothing.]

He enlarges no further upon Faith. Only gives it, the honor, that it is the
mother Grace and of Patience especially, when it self is tried. But he ha^ no
sooner mentioned Patience but he runs out upon That and falls upon the greate^^
Encomium, and praises of it* Let Patience have its perfec^ work, and it will
make you perfect Now there is no occasion, o^ room nor work for Patience,
unless there be Tentations. An^ Patience its work is but so far as the
affliction proves to be. S^ then, his second Argument run upon this principle.
That the ful^ work of Patience in our souls is of all other Graces, the highest
perfection of a Christian: and therefore count it all joy to fall into
tentations: for thereby you will have that grace, drawn forth to the fullest
length, wound up to the highest peg; which is not done, unless tentaons be
answerable. And in all your trials let it but have its swindge, its perfect
work, and it will make your persons perfect, that is, as perfect, as in this
life, you can be made.

. Quest. But in what respect does it make us perfect?

Answ. Not only in this sense (for there is a double sense of that speech)
Either, 1. As if when we had exercised all other Graces, but yet have not had
occasion for this one; that when this shall be added, that then, they should be
perfect Christians. But this is not the meaning, for this may be said of any
other Grace: As if a man has exercised all other Graces, if he begins to
exercise any one new Grace, it may be said there is a perfection in this
respect. As when he says to the Corinthians, As you have abounded in every
other Grace, ^ Cor. 8. 7.
so abound in this also. But there is another sense, and that is his scope
here, Which is not to extol a perfection in common with other Graces, but a
singular perfection to be attributed to Patience, that in this respect, it
makes a man eminently perfect. For his scope is to comfort them against the
greatest trials, and occurrences of their lives, [Tentations:] And therefore a
singular and special Encomion is attributed herein, unto Patience, which is the
shield against them.

My Brethren, to give the full sense of this, I will make a supposition.
Suppose a Christian to have had the privilege, to have lived in the exercise
of all Graces, in a way of acting, or of an active life; As to have lived in
sweet communion with God, and to have walked in the light of Gods countenance
all the day: Psalm. 89. 15
And withal to have had the opportunity of doing good, and accordingly to have
done much good, in an active Way: as having been abundant in good works, holy
duties, Praying, Reading, holy Conference, etc. But yet all this while with a
freedom from suffering; so as he has not had the suffering part yet; so as
there has been no need for, or use of Patience: Suppose another Christian, who
has been obstructed, and hindered, and kept from such an active life of doing
good, with that freedom spoken of, but the dispensation of God, has disposed
him to a suffering life, all his days, and confined him thereunto, and therein
his Patience has been exercised under all sorts of tentations: And then
withal suppose that Patience, with all those gracious dispositions of heart
that are proper to it, has had its free and full passage, through his heart
(such as I shall hereafter describe) has had its operations, all sorts of
ways, according as his afflictions have been. Thi^ alone would so draw out and
exercise all Graces, and head them that you would say, this man is perfect
Christian; shall I say more perfect then the other? at leas^ the text says,
that this makes him a perfect man.

Or again, if you will suppose one that has been very active i^ the foregone
part of his life, and done God great service, with a^ enlarged heart; and that
at last after he has done the will o^ God, further to crown all, God will
exercise this man's Patience with great sufferings; and draws it forth
according to these his trials, that man is perfect every way: and he lack't
till then, that which is his greatest perfection: and he was not before, every
way accomplished.

For Proof: That Patience is the eminent perfection of a Christian.
. ITAke the Instance of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. What was Christ's
perfection? He had been perfect in all active obedience, complete in all
Graces, yet the Glory of his perfection is put upon his sufferings and his
Patience, Heb. 2. 10. For it became him for whom are all things, and by whom
are all things, in bringing many Sons unto Glory, to make the Captain of their
salvation [PERFECT through sufferings.] This of Patient enduring was, that,
which enhaunsed and exalted his obedience so, Phil. 2. He humbled himself and
was obedient to death, etc. This of patient enduring was obedience learned,
Heb. 5. 8. Though he was a Son, yet he [learned obedience] by what he suffered.
The Active part of obedience was natural to him, he being as the Natural Son,
the Holy One of God: having the Law of God in his heart, and it Pf. 40. 8. Heb.
10.
was his delight, his meat and drink to do his will. That is, this was natural
to him: But for him to suffer, who was the Son, and so to be patient in
suffering, who was so great a Person, this was to be learned, as that which was
improper for such a Person, The Son: And yet (as I may say) this perfected the
natural accomplishments of him; this was a lesson out of the rode, utterly
uncouth, and extravagant; He must go to school therefore to learn this: For
so that text implies, this he was to learn, as that which would perfect him,
above all. And so indeed to this purpose, it follows in the 9. ver. Being made
perfect, that is by what he suffered (as in the verse before, and chap. 2. He
had also said.) And as that which did perfect him, more then all his other
obedience, and rendered him more acceptable to his Father: Now it was his
Patience, and enduring, wherein, that his obedience Principally lay: which
accordingly is so often spoken of him, as Heb. 12. 2, 3. He endured the Cross,
and v. 2. He endured such contradictions of sinners, v. 3. the same word that
here is used for Patience: that the Verb, this the Nown. Enduring is put to
express Patience: And is the word used up and down the New Testament, and in
this Epistle most, to express Patience by, as chap. 1. v. 12. chap. 5. v. 8,
10, 11. Now Christ did so endure. He was led as a sheep to the slaughter, he
opened not his mouth. Hogs cry, but sheep make no din, when led to the
slaughter; or when their throats are cut. And this was Christ's Proper, and
Super perfection, who is therefore proposed as an example of suffering and
Patience, to us, and likewise of that glorious end and issue, of it, in these
words of that chap. 5. 11. Ye have heard of the patience of Job. [And you have
seen the end of the Lord] namely of the Lord CHRIST. Which many of these Jews,
he wrote to, had seen with their eyes; or it was transacted in their times, and
so in their view: they saw him suffer, and they see him crowned with Glory and
Honor, Heb. 2. That was the END of our Lord, and his sufferings, which made
him perfect.

And as it was Jesus Christ's perfection, so it was of the most eminent Saints.
Look again into this Epistle, chap. 5. v. 11. and you find the primitive
principle that was in Vogue to be, [Behold we count them happy which endure]
(it is still the same word which is used for Patience, as was said) that is, we
Christians generally esteem them the happiest men in the world, that are most
exercised with sufferings, and armed with patience to endure them. They are
happy to a [BEHOLD!] and so to a perfection, in our common esteem. Behold
WECOVNT them happy. It was a common cried up maxim, amongst them in those
Times, and the thing it self in greatest request.

Then 3. Take the Prophets for an example (says he) chap. 5. 10. He commends
them also for their Patience, as well as for their Prophecies: And though he
describes them by this Character, and Periphrasis, that have spoken in the name
of the Lord: yet that was but to set out and celebrate the example of their
sufferings and Patience, the more. He sets the Crown upon the head of that
Grace: Nor does he mention any of the good they had done* Nothing of that, but
their sufferings only. And then by name, he instanceth in Job. God boasted of
him to Satan, for his former active life in holiness: but you have no mention
of that by the Apostle, nor in the New Testament, but he cries him up for his
suffering, and his Patience, only, as that which had endeared him to God, more
then all the former part of his life.

Lastly, take the Apostles: The Apostle in the Revel. puts it into his Coat of
Arms, as a piece of his Nobility, and a part of his Herauldry. I John who am
your Rev. 1. 9.
Brother and Companion in Tribulation, and in the Kingdom [and Patience] of
Jesus Christ.

Now upon all these grounds, if you be true, and right Christians, and know (as
the Apostles word is) how to put a due estimate upon what is your greatest
interest and privilege in this life, (viz. the proof and trial of your Graces,
and of this Grace of Patience above all, as the highest perfection of a
Christian; yea of Christ himself; and which was the most eminent praise of
Prophets and Apostles) if you value your being rendered, most pleasing unto God,
then count it all Joy when you thus fall into tentations. For now you have God
and Christ, the great, the chief Master Orderer and Designer of these
consticts, setting his most gracious eye upon you, pleasing himself to behold
how valiantly, wisely, and gallantly, you be have, and acquit your selves: He
sits in Heaven, as the great Spectator of these Justs and Tournaments, which are
to him as Spectacles which are sports to us: to which the Apostle alludes, 1
Cor 4. 9. For I think that God has set forth US the Apostles last, (...) it
were appointed to death, for we are made a spectacle unto the World, and to
Angles, and to Men Rejoice therefore as good Soldiers would, to enter into
these Lists, in the sight of their Great General, and Emperor, whom they have
given themselves up to please. Thus 2 Timothy 2. 4. (...) man that warreth
entanglet^ himself with the affairs of thi^ life, that he may [PLEASE HIM, who
has chosen him: TO BE A SOLDIER.] Therefore get your hearts free and loose
from all those entanglements, that arise from adherency to the things of this
world; from inordinate passions that cleave unto the things of this ^ife, which
will hinder and wea^en you, as to a patient bearing ^he losses and crosses you
meet with, in it: Knowing also, that ^ou cannot please the Captain of ^our
salvation, nor approve your ^elves, more to him, then by a ^atient endurance,
which is, in ^he words before that passage, in that place to Timothy, exhorted
^o, v. 3. Therefore endure hardness ^s a good Soldier of Christ. And ^n its
Coherence, this follows, [it ^leaseth your General to see it.] And in the 1. of
Col. he first, in the General, prays, v. 10. That they might walk worthy of
the Lord unto ALL PLEASING. Which Pleasing, as it consists in fruit fullness
in good Works, or the active life of a Christian, [Being fruitful in every good
work] in the same verse: So, i^ being strengthened with all might unto all
patience, and long-suffering; as that, which is the second, and chiefest, and
most glorious part, that a Christian is to perform, to consummate the other;
And which therefore requires a more glorious power to work it, then the former,
the Active part did, as verse 11 shows: Strengthened with a might, [according
to his glorious Power,] unto all Patience, and long-suffering.

Thus much for the opening o^ the words, in Order to that I am more setly to
handle, which follows.

I I. Section.
I have Three GENERAL HEADS to treat of.
1. What Patience is. 2. How Patience is wrought. 3. What it is for Patience to
have a perfect Work.
I. HEAD.
What the Grace of Patience is.
. TAke it at large, that is, in the full Comprehension of it. It is a constant
persisting, whether to do the will of God without fainting, or to suffer the
will of God with submission, and quietness, and cheerfulness, to the end of a
man's days. And thus taken, it respects doing as well as suffering. The good
Ground is said to bring forth its fruit, All its fruit with Patience, in the
Parable of the Sower. It respects,

. First, Doing the will of God Romans 2. 7. To them who by patient continuance
[in well doing (The Greek is The Patience of good work) seek for glory and
honor, etc.

And the Reason, why Patienc^ is required to every good work is because there
is a difficult^ that accompanies every duty, and Patientia it a Dei rebus
proposita est, ut nullum prae^eptum obire quis possit a Patientia extraneus.
Tertul. De Patientia.
to the putting forth of every grace: that we need have Patienc^ to perform the
duty constantly and to continue in the practice o^ that grace: There is a
difficulty not only from our own corruption, unto which the Commands o^ God are
grievous; but from the circumstances of times, places, persons, we live in, and
amongst, though they should not persecute. As not to run into the same excess
of riot, to speak or do what, we know, does not please the company we are in:
Thus to be Chaste in Sodom, was to Lot a trial: to condemn the world, by a
different carriage; as in being stricter then others on the Lords Mat. 5. 47.
day, or in family duties, etc. to cross the stream: to be singular, and the
like. Heb. 12. 12. Lift up the hands which hang down, and the feeble knees:
Wherein I observe, that in doing good in any kind, we are not only lame
creatures, and walk as those that halt, which breeds an aukerness, unto any
duty: but further, we are apt by reason thereof to turn out of the way (as
there) if rugged: The members we should walk withal are feeble: our hands we
should act with, are hanging down: And so the performance has a difficulty. To
go up the hill of good duties (though private and personal) without weariness,
to keep strait paths, not to pick and choose our way, and not to baulk the way,
or work, which God finds us to do: especially not Eclesiast. 9. 10.
to faint, toward the end, when we come to the brow of the hill. These all
have a wearisomness in them. Now that which principally heartens and
strengthens us to all this, is Patience, as in v. 1. he had prefaced, Let us
run with Patience the Race that is set before us: we need Patience, for every
step of it, in doing as well as in suffering; And in the verse immediately
before that exhortation now opened, ('it is verse 11.) the Apostle puts and
devolves an even and quiet walking, upon Patience, obtained first by suffering,
in these words. Now no chastening, for the present seems to be joyous, but
grievous: nevertheless afterward it yields [the peaceable fruits of
righteousness] unto them which are exercised thereby. So as a quiet resolute
and strong performance of all the duties of righteousness, is from Patience,
and is much the fruit of that Patience we get by chastisements. The suffering
life helps and contributes much to the active life: for as there is a Patience
required in doing Gods will, so suffering his will fits the heart for it.

But this of Patience in well doing, is not in strict sense, that Patience,
which is here, in my ^ext, to be understood.

Patience is therefore, Second^y, The suffering the will of God ^n any kind.
And this, does Patience eminently respect: And that is the Renowned Patience
which we almost every where meet with, and which the Text calls for; such, as
when sudden and unexpected Trials and tentations (which they fall into) fall
out, as v. 2. And so is not meant of the difficulties, that accompany our
ordinary constant way of personal walking, in performing the duties of our holy
profession.

. Object. But you will say, My sufferings are not for the Gospel (as theirs
here intended were* but they are mere providenti^^ accidents, that have fallen
upon me, out of common providence, and but such as befa^^ wicked men: they are
not from outward persecution, for Christ sake, or my profession, but from Gods
hand.

Answ. I shall answer this here, once for all.

1. The words of this ver^ Text, may somewhat relieve us hereion: for it is
[tentations] at large, that are spoken of; and tentations arising from sudden
downfalls into miseries, and so of any kind: he does not altogether restrain
it, to temptations by persecution: (though they are mainly intended:) but it
may, and ought to be extended, to other providential occurrences: And the word
(...) used for Patience, signifies a remaining under any pressures unbroken,
and whole; be they of what kind soever. It respects indeed afflictions mainly,
for the Gospel, yet not exclusively, to afflictions in common.

2. In the prosecution of this Argument, the Apostle does, manifestly, carry in
his eye, other Tentations, or sufferings, then from Persecution, as appears
from the Examples he alleges, to press them, to this Patience. For among
others, and above all others, he brings the instance of Job and His, by Name
only, as well as of the Prophets in General, (whom Christ says, they
persecuted.) Thus chap. 5. 11. Ye have Mat. 5. 12.
heard of the patience of Job. His alleging the Prophets, is but a General, v.
10. Take the Prophets (not naming any) for an example of suffering, and of
Patience. But that of JOB singularly, and by name: Now surely he would not cite
His most eminent example, to confirm his Exhortation to this Patience he
intended, of one, whose case did not come within the compass, and dint of his
Exhortation. Let us therefore have recourse to Jobs case, and story. His losses
were but providential from God. The Sabeans, and Chaldeans plundered him of his
goods, and slew his servants. And the fire of God, (or from God,) is fallen
from heaven, so his messengers tell him, chap. 1. v. 16. It Is true, 'twas the
Devil out of spite, that moved them that did it: but they did it, not in a way
of Persecution, but as common enemies; As when the Clangs of one country break
in upon another. But it was God, and the Devil agreed it together: yea, and
'twas God gave first occasion to the Devil, to move him to have leave to do
it. So as that was not, for the Gospels sake in way of Persecution: nor did Job
at all know of that transaction between God and Satan, not all that while his
Patience was in the exercise of it: But took all as the hand of God, though
extraordinary.

. If you now ask a description of Patience, as it thus respects suffering the
will of God.

We must give it, as it is in the Word of God, in the height, for that is the
Rule it self that directs to it: and not lown it, to what is found in our
hearts. And yet that which afterward follows, and will confirm every tittle
of it, is drawn mostly, from examples of the Saints, either in the old or new
Testaments: which show that it is attainable, though with allowance to defects,
which accompany all Graces in this life.

It is a constant, thankful, joyful enduring, with perseverance The
Description of Patience
to the end of a man's life, all the trials that are grievous; how great, how
long, how hopeless soever as to coming out of them: mortifying and compescing
the inordinacy of opposite passions, as Fear, Grief, Care, Anxiety, which will
arise upon such afflictions: with submitting to Gods will, for Gods glory, and
his good pleasure, sake: still blessing and sanctifying God, in all: waiting on
God, and relieving ones self by Faith, in what is to be had IN GOD, and FROM
GOD, in communion with him, and from his love, in this life: In expectation
also of that Glory, which is the Reward, after this life ended.

I might, in this place, confirm every word and tittle of this description:
either, out of Examples of holy men, or the Rules which the Word gives. But I
omit the set collection of such proofs here: because that, scatteredly, up and
down, in the particulars that follow, this will be found performed.

II.
GENERAL HEAD.
How Patience is wrought.
. BRethren, while I show you how Patience is wrought, I do withal show you the
way and means to obtain it. For by the same, it is wrought, by the sam^ it is
nourished, and maintained And I shall not go out of the Text, for this.

There are two principles here that work Patience. The first i^ FAITH, verse
the 3d, Knowin^ this, That the trying of your [Fait^ worketh] Patience. And
because in Gal. 5. 6. It is said, Fait^ works by Love: that is, Fait^ works
by Love whatever i^ works: Therefore we mus^ find also, that LOVE work^
Patience. And that you have in the 12. v. too, Blessed is the man that
[endureth temptations] for when he is tried he shall receive the Crown of life,
which the Lord has promised to them [that love him.] Why does Admonet Victores
omnium Tentationum fore, qui Deum amant. Nec alia de ^^usa nos animo defici cum
tentamur, nisi quia prevalet MVNDI AMOR. Calvin: in Verba.
^he put in [to them that love him] whilst he speaks of him that endures
Tentations? But because it is Love inables a man to endure temptation. So that
Faith in the first place, and then Faith working by love in the second place,
works Patience, or enduring.

And the confirmations of these Two, will give Proofs to the ^atter parts of
that Description I gave of Patience, to wit, Those of the Souls relieving it
self by Faith, by what is to be had in God, etc.

. First, how does Faith work Patience?

Answ. First, in the General, Faith is the substance of things hoped for: and
indeed of all things that are revealed in the Word. That is, It makes them
subsistent and real to a man's Soul. Faith does this, as the eleventh to the
Hebrews shows. And thereupon Faith has all the Motives, and Considerations,
that the whole Word affords, All which it brings in to the Soul, and makes them
subsistent to it, to support it in trials. All is let in by Faith: that is the
Tunnell that fills the vessel. And by thus bringing home to a man's Soul, all
the Considerations the Word affords, which may induce a man to Patience, it
works it.

This is but General.

These Considerations, in the Word, are infinite. And I cannot ^tand to
instance. I will only give what are most proper to Faith.

First of all, Faith has a pri^ative emptying work: it empties ^he Soul, of
all its own worth and ^ighteousness, and excellency in ^s own eyes; and gives a
through sight, unto the Soul, of ^he sinfulness of sin, of its spiri^ual sins,
and contrarieties of ^LL in its self, unto Holiness and Faith: And withal
fully ^onvinceth it, of its just deserved^ess, to be utterly destroyed: and
therefore much more of its due ^esert of all, or any Afflictions, whatever;
they being any, or all ^f them far less then destruction it ^elf. And in the
sight and sense of ^hese, Faith lays the Soul a poor ^mpty, naked wretched
CREATURE, in all Spiritual respects both in the sight and presence o^ God, and
in its own eyes. And thi^ helps greatly toward workin^ Patience. You shall
observe^ in that golden chain of Grace^ whereof each latter link depends upon
the former, Man 5. v. 3, 4, 5. How poverty of spirit is placed first, Blessed
are (...) poor in Spirit, that is, That (...) emptyed of themselves, loo^ upon
themselves, as having n^thing, deserving nothing, able (...) do nothing,
spiritually. And the true poverty of Spirit, the^ have from Faith wrought: F^^
blessedness is only pronounced (...) them that believe, and of the fruits of
Faith, in them; accor^ing to that, Romans 4. 7, 8, 9* Then Secondly follows,
Bless^^ are they that mourn, namely, (...) their sins; that in the second
pla^^* And then Thirdly, Blessed are (...) meek, that is, those who in the
sight of their poverty and sinfulness, lie at Gods feet, so subdued and
affected, as God may do what he will to them, or with them. Thus it is with
them, when, they are thus emptied, which is when they have seen their sins, and
deservedness to be destroyed, and are humbled for them, and mourn for them.
These foregoing dispositions work meekness, submission to God: They have
nothing to ^ay against whatever he shall do; but to justify God in all, and
to condemn themselves. And all these make them willing and Patient to take any
thing well, at the hands of God. It is ^n excellent speech (to our purpose) of
the Church in that humbled frame of heart, you ^^nd her in, Lam. 3. 39.
Where^ore does a LIVING man (...), a MAN, for the (...) of his sin? The Church
expresses it as the mos^ brutish improper incongruity, unbecoming a man, such
as ther^ could not be imagined a greater What? for a man to complai^ and think
much at the punishment of his sins; A man, to murmur (as the word is) against
God a sinful man, against the ho^ God, his righteous Judge! (And (...) is
certain that thinking much the ground of all impatiency: An^ on the contrary, a
submiss temper of Spirit unto God, is the ground of all Patience.) But wh^ does
she put in, besides, to co^vince such an one, of the foll^ injustice, and
iniquity of it, th^^ he is a living man, why do^ [a LIVING] man complain Art
thou alive? Art a living (...) still in this world? Then have th^^ little cause
to complain, wha^ ever thy misery be. Whilst the art alive, thou art not
destroye^ Consider, how Hell, and Destr^ction is thy portion, and the due
punishment of thy sins: And so thou have infinitely less then thou deservest;
and therefore ^hou have no Reason to complain. The Church, out of her own sense
and apprehension of this, had said before, v. 22. It is of the ^ords mercies
that [WE] are not ^onsumed. She says not, that our ^oods are not consumed, or
that ^ur Houses are not burnt (For in^eed, that was the Churches very ^^se when
she spoke this: Jerusa^^m was burnt, their Women ra^^shed, their Goods
plundered, (...) Bodies famished, as you ^ad in the same Lamentations, most
every where.) But yet ^ere was a remnant of Persons, (...) were not consumed,
and this (...) she, is of the Lords mercies, (...) his tender mercies, out of
his wels, as the word there is: And is being less then Destruction being
consumed, is her Reason for that expostulation forementioned, v. 39. As also of
that her so great submission, from that v. 22. unto the 39. verse. You find the
very same to this, as a ground of Patience, expressed els^where, after the
captivity ended Ezra 9. 13. Thou our God has^ punished us [less then our
iniquities deserve] after all that is com^ upon us for our evil deeds (sa^
they) and for our great trespasses Shall then a living man complai^ for the
punishment of his sin when it is so infinitely, far le^^ then he deserves? This
consideration works Patience, as it hat^ reason: If a man deserves to b^
Hanged, Drawn and Quartered and he is but burnt in the hand shall this man
complain? let th^^ man down on his knees at the Bar, and thank the Judge, o^
Prince, that he had not his du^ desert; The Gallows. And the consideration of
this is that also which makes a man accept the punishment of his iniquity, as
you have it in Levit. 26. 41. If ^e accept the punishment, etc. That is, if ye
kiss the Rod. And what makes a man come to accept the punishment of his
iniquities? Oh the punishment of my iniquity, is infinitely far less then I
deserve, For (thinks he) Damnation is my portion. This is the first thing that
works Patience, the consideration of our own deservedness to be destroyed, and
this is from the emptying work of Faith.

Secondly, Faith brings home to a man's Soul the dominion of God, and the
Sovereignty of that dominion, over a man's Soul and Person, to do what he will
with them; and that may very well hush and quiet a man. In the ninth of Job 12.
BEHOLD HE TAKES AWAY (destroys City, a Nation, suppose, as in the 12. chap.
v. 23. He increases the Nations and destroys them, enlarges the Nations and
straitens them again) AND WHO CAN HINDER HIM? (as in that chap. 9.) And who
will say unto him, what do thou? As it follows, If God will not withdraw his
anger, the proud helper^ stoop under him: Or the helper^ of strength (as in the
margin) they bow under him. He took away your Goods, and who could hinder him?
The Fire burnt thi^ City, notwithstanding all the Inhabitants that were
interested and able to have quenched it; ye^ the strong helpers, stood helpless
looking on, weeping, shakin^ their heads, and crying Alas, for why! Who could
hinder him they ALL bowed under him. An^ again, Job 34. 31. Surely it is mee^
to be said unto God, I have bor^ chastisement, I will not offend an^ more. For
as v. 33. Should [IT (the evil, or the good, he is pleased to bring on thee) be
according to thy mind? (Hebr. Should it be from with thee) that is, from what
is in, and with thee? must he ask counsel first of thee, and know what thy mind
is? He will recompense it (or dispense it as he pleases) whether thou refuse,
or whether thou choose, that is, whether thy mind be for, or against it: And
not I. (This, is the speech of Elihu, in the Person of God, and on his behalf)
That is, should thou dispose of all these things for me, [and NOT I] my
self? (says God.) This may, and must silence all, and every man, as well as it
did Job there: For it follows, Therefore speak (if thou have any thing to say
against this) what thou know: As if he had said, this is not to be
contradicted, but to be wholly submitted to.

But my Brethren, Faith brings home to the heart, a message of an higher
Sovereignty, even of love from God born to you, and tells all you, that
sincerely profess an interest in God, that God has shown his absolute Dominion
already, toward you, in saving your Souls. (It is an absolute Dominion, that,
as Romans 9. shows.) And what else is the meaning of that speech, I will be
merciful to whom I will be merciful? It is a speech of Dominion. Well: Has
God showed his Dominion in saving thy Soul with difference, has he shown it on
this, the good side? Then truly thou may very well give him leave to exercise
his Dominion over all else that thou have; thou may very well be content, He
show his Dominion upon thy lumber, and thy appurtenances. He might have shown
his Dominion in destroying both your Goods, and Souls too, as he did the
Sodomites, when he burnt their City.

But Thirdly, Faith brings home the love of God, the Souls interest in God,
with a Communion and fellowship with God; which may well serve to strengthen
Patience in the greatest Distresses. This you see in David, at Ziglag, when the
City was burnt, (I therefore instance in it) and his Goods all plun^red, and
his Wives carried away: And David was greatly distressed, the people talking of
Stoning him: Then, it is said, But David encouraged himself in the Lord his
God: His interest in him, and the coming in of his love, as being his God, did
hearten and strenthen him against all, 1 Samuel 30. 6. Likewise, in extremity of
famine, when there was not bread, nor Oil, nor Wine, nor meat to eat, this
wrought the like, Hab. 3. 17, 18. Although the Fig Tree shall not blossom,
neither shall fruit be in the Vines, the labor of the Olive shall fail, and
the fields shall yield no meat, the stock shall be cut off from the fold, and
there shall be no herd in the stall. Here are all those things enumerated, as
wanting, that are the means to support life and nature, (and it is the want of
food and raiment for you and yours, is that you fear in the loss of y^^r goods,
and loss of your lively-hoods) YET (says he) I will rejoice in the Lord, I will
joy in the God of my salvation. A man has all in God, before him still. And
Faith brings home all in God, or carries the heart out unto God, to fetch in
comfort from him, in these the greatest extreamities. There are two things
there distinct. He first, says, He will rejoice [in the Lord,] Even in what the
Lord is in himself: A God blessed for ever, Amen! And, If God be happy and
blessed for evermore, I cannot be miserable, says that Soul, that can rejoice
in this, that However God enjoyes a perfect blessedness; And I do so rejoice
in that, that whilst God continues to be God, and these apprehensions and
disposition of heart, do but continue in me, I have enough. The second is,
that he is my God, the God of my salvation; so Habbakuk, I will joy in the God
of my salvation: And then to be sure, while he is happy, I shall be happy
indeed; The Lord is my portion says my Soul, Lam. 3. in the midst of those
troubles. The Lord help us to Faith!

My Brethren, the love of God brought in by Faith, will help a man to bear up
under any condition. You know that place, Romans 8. He had triumphed in the love
of God, v. 31. If God be for us, who can be against us? and v. 35. Who shall
separate us from the love of Christ? shall Tribulation, or distress, or
persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or sword? Mark his resolution, expressed
thereupon, in v. 37. NAY, IN ALL THESE THINGS we are more then Conquerours
[through him that loved us.] That speech, Nay in all these things, etc. is a
triumphant slighting of all he had reckoned up, and it was, all any way
formidable, or that might be judged opposite to our comforts in this world. And
yet speaks at that rate, as if Faith on the love of God and Christ, scorned
such low, and weak, and poor adversaries, as not enough, or not of might enough
for them to try their strength upon: and is, as if he had said, are these all,
that come out against us, and threaten to hurt us? But are these all, indeed?
NAY, then says he, if these be all, we are safe enough, We are more then
Conquerours in all these: But how comes this to pass? It Is added, Through him
that loved us. Not only in that he loving us, joins his strength to ours, to
support us: But it is also meant Objective, that the love of God and Christ
coming in fresh upon our hearts, the apprehension of that is sufficient; and in
that respect he says through him that loved us: It Is Objective spoken, of
Christ's love, as it is the object of our Faith, and not only assistenter: We
are more then Conquerours, through his love taken in, by us, and shed abroad in
our hearts; and by reason that his love comes in, and supports us under all,
and helps us to Conquer all. As Faith has all in God to rejoice in, and so
helps the Soul to Patience: So especially it has his love, in all sorts of
distresses.

Fourthly, Faith tells us that there will be a good issue of all, as to the
other world; yea and in this world also, in such things that relate to that
World. Luke 21. 18, 19. He had spoken before in that Chapter, of the greatest
distresses that could befall men (as, if you read the verses before, appears)
and also of such as should fall upon the people of God amongst them personally,
as well as upon the Nation of the Jews in their final desolation: And besides
that common Calamity which befell the people of God with the rest of that
Nation, he says, over and above, they shall first lay their hand on [YOV,] v.
12. And persecute [you,] delivering you, up to the Synagogues, and into
prisons, and shall [put some of you to death;] (It is in all three
Evangelists.) And in the 16. v. Ye shall be betrayed both by Parents and
Brethren, and Kinsfolks and Friends, and ye shall be hated of all men for my
Names sake. But says he, Comfort your selves with what will certainly be the
issue. v. 18. There shall not an hair of your head perish. How? Not an hair of
your head perish! What a strange saying is this! When he had said just before,
they should be persecuted and put to death. How does he say then, not an hair
of your head shall perish? Why, because the issue shall be such as should make
amends for every hair; The soul shall say, I have not lost an hair: Nay besides
those of you, they cannot put to death, shall have an hundred fold, and that in
this life, (as elsewhere) in spiritual blessings. And Faith eying these things,
relieves the Soul. Observe but what follows there as to our purpose in hand
(for which I quote this place) in v. 19. (the very next v.) In your Patience
possess your Souls, the meaning from the Coherence, is, you may well possess
your Souls in Patience, for I have told you, the issue will be most blessed and
Glorious.

Fifthly, Faith brings in Heaven as the Reward of patient enduring, thus in
Chap. first v. 12. of our Apostle. Blessed is the man that endures temptation;
for when he is tried, he shall receive the Crown of Life, which the Lord has
promised to them that love him. And this is the conclusion of his persent
discourse about patient enduring: [When he is tryed] that is, when his trials
are finished and gone through with: And his Faith has all along, wrought
Patience in his course: It Is persevering Patience, or endurance receives this
Omnes virtutes certant, sola Patientia vincit and coronatur.
Crown. Other Graces strive, but Faith and Patience, they are Crowned. And
further in proportion is holds, that as man's Trials and Temptations have been,
and his Patience suitable, such shall the greatness of his Reward be; and
accordingly measured forth unto him. And Faith in the intuition of that Glory
heartens Patience, Romans 5. Faith having caused us first to Rejoice in the [hope
of the glory of God] v. 2. causes us also to Glory in Tribulations, v. 3. in
the strength of our hope in that Glory. Which Hope is said further to be
increased in us, through Tribulations their working Patience, v. 4. As thus,
Patience works experience, v. 5. that is, many a fresh experiment of our own
graces, and Gods dealings in those Trials: And those experiences do work up an
Hope or assurance of Glory (as I John 3. ^.) to that degree of firmness, that
makes us not ashamed, not in respect only of the real disappointment of that
Glory, at death, but not in a man's own hope thereof, in his own heart, (For in
respect to that hope of his this is spoken) because that over and above, and
besides those foresaid experiments, The love of God is shed abroad in our
hearts, by the holy Ghost, himself immediately, who is given to us: which
shedding, etc. of Gods love, is no other then the earnest, and prelibation of
that Glory. And this is given as the reward of our Patience and Tribulations,
which are but the loss of things Earthly, in Exchange for which we receive this
hope and beginning of Glory. If thou had had all the Brass and Pewter that
was in thy house, and has been melted by this Fire, therewithal turned into
Gold; and the stones that paved thy yards, or the bricks or lime that raised
thy walls, all changed into precious stones; thy glass windows, that were
dissolved, converted into Diamonds; thou had little cause to complain at the
loss. Now read Is. 54. 11, 12. O thou afflicted, tossed with tempest, and not
comforted, Behold, I will lay thy ^tones with fair Colors, and lay by
foundations with Saphirs; I ^ill make thy Windows of Agats, ^^d thy Gates of
Carbuncles, and (...) thy borders of Pleasant stones. And if thou have gotten
any increase of Grace by these losses, then has much of this in Isaiah been
truly and spiritually fulfilled in thee. And these repaires are in this life.
But besides that, Thou have a building made without hands, eternal in the
Heavens, 2 Cor. 5. 1. Which stands ready for thee. Those believing Hebrews,
might well suffer the spoiling of their Goods with joy, whilst they found
sealed, and put into their hearts, Bills of Exchange to receive all again, in
Eternal treasures in heaven. But this was their very Case, Ye took joyfully the
spoiling of your Goods, knowing in your selves, that ye have in heaven (...)
better and an enduring substance, Heb. 10. 34. And this happy lot will come to
be thine, if thou exercisest upon thy losses, Faith and Patience: It follows in
that Heb. 10. the following verses Cast not away therefore your confidence,
which has great recompense of reward: For ye have need of Patience, that after
ye have done the will of God, ye might receive the promise. This for Faith's
working Patience.

II. Our LOVE to God, works PATIENCE.
. LOve to God in us, works Patience, or Faith by Love, a^ I showed out of v.
12. Love to God makes us cleave to God, and so to follow him through all
weathers and endurances. That great Convert (in whom at his Conversion, Faith
and Love were so abundant, as 1 Timothy 1. 14.) his Heart through Love to the Name
of Christ, caused him, in the highest passion, to utter, What mean you to weep
and break my heart? for I am not ready to be [BOVND] only, but also [to DYE] at
Jerusalem, for the Name of the Lord Jesus, Acts 21. v. 13. It was Love to that
Name that fired him; yea his Love was wrought up to such an intense degree, as
he could have wished to have been accursed from Christ for Gods Glory, in the
conversion of his brethren, Romans 9. I wonder how he would have done for
Patience under that curse, if in Hell: But that Love which wished that curse,
would have wrought it; and so thought he, or he would never have wished this.
Upon the like account of Love to this Name, Those two Apostles rejoiced to
suffer shame for his Name, as Acts 5. 41. Love makes the Glorifying of God, and
Christ, and the will of God, which is always for his Glory, dearer then all
things to us. Yea, that God should have his Will, for his own Glory, (if it be
the will of God) says the Apostle, of our Sufferings, abundantly stils the
heart in all. It Is true, I may be punish^ in my afflictions for my Sin, and I
humble my self for that: But beyond that, it is the good pleasure of God so to
have it, and I rejoice in [that] says Love, That his Will is done. As truly
that it is done upon me, as that by me. And, Good is the word of God, in both;
and Hallowed be his Name* In that Romans 8. where (as you heard) We are more then
Conquerours in all these things, [through him that loved us] that love of His,
to us, is alone indeed, openly or expressly mentitioned, yet withal it is our
love to him, that, tacitly, is insinuated to be a concurrent cause therewith;
you must take that in, too: For the intent of those very words is, that the
Soul apprehending his Love (Who is THAT LOVER (as that word imports) (...)
out of a reciprocated Love to him again, does hearten us in the conflict, unto
this Conquest. And yet there is one small word, put in, that further argues
this, it is in v. 26. [For thy sake] we are killed all the day long. Our lives
being in jeopardy every hour, and we are counted as sheep for the slaughter;
and this [For thy sake] you have in the 44. Psalm. And he quotes it out from
thence, As it is written (says he) For thy sake, etc. Now therefore it is
evidently, the Love that is in us, to him, and our cleaving to him therewith,
that is there held forth, as that which makes us willing to suffer and endure;
in that it is for his sake. And although the Apostle in his discourse runs upon
the magnifying Gods Love, and Christ's Love to us, as that, which (apprehended
and taken in by us) does principally work this effect: Yet the Psalmist on the
other side, sets out The Love of the Church to God, as the concurrent cause, v.
17. All this is come upon us, yet have we not forgotten thee, neither have we
deal^ falsely in thy Covenant. And v. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. Our heart is not
turned back, neither have our steps declined from thy way* Though thou have
sore broken u^ in the place of Dragons, and covered us with the shadow of
death* If we have forgotten the Name o^ our God, or stretched out ou^ hands to
a strange God, shall no^ God search this out? For h^ knows the secrets of the
heart. Yea [FOR THY SAKE] are we killed all the day long; we are counted as
sheep to the slaughter. If Faith and Love, once but says, It is for thy sake,
oh God, Why then says Patience, I can bear it, yea rejoice in it, for his sake
that loved me. And look as the Apostle says, he could do all things [through
Christ] that strengthened him, so Love can do all things [for Christ] that
loved him, and gave himself for him.

And (to conclude this)

If Love to our Brethren, which springs from Love to God, works so great a
Patience toward them: as in that Scripture, Love suffers long, and is kind,
envieth not, rejoices not in evil: bears all things, hopes all things, endures
all things, 1 Cor. Chap. 13. All which is spoken of (as in those words) of our
Love to man: Though it was our love to God, that is urged, and spoken of in all
the words before; and is the Spring of this our love to man. Now if love (I say)
unto man, works so much Patience, in things, perhaps that are yet injurious to
us, and not only burdensome, from them. And in a manner all those Elogies of
love there, do run upon, and speaks Patience; that Patience being the proper
fruit of that love. What else do suffering long, bearing, and enduring all
things, with the rest, sound and signify? Then much more (I say) will love
unto God, (the cause of this love to our Brethren) enable us to do the like
toward him, who can do us no wrong, nor hurt, but is Holy, and Righteous in
all his works; and all whose ways (and goings forth to us) are Mercy, and
Truth: And for whose sake also it is, that we bear so with our Brethren; and
who has loved and given his Son for us. It was a great speech of an holy Soul,
in an unkindly trial from man. That man should deal thus with me, I should have
much ado to bear it (as David said) But it is God, and I can take any thing
Psalm 55. 12.
well at his hands. And this for the second general Head.

III. Section.
III. GENERAL HEAD.
What is the Perfect Work of Patience.
. IN General, A thing then is perfect, when all the parts that belong to it are
finished: As then, the Creation of the world, is said to be perfect, when, as
Genesis 2. 1, 2. The heavens and the earth were finished, and the hosts of them:
So, when all the whole of the work of Patience, in its several parts, etc. is
accomplished, then patience has its perfect work.

There are four BRANCHES of this HEAD, that complete it.

1. Its Privative work. 2. Its Positive Acts. 3. Its Positive Fruits. 4. Its
Adjuncts of perfection.
All which go to make Patience perfect: And the Proofs thereof will confirm
every tittle of the forepart, and body of that description I gave of Patience,
page 46.

I. Branch.
Its Privative Work.
I Begin with its Privative work. And that lies in this: when Faith by
Patience, does mortify turbulent passions that still arise, and are opposites
thereto. And as love, when PERFECT, casts out fear, (1 John 4. 18) So then
PATIENCE is PERFECT, when it expells those contrary Passions: or else likewise,
too intense thoughts, or porings upon our misery, and crosses; so as our minds
are chained and tied to those objects, and taken off from all other. I take
THOUGHTS in, because Christ says, Luke 24. 38. Why do [THOUGHTS] arise in your
hearts? Why are you [TROUBLED?] For when troubles sink deep, they send thoughts
up fast: as when weights are hung upon a clock, or jack: they make the wheels
run swiftly: And so inordinate affections cause an ^nordinacy of thoughts; and
a fixing our minds to one thing; as upon what we have lost, or are ^ike to
suffer. Now perfect Patience corrects and orders the ex^ravagancies of all
these, reduces a man to possess his own soul: as Christ's phrase is, in Luke
21. 19. In your Patience possess ye your souls, and thereby to dwell in ae man's
self: whereas the violence of such affections, hurry us out of our selves; and
throw our soul out of doors; that we are not within, or our selves.

To instance in some particular passions.

1. Inordinate Grief. You know how Jobs Patience is cried up* and that by our
Apostle. For when he suffered the loss of all both his children and estate, etc
yet he expressed no grief, n^ trouble at all, that we read of upon the hearsay
and tiding thereof; and sure if there had been any, upon those occasions the
story would have told it, as (...) does his other impatiences (which were upon
other and highe^ pressures of another kind) after wards: But all you read of
hi^ upon occasion of those outwar^ losses in chap. 1. is All mere Patience, and
submission to God. The Lord (says he) gave, and the Lord has taken away, and
it is the Lord who has done both, an blessed be the Name of the Lord, for both.
And in ALL THIS charged not God foolishly, says the last verse.

2. Envy and Passionate Anger: 1. Envy, which is apt to rise, when others have
no such afflictions, or losses. As that such and such an one, and of my rank,
should escape with his goods, etc. when the loss falls heavy on me, says the
sad heart: This secretly regreets. Good people are greatly apt to this. The
Spirit that is in [VS] (in us Saints) lusts to envy. But God, in the end,
gives more Grace, that is, when men are humbled (as there, it is said) and
broken; which is usually, when they have been exercised with great sufferings.
The different condition of the holy Apostles, and some other Christians, in
those primitive times, gives demonstration of such a Patience in this case.
There were no men so eminent for sufferings and Patience, next the Lord Christ,
as the Apostles were, who yet viewing other Christians, (as take the
Corinthians, 1 Cor 4. 8, 9.) how they were full, etc. Now ye are full, now ye
are rich, ye have Reigned as King^ without us. It was a Cit^ very rich, and the
Christian^ in it, had a fullness of outward things, when he wrote this they were
full and rich: Bu^ as for us, (says he) God has (...) forth us Apostles last,
as it were appointed to death, etc. Ye are honorable, but we are despised;
(...) both hunger and thirst, and ar^ naked, and are buffited, and have no
certain dwelling place, and labor working with our hands: being reviled, we
bless: being persecuted, we suffer it: being defame^ we intr^at: we are made as
the filth of the world, and are the offscouring of all things unto thi^ day.
And yet he did not at all envy this their fullness in the least; No, he wishes
them all true prosperity, would to God ye did reign, v. 8. that is, in true and
spiritual respects; he wishes them all good rather, in all inward enjoyments,
of God and Christ, together with their outward riches, etc. Now what was it,
that had so much rooted up envy, etc. in him, and the other his fellow
Apostles? It was his sufferings, and wants, and their being made spectacles to
Angels and men (as there): This had wrought his, and their Spirits to this. In
the old Testament, Joshua, though he proved a man of a choice Spirit, yet when
he was young in years, and but a young beginner in Grace, envy rose up in him,
for his good Master, Moses sake. Eldad and Medad Prophecy, (says he) Number. 11.
29. But Moses said to him, Enviest thou for my sake? and so reproved him; and
thereupon expresses his own heart, thus* Would God, that all the Lords people
were Prophets; and that the Lord would put his spirit upon them. Now whence
arose thi^ blessed disposition of heart, thu^ free from envy in him? In the
very next chapter you meet with another instance, which give^ a true account
both of his not envying others, as also in bearing the envy of others against
himself sharpened with the highes^ provocations unto ANGER, (which was the
second.) It being as unkindly, as unreasonable. 'Twas the envy of his own, only
Brother and Sister, for this, that God had chosen him to utter his mind by,
unto his people, and reveal himself, so as never to any man, (as Gods testimony
of him is in that 12. Chap.) Whereupon they had said, v. 2. Has the Lord
indeed spoken only, by Moses? has he not spoken by us? Thereupon follows the
Account, or bottom disposition, of Spirit, which made him bear both this and
the former, v. 3. Now the man Moses was very meek, above all the men which were
upon the face of the earth. And so good man, he would himself have passed this
^y, and have taken no notice at ^ll of this affront: but that God ('it is there
said) heard it, as noting that HE would not put it up so, for Moses sake. Now
what was ^t, had tamed, and made Moses ^hus meek and calm, and passive?
Certainly His great Afflictions. And his Faith, having been exercised thereby
had wrought Pati^nce in him. Heb. 11. By Faith, (v. 24). he chose (v. 25.)
Rather ^o suffer afflictions, etc. and accordingly had lived forty years, ^
mean shepherd, a servile life, ^n exile, a banished man, from Pharaohs
Court-Honors, and pleasures of it, as an underling, i^ hardship and durance.
And i^ was a sudden Trial, for he fle^ for his life at an hours warning as well
as a sore and long Trya^ of forty years; and these sufferings (as great as any
man's in tha^ age) made him Meek [ver^ Mee^], which word the Dutc^ Annotators
render, [Patient. The Hebrew word has affini^^ with afflictions (says
Ainswort^ which had taught him Patienc^ Heb. 5.
as sufferings did Christ, who^^ type he was. These had subdue^ anger and envy
in him, unto th^^ so high a degree: And Patienc^ had its perfect work. For,
otherwise we find he could be angr^ at times, Exodus 11. 8. and 26. 20 and 31.
19. Lev. 10. 16. Nu^ 16. 11. and 31. 14. and chap^ 20. 10, 11. as Ainsworth
has collected them.

Jesus Christ has taught us lesson, against this envy, Mat. 20. 15. Shall I
not do what I will with mine own? Are not all things mine? And will thou envy
that I have taken them from thee, and not done so, from another? Shall thine
eye be evil because I am good? Shall a man be sick, that another is in health?

3. Inordinate Fears. When too much trouble comes upon us, we use to fear too
much, at the present: And are apt to project a thousand things for the future;
as that poverty and beggary will follow: many such fears lay hold upon us,
because we see Gods anger has begun, and we know not the worst, nor when or
where ^twill end. But says Christ, Rev. 2. 10. [Fear] none of those [things]
that thou shall [suffer.] Be thou [faithful] unto death, and I will give thee a
Crown of life. Faith and faithfulness unto God, or constancy in enduring unto
death, he here opposes to Fear: and Faith works Patience, and Patience eats
out fear. Fortitude and courage differs from Patience in this: that a stout
courage in a man of a great Spirit, will indeed overcome FEAR, i^ so be he sees
any hope of evading: and so will rouse a man's Spirit up to resistance, and
defense. But Patience, though it sees no hope* as to this life, yea nothing but
present death before it, it will yet strengthen the heart to bear it and make a
man [Faithful unt^ death] and constant, without prevailing fears, even unto
death.

4. Murmuring against God^ Patience works out that. As i^ Job: The Devil
projected hi^ blaspheming: He will blasphem^ thee to thy face: He made sure
account of it; and would needs turn Prophet, and prophecy what Job would do,
and that before God. But the devil was befooled, and proved a lying Prophet:
Job instead of blaspheming God, he blesses God [In all this Job charged not
God foolishly.] I may say of it as in the Revelation, twice, it is said of the
Saints, Here was the Patience of Job. And it was that patient frame of Spirit,
that God had wrought in him, which the Scripture so extolls, that enabled him
hereunto.

5. Faith by Patience mortifies inordinate CARES. Against the times of those
great distresses, that were to come upon the Jewish Nation, and among them,
upon the Christian Jews in that nation, before the destruction of Jerusalem,
(which would try every vein in their hearts) Christ gives two special
exhortations, besides diverse others, Luke 21. The first, In YOUR Patience (that
is, that Patience, which is truly Christian, and properly Yours) possess your
own souls, v. 19. The second, Take heed to your selves, least at any time your
hearts be overcharged with [the cares of this life,] (...) Cares do (as the
word imports) distract the Soul, scatter it into wild thoughts and wandering
anxieties: But Patience (which Christ first exhorts to) calls all in, and
orders all to keep home, and not stir out of doors, abroad; composeth all so,
as a man possesses his own Soul. In Phil. 4, 6, 7. Be careful for nothing, but
in every thing by prayer and supplication, with thanksgiving, let your requests
be made known unto God: and the peace of God, etc. I instance likewise for
this, in the difference of the two grounds in the Par^ble of the Sower, 8 Luke
14, 15. Of the Thorny ground, it is said, That the word was choked by the CARES
of the world. But of the good ground oppositely, that it brings forth fruit
with PATIENCE. Patience is contrary unto cares, as well as unto Unquietness, or
to other inordinate affections.

This for Patience, its privative Work.

II. Branch of the III. HEAD.
I Come secondly to POSITIVE ACTS, and workings of Patience, which are many. To
begin with the lowest, and so rise to the higher.

. 1. Patience includes, and comprehends an Act of [WAITING] upon God, and his
good pleasure. Waiting is an act of Faith continued, or lengthened out: and
where Faith would of it self be short-winded, Patience eeks it out. The
daughter helps the Mother, with an expectation of anhappy issue. 5. Jam. You
find waiting involved in Patience as an eminent act thereof, v. 7. Be [patient]
therefore, Brethren, unto the coming of the Lord: behold the Husbandman
[waiteth] for the precious fruit of the earth, and has long [patience] for it,
until he receive the early, and latter rain. Look how and in what manner the
Husbandman waits, so he sets out, and exhorts a Christian Patient man should
do. Mic. 7. 7. Therefore I will look unto the Lord, [I will wait] for the God
of my Salvation, my God will hear me, etc. UNTIL he plead my cause, and execute
judgment for me, etc. v. 9.

2. It is a waiting with quietness. And that is Patience work too. Patience is
not an enduring simply by force, (which we call patience per force) but with
quietness. In the third of Lament. the Church, in her doleful condition,
expresses the actings, and workings of her own soul: Although she speaks in
the third person, (which is usual in the Scripture) yet means her self, v. 26.
It is good that a man should bothhope and QUIETLY WAIT for the salvation of the
Lord. This was uttered when she was under the yoke, and so was a fruit of
Patience, v. 27. It is good for a man that he bear the yoke in his youth. It is
the Nature of Faith to quiet the heart in God, Isaiah 26. 3. Thou will keep him
(...) habet vim quietativam.
[in perfect peace,] whose mind is stayed on thee: because he [trusteth in
thee.] And chap. 30. 30. In quietness and [confidence] shall be your
[strength.] And when Faith has wrought Patience, it quiets the heart much
more. Patience speaks quietness in the very sound of it. And the reason is,
because it has a strength accompanies it, 1 Col. 11. [Strengthened] with all
might unto [all Patience] and long-suffering. And thence so far forth as Faith
and Patience do strengthen the heart, so far we are able to bear, and that
with quietness. Let not your hearts be troubled, says Christ, John 14. Why?
You believe in God, believe also in me, Faith on them will cause trouble to fly
away. Which is a great part of Christ's meaning, when he says, in patience
possess your Souls, that (...) dwell quietly in your own Spirits, as a man does
in his house, which our Law terms his Castle.

3. Patience carries on the heart without FAIN^ING or discouragement. Isaiah
42. 4. The Meekness and Patience of Christ is there first set forth, v. 2. He
shall not cry, nor list up his voice to be heard in the streets. Th^n follows
v. 4. He shall not fail, nor be discouraged [not be broken] (as the Hebrew is)
that is, in Spirit, so as to cease from what God had given him to do, or
suffer; he should go on with his work, till he had perfected it.

4. Patience in all sufferings, submits to God, and the will of God. The
Apostle sedulously puts in [if it be the will of God] when he had occasion to
mention their sufferings; and he does it twice, 1 Pet. 3. 17. If it be the will
of God that ye suffer. And chap. 4. v. last, Wherefore let him that suffers
according to the will of God, etc. And in chap. 1. 6. [If need be] that is, if
God see it requisite, to bring them on you: And the Apostle would needs bring
these clauses in, though by way of Parenthesis; so in two of these places
mentioned. The stronger the sufferings are, the stronger is the will of God in
bringing those sufferings. And it is Patience in the Soul, that works the heart
to submission to that will, Psalm. 39. v. 9. I was dumb, I opened not my mouth;
[BECAVSE THOU DID IT.] Then, when he confessed his sin of Bathsheba, and
murdering Vriah, he considered not the wrong done them, in comparison of That
he had done against God; therein: Against THEE, against THEE only have I
sinned, and Psalm. 51.
done this evil in thy sight. And now, when a retaliation for that sin, in the
rebellion of his own Son Absolon, came upon him, and Shimei had likewise
bitterly cursed and reviled him (which some latter expositors have deemed to
have been the occasions of that Psalm.) See Piscator and the Dutch Annotat. And
the Ground why it may be so judged, is the conformity which these pass^ges in
the Psalm, verse 8. Make me not the REPROACH of the foolish, and this
specially, v. 9. I opened not my mouth, because THOU DID IT, do hold with
that story, 2 Samuel 16. 10, 11. When Shimei did curse him, upon occasion of
which, David, simularly, spoke thus. The Lord has said to him, curse David;
Who shall then say, wherefore have thou done so? Let him alone, THE LORD HAS
BIDDEN HIM. Which is just as here [THE LORD HAS DONE IT.]
He in like manner, in this his punishment, lays aside the consideration of
all instruments, that had brought those evils on him, (whoever they were,
whether it were these or some other) and looks only unto God, and submits,
[because thou have done it.] And though he confesses, that he was in a fume at
first, notwithstanding his fixed resolution to have been dumb as for speaking
any thing that should savor of murmuring, before men: Yet his flesh and
corruption boiled within him, (as that uses to rise and work in us first) so
v. 2. 3. I was Dumb with silence, I held my peace, even from good: And my
sorrow was stirred, or my distemper wrought the more, my heart was hot within
me; whilst I was musing, the Fire burned. Then spoke I with my tongue: And what
he spoke, savors of a man weary of life it self: For he would needs know of God
when his life should be at end, thus v. 4. So impatient was he: Yea, but then
when his grace came more deeply and thoroughly to be stirred, and Patience to
have in perfect Work; he then considers Gods hand alone in it; how that it was
HE, had stirred up the Spirits of these wicked One^ against him; and found tha^
himself had to do with Go^ alone: And then, he was (...) and silent indeed, to
purpose. An^ truly his heart at that time ((...) the occasion were, that of
Shime^ and Absalom) had been wrough^ up into as blessed a frame of submission
to God, as ever before, (...) after, in all his life time, as hi^ words (in that
chapter before mentioned) do declare, 2 Sam^ 15. 25, 26. And David said, if
shall find favor in the eyes o^ the Lord, he will bring me again and show me
both it, (viz. the Ark) and his Habitation: BUT IF HE THVS SAY, I HAVE NO
DELIGHT IN THEE: [BEHOLD HERE I AM, LET HIM DO TO ME, AS SEEMS GOOD UNTO
HIM.] He herein perfectly gives up himself to Gods good pleasure. And it is as
if he had said; If it be good in his eyes so to deal, it shall be so in mine; I
wholly give my self up unto whatever his design is upon me: Yea, he casts away
himself into the supposition of Gods having no delight in him; which is the
most afflicting supposition, a Godly man can make to himself, of all other: so
perfectly did his will apply it self to God his will. He had professed his
waiting on God just before in that Psalm; Now Lord, what do I wait for? My
hope is in thee. And now he adds [I am] dumb, so for the present, and [I will
be Dumb] so for the future: I will never open my mouth about it. Piscator and
the Dutch Annotator read it thus, in both Tenses.

5. Patience makes a man not Dumb only, or not to open his mouth through
submission: But it makes him put his mouth in (...) dust: whereby a deeper
humiliation and submission is yet expressed. It Is a farther humiliation to lie
at Gods feet, with hi^ face on the dust, which is as low, (...) the person can
go: that if Go^ will tread and trample upon him, there he is; and in the
posture, presents, and declare himself ready for that, or an^ dispensation from
God. Lam. (...) The church did not only wai^ v. 25. And wait quietly, v. 26 and
then sit down, and keep (...) lence, v. 28. But did put (...) mouth in the
dust, v. 29.

But you will say, all this (...) done, when the Soul (...) hope, as appears in
those words, in that 3. of Lam. v. 26. It is good that a man should hope and
wait quietly, and v. 29. He puts his mouth in the dust, if so be, there may be
hope. and indeed David in the 29. Psalm. and likewise in those places cited of
him, out of Samuel, he had hope concerning that particular thing he yet
submitted unto God in, as at the seventh verse of that Psalm appears. And now
Lord what do wait for? [my hope is in thee.] And then mentions the deliverance
where in his hope lay, in v. 8, 9, 10. And thus when Shimei cursed him, his Soul
in like manner did gather up hope the more upon it, that God would bless him, 2 Samuel 16. 12. IT MAY BE the Lord will look on mine affliction, and that the Lord
will requite me good for his cursing this day. But yet I confess his hope here,
and the Churches before, did each rise up but to an [it may be.]

6. But Gospel Patience (sixthly) will work an effect, when there is no hope,
as to the things and concernments of this life. David and the Church said, if
there may be hope; but Patience will say, if there be no hope, that is in this
life that ever I should come out of this trouble, (I differenced Patien^^ from
Christian fortitude before, by this.) The Apostles did put primitive Christians
over to the day of the Restitution of (...) things, and the Refreshing, that
should be then. Thus Jam. 5. 7* 8. Be Patient therefore, Brethren, [VNTO THE
COMING OF THE LORD.] Behold the Husbandma^ waits for the precious fruit of
the earth, and has long Patience for it, till he receive the early and latter
rain. Beye also Patient, stablish your hearts, FOR THE COMING OF THE LORD
DRAWS NIGH. As if he had said; As for your pressures, I can give you no hope
of release out of them, during this life: but let your hearts, fixedly make
account of no other outward refreshment, but that which shall be then, by the
coming of Christ, which will be Spiritual. And his similitude of the
Husbandmans waiting for the harvest declares thus much, v. 7. Behold, the
Husbandman waits for the precious fruits of the earth, etc. Poorman, he does
not reap this precious fruit of the earth, until the Harvest. He parts with
precious seed: And as unto him, it is until the harvest time, as good as lost.
The Psalmist has the same comparison, They sow precious seed, and they go
weeping (as loath to part with it) but shall return rejoicing, bringing their
sheafs with them. Brethren, there is an har^est a coming, and joy sown for the
upright in heart, against that time. It is now but sown, but must come up one
day. But although the Husbandman in all appearance looks upon all, as lost,
until the Harvest: yet however he has before then, in the mean while, the early
and the latter rain: And they give hope of an harvest, whilst he sees, and
finds God blessing, and following his Corn, with rain upon his Ground. This as
to the Husbandmans Hope (which is the Apostles similitude.) And as to the
Christians hope, I understand by the early and latter rain, according to the
course of the similitude, to be signified, those illapses from heaven, those
refreshing bedewments, which the holy Ghost vouchfafeth, all along to such an
expectants Soul, as earnests of heaven, and pledges of Gods certain intending
to give him his expected harvest, accord ing to the proportion of his Patience
and waiting: But still all these hopes wholly respect that other life: But as
to this life, the Apostle gives no other hopes for them. Nor no more does the
Apostle to the Hebrews, chap. 10. 36. whilst he thus speaks, Ye have need of
Patience (even to the end of your lives.) For it follows, that after you have
done the will of God, you may inherit the Promises: Still you will need
Patience, to your very last. We use to speak the same, to a man, whose case is
remediless, y'ad need of Patience; for your condition is not like to be
bettered. These had suffered the spoiling of their goods already, v. 33. and
had endured a great sight of afflictions (as there.) Well, but the storm is not
yet over: you have need of Patience still, you are like never like to have your
goods and estates again, and I can give you (says he) no other hope but that
you would patiently wait for the restitution of all things, which is to be at
the day of judgment, for so it follows v. 37. For yet a little while, and he
THAT SHALL COME, WILL COME, and will not tarry. And therefore cast not away
your confidence, which has great recompense of reward, verse 25. So that, all
the hope in this life is, That the time will not be long.

. A seventh Act, or Work of Patience is, it causes the Soul to sanctify God
in a man's heart, all sorts of ways. I shall still instance (as I have done)
more specially in Job's carriage, whose Patience is so cried up, by our
Apostle: When his outward losses of children, etc. had their full
accomplishment, and the sad tidings thereof had filled his ears, and heart,
(chap. 1.) by messenger after messenger, till he had no more to lose, the text
tells us, v. 20. He fell down on the ground, AND WORSHIPPED. He had been
frequent in worshipping before, and that upon occasion of his children, that
they might not sin, so you read v. 5. but all those, his foregone worship,
sacrifices, and prayers, could not prevail with God, to preserve them, nor his
goods neither. But now when they are all gone, the first thing he does, is, He
falls down and worships.

Quest. What may that contain in it?

Answ. I shall limit my self unto what his speech thereupon does utter: and the
Posture of his worshipping does signify: both plainly showing, what was in his
Heart, that moved him so to do; and moved within him, in the doing it.

1. He adores God in his Sovereignty, both in his falling down, as also in
those words, The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken. He is Lord (says he)
the Lord of all: All was his own; and shall he not do what he will with his
own? as 10 Mat. 15. I am the Clay, he is the Potter: He is the Lord of me, and
all. Job had prayed for his Sons (as we did for the City) so far as he had then
in his view, what might then concern them: but for all his good prayers for
them, God took them away, by a violent death; and herein God seems angry with
his prayers (as with ours for the City) yet Job begins to worship him afresh,
and adores him after all: And 'twas the first thing he applied himself unto.
(Faith and Patience, will cause the heart to apply it self to God in all sorts
of dealings, and will vent and utter gracious dispositions, some way or other.)
And to adore God (which was most suitable to this condition he was in) is an
higher act then to pray, simply considered, though it be done, mostly in
prayer. And as thus at first, so he retained this practice and Principle, all
along, although he did grow very unquiet, when his Sins, and Gods wrath came in
upon him. Yet however impatient he otherwise were, he still afterward
continued in this manner to adore, and fall down before God at times. Thus in
Chap. 23. 11, 12. You shall see how this poor man falls down before God, and
submits to him. He first professes his integrity, at v. 10. And his Faith, as
to the issue of his Trials, that all would be for good. He knows the way that
I take: when he has tried me, I shall come forth as Gold. My foot has held
his steps, etc. As if he had said: But yet for all my holy walking with him,
his resolution and design upon me, thus to tri^ me, went on: And all my prayers
aforehand could not turn him therefrom, as follows v. 13, 14. But he is of one
mind, and who can turn him? And what his Soul desires even that he does, for
he performs the thing that is appointed for me: (What is my Lot from him, (as
this was) I must take it, and submit to it: And Many such things are with him:
Many such strange and wonderful unusual dealings are with him, and we must
magnify him in all. It is Gods Sovereignty, you see, which he here adores and
falls down before. And this passage you may set upon the score of those eminent
speeches, wherein he expressed his Patience, which the Scripture commends it
for; and in the issue of his worst fits, we find him still adoring, and
submitting to God.

. Secondly, He humbles himself to the dust [falls down to the ground.] First,
as himself was a Creature, poor and emptied of all. Alas! What am I (says he)
or what have I to challenge, or assume to my self as mine? What have I, or am
I, that I have not received? A poor naked thing, I came into the world at
first; and but as poor and naked am I now, when bereft of all my goods; and as
naked I must return: I had nothing at first, and I have but nothing now, and I
shall carry nothing with me into the other World. Thus spoke He.

When Jacob was in hazard of, and thought he should lose his goods, and
children, and all, (as Job here, actually lost both,) see how aforehand he
humbles and debaseth himself, (as you read 32 Genesis 10.) and how greatly, before
the Lord, I am less then the least of thy mercies: I am not worthy of a bit of
bread, and thou gave me all I have. And what was I once? He considers (as
Job) his original condition, both as to matter of estate, and children. I came
over Jordan but with this staff. I had no more (says he) and now I have two
bands, both of Cattle and Children: And if God take all, I am but where I was,
and where he once found me. And truly Jacob his best Policy, and design was to
have compounded the matter, and if he could but save half of either, v. 8. if
he might have half his estate, and half his children, he should have been,
considering the hazard of all, something well appeased: but now he puts in with
God for the whole. His thus Humbling of himself was before he had lost any
thing, to the end to preserve it; and Jobs was when he had lost all, but both
express the same Humility.

And as you find him here humbled, as a poor Creature, (as poor as ever any
was) so elsewhere as deeply broken for his being a sinner, and professing
himself to be as naked and empty in respect of any righteousness of his own, or
of any thing he had to stand upon in the sight of God. The great Apostle does
not more divest himself thereof, in Ph. 3. then holy Job does in chap. 9. 23. I
know it is so of a truth: but how should man be just with God? If he will
contend with him, he cannot answer him ONE OF A THOUSAND. And yet more deeply
and expressly, v. 20, 21. If I JVSTIFIE my self, mine own mouth (I sinning in
all my speeches, and even in this now whilst I speak it) shall condemn me: if I
say I am perfect, it shall also prove me perverse. His meaning is, had I never
so perfect an inherent holiness, yet if I come before God, to be justified, I
know not mine own Soul, as he It Is such a phrase as when Christ says I know you
not.
there adds; that is, I look at nothing in my own Soul, I utterly renounce all
in it; yea, I would despise my life, that is, all that holiness I have in the
course of my life exercised, and had in me, I despise it, I count it dross and
dung. Though as for an integrity, in point of sanctification, he stood upon his
points with God himself.

We find other Saints in their distresses to have been patient in the sense of
their Sins. I might instance in David, how he humbled himself in that great
distress which we spoke of, and which silenced him so, as you heard in that
forecited 39. Psalm. Deliver me from all my transgressions (says he) verse 8.
The remembrance of those struck him dumb before God; for that speech immediately
follows, v. 9. So the Church, 7 Micah 9. I will bear the indignation of the
Lord, for I have sinned against him.

A third Act comprehended in Jobs worshipping God, is his blessing God, as his
words therewith also uttered show: which blessed frame and disposition of
Spirit, his Faith by Patience had wrought, in him upon this occasion: Lo! his
high sufferings cause him to bless the Lord: Blessed be the Name of the Lord,
(says he). He blesses him, that he had given him at first, and that he had
afforded him those blessings of children and goods so long: And he was thankful
for that; and thought it but reasonable, that if he received good, he should
also receive evil, as the pleasure of God was, chap. 2. 10. He blesses God
also, because he found that God had blessed him with such things and blessings,
Heavenly, which could not be taken away. He found the love of God the same
still. It is a sure rule, We never bless God, but when we find, that God
blesses us first: As we do not love God, but, because God loves us first. Now
when the Soul finds that in afflictions and tentations God does bless it, this
draws out from the Soul, a blessing of God again. And then does the Soul say,
it is not only the will of my father, and therefore shall I not drink the Cup
he gives me? But it is the blessing of my Father, and shall not I bless him for
it? In every thing give thanks, says the holy Apostle, 1 These. 5. 18. That is,
whatever the condition be, still there is matter of thanks, and so of blessing
God.

III. Branch of the II. HEAD.
THE FRUITS OF PATIENCE.
THese, the Apostles terms, the Peaceable quiet fruits of Heb. 12.
righteousness, which Chastning yields, after ye have been exercised thereby;
and that is through Patience gained by those afflictions.

. The 1. Fruit, it works contentment: an holy contentment: And that adds a
perfection to the Other former works of this grace, 4 Phil. 11. 12. I have
learned in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be content. I know how to be
abased, and I know how to abound: Every where, and in all things I am
instructed, both to be full, and to be hungry, both to abound, and to suffer
need. And he had learned it, as Christ learnt his obedience, through
sufferings; and by his having run through so great a variety of conditions. A
man may be content when he is not fully satisfied: When God frames a man's
estate to his will, then he is satisfied, as Psalm. 17. whose belly thou fillest
with thy hidden treasure. But to be content is another thing: It is not when
have an estate, according to my will, but my will is brought to my estate: And
then, I have as much content, in that, as in the greatest estate (for, life
(says Christ) that is, the comfort of life, lies not in abundance.) It Is true,
such a man would choose rather, as the Apostle speaks, a full estate; yet
patience boweth his judgment, to such an approbation of his present condition,
as that, which is best for him; as being that, which out of Gods judgment and
wisdom is allotted to him: He so, bends his Will unto such a correspondency
with Gods will, as he rests content.

2. A second fruit of Patience is self-sufficiency; the word is so, 1 Timothy 6.
6. But Godliness with contentment is great gain. The word (...) translated
Contentment, is a more reaching word by far. To say [Contentment] that is too
bare and scant a word; but this more amplysignifies [self-sufficiency] -- In 2
Cor. 9. 8. the same word is there translated [sufficiency], but still in the
Greek it has [self] added to sufficiency, which imports [a sufficiency within
a man's self] that he needs not go abroad for any thing; he is sufficiently
supplied from what is within. The words of that verse are, And God is able to
make all Grace abound toward you, that ye always having all self-sufficiency
in all things, may abound to every good work: which let us consider.

It Is true, that in the Word [all Grace] he includes an outward Grace, of
giving such an abundance of external Blessings, as they might [alwayes] and [in
all things] have enough for themselves, and to spare; yea to abound in every
good work to others: But yet the main of that Grace h^ Centers in, is an
[inward self-sufficiency] in a man's own heart, as without which, they would
never have satisfaction at home, much less an heart to scatter abroad: but a
man's Natural self-unsufficiency (as oppositely I call it) would make his heart
clung and narrow, never contented in himself, much less abounding to others,
though he had all the whole world. So as indeed that is the Grace, which the
Apostle puts the weight upon; THAT i^ the Grace, he Predicates.

So as the inference or Corrolary (as to our purpose) from thence may justly
be. That if (on the other hand) a true Christian be in never so great want, or
fallen into a condition of extreme poverty; Comparatively, either unto what
himself once had (which is the case of many a good Soul now) Or unto others,
who still abound; yet if God give him this [All Grace] of inward
self-sufficiency, he may be, and is still as content and sufficient within
himself, as those in that abounding condition which the Apostle wishes unto
those Corinthious.

And the Reason is, that the self-sufficiency of him that has the most of such
things, lies not in those things, but depends utterly upon that inward Grace
spoken of, or that inward frame of Spirit, which this Grace composeth his Soul
unto.

And this is evident from that place to Timothy (first cited) where it is, that
the Apostle ufoth the same word, on purpose to comfort the Saints, that were in
a scant and bare Condition, as to this World, as the Coherence of verse 6, 7,
8, shows, GODLINESS with SELF-SVFFICIENCY (says he) is great gain, (even
virtually as much, yea infinitely more then gaining all the World, as Christ's
speech is) which moreover is spoken with a Connection to these words: For (...)
brought nothing into this World, And it is certain we carry nothing ont. And
therefore, if we have nothing [but food and raiment, let us therewith be
content]; so it follows: And for so much God has undertaken.

And the holy Apostle verifies this in himself, that he had learned thus to be
as Content when he wanted, as when he abounded And in this frame we find,
elsewhere, his mind to have been in the midst of all, not wants only, but
pressures of all sorts: Which also shows, that Patience and Endurance, through
sufferings, had been his Tutours and Instructiours thereunto: For in a Cor. 6.
chapter, He having first reckoned up his sufferings, v. 4. and made a Catalogue
of them, then in his final conclusion, v. 10. he sums up all in this. As
SORROWFVL, yet always REJOICING: [As poor] yet making many rich: As HAVING
NOTHING, YET POSSESSING ALL THINGS. In which few words he compendiously
speaks, what either out of that to the Corinthians 9. chap. I have now
insisted on, or that Paradox in my Text does amount unto. For those words [as
sorrowful] in respect of diverse Temptations [yet always rejoycing], are all
one with [Count it all joy when ye fall into diverse Tentations] as in the Text.
And His [having nothing, yet possessing all things] there, is adaequate and
aequivalent to the Corinthian^ supposed, outward abounding always, and in all
things. But then his [being poor, yet making many rich] Therein he exceeded and
transcended, what they, or any the most liberal-hearted rich man that ever was
in the World, could boast of, in any of their, or his abounding in any or every
good (or Charitable) Works, in relief to others. So we see it is possible and
attainable, that a Christian may in the want of all have an
all-self-sufficiency: super abounding the fullness of him in outward things, who
abounds most. And all this was the fruit of his Patience, and continual
abiding under sufferings: For he speaks this of himself, whilst he is
enumerating his sufferings, which in that Chapter he does at ^arge. Thus
perfect will Patience make you, that as here the Apostle in my Text speaks, you
shall want nothing, even in outward things, when you have lost ^ll.

. If you ask me, Whence has a a Christian this self-sufficiency, within
himself? and wherein lies it?

I answer, if God, and Christ dwell in the heart; if I have the earnest of the
Spirit for my salvation: Or am partaker of his holiness, and that Grace, which
accompanies salvation; and do delight in the will and glory of God, and in
pleasing him, and the like to these; then I have a self-sufficiency within me.
If, as in the 1 John 4. 16. We have known and believed the Love that God has
to us. God is love, and he that dwells in love, dwellet^ in God, and God in
him: The we have all within our selves And is like as a man that has (...)
provisions in and about his ow^ house, so plentifully, as he need not go forth
for any thing; s^ is it, and will it be with us.

. A third Fruit is JOY, I Colos^ 11. Srengthened with all might unto ALL
PATIENCE and long suffering with JORFVLNESS. You have it also in the Text,
(...) it all Joy, etc. And Romans 5. 8 [We glory in Tribulations] knowing that
tribulation works Patience.

You will say to me how can this be, does not the Apostle say, Heb. 12. 11. No
chastning seems to be for the present joyo^^ but grievous. And our Saviou^ you
shall weep when the world shall rejoice. And many the like.

I Give these Answers.

1. The object of your joy is not simply your afflictions: No, no man can
delight in them alone, they (indeed) are grievous, as says the Apostle. But
your joy lies in looking unto, what is the issue and event, the end and reward
of your Trials by them; and that is it you are to Count the matter of your joy,
and ALL JOY. To rejoice in the thing, or the affliction it self, is one thing:
And to rejoice in the expectation of the event and issue, is another.

Then Secondly, If you observe it, the word in the Text is favorable: Says he
[Count] it all joy; that is, esteem it so. He does not say, you shall have all
joy (at present); But though you have not, you may count it all joy, that is,
you may reckon it [as matter of all joy,] as many Interpreters par^phrase the
words, and so Reason yourselves into joy in your Judgments, and so esteem it
all joy, Appretiative, as the School speaks: though the passion of joy be
wanting.

Thirdly, Jesus Christ himself, when he did endure the Cross, and whilst he
hung upon it, and likewise before, whilst within the Garden, he was not in a
joyous frame of Spirit, at that present, as to the passion of joy; nay, his
Soul was heavy unto death, that while: Yet it is said, Heb. 12. 1. THAT FOR THE
JOY that was set before him he did endure the Cross, etc. And he therein is set
forth as an example unto us, in the same verse, Let us run [WITH PATIENCE] the
race that is set before us, Looking unto Jesus, etc. It is well, if you look to
the joy set before you, as that which you certainly expect to come, although
you want the Passion of joy in that which you expect to come.

Fourthly, You may perhaps not rejoice at present with great joy, yet
afterward through much exercise of Patience it may grow up in you. And this
answer, the Apostle himself gives in that Heb. 12. Distinguishing between what
for [the present,] and what for [afterwards,] in time, v. 11. Now no Chastning
[for the present] seems to be joyous, but grievous: nevertheless [afterwards]
it yields the peaceable fruits of Righteousness unto them [which are
exercised] thereby: And upon the hopes of that, he bids them to lift up the
hands that hang down, and strengthen the feeble knees.

Yet, Fifthly, Some Christians have had, and you may have actual joy at that
present in the midst of your afflictions. These Two, great Trials, and great
Joys, may well meet and stand together, in the heart at once, as in diverse
respects: For the Apostle has reconciled those two, 1 Pet. 1. 6. Wherein ye
[greatly rejoice,] though [Now] for a season (if need be) ye are in heaviness
through manifold temptations. That speech [wherein ye greatly rejoyce] reaches
and rises higher then to an accounting it matter of joy, about what is to
come; but does further absolutely, speak of joy for the present. And therefore
to have the affection of inward joy it self greatly raised up; and yet at that
instant, in the same [Now] as he speaks, in outward respects, to be in
heaviness, are compatible. And 1 Col. 11. The Apostle speaks of such a glorious
power, accompanying the Saints in trials, as shall work Patience and
Long-suffering with JOYFVLNESS: And why else does the Apostle, also say,
Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I say rejoice. He contents not himself
to have said it once, as if to have them rejoice, a little; but he professes
to say it again, because they should rejoice abundantly; and this [always] and
therefore in all times and in all conditions. Of the coexistence of which two
himself proposes himself an example: As sorrowful, yet always Rejoicing.

IIII. BRANCH.
Some eminent Properties, or ADJVNCTS of Patience, which added, do make it, and
its work, Perfect.
. WHen a man's Spirit is brought to do these things with ease: so as he shall
not need to chide his Spirit into a Patient frame, nor force himself into it.
But like as Ezra is said to be a ready Scribe, Ezra 7. 6. that is, he was
perfect at his work; his heart was prepared for it, and inured to it, v. 10.
Thus Patience has had a perfect Work, when it frames the heart to a Readiness
to those actings forementioned. Thus the Apostle, Acts 21. 17. I am not only
[ready] to be bound, but I am [ready] to dye at Jerusalem, for the Name of the
Lord Jesus. His heart was so fully prepared, as he stuck not at all at it; yea,
it was an heartbreaking to him, that his friends should offer to dissuade him.
What mean you to break my heart? etc. 'Twas his being inured to endurance, and
Patience, that had begotten that Habit of it in him: his heart was not to seek
for it.

. A second Adjunct or Property which adds a perfection to all these, is when
the practice of it is DVRABLE, and has some constancy in it.

As first, Not by fits only. That was Jonahs fault. Oh he was a Broken humble
man when in the Whales belly: but how outrageous, when out! In Moses, Patience
had its perfect work, in respect of the constant exercise of that Grace: And
therefore it was he had the honor to be styled the meekest man on Earth: And
truly it was not that meek^ess of his natural Temper; nor merely as a moral
virtue in him, ^or which he is so extolled: though these might contribute
thereto: But it was a Grace that was Spiritual in him, the Grace ^f meekness,
and consequently ^f Patience, which the holy Ghost had wrought in him, and
which he by sufferings had learned. And my reason among others, principally is,
that he was a Type of Christ therein, according as Gods promise was t^ raise up
a Prophet like unto Moses; Like, as in other Eminencies, so especially in this
Grace; for which as Moses is commended there, so Christ in the Evangelists; and
therein proposes himself as an example, Learn of me for I am meek, etc. Now
how CONSTANTLY did Moses, bear (...) along with that perverse, murmuring, and
rebelling Nation both against God and himself with an invincible Patience and
still interceded for them and thus Christ does with us, and for us. And
although we rea^ how Moses was, and could b^ sometimes angry, yea, exceedin^
wroth, as the words are, (where^^ I gave the collection out of Ainsworth) yet
it was often in Gods cause; and still but so as the usual and constant frame of
his Spirit was otherwise, for which he had that renowned denomination; and
never was greatly out, or overcome with impatiency (we read of) but once, Number.
20. 10, 11. compared with Psalm. 106. 32, 33.

Secondly, Patience is then perfect, when it continues to the end. As a Color
is said to be perfect, when it is Durable, as a Dye in grain; or as the Indy
colors, which while the cloth remains, they ENDVRE. Now it is he that endures
to the end, Math. 24. that shall be saved. You shall therefore find that unto
LONG-SVFFERING, Patience is added in two several places, 1 Col. Strengthened
unto all Patience and LONG-SVFFERING. Patience there respects the weight or
grievousness and heaviness of the affliction, we are under: And Long-suffering
respects the duration, and time. The other is in an instance of the Apostle of
himself, 1 Timothy 3. 10. Thou have known my long-suffering, charity, patience. In
4 Jam. 7. It Is said of the Husbandman (whose case is made the persuasive unto
Patience) he has [LONG] Patience. This is a perfection indeed to bear long,
and to the end. Be thou Faithful to death, Revel. 2. 10. To carry a great
burden a quarter of an hour is an effect of some patience; but to carry it a
day, or more, or for a week, there is long-suffering? Why is it said, that When
you have done the will of God, you have need of Patience: but because, still,
in the last part of your life, after an active life for a long while ran
through, even then when you are near the promise, your patience may be then at
last, most of all put to it.

.

A third Property or requisite to perfect Patience, is, that it be universal;
which is either, when a man has been every way tried, and has past through all
sorts of Tentations: Or when he has still come off with Patience in some good
measure, in all those, wherein he has been tried, although his trials have not
been of all sorts. A man's natural Spirit will help him to be patient in some
things, but in other things his heart is weak, and cannot bear; Oh not such
such a Cross, of any other. But it is certain, As GOD tried Abraham in his
Isaac, so GOD will the Sons of Abraham, in what is dearest to them: and yet
enable them to bear it, (as I Cor. 10.) and go through therewith. Hence in the
Epistles you meet with [ALL] added to Patience, and long-suffering, both when
Patience is prayed for, as 1 Col. and exhorted unto, as 2 Timothy 4. 2. But though
this universality is to be prayed for, and exhorted unto, as that which makes
it perfect; yet it is well, if in the great trials of our Lives, we come off
with some Patience suitable; and from henceforth resolve with endurance so to
do; and so much is expected: And it may seem strange, that many that should be
able to bear great trials between GOD and them, with much quietness and
submission, are yet easily disadvantaged, upon smaller occasions between men
and them: For which some reasons might be given.

IIII. Section.
ALthough I have dispatched the subject I first intended, yet I find my self
obliged to proceed a little further in the opening the fifth verse, in order
unto a relieving against a great DISCOVRAGEMENT, which I know has or may have
been in many Readers hearts, whilst I have been thus discoursing these great
things, about the Perfect Work of Patience, etc. And also to leave behind me,
the most apposite DIRECTION, how to obtain this Patience, in the perfect work
of it: and I will not go out of my Text for these things, neither.

An Exposition of the 5. verse.
If any of you lack Wisdom, let him ask of GOD, that gives to all men
liberally, and upbraideth not, and it shall be given him.. THe Discouragement,
I know is, Oh how remote are, and have our hearts been, from this perfect work
of Patience! Which yet some Saints have in so great a measure attained, as
those great examples given have shown, both of Saints out of the Old and New
Testaments: what then shall I think of my self for the present? (will such a
Soul say) or for the future, what shall I do?

Why truly, GOD has provided sufficiently in the Text for Answer to these
Queries and Complaints of yours, whereby both to relieve you against your
Discouragement, at your want of the exercise of these things: And also to
direct you to the most proper and effectual (if not the only) means to obtain
them.

1. As to this present Discouragement about your want, and so great falling
short of this hitherto, (which you are so sensible of) Those first words in the
Text [If any of you lack Wisdom] will be found greatly speaking to your relief
therein.

2. As to a Direction what you should do for the future to obtain it, those
other words, Let him ask of GOD, point us to the most proper and effectual
remedy and way of supply in the case.

3. With this great Encouragement added; first drawn from the nature of GOD,
[Ask of GOD that gives to all men liberally, and upbraideth not] Then seconded
with this Promise, [And it shall be given him.]

Of these three HEADS of what follows, briefly.

I. To the Discouragement,
. THe opening of these words [If any of you lack Wisdom] will greatly conduce
to ease your heart as to that: The effect of which, is, that the Apostle
plainly supposes, that true believers may both, really, and in their own
apprehensions especially, be found greatly lacking in point of Patience when
Trials do befall them. And this I am sure has reason to relieve you in what
is like to be the great discouragement that usually falls out.

This to be the supposition of the Apostle, is made good by opening four things.

1. That by Wisdom, here, is plainly meant Patience; together with the perfect
Work of it, which he had spoken of.

2. That he speaks this unto those that were true believers. [If any of [You.]

3. How it may or can be said, that true believers, who have all Grace and the
principles thereof in them, to lack such or such a grace.

4. The intimate reason and occasion, upon which the Apostle utters himself in
this supposition, [If any, etc.]

. For the first, Wisdom, sometimes is taken largely for all Grace and gracious
actings, whatsoever: Sometimes strictly for a particular Grace. To find out the
difference of which, the measure is to be taken from the scope of the place,
where either of these is mentioned. Now wisdom, in this place, is to be taken
strictly, that is, for that particular Grace, or piece of gracious Wisdom,
whereby to know how to be able to manage a man's self under Trials, especially
great, sore and sudden ones, Patiently: (which is done when we have taken in,
and digested by Faith, such principles as our Christianity affords (plenty of)
as grounds, that instruct, and enable the Soul, joyfully to entertain such
Trials and Tentations, and to endure and go through them, with a constancy of
joy). For look as the word [Grace] is taken, either strictly or largly, that is
either for all Grace, and yet again for any or every particular Grace, each of
which are called Grace also: As ye abound in every Grace, so ye abound in [this
Grace also]. Thus, All Grace is called Wisdom in a large sense, (as usually
throughout the Book of Proverbs,) But withal, a particular Grace is called
Wisdom too, as the third Chapter of this Epistle, ver. 13. shows. The Grace of
meekness, shown in speech, and conversation, he styles it [meekness of Wisdom]
or a wise meekness, or a meekness accompanied with, and proceeding out of
wisdom. And thus Calvin, and most others, understand Sapientiae nomen ad
circumstantiam praesentis Loci restringo. Calvin in Verb.
wisdom, here, in this my Text, of this special Grace: The scope and coherence
with the former words carrying it thereunto. True Patience being from such a
Wisdom, as whereby the Soul has the skill and ability to manage a man's self
patiently under Tentations, to such an issue, as that Patience should have a
perfect work in us; and unto this, it is here to be restrained: For this Grace,
it is, he had been, and still is discoursing of.

And there is a special and more peculiar reason, why this skill of Patience
should be styled Wisdom, in a more eminent sense. For what he had before
uttered of rejoicing in afflictions and tentations, and exhorted unto, that
Patience should have it is perfect work; these things being the hardest lessons
in Christianity, do there fore need and require the highest principles of
Divine Wisdom, both Doctrinal and Practical, to be deeply inlayed and fixed in
the Soul, so as to bow and frame the heart unto a real practice, and willing
performance of such Dictates, and conformity thereunto. For then it is that
knowledge is termed Wisdom; and for that reason it is, that our whole Religion
is styled Wisdom, because it rests not in bare Notional knowledge, (which is a
differing thing from Wisdom) but makes men proportionably wise, to the practice
of the things, in which it instructs. And particularly, this skill of renduring
Tentations (such as has been described) does deserve this style more
eminently, for it so far outvies, and is above the sphere of all Principles,
whether of Philosophy, or what other profession, or professors of Patience
whatsoever, who whilst in a sullen Patience (for all of theirs was no better)
they professed to be wise, they became foolish: and Christianity infinitely
out-shoots them in what they most gloried in.

. Secondly, That he speaks this to them whom he supposes true Believers, and
unto them as such, is evident: Although at the first blush (as we say) the
words would seem to point at and speak to unregenerate men, who wholly want all
true wisdom and grace: and so the drift should be an intended Direction to, or
for such, to seek true Grace, which they lack, at the hands of God, by Prayer.

But the Coherence manifestly shows, that he speaks to such, whom he supposes
to be already true Believers: For in the next words, he exhorts the same
Persons, whom he speaks to in these words, to ask in Faith; and therefore
supposes them to have true Faith already, whom he directs this Exhortation
unto. And otherwise it had been more proper, yea requisite to have exhorted
them (if he had intended it of unregenerate men,) first, to seek Faith it self,
and then out of Faith and in that Faith to seek for this Wisdom, or Grace of
endurance. And again he speaks to them that were Brethren; so he calls them.
And in this passage, says; if any of [YOV] and such, who being true professors
of Christianity were exposed unto those sundry Tentations from persecutions,
especially: And it is such, also whom he exhorts to count it all joy, etc. and
here to ask a Wisdom of GOD, whereby to be able to suffer for their holy
profession. Furthermore, this Wisdom lying in Patience having its perfect work
in them, it supposes the persons such, as had some Work of Patience, and of
other Graces begun in them already. And indeed, to have exhorted Unregenerate
Men, that were as yet utterly destitute of all Grace, and so out of harms way,
as to any sufferings, for the Gospel; and to direct them to make this the first
of their addresses to GOD, and of their requests, that they might be able to
endure Tentations, and that Patience should have a perfect work in them; and so
to have taught them, that, which is the hardest lesson in Christianity, before
ere they had learnt the first letters thereof, this had been utterly improper,
and a lesson at too great a distance, for men in their Natural state, first to
learn. Thus much for the PERSONS, viz. That he speaks it unto men already
Regenerate, and supposed in the Faith.

. The third thing Proposed, was, How it could be, he should speak in this
manner of Believers, that they should lack this Grace of Wisdom; whenas, if
such, they must be supposed to have all true Graces in them: why then should he
yet say, even of them, If any of you Lack, etc.

Answer, This expression, to say, such and such a Christian, [Lacks] such or
such a Grace, is not uncouth, nor unusual in the Scriptures; when he, (or they)
have wanted the EXERCISE of it. For though Christians do receive the
Principles of all Graces, as 2 Pet. 1. 3. yet they may neglect to stir up all
graces, or may have been disused to the exercise of some. Why else, and to what
end does the Apostle in the same place stir them up to add Grace to Grace, as
in verse 5. And in those cases, a Christian may be said, yea charged to lack
that Grace or Graces, which he wants the exercise of. For so in the same
Chapter, ver. 9. speaking of a Dozed negligent professor, though true, he uses
this very language of him, He that lacks these things (as I have elsewhere
opened that Scripture); For Idem est non esse, et non uti: It Is all one for a
thing not to be, and not to be used, when the being of a thing is wholly
ordained for use and operation: Now such a thing is Grace; and such a thing if
not used, is as if it were not. And the opposition that is between adding Grace
to Grace, v. 5. (that is the exercise of one Grace after another) and the
lacking Grace, in that v. 9. evidently shows, that phrase to be so understood,
not of the utter want of the Grace, but of the exercise.

. The Fourth thing is, The intimate Reason or occasion, whereupon the Apostle
does utter himself in such a supposition [If any of you lack.]

This will appear by considering these three things.

First, In respect that the had Siquis vestrum non potest intelligere
V^ilitatem Tentationum, postulet a Deo toibui sibi tentum. Beda in Locum.
exhorted to so hard and difficult a Practice: to Count it all Joy, etc. Which
requires such high principles, to be drunk in, about the good and benefit of
Tentations, in the issue and end of them; which principles must also have been
thoroughly concocted in their hearts, first, who shall attain to this.

And Secondly, There being many poor Souls(as of such that were weak, and some
New Converts) amongst them, whom he wrote to, who might and did then (as many
nowadays, that yet are sincere-hearted) in the sense of their own weakness,
find and apprehend themselves so far off, and remote from such high principles,
and seize; and therefore upon his thus discoursing, were like to be
utterly discouraged; thinking with themselves, (judging themselves by the
present frame of their infirm Spirits) both that their hearts had never yet,
nor would ever be wrought up to this Pitch. What to count it all joy! (think
they) is that it, you exhort us unto? Alas! our hearts tremble at the very
thoughts of entering into such sudden, and so great tentations, as you here
forewarn us of And of all graces else, it is this, of a Patient suffering
frame, and strength of ^ Spirit thereto, that is and has been our want. This
is it [WE LACK] nor do we know how to manage our selves wisely, under such
Trials; so as to glorify GOD; yea, and not shamefully to dishonor him: Nay,
if we should fall into such trials, and sufferings, we are liker utterly to
fall away under them, rather then to rejoice, when we fall into them.

Further, Thirdly, There might be many strong Christians (as to the active part
of the life of Christianity) who yet might be to seek as fresh Soldiers, at
the first, when such trials come unexpectedly, and thick and threefold upon
them; and that they fall into them as down-fals and Precipices. (And in this
dreadful a manner he had set them out to them, as impendent on them, as was
opened) And even such Christians being surprised, might be at a loss at first,
in respect of that Confidence of Spirit to bear them, till by Prayer and Faith
recollecting themselves, they should anew obtain or regain this Wisdom. Even
strong Christians are apt to be stounded at first, as men are with a greatblow,
and cannot well stand or keep their ground.

Now unto such (either of these) does the Apostle in this Language [If any of
you lack] apply himself; and therein speaks to their very hearts: But
especially to the first sort of weak Christians. And indeed speaks their very
fears, and most inward thoughts and apprehensions, they had or might have of
themselves: And so utters their misgivings of heart in their own Language. Oh I
lack these things, says the Soul: [If any of you lack] says the Apostle. And it
is no small comfort to such, to hear an Apostle, from the immediate inspiration
of the Holy Ghost, to suppose, that very true and sincere Christians may thus
be lacking, and thus surprised.

Thus as to the Removal of their main Discouragement, which was the first thing
proposed.

II. THE DIRECTION.
Let him ask of God.
HAving thus spoken their hearts, as to the fears and apprehensions of
themselves in respect of their falling short, of this high duty of Joy and
Patience, etc. He now DIRECTS them to the most proper and sovereign MEANS, for
the obtaining of it, of all other, and that is faithful instant PRAYER. [Let
him ask of God,] etc.

And herein also he speaks the hearts of all true Christians also, even of the
weakest: whose refuge in all their wants is to cry to God, for a supply of what
they lack: especially, when they feel or are apprehensive of their lack, and
want in any Grace, that should help them in time of need. And look what
effectual supply of this Grace in Tentations, all the Apostles persuasions
alone, would not have effected, That, Faith venting it self, in constant and
fervent Prayer, will bring in and obtain; and their hearts will in the end, be
raised and wrought up unto: So as they shall be able to abound in this Grace
also. Weak Faith, when it cannot find in its heart to suffer, or so much as to
enter into trials, can yet pray; and so does beg with desires unutterable, to
have this Grace, to be able to suffer these trials, in this joyful manner, as
the Apostle exhorts unto. And the weak heart continuing so to pray and
importune God, in the end, THIS shall be given him: As here he promises. I
shall not enlarge on this further: For when an Apostle shall single forth a
MEANS, And that One single One, whereby to obtain any eminent Grace one needs,
that means ought to be with all diligence put into use and practice: and so
there needs no more to urge it.

Only observe how in this directive part, he puts them not upon praying,
chiefly to have Tentations and trials averted, or kept of; nor to ask
deliverance out of them, (though that is lawful and may be done:) Not a word of
these, in this his exhortation: but he draws the main, and great intention of
their Souls, unto praying for Grace, how to be patient and joyful, etc. This as
to the direction.

III. HIS ENCOVRAGEMENTS TO PRAY.
. HIs ENCOVRAGEMENTS, That by seeking, a believer shall obtain, are drawn,
first, from that gracious wont and disposition

Of God, that gives to all men liberally, etc. As being a God, 1. [That gives
to all men.] And this also is to be limitedly understood, of all those men who
thus do, have, or shall apply themselves Cum dicat omnibus, intelligit, qui
Petunr, Calvin in Virba.
unto God by faithful and importunate Prayer. For he had said first, Let him
[ask] of God: And therefore Gods [Giving] here, must be supposed to be a giving
to him that asks. Again, although it be said, that Faith works Patience, yet
it is prayer, that fetches and brings down the power from God into the heart,
that works both Faith and Patience, and all. Prayer is the Midwife, by which,
Faith the Mother, brings forth Patience in the heart.

II. His gracious disposition in giving, is further set out.

1. That he gives liberally. The word (...), both signifies a free hearted
giving, in a pure way of simplicity of heart; as being neither moved by any
respect in us, as of worthiness, or the like: But singly, and simply out of
such motives and considerations, as are in his own heart, and which his own
great and gracious divine Nature prompts him to: FREELY. We generally use to
say, [out of his free Grace,] which comes all to one, with the import of the
word, which the Apostle uses here. Therefore make that Grace, as thy plea to
him in thy Prayers for it, or whatever else thou seek at his hands.

2. It signifies largely, abundantly, liberally, [RICHLY] as the word is used
in 2 Cor. 8. 2. And so translated there. You have both in that passage of
David's, 2 Samuel 7. 21. According to thine own heart (there is freely or simply)
have thou done all these GREAT things. (There Is Liberally.)

AND VPBRAIDETH NOT.
That Is a second property or disposition in God and his giving: The sense where
of is, First, that when he has given liberally, never so often, nor so much,
yet he upbraideth not, as men are wont to do. Among men, he that is most
liberal, yet if the same man he has formerly given unto, will come often to
him to be relieved, in the end he (at least) will excuse himself, or else say,
Why do you come so often, thus again and again? Which is a tacit and implicit
way of upbraiding or insinuation of foreg on benefits. Surely, NECEXPROB^T] Hoc
additum est, Ne quis deum sepi us adire metuat; ^ui ex Hominibus maxim sunt
Liberales, rametsi identidem quispiam juvari se postuler, priora beneficia
commemorant: at que ita excusant IN POSTERUM. Calvin in verba. Vel certe ideo
addit nequis deum sepius adire vereatur (Calvin's very words) nonne enim dicit,
jam toties dedi; quid adhuc me obtundis? Ut solent homines, etiam qui maxim
sunt liberales (Calvin's very words again) Sed Deus ut est Fons inex^austus ita
ad dandum, modo pet^ssicut oportet, paratissimus, imo i^^e ultro nos invitans
ad semper petendum, etc. Aestius in verba.
Calvin, and Aestius, from him, have hit it: who put this scope and drift upon
this Clause, That no man should be afraid, or solicitour to come, though never
so often, to this free and generous Giver: nor be discouraged within himself,
that he should need to come so often to him; nor forbear to continue his
incessant importunities, though it be never so long a time, ere he obtains.

And thus understood, it is as if he had said, God is so free, so
simple-hearted and liberal in giving, as the oftener you come, the welcomer;
especially when for Grace: yea, HE hereby inviteth us of his own free heart to
come always; to ask, and pray continually and incessantly, as that Parable,
Luke 18. 1. made on set purpose, shows. So then, a frequent, constant,
importunate continuing in prayer to obtain, is hereby exhorted unto.

A second scope in his adding this clause, is, That though we find, that God
does indeed upbraid impenitent men for their sins (as Christ those Cities) yet
he never did, or ever will do any sinners, in this case wherein it is proposed,
namely, when they shall come and humble themselves for their sins, seeking for
more Grace, to help in time of need against their corruption; and this, much
rather then for deliverance from or out of troubles: in this case, he will not
twit them with any of their unworthiness that has been past: He will pass by
their iniquity, and not upbraid them. And this is a great encouragement indeed.
For the guilt of sin, and former ingratitude, do above all things, deter men,
from coming to God, least He should remember their iniquities, and upbraid
them, with them.

And it shall be given him.
HE follows and confirms this hope of obtaining with this sure and certain
promise [And it shall be given him.] For when the Souls of men, being made
thoroughly apprehensive of their own wants of a Grace, are carried forth (to
choose) to seek for Grace, or such or such a gracious disposition, and that
before, and above all deliverance out of the trials they are in (as was before
observed, the Apostle had directed): In this case, God that is the God of all
Grace, is the most ready giver of Grace, that he is of any thing else. There
are no requests more pleasing to him, or that suit his divine, and blessed
disposition, so, as THIS does of praying for Grace as thus stated. For the
bestowing and giving of Grace, thus prayed for, does tend, above all things
else, to the glorifying of himself: And it is the aiming thereat, that must and
does carry out such an heart, to make this, to be the Top and Chief of its most
earnest petitions. The God of Grace, is the most free of Grace. Thus Christ
says, If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children:
how much more shall your heavenly Father give [THE HOLY SPIRIT] to them that
ask him? Our Apostle has also told us, that though the Spirit that is in us
lusts to envy, that yet God gives more Grace; that is, a counterpoise of
Grace unto that lust, unto all them that humbly seek for it, as Chap 4. 5, 6,
7. Do ye think that the Scripture says in vain, the Spirit that dwells in us
lusts to envy? But he gives MORE GRACE. He resists the proud, but gives
Grace to the HVMBLE.

. I shall now go forth of my Text, but to fetch in one thing. I observe when
the Apostle particularly comes to that part of his Prayer made for the
Colossians, that they might have all Patience and Long-suffering with
Joyfulness (which exactly agrees with what is the matter exhorted unto in this
Text) He implores the GLORIOUS POWER OF GOD, in these words, 1 Col. 11. That ye
may be strengthened with all might [ACCORDING TO HIS GLORIOUS POWER] unto all
PATIENCE and LONG-SVFFERING with JOYFVLNESS. And to draw and fix your hearts on
this Glorious Power of GOD, and point your prayers thereto, is the thing, which
I mean and intend.

And indeed the consideration of this one thing will have a general influence
into ALL those three Heads, have been treated of in this last fourth SECTION.
As first, It may be no great wonder 1 Head.
if many of us have been so deficient, and LACKING in this Grace: For it is not
an Ordinary Power, such as in ordinary walkings holily, does assist us, but a
GLORIOUS Power is requisite to perfect this Grace: which argues this to be so
difficult an exercise above any other; and that our Natures are infinitely
remote from it, of our selves; which we not minding, nor considering, have not
perhaps, with answerable vehemence implored the aid of so Great a Power. And
secondly, This gives us a clear reason, why prayer, of all other means 2 Head.
should be directed by the Apostle, and extraordinarily set upon by us, as the
most effectual, yea, as an only means to obtain this. For seeing that Power
lies out of our selves, in GOD, which must effect this in us; then surely
nothing can be judged so prevailing as Faith and Prayer, which are the Graces
in, and by which the Soul going out of it self, in a sense of its utter
insufficiency, supplicates the Grace in Gods heart, to exert this power, of his
good pleasure; and so do draw it forth, and bring it down into the Heart. And
then thirdly, This 3 Head.
gives us the highest encouragement, that we may obtain this perfect work of
it; however remote from it, the present temper of our Spirits may seem to be to
us: Seeing that no less then such a glorious power is requisite to effect it in
the strongest Christians; And a power so glorious is able to work it in the
weakest.

Let us Pray therefore with all vehemence, for our selves, as the Apostle did
for those Colossians, that this glorious power may come upon us, and strengthen
our inward man, (as it is elfwhere) with all might, which might in us, is the
Ephesians. 4. 17.
effect of that power in God, as the cause.

For as this Patience is to be an [All Patience,] or else it has not its
perfect work: so this MIGHT, it must be an [all might] you must be strengthened
with, unto such A Patience, of you will not be perfect at it. That MIGHT you
had in such or such a Trial will not serve to strengthen you against the next
trial that shall come: But you must still have a new special might for every
new trial. Your dependence, therefore is great upon God, for this perfect work
of Patience: And yet your encouragements are great. For as it must be, that, if
God will please to strengthen us, under any great unusual Tentations, that he
should put forth no less then this [Glorious power:] So we have heard, how, in
our Apostle, he has promised, he will give it; and give it freely and
liberally to them, that make it their main, constant, earnest business, to ask
it: And therefore, his Grace (if applied to) is engaged to put this POWER forth.

It cannot but be a great support, to a weak heart, that finds it self so
remote and distant from such a work of Patience; and weak also in comparison of
finding such an inward might, that it should have Ground and Cause to think and
to believe, that Gods glorious power is engaged most sreely, to be abundantly
and readily put forth, if continued to be sought unto. Why, this (says the weak
heart) will do it: namely, this glorious power: And I have found by some Trials
already, that the strong God and a weak heart will be too hard for any thing;
yea, for the whole World.

And therefore, when you think your present trials, that are come upon you, far
greater then you can bear, think withal of the glorious power of God, that is
at hand to help you. It Is a great word, That, his [GLORIOVS POWER]: A greater
attribute could not have been named or found out for our comfort. And is a word
of virtue, force and power, to hearten to, or against anything whatever. It Is
true, thy present trial may be, and is above that in ward strength, which
serves and has served hitherto, to act thy graces, in thy ordinary walkings
with God, holily and sincerely. A child may by its ordinary strength be able to
walk up and down a room, by stools (suppose) supporting it, without any other
extraordinary help: But if it be to go up a pair of Stairs, the strength that
enabled it to these lesser performances, will not be sufficient thereunto: He
must be carried and held up in the arms of one who is strong and mighty. And so
it is here. That other part, of our Christian obedience, the active ^ife of a
Christian (prayed for by the Apostle in that place to the ^olossians also)
whereby he walks ^ruitfully, etc. as in the seventh ^erse of that chapter,
requires indeed Gods power, for by it, it is, we are kept unto Salvation,
all-a-^ong: But when it comes to Pati^nce, and Long-suffering, and ALL
PATIENCE; and that such ^ trial comes, as will try all Pati^nce in you, then it
is He makes ^ention of that glorious Power, and not before: For it must be no
^ess that must go to that, then Gods GLORIOUS POWER. And ^he promise therefore
is (in such case) that the SPIRIT OF GLORY shall rest upon us, and not ^he
Spirit of Grace only, as I Pet. 4. 14. Relieve and comfort therefore your
selves with these things, and specially with this: That as your trials abound,
so this glorious power of God will abound also, toward you, for your support.

AMEN.
FINIS.
Some Slips and Omissions.
PAge 4. Line 11. For strongest, Read strangest. Page 18. Line 15. After to
Patience, Read Let Patience have but its perfect work, and that alone will make
you eminently perfect. And his scope, etc.

Page 24. line 25. For And they, Read And now they.

Page 58. line 16. After In the world, Read Which he had reckoned up.

Page 90. line 21. After Discouragement, Read For this cause we faint not.

Page 99. line 9. For Sp^ritual, Read In Glory.

Page 106. line 1. For But yet for all my, Read But for all he knew my.

Page 109. line ult. Read His meaning further A.

Page 111. line 18 After So long, Read The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken:
Blessed, etc.

Page 119. line 12. After Sums up, Read The Frame of his Spirit.

Page 131. line 20. Read Unto Patience, LONGSVFFERING is added.

Page 148 Margin. For Toibi sibi tentum, Read Tr^bui sibi sensum.


