AN ANSWER TO A DISCOURSE AGAINST Transubstantiation

Hic est Filius meus dilectus -- Ipsum audite.

This is my beloved Son -- Hear ye Him,

Matthew. 17. 5. Permissu Superiorum.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty,
for His Household and Chapel. 1687.

Introduction.
IF public Applause, and popular Acclamations of your own Party, are to be
believed, your Discourse against Transubstantiation has sufficiently showed,
that the Scriptures cannot clearly demonstrate this miraculous Change; nor the
perpetual belief thereof in the Christian Church, illustrate it; and that there
are all the reasons in the World against it. Yet if a serious consideration,
and weighing of your Arguments in the Scale of Justice, be the Deciders of the
present Debate, we shall find neither Scripture, nor belief of the Primitive
Church, nor any reason in the World, against Transubstantiation. And therefore
in Christian Duty, I think my self obliged, to endeavor, after my poor manner,
a discovery of your winning Artifices, and a removal of your plausible
Appearances; dividing this following Answer into two Parts. In my first, I Will
examine, whether there be any tolerable ground for Transubstantiation. And my
second, is designed to counterpoise (as you think) your Invincible Objections.

PART I.
I Sub-divide my First Part into five Sections, comprehending the five
pretended grounds, one or more of which, you suppose the Church of Rome builds
this Doctrine on. First, The Authority of Scripture. Or Secondly, the perpetual
belief of this Doctrine in the Christian Church. Or Thirdly, the Authority of
the Church to make, or declare an Article of Faith. Or Fourthly, the absolute
Necessity of such a Change, for the benefit of those who receive this
Sacrament. Or Fifthly, to magnify the Power of the Priest.

SECT. I. Whether Scripture authorize Transubstantiation.
BEfore I begin to discuss whether Scripture authorize Transubstantiation: I
think it convenient to premise two Reflections, upon two considerable
Circumstances, delivered in your Introduction.

First Reflection upon the word Transubstantiation.

In the very first entrance of your Discourse, you complain it is a hard word;
and afterward increase your complaint with this unparalled exaggeration. It
was almost 300 years before this misshapen Monster of Transubstantiation could
be licked into that Form Page 25.
in which it is now settled and established in the Church of Rome. Bold
Assertions ought to be supported with great Proofs: And Monstrous Vilifications
of the Divine Goodness expiated with more than ordinary Repentance. Heaven
forbid, that our Blessed Savior should ever prove a misshapen Monster, even to
those who most oppose revealed Truth expressed in Transubstantiation.

A hard word, and who can endure it; a new word, and who will admit it? St.
Hilary answers you in this Reply to the Arian Heretics, importuning the
primitive Church of Christ with the like expressions, Say rather, if you speak
wisely, will you not wage new Wars against new St. Hill. cont. constable. Aug. Die
prius, si recte disputas, nolo adversus nova venena novas medicamentorum
comparationes.
Enemies; or take fresh Counsels against new Treasons; or drink Counterpoison
against venomous Infections? Nor was St. Athanasius's Interrogation St. Athan.
d. cum Ario coram Probo. Nominis ne offenderis novitate, anetiam ret ipsius
veritate, quae hoc est sortita vocabulum.
of less force: Are you offended at the newness of the Name? or afraid of the
verity of the Mystery?

The sentiment of these two great Ornaments of the Church, is the common
Practice of whole Sacred Antiquity; according to the Golden Sentence of
Vincentius Lyrinensis, The Church ordinarily appropriates some new term
Vincent. Lyr. in Commonit. Ecclesia plerunque propter intelligentiae lucem, non
novum fidei sensum novae appellationis proprietate signat. Nic. 1. in Sym.
to signify more pathetically the true Sense of Faith. Thus did the first
Ecumenical Council write (...) Consubstantial, and the Arians could not digest
the hardness of the Word. Thus did the Ephesian Prelates style the B. Virgin,
(...) Mother of God, which was Con. Ephesians. anat. 1. Conc. Later. decret. 1211.
an.
no softer to the Nestorians. And thus did the Lateran Bishops subcribe to
Transubstantiation, and the Berengarians and Modern opposers of the Roman
truth, expostulate with us for this Word, and modestly term it a Misshapen
Monster.

Second Reflection upon the Evidence of Sense.

Here you bring in Aristotle, who long since has pronounced, There ought to be
no dispute of the matter of Sense. I beg Pardon if I am not at leisure, to
digress with you toward Paganism. Neither can I think you serious, when you
quote the Philosopher's determination, for the Mystery of the Lords Supper, who
never professed a revealed Religion, and died many Hundred years before
Christianity was Promulgated and Established. Nor do I apprehend the least
danger to be overburden'd, with the heavy matter of Sense, when my way leads to
the Sublime matter of Revelation.

You cannot deny, Sense, Reason, and Faith, are three various Perfections; so
likewise are their Objects distinguished. The Aristotle.
Stagyrite never pretended Sense should reach farther than to the Accidents and
Appearance of things. And Reasons employ was the contemplation of Essence,
Nature, and Substance. How could Aristotle pronounce, the matter of Sense was
never to be disputed, when 'twas always to be pried into, and regulated by
Reason?

Yet we do not dispute with you, the Prerogative of Sense in the Mystery of the
Sacrament. For we see the outward shape and appearance of Bread and Wine; nor
is Taste wanting. All this is granted. Unless then you perplex and embroil the
Question, Sense reposes, without violation, quiet and contented in its own
Objects.

Nor ought you to believe, that Reason can securely, without Error, always
determine in Natural Sciences, according to the received impression, from the
visible Sign, or Object of Sense. This Maxim is given to Novices entering the
list of Dialecticks, and admitted by the Sect of Peripateticks. So Reason
enlarges the greatness of the Sun, and assures us, it far exceeds in bigness
the Terrestrial Orb, though Sense enclose it in the small circumference of a Ball.

Sense indeed and Reason combining together, and following the prescript of
Logic, are the proper deciders of Philosophical contestations. Sense pleads
for no more, and if the Reason of Aristotle survived, it would be abundantly
satisfied with this voluntary concession.

If for all this you resolve to seat Reason in the Chair of Judicature, even
where Revelation intervenes, Divine Authority will easily rescue Christian
Religion from the information of Sense. Reason following the Dictamen of
outward existence, told Abraham, what appeared were Men; Revelation corrected
the Genesis 8. v. 2.
mistake, and assured him they were Angels. Reason affirmed what descended in
the shape of a Dove, was that Innocent Creature: Luke 3. 22.
Revelation reformed the Judgment, and intimated it was the Holy Ghost. Reason
regards the Species of Bread as inherent to the proper Substance: Revelation
changes that Substance into the Body of Christ. Abraham saw the figure and
shape of Men, and yet the Substance of Man was wanting. The Feathers in
appearance exhibited a Dove; the real Substance was supplied with the presence
of the Holy Ghost.

Again, it was a Maxim of Philosophy, what is, was from something. And this
Evidence vanishes at the sight of Revelation, Ex nihilo nil fit.
which teaches the whole Universe was Created of nothing. 'Twas a Principle,
There Is no return from Privation, to the Habit, from Death to Life; and this
persuasion ceases, acknowledging our Saviors Resurrection.

Reasons reluctance proceeding from Senses information, must yield to the Power
of Revelation, or we must cease to be Christians. Thus Julian Apostatised, and
derided Christians that they were so stupid, to blindfold Reason with the bare
word of a Creed, you must Believe. This in St. Gregory Nazianzen is recorded.
St. Clement St. Greg. Orat. 3.
in the Second Centurie relates the same of the St. Clem. Alex. 2. Stom. (...).
Greek Philosophers, and confutes them by this Definition of Supernatural
Faith: Faith which the Greeks look upon as vain and unreasonable, is a
voluntary Anticipation, a Pious yielding, the Substance of things which are
hoped for, and an evidence of what is not seen, according to the Divine
Apostle. Faith is First according to this Ancient Father, a voluntary
Anticipation of Reason; and you wilfully Anticipate Faith by Reason. Secondly,
Faith is a pious Assent to Divine Testimony; and you boldly contradict our
Saviors own words. Thirdly, It is the Substance of things hoped for; and you
reply there is nothing to be hoped for of Substance in the Sacrament. Lastly,
Faith is an Evidence of things not seen; and you contend Reason evidences the
contrary.

Reason rather with St. Ambrose, who declares, St. Ambr. Super illud Psalm.
Omnia opera ejus in fide. Non creditur Philosophis, creditur Piscatoribus.
We believe Fishermen; we do not Believe Philosophers.

St. Cyril of Alexandria, conceived it impossible St. Cyr. apud St. Maxim. To
(...).
to believe where Reason intermixes inquiries.

St. Chrysostom avowed the very letting of an, St. Chrysostom. in Joan. 6. (...).
How can it be, is a beginning of incredulity.

St. Augustine avers, that if we first demonstrate St. Aug. tract. 27. in Joan.
Nec cognoscare, nec credere valemus.
and afterward believe, we become both Ignorant and Incredulous.

And our B. Savior adds the heavy burden of Condemnation, Mark c. 16.
as we read in St. Mark, Who will not Believe, shall be Condemned.

This is sufficient to show, that Reason in matters of Religion ought to take
her information, not from Sense, but from the proposal of God and Divine
Scriptures. Now I examine;

Whether Scripture Authorize Transubstantiation?

You say we pretend for this Doctrine the Authority of Scripture in those words
of our Savior, this is my Body. So likewise do we pretend for the same
Doctrine, the Authority of Scripture from the 6 Chapter of St. John, which you
passing over in silence as inconsiderable, I shall endeavor to manifest, as of
great importance.

Let us not mix confusedly the thing which our Savior promises to give, and
the manner of receiving the Gift. A worthy receiving the Gift* is Spiritually
by Faith. This is not contested. The Question is, What is the thing promised to
be given, whether the true Body of Christ or not?

Our Savior gives two Promises, both of the same thing, his own Substance;
both contained in the 51 verse of St. John, the Bread that I will give, is my
Flesh; behold the Promise of himself, John 6. from the Greek.
in the Sacrament: And, which I will give for the life of the World, intimates
the Promise of himself to the Cross. The Promises are distinguished; the
Substance is the same; because the same Spirit of Truth which delivers two
Promises, assures one Substance. What is then this Bread which Christ promised
to give in the Sacrament? Christ answers it is my Flesh, and that Flesh which
he will give for the life of the World. Was this a piece of Bread, or the true
substantial Body of Christ?

This is peculiarly seconded from our Saviors appeasing the murmur of the
Capharnait's, and raising their Incredulity to the Mystery of his Flesh, by
presaging the resuscitation of his own dead Body, What if ye shall see the Son
of Man ascend up where he was before? verse. 62.


If I should now return your Sense of the Sacrament for a reply to our B.
Savior, and say, we understand the Promise given of your Flesh, to be Eaten in
Figure only, not in Substance; would not the Reader straight subsume, Then only
the Figure of his Body ascended into Heaven, and so void our B. Saviors
Argument, and destroy the Miraculous Ascension?

Another discontent succeeding among the Jews, caused our Savior to instance
once more the Power of his Divinity. It is the Spirit that quickens, the
Flesh profits nothing. This Spirit verse. 63.
they were promised to receive in the Sacrament, and this Spirit is truly
Christ, God and Man.

The Flesh profits nothing, if we believe St. Austin; as Science, according
to St. Paul, puffs up: Science all alone, barren of Charity; for so properly,
St. Aug. tract. 27. in Joan. Accedat Spiritus ad carnem, quomodo accedit
Charitas ad Scientiam and prodest plurimum: nam si caro nihil prodesset, verbum
caro non fieret. St. Paul 1. Cor. 8. Scientia inflat.
Science puffs up. Add Charity to Science with the Divine Apostle, and then
Science Flourishes and is Fruitful. The Body of Christ as a mortal and fading
Creature profits nothing. Join God to Man, and the Flesh of Christ profits
exceedingly. Thus it profited on the Cross, and profits in the Sacrament.

St. Cyril of Alexandria giving the same literal Exposition, says, when Christ
called himself St. Cyr. 6. in Joan. lib. 4. (...).
Spirit, he did not by this deny, that he was Flesh; and so concludes, that
this Spirit was Christ himself.

If this Spirit then be Christ, who Promised to give in the Sacrament, what he
Promised to give for the life of the World, on the Cross; who will question
that he did not perform what he promised? Or would promise what he could not
effect? It Is dangerous to limit the Power of the Deity; it is impious to
question the Promise of God.

And yet alas! some Men are so enamoured with what they can feel to have some
Substance in it, that Idolizing with Sense, they are not sensible how Christ
promised to give himself in the Sacrament; they question the very Gift it self,
and endeavor to make good these two things,

1st. That there is no necessity of understanding these words of our Savior,
This is my Body, in the sense of Transubstantiation.

2ly. That there is a great deal of Reason to understand them otherwise. These
two general Arguments deserve to be the Subject of two Chapters.

CHAP. I. Of the necessity of understanding our Saviors Words in the Sense of
Transubstantiation.
IF there be any such necessity; you pretend it must be, either 1st. Because
there are no Figurative expressions in Scripture, or else because a Sacrament
admits of no Figure. 2ly. You are willing to stand to the plain concession of a
great Number of the most Learned Writers of the Church of Rome in this
controversy. These two main Proofs shall be considered in the following
Articles.

Article 1. Examen of your First Proof.
I Know not upon what account you say, that if our Saviors words, can be taken
in the Sense of the Roman Catholic Assertion, this must be; either because,
there are no Figures in Scripture; or because, a Sacrament admits of no Figure.
Had any of our Authors made use of such Reasons, or inclined the least this
way, you would not have omitted such Authority. But if you Write what you have
not Read, for the pretended ground of Transubstantiation; I Am sure you have not
Writ what you have Read, for the real understanding thereof. I shall remind you
of some few Motives, which induce Roman Catholics to believe our Saviors words
can import no less than the verity of Transubstantiation.

FIRST MOTIVE.
The Written Law shadowed future Truth, and this Truth was Christ. So we read
Moses sprinkled with Blood, the Book, and People, saying, This is the Blood of
the Testament which God Exodus 24. Heb. 9. v. 20.
has enjoined unto you. The Blood of the Ancient Covenant was the Figure of
the Blood of Jesus Christ in the Sacrament. This appears from the words of our
Savior in the Institution; This is my Blood of the New Testament, which is
shed for many. Luke 22.


This Miraculous concord of the Old and New Covenant: This repetition of the
very same Phrase, is an Evidence beyond denial, that the former was a Symbol of
the latter. And since you cannot understand the latter of Christ's Blood spilt
on the Cross; Because you pretend St. Luke says, his Blood was then shed, which
is shed for many, which preceded the Crucifiction: It follows necessarily to be
understood, of the true Blood of Christ in the Sacrament. Because a Figure is
not without the Reality, nor a Shadow without a true Body.

SECOND MOTIVE.
As it is true that Jesus took Bread, so are we taught, that he blessed it. And
what he brake, and what he gave to his Disciples, was without doubt, what he
had blessed or consecrated. The Question is, what this was? None of the
Evangelists say, that he gave Bread; they say Jesus took Bread, and Jesus
assures, what was blessed, broken, and given, was his Body, saying, This is my
Body. If it was then Bread, as the Evangelists note, Jesus took Bread; and
after the Divine Benediction or Consecration became his Body, as Jesus affirms,
this is my Body: Then without extorting or racking of Scripture, without adding
figurative Glosses, (and wicked is the Man who superads to Scripture) the
facile sense of Scripture readily leads to the plain Article of
Transubstantiation.

THIRD MOTIVE.
The Circumstances of our Savior urge for the Literal Acceptance of This is
my Body. For Jesus spoke to his Apostles; to his dearest Friends; preparing to
bid his last Adieu; and then, if ever, Sincerity discloses it self, without
difficulty, and after a facile and intelligible Method. He Is Wisdom it self,
and knew how to Phrase his Thought. He Is Omnipotent, and so can surmount what
Human Frailty might conceive as impossible. He Is Goodness it self, and cannot
deceive us. And therefore said what it was, and what he said was true.

FOURTH MOTIVE
Is the conformity of Scriptures. For if Christ had ever designed to signify,
that the Eucharistical Bread was only the Figure of his Body, it would surprise
us what inclined him to make use of this Speech, this is my Body; and after
such a choice, to leave it barely without explanation, when he so carefully
taught his Disciples the true meaning of many easier Parables: 'Twould astonish
us, finding the three Evangelists with St. Paul (who testifies he received the
same Doctrine from revelation) St. Paul, 1 Cor. 11.
not constrained, nor combining to join in expression, yet to repeat all the
same words, without the Least alteration. And we read in Latin, Greek, Syriac,
Arabic, all Versions and Languages, nothing but the same expression, and equal
confirmation.

FIFTH MOTIVE.
The very same Interpretation of other Scriptural Passages, wherein are
grounded the chief Articles of Christian Belief, enforces the sequel of
Transubstantiation.

For, I believe, adhering to Scripture as the Rule of Faith, that this Passage,
the word was made Flesh, imports a Substantial Joan. in Evang. c. 1.
Union. I believe the consubstantiality of the Son with the Father, Joan. 10.
v. 30. Ep. 1. Joan. cap. 5.
included in these words, I and my Father are one. I believe one Divine Essence
of three distinct Persons revealed, in These three are one. Upon these
Testimonies of Holy Writ Substantially understood, I quietly repose my belief
of the Incarnation of our Savior; the Son's Divinity; and of the sole and
undivided nature of the Blessed Trinity.

This Method is further secured by the consent of all those who are, and
pretend to be true Members of Christ's Religion.

Now if I follow this Determination, so authorized, and so certain; if I follow
this motive of my own Conviction in other like Articles, extending the same
uncontrol'd Interpretation, to this is my Body, I must necessarily grant this
Inference, this is my Substantial Body. Thus my Faith seeks to be one; as
Scripture is one, and God one Truth.

As this literal Reflection is sincere and pious; the figurative Explanation of
our Savior's Words wants no Fallacy nor Impiety. For, if I may presume to give
this sense to our Savior's Words, this is not my Substantial Body, this
Presumption ought to be strongly grounded, as allowable, just, and in Equity to
be followed. And if so, then I may lawfully give the same exposition to the
three alleged Articles. For the Scripture urges not more out of this Passage,
The word was made Flesh, the substantial connection of the Second Person with
Human Nature; or out of these words, I and my Father are one, the identity of
the Son with the Father; or out of, these Three are one, the unity of Nature in
three Divine Persons; than out of this is my Body, the Substantial Body of
Christ.

If therefore I might lawfully understand our Savior's words in an empty
figurative exposition, saying, this is not my Substantial Body, I might rightly
deduce (following the same interpretation) then the word was not substantially
made Flesh, and so deny the Mystery of the Incarnation; I and my Father are not
substantially one, and so prosess Arianism; These three are not substantially
one; and so dividing the Divine Nature, constitute many Gods. Can such a
figurative Explanation be thought a sincere part of the True Religion, which
undermines, and utterly destroys the whole Fabric of Christianity? And ought
not my own Motive in the most considerable Mysteries of Christianity, contained
in Scripture, be to me the same in the determination of the true Sense of This
is my Body?

SIXTH MOTIVE.
The true sense of our Savior's words may be gathered from the Doctrine which
the Learned and Ancient Fathers maintained against incroaching Heresy.

What if I should now advance, that the Successors of the Apostles upbraided
Heretics for denying the Eucharist to be the Flesh of Christ, that Flesh which
suffered for us upon the Cross; would you not look upon it as an invincible
undertaking? and yet the glorious Martyr St. Ignatius, elected Bishop of
Antiochia thirty eight years after our Savior's Passion, plainly delivers.
They (certain Heretics, whose Names he thought convenient not to mention) (...)
(or as others read, (...)) (...). St. Ignat. Ep. ad Smyrnaeos.
do not receive Eucharists, or Sacrifices, because they do not confess that the
Eucharist is the Flesh of our Savior Jesus Christ, which Flesh suffered for
our sins, and which the Father raised again by his benignity. Nor is it enough
to say, these Heretics could not admit the Eucharist to be a Figure, because
they denied that Christ had true Flesh. This perchance is true. But it is not
here the sense of the Martyr, who says expressly, that they reject Eucharists,
because they do not confess, that the Eucharist is that Flesh which suffered
for our sins. The Flesh which suffered for us, and rose again, was it a Figure,
or was it true Flesh?

If I should affirm that the Language of the Second Century, spoke after the
same manner, and told us that they were taught the Eucharist was not common
Bread, but was the Flesh of our Savior made Man, and Jesus incarnate; would
you not reply it was a Roman Invention? And yet St. Justin the Martyr leaves
this convincing Testimony. We do not receive these things as common Bread, or
common Drink: But as by the word of God Jesus Christ (...). St. Just. Apol. 2.
in the end.
our Savior being incarnate, had both Flesh and Blood for our Salvation: so
are we taught that this Food, by which (changed by digestion in our Bodies,
(...)) our Flesh and Blood are nourished, Eucharistated [or transformed] by the
prayer of this Divine Word, is the Flesh and Blood of that Incarnate Jesus. If
for all this you should reply, that the Eucharistic Food is only figuratively
the Flesh and Blood of Christ; then might the Reader likewise aver, Christ
being incarnate had only figuratively both Flesh and Blood. For it is more to
say, the blessed Bread is the Flesh and Blood of Incarnate Jesus, because this
Speech implies a substantial change, than to say, Jesus being incarnate had
both Flesh and Blood, because this Speech can signify no more than a
substantial Union. And to say less in either, is to diminish and change the
Martyr's Sense.

If I should instance the Third Age was a faithful Imitator of the precedent;
so dividing between the Divine Mystery, and the Grace of the Mystery, that the
Body of Man received the Body and Blood of Christ, and the Soul was replenished
with the Grace of Faith, or effect of the Sacrament; would you not be surprised
at the acknowledgment of what was given in Communion? And yet Tertullian
furnishes us with a sufficient manifestation of this Truth; Saying, Our Flesh
is sed with the Body and Blood of Christ, that Tertull. de Resurr. Carnis, c.
8. Caro Corpore and Sanguine Christi vescitur, ut Anima de Deo saginetur.
our Soul may be filled with God.

Again, These words, Our Flesh is fed with the Body and Blood of Christ, cannot
be deluded in an eating by Faith, because the Body of Man is incapable of an
act of Faith.

If I should continue the Fathers of the Fourth Century, when the Church was
beautified, and enriched with an innumerable Offspring of Pious and Learned
Children; If I should allege how these worthy Champions of Christian Purity
forbid Posterity to judge of the Sacrament by Taste, and taught them the Body
was given them under the Species of Bread; and as Christ changed Water into
Wine, so did he Wine into his own Blood; would you not swear this Language was
unknown in those times? And yet both the Greek and Latin Church conspire in
this Doctrine. Hearken to that Grecian Prelate St. Cyril of Jerusalem, and
acknowledge the plain truth of these words. Do not judge the thing (...). St.
Cyr. Hier. Catech. 4. Mystag.
by Taste, but by Faith. Under the species of Bread is given to thee the Body;
and under the species of Wine is given to thee the Blood. Christ formerly
changed Water into Wine; and is he not to be believed, changing Wine into his
Blood?

Nor are these words of the Learned Latin Bishop Gaudentius of less force.
Jesus giving to Gauden. Epis. Bress. Tract. 2. in Exodus De Pane rursus, quia
and potest and promisit, efficit proprium Corpus; and quia de Aqua Vinum fecit,
de Vino Sanguinem facit.
his Disciples Bread and Wine, said, this is my Body: Let us believe, it is
what he said. Truth is incapable of Error. The Creator of all Nature, and Lord,
who produces Bread from the Earth, made again of this Bread (because he can,
and promised) his proper Body; and because he did make Wine of Water, of Wine
he makes his Blood. I know there are several Expressions and Comparisons in the
Fathers, which only declare a spiritual change effected in the worthy Receiver.
But do not the foregoing Authorities prove something more, a change not in the
Receiver, but in the thing received? and this can be no less than a substantial
one. For when Catholics argue, that as Christ changed Water into Wine, so does
he Bread into his Body: Protestants readily deny the sequel, because this would
be to profess Transubstantiation. If this reasoning of Catholics include a
substantial change of the Bread into Christ's Body, as you grant; how comes it
to pass, that the very same words, and very same reason in the Father's
Writings, must have quite another interpretation? If the Fathers had designed
to have writ for Transubstantiation, they could but have said what they do, and
you might still explicate them in a spiritual sense, or wrested interpretation.

If I should urge on, that I rightly profess the consecrated Bread transfigur'd
and transelemented into the Body of Christ; would you not exclaim, these are as
hard and misshapen words as that of Transubstantiation? and yet many Fathers of
this fourth Age after Christ, use the same Expressions. Witness this Language
of St. Ambrose, As often as we receive Lib. 4. de Fide, c. 5. In carnem
transfigurantur and Sanguinem.
the Sacraments, which by the Mystery of Prayer are transfigurated into Flesh
and Blood; witness this Speech of St. Gregory Nyssene. I properly believe St.
Greg. Nyss. Tom. 3. Orat. Cat. c. 37. (...).
the Bread sanctified, by the word of God, to be changed into the Body of God
the Word. And this is effected, the nature of what appears being
transelemented, by virtue of benediction, into the Body of the word Christ.

I close up this Motive with the decision of the Synod in Egypt, celebrated
before the second Ecumenical Council, to both which presided St. Cyril of
Alexandria. These Fathers composing a Creed, inserted these words in the end of
their Introduction, This is the Faith of the Catholic and Apostolic Church, in
which the East and West agree. Then immmediatly follows their Creed, divided
into many Articles. What if their Seventh Article should decree the Flesh
received in the Sacrament to be the very Flesh of Christ, which made one Person
and two Natures in one Son; and not two Sons, one of God, Divine; and another
of the Blessed Virgin, Human, as Nestorius Heretically taught; you could
require nothing more for Transubstantiation. And yet these are their words, We
do not receive in the Sacrament our Savior's Syn. Egypt. Prove. Alex. Profess.
Fid. Tom. 3. Conc. General. (...).
Flesh, as common Flesh: God forbid. Nor again, as the Flesh of a Sanctified
Man, or associated to the Word by unity of Dignity, but as the true
vivificative, and proper Flesh of the Word himself; truly the Flesh of him, who
for our sake was made, and called the Son of Man.

The Council admitting with Nestorius what was received to be true Flesh,
defines against the Heretic (who pretended our Savior, as he was the Son of
the Virgin Mary, had not only a Nature, but likewise a Human Person, and so
constituted two Persons in Christ) that we do not receive this as common Flesh,
or the Flesh of an ordinary Person.

Secondly, The Council adds, Nor as the Flesh of a Sanctified Man, or
associated to the Word by the unity of Dignity, which excluded that accidental
Union, by which the Nestorians joined together two Persons, that of the Son of
God, and that of the Son of Man, in one Christ.

Thirdly, The Council declares, they receive it as the all-vivificating, and
proper Flesh of the Word, that Word who was made and called Man, professing one
Person in Christ, to whom this Human Nature properly belonged.

Now if all this were to be expounded of a Figure, what wresting would there be
of this Article? And how could the Council conclude the proper Flesh of Christ
was that of the Divine Word, one Person and two Natures, and speak of neither,
but of a pure Figure? The Sacrament might have been a Figure of the Passion,
and yet two distinct Persons admitted in Christ.

SEVENTH MOTIVE.
The Council of Trent declares, that because Jesus Christ our Redeemer, truly
said, that 'twas his own Body, which under Sess. 13. c. 4. Ideo persuasum
semper in Ecclesia Dei fuit.
the appearance of Bread he offered and gave to his Disciples, the Church of
God was always persuaded, that this wonderful change was operated by the
conversion of the substance of Bread into the Substance of Christ's precious
Body, and therefore renews the Canon of Transubstantiation.

And You know, that as our Savior commanded his Apostles to preach the Gospel,
so did he oblige the People to receive the promulgated Word, and be obedient to
their Pastors. The obligation of this obedience, will last to the end of the
world: and consequently in the mean time will be still due, to the true
Successors of the Apostles, with whom Christ had promised to remain till the
consummation of the World. You cannot deny but the Romish Church has true
succession from Christ and his Apostles, and we are sure you have left this
Society of true Successors.

Obedience therefore to the true Successors of the Apostles, who have defined
this Catholic verity, obliges me, in the last instance to believe, this is my
Body, can import no less than the sense of Transubstantiation.

I think a slight consideration of the foregoing motives, easily shows
Catholics pretend not, as you would have them, that if Transubstantiation can
be, it must be, either because there are no Figures in Scripture, or because a
Sacrament admits of no Figures. You seem to be persuaded of this, your self,
turning these imaginary Reasons against the Roman Catholic Assertion. But
alas! they are no more against, than they were for Transubstantiation. For our
Savior's words may be literally true, and yet many Figures admitted in
Scripture. There may be given many Spiritual interpretations of the sacred
Text, and yet this passage, the Word was made Flest, literally signify that
the second Person of the Blessed Trinity was substantially Man. There are
questionless in the old and new Testament many Figures, and neither looked upon
as a mere Figure. There may be then many Figures in Holy Writ, and this is my
Body, not at all be concerned in these figurative interpretations.

Nor is your second reason more efficacious than the former. For these words,
this is my Body, literally received, are not at all prejudiced, by an outward
sign or Figure of a Sacrament. The very notion of a Sacrament in St. Austin's
opinion, shows St. Aug. Apud St. Fulgen. and de diverse. Dicuntur Sacramenta
quia aliud videtur, aliud intelligitur.
part, and hides the remainder. What appears in the Sacrament of the Altar, is
a sign, an accidental shape, or resemblance, and this is the object of Sense.
What is understood and believed, can be no less than what our Blessed Savior
warrants us of, his own Body. How then is the substance of the Elements not
changed, because the Eucharist is a Sacrament, and a Sacrament is a Sign? A Man
is an Image of God, yet a Substance. St. Paul, Heb. 1. v. 3. (...).
The Divine Son is a Figure of his Father's Substance: and who can wrest from
him the same Substance with his Eternal Father? It Is true, it was an Arian
Error, the Son's an Image; therefore not God. Is your Illation stronger, the
Eucharist is a Sacrament or Sign, therefore it is not the Substance? This Error
ought to correct yours. Now this is my Body may be taken, I think, in the sense
of Transubstantiation, and the Eucharist remain a Sacramental Sign, or
resemblance.

Had you foreseen this Answer, I presume you woul have smothered this instance,
viz. When he gave the Cup, he said, this Cup is the New Testament in my Blood,
where first the Cup is put for the Wine, and if any thing be changed, it must
be the Cup.

The speedy quitting of the contested Proposition, this is my Body, is a ready
confession that you were unable to discover therein couched any Figurative
exposition, and so hasten to busy your Reader with a Metonymy contained in the
word Cup, put for Wine.

Had this been so, how easily could sense and reason have unfolded, what
appeared difficult? But why do I say, difficult? It is our common Language, to
ask for a Cup or Glass, when we mean Drink. Nor was the Phrase amongst the Jews
otherwise. This is cleared from the Triple repetition of the same Phrase in S.
Paul to the Corinthians, Drink this Cup. If this then was the proper 1 Cor. 11.
speech, and our Savior did not speak improperly, who could be so remote from
Sense, to guess, the Cup or Chalice was to be drunk? Would you not think that
person extravagant, who hearing you ask (in a place where People were drinking
Wine) for a Glass, should apprehend you would swallow down the Glass, and so
the Vessel be turned into your Substance? Which must be true, if it be false,
that Sense and Reason without the support of some father assistance, could be
deceived in so facile and usual an expression, of a Cup or Glass, put for Wine.
If then the Holy Ghost had used in Scripture the Cup for Wine; I know not who
could have refused such a Figure. And because I find no Metonymy, no Figure
couched in this is my Body, I exclude all Figurative insinuations.

I said if the Holy Ghost had put the Cup for Wine. Wine you say, the Divine
Spirit writes Blood, and so the Cup is metonymically put for the contained
Drink, in the Chalice, or Blood. For what we read in St. Luke, This Cup the New
Testament in St. Luke 22.
my Blood, is equivalent to, this Blood, and so the Cup is Blood. If you
suspect the supposal, harken how St. Matthew Phrases it, Matthew. 26. Mark 14.
This is my Blood of the New Testament; which is repeated by St. Mark, and who
dare contradict two Divine Testimonies?

If the Spirit of God was careful to plain so small a Nicety, in so familiar a
Phrase, is it credible that he would have omitted, the most important in the
World? which he has done, if this is my Body be but a Figure of his Body, since
the Scripture discovers nothing to diminish the reality of Christ's true Body.

What you add, if any thing be changed, it is the Cup into the Covenant, is
very strange. Till you make this good by Reason, or evince it from Scripture,
give me leave not to credit your Authority. And if you think the word
Testament, in this passage this Cup or Blood is the New Testament, excludes
real Blood, Ad Heb. c. 9. v. 18.
St. Paul proves quite the contrary, demonstrating, if there be a Testament,
there must be true Blood, and so concludes, Whereupon neither the first
Testament, was dedicated without Blood, and without sheding of Blood is no
remission.

Lastly, You urge, besides his Blood which is said to be shed, which was not
till his Passion, which followed the Institution and first Celebration of this
Sacrament.

We do not dispute with you the actual effusion of Christ's natural Blood,
which was a sanguinary Sacrifice. But can you deny that in those words you
allege from St. Luke, where Christ's Blood is said to be shed, is contained a
mystical Sacrifice? St. Austin calls this, the Oblation of Christ's Body on the
Altar: St. Aug. Civit. Dei, l. 17. c. 10. St. Cyp. l. 2. Ep. 3. ad Caeci. St.
Greg. Or. 3. advers. Julian. (...).
St. Cyprian four times in the same Epistle, the Dominical Sacrifice: St.
Gregory Nazianzen, the unbloody Sacrifice. Two Sacrifices we acknowledge with
the holy Fathers, different in manner, not distinct in substance. The same
Blood spilt naturally once upon the Cross, and mystically offered daily on the
Altar. Because the same Caracteristical mark of true Blood is attributed to
both the Sacrifices. (Viz.) the remission of Sins by effusion of Blood. Hence
St. Matthew speaking of Christ's Blood in the Sacrament, says, that it is shed
for many for remission of sins. And St. Paul in the foregoing lines, without
sheding of Blood is no remission.

Article II. Examen of your Second Proof.
YOU are willing to stand in the second instance, to the plain concession of
many learned Roman Catholic Writers, concerning the necessity of understanding
our Savior's words in the sense of Transubstantiation. And because you begin
with the concession of the acute Schoolman, let us examine what was the opinion
of Scotus.

Scotus distinguishing two sorts or Classes of People, the worthy and unworthy
Receivers, thus delivers himself. It is undoubtedly to be held, the Good not
Indubitanter tenendum est a bonis sumi, non modo Sacramentaliter, sed and
Spiritualiter. Amalts vero tantum Sacramentaliter, id est, sub Sacramento,
scilicet, sub visibili specie, Christi carnem de Virgin sumptam and Sanguinem
pro nobis fusum sumi: sed non mysticam, quae tantum bonorum est. Scor. l. 4. d.
9. q. 1. B.
only Sacramentally, but also Spiritually receive; the Bad, only Sacramentally;
that is, subjoyns Scotus, under the visible species, the Flesh of Christ, that
Flesh which was born of the Virgin Mary; they do not mystically receive the
benefit of the Sacrament. This he proves from St. Gregory the Great's
determination, the true Flesh and true Body of Christ is received by Sinners
and unworthy Communicants, in essence not in benefit. Then St. Greg. Mag. apud.
Scot. Est quidem indigne sumentibus vera Christi caro, and verus Sanguis, sed
essentia, non salubri efficacia.
Scotus quotes St. Austin for the same evidence, and concludes with the
testimony of St. Paul, to the same purpose.

This acute Schoolman asking afterward (q. 3.) whether Convertitur in Corpus
Christ.
the Bread be changed into the Body of Christ: Answers, (number. 13.) that it is
changed into the Body of Christ.

It Is true, he brings in one objecting (n. 4. and n. 7.) that our Savior's
Words may receive a more facile Sense than that of Transubstantiation.

And Scotus replies, the more difficile sense is not to be admitted, if N. 15.
Non estaliquis articulus arctandus ad intellectum difficilem, nisi ille
intellectus sit verus; sed si verus est, and probatur evidenter esse verum,
oportet secundum illum intellectum tenere Articulum -- Sic autem supponitur de
intellectu hujus Articuli.
it be not true; but if it be true, and can be proved evidently to be so, then
the more difficile ought to be chosen; and this is the case of the present
Article.

He pushes on the resumpt. But why did the Church prefer the more difficile
sense, when she might have chosen a more facile in appearance?

I answer, says Scotus, the Scriptures are expounded Ab eo Spiritu expositae
sunt Scripturae, a quo conditae sunt. Non enim in potestate Ecclesiae fuit,
facere illud verum vel non verum, sed Dei instituentis, sed illum a Deo
traditum Ecclesia explicavit, directa in hoc, ut creditur Spiritu veritatis, l.
4. d. 11. q. 3. n. 15.
by the same Spirit, by which they were dictated; and it is to be supposed, the
Catholic Church expounded them by the same Spirit, by which truth is delivered,
taught by the Spirit of truth, for it was not in the power of the Church to
make that true, but in the power of God the institutor.

Now what is this to your purpose? For if you take the concession of Scotus,
you must profess both the real Presence and Transubstantiation.

And this necessarily deduced from Scripture. Because the Scripture
efficaciously moved the Church to declare for the same Doctrine, according to
Scotus's words; it was not in the power of the Church, to make that true or not
true. The Church then necessarily followed Scriptural evidence. And what was
necessarily compulsive to the Church, was not otherwise to Scotus, who tacitly
intimated the cogent necessity of Scriptures Authority, for the real change of
the substance of Bread into the Body of Christ, instancing it was determined by
the Church for Transubstantiation.

Bellarmin was of Opinion, that according to the two literal senses of this is
my Body read in the acute School-man, the sole evidence of Scripture, could not
in Scotus's mind, abstracting from the declaration and universal practice of
the Church, evidently compel the admittance of Transubstantiation.

Bellarmin was severe enough upon Scotus. Yet he diminished much this severity,
saying, Bellarminus, l. 3. c. 23. Tertio addit (scil. Scotus) quia Ecclesia
Catholica in generali concilio Scripturam declaravit, ex Scriptura sic
declarata, manifest probari Transubstantiationem.
the acute Schoolman added, (because the Catholic Church has declared in a
general Council, the true meaning of Scripture) Transubstantiation may
manifestly be proved from Scripture so declared. But of what mind Scotus was,
the foregoing Page will sufficiently remind the unprejudiced Reader.

Nor can you conclude Bellarmin himself, granted evidence of Scripture was
wanting for the Roman Cause, because he said Scotus's assertion was not
altogether improbable. In like manner you may argue, against the strongest
Demonstration in nature. You may frankly concede an acute Objection, not
altogether improbable, and notwithstanding this Concession, stick fast to the
former Evidence of your Demonstration. This is Bellarmin's case, as the
following words out of the same place testify. For although, adds Bellarmin,
Scripture, which we have heretofore alleged, may seem so clear to us Etiamsi
Scriptura, quam nos supra adduximus, videtur nobis tam clara, ut possit urgere
hominem non protervum; tamen an it a sit, merito dubitari potest, cum homines
acutissimi, qualis Scotus, contrarium sentiant. Lib. 3. c. 23. de Euch.
that it can compel a moderate man, there is evidence of Scripture for
Transubstantiation, and Bellarmin's opinion; Yet the acuteness of bright
understandings leaves some doubt: This is what is not altogether improbable.

But we ought to reflect, these words of Bellarmin, not altogether Improbable,
are grounded upon a mere supposal of two literal Senses, which touches not our
Controversy. For Bellarmin plainly denies, a figurative Exposition probable of
our Saviors words, speaking of things as they are instituted. For thus he
argues, These words, this is my Body, necessarily infer, either the true change
of Bread as Catholics believe; L. 3. c. 19. Haec verba necessario inferunt, aut
veram mutationem panis, ut volunt Catholici, aut mutationem Metaphoricam, ut
volunt Calvinistae.
or a metaphorical mutation, as Calvinists contend. This Calvinistical Sense he
had already, declared as improbable, saying, we will generally demonstrate that
it is not probable our Savior L. 1. c. 9. In universim demonstrabimus, non esse
probabile, Dominum figura te loqui voluisse.
would figuratively speak. And for the Lutherans Error holding both substance
of Bread and the Body together in the Sacrament, he says it L. 3. c. 19. Nullo
modo Lutheranorum Sententiam admittunt.
shares not in the sense of our Savior's words. Thus the true change of Bread
into the Body of Christ naturally follows according to Bellarmin, from the
plain and evident Text of Scripture.

Durandus divides the substance of Bread into Matter and Form. Duran. 4 d. 11.
q. 3.
Then adds, the Bread is converted by conseration into the Body of our Lord;
and the Form perishing, the Matter is animated with the Soul of Christ. A
strange manner of Explication. But what does this avail your cause? For if the
Form of Bread perishes in Durandus's explication, and the Matter be animated
with the Soul of Christ, the remaining Accidents can neither claim Matter nor
Form of Bread, and so the whole Substance of Bread is wanting.

But Durandus calls your Sentiment, holding Bread remains De Corp. and Sang.
Domini. Profanae novitatis dogma.
after Consecration, the Doctrine of profane Novelty.

Suarez and Vasquez, treat Durandus, as one Divine does another Opinion. But
you might have well omitted their names, for one that is moderately learned in
Divinity, knows how copiously they both show from Scripture and Fathers, the
Roman Catholic Doctrine.

Occham. You have not faithfully delivered this Divine's Authority, In. 4.
Sent. q. 6. Dico quod in Altari est vere. Transubstantiatio.
who thus answers to the second Query. I say that in the Sacrament is true
Transubstantiation.

Then he delivers four manners of understanding this Transubstantiation. 1.
That the Bread may remain with the Body. 2. That the Substance of the Bread may
suddenly be removed away. 3. That it may return to Matter the common subject of
all, or receive some other Form. 4. That it may be reduced to nothing. He
admits all four as possible. The first manner he prefers in these words, which
are your Objection, The first manner may be held, because Occham. Ibidem.
Primus Medus potest teneri, quia non repugnat rationi, nec alicui Authoritati.
Bibliae, and est rationabilior, and facilior ad tenendum inter omnes modos --
-- Quia tamen determinatio Ecclesiae in contrarium existit, sicut patet extra
de sum. Trin. de Fid.
it is neither repugnant to Reason, nor to Scripture, and is more reasonable,
and easier than the other (three) manners. These are Scholastic Opinions. And
therefore this Divine leaving them, adheres to the true sense of
Transubstantiation in these following words; Yet because we find extant the
Churches determination contrary to this exposition, and all Doctors universally
hold that the Et communiter omnes Doctores ten nt quod ibi non remanet
substantia panis, ideo etiam teneo quod non remanet ibi substantia panis, sed
illa species, and quod illi coexistat Corpus Christi.
substance of Bread remains not there, (in the Sacrament;) Therefore I also
hold, that the substance of Bread remains not, but the species of Bread, and
with this outward shape of Bread coexistent the Body of Christ. Will you
acknowledge what this Divine holds and professes?

Gabriel Biel. You have corrupted Biel. Biel in Canon Missae, Lect. 40. Quamvis
express tradatur in Scriptura quod Christi Corpus sub speciebus panis
continetur, tamen quomodo ibi sit Christi Corpus, an per conversionem alicujus
in ipsum, aut sine conversione incipiat esse Corpus Christi cum pane,
manentibus substantia and accidentia panis, non invenitur expressum in Canone
Bibliae.
These are his words; Although it be expressly delivered in Scripture that the
Body of Christ is truly contained under the species of Bread, yet we find not
express in the Canon of the Scripture, how the Body of Christ is there, whether
by conversion of some thing into himself, or whether without conversion, the
Body begins to be with the Bread, the substance and accidents of Bread
remaining.

This Author is so far from speaking, what you force him to say, as to any
thing expressed in Scripture, a man may believe that the substance of Bread and
Wine does remain after consecration; that he proves we ought to believe the
contrary sense contained in Scripture. And this upon two accounts.

1. Although the manner of Christ's existence in the Sacrament, be not in this
Divine's opinion, evidently couched, yet it is sufficiently particularized, in
the Canon of the Scripture. For if this which was Bread, is Christ's Body,
according to our Savior's words this is my Body, and Christ's true Body be
there expressly delivered in Scripture, as Biel affirms, it necessarily folows,
that the Substance of Bread is changed. For how can this (which was Bread) be
Christ's true Body, and not lose its own substance?

2. He expounds the Scripture after this same manner from the Lateran Council,
St. Austin, St. Ambrose, and then concludes, From these and many other Ibidem.
Ex his and aliis plurimis Authoritatibus Sanctorum habetur, quod Corpus Christi
est in Sacramento, per Transubstantiationem substantiae panis and vini in
Corpus and Sanguinem Christi.
authorities of Saints, it is held that the Body of Christ is in the Sacrament
by Transubstantiation of the substance of Bread and Wine into the Body and
Blood of Christ. Does this favor the Protestants?

You named, but expressed not Melchior Mel. Canus de focis Com. l. 12. c. 13.
Canus's authority, who says, the Body and Blood of Christ was offered in the
Sacrifice, and Extat apud Lucam Scriptum apertissimum Testimonium ad hujus rei
Probationem.
his proof is the evident Testimony of St. Luke. This I think prejudices us not
in the least.

Petrus Ab Alliaco. You have misrepresented Ab Alliaco, who disputing upon mere
possibilities, proposes (among others) two Questions. First, Whether it is not
possible that the Body of Christ may remain united to the substance of Bread in
the Sacrament. Secondly, Whether the substance of Bread may not be suddenly
removed away by divine power, the accidents only remaining with Christ's Body.
This Divine thinks neither impossible, and prefers the first as more rational
and conformable to Scriptures. These are his words. It Is possible the Body of
Christ may assume the substance Petrus ab Al. 4. Sent. q. 6. Possibile est
Corpus Christi assumere substantiam panis, nec repugnat rationi, nec
authoritati Bibliae; imo est facilior ad-intelligendam, and rationabilior, quam
ille modus, qui ponit quod substantia deserat accidentia.
of Bread, and this manner is not repugnant to reason, or to the authority of
Scripture; it is more easy and more rational than that manner, which pretends
the substance of Bread leaves the accidents. Now for the second. It is not
impossible to God, that the substance of Bread may be suddenly elsewhere Non
est impossible Deo, quod substantia panis subito sit alibi, remanentibus
speciebus in ^odem loco, and eis coexistere Corpus Christi. Ille tamen modus
non esset ita rationabilis, sicut prius.
conveyed, the species remaining in the place coexistent to the Body of Christ;
this manner would not be so rational as the first. All this is upon
possibilities.

But not to enlarge in Scholastic Opinions, when matters of Faith are debated,
Cannot I dispute of what is possible, but you will necessarily deduce I deny
the being of what is actually present? If I should say, it is possible God may
create another World, and People it with another Generation of Creatures; can
you deduce from this, that there is no necessity of admitting any Men alive at
this present in the whole Universe?

Cajetan, It Is true writ, the Scripture did not evidently enforce the Roman
Catholic Tenet. Great Wits speak sometimes Cajet. in 4. d. 29. a. 2. In Coena
Domini.
without consideration. Yet the Good Cardinal retracted afterward his Error in
these words. We can prove Christ's real presence from the words of the Gospel.
And thus in some manner amended, as Soto remarks, what was before amiss.

You instance the words you object out of Cajetan, in the Roman Edition, are
expunged by order of Pope Pius V. I Answer, a worthy remark to demonstrate the
vigilance of the Roman See was not wanting to blot out Innovation in its very
first rise and appearance.

Bishop Fisher, that glorious Martyr of the Church of Rome, Cont. cap. Baby. c.
10. N. 2.
confesses, we cannot prove from the bare words of Scripture, that Priests
consecrate the true Body and Blood of Christ.

I shall not dispute whether this concern our present Controversy or not; but
I Will beg you will take the following Explication of the Pious Bishop; that is,
continues the holy Martyr in the same place, not because this thing is now
doubtful, Non quod res haec jam ambigua sit, sed quod ejus certitudo, non tam
habeatur ex Evangelii verbis, quam Patrum Interpretatione, simul and usu tanti
temporis, quem illi posteris reliquerunt.
but because the certainty of this Doctrine cannot be gathered so strongly from
the bare words of the Gospel, as from the Father's Interpretation, together
with the continued practice of so long a time surviving in succeeding Posterity.

The blessed Bishop gives us this reason, why he provoked to the Fathers, lest
any one should (says he) pertinaciously adhere to the pure words of Scripture,
despising Fathers Authorities, as Luther did.

If this will not suffice, I Will translate, when you require it, the Cap. 4. de
cap. Babyl. Adv. Oecolamp.
Fourth Chapter of this same Book, wherein Bishop Fisher proves the Bread
changed into Christ's Body from the three Evangelists. And I Will rank your
Objections collected from Luther's Instances, and Oecolampadius's Objections on
one Page, and on the opposite place Bishop Fisher's Solutions to them both in
vindication of the Roman Catholic Assertion.

I finish this Scholastic Disceptation with this Querie, Whether you would not
think it weakness in me disputing for Transubstantiation, to use in my own
defense these words of yours, which somewhat favor my undertaking. I readily
acknowledge Page 11.
the Fathers do, and that with great reason, very much magnify, and frequently
speak of a great Sacramental Change made by the Divine Benediction. If from
hence I should vigorously assert, you granted the Fathers were for the
Substantial Change, because since you admit a wonderful Change made by the
Divine Benediction, and that the Species remain unaltered, the Change must be
acknowledged in the Substance of Bread and Wine; would you not condemn this
weakness, and appeal to the other parts of your Treatise to manifest this
Impossibility? And yet all these Schoolmen actually write (in those very Places
you mention) against the Sectarists, or Roman Opposers. And almost every one of
them, produce from Scripture and Fathers, more Reasons for, than you have done
Objections against Transubstantiation. I appeal to your own Judgment conscious
of this Truth. And you know, that if you do follow their Writings, and imitate
the Religion, they professed and died in, you must declare yo^^self a Member of
the Roman Catholic Church.

CHAP. II. Whether there be any reason to understand our Savior's words
contrary to the sense of Transubstantiation.
YOU are sure there are a great many Reasons; and are not scant of them. These
may be reduced to five Heads, Parables, Similitudes, the Context of St.
Matthew, St. Paul to the Corinthians, and the Silence of the Apostles at the
Institution. I follow this order, and examine in so many Articles, these
considerable Reasons against Transubstantiation.

Article I. Whether Parables exclude the sense of Transubstantiation.
IT IS a Maxim among Divines, No Efficacious Argument can be drawn from
Parables. This Calvin acknowledges. Ins. Call. 4. c. 17. p. 21.
And St. Austin goes farther, admonishing the Donatists, never to endeavor an
establishment St. Aug. cont. Petilian. 16.
Ne stabilire posse putent ulla dogmata iis qui solum vel obscure, vel ambigue
vel figurate dicuntur in Scripturis.
of Dogm's from Scriptural Passages, which are obscure, or ambiguous, or
figurative: which if true, the sense of Transubstantiation, will not in the
least be prejudiced, by your Objections from Parables.

You first object this Parable of Christ. I am the Door. I answer John 10.
the 7th verse explicates. I am the Door of the Sheep. And he 6th verse, This
Parable spoke Jesus unto them. What more pressing a figurative understanding of
this passage, I am the door? But when we read, This is my Body, we cannot
over-see, which shall be given for you, which maintains the Reality.

You instance, Christ said, I am the true Vine: I answer, the Cyriac John 15.
interprets, I am the Vine of truth. Descend to the 5th Verse, and Christ says,
I am the Vine, as, you are the Branches: both a full Attestation of a Parable.
But where Jesus tells me, the Bread John 6.
which I will give is my Flesh, and that Flesh which I will give for the life
of the World, what more conclusive for the Catholic Interpretation?

You urge, St. Paul says, Ye are the Body of Christ. I answer; 1 Cor. 12.
the Apostle declares, Verse 13. we are spiritually; For by one Spirit we are
baptized into one Body. But where Christ said, my Flesh is meat indeed, I find
added many repetitions which increase a confirmation of the true Substance.

You finish, They drank of the Rock which followed them, and that Rock was
Christ.

I answer, you are afraid to be just, excluding the word Spiritual. 1 Cor. 10.
For we read, v. 3. Our Forefathers all eat the same spiritual Meat, v. 4. and
did drink all the same spiritual Drink; for they drank of that spiritual Rock,
and that Rock was Christ. What if for a threefold word, Spiritual, in the
precedent, I find a triple evidence of the true substance of Christ in the
Sacrament, which necessarily requires the strictly literal and divine sense of
our Blessed Savior's words? St. Luke confirms, which is shed for you. St.
Mark, shed for many. St. Matthew, for the remission of sins.

Article II. Whether Similitudes exclude the sense of Transubstantiation.
IF it be well known, as you write, that in the Hebrew Language things are
commonly said to be that which they do signify; It is not less evident, that
the four Similitudes you heap together, are not prejudicial to the Catholic
Exposition of our Savior's words. These Similitudes shall be delivered in
single Paragraphs.

Paragraph I. Similitude of Pharao 's Dream.
YOU object, Joseph, expounding Pharao's Dream to him, Genesis 41. 26.
says, The seven good Kine are seven Years.

I answer: We consider some things as Signs, and others as Substances. The Sign
is reasonably called the Thing, and yet it is not, what it represents; so the
Portrait of a King, is said to be the King, that is, only represents his
Majesty. But if we consider a thing as a Substance, we cannot in common
Language affirm, it to be, what it is not. So Prudence will not give us leave
to say, a Pen is Paper, because a Pen is not reckoned among representative
Signs. Josepth reasonably affirmed the seven Kine are seven Years, and so
Pharao understood him that they were seven in Representation, because they both
knew the discourse was of Signs, as the Scripture testifies, ver. 13. And
Pharaoh said unto Joseph, in my Dream, behold I stood upon the bank of the
River, and behold there came up out of the River seven Kine.

Our Savior's Expression, this is my Body, is as far distant from this
Example, as the real institution of the Sacrament, from the Narrative of a
Dream; and therefore ought not to be understood as the like Expression. But
what connection between Pharao's Dream, and the change of Bread in the
Sacrament? As much as betwixt the same Dream and our Savior's being
Substantially Man. If I should then argue thus, as you do, Joseph called the
seven Kine, seven Years (which Language is usual among the Hebrews) that is,
signified seven Years, and so would any man of sense understand the like
expression: Therefore when St. John says the Word was made Flesh, that is, was
a Figure os a Man or Phantasm, is such a Deduction, that no Language but Hebrew
can be able to make it out.

Paragraph II. Of one who never heard of Transubstantiation.
THIS Similitude is very pleasant, as if we should go to Pagans, to know what
is our own Religion. However you believe, that he that never heard of
Transubstantiation, would never imagine any such thing to be meant by our
Savior's words. And I believe a great Number of these who saw our Savior
himself, denied he was God. You believe the Bread only signifies Christ's Body,
because you will bilieve so; I distinguish what Christ distinguished; and
because he said, this is my Body, I believe it was his Body; and because he
commanded us to do this hereafter, for a memorial of his Death and Passion, we
obey him. Is not this to follow Scripture?

You are sure it would never have entered into any Man's mind, to have thought,
that our Savior did literally hold himself in his hands, and give away himself
from himself with his own hand. And I am sure, what cannot enter into Man's
thought, the Divine power and Omnipotency can, and has operated.

It entered into St. Austin's mind, explicating this Scriptural Passage, as he
thought, in the Septuagint, -- he was carried in his hands. Thus to propose
your Objection. How could this be understood of Man? for who is St. Aug. in
Psalm. 33. Conc. 1.
Quomodo intelligitur in ipso David secundum literam non invenimus, in Christo
autem invenimus. Ferebatur enim Christus in manibus, quando commendans ipsum
Corpus suum, ait, hoc est Corpus meum.
carried in his own hands? a Man may be supported in others hands, none is the
burden of his own hands. The Saint Answers: We find not the literal sense
fulfilled in David, in Christ we acknowledge it, for Christ was carried in his
hands, when recommending his own very Body, he said, this is my Body, for he
carried that Body in his hands.

It entered into the thought of our Blessed Redeemer to make use of the like
Argument, before he gave us the Promise, of giving himself entirely in the
Sacrament. For did he not in that miraculous Multiplication of five Loaves, in
the sixth Chapter of St. John, feeding five thousand Persons, give the five
Loaves John. 6.
in some manner from the Loaves themselves? The Fragments, says St. Hilarie,
succeeded to St. Hill. Fragmentis fragmenta succedunt, and fallunt semper
perfracta frangentes.
Fragments, and always broken, always deceived the Breaker's hand. For the
Quantity of five Loaves was given, Raban. de Sang. Dom. c. 3. Minuendo
multiplicabantur.
and the like Quantity still remained. Which Rabanus thus elegantly expressed,
they were multiplied by being diminished.

This Argument of our Blessed Savior; if it did not convince the Obstinate
Jews, it ought to prevail with Christians, or at least silence them from
saying, how can he give himself from himself.

Paragraph III. Similitude of the Passover.
YOU compare with our Savior's words, the ancient Form of the Passover, used
by the Jews from Ezra's time, as St. Justin Martyr, tells us, This Passover is
our Savior and our Refuge; Not that, say you, they St. Justin. Dial. cum
Trypho p. 297. (...).
believed the Pascal Lamb, to be substantially changed into God, who delivered
them, out of the Land of Egypt, or into the Messiah, whom they expected.

Strange method! and dangerous way of allegation! tending to the depression of
Christianity. Our blessed Savior and the Divine Apostles verify the sincere
and literal truth of the new Testament, as figurated, and symbolized in the
Law, Prophets and Psalms: and you scrupling this Order, Judaize with the
Hebrews, and will have the Law of Grace figurative, because the written Law is
full of Similitudes and Representations.

And stranger remark of yours, that the Jews did not believe the Paschal Lamb
changed into God or the Messiah. How could they imagine the Lamb changed into
God, when they knew, God Malac. 3. Ego Dominus and non mutor.
could not receive the least alteration, I am the Lord, and not changed? or
into the Messiah, when change of one thing into another supposes both their
existences, and the Messiah was not yet born? The Israelites only then could
believe the Passover a bare Representation, to put them in mind of that
Salvation, which God wrought for their Fathers in Egypt.

But if St. Justin say, The Passover is our Savior, would you desire a more
plain exposition, than the very following words, that is, our Refuge? (...).


And if this Speech of St. Justin, were in it self somewhat obscure, This
Passover is our Savior; The same Ceremony delivered in Exodus by Moses
varying the Phrase of the Passover, is a sure Rule for understanding any such
like Expression upon this account. For there we read, it is the Lord's
Passover. The Septuagint Exodus 12. Sept. (...)*
translate, It is the Passover to the Lord. Nor was this Expression unknown to
the Hebrews, The Passover to the Lord.

Paragraph IV. Similitude of a Deed.
YOU tell us that a Deed or Writing under Hand and Seal, is the conveyance of a
real Estate, and truly and really to all effects and purposes of Law, as if the
very material House and Lands themselves, could be, and were actually delivered
into your hands.

If our Cause were pleaded at the Bar, the Law, it seems, you think, would make
us the losers. But if Scriptures be the Sentence, I know not why we should
refuse to acknowledge what God is pleased to bestow on us. He tells us what he
gives, is his own Body; why will you not believe him? Corpus meum.


And to come close to your Objection, Do you not by the passing of the Deed
really and truly receive the Possession of the Substantial House, Lands, and
Revenues in Specie? You would little value the Writing, if you did not. So
likewise the Sacrament conveys to the Receivers, the Possession of the
Substantial Body and Blood of our Savior.

Article III. Upon the Context of St. Matthew.
YOU pretend that it was true Wine which our Savior drank of, and
communicated. I Answer, not after Consecration. You Chap. 26.
urge our Savior said; I will not henceforth drink of this fruit of the Vine,
this was true Wine. I Answer, that although we cannot collect from St. Matthew
clearly, whether these last words of our Savior belonged to the Consecrated or
not Consecrated Wine, yet that clearness which St. Matthew's shortness feems to
want, St. Luke abundantly supplies, describing the order of the Passover, and
delivering the Institution of the Sacrament. So where we read in St. Matthew? I
will not drink of the fruit of the Chap. 22.
Vine: St. Luke interprets, and his Interpretation is true, the fruit of the
Vine before Consecration, at the Supper of the Passover. With desire, says our
Savior, I have desired to eat this Passover with you before I suffer. For I
say unto you, I will not any more eat thereof, until it be fulfilled in the
Kingdom of God. And he took the Cup, and gave thanks, and said, take this and
divide among your selves, for I say unto you, I will not drink of the fruit of
the Vine, until the Kingdom of God shall come. Is not this a plain repetition
of St. Matthew's words? And here ended the Passover or Paschal Supper. The
Institution of the Sacrament immediately followed while they sat at Table, and
therefore St. Luke continues; And he took Bread -- likewise also the Cup after
Supper, saying, This Cup is the New Testament, in my Blood, which is shed for
you. Here is the Eucharistic Cup, which had nothing to do with the fruit of the
Vine that was used before Consecration at the Paschal Supper.

Article IV. The Sense of St. Paul to the Corinthians. 1 Cor. 10.

THUS St. Paul speaks of this Sacrament. The Cup of Blessing which we bless, is
it not the Communion of the Blood of Christ? The Bread which we break, is it
not the Communion of the Body of Christ?

These words, the Bread which we break, signify the Sacrament. For instead of
them, we read in the Acts of the Apostles, according to the Syriac Version, the
Eucharist.

Now for the meaning of the word Communion. Some will have it to be taken for
Distribution. Thus the word Communion, is equivalent to does Communicate, and
makes this Sense; The distribution of the Sacrament, does it not communicate to
us the (true) Body of Christ? Thus if I stould say, that the distribution of
Bread in usual eating, is the Communion of Bread, would not any Man of Sense
understand this to be meant of true Bread?

Others, notwithstanding this natural Exposition, in the behalf of the Roman
Catholic Assertion, will have the word Communion, to signify the Substance of
Bread. If it must signify Substance, let us deal fairly, and in the place of
Communion, substitute the word Substance; and so we shall easily see to what
this Substance belongs. The Bread which we break, is it not the Communion.
Substance of the Body of Christ?

Neither can the Church of Rome as well argue from the following Verse 17. For
we being many are one Bread, and one Body; that all Christians are
substantially changed, first into Bread, and then into the Natural Body of
Christ, as you will have it; Because we see no Reason in the World for this.
And the Divine Apostle instructs us otherwise, declaring the precise and only
Reason of this Unity; For we are all Partakers of the same Body. It Is
Participation, not any Substantial Change in our selves makes us one in Christ.
Nor is a pressing Example wanting in the Apostle, to the same purpose; are not
they (the Pagans) which eat of the Sacrifices, Partakers of the Altar?

You instance, the same Apostle speaking of the Consecration of the Elements,
still calls them the Bread, and the Cup, in three Verses together.

This is Acute and Subtle. But each Witty Contrivance is not true. It is not
true, St. Paul calls the Consecrated Elements, the Bread and the Wine. We read
indeed in three Verses together, the bare word of Bread attributed to the
Eucharist, as often as you eat this Bread; and this is all we read; which may
be said without any prejudice to the Substantial Change. And this for two
Reasons, both dictated by the Holy Ghost. First, By reason of the outward
appearance of Bread. Secondly, Because it formerly was Bread.

The First Reason St. Luke authorizes in the Acts. Behold two Acts 1. 20.
Men stood by them in white apparel. Here the bare Name of Man is attributed to
Angels, and Angels are only Men in appearance.

The Second Reason is deduced from two Substantial Conversions. We read in
Exodus, They cast down every Man his Rod, Exodus 7. 12.
and they became Serpents, but Aaron's Rod swallowed up the Rods of the
Magicians. And in St. John, when the Ruler of the Feast had tasted the Water
that was Wine. He tasted Water, and the Water was Wine; The Serpent is called a
Rod, and was a Serpent: because the Serpent, and the Wine, were formerly a Rod
and Water.

It is then true, that the bare Name of bread may be attributed to the
Eucharist without any prejudice of the Substantial Change of Bread into the
true Body of Christ.

And if it be not true that St. Paul says, the Consecrated Elements are Bread
and Wine; it is true that St. Paul calls the Consecrated Bread Christ's Body.
Jesus took Bread, and when he 1 Cor. 11.
had given thanks, brake it, and said, take, eat, St. Chrysostom. Hic (...).
this is my Body, which is broken for you. So does St. Chrysostom; What is the
Bread? the Body of St. Ambr. l. 2. de Fide, c. 4. Panis hic Caro est.
Christ. So does St. Ambrose; This Bread is Flesh.

You resume, this is my Body which is broken, cannot be literally understood of
his Natural Body broken, because his Body was then whole and unbroken.

I answer, how can you contradict our Savior, who says, this is my Body which
is broken? And if it be Christ's Body, it is his real Body: for he had no
Phantasm or imaginary Body. Nor did I ever hear that Christ had two real
Bodies. But the same Body may have two different existences, a Natural, and
Supernatural Existence. For if God can give a Natural Existence to what is not,
can what is, hinder God from adding a Supernatural Existence?

Now these Words, which is broken, cannot be understood of the Natural
Existence of our Savior's Body hanging on the Cross, for there his Body was
unbroken; whence that of St. Chrysistom, we may see this in the Eucharist, and
the contrary on the Ibidem. Os ejus non conteretur.
Cross, His bones shall not be broken.

Nor is it hard to conceive, how the Body of Christ may be said to be broken in
the Sacrament. For as a Substance is said to be visible, by reason of the
visible accidents which environ it; Thus we commonly say, I saw a Man, and yet
nor Soul, nor Substance of the Body, but only the shape and outward appearance
of the Substance, was the object of the Eye. So likewise Christ's Body in the
Sacrament, takes the denomination of broken from the Species of Bread, which is
truly divided.

Article V. The Silence of the Apostles at the Institution.
YOU ought not to be surprised if the Disciples (frequently full of Questions
and Objections) should make no difficulty of this matter, when our Savior
instituted the Sacrament: not so much as ask our Savior, How can these things
be? or tell him, We see this to be Bread and Wine, and thy Body distinct from
both.

My reason is, because when the Jews and the Disciples were blamed for these
inquiries, at the promise of our Savior; the Apostles (assisted with Divine
Grace) gave credit to our Savior's Words. And if they believed the Promise,
why should they be disquieted at the Institution?

We read after these words in St. John, (where the Promise of Christ in the
Sacrament is given, The Bread which I will give is my Flesh:) This Passage, the
Jews therefore strove amongst themselves, saying, how can this man give us his
Flesh to eat?

This Jewish Opposition was seconded with the murmur of Christ's Disciples,
many therefore of his Disciples when they had heard this, said, This is an hard
saying, who can hear it?

This murmur after all our Savior's Arguments to settle the Jews in the belief
of what was promised, ended in a plain desertion or leaving of Jesus, from that
time many of his Disciples went and walked no more with him.

Here is the reluctance you sought for, and the Objections you demanded in the
Apostles. But do you think this Resistance was laudable in the Jews? Do you
believe this Opposition was commendable in the Disciples? Or rather, to be
disturbed at our Savior's Ordination and Assertion, Is it not the beginning of
Incredulity? And yet for all this, you raise Sense, and erect it as an Idol to
the Peoples Devotions. Bewitching Sense! whose Allurements entice the greatest
Integrity of Noblest Souls, and would win too their Thoughts, if less than a
God interposed.

Hence this Speech of St. Hilary, that great Persecutor of Arianism. There is
folly in declaring L. 1. St. Hill. de Trin. c. 8. Deveritate Carnis and
Sanguinis ejus non relictus est ambigendi locus, nunc and ipsius Domini
professione and fide nostra, vere Caro est and vere Sanguis est.
for Jesus Christ, had we not received from him, this Lesson of Truth. Jesus
says the Bread is truly Flesh, and the Wine is truly Blood; after this
Declaration there is left no place to doubt of the verity of his Flesh and Blood.

St. Ambrose opposes to the restless importunity St. Amb. de Abra. Patriarcha,
Quam indignum est Humanis Testimoniis de alio credamus, Dei oraculis de se non
credamus?
of Sense, the prerogative of the Deity; Lest asking of God what we expect from
man, reason of things, we should entrench upon Divine Prerogatives. And what
more unworthy than to believe men in Testimonies they give one of another, and
to despise God in those he speaks of himself?

St. Chrysostom adds, We speak of God, and you ask how this can be? St. Chrysostom.
hic, (...).
do you not tremble at the excess of your Temerity?

Our Blessed Savior himself reprehended his Disciples, following John 6. 62.
what Sense suggested at the proposal of the Sacrament, in these words, does
this offend you?

Finally, The pious Christian guides his unruly Sense in the journey toward
Heaven, by the steady Reyns of true Faith.

Thus the Apostles overcoming their own stubborness, became supple and obedient
to God's Promise and Power, infinitely active beyond Human Imagination, and
they all joined in St. Peter's confession, And we believe, and are sure thou
art Christ Verse 69.
the Son of the living God.

Thus Divine Faith another time prevailed with St. Peter Matthew. 14.
(when Sense, Reason, and the fury of the Sea, contradicted) to press the Waves
with his Feet; and hardened the watery Element, into a solid Passage. The way to
Heaven is still by Faith.

From all which it must needs be very evident to any Man, who will piously
search into Truth, how little reason there is to understand our Savior's Words
otherwise than in the sense of Transubstantiation.

SECT. II. Of the perpetual belief of this Doctrine in the Christian Church.
I Have already manifested how the Roman Catholic Church, rightly pretends as
an evidence, that the Fathers of the Primitive Ages interpreted our Savior's
Words in the sense of Transubstantiation. But what Authors have been so
fortunate in their Writings, that the contrived endeavors of others, have not
culled out some places, not so dark in themselves, as they are shaded with
smothered Representations? These your Industry, with no small increase, has
compacted together. After this great Task, you are pleased to show, when the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation first came in. And finally, you undertake to give
a Solution to the pretended Demonstration of Mr. Arnauld a learned man in
France. These three Subjects shall be the Mattter of so many Chapters.

CHAP. I. Whether any of the Fathers are against Transubstantiation.
REflection is the cause of Knowledge: Division leads to Reflection. I Will
therefore divide your selected Testimonies, that they may be the consideration
of so many distinct Articles.

Article I. Upon St. Justin Martyr.
YOU begin unfortunately with St. Justin, whom you make expressly to say, that
our St. Justin. Apol. 2. (...).
blood and flesh are nourished by the conversion of that Food, which we receive
in the Sacrament.

I find no such thing in the holy Martyr. It Is true, I read these words, By
which Food (changed in our Bodies, (...)) our Blood and Flesh are nourished.
What then? Bread and Wine taken out of the Sacrament, nourish, according to
this Passage, Flesh and Blood, which all the World will allow of. And I shall
believe St. Justin says no more, till you can prove it from the Saint's own
Testimony. But why do I say Testimony, when the Passage you cite, is nothing
but a bare Parenthesis? I could heap up a great many such weaknesses, collected
out of your Discourse, if the World were not already too much troubled with
such trivial Reflections. I Will take liberty to add one more considerable, viz.
If natural digestion can change Bread and Wine into the proper Substance of our
Bodies, how easy will it be to Nature's Author, to change one thing into
another, Bread into the Body of Christ? Nor can any moderate Man imagine any
thing less, when the Devil himself tempted Christ to change one Substance into
another, Stones into Bread, as a Strategem to find out, whether he was God.

Look likewise into the Book of Genesis, and you will find that the sole Word of
God, gave, in the beginning of Creation, a Being to all Nature: and how much
more difficult is it, to make all things of nothing, than to change one thing
into another? Does not this evidence the possibility of Transubstantiation? I
thank you for this Objection.

Article II. Upon St. Irenaeus.
NOR are you more fortunate in St. Irenaeus, who speaking L. 4. c. 37.
of the Sacrament, says. The Bread which is from the Earth receiving the Divine
Invocation, is now no longer common Bread, but the Eucharist, consisting of two
things, the one earthly, the other heavenly. For, what is earthly, may not
unfitly be called the species of Bread; and what is heavenly, Christ himself.
Or what if I should attribute this earthly thing to Christ's Humanity, and the
heavenly thing to Christ's Divinity, the Sacrament would be rightly said,
consisting of two things, the one earthly, the other heavenly? I am sure the
Proper Substance of Bread, is nothing but Common Bread; And yet St. Irenaeus
affirms, this ceases after Consecration; receiving the Divine Invocation, it is
no longer Common Bread, it is not what it was before.

You instance, and elsewhere he has this Passage; when L. 5. c. 2.
therefore the Cup that is mixed, and the Bread that is broken, receives the
Word of God, it becomes the Eucharist of the Body and Blood of Christ, of which
the substance of our Flesh is increased, and subsists.

St. Irenaeus discourses not here of a natural, but of some spiritual increase
of Flesh and Blood. For he says, our Flest is increased with the Bread, as it
becomes the Body and Blood of Christ, in which sense precisely, it is only
supernatural Food.

Bread, as it is supernatural Food, or the true Body of Christ in the
Sacrament, increases the Soul with Grace; and Flesh and Blood with a Legitimacy
of Immortality. These two great Benefits are neatly delivered, as the proper
effects of Christ's substantial presence in the Sacrament, Catech 37. Oportet
autem sicut exitiale, ita etiam salutare medicamentum admitti intra viscera
hominis, ut per illa distribuatur in universum Corpus, virtus ejus quod fert
opem. Quid hoc ergo est? nihil aliud quam illud Corpus, quod and morte ostensum
fuit esse potentius and nostrae Vitae fuit initium.
in these words of the Nyssene Doctor; As the dire consequence of Poison is by
Counterpoyson prevented; so the wholesome remedy, which operates our Salvation,
entering the Bowels of Man, thence everywhere diffuses its force and
vivification. What is this (wholesome) remedy? That Body which Jesus exhibited
stronger than Death, and which was the beginning of Life. What can more evince
Christ's substantial Presence, to be the productive Cause of Sacramental Grace,
than to testify, this Adorable Body, which died for us, is in ours, as a
wholesome remedy, there communicating Virtue, and dispensing heavenly Treasures?

So is the same true Body of Christ present in the Sacrament, the cause
effective of our future Incorruption in Glory; and increases in this sense the
substance of Flesh and Blood, with a beginning of Immortality; as appears from
the following Lines of the same Father. Jesus, Ea de cauta per suae Gratiae
dispensationem, se per Carnem inserit, omnibus credentibus, commissus and
contemperatus corporibus credentium, quibus substantia est ex pane and vino, ut
unione cum eo quod est immortale, sit etiam homo particeps incorruptionis.
according to the dispensation of Grace, enters by Flesh into those who
believe, mixing himself with the Body of the Faithful, that Man may become
Partaker of Incorruption, by the union with this Immortal Body.

This second benefit in St. Irenaeus's mind increases the Substance of Flesh
and Blood, giving a beginning of resurrection to the Body: Or, to use this
Saint's Example; As a grain of Wheat dissolved in earth, rises by the St.
Irenaeus. Quemadmodum granum tritici decidens in terram, and dissolutam
multiplex surgit per Spiritum Dei, sic and nostra Corpora Corpore Christi
nutrita and reposita in terram, and resoluta, resurgent in suo tempore.
power of God with much increase; so Flesh and Blood receiving in the Sacrament
from the presence of Christ's Immortal Body, the living Seed of Incorruption,
rise (when dissolved by death) increased with Immortality.

This agrees well with St. Irenaeus's design, demonstrating in the place
objected, that our Bodies are capable of Resurrection, because we receive in
the Sacrament the true Body of Christ, that Body which consists of Flesh, Blood
and Bones. How can they deny, says he, the Flesh to be capable of the Gift of
God? For we are Members of his Body, of his Flesh, and of his Bones. This is
not spoken of a Spiritual or Metaphorical Man, for a Spirit has neither Bone
nor Flesh, but it is delivered according to the disposition of Man, which
consists of Flesh, of L. 5. c. 2. De ea dispositione quae est secundum hominem,
quae ex Carnibus and Nervis and Ossibus consistit, quae de Calice, qui est
Sanguis ejus nutritur, and de Pane, qui est Corpus ejus, augetur.
Nerves, and Bones, which is nourished with the Chalice, which is his Blood,
and increased with the Bread, which is his Body. Do not Flesh, Nerves, Bones
and Blood, belong to a true Substantial Body?

You add St. Irenaeus 's words, preserved by Oecumenius, when the Apud Oecum.
in 1 Pet. 3.
Greeks had taken some Servants of the Christian Catecumeni (that is, such as
were disposed, but not yet baptized) and afterward urged them by violence, to
tell them some of the secrets of the Christians. These Servants having nothing
to say, that might gratify those who offered violence to them, except only
that they had heard from their Masters, that the Divine Communion was the Blood
and Body of Christ; they thinking, that it was really Blood and Flesh, declared
as much to those who questioned them. The Greeks taking this as it really were
done by the Christians, discovered it to others of the Greeks, who hereupon put
Sanctus and Blandina to the torture, to make them confess it. To whom Blandina
boldly answered, how would they endure to do this, who by way of exercise (or
abstinence) do not eat that Flesh which may lawfully be eaten?

Now if we consider Blandina's Answer, we shall find therein contained, a pious
denial of what was objected, and a Christian reserve of what was received in
the Sacrament. A pious denial of eating the Flesh and Blood of a Child, as the
Greeks (and all Pagans) conceived, after a carnal manner, which shall be more
amply discoursed hereafter. And this caused Blandina to say, How could they be
guilty of such a heinous eating? who abstain, upon fasting days from Flesh
which may lawfully be eaten? A Christian reserve, not discovering the Mystery
to Pagans, which was esteemed a betraying of Religion.

Thus Tharsilius the Acholyt, as venerable Beda relates, having V. Bid Martyr,
18. Octr.
the blessed Sacrament about him, was seized on by the Barbarians, and
martyred, because he refused to show it.

St. Ambrose declares the discovery of the Mystery to those who were not
baptized, passed not St. Amb. l. de Novis Baptis. c. 1. Prodidisse potius quam
edidisse existimaremur.
for an instruction, but for a sort of Treason in Religion.

St. Cyril says, We speak not clearly of the Mystery to the Catecumeni, St.
Cyril, Hier. Cat. 6.
and we are often constrained, to make use of such Expressions; which are
understood by the Faithful instructed, and do not offend other Assistants. Such
was Blandina's Reply, which neither offended the Greeks, nor betrayed the
Mystery.

Article III. Upon Tertullian.
TErtullian proves against Marcion, as you write, the Heretic, Adv. Marcion.
l. 4. p. 57. edit. Rigal.
That the Body of our Savior, was not a mere Phantasm and Appearance, but a
real Body, because the Sacrament is a Figure, and an Image of his Body. His
Words are these; The Bread which our Savior took, and gave to his Disciples,
he made his own Body, saying, this is my Body, that is, the Figure of my Body.
But it could not have been a Figure of his Body, if there had not been a true
and real Body.

Tertullian, often sententious, and difficult in expression, as Lactantius and
St. Jerome affirm, Lact. de Divin. Inst. l. 5. c. 1.
may easily be misunderstood, and misrepresented. St. Hierom. de Inst. Mon. ad
Paul. Tom. 1. Creber in sententiis difficilis in loquendo.


This Father's design here, is to confute the Marcionites, who defended that
the God of the Old Testament, was opposite to God the Father of Christ, Author
of the New Law. He makes good this undertaking, proving the perfect agreement
of both Testaments, completed in Jesus, who did not abolish, but fulfill the
Law, when he changed the Shadow into a Body, the Figure into Truth, As
Tertullian phrases it, in his Fisth Book against Marcion.

This Accomplishment he showed from that of Jeremy, where Jer. Mittamus lignum
in Panem ejus.
we read how the Jews fast'ned to the Cross the Bread of Christ, that is, his
Body. This he evidenced, because Bread in the Old Law, was a Figure of Christ's
Body. These are his Words, It is what God has revealed in Tertul. l. 3. c. 19.
Contra. Marc. Sic enim Deus in Evangelio quoque vestro revelavit, Panem Corpus
suum appellans, ut and hinc jam tum intelligas Corporis sui figuram Pane
dedisse, cujus retro Corpus in Pane Propheta Figuravit.
your own Gospel, calling Bread his Body, making known by this, that Christ,
whose Body the Prophet represented in Bread, long before he fulfilled this
Figure, gave from this very time (of the Prophecy) Bread to be the Figure of
his Body.

These Words, Christ gave the Bread, even from the time of Jeremy, to be the
Figure of his Body, represent Christ as Master; and these others, Jeremy
represented in Bread the Body of Christ, exhibit the Prophet as Minister. Both
testify, that Bread was a Figure in the Written Law; and the Subordination of
Jeremy to Jesus, proves the concord of Christ with the ancient Testament, which
was Tertullian's peculiar Task.

The same he pursues in the place by you cited, Bread, (He Lib. 4.
made his own Body, saying, this is my Body,) that is, a Figure in the Prophet
of Christ's Body. This sense agrees well with the foregoing Tenor of this
learned Father's Discourse. 2. These following Words are another Confirmation,
But it would not have been a Figure of his Body, if there was not a true Body.
He does not say, it was not a Figure, he says, it would not have been a Figure
in the Old Law. 3. Marcion argues for you, but why did he call Bread his Body,
and not something else? Tertullian answers, that he argued thus, not knowing
Bread was an ancient Figure of the Body of Christ, as we learn Lib. 4. c. 40.
Non intelligens veterem fuisse istam Figuram Corporis Christi dicentis per
Jeremiam. --
from Jeremy. 4. He confirms the same in these Words, You may likewise
acknowledge the Ut autem and Sanguinis veterem Figuram in Vino recognoscas.
Old Figure of Blood in Wine.

It follows also from hence, that our Savior's Body, was not a Phantasm or an
Appearance, which was another of the Marcionits Errors, but a real Body; not
that the Sacrament, as you would have it, but that Bread in the Old Law, as I
have demonstrated, was a Figure and Image of his Body in the Sacrament; which
must be a true Body; otherwise there is a Figure of a Figure, which your own
party will not allow of Nor could it, adds Tertullian, have been a Figure of
his Body, if there had not been a true and real Body.

If for all this you will pretend, that as Bread in the Prophet was a Figure,
so likewise is Bread still in the Eucharist a Figure of Christ's Body; I may
without prejudice to the Catholic Belief, humor you so far, as to grant the
Sacramental Bread is a Figure, but a Figure joined to the Reality. For if you
will say, what you find not in Tertullian, that the Bread in the Sacrament is a
Figure of Christ's Body, you cannot deny but you read in this Father, that
Christ made the Bread his Body, as we read in St. John, he made Water Wine. The
Sacrament may then be a Figure, and the true Body.

Thus he proves the same thing to be called a Figure, and yet to be the same
substance, instancing, the Word is God, and L. 5. contra Marc. Deus est and
Effigies.
an Image too. The Catholic Church only disallows those Figures, which exclude
the true Substance of Christ's Body present in the Sacrament.

You urge a second Testimony from the same Author, using this Argument against
the Skeptics, who rejected the certainty L. de cap. 17.
of Sense, He might be deceived in the voice from Heaven, in the smell of the
Ointment, with which he was anointed against his burial, and in the taste of
the Wine, which he consecrated in the remembrance of his Blood. These last
Words are somewhat changed; Tertullian says, he tasted not another Non alium
postea Vini saporem quod consecravit in Sanguinis sui memoriam.
Savor of Wine which he consecrated in remembrance of his Blood.

This learned Father established two Principles. 1. That Christ was truly Man.
And 2. That his Operations were real like other Men's.

The First Verity, was not here Tertullian's Theme. This he vindicated against
Marcion, where he proved that Christ was not a Phantasm, or Appearance.

The Second Verity Tertullian here made good, against the Skeptics. For if the
sound of the Voice from Heaven was not imaginary, if the Smell of the Perfume
was not Odoriferous, and if there was not another Taste of the Wine, which was
consecrated in remembrance of Christ's Blood; then these Operations of our
Savior were not distinct from vulgar Sensation, like those Impressions other
Men naturally receive, sincere, real, and without delusion. All Catholics grant
as much, and none will deny the same Taste of Wine after Consecration. But the
Taste is not the Substance of Wine.

The Substance of Wine is not here spoken of. And the knowledge of Substance is
the proper endeavor of Reason. Senses care is to search into the certainty of
Color, Taste, Accidents and Appearances, which was Tertullian's Province
against the Skeptics.

The whole Controversy then between us is left by this Objection entire and
untouched.

Article IV. Upon Origin.
Origin, on his Comment on St. Matthew, speaking of the Sacrament, has this
Passage; That Food which is sanctified by the Word of God, and Prayer, as to
that of it which is material, goes into the Belly, and is cast out into the
Draught, which none surely will say (as you remark) of the Body of Christ.

But some have said it of the Body of Christ, which they thought was conveyed
under the shape of material Accidents of Bread into the Draught: which Sense,
if admitted to be Origen's, the Learned Cardinal Peron might say without
injury, Origin talks like an Heretic. Peron in Orig.


The same Illustrious Cardinal doubts whether this be the Work of Origin;
because he says, Erasmus was the first that produced this Old Fragment; where
he had it, no Body knows; and this not a Fragment, but only a Version thereof,
and cautioned by himself.

Sixtus Senensis suspects this Testimony of Origin was depraved Sixtus Sen.
Bib. s. l. 6. Geneb. Praef. in Origin.
by Heretics. Genebrard is of the same Opinion.

These Critical Censures take all assurance from your Objection, rendering it
either dubious, or depraved, or heretical.

Moreover, if Origin in this Passage, should downright prescribe the Catholic
Belief of the change of Bread into the Body of Christ, this ought not to
disquiet any sober Inquirer. Because his chief Error was the exclusion of the
literal Sense in Scripture. Whereupon Lirinensis calls Origin the Interpreter
Lirin. in Comm. St. Epiph. Haer. 64. Theoph. l. Pasch. 1. Con. Genesis 5. Collat.
8. cap. 11.
of Scripture after a new manner. St. Epiphanious complains he turned all into
Allegories. Theophilus says, he supplants by Shades and Images the Truths of
Scripture. And the Church in the Fifth Ecumenical Council, peculiarly
anathematised his Works.

Finally, If I should answer, by what is material is understood only the
material Accidents of Bread and Wine which go into the Belly, and are cast into
the Draught, what inconvenience would follow, from your Objection? No more,
than what follows from what the same Father adds by way of explication, It is
not the matter of the Bread, but the Word which is spoken over it, which
profits him who worthily eats the Lord; and this (he says) he had spoken,
concerning the Typical and Symbolical Body. So that the Matter of Bread
receives the Word of God spoken over it, and this Word, as it changes the
Substance of Bread, so does it profit the worthy Receiver; and this Word Origin
calls the Typical and Symbolical Body of Christ, because the Word is Spiritual
Food. Thus the fame Father, in his Homilies upon Leviticus proves Christ's
Flesh to be true Meat, because all his Speech is true Food. And he adds St.
Peter, St. Paul, and all Homil. 7. in Levit. Cibus est Petrus and Paulus and
omnes Apostoli.
the Apostles are Food, will you conclude from hence, the Apostles were not
true Men?

At least, if this will not do, you resolve to do the business by drawing out
of the same Homily, a killing Letter of the New Testament. For if, says Origin,
we take according to the Letter, that which is said, except ye eat my Flesh,
and drink my Blood, this Letter kills.

This Letter except ye eat my Flesh, (understood of the Substantial presence of
Christ's Body after a Sacramental manner, invisible to Sense, under the species
of Bread,) is what gives life in the Catholic Church, according to that of St.
John, who shall eat my Flesh, shall live for ever. John 6.


If Roman Catholics be out of danger, the blow must fall else where. It falls
upon the Capharnaits, who following the naked Letter, carnally thought our
Savior would give his Flesh to be served in as common Meat, and cut in Pieces.
It falls upon those who literally adhering to what they see, believe they
receive, what it seems to be, Bread. Upon both these it falls.

If we follow, says Origin, the Letter, and expound it either according to the
Jews acceptance Levit. 7. Hom. Si vero adsideamus literae, and secundum hoc:
vel quod Judaeis; vel id quod vulgo videtur, accipiamus, quae in lege scripta
sunt, erubesco dicere and confiteri, quia tales Leges dederit Deus.
(were not these the Capharnaity,) or according to what it seems commonly to
be, (are you not of this Number) I blush to confess what is writ in the Law.
Thus you strike at Catholics with the Killing Letter of Origin, and wound your
self together with the Capharnaits.

For your warlike Argument give me leave to propose two peaceable ones, out of
the same Father.

The First is in his Homilies upon Numbers, where he compares the Figure with
the Figurated, Hom. 7. in Numb.
the Manna with the Body of Christ; Tunc in aenigmate erat Manna Cibus, nunc
autem in specie Caro verbi Dei est verus Cibus. Quae in aenigmate designabantur
nunc in specie and veritate complentur.
The Manna was in Figure Food. Now in reality the Flesh of the Word God is true
Meat. And what was first in the Figure designed, is now completed in truth and
reality.

The Second is contained in these Words, Homil. 5. In diversa. Quando illud
incorruptum accipias epulum, quando vite pane and populo frueris, manduc as and
bibis Corpus and Sanguinem Domini. Tunc Dominus subtectum tuum ingreditur, and
tu ergo humilians teipsum, imitare hunc Centurionem, and dicito, Domine non sum
dignus, ubi enim indigne ingreditur, ibi ad judicium ingreditur accipienti.
When you receive the Holy Food and Incorruptible Banquet, when in the Bread
and Cup of life, you eat and drink the Body and Blood of our Lord, then our
Lord enters under your roof; do you therefore humbling your self imitate the
Centurion, and say, Lord, I am not worthy thou should enter under my Roof,
for where he enters unworthily, there he enters in Judgment with the Receiver.
This holy Food cannot be the substance of Bread, because Origin calls it an
incorruptible Banquet; Bread is not such. Nor can it be a bare typical Figure
of the Lord; for when the Centurion said, O Lord, I am not worthy, 'twas our
own Savior present. And if this Humiliation, O Lord, I am unworthy, be
attributed to any thing but our Savior there present, how can you excuse it
from Idolatry? Finally, this Lord invocated, enters into the wicked, which
cannot be by Faith. For your Church, teaches unworthy Receivers are not
partakers of the Lord in the Sacrament by Faith.

Article V. Upon St. Cyprian.
YOU object St. Cyprian has a whole Epistle to Caecilius against those who
gave the Communion in Water, without Wine mingled with it; and his main
Argument against them is this, that the Blood of Nec potest videri Sanguis ejus
quo redempti, and vivificati, esse in Calice, quando Vinum desit Calici, quo
Christi Sanguis ostenditur. L. 2. Ep. 3. ad Caecilium.
Christ with which we are redeemed and quickened, cannot seem to be in the Cup
when Wine is wanting to the Chalice, by which the Blood of Christ is
represented.

Very well. It is Wine in representation, and the Blood of Christ is in the Cup
by propriety or essence; for it is that Blood with which we were redeemed and
quickened, according to St. Cyprian.

You argue afterward from these other Words of the same Saint, by the Water
the People is understood; by Wine the Blood of Christ is shown; but when in
the Cup Water is mingled with Wine, the People are united to Christ; so that
you deduce, according to this Argument, Wine in the Sacramental Cup, is no
otherwise changed into the Blood of Christ, than the Water mixed with it is
changed into the People, which are said to be united to Christ.

I shall not be strictly put to it, for an Answer, after I have Jesus ostendens
gentium Populum succedere in locum quem Judaei perdiderant de aqua vinum fecit.
thus proposed St. Cyprian's mind. St. Cyprian compares here the Jews to Wine,
the Gentiles to Water, at the Marriage of Canaan. The want of Wine marked out
the Jews, who refused to embrace the Law of Christ; The plentifulness of Water
represented the Gentiles converted to Christianity. Hence Water comes in the
Sacrament to design the Elected People, Wine the Blood of Christ, and both mixed
in the Chalice, the union of the People with Christ. Now to your Argument. And
that I may the better convince you, give me leave to make use of your Logic.

Water is the People as Wine is Christ; then as we receive Christ by Faith in
the Sacrament, so do we the People: And consequently the People sanctify the
Soul as Christ does in the Eucharist. Are you not ashamed of your Sophism? Or
rather, how durst you equalize the People with Christ, Sinners with their
Savior, Man with God?

Again, Wine signified the Jews, according to St. Cyprian, and Water the
Gentiles; now deduce from hence, the Water was not changed into Wine at the
Marriage of Canaan, as you have done from the like instance, that the mixed
Chalice is not changed into Christ's Body and Blood.

Article VI. Upon St. Augustine.
THE variety of Testimonies you gather from St. Augustine, cannot well without
perplexity, be considered altogether. I Will endeavor to decline this Confusion,
examining each one of them in so many Paragraphs.

Paragraph I.
YOU pitch first upon this Expression of St. Austin's in his Contra Adimant. c.
12.
Book against Adimantus the Manichee, Our Lord did not doubt to say this is my
Body, when he gave the sign of his Body.

Adimantus endeavors to demonstrate the God of the Old Testament prohibited
eating of Blood, grounding himself upon this Principle of Duteronomy, Blood is
the Soul of the Flesh, thereby Deuteronomy. 12.
to prejudice that Soul, which Jesus declared in the Gospel, was not liable to
corporal harm or punishment.

St. Augustine replys, the Old Law speaks of the Animal Soul, Signum Animae.
and the Words of Christ are only understood of the Rational. Secondly, the
Holy Doctor tells him, that Blood is called the Soul, only because it is the
Sign of the Soul. This he confirms (accommodating himself to the Language of
the Manichees, who were of opinion, that Bread, Corn and Grapes, naturally
signified Christ's Body) with this Instance, our Savior did not doubt to say,
this is my Body, when he gave (in the Manichees Opinion) the Sign of his Body.
The Manichees Opinion was not St. Austin's. And he therefore forewarns us to
call in question Faith, because he made use of Lib. 3. de lib. Arb. Nunquid
ideo Fides in dubium vocanda vel disserenda est.
the Manichee's Principle in their own confutation.

Paragraph II.
SAINT Austin speaking of Judas, whom our Lord admitted Ennaret. in Ps. 3.
to his last Supper, has these Words, in which he recommended and delivered to
his Disciples, the Figure of his Body. Language, say you with exclamation,
which would now be censured for Heresy in the Church of Rome.

I Am confident you are already persuaded to the contrary. And I know not any
Sect, which holds a Figure incompatible with the reality. I shall cite two of
your Learned Patrons; Peter Martyr says, A Figure, as far forth as it is a
Figure, is not repugnant Pet. Mart. contra Genesis
to the presence of the thing. And Calvin before him granted, a Figure does not
exclude the thing figurated. The Lutherans are Luth. Admonit. ult.
not of a contrary mind. And if you will be pleased to look either into the
Ancient or Modern Divines among Catholics, you will find the same acknowledgment.
Paschasius formerly gave this answer to Frudegardus, instancing St. Austin's
Testimony, These are, Replys Paschasius, Mystical things, in which is the
verity of Pasch. Epla. ad Frudeg.
Flesh and Blood, and none others than Christ's, yet in a Mystery, and Figure,
and the Words of this Mystery are called a Figurative Speech; so Christ himself
is called, by the Apostle, a Figure, though Christ be the Truth. Algerus
illustrates the same, with this Reflection upon Alg. l. 1. c. 3.
St. John Baptist, He was called a Prophet, and more than a Prophet. So the
Sacrament is a Figure, and more than a Figure. To these I add of the Modern
Catholic Schoolmen. Art. 13.
Ruardus, Sup. Auch.
Melderus, L. 1. de Eucha. cap. 32.
Cardinal Alen, 3. p. d. 46. Sect. 4.
Suarez, Contro. 3. cap. 9.
Gordon, Sup. Auch. St. Aug. de S. Virg.
Gonet. And I never read any that held the contrary. And I conclude with this
of St. Austin; The Blessed Virgin did not only conceive Christ spiritually by
Faith, consenting to the Angelical Salutation, but also conceived him
corporally, in her own Womb. How then does the spiritual reception by Faith
exclude the substantial Communion of Christ's Body in St. Austin's Opinion?

Paragraph III.
IN the Third Place you cite his Comment on the 98th Psalm, where treating of
the scandal which the Disciples took at that saying of our Savior, except ye
eat the Flesh of the Son of man, and drink his Blood, he brings in our Savior
speaking thus to them, ye must understand spiritually, what I have said unto
you, ye are not to eat this Body which ye see, and to drink this Blood which
shall be shed by those that shall crucify me, I have commended a certain
Sacrament to you, which being Spiritually understood, will give you Life.

This is as much as to say, be not scandalized, that I told you, ye shall eat
my Flesh, and drink my Blood, ye shall not eat it as ye imagine, in the shape
you see it, bruzing, cutting, digesting my Flesh. I Speak of a Sacrament, when
I commend the eating of my Body; It Is this Sacrament you shall taste, touch, and
see in outward appearance. The Spiritual intelligence by Faith will
(discovering there my Body remaining invisibly) vivify you. What more
conformable to the Doctrine of Transubstantiation?

This I shall endeavor to manifest in examining the sense of these two
Propositions, which contain the force of your Argument. 1. Ye must understand
spiritually what I have said. 2. Ye are not to eat the Body which ye see.

The Word Spiritually, excluding the Carnal sense of the Capharnaits,
establishes a miraculous or a supernatural understanding. So when St. Paul
says, Isaac was born according to the Gal. 4. 29.
Spirit, He did not deny by this, that Isaac was born of the Flesh; but
declared that the Power of God was required to fecundate the barrenness of his
Mother. In like manner, when St. Austin names this Word Spiritually, or Word of
Spirit, he does not deny that the Bread is Flesh, but intimates that the power
of God is required to quicken Bread into the Body of Christ. And thus the first
Proposition, Ye must understand what I have said spiritually, does not at all
diminish the reality of Christ's Substance in the Sacrament.

The Second Proposition, Ye are not to eat this Body which ye see, properly
denotes the Quality or diverse existence of Christ's Body. Thus St. Ambrose said
that the change of Life is sufficient to verify this Speech, I am not I, I
justified, am not I a sinner, L. 2. de Paenia, c. 20. Ego non sum ego.
and yet I am the same man in substance.

Thus St. Lanfrancus answered Berengarius, alleging the same Passage which you
object out of St. Austin, It Is not the same, if we consider the manner of
Christ's L. Avers. Bereng.
existence in the Sacrament, it is the same if we regard Idem quoad substantiam,
non idem quoad modum.
the Substance.

Thus the very same Passage is cited in Gratian with this addition, Ye are not
to eat this Body which ye see, I have recommended a certain Apud Gratian. de
Consecratioue, d. 11.
Sacrament to you, which being Spiritually understood Ipsum and non ipsum,
Ipsum invisibiliter and non ipsum visibiliter.
will give you Life, ye are to eat him, and not to eat him, ye are to eat him
visibly (under the species of Bread) ye are not to eat him visibly in the shape
of Flesh.

And lest we should doubt of the reality of his Flesh in the Sacrament, St.
Austin has left us this invincible Argument, in the same Place of your
Objection, He will (says this Father) give us that Flesh, which he received
from Mary, in which he walked on Earth, and De Carne Mariae Carnem accepit, in
ipsa Carne hic ambulavit, and ipsam Carnem nobis manducandum dedit, nemo illam
Carnem manducat nisi prius adoraverit.
which is first to be adored, before we receive it. Language which the Church
of England will censure for Heresy!

Paragraph IV.
YOU instance this Testimony, According to that Flesh which Tract. 5. in John.
was born of the Virgin Mary, ye shall not have me, He is ascended up into
Heaven and is not here.

The forementioned Solution satisfies this Objection, for we are not to have
him in his Natural Existence, we are to receive him in a Sacramental Existence.

Thus the variation of state and change of life caused the great Apostle to
say, there were two Bodies in man, The Animal Body, 1 Cor. 15.
and the Spiritual Body; The Animal Body is a poor Passenger upon Earth,
struggling with Passions, and restless Agitations. The Spiritual Body, is the
glorified Corpse, when Soul and Body meet in Eternity. It is sown a Natural
Body, says St. Paul, it Epl. 146. Seminatur corruptibile surget incorruptibile.
shall rise a Spiritual Body. Which St. Austin thus expresses, It is sown a
Corruptible Body, it rises an Incorruptible Body.

The diverse existence of Christ's Flesh, in Heaven, and on the Cross, was
sufficient to St. Jerome, to call it a Divine Body, Cap. 1. ad Ephesians. Aliam and
aliam.
and a Terrene Body. These two Bodies are but one in Substance, the same in
Heaven, the same on the Cross, the same which the Virgin brought forth, and the
same in the Sacrament, Who eats, says St. Austin, of this Flesh let him first
adore it. Adoration testifies what it is.

Paragraph V.
YOU allege this Similitude from St. Austin, As the Sacrament of the Body of
Christ is in some manner or sense Christ's Body, Ep. 23. ad Bonifacium.
and the Sacrament of his Blood, is the Body of Christ, so the Sacrament of
Faith, (meaning Baptism) is Faith, which the gloss, De Consecratione 2. hoc est.
of the Canon Law, thus expounds. It Is called the Body of Christ, that is, it
signifies the Body of Christ.

Boniface inquiring how Infants, when they are baptized, are said to believe,
and renounce the Devil, was thus instructed by St. Austin; A Sacrament, or holy
sign, is honored for the most part with the names of the things themselves, by
reason of which Similitude the Sacrament of Faith, (Baptism) may be called
Faith, which Infants receiving are said to believe. This Answer exacting a
confirmation, obliged the holy Prelate, pitching upon the Similitude of the
Sacrament, to cast his Eyes precisely on the sole outward appearance of the
Symbols, which in some manner or sense, are Christ's Body and Blood. Not
according to the truth of the thing, as the Gloss notes; or as St. Anselme
exxpresses, the visible appearance of Bread is not the Body of the Lord, except
as the Canon St. Ansel. Tract. de Sacram. Altaris, c. 1. Similitudo illa Panis
per se inspecta non est Corpus Domini.
Law expounds it, improperly and after some manner, as it signifies and
contains the Body of Christ.

What is signified or contained is the Mystery, which is not prejudiced by the
foregoing Speech? For a Mystery properly speaking, is some invisible thing.
Such is that of St. Paul, If I know all Mysteries or hidden St. Paul, 1 Cor. 17.
things. And the Roman Orator expressed Si noverim Mysteria omnia. 3. De
Oratore. Hoc tacitum tanquam Mysterium teneas.
himself after the same manner, when he said, Keep this secret, as a Mystery.

The visible appearance then of Bread, though not the true Body of Christ, may
be called improperly Christ's Body; and yet the thing signified or contained
under this appearance be the true Body of Christ. Or as Faith infused by
baptismal regeneration, to use St. Austin's comparison, is true Faith; so the
thing received in the Sacrament, is the true Body of Christ.

Paragraph VI.
YOU add this remarkable Passage of St. Austin, cited by Gratian; As we receive
the similitude of his Death in Baptism, Apud Gratian. de Cons. d. 2. sect.
utramque.
so we may also receive the likeness of his Flesh and Blood; and so neither may
truth be wanting in the Sacrament, nor Pagans have occasion to make us
ridiculous for drinking of the Blood of one that was slain.

St. Austin here delivers the strict Practice of the Church in his days, hiding
from the Pagans the Mystery of the Sacrament; and adds this Reason, in the same
place: If the Disciples of our Lord could not patiently receive what our Lord
said, how will these Incredulous endure us teaching Si Discipuli patienter
far nequiverunt quod Dominus Dixit, quomodo ferunt ista increduli?
the same Doctrine? But of this more hereafter.

Nor does this Learned Father more exclude the reality of Flesh, calling it the
likness of Flesh: Than St. Paul, saying, St. Paul, Ephesians. 2.
Christ appeared whilst he lived, and conversed with Sinners upon Earth, in the
likeness of Man, denied that he was truly Man.

It Is true, many Dissenters from the Catholic Church, and Heretics, grounding
themselves on this Scriptural Passage, Christ appeared in the likeness of Man,
eagerly taught, that he was a Phantasm, or Appearance, not a natural Man,
composed of Flesh and Bone. And you, their Faithful Imitator, gloss after the
same manner, not upon Scripture, but upon a single Passage of one Father, and
this too borrowed from Gratian.

But with how little reason you gloss after this manner, these following
Passages of S. Austin, taken out of the same Gratian, will farther demonstrate.
Ibidem. Veritas, dum Corpus Christi and Sanguis, virtute Spiritus S. ex Panis
and Vini Substantia efficitur; figura, quod exterius sentitur.
The First is part of the Canon, wherein your Objection is contained. These are
his Words, What exteriorly appears (in the Sacrament) is a Figure; the Truth is
the Body and Blood of Christ, made of the Substance of Bread and Wine. De Cons.
d. 11. can. 41. Fideliter fatemur ante consecrationem esse Panem and Vinum,
quod Natura formavit, post consecrationem vero Christi Sanguinem, quod
benedictio consecravit.
The Second Passage is, We faithfully confess it is before Consecration, Bread
and Wine, which Nature made; but after Consecration, the Flesh and Blood of
Christ, which Benediction consecrated. Can. 57. Panis quem ego dabo, determinat
quomodo sit Panis, non solum secundum verbum, quo vivunt omnia, sed and
secundum Carnem assumptam pro mundi vita.
The Third is the meaning of that Passage of our Savior, The Bread which I
will give, in the 6th of St. John; which words determine in St. Austin's mind,
How Christ is Bread, not only as he is the Word, which gives all things life;
but also according to the Flesh assumed for the life of the World. Is this not
real Flesh?

Paragraph VII.
YOU mention but one more Testimony, but so clear a one, as it is impossible
any man in his wits, that had believed Transubstantiation, could have uttered.
It is in his Treatise, de Doctrina Christiana, where laying down several Rules,
for the right understanding of Scripture, he gives this for one. If the Speech
be a Precept forbidding some heinous wickedness, or commanding us to do good,
it is not figurative; if the contrary, it is figurative; for example, except ye
eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood, ye have no life in you:
this seems to command a heinous Crime, therefore it is a Figure, commanding us
to communicate of the Passion of our Lord.

If I should deny, that St. Austin speaks here of receiving the Sacrament, you
would be puzzled to find out a warrant for your famous Assertion. For many
Learned Writers judiciously remark, that these words, except ye eat of my
Flesh, in Saint Austin's Sense may be thus explicated, except ye eat it by
Faith, by Piety, by Good Works, which is a Spiritual Communion (out of the
Sacrament) of the Passion of our Lord. And if this be true, as it is more than
probably so, St. Austin says here what all Catholics profess; For we all say we
may communicate spiritually of the Passion of Christ by Faith believing in
Jesus, when we receive not the Sacrament; and yet we believe in the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation.

But if you will still keep this Holy Father, whose Learning has always been
the Admiration of Mankind, out of his wits, to use your Phrase; a slight
reflection, supposing he speaks here of Sacramental Communion, will help him to
return to himself, and reconcile him to the Catholic Affirmation.

I think one of a mean Capacity can distinguish the manner of eating, and the
thing eaten. Which if true, St. Austin may literally understand the thing eaten
in the Sacrament, to be the true Flesh of Christ, God and Man; and yet at the
same instant hold, that the manner of eating this Flesh, (to which this
Passage, except ye eat my Flesh, has referenee) is Spiritual. For although the
true Body be taken in the shape of Bread, into the Mouth, and let down into the
Stomach, yet it is not ground with the Teeth, or separated in pieces. We are
taught after a Spiritual manner to eat the Flesh of the Son of Man. Lissen to
the Voice of God, and you will hear the Gospel mention eating a Man, take, eat,
this is my Body. The manner is Spiritual, Matthew. 26.
for the Body is given in the shape of Bread; and in this Sense St. Austin
calls these words, except ye eat my Flesh, a figurative Speech. The Substance
or the thing eaten is not here mentioned by the Saint. But it is the true Body
of Christ, as the same Saint assures us L. 2. Contra Advers. Leg. and Proph. c.
9.
elsewhere in these Lines; We believe (in the Hominem Christum Jesum Carnem
snam nobis* manducandum bibendumque Sanguinem dantem fideli card, atque ore
suscipimus, quamvis horribilius videatur, Humanam Carnem perimere, quam
manducare, and Humanum Sanguinem potare, quam fundere.
Sacrament) with faithful heart and mouth the Mediator of God and Man, Christ
Jesus, giving us his Body to be eaten, and his Blood to be drank, although it
appear more horrible to eat, than to kill Human Flesh; to drink, than to spill
Human Blood.

Every word almost instances a new Argument, for the truth of the Flesh. This
oral receiving with mouth God and Man; This horror of eating and drinking Flesh
and Blood; this Antithesis between eating and killing, drinking and spilling,
terminated to the same substance, leaves not the least scruple to doubt, that
the thing eaten is real Flesh and Blood. And pray what horror would there be,
to eat an Image of Flesh? or what Language speaks of killing the Figure of a
Man? The same Saint, in his Exposition on the 33d Psalm, has this Passage; In
Psalm. 33. In quo tanta perpessus est.
He Is truly our Lord, who truly gave us his Body to eat, in which he so much
suffered. Elsewhere he says, the Faithful receive into their Contra Faustum, l.
2. c. 10. Sanguinem quo redempti sunt.
mouth that Blood which redeemed them. And in his 27th Treatise on St. John,
speaking of St. Peter's Confession, I find this remarkable Sentence; You are
Christ the Son of the living Tract. 27. in John. Tu es Christus Filius Dei
vivi, nec das in Carne and Sanguine tuo, nisi teipsum.
God, and what you give in your Flesh and Blood, is nothing else but your own
self.

Now you must acknowledge the way I have prescribed, or find some other
expedient, to reconcile St. Austin's Wit with the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, or all the World will imagine, you put your own to a
desperate adventure.

Article VII.
YOU mention two Testimonies out of Theodoretus's Dialogues between a Catholic
under the name of Orthodoxus, and a Heretic under the name of Eranistes, who
maintained with the Eutichians, that the Humanity of Christ after the
Ascension, was changed into the Divinity. I Will examine each apart.

Paragraph I. The Dispute of Orthodoxus and Eranistes in the First Dialogue.
ORthodoxus undertakes to show that the Humanity of Christ always remained.
This he proves, because the Humanity was a Vail or Garment to the Divinity, as
we read in Genesis, where Jacob prophesied of the Messiah, He washed his Genesis
49.
Garment in Wine, and his Clothes in the Blood of the Grape. Eranistes replys,
this is understood literally of his proper Habit, with which he was clothed
upon Earth. Orthodoxus resumes, that Jesus called himself the Vine; and the
Fruit of the Vine, is Wine; and the Blood of our Savior is called the Blood of
the Vine. And if our Savior be called the Vine, and the Fruit of the Vine, is
Wine; and from the side of our Savior ran Fountains of Blood, on the rest of
his Body: The Prophet rightly foretold that He washed his Robe in Wine, and his
Cloths in the Blood of the Grape. Again speaking to Eranistes, he pursues with
another Simile, Jesus called his Body Bread, and his Flesh Wheat; But in the
institution of the Sacrament he called Bread his Body, and Wine his Blood;
Though naturally the Body is called the Body, and Blood is called Blood; but
our Savior changing the Names, gave to his Body the Name of Symbol, and to the
Symbol or Sign, the Name of his Body. Eranistes urges to know the cause of this
change of Names. Orthodoxus answers, Nothing more easy to the Faithful. For he
would have those who partake of the Divine Mysteries, not to attend to the
nature of things, which are seen, but by the change of Names, to believe the
change which is made by Grace; for he who called that, which by nature is a
Body, Wheat and Bread, and again called himself the Vine, he honored the
Symbol with the name of his Body and Blood, not changing nature, but adding
Grace to nature. This is a full view of the matter in debate.

We ought to reflect, that as Theodoretus compares here Scriptural passages,
wherein they resemble one another, and consequently acknowledges the Similitude
of the already mentioned Expressions. So also was he not ignorant of their
differences. And therefore he said, Jesus Per nominum mutationem mutationi quae
ex gratia facta est fidem adhibere.
changed the Names, that by their change the Faithful might believe, that
alteration which Grace effected.

The change of names is acknowledged to proceed from a change made in the
Sacrament. For he obliges the Faithful to believe a change which is made, not
in the nature of things which are seen, for the natural Signs or outward
appearances remain; it must be then in some inward thing, not seen, or
Substance of the Symbol effected by Grace, or the Word of God. This in another
place he professes in these Words, Christ gave his precious Body not only to
the Eleven Apostles, but also to the Traitor Judas. This cannot be properly
Grace added to Nature, for Judas received his own condemnation. It must be then
the Body of Christ Comm in Epla. ad Cor.
made by Grace of the Substance of Bread, and added to the Nature or remaining
appearance of the Signs which was given to the Traitor.

Paragraph II. Upon the continuation of the same Discourse in the Second
Dialogue.
ORthod. What are those Symbols, which the Priest offers to God? Eranist. They
are Symbols of the Body and Blood of our Lord. Orthod. Of the true Body?
Eranist. Of the true Body. Orthod. Very right. Eranist. Very well. Orthod. If
these Divine Mysteries represent the true Body, the true Body of Christ is not
changed into the Divinity. Eranistes perceiving himself caught, cunningly
retorts the Argument, in the like manner. How do you call these Symbols after
consecration? Orthod. The Body and Blood of Christ. Eranist. Do you believe you
receive the Body and Blood of Christ? Orthod. I do believe. Eranist. Therefore
as the Symbols of our Lord's Body and Blood, are one thing before the
invocation of the Priest, but after the invocation are changed and become
another thing, so the Body of our Lord after his ascension, is changed into the
Divine Substance.

If Orthodoxus had not believed that the Symbols were truly changed in
Substance after consecration, how could Eranistes have deduced the change of
the Human Nature into the Divine Substance? He could not argue this out of his
own principle. For admitting no Body of Christ in Heaven, how could he pretend
a real Body of Christ in the Sacrament? whence the Protestant Centuriators say,
Theodoretus dangerously Cent. 5. c. 10. Periculose dicit.
affirms, that the Symbols of the Body and Blood of Christ after the invocation
of the Priest are changed, and become another thing.

Orthodoxus answers, you are caught in your own net, because the Mystical
Symbols after Consecration do not pass out of their own Nature, for they remain
in their former Substance, Figure and Appearance, and may be seen and handled
even as before.

As Bread is properly said to have Substance and Nature, which are neither
seen, nor handled; so likewise the Accidents of Bread may be said, though not
so commonly, to have their own Nature and Substance, which may be seen and
handled. St. Aug. Enarr. in Psalm. 68. Quod nulla substantia est, nihil omnino
est.
Whence that of St. Austin, What is not a Substance is nothing at all. It Is in
this sense Orthodoxus holds, the substance of the Symbols remains. And lest we
should doubt what this substance is, he tells us it is Figure and Appearance.
Nor is this a constrained interpretation: For what more usual, when we have
uttered some word, either harsh in expression, or difficult to be understood,
than forthwith to add another, softer in Language, and more obvious to the
Hearer. Thus Theodoretus saying, They remain in their former substance, adds,
that is, they remain in their former Figure and appearance, and may be seen and
handled, even as before. Nor are these latter Expressions referable to
Substance, strictly taken for the inward thing, because this properly, is
neither seen nor handled.

Now if you ask what these Symbols are interiorly, Theodoretus Intelliguntur ea
esse quae facta sunt, and adorantur and creduntur.
confesses, they are, what they were made, Christ's Body. And they are believed
and adored as being those very things which they are believed. Which Words, if
the Bread be not substantially changed into Christ's Body, teach plain Idolatry.

Nor could Orthodoxus say the interior Substance of the Symbols, was not
changed, in his own Opinion; for this he had already granted, in these Words,
They are changed and become after consecration another thing.

Orthodoxus pretends indeed that he caught his Adversary in his own Net. But
this was not because Eranistes believed the Substance of the Symbols was not
changed into Christ's Body; for he thought Christ's Body was no where extant.
How then was he caught in his own Net? He was caught in his own Net, because
these Mystical Symbols, were not changed in appearance, (for after consecration
they may be seen and handled) and they were Symbols still of Christ's true
Body, which Eranistes had formerly granted; and therefore there was a true Body
of Christ; and so the Body of Christ was not changed into the Divinity, as
Orthodoxus had argued. Thus Eranistes was caught in his own Net.

Nor ought Theodoretus to be censured for Singularity, in giving the Name of
Nature and Substance, to accidental Beings. For St. Hilary gives the same to
Proprieties; Saying, That the Flames St. Hilary. Naturam suam amiserunt.
in the Babilonian Furnace, lost their Nature, though the Substance of the Fire
remained.

Innocent the Third, that Venerable Pope and Father of the Church, under whom
was defined the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, frankly concedes the Natural
Proprieties of Bread remain, ut paneitas. And Cardinal Pole, another great
Vindicator of the same Tenet, says, Though there be only Flesh and Blood in the
Sacrament, notwithstanding the Nature Card. Pole, p. 8. c. 3. de Euch. Cum in
Dominica mensa sit solum Caro and Sanguis, nihilominus Vini natura percipiatur.
of the Wine may be tasted. I would have you likewise argue, that these Authors
are against Transubstantiation.

Article VIII. Upon Gelasius the Pope.
THESE Words of Gelasius, The Substance of Bread and Wine, does not cease to
be, are already satisfied by what I have said to Theodoretus, that is, the
outward shape of Bread remains. And if these Words immediately following what
you objected, had been cited, the difficulty would have been removed. They (the
inward Substance of Bread and Wine) pass by the operation of the Holy Ghost
into a Divine Nature, yet remaining in the propriety of their Nature. It is
only the Proprieties of the Nature of the Bread and Wine, the Color, and the
Taste, that remain. The Substance is changed; For how could the inward Substance
of Bread and Wine pass by Divine operation into Christ's Body, and not cease to
be? how can a Protestant pass into the Roman Catholic Church, and become a
pious Member thereof, and not truly cease to be a Protestant?

This Gelasius is not the learned Pope Gelasius; and I need not Gelas. de duab.
Not. Bib. Psalm. Tom. 4.
labor to prove this. Your own Critics write, that that Treatise de duabus
naturas, whence you borrowed this Objection, belongs to some other of the same
Name. I shall instance only one reason. This Author ranks the Works of Eusebius
Caesariensis among those of the Orthodox Fathers, which cannot be said of the
pious and learned Pope Gelasius, who numbers the same Eusebius in his own
Authentic Works, with Apocryphal Writers. There is then not one of our Popes
against Transubstantiation: And if you cannot alledg one Pope from the
beginning of Christianity, who teaches contrary to what is now professed in the
Roman Church, concerning this contested Article of Faith, is it not a great
Argument that it was always taught in the Church of God?

Article IX. Upon Facundus.
FAcundus the African Bishop, justifying Theodorus Mopsuestenus, Facund. p. 144.
who had said, That Christ also received the adoption of Sons, reasons thus,
Christ vouchsafed to receive the Sacrament of Adoption, both when he was
circumcised and baptized; and the Sacrament of Adoption may be called Adoption,
as the Sacrament of his Body and Blood is by us called his Body and Blood.

The intern Grace of the Holy Ghost received in Baptism, properly constitutes
us the true Sons adoptive of God, which could not be conferred on our Savior;
for he was enriched with the plenitude of perfection, and was the natural Son
of God. Yet Christ may be said, Facundus urges, to receive the Adoption of
Sons, because he vouchsafed to receive Baptism, the Sacrament of Adoption. Then
seeking an Example to verify that Baptism may be called Adoption, though it was
not, but only contained the Grace of Adoption, was forced instancing the
Blessed Sacrament, barely to consider the Sacrament in the outward Species of
Bread in the Eucharist, which may be called the Body and Blood of Christ;
because it contains the Body and Blood of Christ. What is contained in Baptism,
is it not the proper Grace of Adoption? and what is contained in the
Consecrated Species, is the true Body and Blood of Christ.

Can any after this believe, that what you have objected, prejudices in the
least the Universal and received Doctrine of the Christian Church, of Bread and
Wine substantially changed in the Sacrament into the proper and true Body and
Blood of Christ?

What you repeat by way of Appendix, the Names of some Catholic Divines, is
inconsiderable. Only this I can say, you might have more prudently omitted them
in your own behalf, than changed their Words in detriment to the Scotus, l. 4.
and 11. q. 3. n. 18. ad 3. In Council. Lat. Ubi-explioicite ponitur veritas,
aliquorum Credendorum magis explicit quam habebatur in Symbolo Apostolorum,
vel Athanasii, vel Nicaeni, and breviter, quidquid ibi dicitur esse Credendum,
tenendum est esse de substantia Fidei.
Catholic Doctrine. For Scotus only says, that the truth of some Articles, is
more explicit or manifest in the Lateran Decrees, than it was in the Symbols of
the Apostles, or in the Athanasian Creed, or that of Nice; and in a word, what
ever is here defined (in the Council of Lateran) is to be held as a sincere
part of our Faith.

Durandus does not say, that he would have been of a contrary Opinion, had not
the Church defined for Transubstantiation; but only tacitly insinuates, that he
would have made use of the Bread and Wine, remaining with the Body of Christ in
the Sacrament, which was possible to God, though really false, in order to
solve some Objections, had not the Canon of the Church intervened. Nor ought we
to be surprised at this. For Durandus ordinarily walked Durand. 4. and Numb. 9.
on the brink of Faith in Assertions, and therefore Substantia Panis and Vini
convertitur in substantiam Corporis and Sanguinis Christi. Quamvis iste modus
sit de facto, non est tamen negandum quin alius modus fit Deo possibilis, scil.
quod remanente substantia Panis and Vini, Corpus and Sanguis Christi esset in
Sacramento.
merited the Title of Temerarius Doctor in the Church of God. These are his
Words, The Substance of Bread and Wine is changed into the substance of the
Body and Blood of Christ; yet although this be really true, it was possible to
God that the Body of Christ might have been in the Sacrament, with the Et Numb.
18. Sed quia hic modus non debet teneri, de facto, cum Ecclesia determinavit
oppositum, quae non presumitur errare in talibus: ideo tenendo de facto aliam
partem, respondendum est ad argumenta quae sunt in contrarium.
Substance of Bread, which is not really true, for the Church has decreed the
contrary, and she is presumed not to err in her decisions; Therefore holding
the Bread changed into Christ's Body, I answer to the contrary Objections.

Tunstal Bishop of Durham says, from the beginning of Christianity, no body
doubted of the real presence of Christ in the Sacrament, and that the Learned
Ancient Writers looked upon the manner, how the Bread passed into Christ's
Body, as inscrutable and not to be searched into, lest we should seem to tempt
Christ with the Capernaits, doubting how this can be? But through
God-almighty's power, Tunstal de Euchar. Sed Omnipotentia Dei cui nihil est
impossible, his qui cum Innocentio in eo Concilio interfuerunt visum est, quod
is modus maxim, cum verbis hisce Christi, hoc est Corpus meum, congruere illis
visus est.
to whom nothing is impossible, the change of Bread into Christ's Body (by
Transubstantiation) seemed to Innocent the Third, and those who sat with him in
Council, to agree most with these Words of Christ, This is my Body. And he
censures those who deny this change, with impudent boldness, and opposes them
to Christ; saying, If we believe them (who profess your Error) neither Si illis
credimus, nec Christus, nec Spiritus Sanctus id efficere possit, ut panis in
Corporis Christi substantiam transeat.
Christ nor the Holy Ghost, can change Bread into the Substance of Christ's
Body, whose Word made all things of nothing.

Tell me what was Erasmus's Thought, and I Will answer what Religion he was of.
In some places he favors the Lutherans, oftentimes he is a Catholic; I am sure
he is not a Protestant in that Epistle to Conradus; If you are persuaded there is
nothing besides Epistola ad Conradum Pellicanum do Euch. Si tibi persuasum est
in Synaxi nihil esse praeter Panem and Vinum, ego membratim discerpi malim quam
profiteri quod tu profiteris, and omnia perpeti malim, quam tali flagitio
contra meam conscientiam admisso ex hac vita migrare.
Bread and Wine in the Sacrament, I had rather be torn in pieces, than profess
what you profess.

If Alphonsus say there is seldom mention in Ancient Writers Alph. a Castro de
Hers. l. 8.
concerning Transubstantiation, these seldom Intimations are sufficient to
show, that 'twas always taught in the Church of God, which ought to convince
any unbyased Understanding.

CHAP. II. An Account of the coming in of Transubstantiation.
I Have already done this to your hand. 'Twas instituted by our Savior. I
suppose then you mean a particular Account of the coming in of the Error
against Transubstantiation, and by what attempts and degrees it was advanced
against the Romish Church.

The first Opposers of this Doctrine, were the Capharnaits, who scandalized at
our Savior's Promise, cried out, How can this Man give us his Flesh to eat?
This was seconded with the Complaint of his own Disciples; This is a hard
saying, and who can hear it? Both were taxed with Incredulity, as St. John In
Psalm. 24. and Tract. in Joan. Dux and Antisignanus.
writes in his Sixth Chapter. And St. Austin calls them Heretics, Judas heading
them as their Prince and Leader, in whom, without our envy, you may triumph and
glory. How often have you been incredulous with the Capharnaits, saying, How
can he give us his Flesh? How often with the unfaithful Disciples murmured,
who can endure this Doctrine?

A second attempt was, as St. Paul delivers, made by the Corinthians, 1 Cor.
11. Non credentes. S. Aug. Ep. 118. c. 3. Non credentes in Euch. contineri
verum Christum.
who not distinguishing the Body of our Lord in the Sacrament, from Bread and
Wine, became incredulous, Not believing. Not believing what? St. Austin
replies, the true Body of Christ to be contained in the Eucharist.

A third Essay must be acknowledged in the Simonits, Menandrians, Gnostics, and
Marcionists, who placing in Christ only a Phantasm, indirectly rejected the
verity of Christ's true Body and Blood in the Sacrament.

A fourth Opposition was from some of the Arians, who thirsting after Spiritual
Grace, were not solicitous for any Corporal Presence, as we learn from St.
Cyril, and St. Gregory Nazianzen. St. Cyril. Alex. in John, l. 10. c. 13.


In the Year 740. we read of certain Heretics meeting together St. Greg. Naz.
Orat. 2. de Paschate.
for the taking away of Images, who gave this reason; That our Lord having left
no Image of himself but Bread, which is the Image of his Body, we ought to make
no other Image of our Lord. This Conventicle, which then was esteemed Heretical
in the Christian World, you mention, make Orthodox, and oppose it to the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation.

You are here again mistaken, for there was no Sect of Men who professed at
this time in any place of the World your Opinion against Transubstantiation.
For these Heretics taking the word Image interiourly, for the Substance it
self; said, that as our Savior deified Flesh which suffered Ex Pseudo-Synodo
Iconomacorum An. 740.
for man's redemption, so (constituting the Eucharistic Bread, not a false
Image of his natural Flesh) he did ordain it should be made, the Priest
Eucharistiae Panem, ut non falsam imaginem, naturalis carnis per S. Spiritus
adventum Sanctificandum Divinum Corpus fieri voluit mediante Sacerdote.
mediating by the sanctification of the Holy Ghost, his Divine Body. These
Words, as containing the Roman Belief, were approved in the Nicene Synod. Nor
did the Writers of the Roman Church, condemning their Heresy which pulled Nic.
2. Dimisso mendacio tangunt paucillum quid veritatem Divinum Corpus dicentes
fieri.
down and destroyed Images, charge them with any disbelief of the real
Presence, or Transubstantiation.

These Iconoclast Heretics indiscreetly naming the Bread the Image of the Body
of Christ, gave probably occasion to the following Writers to dispute how it
was an Image. Amongst whom Scotus Erigena, toward the end of the Eight, or
beginning of the Ninth Century, went so far, that he said, 'twas only an Image
of the Body. Scarce had he broached this new Doctrine, but he was straight
censured by the Writers of those Times.

Hincmarus accused him that he called the Sacrament a remembrance only of the
true Body and Blood Hincmarus in Scot.
Memoria tantum very Corporis and Sanguinis Christi.
of Christ. Prudentius Bishop of Troy, and Ebbo Prelat of Grenoble, confuted
the same Erigena. Nor did this Scotus decline the sinister Opinion of Pope
Nicholas, in his Letter to Charles the Bald, Scotus's great Patron and Friend.
Yet we never read that Scotus ever replied in defense of his Error, and so
seemed in some manner to retract what before he had imprudently spoken. His
Followers were but few, and those too, taught this Error underhand, so
fearfully, that no body could accuse them of open Heresy, or convince them not
to be Catholics. Thus this Infant Embrio of Error covered in the Shell of
darkness, was at length hatched and brought forth by Berengarius in the twelfth
Age.

Berengarius was born at Tours in France. After he had finished the ordinary
courses of Studies, he taught Grammar and Philosophy. Then he was made
Treasurer in St. Martin's Church. About the Year 1149, he went for Angers,
where he was kindly entertained, and constituted by Bruno the Arch Bishop, his
Archdeacon. Here he began to sow several Errors; Viz. That Children were not to
be baptized; that Marriage might be dissolved; that our Savior could not enter
in where his Disciples were, The Door's shut; as we learn from Guitmundus,
Theoduinus, Januis Clausis.
and St. Anselm. He added a fourth Error, which is to our present purpose, That
the consecrated Guit. l. 1. contra Bereng. Theod.
Ep. ad Henricum Galliae in Bib. Pp. St. Anf. de Sacram. Altaris, c. 3.
Bread was only a Figure of Christ's Body. Which, that he might the better
maintain, he kept poor Boys to School, educating them in all manner of
Learning, that so by money and interest, he might have many at his command. But
alas all in vain, for this Error no sooner was vented, but it was opposed by
many Learned Writers. Among these, were St. Lanfrancus, St. Anselm, In suis
Libris de Corpore and Sanguine Domini.
Guitmundus, Durandus, Algerus, In Exempl. ad Bereng.
Adelmannus, Hugo Lingonensis, Humbertus, In Ep. adv. Petrum B.
Petrus Cluniacensis, In cap. 26. Matthew.
Euthymius, L. 2. de Sacramento, p. 8. c. 7.
Hugo Victorinus, L. 4. Sect. d. 11.
Petrus Lombardus. And the same Berengarius more than once abjured his Error,
which during his life was nine times condemned in nine several Councils. The
first at Rome under Leo the Ninth. The Second at Vercells. The Third in the
Convent of Brion, according to the desires of Henry Duke of Normandy, to whom
he fled for protection. The Fourth at Paris. The Fisth at Tours, by order from
Pope Victor. The Sixth at Rome under Nicholas the Second. The Seventh at
Poictous in France. The Eighth at Rome under Gregory the Seventh. The Ninth at
Bourdeaux, under Hugo Bien Bishop and Legate of the Baron. ad Ann. 1055, etc.
See Apostolic in France. This we have from the Writers of those times cited in
Baronius. The last abjuration of this Heresy made by Berengarius, was real.
For after ten years Penance, he died peaceably in the Bosom of the Church. This
we have from L. 3. de gestis Angl.
William of Malemsbury, In Henrico 2. Imp.
Matthew Paris, Vincentius Bellovacensis; and what is most convincing, we read
in an Old Manuscript, in St. Martin's at Tours, these Words, Obiit Magister
Berengarius, Grammaticus fidelis, et vere Catholicus. An. Dom. 1186. Many of
those whom he had perverted, imitated his pious return to the Church, and his
Penance. Others more unfortunate, propogated this Figurative Exposition, and
Exclusion of Christ's Body in the Sacrament, after the best manner, Industry
could invent, and Craft execute.

Hence you may gather what diligence the Enemy of Mankind used; how often he
was forced to repeat, almost the same Stratagems, before the fearful Error
durst publicly appear, or was able to stand in any corner of Christendom.

Pray now compare, if you please, the rise of Transubstantiation with the
beginning of the opposite contradiction; and acknowledge without prejudice or
partiality, which of the two ought to be sincerely embraced. Whether will you
believe, Nine several Councils, or Berengarius an Apostate, who yet afterward
recanted? Whether the Holy Fathers, who vindicated this Catholic Doctrine, St.
Austin, St. Hilary, St. Ambrose, St. Cyril, St. Justin, St. Ignatius Martyr; or
the Marcionits, Menandrians, Simonits, all Heretics, who deny the Substantial
Body of Christ? Whether lastly, you believe St. Paul, or the Erring
Corinthians; St. John, or the incredulous Jews; our Blessed Savior, or the
Contradicting Calvinists? I leave you to your own choice, whilst I pursue your
third Principle.

CHAP. III. Examen of your Solution given to Mr. Arnauld 's Demonstration.
MR. Arnauld, a learned man in France, pretended very rightly, that it was
impossible, that our Doctrine, if it had been new, should ever have come in, in
any Age, and been received in the Church, and consequently it must of necessity
have been the perpetual Belief of the Church in all Ages. For if it had not
been always the Doctrine of the Church, when ever it had attempted first to come
in, there would have been a great stir and bussle about it, and the whole
Christian World would have rose up in opposition to it. But you have shown no
such time, when first it came in, and when any such opposition was made to it,
and therefore it was always the Doctrine of the Church.

It is true, you would fain have me believe, that Rabanus, Archbishop of Mentz,
and Heribaldus, Bishop of Auxerre, and Bertram opposed this Doctrine with all
their might. But what you have alleged from their Writings, do not convince
me. Bertram indeed says, the Writers of that Age talked according to their
several Opinions, differently about the Mystery of Christ's Body and Blood, and
were divided by no small Schism. But what was this Schism? This Schism or
difference according to Bertram, precisely consisted in two Questions. First,
Whether there was a Figure in the Mystery. Secondly, Whether the Bread that was
changed into Christ's Body, was the Natural Body of Christ, which was born of
the Virgin Mary.

Bertram in the first part of his Treatise undertook to show, that there was a
Figure in the Mystery, as the conclusion of his Discourse in the end evidences
in these Terms; From what I have heitherto spoken, it is clear, that Bertram de
Corpore Domini.

Ex his omnibus quae hactenus dicta sunt, monstratum est, Corpus and Sanguis
Christi, quae fidelium ore in Ecclesia percipiuntur, Figurae sunt, securdum
Speciem visibilem. At vero secundum invisibilem substantiam, Corpus and Sanguis
Christi vere existunt.


the Body of Christ, which the Faithful receive into their Mouths, is a Figure,
if we regard the visible Species. And lest any one should impeach him of Error
in the Sacrament, he straight added, But if we consider the invisible Substance
the Body and Blood truly there exist, Grounding himself upon this Principle,
that the Substance of Bread was changed, and the outward appearance only
remained, he could not conceive how his Adversaries (who, though they
faithfully believed with Bertram and the Church, that the Bread was changed
into the true Body of Christ, yet they denied there was any Figure in the
Sacrament) could reconcile Quo credunt destruere comprobantur, Corpus etenim,
Sanguinemque fideliter confitentur, and cum hoc faciunt, non hoc jam esse quod
prius fuere procul dubio potestantur, and si aliud sunt quam fuere mutationem
accepere.
Faith with their Opinion. And this was his Reason; For if the Bread and Wine
were another thing than they were before Consecration, they were changed. And
if the Substance was changed, the visible species which remained must be a
Figure.

Rabanus speaking of the Second Proposition, viz. Whether the Bread, which was
changed into the Body of Christ, was the Natural Body of Christ, declares, that
it was not the Body of Christ received from the Virgin Mary in its natural
existence, but that it was the true Body which he received from the Virgin
after a Supernatural and Sacramental Permanency.

The first Opinion which he rejects, he charges with Novelty, Ep. ad Heribald.
c. 33.
in the passage you cite, Saying, Some of late not having a right Opinion,
concerning the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of our Lord, have said; that
this is the Body and Blood of our Lord which was born of the Virgin Mary, and
in which our Lord suffered upon the Cross, and rose from the Dead: which Error
we have opposed with all our might.

The other, which was the belief of the Church, he thus delivers: God effected
whatever he would in Heaven and on Earth. From hence he deduces, that Bread is
changed into the Body of Christ; and therefore adds, it is no other Flesh, no
other truly than what was born of the Virgin Mary, De Sanguine Domini, cap. 3.
and suffered upon the Cross, and rose from the Non alia Caro est, non alia
plane, quam quae nata est de Maria, and passa in cruce and resurrexit de
Sepulchro.
Sepulcher. And who does not believe this, if he had seen Christ upon the Cross
in the likeness of a Servant, how would he have understood he was God, unless
Et cap. 3. At vero quisquis ista non credit, Si vidisset Christum in Cruce in
specie servi, quomodo Deum illum intelligeret, nisi per fidem prius credidisset?
Faith had prevailed with him to believe? And in the 42 Chapter of the same
Book, he speaks thus; It is the same Flesh, which was given for thee and for
all, and hanged upon the Cross, because truth Cap. 42. Neque aliam Carnem quam
quae pro te, and pro omnibus tradita est, pependit in Cruce, quia sic veritas
testatur, hoc est Corpus meum, quod pro vobis tradetur, and de Calice, hic enim
Sanguis meus est, qui pro vobis effundetur in remissionem peccatorum.
testifies, This is my Body which shall be given for you; and of the Chalice,
This is my Blood, which shall be spilt for you, for remission of Sins.

From hence it is plain, that what is now the very Doctrine of the Church of
Rome concerning the Sacrament, the two Learned Authors you have alleged,
Bertram and Rabanus, never opposed.

But you tell us, though for a more clear and satisfactory Answer to the
pretended Demonstration of Mr. Arnauld, you have consented to untie the knot,
yet you could without all these pains have cut it. If you strive to cut it with
no more skill than you have endeavored to untie it, the work must be the labor
of some Nobler Champion. It Is true, you make use of (in hopes to do the
business) Diogenes plain stroke of experience o'recoming Zeno's denial of
Motion, by walking before his Eyes. Is then the Doctrine of Transubstantiation
not the belief of the Primitive Church, because Diogenes walked before Zeno 's
Eyes? A wilder Proceeding I never heard of from any Christian Divine; and the
bare relation of this matter of Fact, is a full confutation thereof.

From the Pagan Philosophers, you run for assistance to the Servants in the
Parable, who could not give any punctual account when the Tares were sown, or
by whom: Yet it was manifest they were mingled with the good Wheat. From hence
you hasten to the Civil Wars of our Nation, where at length our King his
Gracious Majesty, Charles the Second of Great Britain, was happily restored to
his Crown, without a great deal of fighting and Bloodshed. From this place you
take your journey into Turkey, and bring down the Grand Vizier (invading
Christendom, and besiegeing Vienna) who was not opposed by the Most Christian
King, who had the greatest Army in Christendom in a readiness.

Whilst I ruminate these Similitudes, I cannot easily conceive, how you can
join our Great Monarch's happy Restoration, in a Simily with Tares, where
Wheat was sown, and with the Grand Seigneur invading Christendom, and not give
occasion to the Reader to think you either wanted circumspection in the choice
of your Arguments, or imprudently left a suspicion of your Loyalty.

And I wonder how a man of your great Wit and Judgment, could prevail with
himself to conclude the Nullity of Mr. Arnauld's solid reasoning from
Experiences or matters of Fact, that have nothing at all to do with the
Sacrament? Why must Mr. Arnauld's Demonstration be weak and insufficient,
because the Christian King, not long since reposed in peace, with his great
Army; or some time ago our Gracious Monarch of happy memory, was restored to
his Crown; or because St. Matthew wrote the Parable of the Tares? All the Reason
in the World is too weak to make good any such way of proceeding. But to answer
precisely to what you assimilate them in, (viz. from these Comparisons you
would prove, that the Controverted Doctrine might silently have come in, and
without opposition, although the particular time and occasion of its first
rise, could not be assigned;) Did not a considerable part of Christendom with
all their might oppose the Turkish Invasion? and if all had been quiet, would
not Vienna have been surprised and pilledged? Was all England ignorant of the
Restoration of our Gracious Monarch; and were there none to be found to
witness his coming in? were not the Tares, as soon as they sprung up, seen and
discovered? But no body, except Heretics, ever opposed Transubstantiation; No
body but Rebels rofe against the right Prerogative of their Prince.

And what has the Parable of the Tares to do with the Blessed Sacrament? The
same confidence is sufficient to extend the same Comparison to the rest of our
Christian Mysteries, and proves just as much, that is, nothing at all, except
Christianity be nothing else but Tares.

SECT. III. Of the Infallible Authority of the Present Church for this Doctrine.
YOU say, the Roman Church made and obtruded upon the World this Article,
merely by virtue of her Authority, Seeing not any sufficient reason, either
from Scripture, or Tradition, for the belief of it.

The Roman Catholic Church never taught any of her Children, that She had Power
from God to make an Article of Faith. But She teaches us, that two Conditions
are required for the constitution of an Article of Faith. First, Revelation
from God. Secondly, The Declaration of an Ecumenical Council. Where these two
agree, that we are taught, is part of our Belief.

And I shall desire you will only peruse these words of the Council of Trent,
which intimate the Reason, why the Church of God declared for
Transubstantiation; and I am persuaded you will believe She did not define this
Doctrine, neither warranted with Scripture, nor Tradition. For the Council says;
Because Christ our Savior truly said, Council. Trid. Sess. 13. cap. 4.
that was his Body, which under the Species of Quoniam autem Christus Redemptor
noster, Corpus suum id quod sub specie Panis offerebat, vere esse dixit, ideo
persuasum semper in Ecclesia Dei^ fuit, idque nunc denuo Sancta haec Synodus
declarat per consecrationem Panis and Vini conversionem fieri totius
substantiae Panis in substantiam Christi Domini nostri, and totius substantiae
Vini in substantiam Sanguinis ejus, quae conversio convenienter and proprie a
Sancta Catholica Ecclesia Transubstantiatio appellata est.
Bread, he offered; therefore the Church of God was always persuaded, and this
Holy Council declares again the same, that by the consecration of Bread and
Wine, the whole substance of Bread is changed into the substance of the Body of
our Lord, and the whole substance of the Wine into the substance of the Blood,
which Conversion is conveniently and properly called by the Council,
Transubstantiation.

SECT. IV. Of the Necessity of such a Change for the benefit of the Receiver.
THE Spiritual Efficacy of the Sacrament depends upon receiving the thing,
which our Lord instituted, and a right preparation and disposition of mind,
which makes it effectual to those Spiritual Ends, for which it was appointed.

As God might without any Baptismal Water, without any visible Elements, have
washed away the Stains of Original Sin, and given Spiritual Regeneration: So
could he have made the worthy Receivers true Partakers of the Spiritual Comfort
and Benefit designed to us in the Lord's Supper, without any substantial change
made in the nature of Bread and Wine.

But as we cannot say, the Water in Baptism, and Symbols are unprofitable, as
things are instituted by God, and useless for the cleansing of Original Sin: so
likewise ought we not to pretend, that the Flesh of Christ is useless, and
profits nothing to the worthy Receiver of the Sacrament, because Christ
without this may give us the benefit or fruit of the Sacrament.

God might have pardoned the World, if his only begotten Son had not undergon
so many griefs and anguishes, so much pain, and that ignominious death of the
Cross. Yet who dare say this Flesh was not true Flesh, or profited nothing,
which redeemed all the World? If it profited on the Cross, why does it not
profit in the Sacrament? And if it profit not without Faith, how can it profit
those who believe not?

The very thought of our Savior's Substantial Presence in the Sacrament,
strikes much a deeper impression of Devotion in my Soul, than if I reflected on
bare Symbols or Signs weakly exciting Faith in me.

And even when a Terrene Prince visits Prisons, or in a Solemn Pomp enters the
Capital City, his Corporal Presence customarily frees many Criminals from
Chains, Fetters, and Imprisonments, which the Law would otherwise not have
granted, nor the King consented too: And yet one word of command is sufficient
to do greater execution.

SECT. V. Of the Power of the Priest.
WE acknowledge a Power in the Priest, which is not in the People. All were not
constituted Apostles, all were not Doctors. But we do not acknowledge a Power
in the Priest to make God, as you calumniate us: we acknowledge a Power in God
to change one Substance into another, Bread into his Body. Till you prove this
impossible, (which is impossible to be done;) you will give us leave to believe
God is in the right possession of his Omnipotency, and loses nothing of his
Power by your Detraction. And if you count this Miraculous change no Miracle,
give it what Title you please; we will not dispute the Name, if you contradict
not the thing.

And thus I have dispatched the first part of my Answer, which was to vindicate
the real Grounds and Reasons of the Church of Rome, for this Doctrine.

PART I
MY Second Part was designed to answer your Objections, which are of so much
the less force, because I have already shown, this Doctrine sufficiently
warranted with Divine Authority; and this easily weighs down, and overthrows
whatever Probabilities Sense can suggest, or Reason invent. These Probabilities
you reduce to these two Heads, First, The infinite Scandal of this Doctrine, to
the Christian Religion. And Secondly, The monstrous and insupportable Absurdity
of it.

CHAP. I. Of the infinite Scandal of this Doctrine to the Christian Religion.
AND this upon four accounts. First, by reason of the Stupidity of this
Doctrine. Secondly, The real barbarousness of it. Thirdly, The Bloody
consequences of it. Fourthly, The danger of Idolatry.

Article I. Of the Stupidity of this Doctrine.
TUlly the Roman Orator, says, When we call the Fruits of the Earth Ceres, and
Wine De Natura Provid. lib. 3. Et quem tam amentem esse put as, qui illud quo
vescatur, Deum credat esse?
Bacchus, we use but the common Language, but do you think any man so mad, as
to believe what he eats, to be God? I am of Cicero's Opinion. And all
reasonable People look upon Poetical Fancies, as Extravagant Reveries. But I
hope the Law of Christ, is neither Poetical nor Fabulous. I remember the Poets
sing how Minerva the Goddess of Wisdom was born of Jupiter's Understanding.
Harken, says Tertullian, a Fable, but a true one, like to this. The Word of God
proceeding from the Thought of his Eternal Father. This Likeness, or Similitude
of Poetical invention, diminishes not in the least, the truth of the Son's
Divinity. Nor ought the Stupidity of eating God, in Tully's Opinion, ridicule
our Savior's own Words, Take, eat, this is my Body.

Averroes the Arabian Philosopher, acknowledging in his time this Doctrine, to
be the Profession of all Christians, ought to Dionys. Carth. in 4. d. 10. a. 1.
make (not what you say, the Church of Rome) the Church of England blush,
objecting that the whole Society of Christians then, every where admitted
Transubstantiation. I have traveled, says he, over the World, and have found
diverse Sects, but so sottish a Sect or Law I never found, as is the Sect of
Christians, because with their own Teeth they devour God, whom they worship.

It was great stupidity in the People of Israel, to say, Come let us make us
Gods; but it was civilly said of them, Let us make us Gods that may go before
us, in comparison of the Church of England, who calumniously make the Catholics
say, let us make a God, that we may cat him; when we only say, God has power to
change Bread into his Body.

But the greatest Stupidity of all is, that in all Probability you think those
common Juggling Words of Hocus Pocus are nothing else but a corruption, of Hoc
est Corpus, by way of a ridiculous Imitation of the Priest of the Church of
Rome. I grant this Imitation is very ridiculous. And you are the first Juggler
with this Divine Mystery, and with our Savior's own Words, that ever I read of
in my life. But with all the Legerdemain, and Juggling tricks of Falsehood and
Imposture, you will never make me believe you, sooner than I do the Scripture.

Nay, if Averroes, Cicero, and a whole Progeny of Heathen Philosophers, were
as great Jugglers as your self, and altogether designed to put a Trick upon me,
you should never juggle me, by the Grace of God, out of my Faith in Christ.

And Lastly, If I should ask counsil of the Philosophers (as you do in the
concern of the Sacrament) to know the true cause of this Universe, Heraclitus
would tell me Atoms produced it; Pythagoras would send me to the Marriage in
Numbers; The Valentinians would bring me to the four Principles, which made the
Treatise of Peace between Verity and Silence, Light and Profoundness. But
whilst I let them enquire one of another, what gave being to these Atoms? who
thought these Numbers? whence came this Verity? what is the Origin of this
Silence? the Source of this Light? the Prop of this Profoundness? I rest
contented in mind, and instructed with this Passage of Moses; In the beginning
God created Heaven and Earth: God is the Cause of all things. Cicero may
dispute with his false Gods: And Averroes may deride Christians: A Jugler may
laugh at our Savior's Institution. These words, this is my Body, silences them
all, St. Aug. de v. Apli. c. 7. Tu disputa, ego credam.
and excites me to say with St. Austin, Dispute You, I will believe.

Article II. Of the Barbarousness of this Doctrine.
THE eating Man's Flesh, in its proper shape, is no doubt very barbarous. But I
think the eating our Savior's Flesh under the Species of Bread and Wine,
appears barbarous neither to Sense, nor to Reason. Theophil. c 6. in John.
(...).
Theophilact asks (in John 6.) Why does it not appear Flesh to us, but Bread?
and Answers, lest we should have horror to eat it. And what you St Chrysostom. Hom.
24. in 1. ad Cor. Quid est hoc horribilius? quid autem amabilius.
call horrible, St. Chrysistom calls amiable. For what more Kind than to give
himself?

But you cannot imagine the Ancient Christians ever owned any such Doctrine,
because then we should have heard of it from the Adversaries of our Religion in
every Page of their Writings.

This cannot be expected. For very few Pagans concerned themselves with the
Rites of Christianity: And of these the most Famous complain Christians
concealed the Doctrins they professed. Hence that Murmur of Cecilius in
Minutius Felix, Why are the Christians careful to hide and steal their Worship
from Men's eyes, since Honesty is never ashamed to face Light? And Celsus
disgusted Apud Origin. (...), l. 1. cont. Celsum.
upon the same account, calls our Religion a Clandestin or hidden Doctrine. To
which Origin occurs. It Is true, there are some Points among us not communicated
to all the World, nor is this peculiar to Christians. The Philosophers observed
two sorts of Principles, some were public and common to all; others were
private, and the Science of particular Disciples. It Is therefore in vain Celsus
undertakes to discover the Secrets of Christians, not knowing in what they
consist. St. Austin, and St. Aug. Tract. 11. in John.
St. Denis the Areopagite teach the same. And yet whether the Pagans knew them,
or knew them not, you will have them revile our Mysteries in every Page of there
Writings. St. Dionys. Hicr. l. 3. c. 3.


Nor are you contented with this, for you add, With what confidence would they
have set the Cruelty used by Christians in their Sacrament, against their God
Saturn's eating his own Children, but that no such Argument was then objected
by the Heathens to the Christians, is to a wise Man instead of a thousand
Demonstrations, that no such Doctrine was believed.

Now sure I am nonplust. For how can I solve an Objection which stands instead
of a thousand Demonstrations? What Author will happily fall into my hand, or
dictate how our Adversaries gathered from Slaves and Captives a rude Relation
of this Mystery, which was matter enough for them to hit us in the Teeth, in
requital of Saturn's eating his Children, with the killing and feasting on
Flesh and Blood?

This Passage perchance of Tertullian may suffice any sober Understanding,
Tertull. Apol. c. 7.
that the Pagans did not omit such a return you seek after; We are (says he)
called wicked Infanticides, (Child Dicimur Infanticidae and Pabulo crudi --
killers) and nourished with raw Flesh.

Athanagoras comes nearer, and reminds us how the Pagans with confidence set
the cruelty used by Christians, in their Sacrament, if not against the God
Saturn's, at least against Thyestes's (another like History) eating his own
Child. We are impeached, says he, (by Pagans) of Three Anathag. in Apol.
horrible Crimes, of taking away the Gods, of Thyestean (...).
Banquets (eating of a Child,) and of Incests. St. Justin Martyr fits you with
Saturn's own Fable. It Is reported (says he to the Pagans) we St Justin Apol. 1.
in fine.
practice Saturn's Mystery; and killing Man, exercise, (...).
with hands full of goar, all the cruel and bloody Rites of your Idolatry. Now
sure I may conclude with you, that because such a thing was then objected by
the Heathens to the Christians, it is to a wise Man instead of a thousand
Demonstrations, that the Doctrine of Transubstantiation was believed in
Primitive Ages, and then modestly vindicated from these foul Aspersions.

Article III. Of the Bloody Consequences of this Doctrine.
IF this Doctrine had been the occasion of the most Barbarous and Bloody
Tragedies, to use your words, that ever were acted in the World, the Enemies of
Christianity would have hit them in the Teeth with these Cruelties of terror,
fury and rage; and what endless Triumphs would they have made upon this
Subject? But that no such thing was objected by the Heathens, is to a wise Man
instead of a thousand Demonstrations. And what you want here of Authority, you
supply and make up in a zealous appearance of Devotion, breaking into this
Exclamation; O Blessed Savior! who can imagine that ever Men should kill one
another, for not being able to believe contrary to their Senses; for being
unwilling to think that thou should make one of the most barbarous things
that can be imagined, a Principle of thy Religion; for not flattering the
Presumption of the Priest, who says he can make God.

This is certainly to run headlong into Hell in Heavens Road, wheedling the
People into Blind Ecstasies, with Hypocritically crying out, O Blessed Savior!
But all who says, O Lord, O Lord, Non omnis qui dicit Domine, Domine, intrabit
in Regnum Caelorum.
shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Examine your own Prayer, and
Reason will find matter enough to discuss, and Conscience more to correct.

What Catholic ever said, First, That Men should kill one another; Secondly,
That the most barbarous thing in the World is a Mystery of Religion; Thirdly,
That we flatter the Priest, who says, he can make God?

These are as true, as your Prayer is without Calumny or Hypocrisy. They are
as true, as there were Execrable Murders committed to drive People into this
Senseless Doctrine, by no Body, in no Place.

But they are not as true as the Doctrine of Transubstantiation was delivered by
Christ and his Apostles, taught by the Consent of the Fathers, Divinely
revealed and propagated to Posterity; and so free from Stupidity, quiet from
Cruelty, and a Pious Mystery of our Religion.

Article IV. Of the Danger of Idolatry.
IF we should be mistaken, as you suppose, about this Change through the
crosness of the Priest (which God forbid it should happen) not pronouncing the
words of Blessing or Consecration, we should not at all be guilty of Idolatry
For believing only one true God, we profess there is infinite Distance between
him and all Creatures: and therefore we cannot so honor any Creature, as we do
the true God. Nor is our Intention ever determined by the Will to adore any
thing which is not God; So that if the Host were not, through mistake,
consecrated by the Priest, the Peoples Adoration would be terminated in Christ,
where e're he is, because it is directed to God, and not to a Creature. The
Pagans, it is true, or Persians cannot be excused from Idolatry, in worshipping
the Sun, because erring from the knowledge of the true God, they direct their
Adoration to what is not God, but a Creature.

Mr. Thorndyke, one of the great Lights of your Church, was Thorndyk 's Present
State of Religion, c. 1. p. 7.
so convinced in this point, that he professes, should this Church (of England)
declare that the Change, which we call Reformation, is grounded upon this
Supposition (of Idolatry in the Church of Rome,) I must then acknowledge that
we (Protestants) are the Schismatics.

CHAP. II. Of the Monstrous Absurdity of this Doctrine.
TO show the Absurdity of this Doctrine, you are contented to ask these few
Questions.

Question 1. Whether ever any Man have, or ever had greater evidence of the
truth of any Divine Revelation, than every Man has of the Falsehood of
Transubstantiation.

Answer. If we had no surer Evidence of Revealed Truth, than every Man has of
the Falsehood of Transubstantiation, we should have no true Evidence for
Christian Religion; And thus by your First Question Christianity would
immediately be dispatched out of the World.

Quest. 2. Supposing the Doctrine had been delivered in Scripture in the same
words, which we read in the Council of Trent, You ask, by what stronger
Argument could any Man prove to me, that such words were in the Bible, than I
can prove to him, that Bread and (...) Consecration are Bread and Wine still?

Answer. The Sense of the Council of Trent, and that of the Scriptures are one
and the same. If therefore I can but appeal to (...) Eyes to prove such words
to be in the Bible, as you do appeal to your Senses to prove that Bread and
Wine remain after Consecration; what the Scripture says, is evidently true
according to the Testimony of Sense; and your Testimony from Sense of the
substance of Bread remaining, is evidently false. I have great assurance of
this. For St. Paul forbids me to believe an Angel, if he should come down from
Heaven, and teach me contrary to what is writ in Scripture. As this is the
substance of Bread, and not my Body, is contradictory to, this is my Body. And
what Prerogative enjoy you beyond that of an Angel? And if you draw one way
with your Evidence of Sense, and Scriptural Evidence from Sense draw another
way, is it not evident that your evidence is good for nothing?

Quest. 3. Whether it be reasonable to imagine, that God should make that a part
of Christian Religion, which shakes the main external Evidence and Confirmation
of the whole? You mean the Miracles which were wrought by our Savior and his
Apostles, the Assurance whereof did at first depend upon the certainty of Sense?

Answer. With great Reason and Justice you appeal to the Senses of those, who
say, they saw the Miracles which were wrought by our Savior, and his Apostles;
because their Eyes were the proper Witnesses of Miracles: So with the same
Reason and Justice I appeal to my Senses to prove, that the words which teach
the Doctrine of Transubstantiation are in Scripture, because Paper, Ink,
Syllables, and words, are the proper Objects of Seeing, feeling, and hearing.
How then does the Catholic Tenet shake the main External Evidence of the
Christian Religion, when this external proof of Sense evidences, from
Scripture, Transubstantiation?

Quest. Whether our Savior's Argument were conclusive or not, proving to his
Disciples after his Resurrection, that his Body was risen, Luke 24. 29. Behold
my hands and my feet, that it is I my self, for a Spirit has not Flesh and
Bones, as you see me have.

And if seeing and handling be an unquestionable Evidence that things are what
they appear to our Senses, then the Bread in the Sacrament is not changed into
the Body of Christ.

Answer. Sense, in its own Objects, is frequently certain; and here we may rely
on it. According to this Principle, the Argument which our Savior used, did
certainly prove to the Disciples, that what they saw and handled, was his true
Body. For affirmation of Flesh and Bones rightly follows from feeling and
seeing. These Actions belong properly to the experience of Sense. Besides, we
have all this recorded in Scripture. And our Savior made use of all other
Arguments imaginable to confirm the Mystery of his Resurrection.

In some Circumstances the Senses may deceive us, and then we ought not to rely
on them. Thus the Jews, designing to precipitate our Savior from the top of a
Mountain; Jesus, as Luke 4.
we read in Scripture, passed through the crowd, and departed, and the whole
Multitude, trusting to that Information which Sense gave them, believed he was
a Ghost, or Apparition. In like manner, the same true Body of Christ is
substantially present in the Sacrament after a Spiritual Existence; and
therefore it is not the proper Object of Sense; and so we cannot here rely on
our Senses. We must then trust to something else, viz. to the Testimony of
Scripture, which is the Rule of Faith, to know surely what Substance or Body
lies under the Species, or appearance of Bread.

Now the Scripture teaches us, that the Bread in the Eucharist is the Body of
Christ, This is my Body; and, the Bread which I Matthew. 26. John 6.
will give is my Flesh. If it be the Flesh of Christ, as we learn from
Scripture, then the Substance of Bread remains not; for the remaining
Substance, at the same time, cannot be the Substance of Bread, and the
Substance of the Body of Christ. Moreover, our Savior left many other
Testimonies in confirmation of this Verity. Our Belief is grounded on our
Savior's Words; and what more secure than to build on this Immovable Rock of
Truth.

Now what shall I say, but that your whole Discourse has been levelled at our
Savior Jesus Christ, and his Testimonies, against which the Gates of Hell
shall never prevail.

And I finish with these words of St. Austin. When the Opinion of Error has
prepossessed Man's St. Aug. l. 3. de Doct. Christ. c. 13. Si animum
praeoccupaverit alicujus erroris opinio, quidquid aliter asseruerit Scriptura
figuratum homines arbitrantur.
Mind, whatever Scripture shall say in opposition to his Senses, he supposes a
Figurative Interpretation. Oh that this Figurative receiving Christ in the
Sacrament, presage not a Figurative embracing of the same in the next World!
and so you clipping the Shadow for the true Body, lose for ever Eternal
Happiness.

Ecclesiae Judicio Subjecta sunto.
FINIS.

