A SERMON Preached at St. Michaels Church in CAMBRIDGE, on the 26th of JVLY
1685. Being appointed the DAY of Public Thanksgiving FOR HIS MAJESTY'S late
VICTORY over the Rebels.

By WILLIAM GOSTWYKE Fellow of Trinity College.

CAMBRIDGE, Printed by John Hayes Printer to the University. And are to be sold
by H. Dickinson Bookseller there, and by Walter Davis in Amen-Corner. London.
1685.

A SERMON Preached at St Michaels Church in Cambridge, on the 26th of July 1685.
Prove. 11. 21. Though hand join in hand, the Wicked shall not be Unpunished.
THE Wisdom of Solomon though it was much engaged in the contemplation of
natural things, yet since it was obtained of God for the better government of
that People that was committed to his charge, can never be supposed to have
been more signal in any point than in Political Observations. He as a King
well understood the Duty of his Place, the Power that was reposed in him, and
the Obedience that was required of them whom God had placed under his Command:
He knew the things that contributed to the happiness of a Kingdom, and what
were the most likely means either to establish, or shake his Throne, and
therefore in the Words before us forewarns his Subjects against Popular Tumults
and Insurrections, shows them the danger that there was, though they were many,
and He but One, of entering into Leagues and Associations against their King.
But if the Jews gave ear to this as the instruction of a wise and prudent
Governor, it recommends it self to us with a more pressing obligation of being
registered among those Truths which we acknowledge to proceed from God; and from
that stamp of the Divine Authority impressed upon it, we may reap this
advantage, That though the World presents us only with a prospect of our danger
from the Heat and Fury of an Audacious People, the Church (that always was the
refuge of the Godly) suggests unto us more comfortable meditations of Safety
and Deliverance. Here we have ancient and undoubted Monuments of Gods
protection of his People, and out of them this Maxim drawn by the observation
of the Wisest Man, That Insurrections of wicked doers cannot be prosperous,
that neither Strength nor Multitudes can render their Attempts successful, or
secure them from Defeat, but though hand join in hand, though there be Numbers
combined together, yet shall they not escape Gods righteous judgment, or go
away unpunished.

The joining of hands has always been the symbol and token of friendship, and
an engagement of mutual Help and Assistance; but what is friendship amongst
good and honest Men, is amongst wicked People conspiracy in iniquity, always
designed to the mischief of more Righteous persons than themselves, and
therefore bad in whatsoever sort of men are engaged in it; but if it be against
their Prince, against their Laws and Government, then it amounts to Treason and
Rebellion, the worst of Crimes. So that in Treating of these Words I shall show
you

First, The Heinousness of this Sin, when wicked Men join hand in hand and
combine together, and

Secondly, Present you with some Reasons whence you may conclude, they shall
not be unpunished.

First, Of the Heinousness of this Sin, which is so hateful both to God and
Man, as it has been adjudged in both the Courts of Heaven and Earth, to be
capital above all other. How highly God detests it, we may hear him speaking
by the mouth of one of his Prophets. 1 Samuel 15. 23. Rebellion is as the sin of
witchcraft, and Stubborness is as iniquity and idolatry. Witchcraft is nothing
less then a renouncing God, and entering into a Solemn League and Covenant with
his greatest enemy the devil: Idolatry is the forsaking Him to whom we owe the
highest Worship and Allegiance, and paying a Devotion to them that are not
Gods; whom we unjustly set up over us, attributing an Imaginary power to them,
who are not able either to secure themselves, or give any succor or
protection: and then how nearly is Rebellion joined, how fitly to be compared
with either of these, is easy to be observed in all its Proceedings. For
Rebels either renounce their Allegiance to their natural Prince, who is and
should be in Gods stead over them; and join themselves to some that is his
Enemy, as in the case of Witchcraft, or else they set up Heads of their own,
and pay their worship to the Works of their own hands, making them Rulers whom
they know to be no Such, and stand in fear, and reverence of a power of their
own Creating; which is but too conformable to the notion of Idolatry: then like
the foolish Israelites, though they knew it was their Priest that made the
Molten Calf, at their own Charges, and the expense of their own Gold, and that
but Yesterday, yet to such Idols must be ascribed the glory of the noblest
Actions; These must become the Workers of a blessed Reformation; It Is by their
guidance People must be brought from ignorance and Superstition, to the Light
and Truth of the Gospel; even according to the letter of the old Song, Exodus
32. 4.
These are thy Gods O Israel that brought thee up out of the land of Egypt.

It Is by this Name the Idolatry of the Israelites is often branded, of which
God thus complains, Ezekiel. 20. 8. They rebelled against me, and would not
hearken unto me; and wherein this Rebellion did consist he proceeds to
illustrate, in that they did not every man cast away the abominations of their
eyes, neither did they forsake the Idols of Egypt. And in the 1st of Isai. v.
2. he is introduced proclaiming of it to all the World, Hear O Heavens and give
ear O Earth: for the Lord has spoken; I have nourished and brought up
Children, and they have Rebelled against me. So great a Crime as this not
deserving to be put up in silence, or whispered in the ear, nay the house-tops
were not high enough to proclaim it from, but the whole Creation is made to
ring with the loud Infamy of so great a Wickedness. And how detestable it is
amongst Men, the concurrent practice of all Nations will attest, so tender do
their Laws declare them of the Person of their Prince, that it is esteemed
Sacred; and they have Scripture too to warrant that Respect, which has said of
Prince that they are Gods. Psalm. 82. 6.


And our own Laws have so provided for Them and their Security from any Actual
Violence, that they have made it Capital only to Meditate, and Design it; that
according to the counsel of the Preacher, Eccl. 10. 20. we should not curse the
King, no not in our thought, nor the Rich in our bedchamber, for fear of some
extraordinary providence that should discover our Malice; lest a bird of the
air should carry the voice, or that which has wings should tell the matter.

But not to trouble you any farther with the Heinousness of this Sin, which all
good Christians do acknowledge and heartily detest, I shall only desire you to
consider whence they that practice it took their first pattern; 'Twas Satan was
the ringleader of the Rebels, who ventured to level his Ambitious thoughts at
the Majesty of Almighty God, and taught his Followers by imitating his
Wickedness, to exercise the patience, and disturb the Happiness of Gods
Vicegerents upon earth: so that we may say of them in our Saviors words, Joh.
8. 44. They are of their father the Devil, and the lust of their father they
will do. He was a Rebel from the beginning, and is still such, while he
promotes his Kingdom by these his Instruments and Assistants; who of all Men
are most likely to be rewarded with a considerable portion in it; beside some
other punishment which you may be assured will overtake them, as I propounded
for the Second part of my Discourse, if you will consider

First, Who it is that Wicked men engage against in their Rebellion, and that
is not only Man but God: for as St. Paul says, Romans 13. 1, 2. There is no
Power but of God, the Powers that be are ordained of God. Whosoever therefore
resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God; and what will be the
Effect thereof he further declares, they that resist shall receive to
themselves damnation; which as without repentance they are ascertained of; Heb.
10. 31.
so fearful a thing it is to fall into the hands of the living God: yet that
they may not wholly seem to be put off to a Future punishment, which Men of
their principles may possibly give no belief to,

We may conceive in the second place the Wrath of a King (which without
Solomon's telling them they well enough know to be Dreadful as the Messengers
of Death) may torment them with the fear of approaching Justice; Prove. 16. 14.
which by certain though perhaps slow degrees will go on to overtake them.

For can we think that God who has made so good provision for the Lives of
heathen Princes, that commanded all men to pay Obedience, even to the Enemies
and Persecutors of the Church of his Son (for such the Powers were, the
Emperors that then ruled when St. Paul wrote his Epistles) and will he leave
the Nursing Fathers of his people, those that resemble Himself in the
similitude of their Love and Tenderness to his Flock, as well as in the Power
they have received from him? Can we, I say, imagine that such should be left
destitute of his Immediate protection? who being as they ought to be, not a
Terror to Good Works must needs be such to the Evil; Romans 13. 4
and as they are ordained Gods Ministers for good to us, -- 5.
so are they in like manner by him appointed Revengrs to execute wrath upon him
that does evil: who having the Justice of the Cause on their side, fight to
maintain Gods right as well as their own, have a good Conscience animating them
within, have the Hearts and Hands of all that are Loyal, the Prayers of all
that are Devout to assist them. Such Forces are not easily overthrown, by Men
whose consciences fly in their faces; whose guilt conveys more fear into their
Hearts, than their Despair of pardon (whence commonly their Rage proceeds) can
supply them with of valor and resolution.

But it is true that Temporal punishment has not always been allotted to
Rebels and Traitors; sometimes their Arms have prospered in despite of Justice,
and their Impiety has been rewarded with Victory and Success; yet we have
known such Men before this time who have found a Turn of their good Fortune,
and by their Infamous and Deserved Deaths have left a Testimony to the World,
that Rebellion though it may be successful, is not always long-lived; and if
such wicked Courses may at some time raise a man High, yet they never put him
out of danger or fear of Falling: and such a Man's punishment cannot always be
deferred which Justice longs to inflict on him, either by the open force and
power of his Prince; or the Secret Treachery of his own Party. For who can
repose sufficient Confidence in them whom their Allegiance could not contain
within the bounds of Loyalty? And there are Examples to be found, of Men that
have bought their peace with the Lives of their Confederates, and by giving up
their Fellows Heads, made composition for their Own. Which we may be the rather
induced to believe, if

Thirdly, We consider what bad entertainment Rebellious practices have hitherto
found in the world; in that he that has once dared to violate the Majesty of
Kings, has seldom found all the Hands that he could join together sufficient
to uphold an Usurped Throne; and has taught others to bear no more respect to
himself than he has showed, and given them besides, a pretense to dispossess
him for Unjustly Invading another Right: which being once taken away, and
Power become the Rule of Justice; there have often risen up a Sort of Men
pretending to it, who never failed to give one another their Deserved
punishment.

I shall not mention any thing in Humane Writers to illustrate this, but
confine my self wholly to Divine Authority; especially because the Spirit of
Rebellion that any time within these late Years has been Disturbing the peace
and happiness of these Kingdoms, has always made pretenses to Religion,
wherewith it sought to color and maintain its Wickedness.

Abimelech the son of Gideon was an early Usurper of the Liberties of his
people, Judge. 9.
and strengthened himself by the Confederacy of the Shechemites, and the murder
of Seventy of his Brethren; yet after three years time, himself became a means
to punish those his Instruments in wickedness, with the destruction of all
their City, for their Rebellion against him; and He received his punishment by
the hand of a Woman, God making use of the weakness of that Sex to destroy him
that had many Hands and a great Army joined with him.

'Twas the consideration of some such Divine vengeance to ensue, that
restrained David's hand from slaying Saul, 1 Samuel 24.
whom though his bitter Enemy, and at that very time seeking his Life, in that
he was the Lords Anointed he would not kill, though he had a notable
opportunity, though he was instigated by his Servants with the remembrance of
the promise of the Lord, 1 Samuel 26.
to deliver his Enemy into his hand, that he might do to him as it should seem
good unto him. Whereas could Opportunity have tempted him to a Rebellious
thought, or his Confidence in the Strength and Valor of his Assistants have
wrought him to an Action which he acknowledged no man could do and be
Guiltless, he might as easily have cut off his Head, as the Skirt of his Robe,
and taken away his Life, as the Spear which was set to defend it. But it is no
wonder if a righteous Man would not venture on such a piece of Wickedness
(though with some reason he might have promised himself Freedom from being
punished for it by any Humane means, being so well accompanied with such
Valiant Men so ready to defend the Fact) when even a Woman (and she too one of
the wickedest upon record) had so much Natural Religion in her, as to think no
Condition, how great soever, safe and exempt from Vengeance if it were
purchased by Rebellion: 'twas Jezebel I mean, who seeing Johu entering the
Palace after he had slain her Son, 2 Kings 9. 31.
his King, Jehoram, charge him with Rebellion, and by a late example
denounces the like Vengeance to him, that Zimri had who slew his master. So
much a Woman that slighted justice in other matters, thought it not possible to
be avoided when such a horrid Crime called out to Heaven for it.

And thus indeed it usually has fared with them that think to force their
passage to a Crown, most commonly they have perished in the Attempt; or if they
have possessed themselves of their Desires, yet then, not all the Strength that
they could make, and Guards they set upon their Persons, could render them
Secure from punishment, but usually God has raised up some to pay them what
they have deserved, and render them the fruit of their own Inventions.

And if after so fair warning any that take Rebellious Courses should think to
succeed better at last, it appears to me a sign not only of wicked and depraved
Manners, but of stupid and sottish Minds; Can they imagine their Hands were
stronger than theirs that went before them? yet surely they cannot think to
escape Gods justice, or deliver themselves out of his hand.

What shall we think, but that as such Men do approve themselves to be very
Evil persons, so have they in a special manner appropriated to themselves one
Character of the Wicked used in Scripture, being Men that forget God, or have
not known him? and that they have as little reason to pretend to Religion as to
Loyalty, and that their Absurdity is as great when they declare they stand up
for Religion, in opposition to the Ordinance of God, and the Directions of the
Apostles, as theirs that formerly pretended to maintain the Authority of the
King, to the Ruin of his Kingdoms, and the Destruction of his Person.

I hope it will be needless at this time of day to persuade men not to cheat
themselves with such nice Distinctions, which one word of sound and real
Wisdom will presently solve, and this the Wise man teaches, that you should
fear the Lord, and the King for his sake, that you should make your Religion
the foundation of your Loyalty, Prove. 24. 21, 22.
and not meddle with them that are given to change, For their calamity shall
rise suddenly, and who knows the ruin of them both?

Now God be praised we do; and by his mercy are able to retort upon our
Republican Party their own Argument drawn from Success, which when it goes
along with the Right Side, is then indeed only proper to be urged as a Token of
Gods Favor and Approbation. For we have seen the Counsels of Crafty men
defeated, and the continued Designs that have been hatching several Years,
brought to naught in a short while, the Numbers that were joined overthrown and
broken, and those that were Expected, rendered Incapable to do Themselves or the
Kingdom more Mischief: and though their Strength was formidable, and their
Confederates many, yet when we think how they are brought to punishment, we
must needs acknowledge the Truth of the Text, that Wicked Men cannot escape
without it.

For to say nothing of the private Lives of those that were the Leaders in the
late Rebellion, which were sufficient to discountenance their pretenses to any
kind of Religion; their open Violation of all Honesty and Godliness, Plundering
and Killing Men, Ravishing Wives and Virgins, Defacing Churches, and profaning
Altars, are sufficient to show their Character, and to cry up to Heaven for
Vengeance, and make Gods Justice glorious now it is fallen upon them.

And now let us lay hold of the Occasion, by reflecting on Gods judgments upon
others, to implore the continuance of his Mercy to our selves in this General
Blessing; that God would grant the King a Long and Happy Reign, and save Him
from the hands of all His enemies, whom whether it shall please Almighty God to
clothe with shame of their Proceedings for their Conversion and Repentance; or
by permitting them to go on in their own Obstinate and Destructive Ways, to
bring to their Deserved Punishment; yet may his Throne be Established in
Righteousness, and on His Head may His Crown flourish. Amen.

FINIS.

