A QVAERE, CONCERNING THE CHVRCH-COVENANT, PRACTICED IN THE SEPARATE
CONGREGATIONS. Sent with a Letter thereunto annexed, from J. G. to T. G.
Wherein is proved that there is much evil and manifold inconveniences in the
exacting and urging such a Covenant.

Jmprimatur,

Ja. Cranford



Printed at London for John Bellamie and Ralph Smith, and are to be sold at
their shop, at the three Golden Lions in Cornhill near the Royal Exchange.
1643.

A Quaere concerning the Church Covenant, practiced IN THE SEPARATE CONGREGATION
By what warrant of Scripture or otherwise, can any Church of Christ impose any
such express and formal covenant upon those that desire membership with them,
as a peremptory condition of their admittance, as is now generally practiced in
all your Churches; We conceive the Scripture no where justifies these
proceedings, but rather judge there is much evil, and manifold inconveniences
in the exacting and urging such a covenant.

FIRST,

COnfident we are (as confidence it self can make us) that there is no
Commandment given to the Churches for exacting any such Covenant of those that
are to be admitted into Church Fellowship with them, so that we conceive any
such exaction to be a mere humane invention, and a strain of that wisdom
that desires not only to exalt it self above all that is practiced by men, but
above that which is written by God himself; yea, though instances and examples
could be produced of such Covenants both demanded and given, yet this may stand
without any warrant of lawfulness, much more without the imposition of any
necessity upon Churches at this day to make the like demand of their intended
members; and most of all it may stand without any necessity lying upon
Churches, to make the demand as of a duty of absolute necessity.

First, no example binds but by virtue, and in the strength of some
commandment, and if there were any thing necessary to be done which is not
commanded by God, then must there be found weakness and imperfection in his
Law; therefore to make any thing necessary which the Law of God makes not
necessary, is not to keep the Law, but (as James says) to judge it.

Secondly, there be examples found of many things done by many Christians (yea
by whole Churches) in the primitive times, not only lawfully but with high and
special approbation, the doing whereof in these times is not only no ways
necessary, but liable to much question, whether lawful or convenient. The
selling of lands and houses, by those that were the possessors of them, and
bringing and laying down the money at the Apostles feet, was practiced (we
know) in the Apostles times, Act. 4. 34, 35. And as Tertullian witnesses,
continued 200. years together in the Church. But I know no man now that pleads
for the necessity of any such practice, yea whether it would not be much
inexpedient for the Gospel, (and consequently in some degrees unlawful) if
now put in practice, a few thoughts would sufficiently discover.

Thirdly, and lastly, There is no question to be made, but that many times the
diversification of circumstances, and aspects of things in the world, and
course of Gods providence, have not only a lawful power of dissolving the
binding force and authority of many examples, but of suspending our obedience
to many rules, precepts, and exhortations: as for example, that kind of
salutation between men mentioned, Genesis 27. 26. 1 Samuel, 20. 41. and often
elsewhere, being generally left and out of use; those injunctions of Paul, Romans
16. 16. 1 Cor. 16. 20. and elsewhere, Greet yea one another with an holy kiss,
impose no such literality upon the Saints in these days as they did, when they
were written; neither do I conceive (nor I suppose you) that the Elders of the
Church are now bound to anoint the sick with oil, because this is commanded,
James 5. 14. neither do I conceive that the French Churches lie under any
guilt of sin, for suffering their teachers to have their heads covered in their
public ministry notwithstanding that rule or direction of Paul, 1 Cor. 11. 4.
Every man praying or preaching having any thing on his head, dishonors his
head, because that topicall custom amongst the Grecians, upon which Paul built
this rule or assertion, is wholly disused by their Nation, and the contrary
generally practiced amongst them. Though I do not think this Scripture is to
be restrained to the teacher only, but to concern as well the whole Assembly
of men present, who are all here said to pray or prophecy in a passive sense,
(as women also are) that is, to partake of these ordinances with the teacher:
Other like instances might be given. And doubtless the rule that Cameron
gives, who was a man of as much learning, sharpness of wit, and happiness in
opening the Scriptures as any the reformed Churches in France, yea I may say in
any part of the world have enjoyed of latter times, is most true. There are
many things commanded in Paul's Epistles, whereof there is no use at this day,
(viz. as touching the literal and precise observation) as is that of
prophesying, 1 Cor. 14. and concerning the habit of women prophesying, which
belong not to our times; but concerning prophesying we shall God willing move
some special Quere's afterward. And I verily believe, that one maine reason
and grand occasion of all separation from us, (on that hand you are gone) is,
because the words of the sacred text fitted to particular occasions, and to the
condition of the times wherein they were written, are taken and applied by such
men to themselves and others, as they find them, without due respect had to
those weighty and material differences that are between one and the other: as
might be demonstrated at large, (if it were any part of our present purpose.)
In the mean time evident it is by what has been said, that though particular
instances could be produced, wherein the Covenant so much magnified, so
indispensably urged by your Churches (generally) upon their members before
their particular admission, yea by some Masters of your way defended in writing
as the very form and essence of a true Church, (the writing here has gone a
long time under your own name, but of late I hear you have disclaimed it)
has been practiced by former Churches and put upon those which desired
membership with them, yet there is no sufficient ground to conclude a necessity
now lying upon all Churches to do the like, except there be a precept or
command found for the doing of it, no nor yet to prove a lawfulness of doing
it, except circumstances lie clear and fair for the doing it, nay a precept
or command it self will not evince a necessity hereof, if any master or grand
circumstance be now changed or altered, upon which the precept was given: but
yet notwithstanding I add, in the Second place, neither do the Scriptures
afford any instance or example, wherein any such Covenant has ever been
demanded or exacted by any particular Church of those who desired fellowship
with it: But many instances there are wherein only upon a sober profession of
their faith in Christ and entertainment of the Gospel, men have been
received into Churches without the least noise or mention of any such Covenant.
Act. 2. 41. They that gladly received his word were Baptized, and the same day
there were added unto [the Church] about three thousand souls: some of your
judgments strongly conceit that they espy their Covenant in these words [were
added;] but surely if they were assisted by the same imagination they might as
soon discover it in those words, Genesis 1. In the beginning God made Heaven and
Earth; for to any reasonable and disingaged apprehension, that word [were
added] with the number of converts joined with it, only expresses the
exceeding great work of God, in making so great an enlargement or addition to
his Church in so short a time: and doubtless a man must get a dispensation for
his understanding, to enable him to think or believe that within the compass
of half a day, or little more at the most, perhaps somewhat less, (for the
former part of the day was well spent before Peter began his Sermon, verse. 15.
and how long he continued the Preaching is uncertain, it seems he was not very
brief, verse. 40.) three thousand persons should particularly and distinctly
one after another in the same place and before the same persons being examined
and tried, take a solemn Covenant repeating the Contents and words thereof;
doubtless the art and method of such dispatch is utterly lost and perished at
this day, either the Covenant they made was very brief, and but an act to
yours, or else the motion of their tongues in speaking was much swifter then
our thoughts: you must favor your self beyond al reason in both these
suppositions, or else suppose no longer your Covenant here. Besides evident it
is, that these that were added to the Church, were baptized before; this is
affirmed of them: Now being baptized, and that in an orderly and right way, as
you will not deny, this did immediately qualify them for Church fellowship
according to your own grounds, and the truth it self, therefore they needed
not the mediation of a Covenant to make them capable hereof: so that you see an
impossibility of any Covenant to be emplyed here. And if you be not relieved at
this door, there is little hopes to find more charity in this kind at others:
Philip required no other Covenant or condition of the Eunuch to qualify him
for baptism, and thereby to give him entrance into the Church, but only to
believe in the Lord Jesus with all his heart, and to profess it to him, Act.
8. 37. When Saul assayed to join himself with the Disciples at Jerusalem,
Act. 9. 26. the reason why they declined him for a time, was not because they
tendered a Covenant to him and he refused it, but because they were all afraid
of him and believed not that he was a Disciple; implying that had they believed
this concerning him that he had been a Disciple, a believer, they would have
received him without any more ado; yea upon Barnabas his mere Testimony of
him without any Covenant subscribed, confession made, or word spoken by
himself, he was received, verse. 27. 28. So again Act. 11. 24. there is
mention made of many that were added or joined to the Lord, i. e. were
immembred into the Church, but no more words of any such Covenant as you urge,
then a deaf man may hear: If you peruse the passages of the New Testament
further, you will epsy many more Stars of the constellation, neither can you
here have recourse to those Covenants mentioned in the Old Testament, Ezra 10.
3. Nehem. 9. 38. to pattern you withal, for then you flee to a Sanctuary
which your self have polluted, by destroying all sympathy and agreement
between a national Church and that which you call instituted or particular:
and besides to forsake the guidance of the Spirit of God under the New
Testament, to seek to make out our thoughts by the old, is to ask the
twilight in the Evening, whether it were light at noone day. Moreover if desire
of brevity (for the present) did not bind my hands, it were easy to
demonstrate unto you what a solemn disagreement there is many ways between
these Covenants and yours, and particularly in that precise circumstance which
must have relieved you.

3. To me there is no imaginable use or necessity of this your Covenant,
because believers, willing, or agreeing, to live together in the same body are
bound by greater bonds a thousand fold then any Covenant they can make between
themselves, to perform mutually all, and all manner of love, service and
Christian duties whatsoever, Christ himself is the greatest of bands and of
all manner of obligements or engagements whatsoever both to knit and hold
Christians together, and to make them of one heart and of one Soul, and to
keep them so: by whom (by Christ) all the body being coupled and knit together
by every joint, etc. Ephesians. 4. 16. And where the Scripture speaks of other
bands with him and besides him, (yet all relating to him) indearing and binding
Christians together as close as ever their hearts and souls will pack or
work into one, amongst them all your Covenant comes not into any mention or
remembrance, There is one body, one Spirit, even as ye are called in one hope
of your vocation, There is one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and
Father of all; surely if they had been joined and joynted together by any such
Covenant as you speak of, and this Covenant been of divine justification, and
of that high and Sovereign consequence as to give them their very life, being
and subsistence as a Church or body, the Apostle could not have so far forgot
himself as not to have inventoried it amongst its fellows, especially there
being no place (that I can readily call to mind) more commodious throughout all
his writings to have made a particular and an express mention hereof then
here: And for my part I freely and ingenuously and in the simplicity of my
heart profess unto you, that I neither know what further or greater duty or
service of love in any kind I can desire or wish of those my brethren in
Christ, upon whom the providence of God together with my own voluntary
election either has or hereafter shall cast me in Church Fellowship, then what
they stand bound by the common band of our mutual interest in the same God, in
the same Lord, in the same baptism, in the same faith, in the same hope, etc.
to exhibit, tender, and perform unto me without the express of any such
covenant made with or unto me; nor yet can I conceive how possibly I should
have any better, richer or stronger assurance from them for the performance
hereof unto me by the virtue or aid of any such covenant above what I have by
the power of that grace and godliness which (as far as I am able to judge)
works effectually in them, and subjecteth them to all the said bands and
obligations; nor can I think that he whose strength to do evil will serve to
trample under feet the blood of the Lord Christ, to cast the Commandments of
the glorious God behind his back to betray the hope of his own peace and
glory, will ever be kept in a Christian compass toward me by any promise,
band, or covenant of his own, I know not how to think it a sin in me not to
desire or exact a greater security for my portion in the Saints then God
himself has given me, and established me in: I hear your answer be, that
your covenant respects as well every man's faithfulness toward God as
discharge of duty toward one another, and therefore in this regard (at least)
there may be a necessity of it. To this I make answer in few words; First, why
is not then the unnecessary part, at least of your Covenant (which I conceive
is the greatest) viz. that which concerns the Covenanters duty toward his
fellow struck off? Secondly, if such a Covenant as this, with or toward God
be so necessary a duty, why is the place of it no where to be found amongst
all the Commandments of God? doubtless God requires it not at our hands, to
be either more provident or zealous for his glory then he is himself. Thirdly
and lastly, it is neither lawful before baptism, nor necessary after;
therefore the necessity of it falls to the ground, and is not defensible; that
it is not lawful before baptism is evident, because it is not lawful for a
Church to receive the unbaptized into fellowship with them as members of that
body, neither is there example or appearance of warrant in Scripture for such a
thing. As evident it is that after baptism it is altogether unnecessary,
because baptism does immediately qualify, for Church fellowship, (as has
been said, your own principles not gainesaying) and the Church it self, by
admitting any to her baptism, (ipso facto) admits into her fellowship and
communion. Therefore I add:

4. That the requiring and exacting of such a Covenant of men, and the
imparting of Church fellowship upon it, I conceive it to be an unchristian
usurpation upon the consciences of men, and a tempting of God, by laying such a
burden upon his people, which he must give strength (more then otherwise were
necessary) to bear, or otherwise they must suffer (at least) (if not fall)
under it; and I believe, I know some worthy every ways of the honor
(according to the line of men) who desirous of entrance into some of your
Churches were turned back, by dislike of that new door of your Covenant.

5. And lastly, We conceive the exacting and giving of such a Covenant is not
only a thing unnecessary (...), as something above any thing that is written,
but of worse inconvenience also, (at least, as many of those that are engaged
in it, are wont to interpret and draw the importance hereof) for many look
upon a Covenant they have made with a particular Church as a partition wall
wholly to separate them in care, affection, dependence, and from all other
Churches and the Saints of God throughout the world, and take it for an
authentical discharge, and release from heaven from troubling themselves any
ways with the affairs of other Churches as ministering unto their necessities
at any times. It was not much short of this which a great defender of you faith
professed plainly unto me not long since, and that before some witnesses.
Calvin well observes upon Romans 16. 16. that Paul's study and desire was by his
careful remembrance and sending the mutual salutations and greeting of one
Church to another, quantum in se est, mutuo amoris nexu devincire inter se
omnia Christi membra: As far as it lay in his power, to bind all members of
Christ whatsoever in one and the same mutual band of affection together. Now
if Paul herein did the will and Commandment of God, (which I cannot think you
will deny) then as your Savior charged the Scribes and Pharisees, that they
had made the Commandment of God of none effect (they had taken a course to do
it, they had done that which directly tended thereunto) by their traditions, so
(we conceive) we may justly challenge your Covenant for an ill look, or
malign aspect, upon that part of the will of God, wherein he desires that all
believers, the world over should desire to maintain a free intercourse of the
dearest love and tenderest affections one toward another.

A LETTER SENT From I. G. to T. G.
My dear Friend,
WHom I love and honor, if not enough, yet (certain I am) very exceeding much
in the Lord, I am sorry there being differences between us otherwise, that in
this we should so perfectly and so long agree, neither to send so much as a
small piece of his mind to other for a love-token; upon which of us the Law of
love and Christian acquaintance rather imposed it, to have first appeared in
breaking this agreement, the same Law prohibites to dispute. Whether it will
ease the burden on my part or no, I leave to your ingenuitie to consider and
determine; but this I may truly say unto you, that I have had many thoughts
from time to time since your departure from us, that have dearly longed after
your bosom, and would hardly have been kept from their longing till now, but
by a strong hand of some indispensable occasions, and employments otherwise;
And if my respects unto you did not command me to entreat you more gently in
this behalf, I might truly charge upon your self (in part) the occasion of
my silence hitherto, your authority, grace, learning, parts, judgment and
example, have made the stone of separation among us so massy and heavy that we
are constrained to be at double pains and labor in removing and rolling it
from the consciences of men. A great part of our employment is to stanch the
issue of that fountain of blood, which you (I presume in simplicity of heart
for your part) have opened in the womb of our Churches here; we hoping again
your reunion with us and return unto us, through the power of our Lord Jesus
Christ who is is able to give you light to comprehend your darkness in those
things lying yet under dispute between us, are willing to save you what sorrow
we can against the time of your return, and for this purpose endeavor our
selves to make your mistakes as innocent as may be, and to keep as many as we
can from falling thereby. Dear brother that there were a heart in us to lay
our heads together to find out (if possible) some course that the Sword may
not always thus devoured doubtless there are waters to be found that will
much assuage the heat, if not wholly quench the flames of these contentions
and divisions. How greatly is it to be lamented that he by whom God has
reconciled the world to himself, should be made a means of dividing this
reconciled world between themselves! The heavens (I doubt not) will accord us,
yet were it our greater comfort and glory if they might be prevented herein by
the earth. I verily believe it would strike a great stroke in compremising
this contention, if the great men and chief leaders on both sides could be
persuaded but to take fast hold upon this free and noble resolution, which yet
I suppose we all intend to do, (...), rather to do sacrifice to the truth then
to be in bondage to suppostions. I know not how to open my mouth wide enough to
show you the enlargement of my heart unto you, if we saw the truth clearly
with you, you should not reign alone, we would doubtless at once divide such
a kingdom with you. Many indeed of your party are ready to say in effect,
that as it is heaven that separated you from us, so it is the world that
separates us from you: But if you have the truth with you (which indeed if you
have at least in many of your beloved Maxims, woe to my wits, reason and
understanding; never poor man so strangely misused by such friends in this
world) it would never be a debtor to such interpretors or agents for it. As
for the world, if it be as little on that side the Sea as it is on this, it
will never be so much as a moate in your eye to hinder you from seeing any
truth of God clearly. But as little as it is with us, we think it too great
and too good to be sacrificed upon the service of an error at any time.
Otherwise I doubt not but the Saints of God in England tread as light upon the
earth, as you do in Holland, and are as ready to buy the truth and give as
good rates for it as the best Merchants among you, but howsoever I knew that
this left handed spirit rules much in men of your way, who not ontent to make
our standing naught, labor much to make us worse then our standings, yet I
make no question but your anointing teaches you better, and more Christian
thoughts concerning us. And if we judged it any advantage to the truth and
cause we maintain against you, we durst view moral imputations with you, and
are confident that we could assign and suggest against you both as many and
as likely indirect and fleshly grounds for your departure from us as you can
against us for keeping our first standing and profession. But the truth will
never be made great by such demonstrations or arguments as these on either
side, sometimes the truth is there where a man for many reasons would think
there were least hope to find it, and again many times fair overtures, and
many pleasing inducements will but deceive and disappoint men in this kind. And
as for that kind of truth which we inquire after and toil in the fire of
contention to find out, viz. spiritual and divine, there is no substantial
and satisfying means for the discovery of it, but by a holy, humble and
unpartiall consultation with the oracles of God, yea if it be of that species
or especial kind of truth which is not spread (like the Mannah) upon the face
of the Scriptures, but lies low amongst the deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2, 10.
as it seems your truth in those questions depending between us in part does;
now it is not sufficient simply to consult or ask (as it were) the Scriptures
concerning them, but they must be examined and re-examined again and again,
both solitary and in consort, they must be put home to it, and urged, and
pressed close together before they will speak their mind plainly in this case
or deliver out any of this treasure, yea in many cases a man must be content to
go to one end of the Scripture to know what they mean in the other, yea (that
which is much considerable, and I fear wants that which belongs to it) they
may seem to deliver many pleasing and plausible answers under the shadow
whereof the judgments and consciences of men be much refreshed for a season,
so that they may be ready to shoute for joy, and congratulate themselves with
his acclamation that said (...), he had found, he had found, and yet none of
these answers, neither be the (...), the true direct and bottom meaning of
them: As Sampson gave Dalilah answer upon answer to her question or demand,
which pleased her for a time carrying a semblance of realitie and truth in
them, but still her experience discovered the insufficiency of them, and then
she rejected them and would not give over till she had the true answer indeed,
Judge. 16. 7. 8. so doubtless the Scriptures may in many places (to our
apprehensions) affirm many things, and deliver out many notions of choice
approbation to us for a time, the weakness and effects whereof
notwithstanding farther time and experience and a clearer light may discover,
yea there may from the same Scripture rise up many meanings and interpretations
before us one after another, that may be in our eyes as Eliah Jesses eldest
son was in Samuels (when he was sent to annoint one of his sons for King)
surely (so he looking on Eliab) the Lords anointed, is before him, but he was
yet a great way off from the Lords anointed there was Elihah, Abinabad, and
Shannuah, and more then as many more presented before him, before David came in
sight, who was the Lords anointed indeed, he was behind and a great way off in
the field, and must be sent for before he comes: so the anointed sense and
meaning of the Scriptures may yet be far off when we persuade our selves
with the greatest confidence it is before us: And as he said of benefits, Multa
perdenda sunt ut semel ponas been, A man must bestow many amiss, that he may
bestow one well; so many times a man must cast away many interpretations of
Scripture, (and those sometimes such as otherwise he would not wittingly part
with) that he may interpret at last as he ought to do. I make no question but
you have had experience hereof in your self more then once; for my part I
confess it has been a very frequent thing with me in the course of my
studies and meditations, to meet with both from the pens or mouths of others,
and by mine own conceptions also, some interpretations which have much
affected me upon the first greeting, yea which for a time I have nourished in
my bosom, and have treasure of, and yet afterward have apparently seen, that
(...). my rejoicing was not good, and by a strong hand of superior conviction
have been compelled to call that darkness, and so to east it from me which
sometimes I called light, and kept close unto.

Wherefore I beseech you by the tender mercies of Jesus Christ, and by the
glory of those many talents given unto you, the strength whereof, methinkes,
should so work, as to break through a napkin and disdain so weak and
contemptible an enclosure, once more to survey with a single, unpartiall and
disingaged eye, your present thoughts and apprehensions concerning these things
which have removed you from off an English Table, and put you under a Holland
Bushel. Confident I am that there is a light beyond your light in these
matters, and which you are very capable of, if your eye by your long slumber be
not over heavy to open. I profess in the sight of God, and in as great
singleness and simplicity of heart as ever man in this world spoke word unto
you, that I do as clearly apprehend error and mistake throughout the greatest
part of your way, as I do in this conclusion, that twice two makes four. The
necessity of your Covenant, Prolix confession of faith putting men to deliver
their judgments in points of doubtf^^^ disputations upon and before their
admission into your Churches; the power of the Keys and of ordination of
Pastors to be the right and inheritance of the whole body of the Congregation
and of every member indifferently, and promiscuously, the divine institution or
peremptory necessity of your ruling Elders, the necessity of widows as
Officers in the Church, the absolute necessity of one and the same government
or discipline in all particulars whatsoever for all Churches, in all times and
places, a full and peremptory determination of all things whatsoever
appertaining to the worship of God, with diverse such like positions (which are
the very life, soul, and substance of your way) I am at perfect peace in my
thoughts that you will never be able to demonstrate or prove from the
Scriptures to any sober minded or considering man, I am loath to overcharge you
with words or writings; To desire you to return and to repair the breach you
have made upon us, I confess were a hard mention, and of flender hope to be
obtained, were it not made to a truly great and noble spirit: and (Caeteris
paribus) the request were more reasonable from you to me, and others with me
to go over to you then, that we should desire you to return back unto us,
because you have suffered already (at least in the thoughts of many) under the
disparagement of some inconstancy, and equal it is when there is not some
overruling reason to the contrary, that burdens should not be doubled, but
rather divided. But herein I beseech you consider your advantage is the
greater, you have by this means (...), a greater and better sacrifice, to
offer upon the service of the truth and Gospel of Jesus Christ, then we, if
you can apprehend the truth with us, and deny your self the second time in
coming over to us. And yet give me leave to say this unto you, though your
restitution to us be one of the first borne of my joy in this worlds wishes,
and the dayther of would be unto me above the days of the year, yet had I
rather mourn over your absence still, then bring you hither any other ways
then by an Angel of light, I relish no satisfaction to any my requests from
any, but what I purchase more by reasoning, then by requesting; and for your
part I know that innovations of this nature, a friend and a feather are alike,
except reason make the difference, I have made upon some words of encouragement
from your mouth (related unto me by D. P.) and propound a Quere unto you
concerning the head of your way, your Church Covenant, with some reasons
hereof; If you be willing to treat with your old friend in a way of this
commerce, I shall hereafter (God willing, as health and liberty agree) desire
like satisfaction of you in some other particulars of your way, if the motion
dislike you, neither have I any further pleasure in it, if you shall suspend
your answer, give me leave so far to please my self, as to interpret your
silence a ground of hope that your own coming is not far off; or otherwise
if your answer be too strong for me, and able to remove my mountains out of
my way, they are not Seas that shall keep friends asunder any longer; I am
yours (if you care to own me) send me over the silver and bright shining
wings of truth, and upon these I come flying over to you out of hand, I would
be as glad of a bargain of truth at any rate whatsoever as another, God having
taught me how to drown the world in the least drop of the water of life: only
this I desire may be the Law of dispute between us, that since the strength of
the confidence of your way is such as to break out into a departure from us
(and I conceive double light is required for separation in any kind, whereas
single light suffices for any man continuing in his standing) you will go to
work as a Prince and not as a beggar, and command the truth which you hold and
practice in opposition to us, by a high hand of pregnant and express
Scriptures, and not beg any thing by any loose or faint interpretation or
supposition; we look for, letter for letter, word for word, and little for
little, to the proof of all you maintain against us, and judge it somewhat
hard to be forsaken in such a manner, only because our logique is more dull
and less piercing then yours; I have used the more liberty of speech unto you
because I know you are able to bear it, and pity it is but a good pair of
shoulders should now and then be balanced. The mighty God and Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ teach us how to make something out of nothing, and by the use
of a miserable distracted and broken world, how we may compass and setch in
the days of Eternity; Grace, Peace, and Truth be multiplied unto you and
yours, from the great fountain of these heavenly treasures.

Yours in the Lord for the greatest services of Christian love and
acquaintance. J. G.

FINIS.

