THE DISCOVERY Of a great and wicked Conspiracy against this Kingdom in
general, and the City of London in particular.

Being a Letter sent from the Hague in Holland, and directed to Secretary
Nicholas, but intercepted by the way, and read in both Houses of Parliament on
Saturday the 26 of November. 1642.

Also, what great preparations of money, men, and Arms, there is now made in
Holland, France, and Denmark, to assist the Kings Majesty in England. With the
manner how the said Letter was intercepted and taken.

Whereunto is added, An Order by the Lord Major, for the raising of 30000 l. in
the City of London.

Die Sabbathi, 26 November. 1642.

ORdered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, that this Letter be
forthwith printed and published, and read in all Parish Churches within the
City of London and the Suburbs thereof, by the Parsons, Vicars, or Curates of
the same.

J. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

LONDON: Printed for Ed. Blackmore. November. 28. 1642.

IT is now long since I had the opportunity of writing to you, but since my
first have not heard any thing from you at all; The occasion of our long stay
here, was first the expectation of our Irish ships, next the raising money,
which the proposition of Newcastle drew as fast as it could advance, the
failing of the Ships had it not been supplied by the reputation of the Kings
success at Land, had given us a dangerous blow here; but that has so
supported our credit that the Prince of Orange has since played his part, and
advanced all those sums we were to expect, of which 20000.l. is sent toward
you, 20000. l. to Newcastle, and 20000.l. at least we bring with us, besides
the great business which we expect this day a final end of, which will
advance 60000 l. more, in which we are ascertained of the Prince of Orange his
utmost power; such nevertheless we apprehend the importance of the Queens
being in England, that we had gone this last week, and expected the coming of
thatafter, had not an unseasonable complement from your side stopped us, till
this express sent to you: the fleet is now ready, and this week we certainly
go, if those counsels, or chances, that move to dilatory resolutions, move not
more effectually then the certain advantages of our expedition and dispatch
from hence, all our affairs now done, and nothing more to be expected. That
you may know upon what grounds we go, and what security we expect there, and
what advantage you in the South are to derive from it, you must know we have
sent over 10000. foot arms, besides the Garrison near 2000 horse arms, and
20 piece of Canon; we bring over wagons and all accommodation to march so soon
as we arrive, we carry very considerable Officers from hence, and by the advice
we receive from that side 8000 men are on foot already, 6 Troops of Horse, and
the rest will not belong on raising after we come there. General King is
designed for Lievtenant-generall, has been with the Queen, and will be
suddenly there. From Denmark are likewise sent Arms for 10000 foot, and 1500
horse, with a train of Artillery, and every thing proportionable, to the very
Drums and Halbards. Two good men of war come their Convoy, and in them an
Ambassador to His Majesty, a person of great quality in Denmark, I hope it
will be a general care there to see him Nobly treated, for the entertainment
and neglect of the last was much complained of, and is so much insented by the
King, that it had like to have frustrated all our expectations in that Court,
had not Cochran very handsomely evaded it, he comes along with the Ambassador,
with whom if you encounter you will communicate some Propositions of great
importance, which in how much the fewer hands they are carried, will be so much
the better liked by them you are to deal with, if my employment in this
affair may fall upon your servant that writes to you, I know you will not be
unmindfull of him.

We have great apprehensions here by something intimated from my Lord of
Holland, of a treaty further entered into then we have advertisement of, or can
well approve; We have confidently bel^eved your approaching London, (if you had
not made too long stay upon the way) would have determined that matter, and
what the difficulties are now of that we cannot yet understand, for if
intelligence from hence came as freely to you as to us, the Kings party there
are very considerable, and full of that expectation, and a day or two loss of
time by the late example of Hull, may be judged of what contrary consequences
it may produce.

We hear my Lord of Essex approaches London, but believe he will be so waited
on by the Kings Horse, not to let him join with their Forces there, being now
so lame an Army without Horse or Canon, as the Relations you send hither makes
him to be. We believe the Kings Horse likewise, now so great a body, that it
will be as troublesome as unnecessary for them to subsist together, and think
so many Troops might be well spared as might be sent into Kent, to countenance
a party to be set on foot there, which according to our intelligence here
would undoubtedly be found very affectionate and considerable, so that by
sparing 500 Horse, you might possibly add to your Army 5000 Foot, to be
employed upon the River on that side the Town.

If the unhappy interception had not come of the last weeks Letters, we had
undoubtedly been with you on the other side in Norfolk and Essex, within three
weeks, and in that condition having all the Kingdom behind us on every side,
it will not be hard to judge whether should have been better able to subsist,
they within the Town, or the Kings Army without; admit my Lord of Essex were
gotten in, or that the Town had not yielded it self so soon as you had
approached, you may yet certainly presume on this, that our being once on foot
we shall be able to collect for you all the 400000 l. Subsidies, universally
throughout the Kingdom, which will make the Kings Army subsist, and wear out
theirs, besides which the money we bring; what we expect from Denmark, and
France, are all encouragements to make us expect no Treaties to be admitted,
but upon terms of great advantage and honor to His Majesty, those you are
best able to judge of upon the place. If the King have use of them, I am
confident you may expect from France, (so soon as you set footing in Kent, and
shall intimate you desire the same) the three Regiments of His Majesty's own
Subjects there employed, under Colonel Hill, Colonel Fitz williams, and
Colonel Beling: your Letters directed to Newcastle will direct our addresses
to France, for I hope we shall yet be there before you can return any in
answer to this.

Hague, November. 22. 1642.
The manner how this aforesaid letter was intercepted and taken.
ON Saturday morning the Gentleman that brought this letter from Holland came
up to London in a Gravesend-boat, intending to land at Brainford, and therefore
for the more expedition shot the Bridge, which being perceived by one of the
Pinaces that lie on this side for the guard of the City and Parliament, and
being known to be a Gravesend-boat, which always land on the other side at
Billinsgate: they called to them to know their business; But they not
regarding their summons still posted away, whereupon the men in the ship made
after them and hald them in, examined the Gentleman, and having some suspicion
searched him, and found this with some other letters about him; whereupon they
presently carried him up to the Parliament, where after examination his letters
were taken from him, and he committed to safe custody.

This letter (as is supposed) was writ by Collonell Goring.

By the Mayor.
Whereas certain Letters from foreign parts and several places of the Kingdom
have been intercepted, and brought unto the Parliament, discovering the
desperate designs and plots of Papists and other ill affected, in collecting
great sums of money and providing many thousands of men and Arms, for the ruin
of our Religion and Kingdom. For the preserving and securing whereof, there is
great necessity of a present and speedy supply of money, that the Army may
suddenly advance, for preventing of the many outrages that the Cavaleers daily
commit in several places of this Kingdom at once; and in regard the burden
has hitherto lain upon the willing and well-affected persons; the Lords and
Commons assembled in Parliament have passed an Ordinance, that all such persons
as hitherto have not contributed, or not proportionable to their estates, upon
the Propositions of Parliament, for the safety of the Kingdom, shall be
assessed and compelled to contribute and pay according to their ability. And
forasmuch as moneys cannot be advanced by virtue of that Ordinance, to supply
the urgent and pressing occasions of the Army; It is desired by a Committee of
the Lords and Commons, appointed by the Parliament, for advancing of mon^ys,
that a sum of 30000 l. might be raised by Tuesday in the afternoon, and all
such as shall lend any money for the present raising of the same, shall be
repayed their moneys so lent out, of the first moneys that shall be collected
upon the said Ordinance: and for the better advancing of this necessary
service, the Ministers of every Parish are requested, publicly to stir up
their Parishioners hereunto, and that the Church wardens of every Parish cause
an assembly of the Parishioners tomorrow after Sermon, in the afternoon, that
amongst them they raise a proportionable sum, and that upon Monday next, at
three of the clock in the afternoon the Churchwardens appear at Guild hall
before the said Committee, to give an account of what moneys they have raised.

Dated November 26, 1642. Isaac Pennington Major.

FINIS.

