A PLEA FOR FREE GRACE AGAINST FREE WILL:

WHEREIN Matters about Grace and Providence are plainly and fully cleared, and
contrary Opinions demonstrated to be against Scripture, the Judgment of the
Primitive Church, and the Doctrine of the Church of England.

By J. GAILHARD, Gent.

For I know this, that after my departing shall grievous Wolves enter in
amongst you, not sparing the flock. Also of your own Selves shall men arise,
speaking perverse things to draw away disciples after them Acts 20.29, 30. By
the grace of God I am what I am... Yet not I but the grace of God which was
with me. 1 Cor. 15.10. LONDON, Printed for George Grafton in Middle-Temple-lane
in Fleet Street MDCXCVI.

THE PREFACE.
THE Church of God, is in Scripture, under the name of his Love, compared to
Cant. 2.2.
the Lilie among Thorns, which not only make her uneasy, but also do often
strike deep wounds into her sides: The two head Thorns which from the beginning
pricked her sometimes to the very bowels, and will do so to the worlds end, are
Tyranny, whence arises Persecutions, and Heresy, the cause of great Disorders
and Confusion, this is the worst of the two, for though the other destroys
several of the members, yet it purges the dross, and makes the blood of Martyrs
the Seed of the Church: But this reaches the very vitals, lays her in a
languishing and fainting condition. Gal. 5, 20.
Tyranny, is a foraign Enemy, for tho sometimes persecutions were raised by
some that had been members, yet they were fallen off, and had declared open war
against it: But Heresy rockoned among the works of the flesh is a Domestic
Enemy, living within her pales, yet so unnatural a child to the Mother, as to
divide, rent, and tear her.

The Holy Ghost forewarned us, that such things should happen, to the end we
should not be surprised when they do: Our Blessed Savior foretold his
Disciples that there shall arise false Christ's, and false Prophets, and to make
the Prophecy the more to be taken notice of, he adds in the next verse,
Matthew. 24.24, 25.
behold I have told you before. After him St. Paul shows a necessity for it,
and gives the reason, for 1 Cor. 11.19.
there must be also heresies among you, that they which are approved may be
made manifest among you. And elsewhere he says not of himself, but 1 Timothy 4.1
the spirit speaks expressly, that in the latter days some shall depart from
the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits and doctrines of Devils. St. John
gives the like warning how 1 John 4.1.
many false prophets are gone out into the world. There be false Prophets that
are to come in among the flock in Sheeps clothing Matthew 7.15.
to do the more mischief, but inwardly they are ravening Wolves: Wherefore it is
a truth beyond all dispute, that Men teaching false Doctrines are to arise out
of the bosom of the Church, for as Christ's love is compared to the Lilly, so
are the Daughters compared to Thorns.

It would be tedious and superfluous to name those Plants which our heavenly
Father having not planted, have been, or ought to be rooted out, and those
Tares which the enemy the Devil has sowed in the Field; only out of the vast
number of those that have been notorious, we shall mention two Heresiarcks,
Authors of abominable Doctrines, one against the Person of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, the other against his Grace. The first, Arrius who afterward was
followed by Photinus, and others, and of late years by Socinus, denied and
opposed the Deity of Christ, and in number prevailed to astonishment, for
though that pestilent Heresy had, in the days of Constantine the Great, been
condemned at the first Nicene Council, yet afterward being maintained and
upheld by some Emperors, in some other Councils, as Sirmiense and Seleucense,
especially in that numerous meeting of Bishops at Rimini, that abominable
Heresy was approved of and confirmed. The other infamous and notorious
Heresiarch which opposed the Grace of Christ to set up Nature and Free Will,
was Pelagius, who afterward was followed by the Semipelagians, Papists, and of
late by Arminians; and now unhappily at this time, the Church is troubled and
pestered with both Arminianism and Socinianism, and to explode this last, the
true way is to begin with the first, which also once was here, and is still a
Shooing-horn to draw on Popery.

Yet herein we ought to admire at, and adore the most wise Providence of God
who thereby not only tried his Church, but also out of those Heresies brought
forth this great Good, that several truths which before were not so well, nor
so publicly known, and in the dark, have been brought to a greater and a more
universal light; for ever God raised some eminent Instruments to maintain the
Truth. Thus Athanasius was raised against Arianism, and endued with such
courage, and other necessary qualifications, that though Error seemed to triumph
in number of Men, yet he stood fast for the Truth; hence it was said of him,
Athanasius against the whole World, and the whole World against Athanasius. If
there had never been a Pelagius, or some such a Man, very likely we would never
have had those excellent Writings of Austin, which so well enlarged upon, and
cleared Matters of Grace; so that after St. Paul the great Apostle for free
Grace, no Man has upon those points written better than Austin. Thus, those
Rocks which once others made Shipwreck upon, are to us become Buoys and
Warnings.

It has been, and still is God's Method, from time to time, to exerci^^ the
Faith of his Church, upon several and different Matters, by means of heterodox
and unsound Men; so that though Truth in it self be always Truth, yet some may
well be called Truths of the Times, because sometimes they were not at all
spoken for or against, and at one time they were opposed more than at another,
especially at that very time when old Errors were revived, or new ones
invented; for afterward, new things being brought upon the Stage, old
questions did wear off, and People minded new ones, yet with this good effect,
That after all oppositions, Truth appeared the more glorious, like the Sun
after it has dispersed the Clouds that stood between it and our aspect.

Thus after the Roman blast had for a long time almost withered the face of the
Church, and the Frosts and Snows of the Alps almost starved it in appearance,
yet when once more the light of the Gospel began to shine, the World was made
sensible how all fires of Persecution could not consume the Truths of God, nor
all the Waters of Affliction drown them; that Church which seemed to have been
buried under the violence and cruelties of Antichrist, and wholly overlaid with
all his Errors in Doctrine, with Superstition and Idolatry in Worship, yet when
God's time for Heb. 9.10.
Reformation was come, though that light of the Truth appeared but dim in a
little corner of Germany, and upon occasion only of Indulgences at first, how
suddenly upon new inquiries and new discoveries, notwithstanding the rage and
craftiness of those that held it in unrighteousness, did it spread abroad
almost all Europe over? So that the Lilly, though amongst Thorns, by the dew
from Heaven, the heat of the Sun of righteousness, and the fatness of the Soil
watered with the Blood of so many thousands of Martys, became extraordinary
fruitful; Germany, Bohemia, Hungary, Sweden, Denmark, Poland, England,
Scotland, Ireland, the Low Countries, France, Swisserland, generally, and for
the most part, and some Persons in Italy, received it.

But since, whilst the Protestant Reformed Churches, (though in some of their
Members lying under Persecution from Worldly Powers) were undisturbed amongst
themselves, and agreed upon these Points, the Enemy again sowed Tares, which
out of Flanders spread into Holland, whence, not just presently, but soon
after, that Poison crept over hither, where it was opposed and condemned, as
contrary to the professed Doctrine of the Church as by the Grace of God, I
shall clearly make it appear.

Though, upon these Matters, several Books have been written in Defense of
Truth, yet it is long since, so that many of them are almost out of Print, and
those that remain do not fall into every one's hands, wherefore it will not be
amiss sometimes, and upon occasion, for some to publish their thoughts, to
assert and vindicate Matters of God's Grace and Providence, in opposition to
what Adversaries do write or say against it, in their Discourses, and in the
Pulpits, and upon that same account I now do bring in my Evidence.

That which chiefly engages me upon this present Design, is to hear, upon all
occasions, these unsound Doctrines ring out of the Pulpits, which for the most
part they have been in possession of for several years, they having taken
effectual care to keep those that are for the Truth from going up to such
public Places; so that they would create a belief in People, that what they
teach is the Doctrine of the Gospel received by the Church, and by those means
infuse into common capacities, those evil Principles which do puff up Men with
the Opinion of their Natural Strength, which must needs produce dangerous
practices. We teach, how God from Eternity has freely Decreed our Salvation,
in the fullness of time Christ purchased it, and in time it is promised and
offered us in the Word, and thereby we are called to come in to Christ upon his
own terms; Sacraments do seal it, the Holy Ghost applies it, Faith receives
it, and Holiness, with other good Works, do bear Witness to it. In few Words,
out of the whole corrupt lump of Mankind, God has freely chosen some to be
Objects of his Mercy, and has elected them to eternal life through Faith in
Christ our Lord, which Faith, and other necessary means to come to Glory, in
execution of his Decree, he does in time give us, till at last, through these
means of Grace, we are brought into eternal life, and all this merely out of
his Mercy, and only through his free Grace; the rest of Mankind he leaves in
their Natural corruption, at last to have his Justice executed upon them. We
attribute our whole Salvation to God's free Grace, and they to Natural Strength
and Free Will; which is clearly made out.

But a further reason to engage me upon this Design, is the great affinity
between Socinians and Arminians, for in some things they border so near one
upon the other, and in others are so united, that specially they agreeing with
Papists in most of those Points wherein they differ from us, I am afraid of the
production of some new Monstrous Opinion, now when Socinians increase, come
fast upon us, and even in Print, without any check, grow bolder every day: God
knows what the effect of such an Union may prove, and how pernicious to the
Souls of many, as some of them formerly turned Papists, so now others may
happen to become rank Socinians. Once Arminianism had very near brought in
Popery, and now it is a-pace ushering in Socinianism; these are great Judgments,
though most Men seem not to be sensible thereat, which at last may happen to
deprive us of the light of the Gospel; all this danger and evil, if it does
befall us, we do, and shall owe to Arminianism.

Here we have a large Field to bring in the Evidence and Authority of several
of the Ancient Fathers of the Church, engaged in the Defense of the same Cause
with us, which have spoken clearly, fully, and to the purpose; but because the
Rule, I mean the Word of God, is so clear, I think it were needless to borrow
the Authority of Man, which we may believe no farther than it agrees with
Scripture, after God has declared his Holy Will and Mind; neither are there
such difficulties, as do need the interpretation of most, or many Ancient
Doctors: Besides, it would be tedious for common capacities, which I desire to
make these Matters intelligible to, as match as I can, and the subject will
admit, to run over several passages of the Fathers, for it is not material,
chiefly, for a kind of Readers, to know what Austin, Hilary, Prosper,
Fulgentius, Hierom, and so many others, with Bertram, Bernard, etc. have
written upon the matter, as what the Word of God says about it; wherefore for
Proofs, we shall stick chiefly to the Law and to the Testimony.

The Church, like the Ship in the Marth. 8.24, 25, 26.
Gospel, is tossed up and down with Winds and Waves, exposed to Rocks, Sands,
and many other Dangers; in such a case what is to be done? In Storm time, like
the Disciples, we must go to the Lord Jesus with Cries and Prayers awake him,
and say, Lord save us, we perish; for our Comfort we must not go far, he is in
the Ship, and though he be asleep, and to make us call the louder seems to be
so, for Psalm. 121.4.
he that keeps Israel does neither slumber nor sleep, yet in good time he
will awake, arise and rebuke the Winds and the Sea, and there shall be a great
Calm; may the Lord do so in his due time. Yet sometime some Jonah, who is the
cause of the Tempest, must be cast overboard; some are by Christ Rev. 3.16.
spued out of his Mouth, and 1 Timothy 1.2.
delivered unto Satan, that they may learn not to blaspheme. This is the end of
many a disturber of the Peace of the Church, which we are sure cannot miscarry,
but shall at last come to a good Harbor, for though sometimes the Body be under
Water, as long as its Head is above it, there is no danger of being drowned.

TO THE READER.
THE following Sheets I once intended to Dedicate to my Lord Carteret, thereby
to show my singular esteem for his Piety, Virtue, and Merits: But God By a late
untimely Death, and much to be lamented, having taken him to himself, That
design vanished and my measures were broken, and so I now leave only these few
words of my respect for his Memory.

ERRATA.
Page 1. last line but one, before and what r. wait for: p. 15. in the Margin,
r. Deuteronomy. 28: p. 18. in the Marg. r. Psalm. 135: p. 19. l. 1. r. bow: p. 25. l.
24. after which r. Sense: p. 33. l. 7. r. that all: p. 50. in the Margin r.
Isaiah 12.40: p. 60. l. 5. before question add to: p. 104. l. 14. r. Elijah: p.
120. l. 7. before looked add God: p. 128. l. 37. for naturally r. wholly: p.
135. in the Margin, for John r. Joshua: p. 142. l. 29. after but add be is: p.
170. in the Margin, for John r. Jonah: p. 217. l. 32. r. 1615: p. 222. last l.
for mistake r. mislike: p. 231. for beg r. buy; besides few mistakes in the
Marginal Quotations.

CHAP. I. A Plea for Free Grace against Free Will.
SO much, and by several hands, has already been said upon the points I now go
about to handle, that I must not pretend to bring many new lights to the
matter: Only what I propose to my self is as much as I can, and the nature of
the thing will give me leave, to make it clear to a common Capacity, that
ordinary people may not, as often they are, be easily imposed upon by those who
disguise and defame the Truth, whither out of Ignorance or Malice or both, let
God and their Conscience be their Judge: all they could, they have done upon
wrong suggestions, to influence a prejudice not only against the things but the
very names, so that some are come to that length as to slight and leave off
reading a Book if they see the word Predestination in it, as if they were
frighted with the name, or there was some dangerous Poison under it: but after
this rate, such must also leave off reading some places of Scripture, wherein
the word to Predestinate is several times contained: I know how to write Truth
upon the Mind, and the Heart is the proper work of God's own Spirit; specially
those Truths that are contrary and cross to Man's natural Pride and
Inclination: Only I desire the Reader to remove all prejudices so, quietly and
patiently to peruse those few sheets, and what God will do for him in the
discovery of these truths which the Adversaries thereof have done what they
could to confine and hide in Corners, and if thereby he meets with satisfaction
and advantage in the discoveries of it, let him thankfully give God the Glory.

But this is certain, how those errors which tend to destroy Grace, and set up
a strength in Nature, began some years ago to be so propagated by a sort of Men
who designed to meet with, and be reconciled to the Church of Rome, that they
went about (and too far prevailed in it) to corrupt the very Springs of
Learning, with keeping out of the Universities those that were for free Grace
against free Will, and bringing in only those whom they thought fit for their
purpose; wherefore it is no wonder if so many Streams derived from thence, have
been infected with that Corruption infused into and influenced upon them, and
if the Disease is become Epidemical amongst that party, wherein to profess such
Opinions, was a great qualification for Places and Preferments: But every sound
and Orthodox Christian must own, that in matter of Salvation, we cannot
attribute too much to free Grace, nor too little to Nature and to our own
Strength, which is the true State of the Dispute.

CHAP. II. Who Arminius was, and what are his Opinions.
BUT before we proceed, it will be necessary for a better information of the
Reader, to give some account of the Author and of his Opinions. Arminius or
James Van Hermin a Dutchman, from whom they are called Arminians, though they
take the name of Remonstrants, was not properly the Author, but Reviver of old
Errors, with some kind of alteration. It Is commonly known in Holland whence we
have this account of his Person, how at first (let it be spoken without any
design to reflect) he was a Tapster or Chamberlain in a Publick-house, from
whence by the care of some Guests, who were pleased with his Wit, he was sent
to School, and there maintained out of the public Treasury of Amsterdam; where
he afterward was admitted to be a Preacher: whence after the Death of Learned
Junius, he was called to Leyden, to be Divinity Professor in his place, but
upon condition that before his admittance, he should have a Conference with
Gomarus, etc. and in that Conference he should by an open Declaration of his
Opinion, clear himself of all suspicion of unsoundness in Doctrine, and that he
should promise, if he had any singular Opinions, he would not discover them to
the disturbance of the Churches: Which Conference was accordingly held before
the Curators of the University and the Deputies of the Synod, in which Arminius
most expressly denied and condemned the Opinions of Pelagius, about Grace,
Free Will, Original Sin, Perfection in this Life, and Predestination; adding
that he approved all that Austin and other Fathers had written against
Pelagius, promising also to read nothing different from the received Doctrine:
hereupon he was admitted Professor, and for some time taught the Doctrine of
the Reformed Churches in the points of Christ's Satisfaction, Justification by
Faith, Perseverance in Faith, Certainty of Salvation, and such other matters as
afterward he denied; this breach of his promifes was so notorious, and he went
so far on, that to remedy this evil, the calling a Synod was thought necessary,
which he by means of Friends and Credit which was considerable amongst great
Men, as Barnevelt who afterward lost his Head, Vtengobard, of Grotius, etc. he
did stop it as much as he could, knowing he there should be called to answer
for himself: But seeing, how for all his oppositions, a Synod was like to be,
he fell Sick for Grief, as generally believed, and died October 19. 1609. He
was so full of Envy against the reputation of the first Reformers, that one of
his chief designs ever was, how to discredit their Persons and Labors, which
spirit of his in a high degree is transmitted to his Sectators. For certainly
no Papist can or does express a greater Contempt, Hatred and Malice against the
Blessed Memory of those Eminent instruments of Reformation, than most Arminians
do.

After his Death, his Party used the same means to prevent a Synod, nay rather
than not to do it, they would have betaken themselves to their Arms, had they
not been prevented by the extraordinary care and diligence of Maurice Prince of
Orange, in Conformity to Orders from the States: Before this, they had so
shuffled things, that with their tricks they hindered it for some Years, till
the disease and danger of ruin not only in that Church, but in the State also,
growing worse and worse: And King James from hence pressing strongly the States
General for a Convocatio of a Synod, at last it began in 1618, to be held at
Dort: Where did meet Divines, not only within the Dominions of Holland and the
Seven Provinces, but also out of England, and from most if not all other
Reformed Churches. It Is true the French did not send in any solemn deputation,
for they dared not do it without leave of that Popish Court, and they chose
rather not to ask than to do it and be denied; however the sense of that Church
was by the French Churches gathered in those Provinces, and then by Peter
Du-Moulin in his Letters and Book of Anatomy of Arminianism sufficiently made
known to that Synod: and afterward a French Held at Ale^zon, October. 6. 1620.
National Synod approved of, and inserted amongst their one resolutions, the
Acts of the Synod of Dort, where the Arminian Errors were unanimously
condemned. This, the Arminians from the beginning thought would be the
conclusion of such a Solemn Assembly, wherefore like Popes, Papists and
Heretics, they were afraid to have things discussed in a free Council, where
the word of God is the only Rule: and therefore they used their utmost
endeavors to stop it as long as they could.

As to Arminius his Opinions, they are part from Pelagius and part from
Papists: Against the first God raised Austin, who by force of Scripture did
beat the Heretic in all his Errors: yet after his Death, Faustus and Cassianus.
those of his Sectators that remained, thinking it not fit for them to own
things to the height, as Pelagius had done, abated something of it, and made
alterations, and got the name of Semipelagians, whom also Austin and his
Followers did write against, with the same success he before had obtained
against their Founder: In the Eighth Century Semipelagians caused a great deal
of trouble as we see in the Cause of Gottescalk, whereof Worthy and Famous
Primate Usher, has given so true and so good an account. About the Year 1590
Molina a Jesuit renewed the old Errors, but was opposed at Rome by Alvarez, a
Dominican Friar, who followed the Principles of Thomas Aquinas, hence to this
very day continues the dispute about these matters between Jesuits and
Dominicans: Lessius another Jesuit at Lovain in the Spanish Netherlands, became
a Second to Molina, and under the favor of the Neighborhood, those Errors
passed into Holland, where Arminius entertained them. Let those who have a mind
to a fuller account of Pelagius his Errors, read what Joh. Ger. hardi Vossii
Hist. Pelag.
one has written upon that Subject, for I mention it only by the by, and as it
leads me to the Arminians, who here durst not appear during King James's Life,
but in his Sons Reign under Archbishop Laud's Favor and Protection, in they
came with a full Sail, and then indeed, but not before, begins our Arminian
Church, but with this difference from those in Holland, that they incline more
to Socinianism, and ours more to Popery, hence it is that at last some of them
as Barret, Montague, etc. turned Papists.

Now it is true, and to be observed, how concerning the controverted points we
hold the same as did the ancient Fathers who did write against Pelagius: and
Arminians assert some of the same things, if not all, which Pelagius did, so
that it is the same Cause, and, as by the grace of God we shall see anon,
Pelagians did cast on their Adversaries, the same aspersions as Arminians do
upon us: But first we must set down what are their Opinions contained in
several Articles which they themselves at the Hague-Conference, and at the
Synod of Dort, reduced to five the Chief, though there be more: Here I will in
substance set them down; but to help the Reader I must first write the Orthodox
Doctrine in opposition to every Article of theirs, as an Antidote and
Preservative against the Poison. Afterward I shall endeavor out of Scripture
to prove it, and so confute their Notions, and this as shortly as I can, and as
far as I am able accommodating things with the capacity of the unlearned
Reader, which being done, then by the grace of God I shall go on, and as far as
God will be pleased to enable me, enlarge somewhat in the School way upon every
point.

First, Orthedox I.
We say that from all Eternity, God has by his unchangeable Decree and
Purpose, predestined unto life, not all Men, nor any undetermined, but a
certain select number of particular Men, commonly called the Elect, which
number can neither be increased nor diminished: Others he has passed by and
predestined to eternal Death.

They say, Arminian I.
there is no absolute or unrevocable, but only a conditional and mutable Decree
of Predestination both to Life and Death, and that not of any particular
persons, but indefinitely of all Believers and Unbelievers, and that the number
of the Elect and Reprobate is not so certain, but that it may be either
increased or lessened.

We say that the only moving and esficient cause of Predestination or Election
unto Life, Orth. II.
is the mere good Pleasure, Love, Free Grace and Mercy of God, not the
foresight of faith, perseverance, good works, good will, or any other quality
whatsoever in the persons elected: And that though sin be the only cause of
Damnation, yet the sole and primary cause of non-Election or Reprobation, or
why God does not Elect those that Perish, is the mere Free Will and Pleasure of
God, not the foresight of any actual sin, unbelief or final impenitency in the
person rejected.

They say, Arm. II.
the foreknowledge of Faith, Perseverance, Goodworks, and the right use of
Grace received, are the prerequired Conditions, and the efficient causes of
Election unto Life, not God's free grace and mercy only without respect to
these as to a cause, and that the original and moving cause of reprobation,
that is of the Decree not of its Execution, is only the foresight of sin,
unbelief or final impenitency in the persons rejected, not the mere free will
and pleasure of God.

We say that the Elect do always obey, Orth. III.
when the time appointed for their Conversion is come, neither do or can they
finally or totally resist the inward powerful and effectual call or working of
God's spirit in their Hearts in the very act of their Conversion, neither is it
in their own power to Convert or not Convert themselves, at that very time when
they are converted.

They say it is in the will and power of men, Arm. III.
either finally or totally to resist the inward call, the effectual working of
God's Spirit in their Hearts in the very act of Conversion, so that they may at
that very instant and all times else, either withstand or embrace their
Conversion as they please.

We say that true justifing, saving faith, Orth. IV.
is proper and peculiar to the Elect alone, who after they are once truly
regenerated and by faith ingrafted in Christ, do always and constantly
persevere unto the end, though they sometimes fall through infirmity into
grievous sins, yet they never fall totally or finally from the habits, seeds
and state of Grace.

They say that true justifying Faith is neither a true special fruit of
Election, Arm. IV.
nor yet proper to the Elect alone, that it is often found in Reprobates: And
that the very Elect by falling into sin, may and often do fall totally and
finally from the very habit, seeds, and state of Grace.

We say that Christ's death is of sufficient intrinsecal merit in it self,
Orth. V.
though not in God's intention or his holy Spirit's application, to redeem and
save all mankind, wherefore he died really and effectually for none but the
Elect, for whom alone he actually and effectually has obtained remission of
sins and everlasting life.

They say Jesus Christ died effectually alike for all men whatsoever, Arm. V.
whether Elect or Reprobates: without any special intent to save the Elect
alone, or any particular persons more than others: With a general purpose to
save all men alike, upon condition of their believing and applying of his
death, which depends principally upon every man's own actual will and powers,
not of Christ's actual application of it to them by his Spirit.

To this one thing more I shall add against one of their Opinions: Orth. VI.
We say there is not any such Free Will, any such universal and sufficient
Grace communicated unto all men, whereby they may Repent, believe and be Saved,
if they will themselves.

They say there is an universal sufficient Grace derived upon all men since the
fall of Adam, Arm. VI.
by virtue of which, they may all Repent, Believe and be Saved, if they will
themselves.

These and several other things of that kind, as namely, the important point of
Justification, which they so highly have corrupted, of Providence and others,
which by the grace of God in due time we shall have occasion to speak of, are
the matters we do differ about: yet to what we already said of their adhering
to Pelagians, Massilienses and Semipelagians, we may add how some of them own
Socinus's and Worstius his Blasphemies against the Trinity of the Divine
Persons, the simplicity of divine Nature it self, etc. as King James charges
them with it; and well so he might, for after Arminius's Death, they were so
desirous to be headed by Worstins, that they used all their endeavors to have
had him to succeed the other in his place of Professor of Divinity at Leyden:
Hence it is that they openly declared they had nothing against Worstius, nor
had found any thing in his Writings contrary to Truth and Piety, and that it
would be most profitable for Church and Commonwealth, if his calling should go
on. This account we have in the Preface of the Acts of the Synod of Dort. And
it is well known how King James opposed effectually that man's promotion to
that place, and whose Book De Deo and Attributis was here burnt by the hand of
the Hangman, according to King James's special Order, and by advice of the
Archbishop of Canterbury.

But because it is not enough to affirm things without proofs, therefore now
before I proceed, I must bring in evidence for the Articles I set down:
Scripture, which in this is Judge and Rule, affords us a great cloud of
Witnesses: And to begin with our first Article clearly proved out of that
excellent place of Ephesians. 1.4, etc.
St. Paul, which hereafter I shall have occasion to make use of, but for the
present omit to prove first the Eternity of God's Decree out of another Text of
the same Apostle. God who 2 Timothy 1.9.
has saved us and called us with an holy calling, not according to our works,
but according to his own purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus,
before the world began. This Text is very comprehensive, here is the Decree
under the name of his own purpose, out of which are excluded any thing of our
own, not according to our works, but attributed only to his Freegrace according
to his own purpose and grace: The eternity of this Decree, is thus expressed,
before the world began, this Decree of Election is the ground of our Salvation,
God who has saved us, the next effect is our Vocation, and called us with an
holy, that is an effectual calling. We want not other places of God's word to
prove the Eternity of his Decree, but afterward we shall have occasion to make
use of them, for often one and the same Text does prove several things.

As for the Immutability of God's Decree of Predestination, we have clear and
undeniable proofs. Psalm. 33.11.
David says, The counsel of the Lord stands for ever, the thoughts of his
heart to all generations. As positive as this is what he says in another
place: Psalm. 89.28, 33.34.
My mercy will I keep for him for evermore, and my covenant shall stand fast
with him. And a little below, nevertheless my loving kindness will I not
utterly take from him, nor suffer my faithfulness to fail. My covenant will I
not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my mouth. Here we see how
the Counsel of the Lord, and the thoughts of his heart which are his Decree
shall stand, that is, are unchangeable, so are his mercies, his
loving kindness, his faithfulness, which the Decree of Election is grounded
upon; as to his Covenant, called the thing that is gone out of his mouth, it
shall not be broken nor altered, but it shall stand: All this is for its
immutability. And the prophet, says, Isai. 14.24.
The Lord of hosts has sworn, saying, surely as I have thought, so shall it
come to pass and as I have purposed, so shall it stand: For the Lord of hosts
has purposed, and who shall disanul? and his hand is stretched, and who shall
turn it back? This makes good the immutability of a Decree both of Election and
Reprobation, so it does the final unrefistibility of Grace and of the works of
his Providence.

St. Paul that great Preacher of Free Grace, out of a sense of the great mercy
God had showed him, does almost every where batter down Works, Free Will, and
all pretenses of man's strength, to set up the Grace and Power of God,
specially in his Epistle to the Romans, but above all in the 9th chap. which
before we have done, we shall often have occasion to make use of, for it seems
to have been written to condemn Arminianism: In a place there the Apostle
says, Romans 9.11.
For the Children being not yet born, neither having done any good or any evil,
that the purpose of God according to Election might stand, not of works, but of
him that calls: any thing of works and of Faith too, (for they could have no
Faith before they were born, or had done any good or any evil) are here
excluded, and all attributed to the purpose of God according to Election: The
same Apostle, says in another place, that though some have erred concerning
the Truth, even those who before were professors of it, such as 2 Timothy 2.17, 19.
Hymineus and Philetus, yet, Nevertheless, the foundation of the Lord stands
sure, having this seal, the Lord knows them that are his: it is no prejudice
to, neither can it change God's Decree. And still to make use of the same
authority, St. Paul says elsewhere, Ephesians. 1.9.
Having made known unto us the mystery of his will, according to his good
pleasure, which he has purposed in himself: Not only that purpose in himself,
but also the declaration to us of that my stery of his will, are altogether
attributed to his good-pleasure, not to any thing without him, or in the
Creature, and all this to the end, Ephesians. 2.7.
That in the ages to come, he might show the exceeding riches of his grace, in
his kindness tovards us, through Christ Jesus. Here is Grace, here are riches
of Grace, yea, exceeding riches of Grace and kindness toward us in Christ
Jesus, through whom only these graces are conveyed to us, and who is the sole
dispenser thereof, and he adds, Ephesians. 1.11.
In whom also we have obtained an inheritance, being predestined according to
the purpose of him who works all things after the counsel of his own will.
Here every word is a sentence against our Adversaries, and after this, it is an
amazement to me, that amongst those who pretend to be Christians, and to
receive the word of God for rule of the Truth, there should be some who go
about to set up Free Will, and Man's strength to the prejudice of Grace; and
forge Motives and Counselors for God, besides his own good will and pleasure.

We say further, there is a certain small select number of those that are
predestined to Glory, this we speak after St. Paul, Romans 11.5, 6.
Even so then at this present time also, there is a remnant according to the
election of grace; and if by grace then it is no more of works: otherwise,
grace is no more grace; but if it be of works, then it is no more grace,
otherwise work is no more work. Here the reason is given, why amongst the
unbelieving obstinate Jews, there was a small remnant which did believe and
were saved: The Faith, Grace, and Salvation of this remnant is ascribed to
their Election as to the cause, and this Election affirmed to come only of
God's grace, and denied to have proceeded from any of their works, not by a
simple affirmation, but by a double opposition of Works and Grace, as
incompatible in point of Election. Arminians must not think to blind this with
saying, they do not attribute Election to a foresight of Works, but of Faith:
It Is true their Father Arminius does not openly assert it, this Text being so
clear and so positive, however he minced the matter, for he made Election and
Justification to depend upon Faith, not as an Instrument applying Christ, but
as an Evangelical Work in the Gospel, appointed of God to be a saving quality
in it self, as a perfect Obedience should have been under the Law: but his
Followers are not so scrupulons as he: But the Apostle denies it to be of Faith
as of Works, wholly ascribing it to the Election or Grace.

But as to the point of the small number of the Elect, our blessed Savior
himself decides it, when he says. Matthew. 20.10.
Many be called, but few chosen; and St. Paul, to show the small number of
those that are elected and shall be saved, is not satisfied to call it a
remnant in the place already quoted, but in another of the same Epistle, he
also makes use of the word remnart, Romans 9.27.
Though the number of the children of Israel be as the Sand of the Sea, a
remnant shall be saved. Only a remnant, and this after the Prophet Isaiah
10.20, 21. Who elsewhere calls it Isai. 1.9.
A very small remnant, which the Apostle in the same Chapter does call a Seed,
Romans 9.29.
Except the Lord of Sabbath had left us a seed, which is only as much as
suffices to sow the ground. Heb. 12.23.
These are called the general Assembly, and Church of the first born, which are
written in Heaven, in the Book of God's Election, which can never be increased
nor diminished, and this Ephesians. 4.12, 13.
for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the ministry, for the
edifying of the body of Christ: till we all come in the unity of the faith, and
of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the
stature of the fullness of Christ: Which means that there is a fullness of
the mystical body of Christ, that is so many Members, and that every Member is
to come unto a degree of Stature, unto a perfect Man, as a certain number of
Martyrs that shall be fulfilled, Rev. 6.9, 11. All those and those only Romans
8.30.
whom God did predestinate, them he also called, with an inward and effectual
calling, and whom he called, all and only them he also justified, all and only
them he also glorified. This is the Golden Chain of our Salvation, and the
thing so certain and so sure, that though to some it be to come, it is
represented as already past; and as if they were in actual possession of Glory:
There shall be no more nor less; and though to the eye of Man in this there may
seem to be some alteration, some falling from the Truth, it is only as to the
outward show and profession, not as to the Election. Wherefore St. John 1 John
2.19.
says, They went out from us, but they were not of us, for if they had been of
us, they would no doubt have continued with us. And this also is a strong proof
and evidence of the perseverance, and against the final Apostasy of Saints,
which Arminians are stiff asserters of: And that Election is the sole cause of
everlasting Salvation, it appears, because into the heavenly City Rev. 21.27.
none shall enter, but they which are written in the Lamb's Book of Life? In
another place this Book is mentioned, Rev. 13.8.
and all that dwell upon the earth shall worship him (the Beast) whose names
are not written in the book of the lamb, slain from the foundation of the
world. This is the Book of God's Decree of Election, all that have names
written in it shall enter into new Jerusalem, or Heaven; but those whose names
are not written therein, and do worship the Beast, Rev. 20.10, 12.
shall with the devil, the beast and the false prophet be cast into the lake of
fire and brimstone, that is Hell, and shall be tormented day and night for ever
and ever, and in that same chap. ver. 12. again amongst the Books that were
opened, a particular mention is made of the Book of Life, the opening of which
Book is mentioned by a Dan. 7.10, and 12.1: Philip. 4.3.
Prophet, and by an Apostle, speaking of some whose names are written in the
Book of Life.

On the other side, we say that as God has elected some to everlasting Life,
so others he has reprobated, and appointed to eternal Death. The Decree of
Predestination is the sentence of both, of Pardon and Absolution for some, and
of Condemnation for others. See the proof of this, Romans 9.22.
What if God willing to show his wrath, and to make his power known to men,
endured with much long suffering, the vessels of wrath fitted for destruction?
Such as Esan, whom God hated, such as Pharaoh, Ver. 13, 17.
whom God raised for this same purpose, that I might show my power in thee, and
that my name might be declared throughout all the earth. All the earth is
God's, and so are all that dwell therein, and this calls to my mind a common
saying we have my Lord is Lord and Master at home, where, as he pleases, he may
order things as they best conduce to his honor and convenience, and if we may
argue from the less to the greater, why should we not say, Heaven and Earth are
God's; why then should not the Lord dispose of all things therein for his
Glory, as it best seems good unto him? Scripture speaks of it, as matter of
Fact, I hope no Man may or will question the matter of Right. Jude 4.
There are certain men crept in unawares, who were before of old ordained to
this condemnation, etc. So that as some are ordained to eternal life, others
are to condemnation, this is a Scripture phrase, not of our making. We have a
third witness for this Truth: Christ is a stone, 1 Pet. 2.8.
a stumbling, and a rock of offense, to them which stumble at the word, being
disobedient, whereunto also they were appointed: As some are vessels of honor,
appointed to obedience of Faith, so others are vessels of dishonor, appointed
to disobedience; and this we do clearly see in the next verse, by the
opposition he makes between some men and others: But ye, says he, are a chosen
generation, Verse. 9.
a Royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar people. The Lord Jesus says
clearly, how at the last day there shall be two sorts of men: To his sheep at
the right hand, he will say, Matthew. 25.33, 3^, etc.
come ye blessed of my father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you, from the
foundation of the world. Which proves their Election to Glory from Eternity,
as blessed of the Father: In these words I think I read God's Decree of
Election of those blessed ones. But Christ will say to those on the left,
depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his
Angels. Here is a Kingdom prepared for the blessed of the Father from the
foundation of the World; here is an everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and
his Angels, so that in that very place me may see Christ opening the Books of
Election and Reprobation, of Salvation and Damnation; not only the Names but
the Persons of the Elect may be seen on the right hand, as those of the
reprobate may be seen on the left. This everlasting fire is prepared not only
for the Devil and his Angels, but also for the Devil and his Children, for so
our Savior calls some Jews, John 8.44.
Ye are of your father the Devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do: he
was a murderer from the beginning, etc. he is a liar, and the father of it.
Thus Elymas the Sorcerer, is by St. Paul, called Acts 13.10.
thou child of the devil, thou enemy of all righteousness: Such was Judas by
our Savior called, Joh. 17.12.
the son of perdition, who as Peter says, Acts 1.25.
was gone to his own place: If there be, as certainly there is, a place for the
Devils and wicked Men, prepared from Eternity, there is reason also why from
Eternity wicked men should he appointed for that place, upon which account as I
said before, they are vessels of wrath fitted for destruction. Now that God is
the efficient cause of both Election and Reprobation, it is plain out of what
the Apostle says, 1 These. 5 9.
God has not appointed us to wrath, but to obtain salvation by our Lord Jesus
Christ. Then God does appoint some Men to Wrath, and some to Salvation. Thus
the Reader may see how strong in that way comes the stream of Scripture, which
we do but follow.

Our Second Article is this: The only moving cause of our Election, is the mere
good pleasure, love, free grace and mercy of God: This truth we also have many
proofs of. I Exodus 33.19.
will, says God, be gracious to whom I will be gracious, and will show mercy
on whom I will show mercy: What can Men object against this? By the mouth of
his Prophet, he says, Hos. 14.4.
I will love them freely. We use to say nothing is more free than Love: Yet
amongst Men, some motive or pretense may happen to be assigned, but in relation
to God's love to the Creature, no such thing may be pleaded for, even in this
world when God prefereth a people or one person before another, there is
nothing in that subject to move him to it, as in the case of the Children of
Israel. Moses tells them plainly, first, not for their number Deuteronomy. 7.7, 8.
the Lord did not set his love upon you, nor choose you, because you were more
in number than any people, for ye were the fewest of all people: but because
the Lord loved you, and would keep the oath he had sworn unto your fathers. Let
this stop every Man's mouth, God loves because he will love, let who can go
further and fathom that which is infinite: neither were they chosen and loved
for their wisdom, for Deuteronomy. 32.21.
they were a nation void of counsel, neither was there any understanding in
them. Nor for their uprightness of heart, or for chap. 9.4, 5, 6.
their righteousness, for they were a stiff-necked people. Neither was it for
any power of theirs, chap. 8.17, 18.
to do, to say, not so much as in thine heart, my power, and the might of mine
hand has gotten me this wealth. And chap. 4.38.
the nations that were driven out before them, were greater and mightier than
they: So none of the things mentioned, nor any thing else in them, commended
them to God. We see how careful was that faithful Servant of God, to beat them
out of the conceit of any merits of their own, to move the Lord God to do them
good: Hence it is that Samuel says to Israel, 1 Samuel 12.22.
the Lord will not forsake his people, and the reason he gives, is this,
because it has pleased him to make you his people. Thus it is with God, upon
the account of any mercy he bestows upon the Creature of any nature
whatsoever, David declares the same, Psalm. 44.3.
for they got not the land in possession by their own sword, neither did their
own arm save them: but thy right hand, and thine arm, and the light of thy
countenance, because thou had a favor unto them. Thus we read in the Gospel,
when the Lord Jesus worked a Cure of any bodily or spiritual Disease, he made
it wholly depend upon his will, as in the Miracle upon the Leper, he said,
Matthew. 8.3.
I will be thou clean; and in the case of working Faith, chap 11.27.
neither knows any man the Father save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son
will reveal him. So Joh 5.21.
the Son quickneth whom he will. Thus as of our Election, so of our
Regeneration and Conversion, there is no other cause but the will of God, for,
Jam. 1.18.
of his own will begat he us, with the word of truth. In few words, the whole
work of Salvation is an effect of his free grace: Ephesians 2.^ ad verse. 8.
When we were dead in sin, he has quickened us, the reason he gives there, is
this, by grace ye are saved, in both verses, for he repeats it three verses
lower, by grace ye are saved, through faith, and that not of our selves, it is
the gift of God.

We further say, there was no foresight or consideration of any work, faith, or
merit in us, why God should Elect us? Ezck. 16.6.
And when I passed by thee, and saw thee polluted in thine own blood, I said
unto thee, when thou wast in thy blood, live: yea, I said unto thee when thou
wast in thy blood, live. What sign of Faith or comeliness in that condition was
there in us? what ornaments in us there have been since, they are the work of
God in us, whether repentance, faith, holiness, or any other grace: For after
God said to us, live, he washed and anointed us, clothed and decked us, etc. as
may be seen in the following verses. verse. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.
We add that sin is the only cause of damnation, as in St. Matthews Matthew
25.42, 43.
Gospel, by me quoted already: Romans 2.9.
Tribulation and anguish upon every soul of man that does evil. In another
place of Scripture he says positively Romans 6.23.
the wages of sin is death. But here by the by this I must take notice of, how
though Damnation be the reward for Sin, it does not follow, that Salvation
should be the reward of Faith or good Works, the just reward of Sin is Death,
it is its due; but the Apostle does not say that Eternal Life is the wages of
Faith or Righteousness, as Death is of Sin; Ver. 23.
but the gift of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord. There is a
great disparity between the rules and means of Justice, and of Mercy, as
hereafter we shall have occasion to show, as also why God leaves and Elects one
and not the other, as in the ease of Esau and Jacob. Malach. 1.2, 3.
I have loved you says the Lord, yet ye say, wherein have thou loved us? Was
not Esau Jacob's Brother, yet I loved Jacob, and I hated Esau, of which no
account but God's pleasure, for St. Paul makes to the same purpose, use of the
place in Romans 9. as already quoted.

But now we must come to the proof of our 3d. Article, namely, that the Elect
do constantly obey God's call when the time is come, when Cant. 1.4.
God draws they follow, nay, they run; draw me, we will run after thee, and
Lament. 5.21.
turn thou us unto thee, and we shall be turned: The Elect obey the call: When
St. Paul heard the voice from Heaven, he said, Acts 9.6.
Lord what will thou have me to do? This inward call, for St. Paul's was such
as well as outward, makes a great change in Man, how willing, how ready to
obey, Gal. 1.16.
he confered not with flesh and blood, but submitted. So did the Jailour, he
said to Paul and Silas, Act. 16, 30.
Sirs, what must I do to be saved? The new Converts willing to be directed,
said unto Peter and other Apostles, Acts. 2.37.
men and brethren wha shall we do; though at first all know not what to do, ye
are prepared to obey, and desirous to be instructed, when the Lord said unto
Paul, arise and go into the City, and it shall be told thee what thou must do;
he complied and went: So Samuel, as soon as 1 Samuel 3.4, 6, 8, 10.
the Lord called Samuel, he answered, Here I am: and though he at first did not
well know the nature of the voice, nor whose it was yet he ran to the place
whence he thought the voice came, disposed to obey, and when heat last was
better informed, then he said, Speak Lord, for thy servant hears: For though,
may be at first, God's people do not distinctly understand the call, yet God
never gives over calling till we are come to him, God makes known unto us the
mystery of his will, to this end, says St. Paul, Ephesians. 1.10.
That in the dispensation of the fullness of times, he might gather together in
one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven and which are on earth, even
in him: But God is never disappointed of his ends, he works effectually, and
unresistibly, Ver. 19.
wherefore this is called the exceeding greatness of his power to us ward who
believe, according to the working of his mighty power: Observe the Emphasis.
This dealing of God in and toward Believers, is in one and the same verse
called the working of Gods power; yea his Mighty Power, and in the beginning of
the verse, not only his Power, but the greatness, and the exceeding greatness
of his Power. The effectual preaching of the Gospel to People or Persons, is an
effect of their Election, as the Cause is known by the effect; so a posteriori,
Election is by a powerful preaching of the Gospel. 1 These. 1.4, 5.
Knowing, beloved, your election of God, says St. Paul; for our Gospel came
not you unto in word only, but also in power, and in the holy Ghost, and in
much assurance, etc. to the Elect ever it comes so, in the due time, and by its
coming so, they may judge themselves to be Elect, for he says also in much
assurance.

We add further, that the Elect neither do nor can finally and totally resist
the inward, powerful and effectually calling of God's spirit in the very act of
their Conversion: Psalm. 115.3.
For our God is in the heavens, he has done whatsoever he pleased. The same in
another place, we have with enlargement, Psalm. 13.6.
Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that did he in heaven, and in earth, in the seas,
and all deep places. No deeper places than Man's Heart, which no humane power
can dive into, much less to frame and govern it; but God can and does, even
those hearts that are the most unsearchable and past finding out; the hearts of
Kings, full of turnings and windings of humane Policy. Prove. 21.1.
Yet the Kings heart is in the hand of the Lord, as the rivers of water: he
turns it whithersoever he will, Ver. 2.
he makes nothing of it, and the Lord pondereth the hearts. Now in matter of
Conversion, the greatest opposition lies in the heart, but God can remove it as
it pleases him: Therefore let it be never so stubborn, it must fall when God
will have it, and it can never finally resist Grace: Isa. 45.23.
I have sworn by my self, says the Lord, that every knee shall bow, and every
tongue shall swear; yea, and every heart too shall vow and swear. Who can
resist the power of God, when he has a mind effectually to work? Chap. 43.13.
I will work, and who shall let it? What miserable wretches are those that dare
assert the Contrary.

Our 4th. Article says, True justifying Faith is peculiar to God's Elect: St.
Paul indeed calls it Tit. 1.1.
the faith of God's elect, and it must be proper to them, because it is an
effect and consequence of Election: Romans 11.7.
Israel has not obtained that which he secketh for, says Paul, what is it?
Righteousness and Justification, they were seeking to be justified by the works
of the Law, which is not the way, Faith is the only instrument of justification
before God, and as true Faith is an infallible effect and consequence of
Election, for they that are predestined, are also called and justified, as
appears Romans 8.30.
by the link of Salvation, so election has obtained it. Justification is only
for the Elect, and the rest were blinded, says the Apostle in the same verse:
We also in the same Article do affirm, that the true regenerate and believers
never fall totally, but persevere in the Faith, we have God's word for it, the
blessed and good man, says David, Psalm. 37.24.
Though he fall, he shall not be utterly cast down, the reason is in the
latter-end of the verse, and a good one two, for the Lord upholdeth him with
his hand: and in another place speaking of the same sort of men, he says,
Psalm. 145.14.
The Lord upholdeth all that fall, and raises up all those that be bowed down.

Our 5th. Article is that Christ effectually died not for all, because
Scripture speaking of the extent of his death, reduces it to many. Our Savior
says, Matthew. 20.28.
The Son of Man came to give his life a ransom for many, the same word he used
when he instituted his holy Supper: Chap. 26.28.
For this is my blood of the New Testament which is shed for many, not for all,
for the remission of sins: none could know the design of his death, and whom he
died for, better than himself: St. Paul makes use of the same word when he
says, Heb. 9.28.
Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many; long before his time, a
great Prophet had said so, or rather God by his mouth: Isai. 53.11, 12.
By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many, only those whom he
died for are justified, for justification is the fruit of his death, and in the
following verse it is joined to his Death and Satisfaction for sin, And he bare
the sin of many. Who these many are, Scripture explains it in other places,
they are called his people; the Angel said to Joseph, Matthew. 1.21
Thou shall call his name Jesus, for he shall save his people from their sins.
In another place they are named his sheep: I 1 John 10.15.
lay down my live for my sheep, says the Lord Jesus. St. Paul calls them his
Church, Acts 20.28.
Have a care to feed the Church of God, which he has purchased with his own
blood. So elsewhere he says, Ephesians. 5.^5.
Christ loved the Church and gave himself for it.

Our 6th. Article says there is not in any one, such free will, such universal
sufficient grace whereby to be saved, if they will, let a man never so much
consult in his affairs, yet God has the governing part. Prove. 16.9.
For though a man's heart devises his way: yet the Lord directs his steps.
And although Chap. 19.21.
there are many devices in a man's heart: nevertheless the council of the Lord
that shall stand. And if Chap. 20.24.
man's goings are of the Lord, as certainly they be, How can a man then
understand his own way? How can he be free to choose, specially in those things
that concern his Spiritual and Eternal welfare: If we have free will, How is
it Isai. 26.12.
that God has wrought all our works in us? With free will we could do it our
selves, and if in every one there be a sufficient universal grace, how can it
be true? That Jerm. 10.21.
the Pastors are become brutish and have not forght the Lord, therefore they
shall not prosper, and all their flocks shall be scattered: Wherein is the
grace here? and where the sufficiency? But we must come closer to the point,
John 6.44.
No man can come to me except the father which has sent me draw him. Where is
here our free will, and our sufficient grace? Our Savior to beat us out of
this conceit says, Chap 15.5, 6.
Without me ye can do nothing; it is not said far from me, for then we being
near him, might happen to do something of our own, but without me, we must have
him, or we can do nothing at all, not so much as to think a good thought, which
is least of all, for St. Paul says, 2 Cor. 3.5.
not that we are sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our selves,
take notice of the double exclusion given to our selves, but our sufficiency is
of God, there we must look for it, and expect it from. Our Savior, to make us
the more sensible how without him we can do nothing, strengthened that saying
with a similitude very proper in the next verse, If a man abide not in me, he
is cast forth as a branch, and is withered: a branch of a Vine or any other
Tree that is broken or cut off from the Tree and Root is thereby deprived of
the Sap, and nourishment thence conveyed to it, so it cannot live, but is
withered and cast into the fire to be burned, no sign or hopes of life in such
a bough, this is the certain and infallible doom of those who abide not in
Christ; John 15.6, 7, 8.
But if ye abide in me and my words, abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will,
and it shall be done unto you. Then we shall bear much fruit, and be Christ's
disciples: Let us take notice that it is not enough for us to have Christ with
us, but we must be and abide in him, or else he will profit us nothing. St.
Paul could say 1 Cor. 15.10.
by the grace of God only, I am what I am, and what I do, Yet not I but the
grace of God that was with me.

Thus much I premised at first, to make things as clear and intelligible as I
could: I have been somewhat long in my Quotations, that I might lay a sure
foundation, for the word of God must be judge in the case, and See my
seasonable discourse about Religion, in 1689.
Texts of Scripture are the plainest and strongest Arguments that can be used
in and about such Controversies; though I omitted several which in the
prosecution of this design of mine, shall be produced: I do not enter upon this
Subject as acted by a spirit of strife, to dispute for disputes sake, as too
many do. I thank God I am acted by a better principle: I know, and others as
well as I, may, how it is the duty of every Christian to seek after and
endeavor to find the truth, and when found out, to own and embrace it, and
never part with it, give glory to God, without any thing of self ends. This
truth may be found in the revealed word of God, which is Psalm. 9.7.
perfect converting the soul; making wise the simple: It must often be read,
for God will be sought after in the way of his Commandments, for the
understanding whereof, men are not to trust to their Parts and Learning,
because without Grace that is but ignorance and foolishness, men stand in need
that Christ would open their understanding, as he Luke 24.45.
did that of the disciples, that they might understand the Scriptures: But 2 Timothy 3.^3.
evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse deceiving, and being deceived:
But we must give God thanks, That his Decree of Election has secured our
Salvation, which if it had lain in our hands, had soon been lost and forfeited,
like the Birthright of Esau, and the substance of the Prodigal Son. And all
that would advise others to, or themselves stand to this trial of free will,
and right improvement of Graces, I may very well in Job 16.2. chap. 13.4.
Job's words, say to, Miserable comforters are ye all, and ye are forgers of
lies, ye are all physicians of no value.

Hitherto we have given an extract of Controversies about these several points,
and I hope have out of Scripture made good our assertions, so that an ordinary
capacity may with the help of God be able to understand them: Now we must
proceed, and by God's grace, endeavor to dive into this Subject: But before I
engage further upon this important matter, I must lay down some rules that will
contribute toward the better understanding of it.

First, Nothing is done in time but what was foreordained of God from all
Eternity. Act. 15.18.
Known unto God are all his works from the beginning of the world. Thus Chap.
2.23, and 4.27, 28.
Christ was delivered by the determinate council and foreknowledge of God:
else you settle a contingency in relation to God, and destroy his
foreknowledge.

Secondly, what God decreed shall infallibly come to pass, or else you destroy
his immutability: Malach. 3.6.
I the Lord change not.

Thirdly, No motive in God from without, why he should decree: neither does the
execution of the decree depend upon any condition in or from men; else you take
away Act. 17.25. Psalm. 50.12.
Gods independency and self sufficiency.

Fourthly, The decree is one single act, or else you destroy the simplicity of
God, when we speak otherwise, it is after our manner of conceiving; in God is no
prius or posterius, first and last, or else you deny his Eternity. Now
Eternity, Independency, Immutability and Simplicity are God's incommunicable
Attributes, which no man may strike at.

Fifthly, Secret things belong to God, Deuteronomy. 29.29.
but revealed things unto us and to our Children for ever: The one we must not
dive into, but the other we ought not to neglect: We are forbidden to presume
beyond what is written, but are commanded to acquaint our selves with what God
has set forth in his word: That he would have us to know, or else had not
declared it: What is fit and necessary for us to know, we must inquire into,
and not else; so these measures must be observed about these high mysteries of
our Salvation as are God's decrees; we ought to assort nothing but what we have
a warrant for out of God's word.

Another thing we ought to lay for a foundation is this: In every thing God
proposes his own glory for his ultimate end; now in two ways God is glorified,
in his Mercy, and in his Justice, which include also both his Wisdom and his
Power. God's mercy is manifested in his free grace and pardon to some, and his
justice in the punishment of those that transgressed his Law: God is a gracious
King, the fountain of Mercy, and Judge, of the spring of Justice. Now that
which is first in intention, is last in execution, eternal Happiness for some,
and everlasting Misery for others, is the subordinate end: thus Heaven is
prepared for the Elect, and Hell for Reprobates: And this in one word is called
Predestination.

CHAP. III. Of Predestination.
SOme ignorant people amongst Men and Women, are well acquainted with the name,
though they do not at all know the thing thereby signified; they are startled
and abhor the word, as if it was a kind of a Spell, but if they were well
acquainted with God's word, they would easily find it there. The great Preacher
of free grace, St. Paul, has it no less than twice in one and the same
Chapter, Ephesians. 1.5. Verse. 11.
Having predestined us unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ, and six
verses lower he adds, In whom also we have obtained an inheritance, being
predestined according to the purpose of him who works all things according to
the counsel of his own will. And in another place, he mentions it twice in
two verses, For whom he did foreknow, Romans 8.29, 30.
he also did predestinate: Moreover, whom he did predestinate, them he also
called, etc. Thus it appears it is no Barbarous name, nor unknown to Scripture,
it is the same as foreordained and appointed.

Now I will come to the thing: Predestination is an Eternal and Immutable
Decree about the everlasting future state of Angels and Men: But because we
were not concerned in that which relates to Angels, and that Scripture in
matter of Predestination speaks only of men, we shall consider it only as men
are the object thereof: but before, I must show what a Decree is, because it
enters within our definition; now God's Decrees are the eternal and
unchangeable counsels and resolutions he has taken from all Eternity, about
what he purposed to do in time, according to the first rule we have laid down:
These Decrees are called God's essential works ad intra, inward, according to
our capacity and manner of conceiving, which himself in his word is pleased to
condescend to: We then call them Decrees after the manner of Men, for Decrees
and Resolutions of Men are works or acts really distinct from Man, from his
Understanding and his Will: By this way we do conceive God's Decrees or rather
God Decreeing, though properly they may not be called his Works, for every act
so properly called, is an effect really distinct from the Agent: But in God
it is not so, or else his supreme Simplicity would come to nothing; when it is
said of God are known all his works, that knowledge is nothing else but his
Decree of doing all things to be done in time.

Of ELECTION.
PRedestination has two parts, Election and Reprobation, the word is not
restrained only to Election, as Papists and some others would have it: It is in
vain amongst Hebrews or Greeks, to search the Original of the word, which is
Latin: The ancient Latin Authors used the word destinare to destinate, or
appoint for Pains as well as Rewards, so did the ancient Doctors of the Church
as Enchirid. cap. 100. de Civit. Dei lib. 12. cap. 24.
Austin, Ad. capital. Gallor.
Prosper, Lib. 1. ad Monim.
Fulgentius. Now the Election we here speak of, is not to an Office in which 1 Samuel 10 24.
Saul and David were chosen Kings over Israel. So Matthias Acts 1.24, 26.
was by lot chosen one of the twelve: But it is Election to Eternal Life and
Salvation.

Now Election is a Predestination of some Men to Eternal Life, to be obtained
by Faith in Christ, only out of God's pleasure, in them to declare his Divine
Mercy: Every part of which definition, we by the grace of God shall speak of:
This point most of any is to be taken notice of, because it is the ground of
our Hope, Faith, Holiness, in a word, of the whole mystery of our Salvation,
which does wholly run and depend upon the decree of our Election, therefore to
darken it, the Devil has stired up so many instruments to oppose it: In
Scripture among many Texts we have, one specially lays open the whole matter
before us, which here. I quote to be read with great application. Ephesians. 1.3,
4, 5, 6, 7.
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us
with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ; according as he has
chosen us in him before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and
without blame before him in love: having predestined us unto the adoption of
children by Jesus Christ, to himself, according to the good pleasure of his
will: To the praise of the glory of his grace, wherein he has made us accepted
in the beloved, in whom we have redemption, through his blood, etc. The
eternity of God's decree of Election is here asserted, he has chosen us in
him, before the Foundation of the World; this Election is affirmed to be the
cause of all spiritual blessings which God has blessed us with, some of those
blessings are named, as Holiness, Blamelessness, and Adoption: Now Faith,
Repentance, Charity, and such graces are parts of Holiness, and the fruits of
the Spirit, Holiness is posteriour to our Election: All those blessings are in
and by Jesus Christ: Out of this Text it also appears that the good pleasure
of God is the only impulsive or moving cause (if we may use such a word which
is improper here) to Elect us, nothing from without, all from within according
to the good pleasure of his will.

Hence between Papists, Arminians and Us (for I must say in matters of grace,
they both join against us) arises the question, What it is that moved God to
appoint some Men to Eternal Life? We say, nothing but God's good will and
pleasure moved him to it. Amongst several reasons we have to prove it, I will
only bring two of the chief. The first, because Scripture assigns no other
cause but that as the only, and when the word is silent we ought not to speak.
The whole 9th. Chapter to the Romans, is a sentence of condemnation against the
Adversaries; there St. Paul says of Election, Romans 9.16, 15.
It is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that
shows mercy: Which is but a conclusion out of what God said to Moses in the
foregoing verse, verse 18.
I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, and I will have compassion on
whom I will have compassion, whence he thus concludes, so then it is not of
him, etc. it is only of free grace. Why? three verses after the Apostle gives
the reason, He has mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he
hardens. This is very plain, if any one is willing to dispute God's right
herein, let him do it: but he shall find God is a strong party. 2 Timothy 1.9.
God has saved us and called us with an holy calling, not according to our
works, but according to his own purpose and grace, which was given us before
the world began: Here the Decree of Election is made the cause of calling, and
other graces we receive in time. The other reason is, because in those that
were elected was nothing at all that could move him to love them. Ephesians. 2.1.
We were men dead in trespasses and sins, unfit for any good thing, and guilty
of eternal death.

They say God has chosen some, because from Eternity he foresaw they would
believe in Christ and continue in the Faith; to which some add the foresight of
some good works with Faith; but against this I say, God could foresee in sinful
Man no spiritual good, but what out of his mercy he was to give him, (this none
but Pelagians can deny) consequently God could not foresee Faith or Good Works
as a motive to his Decree. God elected us to be holy and without blame before
him: That is, to the end we should be, and not because we were such. Holiness
is an effect, and not a cause of Election, Faith also is an effect of Election,
as clearly expressed in Scripture. Acts 13.48.
And as many as were ordained to eternal life, believed. If so, then Faith is
not the cause that moved God to elect us, we were elected to believe, not
because we believed before, for then we had chosen Christ, and not he us,
contrary to what he positively says to his disciples, John 15.16. chap. 13.1^.
Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and I know whom I have chosen.
Now though Election be the cause of Faith, it does not follow by the rule of
relatives which are said to be the cause of one another, that Faith should be
the cause of Election, that maxim is to be understood of the natural respect
and relation of the Subjects, not of the Subjects themselves of relations, else
it would a so follow, That because the Creator is the cause of the Creature,
the Creature ought also to be the cause of the Creator, which is Blasphemy.

It is the part of a wise Agent, when he does appoint to the end, also to
appoint to and provide the means: So the only wise God having predestined us
to the end eternal life, has also predestined us to the means, namely Faith.
For says the Apostle, 2 These. 2.13.
God has from the beginning chosen you to salvation, through sanctification of
the spirit, and belief of the truth: here are the decree, election chosen, the
efficient cause God the Object, you the end to salvation, with the means
sanctification of the spirit, and belief of the Truth or Faith. Farther I say,
if prevision of Faith had been the cause of our Election, it would also be the
cause of our Vocation in time, which is contrary to the word, 2 Timothy 1.9.
God has called us with his holy calling, not according to our works, but
according to his purpose and grace. I bring one Argument more, which is this,
if Faith and Holiness foreseen, had been the cause of our Election, it would
follow, that the object of Election had been Man already restored through
Grace, and justified, which is false. Take notice that there are not two
Decrees, one to Grace, the other to glory, as they say, Scripture makes no
mention of a double Election, by one and the same Decree we are elected to
Glory through Grace, as the means and way; for the first in Intention, is last
in Execution: We are saved by Faith, yet not elected by Faith, the reason of
both being different, Election is an eternal act of God, inward and
immediately, proceeding from God, but Salvation is a temporal act of God,
outward and mediate, which is perfected thorough many other means, and second
causes: if the causes of Election and Salvation be the same, then the Law of
God, the Gospel, Sacraments and Ministers, are the causes of our Election, for
God makes use of all these means to bring us to eternal life. We are elected in
Christ, not for Christ; God was never moved by the merit of Christ to Elect us,
but he decreed to save us in Christ, who is not the cause of the Decree, but a
medium or means appointed in the Election, to execute it.

We must have a care not to confound between the cause and sign of things which
do very much differ; thus the Rainbow is not the cause why the world shall no
more be drowned with a general Flood, it is only the sign of it, the cause is
God's Will and Promise, thus Sacraments are signs, not causes of the things
they represent, Circumcision was the sign of God's Covenant with Abraham, but
not the cause which was God's Free Grace and Mercy to him; the Lords Supper is
the sign of Christ's Passion, but not the cause, which is God's Free Grace and
Mercy to mankind. When our blessed Savior says, Matthew. 16.2, 3.
When it is evening ye say, it will be fair weather for the Sky is red, etc.
that color of the Sky is not the cause, but the sign of fair or foul weather.
Thus to make an Application to our Subject, I say we must take heed not to make
Faith the cause of our Election, when it is the sign and effect of it, so much
posteriour to it; for Election is from eternity, when Faith is given but in
time, and yet serves to prove Election, for wheresoever true saving Faith is,
there is an infallible sign, but no cause of Election, which far from being
caused by any grace, is the sole and only ground of all and every grace we
receive, Faith it self the chief Gospel grace, is an effect of it, as it
appears out of many places of Scripture, which I already quoted, so out of Acts
18.27.
Acts, where it is said Apollos helped them much, which had believed through
grace: And those men who will not believe this, will have much cause to fear
they are of the same sort of those whom our Savior speak of, when he says:
John 9.39.
For judgment I am come into this world, that they which see not may see, and
that they which see might be made blind: There is mercy for the first and
judgment for the last; for certainly Christ came into the world both for mercy
and for judgment, to make some unexcusable. John 15.22.
If I had not come and spoken to them, they had not had sin, but now they have
no cloak for their sin: It was said of Christ almost after his very Birth, That
Luke 2.34.
he was set for the fall and rising again of many in Israel, and for a sign
which shall be spoken against. And as the Prophet says, Isa 3.14.
a stone of stumbling, a rock of offense to both the houses of Israel, for a
gin and for a snare to Jerusalem: And Men are too apt to fancy things to be
the cause of God's actings, which are not; thus the Disciples themselves
thought, because a Man was born blind, the Man's sins or his Parents must be
the cause of it, but our Savior tells them they were in an error, for Joh. 9.3.
neither has the man sinned nor his parents, but he was born blind, that the
works of God should be made manifest in him. This place shows clearly, how
God in whatsoever he does, in, upon, or for Men, he minds chiefly his own
Glory, and follows his own will and pleasure: Thus Chap. 11.4.
Lazarus's Sickness and Death was for the glory of God and of Christ; God
denied the Man his sight from his Birth, here are his Will, his Power and
Justice over his Creature, the Lord Jesus gives him his sight, there is mercy,
thus the works of God are made manifest in this Man, and why not so too in
others, in relation to eternity as well as to time? This Man was naturally
blind, but God is pleased to give him his sight; as he might without any wrong
have left him in his blindness, if it had been his pleasure: So if God be
pleased to leave some Men naturally dead, in that condition, and quicken others
that were in the same state, what has wretched Man to do to cavil against or
find fault with it? Or presumptuously not to be satisfied with this cause, the
mere will and pleasure of God, but must prye into his Secrets and forge other
Motives, instead of sticking to the Rule and Word of God: To such we may put
St. Paul's question, Romans 11.34, 35.
Who has known the mind of the Lord; or who has been his counselor? Have
thou known his mind, or have thou been his Counselor? Or who has first given
to him, have thou? then it shall be recompensed to thee again. Thou have chosen
him to be thy God, before he predestined thee to the adoption of Children,
thou have believed in him before he elected thee to believe in Christ; since
thou make God as accomptable to thee, be sure if he owes any thing, he will
pay it, but one should know that Job 33.13.
there is no striving against God, and that he gives not account of any of his
matters. For Prove. 21 30.
there is no wisdom, nor understanding nor counsel against the Lord.

As to the question, whether or not the decree of Election be absolute, I say
it is not in some respect, and in some other it is; it is not absolute in
relation to the means conducing to the obtaining of Salvation, which are
included in the decree whereof the merits of Christ and Faith are the chief,
though I must say that the Use and Application of those means is the work of
grace, God says Job, Job. 23.1^.
performs the thing that is appointed for me: And St. Paul, by the grace of
God I am what I am... Yet not I but the grace of God that was with me. 1 Cor.
15.10. And I can do all things through Christ, which strengthens me. Philip.
4.13. It is absolute in relation to any impulsive or instrumental cause, or any
condition which the decree should depend upon, which is the question between
Arminians and us: In the execution of the decree, Faith is the instrument and
hand whereby we receive and apply Christ's merits unto us, but it is under no
such Notion in the making of the decree. What I said before I repeat here, that
there are not two decrees, one for the end, another for the means, but one and
the same for both, because God wills together end and means, where one can
do, two are superfluous: Now God does nothing in vain.

Let us now speak of the matter of Election, or who are those whom God elected
unto eternal life? They are Men fallen in Adam, and for sin in the sight of
God, guilty of eternal death, yet God has not chosen all men sinners, but only
some few of every sort, especially of those which are low and contemptible in
this world: As to the first, they are Men fallen in Adam. We think this to be
the order of God's decrees about Men; First, to Create Man for the glory of his
Name; Secondly, to permit they should fall from the integrity wherein they were
created, and so become guilty of eternal death. Thirdly, Out of that whole lost
lump of mankind, to restore some to everlasting life, thereby to show his
mercy, and leave the rest in the state of Perdition and Damnation for their
sins, to manifest his Justice. Our reasons why God has chosen men in that
state are. First, Because he has Ephesians. 1.4.
elected us that we should be holy and without blame; Therefore he looked upon
such as unholy and sinners. Secondly, Scripture calls Election, Romans 9.15.23.
a will to show mercy, and a little lower, the Elect are called vessels of
mercy; therefore considered as in misery, for misery is the Object of Pity and
Mercy.

We say in the second place, all men are not elected, only some out of all
sorts, on which Scripture is positive, Matthew. 20.16.
few are chosen: Neither does God give eternal life to all, for some are
Damned, therefore he decreed not to do it; for God does nothing in time, but
what from eternity he decreed to be done, God has not mercy upon all, but Romans
9.18.
he hardneth some, neither does he give the means of Salvation as calling by
the word, Faith in Christ, Repentance, Justification by Faith, to all but only
to some, so that we may say they who are not elected to the means, are not
elected to the end, for God will not bestow the end, but through the means, the
very name of Election signifies a choice of some out of many, he cannot be
said to choose, who takes all promiscuously.

The Adversaries we are now disputing against, to prove that God decreed from
eternity, with an antecedent will to save in time all and every Man, do argue
thus, 1 Timothy 2.4.
God will have all men to be saved, therefore he decreed to save them all, but
the consequence is not good, for in the Text the Apostle does not mean every
particular Man, but men of all sorts as Princes and Subjects, which is the
scope of the place. For there he exhorts to have prayers made for all men,
for Kings and all in authority, Rich and Poor, Old and Young, Men and Women,
great Men and of low degree, that is of all Ages, Sexes, Quality, Nation and
People, etc. The particle all is distributive, as Schoolmen say, into the
genders of singulars, not into the singulars of genders; we do not our selves
give that sense, but it is Scripture interpretation: The four Beasts and twenty
four Elders, said to the Lamb, Rev. 5.9. chap. 7.9. and chap. 11.9. and chap.
13.6. and chap. 14.6. and chap. 19.18.
Thou wast slain and have redeemed us to God by thy blood, out of every
kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation. Which is repeated in several other
places of the same book as are quoted in the Margin, to show this is the true
meaning of the Spirit of God. And the Reader may peruse them with that of
Colos. 3.4.

Again they object, 2 Pet. 3.9.
God will have none to perish but all that should come to repentance. But there
the Apostle speaks not indifferently of all Men, but only of the Elect, as
appears in the same verse, God is patient, or long suffering to us ward, so,
he is not willing that any of us should perish; and who those are whom he
speaks to, they are the same he writes his Epistle to, and them he names in
the first verse of the first Chap. To them that have obtained like precious
faith with us, thorough the righteousness of God and our Savior Jesus Christ:
He will have none of these to perish, but that they all come to repentance, and
certainly they will: Thus the word all is taken for the Elect in the two
following places, 1 Timothy 2.6.
Christ gave himself a ransom for all, and 2 Cor. 5.15.
Christ died for all, and not for every Man whether Believer or Reprobate, as
it will be proved in its place by the grace of God. What St. Paul says, that
Romans 11.32.
God has concluded them all in unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all, is
not to be understood of every particular Man, but of Jews, and Gentiles
indefinitely, to whom he gives hopes of Salvation through Faith in Christ, for
that is the scope of that whole Chapter; so the sense is this, God has
concluded under sin Jews and Gentiles, to have mercy on both in Christ
apprehended with Faith, so that Jews and Gentiles may ascribe their Salvation
only to God's mercy. This Text compared with another, Gal 3.22.
Scripture has concluded all under sin, that the promise by faith of Jesus
Christ might be given to them that believe, does clear the point: this last
interpreting the other, for as it appears, that all are concluded under sin,
so it shows how special mercy reaches only those who through the grace of
God, do believe, and through Faith are elected to everlasting life.

To say that God has from Eternity decreed to save all and every Man under
this condition, if they believe in Christ, not only they find in Scripture,
nothing to ground it upon, but withal entangle themselves in two very great
difficulties: First, to God they attribute a vain and imprudent Decree, for if
from Eternity God has foreseen that the condition of Faith in Christ shall not
be performed by many, to what purpose to make such a Decree of Salvation to
depend upon such a condition: Such a Decree does not become the wisdom of any
Man, much less of God: The Second inconveniency is this, they submit and make
faith a free gift of God, to depend upon the free will of man dead in
trespasses and sins; that it is in the power of Man to believe or not believe,
which is mere Pelagianism, and wholly contrary to Scripture. These
considerations have so wrought upon some, that they wave off the foresight of
Faith, but betake themselves to the foresight of the right use which Men would
make of outward means, of Conversion and Salvation, as the serious, saving
hearing, reading and meditation of the word of God, receiving of the Sacrament,
frequenting of Churches, etc. But alas, the first of these, is the fruit of the
Spirit, not of corrupt Nature, the saving hearing of the Word, as well as
Faith, proceeds from our Election. For 2 Cor. 2.15, 16.
the word is a Savior of life unto life, to none but the Elect; but to others
that perish, it is the Savior of death unto death. And if going to Church and
every hearing of the word of God, could make a difference between chosen and
reprobates, and was necessarily joined with Election, all those that perform
those duties would be Elect, which we know to be false: Experience teaches us
how sometimes the worst of Men, most averse from hearing of the Word, or
walking in the way of Salvation, are converted to God, others who seemed better
and fitter for the Kingdom of God being passed by and left; so calling is
sometimes for those who seemed the worst, not for those who appeared the best:
Farther this opinion makes the rejecting of the grace of the Gospel outwardly
offered, the only cause of reprobation: What then shall we say of those who
from the beginning of the world to the birth of our Savior, were damned,
whereof the thousandth part, never heard a word of Christ.

Now we proceed and say in the third place, the lesser part of sinners is
elected, and the greatest part left in their state of Damnation, which
Scripture clearly affirms: Romans 9.29. Chap. 11.5 4.
Except the Lord of Sabbath had lest us a seed, it is but a Seed, a remnant, a
little one, seven thousand amongst all the people of Israel: our Blessed
Savior who knew it very well says, though Matthew. 20.16. Chap. 7.13.14.
many are called, yet few are chosen, and broad is the way that leads to
destruction, and many there be that go in thereat. But, strait is the gate and
narrow is the way which leads unto life, and few there be that find it. They
are called the little Flock, whereof the Members at certain times are so few as
thereby invisible to man's eye, some times in God's not one. Fourthly, Kings
19.14. Ezekiel. 22.30.
We say, that these few ones are chiefly chosen out of those that are low and
contemptible in the world, for which we have that famous Text: 1 Cor. 1.26, 27,
28.
For ye see your calling brethren, how that not many wise men after the flesh,
not many mighty, not many noble, are called, but God has chosen the foolish
things of the world to confound the wise, and the weak to confound the mighty,
and base things of the world, and things which are despised has God chosen,
etc. Hence we learn two considerable things. First, Not to judge of the love of
God or his special grace out of humane Wisdom, Power or Nobleness: The Second
patiently to bear the lowness, meanness, weakness and despicableness before the
world, for they are signs rather of Grace than of Wrath. To that purpose also
is that passage in the Gospel, John 7.48, 49.
Have any of the Rulers, or of the Pharisees believed on him? But this people
who knows not the law are cursed: These learned and wise Highpriests and
Pharisees in their own conceit) would not go into Heaven, nor suffer others to
enter into it, are ye also deceived? But upon occasion our Savior plainly
tells them the truth, ye who think your selves so wise and righteous. are fools
in comparison of those whom you despise: For Matthew. 21.31.
Publicans and Harlots go into the Kingdom of God before you.

As every wise Agent proposes an end to himself in every thing he does, so
likewise the only wise God in our Election purposed the manifestation of his
mercy in his gracious Salvation of some sinners, this St. Paul speaks of, when
after having said, Ephesians. 1.4.6.
We are elected in Christ, he adds, to the praise of the glory of his Grace.
Hence it is that the Elect be called Romans 9.23.
Vessels of mercy: Which mercy, when God gives us grace to depend upon, then we
are grounded on the rock of Eternity, but Man's Pride makes him desire to be
loose from the Rock, and stand on his own bottom, which is mere quick Sand and
Mud. So at last he must needs sink into it, if God leaves him.

Now two things belong to the Decree of Election and are inseparable from it,
which do afford us matter of unspeakable comfort, they are, Eternity and
Immutability, for our Election is eternal and unchangeable. First, Eternal,
Ephesians 1.4. chap. 3.9.
God has chosen us in Christ before the foundation of the world, which in the
same Epistle is called the mystery, which from the beginning of the world has
been hid in God. And in another place, 2 Timothy 1.9.
Grace was given us in Christ Jesus, before the world began. And in another,
the same Epistle calls it Romans 16.25.
the revelation of the mystery, which was kept secret since the world began.
And in another Epistle, Colos. 1.26.
The mystery which has been hid from ages, and from generations, but now is
made manifest to his saints. It Is named Tit. 1.2.
the hope of eternal life, which God that cannot lie promised before the world
began: Because our hope of it is grounded there upon, which place proves also
the immutability and certainty of it, for God cannot lie: And St. Peter calls
Christ 1 Pet. 1.19, 20.
the lamb without blemish, and without spot, who verily was foreordained,
before the foundation of the world. All which Texts do point at our Election in
Christ from all Eternity; so we need no longer to insist upon this, but to
proceed to the unchangeableness.

When we say Election is unchangeable, we mean that none of those that are
elected to everlasting life can perish, and be damned, which is the same as to
say the number of Elect is certain, and can neither be augmented nor
diminished; so that the Elect ever remain Elect, and are never reprobates.
Several places in Scripture do prove this immutability of Gods Decrees, as the
following, which are so clear that there is no need of enlargement or
exposition. I Mal. 3.6.
the Lord change not, not in his Nature, which is always the same, that was,
that is, and that is to come, Eternal, immortal, etc. Nor does he change place,
because he always is every where, filling all with his infinite Being, nor is
his Mind and Will, which is the question in hand, he is not as men who often
alter their resolutions, but God being most and infinitely wise, the only Wise,
is unchangeable in his Decrees: So that 2 Timothy 2.19.
the foundation of the Lord, stands sure, having this Seal, the Lord knows
them that are his. His chosen, Romans 11.29.
The gifts and calling of God, are without repentance, for Numb. 23.19.
he is not a man that he should lie, neither the Son of Man, that he should
repent.

I know our Adversaries cast a slanderous aspersion upon this Doctrine, as
thus, let a Man walk, continue and obstinately persevere in sin, and do all the
evil he can, if he be unalterably elected to eternal life, he needs not care
what he does, for he shall be saved, which, say they, is an encouragement to
sin; so a Man that is a reprobate, let him do all possible good things, it is in
vain, he can never be saved: But those that say so, must either have a great
deal of gall and malice in their Heart, and be in the bonds of iniquity, or be
very ignorant of God's ways, and of the workings of grace upon the heart, What
an injurious opinion have they of God? as if he knew not what he does, to bring
Men into Heaven by the way of Hell, or into Hell by the way of Heaven, has the
Lord forfeited his wisdom, as to separate the means from the end? Is it not
blasphemy to think, nay, which is more, to say, that God who so strictly
forbideth Sin, and commands Repentance and Holiness in his word, would
therein give an encouragement to all manner of vice and wickedness. We own that
if the Elect would obstinately continue in sin, they should be damned, but God,
who will not have them to be damned and Perish, but after they have sinned to
return to him, and 2 Pet. 3.9.
come to repentance, does convert and with threatinngs and chastisements
contain them in their duty, as it appears in the cases of David, Peter, etc.
I add it is no more consisting for an Elect to persevere in sin to the end, than
for a Reprobate to persevere in grace and true Faith, which he never had. They
who in consequence of their Election be converted, are of another sort of
temper than those Slanderers take them to be of: notwithstanding the frailty of
the Elect, there is in them a fear and love of God, sin dwells but does not
reign in them, though sometimes they commit wickedness, yet they have not sold
themselves, as it is said of Ahab, to commit it, they sin, but are none of those
whom the Apostle speaks of, 2 Pet. 2.14.
that cannot cease from sin: If sometimes God leaves them to themselves, yet
he returns to them with his restraining, preventing and strengthening Grace,
Psalm. 68.28.
He strengthens that which he has wrought for them, and in St. Peter's
words, God does 1 Pet 5.10.
make them perfect, stablisheth, strengthens, and settleth them. After sin,
God does give them Checks. We read of David, that after his sin of numbering
the People, 2 Samuel 24.10.
His heart smote him, they have reality of faith though it be weak, sincerity
of Repentance though it be unperfect, truth of love to God, and Charity for the
Neighbor, though attended with much frailty and weakness.

Those that have experience and some inward assurance of God's mercy to them,
in Christ, have better thoughts of their duty, and will not be drudges of sin
and Satan, they will be afraid of doing things unworthy of God's Children for
fear of displeasing so gracious a Father, they will endeavor to work their
Salvation with fear and trembling, and as much as humane frailty and the
sinfulness of their nature will allow, they will avoid doing things unworthy of
their holy calling; they who have such an opinion of them, have not yet tasted
how good and sweet the Lord is: We who assert this true and sound Doctrine of
Election, know Ephesians. 1.4.
we are chosen that we should be holy, not commit sin and wickedness; we are
called unto holiness, and certainly in God's Children the persuasion of
Election is the greatest motive and encouragement they can have to a good life
and conversation: We know we are God's workmanship, Chap. 2.10.
created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has before ordained that
we should walk in them. Not to lead a loose and vicious life, and that 2 Timothy
2.19. Psalm. 85.8.
every one that names the name of Christ, let him, as much as he can, depart
from iniquity: And not turn again to foll. Every one that has a saving
knowledge of God's word, which is the rule of Practice as of Doctrine, is
convinced, it is against a vicious and wicked life. Tit. 3 8.14.
This is a faithful saying, says Paul, And these things I will that thou
affirm constantly, that they which have believed in God, might be careful to
maintain good works. And the 6th. verse following, he gives the same charge,
Let ours also learn to maintain good works. We do, and so will all true
Believers join with St. Peter, in a just and right conclusion of a gracious
premise. 1 Pet. 2.^.
Ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar
people. All this is admirable well, but what will our Adversaries conclude from
hence, out of their principle, and according to their way now of arguing
against us? They will say, then you are well enough, trouble not your selves
any further, live as ye will, do what ye please ye are sure of Heaven: Oh but
St. Peter is of another mind, if we ask him to what purpose, and for what end
are these excellent privileges bestowed upon us, in the same verse he tells us
what use we ought to make of this. That ye should show forth the praises of him
who has called you out of darkness unto his mavelous light: Wherefore it is
not to do the works of darkness, which can never show forth God's praises.

We abhor such wicked Consequences and Practices, out of such an holy Doctrine
as is that of the immutability of our Election. That Doctrine of Free Grace and
Election is the same which St. Paul (as we proved it out of so many Texts in
his Epistles) so earnestly preached and asserted, how earnest was he to put Men
upon the study and practice of Holiness, Sanctification, Romans 3.8.
and all good works: In his time was abroad the same spirit as now; as then
upon his Doctrine, so now upon ours, which is the very same he preached, there
were aspersions cast, though not by the same men, yet by the same spirit which
is a liar from the beginning: That holy Man complains of it, Romans 3.8.
as we be slanderously reported, and as some affirm that we say, let us do
evil, that good may come: But see their doom, whose damnation is just. They
were most impudent liars, for they affirmed that he said so, when there was no
such thing, wherefore he reproves such unjust and abominable consequences,
Chap. 6.1.2.
What shall we say then? shall we continue in sin that grace may abound? God
forbid: Thus, shall we say? We are Elected, and let us do all the evil we can,
yet we shall be saved, God fordid. Blessed Apostle from these Men, we suffer
the same thou did from those, for the same cause: St. Paul, and we after him,
are for Free Grace against Free Will, and our common adversaries are for
Free Will against Free Grace.

We have upon this matter about Election, a very considerable Text of
Scripture, which I desire to be specially taken notice of: It Is our blessed
Saviors answer to the Mother of Zebedee's Children, who asked of him that her
two Sons might sit, one on his right hand, the other on his left, in his
Kingdom; which answer the Lord, does thus conclude, But to sit on my right hand
and on my left, is not mine to give, but it shall be given to them for whom it
is prepared of my father. Matthew. 20.23. The meaning of sitting on the right and
left hand in Christ's Kingdom, is to be glorified with him, which is the same
as to have Salvation and enjoy eternal life: By the Father's having prepared,
is understood the Decree of Election, whereby some are appointed to eternal
life, hence are deduced these several truths.

First, There are places in the Kingdom of Christ's glory, That is in Heaven
prepared of the Father.

Secondly, Those places are prepared not for all but only for some.

Thirdly, Those whom those Seats and places are prepared for, shall have them,
it shall be given them.

Fourthly, The Lord Jesus declares, it is not his, or in him to give those
Seats, and to dispose of those Places, otherwise than the Father has prepared
and ordered of before.

The first of these teaches us, how our glorification is an effect of, and
depends upon his Decree of Election, which is meant by the word prepared, as if
he had said, Decreed, Resolved and Ordained before.

From the second we learn how there is a certain number of those whom these
places are prepared for, and consequently it cannot be increased or lessened.

Out of the third we are taught the certainty of Salvation, for if those whom
they are prepared for, shall have those places, then they cannot tall from
their Election, nor miss Salvation and come short of Heaven.

The fourth informs us of the unchangeableness of the Decree of Election, which
admits of no alteration, for if our Savior declares, as he does, how those
places are kept only for those whom they are prepared for by the Father, and
that he may not dispose of any otherwise than the Father has, I know not who
can besides him; if there be any let him speak: Our Blessed Savior the
Mediator of the New Covenant says, he may not reverse nor alter that Decree
about some men elected to have place in Heaven.

This also teaches us how our whole Salvation depends upon the Decree of
Election, as the ^^^und and foundation thereof, how reverently does (...) of
God himself speak of that adorable Decree, wh^^^ some Men in the world, make
bold with God, do ridicule it, and do make of it a Nose of Wax to be turned as
it pleases the will and fancy of Men to make it effectual or uneffectual, to
believe or not believe, persevere or not persevere.

To this place answers that other about the last Judgment, Matthew 25.34,
etc. Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, from
the foundation of the world. Here is Christ sitting indeed in his Kingdom of
Glory, to Judge the whole World divided into two parts, in execution of the
Decree of Predestination, some standing on the right hand and others on the
left, those Blessed, these Cursed; here is a call come ye, to the Elect,
blessed of my Father, the spring of all Blessings in Christ Jesus our Lord; the
call is, to inherit the Kingdom prepared, and foreordained, a Kingdom that
imports honor and glory, joy and power, and an happy eternal life to be
enjoyed in the sight of God, in whose presence is fullness of joy, and at whose
right hand are pleasures for ever-more, Psalm. 16.11. All these prepared for you
all, (and none else) that are chosen of my Father, Yea prepared from the
foundation of the world; here is the certainty of the Decree, here lies his
Mercy and Free Grace, that he most graciously provided for us before we had a
Being. O what a distinguishing mercy, whilst the Cursed are commanded to
depart, an eternal separation from God, the spring of all Joy and Goodness,
into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels. God has prepared
the Kingdom for the Blessed and Elect, and everlasting fire for the Cursed and
Reprobates: Does not this to the life represent Election and Reprobation,
whereof God is the efficient cause, from Eternity, so before the Blessed or
Cursed had done any Good or Evil to move God? Thus it does declare the Sentence
and Execution thereof.

Hereunto, and to the same purpose may be added, that other Text of Scripture,
Luke 2.32. Fear not, little flock, for it is your Father's good pleasure to
give the Kingdom. The Elect are here called, little flock, to show the
smallness of the number in comparison of the Reprobates; Heaven and eternal
life are called the Kingdom by way of Excellency, which Kingdom is not any
purchase of ours, but the gift of God to give you, to the Elect, to the little
Flock, and to no others upon no other motive, than God's Will and mere
Good-pleasure, for it is your fathers good-pleasure: it is not said your God,
which is also true, but your Father is a more tender word to express love, for
in a special manner he is Father to the Elect, whom God has chosen and adopted
in Christ Jesus our Lord, who himself is the Author of these words, and did
speak them upon sure grounds, and out of his certain knowledge, thus he says
elsewhere, I appoint unto you a Kingdom, as my Father has appointed unto me,
Luke 22 29. All done by way of preordination, and fore-appointment.

But before I conclude this matter of our Election, I must speak of the Effects
and Consequences thereof, which are the means whereby to attain unto the end,
for as we said before, the most wise God has not ordained us to Glory and
everlasting Happiness, and left us to seek how to come there, but also he has
appointed the way, that every thing belonging to Salvation, the grounds and
beginning, the progress and end, may all be of his own, so that we may be sure
of it to the praise of the riches of his Grace. Hence it is that our Blessed
Savior is called not only Heb. 2.10. Chap. 5.9.
the captain of our Salvation, and the author of eternal Salvation unto all
that obey him; but also the author and finisher of our Faith, which is the way
and means conducing to it. The most Holy and Blessed Trinity did purpose and
resolve it. In the execution Christ is the Captain and Leader, and he will
finish it, for he will never give over, till Joh. 17.24.11.
those whom the Father has given him, his elect be with him where he is, that
they may behold his glory: and that they may be one as the Father and he are.
Now the means appointed for the execution in time of the Decree of Election,
are our Vocation to and in the Church, thorough the ministry of the Word, our
Conversion, Regeneration, Faith in Christ, Justification, Sanctification which
are all grounded upon our Lord and Mediator Jesus Christ. These means that are
between our Election and Glorification, are as the Chain that links it
together, and spoken of by St. Paul in the place already quoted. Romans 8.30.
Whom he did predestinate, them he also called, and whom he called them he also
justified, and whom he justified; them he also glorified. No danger of breaking
or miscarrying; it is so sure that he speaks of it not as a thing to come,
but as passed and already done. The Consideration of these means, is part of
the Decree of Election, as well as Glory and Salvation, for it is but one
single, and individual act of Election to Glory by the means of Grace, for
neither Glory was decreed without relation to Grace, nor Grace without relation
to Glory.

Another fruit and effect of our Election is the certainty we have of it within
us, whereby This affirmed in Rogers Analysis. Page 76.
we know and are sure we are elected to everlasting life: This certitude
arises out of the sense and feeling we have of the means appointed to execute
Election; every Elect after his Conversion having faith in Christ, may
certainly know whether he be elected: If upon examination of himself he may
say, I by the word of God, am called to the Church and to eternal life, I have
the gift of Faith in Jesus Christ, that is, I believe my sins are forgiven me,
for the merits of Christ the Mediator, God and Man. Furthermore with a real and
sincere desire and endeavor I worship God according to the rule of his word,
and I love my Neighbor; out of this he may conclude, I am elected to life
everlasting: All this depends upon a true examination, and the Consequence is
drawn a posteriori, where are fruits, there is a Tree; when we find heat and
motion in a Man, we safely conclude there is Life: Now all this examination is
grounded upon that Text of Romans 8.30. which I quoted but a little before, but
the calling is inward, proper to Believers that answer and obey the call, which
our Savior speaks of, John 5.25.
the hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son
of God, and they that hear shall live, for they were dead in their sins, the
call is inward and spiritual, whereby the blind mind is enlightened by the
Word, applied by the Spirit, and the obstinate and perverse will, is brought
under to obedience, they who make Faith and Justification common to Believers
and Reprobates, cannot have this certitude of Election, but others can
according to St. Paul, 1 These. 1.4.
Knowing, brethren beloved, your election of God. Hence we conclude it may be
known: This certitude and assurance of Election and so of Salvation (for if I
can but make my Election sure, then I am sure of my Salvation) is no motive to
softness, neglect and carelessness; he who is sure of Salvation, is sure to
perform the Condition; Salvation is the end of Election, and Repentance, Faith,
Holiness, perseverance are the effects thereof, Grace is the way to Glory. God
promising to save the Elect, promised also to preserve them in that without
which is no Salvation, and when sometimes Believers do so much forget, and are
so senseless to themselves as to sin, offend, and leave Gods ways, God wants no
Scourges or other means to bring them in again.

This certitude of our unchangeable Election does not, as our Adversaries would
have it, breed in us Profaneness and carnal Security; on the contrary, as we
already said, it is the greatest motive and incentive we have to Piety, for
which St. Peter is my Witness, 2 Pet. 1.10.
Wherefore the rather brethren, give diligence to make your calling and
election sure: For if ye do these things, ye shall never fall. If it were not
possible to attain unto it, it were in vain for the Apostle to exhort us
thereunto: When once Men have that assurance, they will endeavor to answer it
in the study and practice of holiness, and become worthy of it with their
upright walking, knowing they are elected and called thereunto. For Tit. 3.8.
they which have believed in God, must be careful to maintain good works. And
they will take care of their ways, so that they can never fall finally. For
Psalm. 37.24.
God upholdeth them with his hand: St. Paul says the same with St. Peter. For
Romans 8.14, 15, 16, 17.
as many as are led by the spirit of God, they are the Sons of God: For ye have
not received the spirit of bondage again to fear, but ye have received the
spirit of adoption, whereby we cry Abba, father: The spirit it self bears
witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God, and if children, then
heirs of God, and joint heirs with Christ. The Holy Ghost we received, which is
the earnest of our inheritance, and whereby we are sealed against the day of
Redemption; and having Christ's spirit we are sure to be his, this spirit makes
us call God our Father, which is no lie, for it is the Spirit of Truth, it is
the Spirit of Adoption, which assures us that we are the children of God, and
consequently heirs of the Kingdom of Heaven, which Christ is gone before to
take possession of in his name, and for us, and if we may so speak after the
manner of Men, God the Father trusted the Son for the satisfaction to be given
to Divine Justice, till the time appointed to do it was come, in hope of the
Resurrection of the Body, the Souls of the redeemed were before Christ's death
received into Abraham's bosom: So for the possession of the purchase made by
Christ's death, namely eternal life, if I may so say, the Son does trust the
Father, till the time of the whole and full purchased possession be come: Yet
this ought to be taken notice of, how God not only has promised, but also for
our Comfort and Assurance has given us his holy spirit for earnest of
performance of his promises.

And this holy spirit is given us, not only as security, but as a guide to
direct and Joh 16.13.
lead us, as our Savior says, into all truth, which he does 1. with
Illumination, and showing us the way. 2. In his giving us strength and courage
to go thorough Dark and Thorny ways. 3. In removing obstructions and
difficulties. 4. In continuing his help to improve grace. 5. In bringing us at
last into eternal life. Which truths, the Soul of the Elect being convinced of,
they suffer themselves wholly and only to be guided by him, with an absolute
resignation unto his directions, whereby we learn not to trust our selves, to
the guidance of our own natural reason or of our heart, for in spiritual things
our Light is but Darkness: And Prove. 28.26.
he that trusts in his own heart is a fool, for neither our Reason nor our
Heart can show us a way to be delivered from sin and to give a satisfaction to
God, there being none but the righteousness of Christ, which the holy spirit
does persuade us of, and through Faith applies it to us, to which end Joh.
14.16.
he does abide with us for ever: He is not come afterward to leave us, but
says our Savior, Ye know him for he dwells with you, and shall be in you.
Paul's steps in those Quotations we had of him just before out of those several
verses of his 8. chap. to the Romans, than the which nothing can be more fu^l
and to the purpose, to work an assurance, and a study how in our lives and
conversations to behave our selves as becomes the children of God; to which
for greater confirmation of this we shall add the three last verses of that
Chapter, where after he has said before, by way of defiance, no body can lay
any thing to the charge of God's Elect nor condemn them, nor nothing in this
World part them from God's love in Christ, he concludes in these words, Romans
8.37, 38, 39.
Nay, in all these things we are more than conquerours, through him that loved
us; for I am persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come: Nor height,
nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us from the love of
God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. After this, he who will believe
Scripture, must believe there is a certitude of Election, though in a different
degree, every true Believer has assurance, though every one has not a full
assurance; 1 John 3.3.
Yea, every man that has this hope, of glory, in him, purifieth him self, even
as he, God, is pure.

Yet for all the clear Evidences of this Truth, the Adversaries thereof will
not be mute, but better for them to say nothing, than what they say. First they
corrupt a place of Scripture, which Papists made use of against us upon the
very same account. Eccl. 9.1, 2
A man cannot tell whether he deserves love or hatred, so he cannot be sure;
but according to the Original, it is thus, No man knows what either love or
hatred, by all that is before them. That is, he knows not the causes of the
things which in this world happen unto men, for this he speaks of, verse. 2. as
follows. All things come alike to all men; there is one event to the
righteous and to the wicked, to the good and to the clean and to the unclean,
etc. As is the good, so is the sinner, and he that swears, as he that fears
an Oath. So that has no relation to his Eternal State, or his Election, and
though Man cannot tell the reason, of the several dispensations of God's
Providence, it does not hinder but he may know his own Eternal State and
Condition.

They object the saying of Prove. 27.1.
Solomon, Boast not of to morrow for thou know not what a day may bring
forth. Which Text forbids an over confident boasting of good successes in
this Life; and it is not to the purpose of Election or Eternal Life: As to that
of St. Paul Romans 11.2^.
thou stand by faith, be not high minded but fear. There the Apostle
speaks against carnal Security, and a confidence in ones own strength. Many,
say our Adversaries, who think to be in favor with God, deceive themselves,
consequently cannot be sure of their Election; we own there are such ones, but
they have nothing of true Piety, only an outward profession, a vain name and
only in appearance. So they cannot be sure of that which is not: But those who
are elected indeed, do attain to the certitude of it: In time of temptation
this assurance is shaken and somewhat disturbed, but when through grace we have
overcome the temptation, the certainty is renewed and strengthened, for in the
temptation or out of it, it is never utterly lost. We do not wonder some deny it
to be had till the last breath, if at all, because the ordinary means of
certitude, as justifying Faith, Justification, Sanctification, etc. which are
only the Childrens Bread, they make common to Believers and Reprobates. Thus
much of Election, now we must speak of Reprobation.

Of REPROBATION.
BUT because some of the unlearned sort of people and others have a prejudice
against the word, as I have done about the name Predestination, so I must show
Reprobation to be a Scripture Phrase, always taken in an ill sense. Thus St.
Paul speaking of the Rom 1.18, 28, 29, 30, 31.
ungodliness and unrighteousness of some men, against which the wrath of God is
revealed from heaven; he says God gave them over to a reprobate mind, that is,
to do all the wickedness expressed in the three following verses, which are the
works of reprobate and wicked Men. and in another place the Apostl speaks of
some that Tit. 1.16.
are unto every good work reprobate, unfit for and incapable of it. Some 2 Timothy
3.8.
are reprobate concerning the faith; so elsewhere he speaks of it in the proper
sense, and to our present purpose: 2 Cor. 13.5.
Know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be
reprobates? Where Christ is not, there is the reprobate, but Christ has
nothing to do as Mediator with those who lay under the Decree of reprobation;
thus it appears how reprobation is a Scripture word, and consequently may well
be used in its sense.

Now to the thing; as there is Election so there is Reprobation. St. Paul
speaks of both as parts of Predestination, when he says, 1 These. 5.9.
God has not appointed us to wrath, but to obtain salvation by our Lord Jesus
Christ. Hence it is clear, how God appointed some to Salvation through Christ,
and others to Wrath, which is Reprobation. In God's work of Mercy and
Salvation, ever mention is made of Christ, but not in those of Justice and
Damnation, because there is no mercy from God but through the Lord Jesus, and
where is no interest in Christ there is no true saving mercy: The world may be
called the house of God, so may National Churches, or particular Congregations,
wherein are Believers and Hypocrites; therefore as 2 Timothy 2.20, 21.
in a great house there are not only vessels of gold and vessels of silver, but
also of wood and of earth, and some to honor and some to dishonor, and as
those unto honor are through grate prepared unto every good work, so those of
dishonor are by nature fitted for pains and torments, the just reward of sin
Job 21.30.
The wicked, says Job, is reserved to the day of destruction, they shall be
brought forth to the day of wrath; and as Matthew. 3.7.
John Baptist said to the Scribes and Pharisees, there is the wrath to come.

Reprobation is the Predestination of some to eternal death, to be inflicted
upon them by reason of their sins, for the manifestation of the justice of God.
Now God and none but God is the author of the Decree as of Election, so o
Reprobation: For as in time he damneth some as scripture expresses it in
several places; so God from eternity reprobated them, and appointed them to
damnation, because as I said before, nothing is done in time, but what from
eternity God ordered should be so: As there is Election, so there must be a
Reprobation, for if all were elected, God would be all Mercy and no Justice,
and if all were reprobated, then he would be all Justice and no Mercy,
therefore as both these Attributes must be manifested, so there ought to be
both Elect and Reprobate. Job 9.12. and chap. 11.10.
Who can hinder him? who will say unto him what do thou? Let men hereupon not
quarrel with his Justice, but tremble at his Judgments. God, says Prove. 16.4.
Solomon, has made all things for himself, yea, even the wicked for the day of
evil; which is generally interpreted the day of Judgment, Vengeance and
Perdition: Again the Lord from Eternity Romans 9. from 13. to 19.
hated some and loved others, decreed to harden some and show others mercy; as
St. Paul by the examples of Esau, Pharaoh, and Jacob, does clearly demonstrate
it in the 9th. to the Romans, where the Apostle compares God to a Potter, who
of the same lump makes one vessel to honor and another to dishonor: By this
making vessels to Honor, is meant Election; as Reprobation is by others to
dishonor. Thus in Scripture Reprobation is represented under different
expressions, as making the wicked for the Evil Day, hating and hardening some,
making some vessels to dishonor; and in the Gospel our Savior expresses it
thus out of Isaiah, John 12.40.
He has blinded their eyes and hardened their hearts, that they should not see
with their eyes, nor understand with their hearts, and be converted, and I
should heal them. For they who are not converted nor healed must be damned;
With Job and David we must say, Job 9.10. Psalm. 36.6. Romans 11.33.
God does great things past finding out: Except he be pleased to reveal them.
They who grumble or fret at these actings of God in matter of Reprobation, may
well be asked the question which God puts to Job, in point of his Justice. Job
40.8.
Will thou also disanul my judgments? Will thou condemn me, that thou may be
righteous?

To these several Texts, I shall add only one reason, which is this. If God had
predestined no Man to damnation, either no body is damned, which is contrary
to Scripture, as I showed already; or else if any be damned it is by chance, or
else out of an extemporal or sudden change in the will of God, all which are
absurd and false: Though God be merciful in the highest degree, it does not
hinder its being perfectly just: He does not use his mercy toward all, but
only those on whom he will have mercy, by his Justice he does reprobate and
harden men for their sins; neither is this contrary to the goodness of God, for
that perfection whereby he does good to some, does not hinder his Justice and
Judgment against others: Neither does it follow that because it is the duty of
one Man to wish another Man well, therefore God is bound (for this is the
objection) to wish and do good to all; God and Men are not bound by the same
rule, a Man is bound to wish his neighbor well, in as much as he knows it
not to be contrary but according to the word of God; but not withstanding any
Law, God wills all things for himself, therefore he wills evil to the
wicked for himself, that is for the glory of his Justice.

Sin is the reason for Reprobation, if we absolutely inquire into the cause,
for Man fallen and sinner is reprobated: But if comparatively there is no other
cause but the pleasure of God. Hence arise two questions. The first why from
eternity God has decreed to damn some Men? The answer is, God has so decreed
for sin, which in his sight they were guilty of; and this to declare his
Justice; nevertheless, sin alone is not the cause of Reprobation, the will of
God does intervene, without which no Man should be reprobate for sin, for
notwithstanding sin, God without doing his justice wrong, could have decreed
Salvation to all, for by means of his Son he could fully have satisfied his
justice. This as to the first question. The second is, why God has decreed for
sin to damn these or such and such Men, rather than others? no other cause can
be assigned, but the good will and pleasure of God. Sin cannot be the cause,
for all Men considered in themselves, are all equally sinners, the following
example will illustrate the thing. Let there be many guilty Men convicted of
Rebellion, the Prince commands some to suffer, and others he gives a pardon to,
if the question be put, why out of many, only some are punished? The reason is
good, because they are Rebels, for the Prince being just, he puts none to Death
without a just cause; but if again the question be put, why out of many these
rather than those do suffer, Rebellion cannot be said to be the cause, for they
all are equally guilty. Some Schoolmen in matters of Reprobation do
distinguish between the negative act, called Preterition, or passing by, or the
will not to give eternal life; and the positive or affirmative, or the will of
damning. The first say they is Absolute. The second not so, but Relative to
sin, as a necessary antecedent. But every act may in a different respect be
called Absolute and not Absolute, if the question be made Absolute or
Comparative.

The Matter or Object of Reprobation are they whose names are not written in
the Book of life of the Lamb, Rev. 13.8.
etc. they be the greatest part of sinful Men in the sight of God, considered
as fallen and corrupted with sin, wherefore they are called Romans 9.22.
Vessels of wrath fitted for destruction. Now God is angry against none but
sinners, and appointed to destruction none but the guilty. Out of Scripture,
it is clear that the greatest part of Men are Reprobate, for Matthew. 20.16.
few are chosen, which does exclude the rest, therefore Reprobates are more in
number, and greater is the number of those that are damned, than of those that
be saved. Matthew. 7.13, 14.
Some say against this, a just Judge does Decree equal things for those that
are equal, wherefore since God is a just Judge, having elected some sinners, he
has not reprobated others, which are not worse; but this rule is meant only of
a Judge, who by Law is bound equally to distribute rewards and pains, but if
there be no such obligation, without acting contrary to justice, he is free to
make an unequal distribution to those that are equal. Now God is not bound by
any Law, and has a most just cause of his Decrees, and Matthew. 20.15.
with his own may do what he pleases.

Secondly, It is argued if the number of Reprobates be greater than of the
Elect, then the justice of God will be greater than his mercy, which seems to
be contrary to that place of Scripture, Psalm. 145.9.
His mercies are over all his works. The answer is, the Mercy and Justice of
God are considered either in themselves, and as they are in God, or in relation
to their Effects and Objects; upon the first account they are equal, upon the
last it may be said that the universal Mercy of God upon all men is greater
than his Justice; but in relation to his special Mercy about Salvation, it is
lesser, or of a less extent than his Justice.

The end of Reprobation is that the Justice of God may be made known in the
punishment of sin, according to Scripture God said to Pharaoh, Romans ^.17.
Even for this same purpose have I raised thee up, that I might show my power
in thee, and that my name might be declared throughout all the earth. God
willing to show his wrath, and to make his power known, endured with much long
suffering the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction. God does not appoint or
destinate them to sin, for he found them in it, but to the pains of sin. It Is a
slander in our Adversaries to say, we attribute to God a decree of Reprobation,
without any relation at all to sin.

As we said of the Decree of Election, that Eternity and Unchangableness are
inseparably joined to it, the same we must say of Reprobation; there is the
same reason for the Eternity of Reprobation as for that of Election, for if God
from Eternity elected some, he also from Eternity has passed by others, for
there can be no Election without Reprobation. Besides, what I said before, more
than once, nothing is done in Time, but what from Eternity has been decreed to
be done: Hence God is said to act Romans 9.1^.
according to his purpose, as may be seen in several places of Scripture.

As to the Immutability of Reprobation, it is proved out of God's
Unchangeableness, for as he is Unchangeable, so are all his Decrees. Isai.
46.10.
My counsel shall stand, and I will do all pleasure. If it be thus, will some
say, then it is in vain for Reprobates to repent, for they cannot change their
doom, yet Scripture promises forgiveness of sins to penitent sinners. I
answer, in reprobates there is no such thing as true Repentance, as we see in
the case of Judas, who repented, not 2 Cor. 7.9, 10.
of that repentance to salvation, not to be repented of, as St. Peter's was,
but of Repentance to Death, for he went and out of despair hanged himself; he
saw his crime which appeared horrid to his mind, but no change in the heart.
Yet if reprobates could truly and sincerely repent, they would not be damned;
hereupon our Adversaries lay at a catch, and will say, then the Decree of
Reprobation is changeable and can be reversed; but not so, because reprobates
neither do nor can truly repent, but says one, they are commanded to repent;
it is true, but this Precept shows their duty, what they ought, not what they
can do. Frecepts and Threatenings do sometimes make reprobates to abstain from
some certain sins, and though they cannot avoid eternal death, yet they have
this advantage, that their condition Matthew. 11.24.
shall be more tolerable than of those that give themselves to all manner of
wickedness, for as there are degrees of guilt, so there will be of pains;
besides, that this abstaining from some certain sins, or having an outward show
of repentance of them, puts off for a time those judgments which they are
afraid of, as befell wicked Ahab, who sold himself to work wickedness, for that
heavy judgment which the Prophet Elijah by God's special command threatened him
with and his house, upon his outward show of repentance, Kings 21. from 17. to.
29.
was put off till his Sons days.

Of Reprobation there are two Effects and Consequences. First, A desertion, or
God's totally forsaking them. The Second, Induration or hardening; the first is
a final denial of Grace necessary to obtain eternal life; thus God is said to
forsake wicked Men, when he leaves them in unbelief, and denies them Faith in
Christ, which no reprobate has. Hardening is a higher degree of punishment,
it is an effect of God's anger when he does not take away the hardness and
malice which is in a Man's heart; but by a just judgment, it becomes a
punishment for former sins, and by outward means is so aggravated, that though
God adds no new degree of hardness, it suffers it to spring out of the root
of former evils; thus we often read in Exodus, Exodus 4.21. and chap. 7, 3, 13.
etc.
God hardened Pharaoh's heart, and the Chap. 14.17.
Egyptians, but this hardening does not indifferently befall every reprobate,
only some notorious sinners; whence it is a particular judgment of God, which
is not executed with a bare Permission and Direction, with relation to every
reprobate, but with acting something within and without the wicked, whereby
their malice and hardness is increased, we have several reasons to prove it.

First, Hardening is a Judiciary act of God and an effect of his Anger. Now a
Judge does punish not only with permitting and directing, but also with
actually inflicting a Pain by himself or by another. When God hardneth, he does
something as it appears by the usual phrase of Scripture, which expresses
the judgment of an Angry God, with words signifying an action; now he who only
permits, does not act, but leaves others to act, and to call this a
direction to the end, is not to the purpose, the direction is not the hardening,
but a consequence of it; Furthermore, if hardening properly so called was a bare
permission, it would not be a special judgment of God as it is, against
notorious sinners, because no sin is committed by any sinner whatsoever but by
God's permission. Moreover, if God was said to harden Men, because he
permits them to be hardened, in the same manner he might be said to Kill,
Steal, commit Adultery, etc. because he permits all these sins, which is
most false: Therefore God's hardening a Man's heart is not a bare permission but
an action, as it appears in the case of Pharaoh, for if God had hardened only
permissively, there had been no need of so often repeating by Moses the command
of letting the people go, no need of so many Miracles wrought, nor of so many
Plagues inflicted upon Egypt, whereby the Tyrant was more and more hardened and
more cruel: Which is the effect of those judgments of God upon some, to whom
they are an occasion of growing worse and worse: Thus when Rev. 16.9, 21.
men were scorched with great heat, and when great hail out of heaven fell upon
them they repented not, to give God glory, but blasphemed the name of God,
which may be they would not have done, had it not been for the smart of the
Plague; the feeling of God's heavy hand makes wicked Men fly out, break into a
rage and grow mad, as we read of Julian the Apostate, who in the Fight where he
dyed, being wounded with an Arrow, took in his hand some of the Blood that came
out of the Wound, and threw it up whilst he pronounced these blasphemous words
against our Savior, Galilean, thou have overcome me. Thus God by himself or
instruments works such things as make notorious sinners much worse and more
desperate: This Doctrine Lib. 5. contra Julian. cap. 3. and de great. and lib.
^rbit. cap. 20.21.
Austin taught out of Scripture, and by other strong reasons proves how God
does blind the minds and hardneth the hearts, not with patience and bare
permission, but with power and action. Amongst other things in several places
he says to this purpose, how by a just and secret judgment of God, the wills
of wicked Men are moved to commit those things which in relation to Men have
the nature of sin. This I bring to show that as our Adversaries would have it,
it is no new Doctrine of our own, but that some Eminent Doctors of the primitive
Church have found it in Scripture as well as we.

But the better to understand this, we must know how God hardneth, Satan
hardneth, and reprobates harden themselves: God as a Judge, Satan as an
Executioner, and the wicked harden themselves as guilty Men. First, God
hardneth, not by infusing any malice or hardness, but first leaving them in
their hardness, not softning them, withdrawing and denying them his Grace.
Secondly, Working something both within and without wicked Men, by means
whereof out of their natural corruption, they take an occasion of hardening
themselves more and more, such are several thoughts and affections, not evil in
themselves as may be outward lust and desire of Honor, Riches, etc. which the
corrupt mind is easily and blindly enticed by and lead unto such are also
several Calamities, Precepts, Accusations, Threatenings, Prohibitions. Thirdly,
With delivering up to Satan and to ones corrupt affection. Fourthly, Inclining
evil affections to some certain Objects as a punishment, for some times one sin
is the punishment of another. The Devil having God's leave hardneth with
enticing men to all sorts of evils, blinding Reason, disturbing the Fancy,
striking Fear, giving vain hopes, and suggesting evil Thoughts, when Men are
either awake or a sleep: Wicked men do harden themselves with giving up
themselves to their own lusts, rejecting the dictates of Right reason,
despising commands, threatenings, etc. Hence it appears how the acts of the
Devil and of Reprobates side, concurring to harden, are evil for the most part,
but on God's part all are good of themselves; therefore God can by no means be
made the Author of sin, though he hardneth not only with permitting, but also
in acting: There is no certainty of Reprobation whilst Man is alive, except in
case of the sin against the Holy Ghost which is never forgiven, and so
committed by none but Reprobates, all other sins are pardonable which are
common to Elect (specially to those not yet regenerated) and to Reprobates,
therefore by them we ought not and cannot ground any judgment: The sin against
the Holy Ghost does not befall every Reprobate, but only some, as induration
properly so called; and although the number of Reprobates be much greater than
that of the Elect, yet no Man but he who is guilty of the sin against the Holy
Ghost, has just cause to despair, and of that too, one is not rashly to judge;
but hereafter we shall have occasion to enlarge upon this.

Before I make an end with this point, as much conducing to our purpose, and to
show that what we hold in this matter, is the doctrine of St. Paul, I must show
how two Objections of our Adversaries against it, were set down and answered by
the Apostle. They are contained in the 9th Chapter to the Romans, wherein are
decided these matters of Election and Reprobation, now in question against
Pelagians and Semipelagians or Arminians. The first objection is as if God was
unjust in his absolute Decree of Predestination. The question is set down verse
the 14. in these words: What shall we say then? is there unrighteousness with
God? The answer is in the same verse, God forbid. Romans 9.14.
The ground of the question is in verses, 11.12, 13. Wherein by the examples of
Jacob and Esau, is demonstrated that there was nothing in the subject elected
or reprobated to move God to choose or reject, but the only cause is, the
purpose of God according to election, not of works, but of him that calls;
The circumstance of the persons does afford us these Considerations. First no
difference could be pretended from nature, they were Brothers by the same
Father and Mother, nay, born at the same time, for they were Twains, so that on
that account no privilege or advantage to plead for. Secondly, Not any thing
of works or of Faith, for before the Children were born, neither having done
any good or any evil, it was said, the Elder shall serve the younger. Mark that
if there had been any natural privilege, it had been on Esau's side, who was
the Elder, yet the Elder was to serve the Younger, for God loved Jacob and
hated Esau, of which no other cause assigned but the will and purpose of God.
What? says carnal reason, to make so great a difference where is such an
equality, to love and to hate those which had not deserved it, cannot be
without some injustice: yet, ye see the Apostle says, no such thing, God
forbid, for the Lord is just in all his ways, and the reason of this by the
Apostle given in the following verse, is this, the will of God, I will have
mercy one whom I will have mercy. Out of this we say, the purpose of God
according to Election, is here understood of God's eternal Predestination,
which Election is ascribed only to God who calls, all works excluded, because
there were none, nor could be none, the persons not yet being born. It Is an
idle distinction to say, not for works present, but for works to come, since,
if it had been necessary, the Apostle might have made the distinction, but he
absolutely say, not of works. After Semipelagians, Arminians says, not of
works but of Faith. As St. Austin answers against works, so he does against
Faith being the cause why God loved Jacob? It can be no better done then in his
words. August. de dot^ je severa^ntiae cap. 7.
Did the Apostle say not of works, but of him that believes, even this also
did the Apostle take from men, that he might give all to God, saying, but of
him that calls, not with every call, but by such a call whereby we are made
to believe.

We now come to the second objection, Verse 19. Romans 919
Thou will say then unto me, why does he yet find fault? For who has resisted
his will: As if he had said, if I be reprobated, I cannot help it, it is not my
fault if I be damned, I cannot resist his will; neither my self nor Job 10.7.
none can deliver me out of his hands. To know the occasion of this second
Objection, we must go back to the 15 verse, and so down to the 19th. St. Paul
not being content to say, God forbid there should be any unrighteousness in
God, gives a reason out of God's own mouth, for he says to Moses, I will have
mercy on whom I will have mercy, Romans 9.15, 16. etc.
and I will have compassion on whom I will have compassion. Which makes the
Apostle draw this Consequence, So then it is not of him that wills, nor of
him that runs, but of God that shows mercy: To this purpose, he brings out
of Scripture an argument concerning Pharaoh. For this same purpose have I
raised thee up, that I might show my power in thee, and that my name might be
declared throughout all the earth. The History of Pharaoh is well known; The
Apostle here makes use of that example, to show how God raises up some to be
subservient to his ends, and this particularly to show on him the glory of his
power, to be manifested either in this world or in that which is to come, or in
both: Hence he draws this Conclusion, Therefore has he mercy on whom he will
have mercy, and whom he will he hardneth. Which gives occasion to the
question, why does he find fault? Which puts the Apostle upon a high strain, as
mightily concerned for the Right and Honor of God, which this Objection seems
to strick at. Wherefore to stop the mouth of such, he says, Nay but, O man!
who art thou, that reply against God, shall the thing formed say to him that
formed it, why has thou made me thus? Shall Man expostulate with God? The
Creature with his Maker, as if he were accountable. Has not the Potter power
over the clay, of the same lump, to make one vessel to honor, and another to
dishonor. Hereat, let every mouth be stopped, the Plea is the sovereign and
absolute power of God over the Creature. The Clay is the Potters, and what has
any one to do to question what he does with it? Let me answer such wretches in
the words of the Prophet. Isai. 45.9.
Woe unto him that striveth with his maker: let the potsherd strive with the
potsherds of the earth: shall the clay say to him that fashioneth it, what
make thou or thy work, he has no hands? As amongst Men, question a lawful
Princes Right is Treason, so to question God's Right is no less than Blasphemy.
In Scripture when God is willing to demonstrate his Absolute Power, he makes
use of the comparison of the Potter and the Clay. Thus Jeremiah is sent to the
Potters House, Jerem. 18.2, 3, 4, 6.
O house of Israel, cannot I do with you as this Potter, says the Lord? behold
as the clay is in the potters hand, so are you in mine hand, O house of Israel.
The same comparison is used in another place by the Prophet Isaiah: Isa. 29.16.
Shall the work say of him that made it, he made me not? or shall the thing
framed say of him that framed it, he had no understanding? God cannot endure to
have his Sovereign Right and Power called in Question, and good reason too:
Matthew. 20.2^.
Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with my own? No say some, besides
his good will and pleasure, he must give the reason why he reprobates some and
not others? Why he elected Peter and reprobated Judas? Why he loved Jacob and
hated Esau? To say it is according to his Will and Pleasure, that does not
satisfy us, what reason can we have above the Will of God, which is the rule
of all Equity, Reason, and Wisdom? Herein we are not to presume beyond what is
written.

For all this they make two Objections, first, it is against the Justice of God
to reprobate Men who have done no evil, though Scripture says clearly it is
so, to father injustice upon God, is certainly a great impity, God is most just
in every thing he does, though we cannot fathom into the particular causes, yet
his justice is a general one, the consideration whereof ought to stop the mouth
of every Creature. What shall we say to the case of the Flood, which was a
great judgment, whereby the whole World, eight persons excepted, perished in
the Waters. It Is true, the wickedness of Men was raised to an utmost degree,
but withal it must be owned, that there were many Infants, new born Babes, yea
several quick in the Womb who had committed no actual sins, yet were involved
in that general destruction. Death, says, Romans 5.14.
Paul reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them that had not sinned after the
similitude of Adam's transgression Adam's sin was an actual sin, eating the
fruit of the Forbiden-tree, it could not be Original, for he was created in
Innocence; but seeing Chap. 6.23.
death is the wages of sin, and that those Infants who had committed no actual
sin, dyed in the Flood, we must find another sin, not after the similitude of
Adam's transgression, and that is Original-sin. Now I say, that as Original-sin
was a just cause of the natural Death of those Babes, so the same sin, when it
pleases God to leave them in it, is a just cause of Eternal Death, in those
whom he punishes with it; for Eternal Death, as well as Natural, is the wages
of Original, as of Actual-sin. And though sin be not the cause to move to pass
sentence upon any, yet that sentence is passed upon none but what are sinners.
Hence I conclude, that as God was just in inflicting by the Flood, Natural
Death upon those Children that were unborn, or newly born, before they had done
any evil, so this holds for Election as for Reprobation, in relation to Faith
as to Unbelief, according to that famous place of Romans, about Jacob and Esau.
It is to be observed how St. Peter calls Pet. 2.5.
the world of the ungodly, that world which the Flood drowned, without any
exception at all of Infants or others. What has been said of the Flood, may be
spoken to the same purpose of that terrible judgment upon Sodom and Gomorah,
and the Cities about them, where no doubt were also Infants, new born Babes and
some quick in the Womb, which as Jud. 7.
St. Jude says, suffered the vengeance of eternal fire, and are set forth for
an example. Yet in all those things no exception against God's justice, for he
is most just in all his ways. For if we must believe David, the Lord is
righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works, Psalm. 15.17. What shall
we say as to the case of Achan, his sin was personal, he alone had committed
it: yet that same sin his Sons and Daughters; nay the very Beasts, as his Oxen,
Asses, Sheep as well as he, were by God's immediate command stonned to death,
and burned with fire: Though, in the eyes of Men, they seemed innocent, yet
were guilty in the Lords eyes. Josh. 7.24, 25. So in the particular case I
before quoted, of the Man that was blind from his birth, our Savior says,
that neither the Man had sinned nor his Parents, but that the works of God
should be made manifest in him, This was a sufficient answer to the disciples,
they put no more questions about it. But Arminians will impeach God's justice
for denying sight to one who had not actually sinned. Do not they do so in
calling the equity of God's Decrees touching Men into question? Can any thing
in Scripture be plainer than this, Romans 9.18, 22, 23. Ephesians. 1.11.
that God has mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he hardens,
that he has appointed some to be vessels of mercy to the praise of the glory
of his grace, and some to be vessels of wrath, to make his power to be known,
and that he makes all things after the counsel of his own will^: Yet what more
usual than to dispute how this can agree with justice? And with what reason God
may punish that sin, which by virtue of a Decree is unavoidable. It Is strange,
yet too true, how peremptory saucy and blasphemous speeches some in their Cups,
and others sometimes upon other occasions break into, upon this subject, and
would reduce God to such terms of reason as they fancied to themselves. After
such declarations about these things which God has given in his word, were it
not better to give him Glory, and with David say, O Lord, thou art just when
thou speak, and pure when thou judge: And if they cannot conceive how this
should stand with equity, rather than to call to question God's justice, were
it not better to own their weakness. And with David say, this is my infirmity.
For woe unto him that striveth with his Maker, according to Solomon, Eccles. 8.4.
it is prudence not to control an earthly King's actions, who may say unto him
what do thou? And, O man! who art thou that reply against God, and if in
reference to Politics of Government, and Mysteries of State, the same Prove.
25.2.
Solomon says, the heart of a King is unsearchable, there is some secret
reasons which many cannot dive into: In God's matters, as his Decrees and wise
dispensation of his Providence, much more we must think it to be so, for in the
same Chapter the wise Man says, it is the glory of God to conceal a thing.

The second Objection they make, and which we already have given a hint to, is
this, if I be reprobate, and it is God's pleasure I should go to Hell, it is not
in my power to help it, so their Damnation they father upon God's pleasure:
This is too much like our first Parents, to lay the fault upon others, to
excuse themselves, Genesis 3.12.13.
The woman whom thou give to be with me, she gave me of the tree, and I did
eat: He throws it on the Woman, and she upon the Serpent, the serpent begiuiled
me. If God had not given him the Woman, then he would not have sinned, nor the
Woman, if God had not created a Serpent; so if God had not reprobated us, say
some, we had not been damned. But this is no more able to excuse them, then the
fig leaves were to cover their nakedness, though never so cunningly sewed
together.

The Apostle lays open the case, how God directs and turns all for his
glory, even the worst of things, For our unrighteousness does commend the
righteousness of God, and thorough our lie the truth of God has more abounded
unto his glory. Romans 3.5, 6, 7. Yet for all this, though these evil things are
turned to the greatest good, that is, the glory of God, we are nevertheless
guilty and not excuseable when God judges us as sinners, and takes vengeance
of our unrighteousness. The Doctrine then is this, that the sins of Men serve
to the glory of God, for as skillful Physicians make poisons to be ingredients
into their best Cordials, so the wise God makes Man's greatest sins to be
subservient unto his glory, and draws good out of evil. Yet for that, those
poisons are poisons in themselves, those sins in themselves are sins, and God
does punish them without any injury either to his mercy or to his justice. But
because it is natural: with Man to raise questions, to find out excuse for
himself, here the Apostle does propose one, which carnal sense and reason, are
apt to make against this Doctrine, and therefore to qualify the objection, and
show he does not approve of it, he says, I speak as a man: Well, what does Man
say, if my sin commends the righteousness of God, and becomes an instrument of
his glory, then God is unrighteouss to take vengeance of me, and punish me as a
sinner, besides, that I cannot avoid sinning, being a reprobate. But the
Apostle says, God forbid, though things be so, yet there is no unrighteousness
in God, thou art in the wrong to think and to say so, and he gives a reason,
For then, how shall God judge the world? and as Abraham said, Shall not the
judge of all the earth do right? Genesis 14.15. This is a true Doctrine which by
some was misconstrued, and that makes St. Paul complain, they slanderously
reported of him: We have the same ground to complain against Arminians, and for
the like slander: Let this Text be compared with that of Romans 9.14.15.

To what has been said, we shall add that the Decree of reprobation is the
sentence, and Damnation the execution of it. Sin is not the cause of
reprobation, but sin is the cause of Damnation; God as Judge has passed
sentence, yet there is a reprieve, but the last day shall be Execution-day,
then actual sins shall be laid to the charge of reprobates, they shall have
nothing to say for themselves, why sentence should not be pronounced against
them. For the sins of the Elect, they shall solemnly be declared to be forgiven
in and through the Lord Jesus; and though Grace be the means appointed for us
to come to glory, yet reprobates are not appointed to sin, though it be the way
to eternal misery, for there is a different reason of means conducing to
Salvation and those to Damnation. God is the Author of the first, which are
good, because he puts into the Elect that which was not in them, namely, his
Grace, Faith, Repentance, Holiness, etc. But as to the last, he infuseth
nothing into reprobates, he finds in them that which is evil, namely sin, and
there he leaves it, he is not bound to take it away, Mercy is free, and God is
the Author of Grace, which is the way to Salvation, but not of sin, which is
the way to Damnation: These two several ways all the world will go, some one
way, and some another, wherefore that Exhortation of St. Paul is very
necessary, 2 Cor. 13.5.
Examine your selves, whither you be in the Faith: prove your selves: know ye
not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except you be reprobates.
The reasons of God's election and reprobation differ as much as Mercy does from
from Justice: His ordaining means for one does not conclude his ordaining means
in like manner for the other.

Against the Text about Jacob and Esau, which strikes home upon them, they say
two things, first, concerning the signification of the word hated. Secondly,
That it is spoken of temporal advantages, and not of spiritual things. As to the
first, God loved Jacob, and hated Esau, mean's nothing else but that God loved
Esau less than Jacob, which interpretation they ground upon that place, where
it is said that Leah was hated, that is, as in the foregoing verse, less loved
than Rachel, Genesis 29.31.

We know how in Holy Scripture, one and the same word, has sometimes a
different signification, but the true one, is always to be deduced out of the
scope of the place, and the Analogy of Faith. How often does the word of God
mention his Hatred, Anger, Indignation and Wrath against the wicked, whom he is
said to abhor, and they are said to be abomination unto the Lord, when God
speaks of evil men, in opposition to the good, whom he is said to love as to
hate the others, must we understand that hatred, of his love only with this
difference of a lesser and lower degree, this were to overthrow the whole
Scripture, and the intent of God's Spirit therein. Certainly the sense of that
Scripture by them quoted, does not at all reach our case, or come within our
present purpose. There it is spoken of the passion of a Husband who having two
Wives, that Affection of his had two several Objects; but St. Paul mentions
the love and hatred of God toward his Creatures, which in verse 18. of the
same Chap. is represented by his showing mercy to one and hardening the other.
Let the signification of a word be what it will, yet all must agree how there
ought to be a vast difference in the meaning, in relation to the carriage of a
Husband toward two Wives, whereof he loves one more than the other, and that
of God, of a great and a just Judge toward two persons whereof he has chosen
the one and rejected the other, as may be seen in the case of David and Saul:
As in that of Abel, unto whom and to his Offering the Lord had respect, Genesis 45
5.
and of Cain unto whom and to his Offering God had no respect. The like may be
said of Isaac, that was the Son of the Promise, and Ishmael of the Flesh, and
so here God loved Isaac and hated Esau.

Besides, love and hatred are humane Passions, not really in God, though
improperly attributed unto him after our manner of conceiving, and to
condescend to the weakness of our Nature, they are not affections in, but
effects from God; when God bestows favors, he is said to love, and when he
inflicteth punishments, to hate. By love and hatred of God are meant the
Mercies or Blessings and Curses of God, Come ye blessed, depart ye cursed. It Is
called the wrath of God, which abides on him that is the unbeliever.
Reprobation is called hatred, John 3.36.
as Election love. Romans 9.11.

Now we must come to the other part of their exception, how here the Apostle
speaks of temporal advantages, and not of spiritual blessings: To say that love
and hatred here relate only to temporal things is not enough, those words are
taken out of Malachy, 1.2, 3, 4. and there is in it also something of the
worldly concernment, when God said he laid his Mountains, and his Heritage
wast, for the Dragons of the Wilderness, which yet is a Metaphorical
expression, whereby things of another nature may be represented as we see at
the latter end of the 4th. verse, it is called the border of wickedness, and the
people against whom the Lord has indignation for ever. So this hatred is
extended upon his Posterity.

But as to the scope of the place, we can neither desire nor have a better
interpreter than St. Paul, Romans 9. Where we find he does apply it to spiritual
things; not only to temporal Mercies and Judgments, but also to eternal, as
it is the whole scope of the Chap. Wherein from the beginning the Apostle
shows God's distinguishing mercy in matters of Religion between Jews, and
Gentiles, to the first, beloved, the Adoption, and the Glory and the Covenants,
and the giving of the Law and the Service of God and the Promises, which our
Savior reduces to Salvation, when he says Salvation is of the Jews. John
4.22. All which privileges, the Gentiles were excluded from, as the Apostle
says elsewhere they were without Christ, being aliens from the common wealth
of Israel, and strangers from the Covenants of promise, having no hope, and
without God in the world. Ephesians. 2.12.
Another great privilege of the Jews by the Apstle mention ed, is this of whom
as concerning the flesh Christ came, who is God blessed for ever. The very
naming of Christ, the promised Messiah, shows, St. Paul speaks of higher things
than are worldly and temporal. He goes farther, for he declares distinguishing
mercies between the Jews themselves, when he says, They are not all Israel
that are of Israel. And what also means his opposition, of the children of
the flesh, to the children of God, of the promise, and of the seed? Does he not
make a palpable distinction and visible opposition between Isaac and Ishmael,
when he says, In Isaac shall thy seed be called, which afterward does
continue in the persons of Jacob and Esau, the first (...) loved, the other he
hated before they were born and had done any good or evil, the ground of which
love or hatred he attributes to Election, when he says, That the lave of God
according to election might stand, not of works but of him that calls? Hence
does it not appear how God not in consideration of any works which could not be
before men were born, loved and elected Jacob, hated and reprobated Esau; and
that without any injustice in the least, or the least ground in the Creature to
complain, whether Jews or Gentiles, for he speaks generally of both, when he
says, Therefore has he mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he
hardneth, and this out of his absolute power over the Creature, as the Potter
has over the Clay? Can any one without blushing, say that by making vessels to
honor and vessels to dishonor, that by these words God willing to show his
wrath and to make his power known to men, endured with much long suffering the
vessels of wrath fitted to destruction, and by these other words, that God
might make known the riches of his glory, on the vessels of mercy which he had
before prepared unto glory? I say can any man of sense affirm this to be spoken
of outward and temporal things, and not of Spiritual and Eternal, of Election
and Reprobation, whereunto in the next verse he joyneth vocation of himself and
others, when he says, Even of us whom he has called, not of the Jews only,
but also of the Gentiles, which has a Connection with, and must be applied to
those vessels of mercy before prepared unto glory mentioned just the verse
before, amongst whom he declares himself? The whole rest of the Chapter does
evidence and confirm our assertion, wherefore we shall no longer stand upon it,
to say some few words more to the instance of Jacob and Esau.

Esau had Temporal Blessings, his Father gave him the Fatness of the Earth and
the dew of Heaven from above; he grew Strong and Mighty, so the great
difference between him and Jacob, consisted not in worldly advantages, it was
of another nature; in Scripture he is branded with the name of profane, who
after he had sold his Birthright; yet before his Father, called himself his
first Born, and would as such have inherited the Blessing, which though his
Father intended for him as we see by his being so cautious to know when Jacob
came for it, whether or not he was Esau indeed, yet thorough Gods providence
and Rebeckah's direction, he was deprived of, and as Scripture says, when he
would have inherited the blessing, he was rejected. Genesis 27. Heb. 12.16, 17.

Part of Isaac's blessing to Jacob was this, Blessed be he that blesses thee,
and cursed be every one that curses thee; which curse lighted upon Esau, who
afterward hated Jacob, Genesis 27.41.
because of the blessing wherewith his Father had blessed him. It Is natural for
one that hates another, to Curse and wish him Evil, and Esau so hated his
Brother, that he would have served him as Cain served his, being fully resolved
to have killed him, which in the sight of God was accounted as if he had done
it. Obid. 10.
For thy violence against thy brother Jacob. It Is not in vain, but surely for
good reason that the spirit of God by the mouth of two of his Prophets, Ezech.
35.5. Amos 1.11.
takes notice of the hatred of Esau against his Brother Jacob, and of his
Posterity against Jacob's, as if it had been entailed. Well upon this hatred of
Esau, Jacob was forced to leave his Father's House, but God to show the
difference he made between the two Brothers appeared unto Jacob in the way, and
to him renewed the promise made unto Abraham and to Isaac, and in thy seed
shall all the families of the earth be blessed, Genesis 28.13.14. Which was a
Spiritual and Evangelical promise, by virtue of that choice which God from
Eternity had made of him, preferably and exclusively to Esau: So then this love
to Jacob, and this hatred to Esau before they were born, and had done any Good
or Evil, had a relation to future Spiritual and Eternal Privileges.

This matter of Predestination may very well be illustrated out of the
consideration of the execution here, in a visible way, of his Eternal Decree.
So we shall begin immediately after sin with that Divine Oracle. Genesis 3.15.
I will put enmity between thee, the Serpent, and the woman, and between thy
seed and her seed, it shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel.
This first promise of a Messiah includes not only that conflict and victory of
his over the Serpent, but also, an enmity between their Seeds; for though the
Woman's Seed and the Serpent's be only mentioned, yet the enmity is to be
between the Serpent's and the Messiah's Seeds; for he, though he be the Woman's
Seed, yet also has his Seed, for says the Prophet, Isai. 53.10.
When thou shall make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his seed. The
special Seed therein mentioned was the Messiah, but also there is contained a
general, a chosen Seed, out of which by a Lineal Succession the Messiah was to
come: So that from the beginning of the world, there was a beginning of the
execution of the Decree, there was a preterition as an Election, God divided;
of two Sons of Adam, Cain the Eldest, taking notice how God accepted his
Brothers Sacrifice and not his, Genesis 4.5, 8, 11.
Was wroth, and his countenance fell, after which he killed Abel: Whereupon he
was cursed; and thereby excluded from the hope that ever the Messiah should
come from him or Posterity. Here is visible the execution of that part of the
Decree relating to mankind. Our first Parents had but two Sons, whereof Cain
who as the Apostle 1 John 3.12.
says, was of that wicked one, slew his brother that was righteous. Now for
the continuation of the righteous, God gives Adam another Son, Seth, so called
by Eve, Genesis 4.2^^
for says she, God has appointed me another seed instead of Abel. Yet at
first, she thought Cain had been the man, for at his birth she said, I have
gotten a man from the Lord, because the promise being in general terms, might
be applied to him or his Posterity, but after the Murder and Curse, he was
visibly excluded, and so the promise devolved upon Seth and his Posterity, not
the Eldest, but the Youngest. Here take notice how the several Restrictions and
Applications of the promise, not only about the Messiah, which was to be but
one individual person; but as to the rest of the Seed of the promise, the
birthright which otherwise was a great privilege, was of no advantage, nor
nothing else of natural consideration, but ever God himself made the
difference, contrary to the opinion, and sometimes to the inclination of
Parents, as we shall show it in its place. We see God's discriminating choice
in the almost constant preference he gave the younger Brothers, so that the
birthright, as we said just now, was of no advantage to elder Brothers, and
this by St. Paul is hinted at, when he quoted that place of Genesis, The elder
shall serve the younger. In few words, that whole method of God in bringing by
degrees things into that Line, out of which the promised Messiah was to come,
is wonderful, and does confound all humane Reasoning and Speculation, God
managing every thing so, that nothing of humane Wisdom, Choice or Power
appeared in it, if it was thus in the execution of that part of God's eternal
Decree, much more cause have we to say there was nothing of Man's Prerogative,
Good Disposition, or any thing else of that kind in the framing of the Decree,
when as yet no Creature was existing, wherefore God's Predestination ought to
be wholly and only attributed to his Good Will and Pleasure. When that great
Prophet Samuel was abroad anointing one of Jesse's Sons to be King, which was
an Election only to an Office, how much was he mistaken in his judgment? As 1 Samuel 16.7.
God himself said to him in words very considerable, how much more shall they
be mistaken, who in matter of relecting Men to Eternal Happiness, do fancy
other motives, besides the Good Will and Pleasure of God.

Farther we see how by the Flood God excluded not only all the Posterity of
Cain, which was wholly corrupt, but also the greatest part of Seth's, it being
only reduced to Noah's Family, consisting but of eight Persons; Noah had three
Sons, Sem, Ham and Japhet, Genesis 7.1. Chap. 9.1, 25, 26.
and it seemed there was no difference, God blessed them after the Flood, yet
not long after, a Curse is thundered against Ham, in the person of Canaan his
Son, upon the occasion of his having derided his Father, and a Blessing is
pronounced upon Shem. This Curse was so terrible, that afterward almost his
whole Posterity was destroyed by Joshua, when he put that of Shem in possession
of the Land of Canaan. Chap. 11.27. chap. 12.1, 2, 3, 7.
Things continued in an equality, till it came to Terah's Family, who had three
Sons Abraham, Nahor, and Haran. To Abram in a most solemn way, and at several
times, chap. 21.12.
the promise was renewed and applied, so that by God's choice the promise was
in Abraham's Seed. Yet not by Hagar in Ishmael, chap. 17.18.
but by Sarah in Isaac. It seems Abraham, before the special promise of a Son
by Sarah, thought it was in Ishmael, chap. 21.11, 12.
for he said, O that Ishmael may live before thee, and therefore after the
birth of Isaac, it was very grievous in his sight to part with him, till God
said unto him, in Isaac shall thy Seed be called, so that though Ishmael was
the first born, Circumcised as well as Isaac, and afterward saved from death
by means of an Angel, yet in Isaac shall thy seed be called: God and not
Abraham made that distinction, so between Jacob and Esau, thus God chose the
Tribe of Judah only the fourth Brother out of the other Tribes, and of the
Families of the Tribe, that of David the 7th and youngest Brother: God himself
chose Moses, Aaron, Joshua.

The like example we have afterward in Isaac's Family about Esau and Jacob,
which hereafter I shall have occasion to make use of. Esau was the Elder by the
same Wife, Rebeckah. Genesis 27.4, 8, 27, 28, 29.
Isaac is fully resolved to give him his chief Blessing, yet by God's special
direction sends him out of the way, and in his absence Jacob by his Mother's
advice, who liked and loved him best of the two, obtained that Special
Blessing, which God intended for him, and as these promises after Abraham, had
been renewed unto Isaac, so afterward they were unto Jacob.

And although this distinctions of Persons, Families and Nations, had a special
regard to the Person of the Messiah, yet there is such a relation between that
Savior and those that by him were to be saved, that both these things were a
carrying on at the same time. Indeed till Abraham's time things were in a more
general and indefinite way, but then his Person and Family being fixed upon, as
to the extent of that, things were brought into a narrower compass, though as
to the promises which before were more in the dark, God did much enlarge and
give them a greater light; and to show it is so, and that this does also relate
to the Elect, I appeal to St. Paul, who makes use to this same purpose of those
dispensations of God with Abraham under the Old Testament; as we may see it
clearly in that place where he speaks of Abraham's righteousness, not
thorough Works, but thorough Faith, and that promise was not only to him, but
also to his Seed, which also received the Seal of the Covenant, and not only to
him, but he received the promise, That Genesis 12.3. and chap. 22.18.
in him should all families of the earth be blessed, which directly pointed at
the Messiah Jesus Christ, that should be born of his Seed; but also this other
promise, that he should be Genesis 17.4, 7.
Father of many Nations, and that he would be a God to him, and to his seed
after him, and these promises the Apostle calls Gal. 3.8.
The Gospel preached before unto Abraham. And to show how this relates to the
Elect and Believers, the Apostle says Romans 4.16.
Therefore it is of faith, that it may be by grace to the end the promise may
be sure to all the seed, not only to that which is of the law, but that a so,
which is of the faith of Abraham, who is the Father of us all, That is of all
Believers; so then there was a double Seed, that which is of Faith, and that
which is of the Law; and accordingly a double promise, one of Temporal, the
other of Spiritual Blessings which both were surely performed, and this the
same Apostle enlarges upon, and spiritualiseth the promise, with saying that
Romans 9.^, 3.
all the seed of Abraham are not children of Abraham, for there are the
children of the flesh, and the children of God. But the children of the promise
are counted for the seed: And he instances it not only in Isaac, who was the
son of the promise, but also in Jacob and Esau, the first a child of God and of
the promise, the other the child of the flesh, one was loved, the other hated;
but there is in the Book of Rev. 12.5.
Revelation something much to our purpose, the Woman was delivered of a
Man-child, that is the Lord Jesus, for two reasons. The first, by the character
therein given of him, who was to rule all nations with a rod of iron, a thing
applyable to none but him. The second reason is the attempt of the Dragon at
his birth, for that ancient Dragon, would have destroyed him in his very
Cradle, by the means of Herod, Matthew. 2.19, 20.
who sought his life: So that Christ was that true individual person promised
under the name of the Woman's Seed; but there is besides her the remnant of her
Seed, for when the Dragon could hurt neither the Man-child nor the Woman, he
went Rev. 12.17.
to make war with the remnant of her seed, which keep the commandments of God,
and have the testimony of Jesus Christ. That is the Elect and Believers.

This has not led us out of our way, but all along showed us a distinguishing
mercy of God upon some, which others were excluded from, and that nothing of a
natural privilege moved God to do so, only out of his own good will, even in
some places against the intentions of the good Instruments he made use of, and
this has by degrees led us to the great points of Vocation and Election, which
St. Paul does treat of in the last quoted place, all which together does concur
to the clearing and further manifestation of the truth. I could carry it on
further in both branches, as to the person of the Messiah, and as to his Seed
and his Chosen, and to entail those promises chiefly upon the Tribe of Judah,
and the Family of David, and also to show how great and visible a difference
there was after Solomon's death, and the renting of Ten Tribes, only Judah and
Benjamin adhering to Reoboham, David's Grandson. How Jeroboam upon a Politic
account altered the true worship of God, whereby he made Israel to sin, after
that division, not one good King over Israel, they all generally fell into
Idolatry, and all manner of wickedness, till after several interruptions in the
Succession, and after the cutting short the Tribes of Gad, Reuben and Manasseh,
and how by Tiglath-Pileser the people of 2 Kings. 15.29.
Gilead and Galilee, and of Naphtali were carried into Assyria. And at last, in
the days Chap. 17.6. Chap. 25.
of Hoshea, the Ten Tribes were by Shalmaneser transported into Captivity, and
about 140 years after in Zedechiah's time, Jerusalem was taken by
Nebuchadnezzar, and Judah carried into Babylon, whence after 70 years Captivity
they returned, the City was newly built, and also a new Temple, but they could
never recover themselves as before, Antiochus came after upon them, then they
passed under the Dominion of the Romans, and then in the fullness of times,
after great Confusions and Revolutions, the promised Messiah the Lord Jesus.
Christ came into the World, whose coming made a new face of the Church, then
the Woman's Seed bruised the Serpent's Head, the Ceremonial Law was abrogated,
a new Ministry instituted, the Gospel Preached, the Gentiles called, and though
the Oracles concerning the coming of the Messiah be fullfilled, yet the
promises about his Seed do go on and will, till all be gathered in one, and
their number perfected. So with David we must say his work is honorable and
glorious. Psalm. 111.3.


All these things I say, I could have insisted upon, to show the wonderful and
adorable Providence, according to his Eternal Purpose, Heb. 2.10.
In bringing many sons into glory, by the way of Grace, and amidst a great
variety of Dispensations; but I think what has already been spoken is
sufficient for our present purpose, and it directly leads us to say something
about Providence.

CHAP. IV. Of PROVIDENCE.
GOD has not only created the World, but he does also govern it, this is
called actual Providence, whereby he rules all his Creatures, specially
mankind. We shall not speak of it in its full extent, for the whole world, and
every thing therein is the Object of God's Providence; he takes care of, and
governs great and small things, necessary and contingent, good and evil, but we
shall speak of it only as much as is conducing to our present purpose, and as
it chiefly relates to good and wicked Men, in order to their Salvation and
Damnation, as much as it leads to the execution of God's Decree of
Predestination, for this is the part of it which the Papists and Arminians do
strike at, and which by the help of God, we now intend to vindicate, as far as
he will be pleased to enable us. Some make a confusion of Predestination and
Providence, as if it was the same thing, but there is a great difference, this
last is of a larger extent, and as we already said, is extended upon every
Creature of what nature soever, but Predestination regards only Men (and Angels
at the most) yet such a relation they have that one is the Decree, and the
other the execution of it. Whereof for the present we shall give but two
instances, to show how these things which in the world seem to us to be in a
Confusion, and mere accidents of Man's malice and designs, are by God's
ordering most wisely directed to a good end; to the unspeakable comfort of
those who observe such effects of Providence. The first instance is that Genesis
3^.21.
of Joseph's being sold by his Brethren, a most wicked thing in it self, which
he acknowledges, and in it admireth the ordering of Providence, for he says
to them: Genesis 50.20.
As for you, ye thought evil against me, but God meant it unto good, to bring
to pass as it is at this day, to save much people alive. For thus they were
preserved from being destroyed by Famine, and this in order for above 400 years
after, to bring them out of Egypt with so many wonders, and to lead them into
the possession of the promised Land. But before I leave this point, some thing
more I must offer to the consideration of serious and thinking men. Certainly
the several degrees of God's Providence in Joseph's case, are to be admired.
First, his dreams, then his declaring of them, which raised the hatred and envy
of his brethren against him: his Fathers sending him to them in the field,
whereupon they took counsel to kill him: Reuben's preventing their design, and
advising to cast him into a Pit, God at that very time bringing by a company of
Ishmalites, and Juda's council of selling him to them, their bringing him into
Egypt and selling him unto Potipher a great Man with Pharaoh, his Wifes unchaste
designs upon him, her manner of vengeance seeing her self denied: And here
indeed appears a dark effect of a wise Providence, that so good an act of his
should be followed with his being cast into Prison; but 'twas in order to bring
him nearer to Pharaoh, for it is observed how the Lord was with him, giving him
favor in the sight of the keeper of the Prison, as before he had fonnd grace
in the sight of Potipher whilst he was in Prison, God's Providence brought into
the same place the Butler and the Baker of the King of Egypt, then followed
their several dreams with their interpretation by Joseph, whose desire the
chief Butler minded not, but forgot him. But two years after Pharaoh dreamed,
and none of the Magicians could interpret, upon this occasion the Butler
remembered him, so he was sent for by the King, and after the interpretation he
was raised to be next under Pharaoh, the greatest Man in the Kingdom. Then God
called for a Famine upon the Land; but as David observes, Psalm. 105. he had
sent a Man before them to preserve life to Jacobs Family, as Joseph said to his
brethren, it was not you that sent me hither, but God. Genesis 45. In Egypt they
multip ied exceedingly, though under Oppression and Bondage, till the time of
their deliverance, as promised to Abraham, was come, and the iniquity of the
Amorite was full: How much is herein to be admired God's wise and adorable
Providence? Thus (for a second instance) the combination of Acts 4.27.28.
Herod, Pilate, the Gentiles and people of Israel, against our Savior, to shed
innocent blood, was by God's Providence directed, to do whatsoever the hand and
counsel of God determined before to be done. We must think the like of every
other effect of Providence, though we cannot tell the reasons of it. I declare
in the whole dispensation in time of our Salvation, nothing moves me more than
the consideration of God's ordering things for the good of his people, and I
therein admire and adore his Infinite Mercy, Wisdom and Power.

And thus God overrules the evil designs of wicked men, and of devils too, for
although their being evil be contrary to God's will, which is good, it does not
hinder but that they do fall under his Providence, for as a stubborn Horse is
by the Rider governed and directed to a certain end and place; and as a
Magistrate does rule and compel to duty, Seditious and Rebellious Subjects;
Thus with the Curb of his Providence, God does overruled the stubbornness of
the wills of Devils and Wicked Men, reduces them to order, and directs them
to his end. We see in the case of Job how Satan can do nothing against him,
without God's special leave, neither can he go a jot beyond what he is allowed.
Against this truth this objection is made, God is the Author of things done by
his Providence, but God is not the Author of Evil and Sin, therefore Evil and
Sin are not done by his Providence. I Answer God is the Author of things
efficiently (that is the true and proper effect of a Cause) done by his
Providence, but sin and evil are not efficiently done, but permissively, or by
permission, as hereafter it shall be explained. Evils of sin, are said to be
done by Providence, because God rules things done by evil and wicked Men, yet
is free from the evil and sinfulness thereof, Thus a Rider rules and makes a
lame Horse to go, yet is not the cause of the lameness, a Man writes a good
hand, yet writting with a bad Pen, what he writes is not well written, it is not
the fault of the Hand but of the Pen; the lameness lies in the Horse, and the
vitiosity of fault in the Instrument.

Now Providence is a Divine and perpetual act, whereby all and every thing is
preserved, ruled and directed to its own and proper end: There are three
degrees of Providence, as Preservation, Governing and Ordering of all things;
out of every one of these degrees do appear the Wisdom, Freedom, Power and
Goodness of God: Hence he is said to administer every thing Wisely, because
Hob. 4.13.
every thing lies open before his eyes; all being well disposed toward good
and certain ends, Causes do accordingly produce their effects. God herein
acts freely, for nothing compels him to this Government of the World,
neither does he without himself act any thing out of a natural necessity, but
out of his own free will, then powerfully, because out of his own Will and
Pleasure he does what he pleases without any trouble or disturbance, so that
nothing can hinder him. Lastly, he administereth well, because he never fails
in any thing he does, out of any mistake or error in the understanding, or a
deviation in his Will from that which is Right, Good and True.

And though I am to speak chiefly of God's special Providence, yet before I
enter upon the matter, it will be necessary for the better understanding of it,
for me to go up higher and say some things in general of the acting principle
in God, which is threefold, Directing, Commanding and Executing; the principle
directing the Action, is the understanding which in God is the same with his
Divine Knowledge and Wisdom; This is a property of God, whereby he knows
himself, in himself, and every thing without himself, not only of things that
are, whether they be necessary, contingent, passed or future, whether thought,
spoken or done, whether good or evil, but even those which are not to be, and
all that most truly and infallibly: This understanding is the principle
directing the Action, for no intelligent Agent wills and executes any thing
but what the Intellect has some foreknowledge of, and proposed it to the
Will. In Men are the Intellect a faculty of the Soul, Science an habit of that
faculty, and Knowledge an act proceeding from the faculty, thorough the habit,
but no such distinction in God, in whom all these are but one and the same,
distinguished only according to our manner of conceiving, God by his Essence,
and not by any faculty or habit does understand all in one eternal indivisible
and unchangeable Act, because every other manner of knowing, is attended with
imperfection; for he is a most simple and infinite Agent, in him no Succession,
no First and Last, in him is the most perfect power of understanding, the
knowledge of God being nothing else but the nature of God knowing, with one Act
he comprehends his whole nature, and all things besides, as the Sun at once
gives light to every thing that is capable to receive it, much more the eye of
God infinitely brighter and more piercing than the Sun, does see and know all
things that can be known and are visible, which universal Science is by
Scripture attributed unto God. John 21.17.
Lord thou know all things, and Heb. 4 13.
all things are naked and open unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do.
God's Science of simple intelligence, or of things that can be, or of vision,
of things that shall be, we wholly omit, but the conditional Science called
media, because a middle between the other two, was forged by the Jesuits, and
is an absurd invention of theirs, to reconcile free will and with the
infallibility of God's Prescience and Predestination. One thing more to be
observed upon this is, that the will of God is in order before his Science of
things to come, wherefore God has foreseen this or that shall come to pass,
because from Eternity he decreed to do^t or permit it to be done, without which
will of effecting or permitting, nothing would be done, or foreseen to be done.

Therefore the will of God is the commanding principle, as his mind the
directing. These are (if I may so say) the grounds which his Providence is
acted by, this will is that whereby God wills himself, by himself, and every
thing out of him for himself; that is for his glory, in Scripture this Will is
attributed to God. Isai. 46.10.
My counsel shall stand, and I will do alt my pleasure, and St. Paul, Romans 9.19.
who has resisted his will? And our Savior says, Joh. 6.39.
This is the will of him that sent me. Now the great and ultimate end of the
will of God, is his glory, which all things are and ought to be subservient
unto, to that end says, St. Paul, Cor. 10.31.
do all things for the glory of God.

To dive into these matters, and be able to understand the works of learned
Divines upon the Subject, one must well observe some distinctions of the will
of God, as secret and revealed, of the good-pleasure and of the sign. The
secret properly so called, is the eternal and unchangeable Decree of God, about
doing or permitting several things in time to be done, which for want of being
revealed are unknown to us, of this it is said Deuteronomy. 29.29.
Secret things belong to God, as of the other, But those things that are
revealed belong to us and our Children. Thus there are many things relating to
particular men, which except those that concern the certitude of Faith, we are
wholly ignorant of. Wherefore St. James reproves the pride and over confidence
of those, who for time to come dispose of their affairs, Jam. 4.13, 14, 15.
though they know not what that day or next will produce, therefore he will
have them to add this, If the Lord be willing. The revealed will is not
properly the Decree, but a declaration made in the word, which ever is an
evidence of some Decree, but not always of that which we took it to be; this
declaration is made either by way of Precept, Promise or Threatening, if that be
done which God commands to be done, that declaration of God's will, is a sign
and evidence that there was a Decree of doing or permitting the things that are
done, if what is promised be performed, that declaration signifies there is a
Decree of performing what is performed, so if God inflicteth what is threatened,
the revelation is a sign of a Decree, to have things inflicted which are
inflicted. But if that which is commanded to be done be not done, that
declaration is sign of a Decree to admonish a Man of his duty by way of
Precept, and oblige him to do it, thereby to make him unexcusable. And if what
God promises under an expressed or employed condition, be not per^ormed, the
declaration is sign of a Decree of showing a Man reason why he may obtain a
good promise? And why that promise is not obtained, namely, the neglect of the
condition prescribed, and if that which is threatened be not inflicted, the
declaration is sign of a Decree to exhort and invite a Man to his Duty and
Repentance, and of remitting the punishment upon condition of Repentance;
whence it appears that there is no contradiction between the Revelation and
the Divine Decree, if one considers well the diversity of Decrees, and the
meaning of the Revelation.

The other distinction of the good-pleasure, and of the sign does not differ
from the former, only that the good-pleasure is a Decree properly so called,
which may be either secret or revealed; for some are so, the will of the sign,
is the same with the revelation of the Decree, but one must have a care not to
misapply a declaration to a Decree, which it is not the declaration of and does
differ from, which some do, and so run into difficulties and inconveniences.
Now our assertion is, that God will have nothing with his good-pleasure, but
what also he will have with the sign, provided one does not understand every
good pleasure, as for instance, God in his word would have all men to be holy
and obedient to his Law, but seeing the most part of the world is not holy and
obedient, we draw this consequence, that God by his eternal Decree, will not
make all men holy, and so will not have them to be holy, for none is holy,
except he is made such by God. Here seems to be a contradiction between the
Good-pleasure and a sign, which if so, what would become of the truth of word
of God; wherefore though there be some diversity, yet there is no contrariety,
for the will of God revealed in the word, or the declaration that will have all
Men to be holy, is not the sign of the Good-pleasure or Decree, nor to
sanctify the greatest part of Men, for here is no agreement between the sign
and the thing signified, or between the Word and the Decree, but it is the sign
of another Decree, namely, to invite and command Men to do their duty, and
study Holiness: As to the other Decree of not making holy the greatest part of
the world, it has another declaration, partly in the words and partly in the
event. There is then no contrariety, but that sign which does not agree with
that Decree which it does not belong to, will agree with another of which it is
the sign.

And because this is a matter of high concernment, both as to the Decrees of
God, and as to his word between which, nor in the word it self, there is no
contrariety, to make the matter the more clear, I will bring two more
instances; The first is out of Genesis Genesis 22.2, 12.
God said to Abraham, take thine only son Isaac whom thou love, and get thee
into the land of Moriah, and offer him there for a burnt offering, etc. Here
God commands Abraham to Sacrifice his Son, but in the 12 verse, lay not thine
hand upon the lad, neither do thou any thing unto him. Here God forbids him
to Sacrifice his Son; hence it apeareth as also the event made it good, how God
would not have Isaac to be sacrificed, though before, he had positively
commanded it. The second instance, God by Moses said to Pharaoh, Exodus 9.1, 12.
Let my people go, that they may serve me, these are the words whereby God
declares he will have Pharaoh to let Israel go, and verse the 12. God hardened
the heart of Pharaoh that he would not let the people go. As Exodus 4.21.
he said to Moses he would do. I will harden the heart of Pharaoh that he will
not let my people go. Which God did at Chap. 10.20, 27.
several times, hence it appears that God in his Decree would not have
Pharaoh at that time to let his people go, when he commanded him to let him go,
for God hardened his heart that he would not let him go. This is the other
instance.

God forbid that Scripture should attribute to God two contrary wills, a sign
contrary to the Decree, or a declaration in his word opposite to his eternal
purpose, which to affirm is no less than Blasphemy. What difference or
contrariety seems to be here, is not real, only in appearance, arising from
this, that though in Scripture, God ever signifies, that he will have that
which indeed he is willing to have, yet he does not always precisely signify,
that positively he would have that which at the first sight we conceive him to
be willing to have: Wherefore to remove difficulties, to assert God's truth and
show the harmony and agreement between God's Good-pleasure or Decree, and his
revealed will in his word, we must go to Scripture, and accordingly proceed to
a farther examination of the places.

In the History of sacrificing Isaac, do appear two inward and different
thoughts of God, partly out of Scripture, and partly out of the Event: The
first was to preserve Isaac on whom were the promises, and hinder Abraham from
killing him. The second thought of God was his will, by a command to engage
Abraham to Sacrifice his Son, (who by virtue of that order, prepared himself to
obey) and thereby give an illustrious example of Obedience, which was tried by
this. For in the first verse it is said, God tempted Abraham, so was Job tried
to be made a famous example of Patience, as in this, Abraham was both of Faith
and Obedience. Now to the point, to every one of these Thoughts and Decrees of
God, answered its sign, which are not to be confounded one with another. To the
first, and not to the last belonged this Sign, or Declaration, thou shall not
lay thy hand on the Lad, etc. which at first was not revealed to Abraham. Not
to the first but to the last answered this sign, Offer thy Son for a burnt
offering, ye see here is no real contradiction; different Decrees, different
Signs, and a true harmony between signs and things signified, which would be
disturbed, if the sign of the first was attributed to the last, and of the last
to the first.

Now to the other Instance, in the History of Pharaoh, are also to be
considered two different Thoughts of Good-pleasure of God. When Pharaoh was the
first, second and third time commanded to let Israel go, God's will was not so
soon to bring his people out of Egypt, but to harden the heart of Pharaoh, not
to let them go. The second Thought was to oblige Pharaoh by a special command
to let the Jews go, but not presently, for then God had missed his aim, and
with hardening Pharaoh's heart had contributed toward it, which is in no wise
consisting with God's Wisdom; but the end was to let Pharaoh understand that he
was justly punished for obstinately disobeying God's command, and this hardness
of Pharaoh was an occasion for God to make his power known through the earth.
Exodus 9.16.
Every one of these thoughts had its proper sign, the first's and not the
last's (which at first was hidden from Pharaoh) is expressed in these words, I
will harden the heart of Pharaoh that he will not let my people go. The sign of
the last and not of the first declared to Pharaoh, is expressed in these words,
let my people go. Thus one may see here is no real contradiction, but a true
agreement between the signs and the decrees, as their things signified, and it
would cause a confusion if they were not rightly applied. Thus one may see the
true sense and meaning of those places of Scripture, which I have the more
insisted upon, because the matter is of so high a concernment, and that by the
means of those distinctions of the will of God, one may resolve the doubts and
difficulties which occur upon this matter.

But before I leave it, I must take notice of a new fangled distinction already
mentioned in the Chapter of Predestination, the more because this brings us
directly upon Arminians, it is of the will of God unto absolute or peremptory,
and conditional, the former say they depends upon no condition, but the last
does. If by this they meant only that which is called of the sign, it might be
allowed, for sometimes in Scripture are conditional Precepts, Promises and
Threatenings. But when they extend it to God's Decrees, some whereof they would
have to depend upon certain conditions, which from Eternity God has foreseen
shall never be performed, as when they say, God has decreed to save those that
are to be damned, upon condition they shall repent and believe in Christ. We
cannot but reject it as contrary to God's Wisdom. Amongst Men one would be
looked upon as very imprudent and inconsiderate, who would seriously resolve
upon a thing under a condition, which he is most sure, will never be performed.
Thus if a Prince would in earnest resolve to make an old ignorant Man,
unexperienced, dull, unskilful in every Art and Science, his Chancelour, upon
condition he becomes a famous Orator, a great Statesman, very Wise and Prudent,
versed in all manner of learning, and that he gets all endowments necessary for
the Place (which comparison I look upon as very defectuous to represent what I
mean) what would one say of such a Prince? And what can we say to those who
would father such inconsiderable and nonsensical decrees upon the only wise
God. Which of these two is more consisting with the Word and Wisdom of God? To
say, I elect such a one to Salvation, if he repent and believe, or, I elect him
to Salvation through Faith and Repentance, which I will give him, taking these
means for condition they enter into the decree, thus when God decreed to save
Noah and his Family, it was by the means of the Ark: As I said before, it is the
part of a wise man when he appoints to the end to appoint also to the means,
these means enter into God's decree, for by them as away, he will bring men to
his end; now these conditions do not hinder the decree from being absolute,
that is, it does not depend upon a condition, for God has absolutely decreed
to save a Man by Faith.

Of the same stamp is their other distinction of God's will into antecedent and
consequent, which they explain thus, God has decreed indifferently to save all
and every individual Man upon condition, if they believe in Christ, and this by
an antecedent will: again he has decreed to save only some, because he has
foreseen only some few would believe, and this is done by a consequent will.
The first is contrary to the wisdom of God. The second also argues God of
Imprudence, and with Pelagius supposes faith in Christ to depend upon the will
of Men, contrary to what Scripture affirms positively. Ephs. 2.8.
Faith is the gift of God, and why to make two decrees of one, when one can and
does serve. That Truth which out of Scriptures we do assert, does stand
altogether and all in good order, when the erroneous opinions of our
adversaries are in confusion, and by pieces and do not well agree together.

To answer their Objections we are to know that to every decree belongs it is
sign, which is conditional, the decree not so, as any ways to depend upon the
condition, and though the will of the sign be conditional, and that of the
decree absolute: Yet the agreement between the decree and the word does remain,
for according to the rule of Civilians and Logicians, every proposition
whereunto is annexed an unpossible condition to which answers one, which for
certain can never be performed, is equivalent to an absolute or Catagorical
Negative, this agrees with an absolute negative decree, not depending upon the
condition. Thus the promise of Salvation to one (who by reason of his final
impenitency is to be damned) under condition of Repentance, and faith in
Christ, is equivalent to a Catagorical Negative of Salvation for that Man by
reason of his final Impenitency. To this answers the negative decree, with
relation to Impenitency and Unbelief, as cause of future Damnation; for all
this, God does not mock those whom he promises Salvation unto under condition,
though he has not absolutely decreed to save them, for by this conditional
promise God shows them the means of Salvation, and the just causes of
Damnation, namely, the neglect of those means which go before Salvation, and he
shows it to the end they be unexcuseable, and make them sensible how justly
they are damned. But say the adversaries, they cannot apply those means, true,
but this excuses them not, for it is thorough their fault they cannot. Some put
a question whether there be any Cause to the Will of God, not as to the Object
of the Will without himself relatively to the Creature, it is generally granted
he has, but the question is about the will wherewith God wills: Divines
answer no Cause per se of it self properly called can be given of the Will of
God, either instrumental, impulsive or final, because God is so Cause-active,
that he cannot be Caused or Passive, his Will is Independent, and there is
nothing greater, nor before the Will of God, in whom is not a Will of the end,
and another of the means, for as with one single act he knows the cause and
the effects, so with one single act he wills the end and the means. They who
attribute moving and impulsive causes to the Will of God, do it to condescend
to Man's capacity, for men cannot represent to themselves the greatness and
Majesty of God, but in low and humane conceptions.

Now we should come to the executing principle, or the third part of the
principle of acting in God, and this is his Power, but because it leads us to
Providence, which is our present Matter and chief Subject, we omit speaking to
that as not conducing to our present purpose, and reassume our Discourse about
Providence, where we left it.

There are three parts or degrees of God's Providence. First, Preservation.
Second, Governing. Third, Ordering. As to the first, God's preserving
Providence is extended over all his Works, it is a continued Creation, whereby
he preserves all his Creatures; some as to their Species, others as to their
Individuums. Under the first Branch come all things Mortal and Incorruptible.
Under the second those that are Incorruptible, but this I omit insisting upon,
to come to that which is to my purpose; namely, that special Providence of God
in the preservation of his Elect in this world, from those great and imminent
dangers that are brought upon them, whereof Scripture affords several
instances, as of Genesis 7.7.
Noah and his Family from the Flood, by the means of the Ark; Genesis 19.15, 16.
of Lot from the destruction of Sodom; of Exodus 2.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
Moses from being drowned when exposed upon the River Nilus; of 1 Kings 17.4,
10, 13. Dan. 3.24. Chap. 6.22.
Elijah, for God commanded the Ravens to feed him, and at Zarephath also
provided for him; of Shedrach, Meshack and Abednego, the three young Men that
were delivered from the burning fiery Furnace; and Daniel from the mouth of the
Lions. But because there is no dispute about this part of God's Providence, I
come to the next, which is the governing part.

The Government of the World is an act whereby God by his Supreme Authority,
Power and Wisdom, rules all things, and disposes thereof according to his
Will, and this is done either actively or permissively: By the first God does
act every good thing, either immediately or mediately, it is in the first manner
when God makes use of no Instrument or Second Causes, to show he is not tied to
them, thus he immediately created the world without any Instrument. When God
works with Second Causes, and Instruments he is said to act mediately and by
means, and this not out of any necessity, for he can do all he pleases without
them, but it is only out of his Free Will and Pleasure, not for want of Power,
but out of a fullness of his goodness, to communicate to the Creatures a power
of acting, and also to teach us how to make use of the ordinary means by him
appointed. These Instruments which God makes use of, are either good or bad,
ordinary or extraordinary. Good Instruments he makes use of when by the means
of good and pious Ministers, he calls Men to Salvation; when he rules People
by good Kings, and preserves Believers by good Angels: God also makes use of
bad Instruments. First to punish the wicked, when by the means of the Devil or
wicked Men he destroys Tyrants, Witches, etc, Secondly, He chastises his
Children when he sometimes delivers them into the hands of Cruel Tyrants, to
the end that being thus afflicted, they may know their sins, repent and draw
near to God. Thirdly, To try the Faith and Patience of his Children; thus he
makes Job's Patience known all the world over; he made use of the Devil and of
the Chaldeans, and Sabeans: And although those evil Instruments which God
makes uses of, do sin, yet God does nothing amiss, he does not infuse any
malice into them, but makes a good use of that which in them is inherent, to
execute his just Judgments. In the same work, says Austin, God is just, and
Man guilty, because in the same thing they have done, they had different ends.

The ordinary Instruments, which God makes use of, are Second Causes appointed
to produce certain ends, thus the Sun is the usual means whereby God does give
light to the World, heat and warm the Earth, for to that same end it is
appointed, and always made use of, the word of God is the usual means to
convert Men to God. The extraordinary means are those which are not appointed
always or for the most part, to cause such effects, but according to God's
Will, they variously produce sometimes one thing sometimes another; thus God to
kill a Man does sometimes make use of a Thunderbolt; another of the fall of a
House; of a Wild Beast; of Highway-men. Hence one may see there are an ordinary
and an extraordinary Providence: The first is when he observes the order he at
first settled in Nature, namely, that certain Causes acting according to the
perpetual Law of Nature, shall produce some effects which hold a proportion
with the strength of the Cause: Hence are the several seasons of the year
succeeding one to another, rising and setting of the Planets, motion of the
Stars; and the generation and corruption of worldly things. The extraordinary
is when God without or besides the way and order settled in Nature above the
strength of Second Causes, does through his Omnipotency provide for things.
Hence are Miracles which are Works of Divine Almightiness, exceeding the power
of Second Causes. Hence it is that those Second Causes sometimes employed by
God in working Miracles, in relation to the miraculous effects, are signs and
Evidences rather than Causes. When God has a work to do, and has a mind to
make use of Instruments he does fit them for his purpose. 2 Chronicles. 20.6.
For in his hand there is such a power and might, so that none or nothing is
able to withstand him. Because Prove. 21.30.
there is no wisdom nor understanding, nor counsel against the Lord. In point
of these acts of God's Providence, let it be farther observed, how though God
has appointed certain Causes to produce some effects, yet as he is not tied to
them, so he is sometimes and often seen to work such events as do not answer
those Second Causes. One would think that swiftness in running of a Race should
carry the Victory, that the strongest should in a Battle have the better; and
that the Wisest should heap up Riches: yet these Successes are by Solomon
ascribed to God's Providence, more than to such Second Causes, for he says,
Eccles. 9.11.
the race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, neither yet bread
to the wise, nor yet riches to men of understanding, nor yet favor to men of
skill.

Now we are come to the most controverted part of God's Providence namely
Permission, which is a governing, whereby God does not restrain or bring off
Devils and wicked men, so prone and inclined to sin, but withdrawing or denying
his Grace, suffers them to fall into sin, yet so that he turns their bad
and violent inclinations to the execution of his just Judgments, and directs
to very good ends their wicked Designs and Purposes. In the permission of sin,
God is not an idle Spectator, but a mighty, just and wise Judge: God's method
herein is this. First, To men dead in trespasses and sins, he denies and
withdraws the effectual helps of his Grace, without which they cannot but
sin. Secondly, Very often he keeps not form sinning Devils, and Men of their
nature, and out of custom so prone to sin, when he could do it, but suffers
them to fall into it. Thirdly, That sin conceived in their mind, he so
restrains and rules, that he suffers it not to break out upon every Object;
but he inclines and directs it to such Objects or Men whom he is willing to
Punish, Chastise or Try. Fourthly, He directs to a good end, those designs
which they intend for evil ends; as for instance, if a Traveller on his way be
killed by a Highway-man, God is said to have permitted the Murder. First,
Because he has withdrawn and denied him his effectual Grace, without which he
infallibly was to commit a Murder. Secondly, Because he has not kept from
Murder the mind of that Highway-man, by nature and custom inclined to it, when
he could easily have done it, but has suffered him to commit it. Thirdly,
because he so inclined and ruled the Highway-man's violence and design of
committing a Murder, that he neither would or could indifferently kill any
Man, but this Man rather than another, hence by a just Judgment (which for the
most part Men know not the cause of) he has exposed to the Highway-man's fury
this Traveller, rather than another. Fourthly, Because that which by the
Highway-man was committed for a bad end, as may be to get money to bestow upon
his own lust, God directed it for a good end, as may be the Robber's
punishment, or of him that was killed, or to hinder him from executing some
evil design he was going upon, or some other end unknown to us.

In the Sins of Men, about which Divine Permission is exercised, four things
are to be observed. First, The act it self as it is a natural act physically
taken. Secondly, The vice inherent to the fact, or the morality of it. Thirdly,
The directing of the bad Instrument and evil Act to a certain Object. Fourthly,
The end of this direction is that God executes his just Judgments by the sins
of Men. The first, third and fourth of these are of God, and he is the Author
of them, for every act as such is good, the motion of the hand, stirring of the
body are good, the direction of the feet is good, and the execution of God's
judgments is very good. But the second, wherein properly sin consists, is not
of God, but only of Man; wherefore Man alone is the author of sin as such.
Arminians accusing us to make God the author of sin, do but follow the steps of
their Elder Brothers the Papists. Calvin and Beza, etc. falsely aspersed by
slanderers, speak well of this matter. The first in his Treatise of
Predestination, a piece much worth reading, the Beza contra Castellinem.
other as quoted in the Margin, are both De gratia and lib. arbit. cap. 20, 21.
St. Austin's followers against Pelagius. They who in this permission attribute
nothing to God, but only that he leaves the wicked to act according to their
mind, or to turn themselves to this or to that Object, make God an idle
spectator of things; and one of these two things they must own, either that God
does not execute his just. Judgments by the sins of the wicked, which is false
and contrary to Scripture, or else that many of God's Judgments are executed
accidentally, or by chance, so that God decreed to punish David by his Son
Absalom, because he did foresee Absalom would go about rebelling against his
Father, and to punish Israel by the Kings of Assyria, because he foresaw the
Assyrian would make War against Israel, a thing absurd and altogether contrary
to Scripture, which expressly says that Tyrants are called God's Isai. 13.3.
sanctified; the Medes and Persians to execute his Judgments: and in the same
verse, I have also called my mighty ones for mine anger. They are called Isai.
10.5, 6, 15.
the rod of God's anger, and in their hand is the staff of his indignation, as
the Assyrian, which is also called the Ax, the Saw, the Rod, and the Staff in
God's hand, verse. 15. I will send him against an hypocritical nation, and
against the people of my wrath will I give charge to take the spoil, and to
take the prey, and to tread them down like the mire in the street. God sent
him, and he had God's Commission for what he was to do. He is called Jerem.
50.23.
the hammer of the whole earth, and in the following Chapter, the King of Media
is called God's battle-ax and weapons of war, etc. Certainly all this is more
than a bare permission, Chap. 51.20.
whence we conclude there is an effectual acting of God, and directing wicked
Instruments to a certain Object against which God is pleased to execute his
Judgments.

We have so many more Texts of Scripture to prove the effectual concourse of
God with bad actions of Men against those who assert only a bare permission and
a direction of evil to a good end. The expressions of Scripture upon this
subject, are so full, so clear, so significant, and so much to the purpose,
that Men must be blind who will not see. Here we will produce only some few.
God says to David, 2 Samuel 12.11, 12.
I will raise up evil against thee out of thine own house, and I will take thy
wives before thine eyes and give them unto thy neighbor, and he shall lie with
thy wives in the sight of this sun; for thou did it secretly, but I will do
this thing before all Israel and before the Sun. By Absalom 2 Samuel 16.10.
the Lord hath-said unto Shimei, curse David. 1 Kings 22.22.
God sent a lying spirit in the mouth of all his (Ahab's) Prophets. Jerem. 15.8.
I have brought upon them a spoiler at noon day. Ezech. 14.9.
I the Lord have deceived that Prophet. The falling off of the ten Tribes is
the work of God. 2 Chronicles. 11.4.
Ye shall not fight against your brethren, return every man to his house, for
this thing is done of me. 1 Kings 12.15.
And Roboham hearkened not to the people, for the cause was from the Lord. 2
Kings 10.32, 33.
God stirred up the heart of the King of Assyria to carry a way some of the
Tribes of Reuben, Gad and half of Manasseh.

The destruction of Ahaziah was of God, by coming to 2 Chorn. 22.7.
Joram. Chap. 25.23.
Amaziah would not hear, for it came of God, that he might deliver them into
the hands of their enemies, because they sought after the Gods of Edom.
Besides; what we said before of God's hardening Pharaoh's heart. God Josh. 11.20.
hardened the hearts of several Kings, that they should come against Israel, as
he had done before to Sihon King of Heshbon. Deuter. 2.30.
For the Lord thy God hardened his spirit, and made his heart obstinate that he
might deliver him into thy hands; Must all this be understood of a bare
permission? Farthermore God by Deborah said to Barak, Judge. 4.7.
I will draw unto thee to the river Kishon, Sisera the captain of Jabin's army,
and deliver him into thine hand. Psalm. 78.49.
He sent evil Angels amongst the Egyptians. And Judge. 9.23.
God sent an evil spirit between Abimelech and the men of Shechem. Isai. 19.14.
The Lord has mingled a perverse spirit in the midst of Egypt. Jer. 13.13
God will fill the Kings that sit upon. David's throne, and the priests and the
prophets, and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem with drunkenness. In another
place it is called Isai. 29.10
a spirit of deep sleep. 1 Samuel 2.25.
The Sons of Ely hearkened not unto their Father, because the Lord would slay
them. God says by the mouth of his Prophet. Isai. 45.7.
I form the light, and create darkness. I make peace and create evil. I the
Lord do all these things. Amos 3.6.
Is there any evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it? Hence it is that
Psa. 17.13.
the wicked is called the sword and hand of God. David prays to God, Psalm.
141.4.
not to incline his heart to any evil thing, to practice wicked works with men
that work iniquity. And also, Psalm. 15.25.
God turned the heart of the Egyptians to hate his people. Psalm. 69.27.
Add iniquity to their iniquity, says David. Isai. 54.16.
God has created the waster to destroy. And the same Prophet says, Isai.
42.24.
Who gave Jacob for a spoil? and Israel to the robbers? did not the Lord? 2 Chronicles. 21 16, 17.
God stirred up against Jehoram the heart of the Philistines and of the
Arabians, that are near Aethiopia, and they came up to Judah, and brake into
it, and carried away all the substance that was found in the King's house, and
his Sons also, and his Wives. And three Chapters after it is said, Chap. 24.24.
For the army of the Syrians came with a small company of men, and the Lord
delivered a great host into their hand, because they had forsaken the Lord God
of their Fathers, so they executed judgment against Joash. Hence it is clear
out of the very words, how by some men God does execute judgment upon others.
Thus also a Prophet said to Amaziah, when he refused to hear, and repulsed him.
I know that God has determined to destroy thee. Neither would he hear what
Joash sent to him, For it came of God, who would, as I quoted before, deliver
him into the hands of his enemies. Furthermore, Shishak 2 Chronicles. 12.2, 3, 4.
King of Egypt came up against Jerusalem, because they had transgressed against
the Lord. Then the Lord brought him up to punish them, and took their fenced
cities in execution of Gods Judgments; and again the Lord brought upon them the
captains of the host of the King of Assyria, Chap. 33.11.
which took Manassch amongst the thorns, and bound him with fetters and carried
him to Babylon. Why should we any longer insist upon a thing so clear, by God's
Order and appointment? 1 Kings 15.29.
Baasha destroyed Jeroboam's Family. And Chap. 16.12.
Zimri that of Baasha. And 2 Kings 10.17.
Jehu that of Ahab. And all along in the Old Testament God takes upon him self
to be the Author of all punishments inflicted upon his people by cruel Princes,
and upon all other Nations, Assyrians, Syrians, Chaldeans, Moab, Ammon, Egypt,
Tire, Sidon, Philistines, etc. in so many Chapters of the Prophets Isaiah and
Jeremiah. Not only whole Nations, but also individual, though public persons
were made sensible of God's working in and against them, as in the Case of
Saul, 1 Samuel 16.14.
The spirit of the Lord departed from Saul, and an evil spirit from the Lord
trouble him. The most excellent and glorious work that ever was, managed by the
worst men in the world, namely, the death of our Blessed Savior, yet Judas,
Herod, Pilate and the Jews and Gentiles concurred in it, did nothing but what
the Hand and the Counsel of God had determined before to be done, and
fullfilled all that was written of him. So that we see this truth contained in
the Acts 4.27.28. and chap. 13.27, 29.
New Testament, as in the Old. God gave some to Romans 1.24, 26, 28.
vile affections, and to a reprobate mind and to uncleanness, and to Idolatry.
Acts 7.42.
So as to worship the host of heaven. And God shall send them strong delusion,
that they should believe a lie. Thus we see how God as a just Judge does
inflict not only bodily but also spiritual punishments upon men. 2 These. 2.11.
And if all these places were heaped one upon another, and many others we could
bring, do not fully and clearly express the effectual concourse of God in and
upon Men, then all actings of God mentioned in Scripture must be explained of a
bare permission, and I dare say that those who amidst so great a light will not
see, must be in that darkness which comprehends not the light, and there is
cause to suspect Psalm. 81.12.
God has given them up to their own hearts lust, and to walk in their own
counsels. And sometimes God Deuteronomy. 28.23.
smites with madness, blindness, and astonishment of heart. St. Paul speaks to
the purpose of this universal and special actual Providence of God (when he
says, Romans 4.3^.
For of him, and through him, and to him are all things, none excepted, good
and evil; not evil of sin which God abhors and it is Blasphemy to say it, but
evil of punishment upon the wicked, and of chastisements and afflictions to try
the Faith and Patience of his Elect: God threatens to punish them that deny
it. Zeph. 1.12.
And it shall come to pass at that time, that I will search Jerusalem with
Candles, and punish the men that are set on their Lees: that say in their
heart, the Lord will not do good, neither will he do evil: Though they speak it
not with their Mouth, but say it only in their Heart; and he will so strictly
search into it, that they shall be found out. These Effects and Workings of
Providence come from him, and do serve his Ends; Job 37.13.
For, says Job, He causes it to come, whether for correction, or for his
land, or for mercy And in another place he says, Chap. 5.6.
Affliction comes not forth of the dust, neither does trouble spring out of
the ground.

That signal Plague of Egypt, that is, the Lice, came out of the Dust, which
became Lice: Yet the wicked Magicians of Exodus 8.17, 18.
Pharaoh perceived God in it, for they said, This is the finger of God. And the
holy Man, Job, though the Sabeans, or Arabs and Chaldeans had plundered and
robbed him of his Oxen and Camels and killed his Servants, yet he said, Job
1.21, 22.
The Lord gave, and the Lord, not the Sabeans or Chaldeans, has taken away.
Here some will be apt to say, Why does he attribute unto God those Actings of
Men? Job is to blame for fathering upon God the Actings of wicked Men. But as
the Spirit of God knew there would be those so pragmatical as to cavil thereat,
so in the following Verse he does clear him from such Imputations, when it is
said, in all this Job sinned not, nor charged God foolishly, in saying that God
had taken away. So God, speaking of himself in relation to his dealings with
Men, declares, how because of the Sins of Israel, he had given them Laws as a
Punishment. So he says, Zech. 20.24, 25.
Wherefore I gave them also Statutes that were not good, and Judgments whereby
they should not live. We know all God's Laws are good, but the meaning is, they
shall do them no good, nor be profitable to them. Thus the best things can do
no good without God's special Blessing, nor the evil harm with-it, his
sanctifying grace makes a difference; yet both Job 2.10.
good and evil we receive at his hand.

This Doctrine, as we see, is strongly grounded upon the Word of God, yet by
some it is aspersed with the abominable slander, that it makes God the Author
of sin, which we call Blasphemy, and in our Minds and Hearts, we abhor, detest,
and pronounce a Curse against, and appeal to the Judge of the World to
vindicate our Innocence against so notorious, false, and impudent Aspersions.
They make God the Author of Sin, who call Sin a positive Being, as does one of
their great Men, Dr. Pierce, in several places: For God is the maker of every
positive Being, but sin is a negative Being, which God never was the Author of.
In the New Testament the name of Sin is with an Alpha privative, (...) It Is a
nonconformity to God's Law: Wherefore he that calls Sin a positive Being,
makes God the Author of it. We sufficiently declared, how though God does concur
with the natural and Physical part of the Act, he has nothing to do as Author
of the Moral, or of the Deviation, no more than the Sun when it shines upon,
and stirs Filth and Corruption upon Earth, and draws it, but is not
thereby in the least defiled, the Corruption and Sin lay in the Subject. The
wicked is like the Spider, which is wholly venomous in it self, and turns
into Poison every thing it eats; contrary to the Be, which makes Honey out
of every Flower. However skilful Apothecaries make Vipers, and other such
things Ingredients of their best Cordials. Thus God's Wisdom draws good out
of evil, and light out of darkness: He makes use of the Malice and Wickedness
of Men to bring his Purposes to pass, and to execute his Judgments, ever
remaining as he is, most Pure, and a most Holy God. Absolom's Incest, as it is
a Sin, we attribute to Absalom and to Achitophel as it is a punishment for
David's sin of Adultery, we attribute it to God. The numbering of a people as a
sin we attribute to Satan, and as a punishment to God as a just Judge of the
whole Earth. Thus by several causes concurring to produce one and the same
effect, one may be pure and just, and the other impure and unjust according to
the different motives and ends of acting, so an act in one relation and under
one notion may be good, yet be evil in and under another.

The ways of God are rather humbly to be adored, than presumptuously searched
into, only we ought not to neglect as much as he has been pleased to reveal in
his word. When Men will measure God's proceedings with the line of weak and
shallow humane reason: Romans 1.22.
Professing themselves to be wise, they became fools. But if we hearken unto,
and follow the Word which is the Wisdom of God, then we have a sure and certain
rule 2 Timothy 3.15.
which is able to make us wise unto salvation, and will bring Gal. 6.16.
peace to those who walk according to it. It teaches us how God deals not
only as a gracious Father, but also sometimes in spiritual as in temporal
matters, does act the part of a just Judge, which quality I hope none will dare
to deny him, as a gracious Father he does pardon and show mercy, as a just
Judge he does condemn and punish in those ways that are best suitable with his
Wisdom and Holy Will. Ezech. 16.50.
God says, I took them away, the people of Sodom, as I saw good. There are
Spiritual Judgments as well as Temporal. There is Amos 8.1^.
a famine not only of bread, but also of the word. As a Judge, God sometimes
punishes one sin by another, Hos. 8.11.
because Ephraim has made many altars to sin, altars shall be unto him to sin.
He delivers them up to themselves, and their corrupt affections become the
executioners of God's Judgments; Ephraim is joined to idols, Chap. 4.17.
let him alone. And not only one Judgment is the effect of another, for David
says Psalm. 69.27.
add iniquity to their iniquity, a very strong expression, to show how far God
sometimes works upon the wicked, but also his very mercies are to them turned
into Judgment, for except common graces be attended with a special Blessing to
sanctify them, they are Curses, and shall one day be brought in as Evidences
to condemn the unthankfulness and want of a right use made of them, if what God
gives us to supply our necessary occasions and relieve the wants of others, we
bestow it upon our Lusts and sinful Pleasures, we become guilty of the abuse of
such things, and without pardon of sins, shall be called to give an account of
those Talents. We have David for a witness of this truth in the very same Psalm.
we quoted last. Let their table become a snare before them, which St. Paul does
enlarge upon thus, Romans 11.9.
Let their table be made a snare and a trap, and a stumbling block, and a
recompense unto them. Nay, Psalm. 109.7.
let his prayer become sin. He suffers them to go on, and gives them time to
fill up their Measure, and this not only for private persons and particular
men, but also for whole Nations; there is a famous Instance of it, Genesis 15.16.
For the iniquity of the Amorites, says God to Abraham, is not yet full, and
when it was, destruction came upon them by the Hands of the Children of Israel.
To this purpose our Savior speaks to the Jews, Matthew. 23 32.
Fill ye up the measure of your Fathers: In a word, God when he pleases, Deuteronomy.
28.28.
does smite with madness, and blindness, and astonishment of heart. And all
this in a way of Judgment; and is there any one to prescribe or advise to other
ways the Judge of the whole Earth? God says it is so, and may any one question
his Truth? God does so, may any one question his Justice or his Wisdom? God in
the act concurring with Men and Satan, is pure and undefiled, whilst Men and
Satan are guilty and impure: The same thing is to them night and darkness, to
God is day and light. Psalm. 139.12.
The darkness and the light are both alike to thee. And as in outward and
temporal things we depend upon the Will and Providence of God, as we see it in
the success of Abraham's Servant about a Wife for Isaac, Genesis 24.50.
the thing proceeded from the Lord; So in inward and spiritual, the same effect
is to be attributed to the same cause, God opens and shuteth the eyes of
Man's understanding, he softneth and hardens the hearts, either to yield
obedience or to disobey his commands; and also those of bad Men to be
favorable unto his people, thus Psalm. 106.
he made them (Israel) to be pitied of all those that carried them captives.
Yea, restrains and curbeth them as he did Genesis 31.24.
Laban in relation to Jacob. The same command he has and exercises over all,
good or bad in the good actings of bad Men, and in the bad actions of good Men.
Thus as Esra 1.1.
he stirred up the heart of Cyrus to build the Temple of Jerusalem, so 2 Samuel
24.1.
he moved David to number the people. This was after the Adultery and Murder,
and for what we know a punishment for it, after so many that went before.
Arminians would have it to be Satan that moved him, but except the Lord and
Satan be the same, the Text affords them no ground at all, for what they say,
for there is not one word of Satan in the whole Chapter, nor in many before:
The third person, he is related to the Lord, expressed before in the same
verse. We know what ground they go upon, in another place it is said 1 Chronicles.
21.1.
Satan provoked David to number Israel, but God made use of Satan as in the
case of Job; and of Judas, so of Herod and Pilate, instruments in God's hands
against our Blessed Savior; Acts 4.26, 27.
but this excludes not God, for it is said they were gathered together to do
whatsoever the Hand and Counsel of God had determined before to be done; so in
this place it is expressly said, the anger of the Lord was kindled against
Israel, and he moved David to number the people. To this subscribes that famous
Primate Usher, in his Body of Divinity, Page 112.

Numbering of the people was not a thing evil in it self; by God's command
Numb. 1.
Moses numbered them in the Wilderness. They were a second time numbered in the
Plains of Moab, only upon such an occasion a Poll was to be paid for an
offering to the Lord half a Shekel a Head, for want whereof they were threatened
with a plague, Exodus 30.12, 13.
and there is no mention made that this was performed upon this numbering,
whereupon they incurred the penalty, and the plague followed; but no doubt this
desire and curiosity of David was mixed with Pride and Vanity, which we are
most sure God had no hand in. This Satan raised in his heart, which made him
reject Joab's wholesome advice. In some circumstances this case may be
parallelled with that of Hezekiah, 2 Kings 20.
who showed all his Treasures to the King of Babylon's Ambassadors. In it self
it was no evil thing, but the Pride and Vanity that attended, marred it and
made it displease God: then the good of our actions is of God, the evil of our
selves.

This matter being so important, to clear it the more, we must briefly answer
some objections made against it. First, He who denies sinners his help,
without which they cannot avoid sinning, is partaker to the sin; but God does
so, wherefore he is partaker to the sin. I answer he who denies it when bound
to help, is partaker to the sin; but upon God there is no obligation as upon
Men to help one another. God is most free in all his workings, therefore he is
not in fault, as to the guilt of sin. Secondly, They say if the wicked do
execute God's judgments, yet so that their designs by God are directed and
determined to certain objects, it follows that either they sin not, or else
it is not well in God to be angry against those who cannot resist his power. We
answer with a denial of the Consequence, for neither of the two things do
follow; wicked Men do sin, for what they do is not with a design to execute
God's Judgments, but to satisfy their own lust against God's Law; wherefore
God without any evil, may make use of their sins; but they are unexcusable,
because they sin against the Law of God, and do that which is forbidden, though
God does by them that which is just and lawful; neither is it ill in God to be
angry against them, because they sin freely and without compulsion; and by
their sins they study to serve themselves, not God; neither do they, consult
with Providence, but only their own Malice. St. Paul's Objection, why does he
yet find fault, for who has resisted his will? Is by him answered; But O man
who art thou, etc. whereof we have before given an account. Now that Tyrants
cannot execute their injustice and cruelty, and ought not to promise themselves
impunity, though they be God's instruments, it appears out of that Scripture
we made use of not long before. O Assyrian the rod of mine anger, etc. Though
God had sent him to chastise his people, he had his own private ends, and went
on upon his own score; wherefore it is added by the Prophet verse 7. Isai. 10.
How be it he means it not so, neither does his heart think so, but it is in
his heart to destroy and cut off nations not a few.

They farther object, he who directs and inclines Men to this or that sin, and
makes use of them as instruments, is author of their sins. We answer thus, He
who inclines and directs men not sinners to this or that sin, as it is sin,
and makes use of them as instruments to commit sin, as it is sin, is the Author
of those sins; but God, as a wise and a just Judge, does not infuse sin, but
does incline and direct Men, not unwilling, but willing and ready; not free
from, but corrupt with sin, to this or that sin, not as sins, but as Acts
whereby as a just Judge he executes his Judgments in and against Sinners,
according to his eternal Decree; and, as I said before, is no more guilty of
their sins, than the Horseman that rides a lame Horse, is the cause of his
lameness; he sets him on, thus he is the cause of the motion, but not of the
lameness. And except we admit this, the Blasphemy of making God the Author of
sin, will fall upon the Word of God it self. For in the fore-quoted places, it
calls wicked Men, Instruments, Rods, Axes, Saws, Staffs, Battle-axes, Hammers,
and attributes their Works to God. Isa. 5.26. and chap. 7.18.
I will lift up an ensign to the nations from far, and will hiss unto them from
the ends of the earth; and they shall come with speed swiftly. And the Lord
shall hiss for the fly that is in Egypt, and for the be that is in the land
of Assyria. And he calls, Joel 2.25.
the locusts, the canker-worm, the caterpillar and the palmer-worm, my great
army which I sent among you.

They say we affirm, That God has predestined Men to sin; but it is no fair
dealing to charge our Doctors in general: They should quote Names and Places,
because out of the consideration of some Antecedents and Consequents, one can
more easily know the Doctrine of Authors. Now, the better to answer most
Objections against this truth, That Man sins with Gods Will and Appointment,
we are to take notice of the following Observations. First, The Will of God is
either Effective, Permissive, or Directive, as we already have spoken of.
Secondly, Sin is considered either materially, as an Act, or formally, as a
Transgression of the Law: Or Lastly, as it is a Punishment of God. These things
thus premised, to remove from our Adversaries all occasions and pretenses to
blame us, we here set down our belief as follows. Sins materially considered,
are from the Effective and Approbative Will of God, for an Act as an Act is a
Positive Being, and so is Good, and from the chief Good. Sins formally
considered are not from God's Effective, Preceptive or Approbative Will of God;
yet are committed by Divine Permission and Direction; the fault is of Men, not
of God. Sins considered finally, in relation to the end of Punishments and
Divine Judgments, are from God's Effective and Approbative Will: Hence it
appears we do not make God the Author of sin as such, and formally considered.
Farther they object, that some of us say, some Men are predestined to the
causes of Damnation as sin, and so make God the Author of it. Some may happen
to say so, but we are not sworn to any private Man's words or opinions; but we
say that Men sinners are predestined to Damnation, neither does Man sin
because he is appointed to Damnation, but is appointed to Damnation because a
sinner. They who are of the opinion here argued against, yield the Thing, but
deny the Consequence, thereby God to be the Author of sin, though he made Man
in a condition to fall into sin, and decreed to permit him to yield to the
temptation, and commit sin to manifest his Justice in the just condemnation of
Man sinner: Then say the Adversaries, God has not found a guilty Man to be
punished, but has made him such, which is not true, for God made him not so,
but permitted him to be made so; he who thorough his own fault became guilty,
is justly punished by God: Lastly, they object thus, that which is the cause of
the cause, is also the cause of the effect, which is only true of the necessary
cause called per se, not of that per accidens: but say they, you say that
reprobation is a necessary cause of sin, which is a mere untruth and slander,
none of our Authors ever said or has written so, for it is Blasphemy, except it
be through an abuse of the name: Sometimes it is usual to say causa sine qua
non, a Cause without which a thing is not, but it is improperly so called, for
every true Cause does influence the Effect. Thus we have answered their most
plausible Objections, and given them their best and most advantageous light, to
make the matter more intelligible.

It is time to come to the third degree of Providence, Ordination or ordering
of things, whereby God according to his wonderful Wisdom and Power reduces
every thing into Order, constituting good and certain ends; disposing means to
those ends, and ruling things thus disposed: About these degrees of Providence
we must well observe, how in the effectuating, permitting and ordaining, there
is about every act of Creatures not only an universal but also a particular and
special influence of God, which is proved out of Scripture. First, In general,
Psalm. 113.5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
Who is like unto our God, says David, who humbles himself before the things
that are in heaven, and in the earth; he raises up the poor out of the dust,
etc. He makes the barren woman to keep house and be a joyful mother of
children. And in another place, Psalm. 146.6, 7, 8, 9.
God made heaven and earth, the sea and all that therein is, which executes
judgment for the oppressed, which gives food to the hungry; the Lord loses
the prisoners; the Lord opens the eyes of the blind, raises them that are
bowed down, preserves the strangers; he relieves the fatherless and widows.
Nehemiah says, Nehem. 9.6.
thou have made heaven, the heaven of heavens with all their hosts; the earth
and all things that are therein, the sea and all that is therein, and thou
preservest them all. And in the New Testament Heb. 1.3.
God upholdeth all things by the word of his power. Secondly, The particular
Providence is proved out of the following Texts. Matthew. 6.25, 26, 27, 28, 29,
30, 31.
Take no thought for your life, says our Savior, what ye shall eat or drink,
nor for raiment, for your heavenly father feeds the fowls of the air, etc.
even the smallest things God takes care of, Chap 10.29.30.
one sparrow shall not fall on the ground without your father, the very hairs
of our head are all numbered. This providence is extended over contingents,
nothing seems to be of chance, so much as casting of the Lot, yet says
Solomon, Prove. 16.33.
The lot is cast into the lap: But the whole disposing thereof is of the Lord.
But the special providence of God was ever extended on his people, as I showed
before in the cases of Noah, Moses, etc. how admirable was it in relation to
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, the Children of Israel, in and out of Egypt, as it may
appear out of the Genesis 15.7. and 16.10. and 17.2.4.16.20. and 21.13. and
28.13.14. Exodus 1.20. and 12.3^. Deuteronomy. 10.22.
Texts quoted in the Margin: Not only the Psalms and the Prophets are full of
this, but also whole Scripture contains abundance of evidences of special
divine influences upon every particular act of Creatures; and this not only
upon those that are good, but also them that are evil, for God does specially
rule both, though he be not the Author of evil, as such, that hinders him not
from being the Rector and Ruler thereof: For, as we said before, he is not an
idle Spectator; for at his pleasure he overrules corrupt Instruments, turns
them which way, and to what end he pleases, his Holiness and Justice ever
undefiled; and the end of his Providence is ever the Glory of God, and
Salvation of the Elect, which all things are subservient unto. And in every
thing it is most true what is said, Jonah 1.14.
For thou Lord have done it, as it pleases thee.

In relation to the wicked, how wonderful God's Providence is in bringing his
ends about, we may see it in the Case of Ahab; God by the Prophet Elisha, for
his abominable Idolatry, and other Sins, had threatened him and his whole Family
with utter ruin: But because upon his outward Repentance, 1 Kings 21.29.
God had said he would not execute his Judgments during his Life, but in his
Son's days, Ahab must be the first taken out of the way: In order to it, he
must begin a War against the King of Syria, though there had been none for
three Years before: The occasision, or pretense of the War, is to recover the
Town of Ramoth in Gilead; an encouragement for him to go on in his design was,
Jehosaphat King of Judah being come to visit him, promises in Person to assist
him with his Forces. But further to engage him in his Design, his Prophets,
about 400 Men, must promise him a Victory. They come to a Battle, before which
the King of Syria commanded all his Captains to fight with none but the King of
Israel, who, not to be known, disguised himself in the Fight. Jehosaphat is
taken for Ahab; so the Syrians fell upon him, but perceiving he was not the
King of Israel, they turned back from pursuing of him; For God helped him, and
the Lord moved them to depart from him, 2 Chronicles. 18.31. Here is Providence! All
this while it seemed to Ahab he was safe enough; but God, who had sent
Jehosaphat to visit and join with him, who had put a lying Spirit in the Mouth
of all his Prophets, and put in the Heart of the King of Syria to command the
32 Captains of his Chariots to fight only against Ahab's Person; Chap. 22.
who thinking himself in some measure free from danger, when behold, God does
his work: a certain man drew a bow at a venture, and smote the King of Israel
between the joints of the harness. Certainly, though the Man shot at a venture,
the Arrow was guided to the place where it did wound him: The Blood ran out of
the Wound into the Chariot, wherein he was carried dead to Samaria: The Chariot
is washed in the Pool of Samaria; and whilst it was a washing and his Armor,
the Dogs licked up his Blood, according to God's Word by Elisha, in the same
place where they had licked up the Blood of Naboth. How, what remained of God's
Judgments, was afterward executed upon Jezabel and the rest of Ahab's whole
Family, Scripture makes a large mention of, and therein God's Providence is
visible and wonderful. One thing more to be observed is, that there is no other
account given of the success of the Fight, as if that part of the Chapter had
been written only to relate Ahab's Death, the manner of it, and nothing else:
Because at that time the chief work upon the Wheel of Providence, was the
beginning of execution of God's Judgments upon Ahab's person, which were next
to follow upon his Son Ahaziah, who died of a fall: Jehoram was killed by Jehu,
who destroyed the whole Family.

All Dispensations of God's Providence are attended with Wisdom, Power,
Holiness, and Immutability. Every thing that happens does so according to the
same wonderful Providence, God from eternity having unchangeably decreed to do,
or to permit every thing that happens in time; and whatsoever he has decreed
and appointed shall infallibly be. For if it were not so, God would be mistaken
in his Prescience. Divine Providence cannot be hindered, seeing there is
nothing more potent than God; for, who has resisted his will? or who can
resist it, he being Almighty? Romans 9.19.
That makes him put a Question with Defiance, Is there any thing too hard for
me? Jer. 32 27.
which in that same Chapter 10. verse before, the Prophet answers in the
negative, there is nothing too hard for thee.

Against this it is objected, if all things be out of an unavoidable necessity
of God's Providence, then Counsels, Precepts, and Prayers of godly Men are of
no use, for Counsels are taken to obtain a good success of our undertakings,
and avoid bad ones, prayers are made to get good things and avoid evil ones,
but if all things be done by an unchangeable Providence, these are in vain;
which we deny for this reason, that Counsels and Prayers are means subordinate
to God's Providence, whence God grants prosperous success to prudent Counsels
and pious prayers; God in his word binds us to these means; thus the
forgiveness of sins is an Article of our Creed, it is matter of Faith, for we
believe it; yet in the Lord's Prayer we are commanded to pray God to forgive
our trespasses. And if sometimes he does not hear us, yet our Counsels and
Prayers are not altogether in vain, for they who use the means which God has
prescribed, do perform their duty and serve God, not without benefit one way or
other, and the same thing we pray for, though not granted for the present, yet
often it is so in God's due time. Dan. 9.2, 3, and Rev. 22.17, 20.
Saints pray for those things which they know will be infallibly. They which
use this argument against prayers, dispute like those who deny the world shall
be consumed with Fire, because by an unchangeable Decree it is to be consumed.
Now these Counsels and Prayers are not made use of as lets thereby to change
the Decrees and stop the course of Providence, but to the end that yielding
obedience to God's law, and following the usual course of providence, we may
obtain a good Conscience and be filled with good hope, leaving the success of
what we pray for, to the most wise God. A last Objection is this, if God's
actual Providence be immutable, then none of God's precepts or promises are
conditional, for a condition does imply a possibility of change to the
contrary, according to the performance or no performance of the condition; but
it does not follow, neither is the proof universally true, but false in
particular as to the condition of God's precepts or promises, it is uncertain
only on Man's side, for on God's side, it is most certainly decreed and
determined.

Though already we sufficiently declared we ought not to separate the means
from the end, yet because about these disputes it is a fundamental truth, I
cannot forbear for confirmation of it, here to insert two Instances, one out of
the Old Testament, the other out of the New. The first is concerning King 2
Kings 20.
Hezekiah, after God had sent him word by the Prophet Isaiah to prepare for
Death, and (here by the by, take notice how the last message differed from the
first) given him a Reprieve for fifteen years, though without any means God
might have cured him, yet he is pleased to make use of some, and the remedy
prescribed was proper for the Disease, for a lump of Figs which are a great
drawer is laid upon the Boil which thereupon broke, and so the malignant
humor came out. The other instance out of the New Testament is very
remarkable: Acts 27.
Amidst the great danger of Shipwreck which Paul and other Men in the Ship,
were under, God promised him not only his life, but also of all them that were
with him in the Ship, which made him assure them, there should be no loss of
any Man's life, though 276 were in it. Yet after so positive a promise, though
God could have saved them all, to show how means must be used, when he saw the
Seamen under a pretense of casting Anchors, were about to flee out of the Ship,
Paul said to the Centurion and to the Soldiers, Except these abide in the
Ship, ye cannot be saved.

Now all that remains for me to say upon this whole matter, is to observe how
many a good use may be made of the Doctrine of Divine Providence, and so
conclude with it. And first out of the administration of all things, we must
own the infinite Power, Wisdom and goodness of God. Secondly, We ought to put
our trust and confidence in God, as a Father who takes a special care of all
his. Thirdly, In adversity we must not look so much upon Second Causes as upon
the first; and whatsoever we suffer, we must own it to come from the hand of
God; and in prosperity, we must acknowledge and praise God as the Author of
every good thing we enjoy: Job. 2.10.
For at the hand of God we receive both good and evil. Then we ought to fear
and reverence so potent a God in whose hands is every Creature, which he can
arm all against us. David says, Fire, and hail, snow and vapor, stormy wind
fullfilling his word. Psalm. 148.8. So we may say of every other Creature, they
all are his Servants. Psalm. 119.91. Further more we must love God who out of
his Fatherly care, watches for and promoteth our good; and hereby ought to be
excited a mutal love amongst us, who are Children of the same Father. This also
lays an obligation upon us, when there is occasion, to make use of the means
God has prescribed, yet not so as to put our trust in them; neither are we to
despair in case they fail us, knowing how God is not so tied to them, but that
he may help us without, so that upon all occasions of whatsoever nature they
be, we ought to submit, to trust and depend upon God's providence, and in
conformity to God, we ought to follow our Work and Duty.

The Psalmist in the whole 107. Psalm, having exhorted the redeemed of the Lord
to praise God for his manifold providence, as over Travelers, Captives,
Sick-men, Seamen and several other varieties of life, in the last verse of all,
to bring them into a serious consideration of the right use they ought to make
of it; says, Who so is wise, and will observe those things, even they shall
understand the loving kindness of the Lord. We must not be as idle and
unconcerned Spectators; for such are not wise. But it is a part of wisdom in us
to take a special notice of all effects of God's wise, mighty and gracious
Providence.

CHAP. V. Of GRACE.
WIth corrupt Men, it is natural to have too good an opinion of themselves, and
too mean of God; therefore they are pleased with what exalts humane strength
and Free Will, though Free Grace be thereby abased; the more a Doctrine is
suitable with Holy Scripture, the less it is acceptable to humane affections.
People must not dispute about these matters as some do, to try their Wits and
make a show of their Parts, but to find out the truth as revealed in God's
word, and then receive, adhere to and profess it. About this important matter
of grace several parts are controverted between Arminians and us: As first,
About Resistiblity of it. Secondly, About the Amissibility. Thirdly, About
universal grace. Fourthly, About Faith the chief Gospel Grace which has
several branches. By the grace of God we intend of every one of these to speak
in its due place; but in order thereunto we must endeavor first to beat down
Free Will opposite to grace. Here I put them together, not by reason of their
affinity, but of their contrariety; about this matter, though in some different
degrees, we have for Adversaries, Pelagians, Papists and Arminians.

CHAP. VI. Of FREE WILL.
THE Word Free Will, does properly denote the faculty of the Soul, called the
Will, but in the present Question, the Understanding, and other faculties of
the Soul, are also understood thereby, in as much as the Will is enlightened by
the Intellect, and follows the last Dictates of it; so that it is the guide
of Will and Affections. Now the Question is about the power of all Natural
faculties of Man; how far they may go in promoting of his own Salvation. This
is called Free Will, and we are to see how much Nature, which here is opposed
to Grace, can promote or hinder our Salvation. Pelagians do say, that by
Obedience to the Law of Nature, through the direction of right Reason, Men may
be saved; that is, by Nature without Grace. So that the right use of Nature, by
infallible dependence, draws the Grace of Regeneration, which is to settle a
soundness of Nature so contrary to what is expressed in the whole course of
Scripture. But these I pass by to come to others, (Papists) who go not so far,
yet in matter of Salvation give Nature too much, for in part they attribute it
to Nature, and in part to Grace. Sin, say they, has not taken away the Power
of the Understanding, and of the Will of Man, to obey God, and to believe, but
only the exercise of that Power; that the power of Man's Soul, to all good
Works, is not dead, but only chained up, and bound, and in the act of
Conversion, the effect of it does depend part upon Grace, and part upon Man's
own Strength. About this part of farthering our Salvation, Arminians do mince
the matter, and are sometimes on and off, if not wholly, yet in part; but as to
the other point of Man's natural power to hinder Grace and Salvation, they
highly, and altogether, are for it, as it will appear when we speak about
resistibility of Grace.

But as neither Free Will, nor any natural faculty, has any power to purchase
the beginning, or progress of our Salvation, for both Grace and Glory, as after
David, I said before, Psalm. 84.11.
come from God, who alone quickens Nature dead in Sin, so Nature cannot
hinder the Almighty power of God in the Conversion of Sinners, except one will
affirm the power of Men to be greater than that of God; which is downright
Blasphemy. We say, First, That Man, through his Fall, is so corrupt, that by
Nature there is not in him any power at all to any Spiritual good, rather a
propensity and inclination to all kind of Spiritual evil; so that our Will,
instead of being free, is a Servant and a Slave to sin. The consideration
whereof, made Luther give a Book he did write upon this Subject, the Title de
Servo Arbitrio, the Will Slave or Servant. The first Part, that is, our
unableness, is clear. Joh. 6.44.
No man can come to me except the Father draw him: Jer 13.23.
Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the Leopard his spots? then may ye also
do good that are used to do evil. St. Peter speaks of those who 2 Pet. 2 19.
promise others liberty whilst they themselves are the servants of corruption:
for of whom a man is overcome, of the same he is brought in bondage. How far
this Text is appliable to those who boast of a Power of Free Will in
themselves, and promise it to others, I leave it to God and their Consciences;
sure I am, the best of us Ephesians. 2.3, 5.
are by nature Children of wrath, even as others and dead in Sins. This Natural
and Moral impotency, is by St. Paul clearly set down, 1 Cor. 2.14.
The natural Man receives not the things of the spirit of God, for they are
foolishness to him, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned. Our most blessed Savior speaks home and positively upon the matter,
Matt. 12.34.33.
O generation of Vipers, how can ye, being evil, speak good things, after he
had said, in the foregoing verse, either make the tree good and his fruit good,
or else make the tree corrupt, and his fruit corrupt, for the tree is known by
his fruit. The words of Austin upon the matter are excellent, Mea bona nec mea
sunt nec perfect bona; mea mala and mea sunt and perfeste mala.
The good I do is neither mine nor perfectly good, but the evil I do is both
mine and perfectly evil.

But this is not all, for not only there is an impotency to all Spiritual good,
but also a propensity and inclination to all Spiritual evil, through a
perverseness that is in our nature; Genesis 6.5.
God saw that every imagination of the thoughts of man's heart was only evil
continually. The Text is very full and comprehensive in every word thereof, if
any thing can be added to it, elsewhere we find it thus: Jer. 17.9.
The heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked, who can know
it? We sometimes find, by experience, how a Man desperately in love with a
Daughter of Belial, I mean a Woman without any Fortune, Honor or Virtue, will
confess he is in an error, and overruled by a Passion, yet though to the ruin
of himself and Fortune, he must have her, or else he cannot live; and is not a
Natural man's Will desperately wicked? So that though he has checks and
convictions of Conscience about his evil courses, with his being so fond of the
World, and so much in love with Sin, and though he knows better, yet he neither
can, nor will leave it; where is here Free Will? where sufficient Grace? If it
is not to be found in those Natural and Temporal things, much less in Spiritual
and Eternal; O, let every one lay his hand upon his Conscience, and seriously
examine himself.

Another thing we assert, is, That whatsoever good or spiritual working is
found in any Man, it comes from God, who works it in Man; nothing of Nature,
but all of Grace. Our being Enlightened, Conversion, Repentance, Holiness,
Faith, etc. come all from God alone, Isa. 26.12.
for he works all our works in and for us; and Ephesians. 2.10.
we are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good works. Also, Phil.
2.13.
It is God that works in us both to will and to do of his good pleasure. It
does not lie in our free will, nor is it in our power, to receive or reject
Grace; neither do we thereby destroy the natural liberty of the Will, which
does not consist in indifferency, that is, to choose, or to reject this or
that, but in a freedom from compulsion; neither does the immutability of the
Decree take it away, that which God has Decreed shall indeed necessarily be,
but a thing may be done voluntarily and necessarily too, for necessity and
liberty in one subject do very well agree. Thus God is necessarily good, yet
most freely good; the Devil is freely evil, yet necessarily evil. Saints in
Heaven do necessarily praise God, for they can do no otherwise, yet they do it
most freely and voluntarily; nothing but a necessity of coaction, a forcible
necessity, takes away liberty, and this the Will of Man is free from. Wicked
Men do necessarily, yet freely sin with pleasure and delight; 2 Pet. 2.14.
they cannot cease from sin. These are Scripture words, yet our Adversaries, as
before, clamor thus; then, after this, all Precepts, Promises, Threatenings and
Exhortations to make Men abstain from Sin, will be in vain, if they cannot
forbear sinning. But, I say, though some be not the better, rather the worse
for these things, yet such things are not in vain, for thereby they are taught
their Duty, and commanded and exhorted to perform it; and thereby unpenitent
and unbelievers become unexcusable, for they cannot pretend ignorance. Neither
is it in vain, in relation to the Elect, who enjoy these outward means together
with Reprobates, because thorough the inward working of the Spirit, the
Preaching of these things becomes effectual in them, and puts them upon
avoiding of Sin.

In few words, the better to understand this matter of Free Will, two things
ought chiefly to be considered: First, What a state Man is in when we speak of
his Free Will. Secondly, The nature of the things which he does exercise his
Free Will about. There are four states of Man, which Schoolmen call Institutus,
Destitutus, Restitutus, Praestitutus; that is, to be more plain, of Innocence,
Nature, Grace, and Glory. The things are either necessary or natural,
indifferent, mixed or spiritual. The state of Innocence needs not to be spoken
of, it is lost and gone in Adam; of whom Divines say, Habebat posse quod veltet.
He had Freewill and Power to do what he would, though at last he wanted the
Will to do what he could, for he would not continue in his Integrity.

In the other three states, the Will is free from compulsion and coaction,
else, instead of being voluntas, it would be noluntas, not Will, but Vnwill;
God himself never offers such a violence, whereby its nature would be destroyed
So then, in the state of Nature, the Will is free only to Evil; in that of
Grace, part to Good and part to Evil, yet so, that the Evil is wholly from our
selves, and the Good only from God; in that of Glory only to Good. It Is to be
observed, how, in the passing out of the state of Nature into that of Grace,
that is, at the time of our Conversion, God, by his holy Spirit, works in us
against us, I mean, our natural corrupt inclinations. But afterward he works
in us and by us; that is, he guides, inclines, and turns our faculties to that
which is good and acceptable in his sight. But to come nearer, We say, in the
state of Nature, in Natural and Necessary things, as to eat and to drink, which
are natural and necessary to preserve Life, yea, this or that kind of Meat and
Drink, man's Will is most free; so it is in indifferent things, as to Walk,
Stand, or Sit, to Game, Sing, or the like. The Will is very free even in those
things that are of a mixed nature, and which seem to imply a violence; as when
a Man gives his Purse to a Highway-Man to save his Life; when, in a Storm,
Merchants and Seamen cast the Wares into the Sea, to save the Ship and
themselves. Though, in such cases, there be an unwillingness and a repugnancy
to the thing, yet the Will determines it self, of two Evils to choose the
least; but our Question, concerning Free Will, is not about such Objects, but
about Spiritual things, in this state of Nature, and before Conversion.

Hereupon, we say, the Will is free only to do Evil, most willing with
greediness. In this case, with Scripture, we call it a Slave, a Drudge, and a
Servant to Sin, for it cannot cease from Sin; wise and willing enough to Sin,
but without knowledge and willingness to do good: Romans 6.16.
Whom man does obey, his servant he is to whom he does obey. That Will that
obeys Sin in the lusts thereof, as every Will in its state of Nature does, Sin,
says the Apostle, reigns in it as in the Mortal body; such Will is in the
snare of the Devil, and 2 Timothy 2.26.
taken Captive by him at his Will, says the same Apostle. In this unregenerate
state, the Soul, and consequently the Will, is dead in trespasses and sins; the
natural man receives not the things of the spirit of God, for they are
foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, for they are spiritually
discerned, 1 Cor. 2.14. And the carnal Mind, and Will too, is enmity against
God; before our reconciliation to God we are his enemies, Romans 5.10. both in
Soul and Body, in every faculty of the one, and in every member of the other.
In short, the whole stream of Scripture runs strong that way, to show how, in
the state of Nature, there is no more possibility for our Will, of it self, to
be carried to good Spiritual objects, Jerem. 13.23.
than there is in the Ethiopian to change his skin, or in the Leopard to
change his spots.

Now, in the state of Grace, as to Free Will, in relation to spiritual things,
for those of another nature come not within the question, though the Will
remains free from compulsion, yet we ought to consider it in a twofold
respect, according to the two different Principles that are in us, the Flesh
and the Spirit, the Old and the New Man, of a quite different and contrary
nature one to another; the Flesh has her Lusts, which must be Crucified; the
Old Man has his Deeds, which ought to be Mortified, all by degrees, and after
a fight, wherein the Spirit of God, thorough Christ's Blood, gives a
regenerate Man the Victory, not the Israel after the flesh, 1 Cor. 10.18.
but to that after the spirit and the promise.

What this New Man is, St. Paul mentions to the Galatians, 4.19. My little
Children, of whom I travail in birth until Christ be formed in you; that is,
the Image and likeness of Christ in Righteousness, Holiness, and every
Christian Virtue; of this formation, the Apostle, by the means of the Ministry
of the Word, was the Instrument, but the Holy Ghost, not the Will of Man, the
Efficient Cause; it is that Wind that blows where it lists, and though one
hears the sound thereof, one cannot tell whence it comes, and whither it
goes, Joh. 3.8. In some kind we may say of it, what David speaks of his Body
made in secret, at first imperfect, but in continuance fashioned, Psalm. 139.15,
16. This puts a new or spiritual Life in us, so that every one, in that blessed
condition, may with St. Paul say, I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me,
Gal. 2.20. I know, I will, I love, and I do, yet not I, but Christ by his holy
Spirit, knows, wills, loves, and does in me; and even as after the birth
of our Body, to preserve and strengthen it, food must be given it, and Milk is
the first, so must the New Man be fed with Milk till it be able to bear Meat, 1
Cor. 3.2. but this forming, feeding and digesting, is the Work of God, and not
an effect of the choice of our Will. Thus much I could not forbear taking
notice of, as to that Spiritual Principle within us.

Well, both these Principles retain the Nature whence they come: The first of
the earth, earthy; the second is the Lord from heaven, heavenly, 1 Cor. 15.47.
Now that first and Old Man answers, The Jerusalem that now is, and is in
bondage with her Children, but Jerusalem which is above is free, Gal. 4.25, 26.
We then must say, that where the spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty, 2
Cor. 3.17. where that Spirit is not, there is nothing but bondage; so then, in
the twain Man are both liberty and bondage upon different accounts. What Paul
does, he allows not, for, what I would that I do not, but what I hate that do
I. He delights in the Law of God after the inward Man, but the Law of the
Members brings him into Captivity to the Law of Sin, which he desired to be
delivered from, and obtained it through Jesus Christ, Romans 7. Wherefore, in
that state, though the corrupt principle would pull back and mislead our Will,
yet, by the guidance and direction of the Holy Ghost, our Will is made
tractable, inclined, and, without any violence, turned willingly to Spiritual
things. Thus we are made a free, willing People, in the day of God's Power, to
the pulling down of strong holds, casting down imaginations, and every high
thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and bringing every
thought, and every desire too, into Captivity, to the obedience of Christ, 2
Cor. 10.4, 5. As to our Free Will in the State of Glory, I pass it by, there
being no question made about it.

The Controversy about Free Will is a large Subject, yet, I think, we said
enough to our present purpose; what remains to be spoken about it, shall be
under another head, which, that we now leave, does directly lead us to.
Arminians are stiff sticklers for a Free Will in Man, to receive or reject
Grace, when offered by the Preaching of the Gospel, as the outward means
appointed for that end. Now we proceed.

CHAP. VII. About Resistibility of GRACE.
TO understand this well, it must be well stated; the Question is not whether
Man can, and does resist Grace, when offered in the Preaching of the Word, or
even some good motions of the spirit of God; we are all agreed it can, and
does. But the true state of the Question between Papists with Arminians and us,
is this, Whether, when God does offer men Grace, with a design to have them
thereby converted? Whether or not, I say those Men shall actually be converted?
Or, Whether the Free Will and Corruption of Man, shall overcome the motions of
the spirit of God, when he purposes actually to convert? We say, at that time,
God works irresistibly and invincibly; that is, they shall be converted; they
say no.

To prove this, we have many Texts of Scripture: There is in God Philip. 3.21.
a power whereby he is able to subdue all things unto himself; so that, when he
is willing, he cannot miss of his aim. If the difficulty lies in the
Understanding, he can bring light out of darkness, and enlighten the eyes of
our Understanding; if in the Will, 2 Cor. 4.6. and Ephesians. 1.18.
he can make us willing in the day of his power; if we be unwilling, he makes
us willing, and able to do too, Psalm. 110.3.
for it is God that works in you both to will and to do of his good pleasure.
And how so? Phil. 2.13. 2 Pet. 1.3.
His divine power gives unto us all things that pertain unto life and
godliness, through the knowledge (here he works upon the Intellect) of him that
has called us to glory and virtue. If he gives all things, then nothing is
wanting; if so, how can it fail of a success? Does not St. Paul, as plainly as
can be, assert this, Romans 9.19
who has resisted his will? Surely this concludes negatively, and ab
impossibili: As if he had said, it is not possible for any Man to resist his
Will. What then? his Power: no, for it is Ephesians. 1.19, 17, 18.
a might, power, a power of exceeding greatness: And he says in the two
foregoing verses, that God gives the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the
knowledge of him; and as we said before, enlightneth the eyes of our
understanding, etc. Now that power of God working in us, is no less effectual
and mighty than it was, when it raised Christ from the dead. Which is confirmed
when the Apostle says in another place, As we were buried with Christ in
baptism, so also we are risen with him through the faith of the operation of
God. Does not our Savior himself say? that John 6.3^.
all the father gives him, by the decree of Election, for in him they are
elected, shall come to him. every man that has heard, and learned of the
father comes to him: And shall Men attempt to break that link of Salvation?
Romans 8.30.
Whom he did predestinate, them he also called: Whom he called, them he also
justified, and whom he justified, them he also glorified.

If God be willing, the thing is done: Lord, if thou will thou can make me
clean, the answer and effect, is I will, be thou clean. The will of Man not
only does ever obey effectual calling, but it must do so, for the effectualness
of God's calling consists in the removing of all stubbornness and perverseness
that is in the will, and giving a new heart soft and pliable to the call. Luke
5.12, 13.
A new heart will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you; and I
will take away the stony heart and give you a heart of flesh: And ye shall be
clean, etc. And who shall hinder him. Ezech. 36.26.1.25.
Prove. 21.1.
Are not the hearts of men in the hand of God, be turns them whithersoever he
will? But how does the Lord make that great change in the heart? In the same
chapter of Ezechiel, and the next verse, it is thus expressed, I will, it is my
pleasure, and it shall be so, put my spirit within you, Ezech. 36.27.
and cause you to walk in mystatutes, and ye shall keep my judgments and do
them. If God speaks truth, we shall do all these when he will have it to be so,
and nothing shall hinder it. The Creature cannot hinder its own Creation; nor
the Dead his own Resurrection; nor the Child his own Generation; nor Darkness
its own Illumination; nor White-paper writing on it self. Most of these
Comparisons are taken out of Scripture, to represent the act of the spirit
converting a Soul: Moreover if the evil Man could overcome the effectual
working of the spirit of God, then could the decree of our Election be made
altogether uncertain, and often void and null; so God could be disappointed of
his ends, which how injurious it is to God's Wisdom and Power, let every one
judge. But Isai. 14.24.
surely as God has thought; so shall it come to pass, and as he purposed so
shall it stand. So many other Texts we have to this purpose, some of which I
already made use of in the very beginning: If I would make use of Man's
authority in this matter, how many places out of Austin and others could I
quote to this purpose. This only I shall be content with. Depredest. sanct.
cap. 8.
Essicacious grace cannot be rejected by any hard heart, because God softneth
the heart, and no will of any man resists God's, when he has a mind to save.
The rest I omit, for the matter is very clear: However let us hear what they
can say for themselves.

Arminians as well as papists are of a contrary opinion, they assert Conversion
to depend so much upon Man's free will, that there shall be no efficacy of
Grace, no effect of God's Mind to Convert, all things used toward it shall be
in vain; if Man does not answer God's end, and therein he has his Free will,
so far as not to answer if he has not a mind, and wholly disappoint God's
design to convert him, thus converting grace may be resisted, and in vain God
will attempt, if Man be not willing to it, which is to make God depend upon
Man, and not Man upon God. In effect they own no other converting grace but a
moral persuasion, whereby out of God's words, unregenerate Men are preprevailed
upon to believe, to repent, hope, just as one Man brings arguments to
persuade another; thus Conversion is not wrought in Man but by Man, which is
mere Pelagianism.

This they endeavor to prove out of Scripture, and bring examples of some whom
God would have Converted, toward whose Conversion he made use of means, yet to
no purpose, because those people would not be Converted. The first, Is from the
Gospel. Matthew. 23 37.
Jerusalem, etc. How often would I have gathered thy children together, even as
a hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and ye would not? The Second is
this, Acts 7.51.
Ye do always resist the holy ghost: And another is, Isai. 65.2.
I have spread out my hands all the day unto a rebellious people, which walks
in a way that was not good. To this I answer, there always has been some who
obeyed not the outward Call and Precept of God; but God never intended the
Conversion of such, because he did not bestow upon them true Converting Grace,
which consists in the working of the Holy Ghost upon their hearts: As to the
place about Jerusalem, Christ would have gathered them with the will of
precept; that is, he commanded them to come and be gathered to him, to show
them their Duty: But Christ would never gather them with the will of the
Decree, whereby he is willing to Convert the Elect, who are the only Men
actually to be coverted. As to the Second Text, those Men are said to resist
the Holy Ghost who refuse to obey what he does command, and these Precepts are
directed either to Reprobates or to the Elect, to the former, Converting Grace
is never given, so they are never Converted but ever continue disobedient: As
for the Elect, though sometimes they reject the outward vocation, yet at last
by the inward calling, they are all converted, so that the inward grace is not
bestowed in vain upon any of them. To the third, I answer, if they to whom God
spread out his hands be not converted, the hands of God were not spread for
their Conversion; and this spreading out of hands is nothing else but the
outward calling, which true converting grace is not always joined with, so that
the end of it is not the Conversion of Reprobates but their Conviction; and to
leave them without excuse; out of another place of Scripture they object how
God made use Isai. 5.1, 2, 3, 4.
of all necessary helps toward the Conversion of the Jews, yet they were not
converted: As to Reprobates amongst those Jews, it is false, that all necessary
helps to Conversion were afforded them, but say they, if all such means had not
been afforded, how could God have said, what could have been done to my
Vineyard, that I have not done in it? But all this is said only as to outward
means, which if the Vineyard had not been bad, might have been sufficient to
make her bear fruit; God compares himself to the Husbandman who has performed
his part, when he has taken all the outward care that belongs to him; but
again, say they (for I am willing to give their arguments their whole strength)
looked that it should bring forth Grapes, which is a sign he manured it in
hopes to have fruit by it; but a looking for and expectation are improperly
said of God, so that here that expression signifies only that God required of
the Vineyard to have done her part and performed her duty; this is just as if
one should say, God hoped for that to be which shall never be, which is to
father ignorance or great imprudence upon God, for he that hops for that to
be, which shall not be, either he cannot foresee that which is to come, or if
he knows that shall not be, he is not wise to hope for it.

In few words to conclude this, a general rule to answer most or all objections
is, that all means afforded Men for their Conversion if they be not effectual,
are only outward means, never intended of God for their Conversion, for else
God had applied the inward means, without which the outward are uneffectual,
and so they had been converted.

We must answer an objection more of theirs, and endeavor by the grace of God
to beat them out of their strong hold, as they take it to be, but are mistaken
in the meaning of the place, and so misapply it. The words are these, Chap.
18.31, and 33.11.
why will ye die, O house of Israel, contained in Ezechiel, whence they would
conclude, if they will it is in their own power not to die, whereby their Life
and Salvation is lodged in their own hand, and wholly depends upon their will.

In order to an answer, we are in our way to take notice of several truths
conducing to the point, asserted by the Prophet. As first, that God punishes
not one Man for the sins of another, according to a common proverb among them.
The fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the childrens teeth are set on edge,
but God declares positively against it when he says, The soul that sins it
shall die. The people, as all Men are apt to do, would have excused themselves,
as if they had born the iniquities of their Fathers, but God in most part of
the Chapter does vindicate his dealings, how he neither absolves the Guilty nor
punishes the Innocent, a most infallible truth and effect of God's Justice,
which yet some, apt to wrest Scripture, would gainsay out of the 4th.
Commandment; God visits the iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children, Exodus
20.5. Which our Blessed Savior explains thus, when Children commit and
continue in their sins, and fill up the measure of their Fathers: fill ye up
the measure of your fathers: This I point at, Matthew. 23.32.
to show how cautious we ought to be, in the Exposition of Scripture, not to go
against the Analogy of Faith, and make the word of God contradict it self,
which our Adversaries become guilty of in this place.

A Second truth, which is a Conclusion from the first, here asserted, is this;
The Lord's way is equal, but the people's ways are unequal. Thus God must be
owned to be just in all his ways, and every Man and People guilty in theirs,
wherefore let every mouth be stopped before God. A Third truth, is this: As the
Father shall not suffer for the sin of the Son, nor the Son for that of the
Father; so, to encourage Men to repentance, both Son and Father or any one else
that leaves his wickedness and truly repents, God will pardon his former
transgressions, and they shall not be imputed. So likewise, they who for a time
have morally and seemingly lived well and avoided sin, if they fall into
wickedness and follow evil courses, they shall be punished for the same without
any regard to their former behavior.

Here before I proceed, I must remove a difficulty arising out of the words
righteous and righteousness, upon which the Adversaries would ground one of
their Errors, as if a truly righteous Man that is elected and justified, could
fall from true saving grace and be damned, which is against Scripture, as I
clearly demonstrate it in a Charpter of this Discourse of mine: however some
few words I must say in relation to this Text. The word righteous has in
Scripture two different senses. First, When one is really and truly such, as
whenever the name is given to the Lord Jesus, Isai. 53.11. and 1 John 2.1.
my righteous servant and Jesus Christ the righteous: But here the question
being about men, of so many places we shall produce but one to our purpose, if
the righteous be scarcely saved, 1 Pet. 4.18.
where shall the ungodly and sinner appear? The truly righteous Man is meant
here, and therefore opposed to the ungodly: But Scripture sometimes calls those
righteous who are such only in show and appearance, and that is the
signification of the word in this place; for, a truly righteous man does not
finally turn from his righteousness, nor do according to all the abominations
that the wicked man does. And for a farther confirmation of what I say, it
cannot be denied, that a legal righteousness is here spoken of, as verse 19.21.
to keep all my statutes. But the question between us is about Evangelical
righteousness, which is through Faith, and not by Works, and this legal
righteousness here spoken of, must be owned to be unpossible, and not to be
found in any Man. Now that it is the style of God's word, to call righteous and
righteousness that which is not really, but only seemingly so, it is clear: thus
our Savior says in the Gospel, Luke 5.32.
I eame not to call the righteous, that are such in their own opinion, but
sinners to repentance: Matthew. 23.28.
And to the Pharisees he says, Ye also outwardly appear righteous unto men,
but within ye are full of hypocrisy and iniquity; and except your
righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees ye
cannot be saved, Matthew. 5.20. This Pharisaical righteousness was not really
such, but hypocritical, only in show and for ostentation, men do sometimes
fancy themselves to be righteous, when they are not. Thus Solomon advises, be
not righteous over much, that is in thine own conceit, such was the Angel of
the Church of Laodicea, Eccles. 7.16. Rev. 3.17.
who said, I am rich and increased with goods, and have need of nothing, when
he was wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked.

Now to come just to the point, God having declared unto the people their
transgressions as the Cause of his Judgments; he commands them to repent and
turn from all their sins; having showed the distemper does propose the remedy
and presses the use of it; herein God reveals to them their duty, what they
ought, but not what they can do; they may not pretend ignorance, for here is a
warning, and thereby they are acquainted with the Masters will, and if they do
not what they are commanded, Death lies at their door, and they are without
excuse. Here, as Moses had done before, are set before them life and death,
Deuteronomy. 30.^^.
but being like not to choose well, God expostulates with them, why will ye die,
O house of Israel? No Man, but very few wretches whom God leaves under a fit of
despair, is willing to die of a natural death, but would gladly live a day
longer, even those that are most submissive to God's Providence, much less is
any willing to die of eternal death; wherefore we must observe that the
question does not directly tend to show the house of Israel is willing to die;
but rather that the ways of the house of Israel tend to death. Death it self is
no good nor desirable thing, it is a deprivation of life, the best thing in
nature, and destruction for a time of a strict union, and of a noble Being; but
often that which men desire not, befalls them, because they fall into a way
conducing to it; it is not the end they propose to themselves, but it is the
event that happens unto them. A man who is very prodigal of his Estate, fallen
into great excess of intemperance, and debauchery, may very well be asked, Why
will you ruin and kill your self? though he intends no such thing; but is
engaged in a course of life that will lead him to it. Thus upon such a bottom,
is grounded this expostulation of God with the house of Israel; as if he had
said, the way ye are in shall bring you to death and destruction, therefore
turn from it if you will live, and avoid judgments temporal as spiritual, for
we see the former, are meant as out of Ezech. 33.21.

A thing here chiefly to be taken notice of, is that all this does wholly run
upon the Covenant of works, the Law of Moses, for it is said, Wherefore I caused
them to go forth out of the land of Egypt, and brought them into the
wilderness, Ezech. 20.^0, 11.
and gave them my statutes; and showed them my judgments, which if a man do he
shall live in them. And consequently does not reach our question about the
Covenant of Grace and receiving of Christ, when offered upon his own terms. Now
Christians do not or must not stand upon that old Covenant which was not
faultless, Heb. 8.6, 7.
or else no place should have been found out for the second, which is a better
covenant, established upon better promises. Now as Perfect Obedience, the
condition of the old Covenant, was impossible for Men to perform, so is Faith
under the new Covenant, a condition impossible for Men of themselves to attain
unto, it is not found in Nature, nor amongst Works, but it is a gift of God, and
none have it but those whom he is pleased to bestow it upon: The house of
Israel is willing to die, and the reason is, because naturally they are so
inclined; darkness, ignorance and blindness are the natural portion of humane
nature. John 14 10.11.
When he that was and is the life and light of men, came into the world, and
that the light shined in dark ness, yet darkness comprehended him not: The
world was made by him, and the world knew him not: He came to his own, and his
own received him not, because Men loved darkness more than light. This is the
reason why people will die, because they love not life, there is a natural
impossiblity. 1 Cor. 2.14.

How can Men, naturally dead in trespasses and sins, be willing to live? What
will is left in them, tends not to spiritual life, but for death; if there be
such strong inclinations in a good Man, what must it be in the wicked? Though
the Angels had assured Lot they were come to destroy Sodom, and hastened him out
of it; yet he lingered, had no mind to come out, till they to save him, were
forced to lay hold upon his hand, and as it were force him out of it; they
certainly might have put to him the question, why will thou die? Seeing he
stayed as it were to be involved in the destruction of the place; and his Wife
how unwilling was she to leave it, and contrary to the Angels order, she must
needs look behind, either out of curiosity, or a desire to go back. So the
Children of Israel had preferred to have continued under bondage in Egypt;
Genes. 19. Numb. 11.5.
if they might but eat their Leeks, Onions and Garlic, than being in the
Wilderness free from Slavery. It Is an amazement to think and see how averse Men
are from their good, and prone to their own mischief; we must conclude those
Men to be willing to die, that are unwilling to live, which will not turn from
the paths of death. There are in the world those that cannot cease from sin. 2
Pet. 2.14.
There are those that cannot recover themselves out of the snare of the devil,
who are taken captive by him at his will. 2 Timothy 2.26
And who are bent upon and willing to die, in whom is a repugnancy to their
good and reluctance to their happiness, because born and bred under slavery. I
say a thing which to some will seem strange, yet to my certain knowledge it is
very true, how in some parts of Italy, chiefly in the State of Venice, there
are those men who sell themselves to be Slaves in the Galleys, some for a
shorter, some for a longer time, and some for life, and undergo the same
Drudgery as do those who are put in there for great crimes: Nay, there be
those, who having as Malefactors continued there for a long time, after their
time was expired, of their own accord returned thither. This Paw I produce only
thereby to judge of the Lion: how corrupt is man's nature, and how willing and
naturally inclined they are to ruin and destroy themselves? far from a Free
will to receive good as evil.

This I shall conclude with an observation upon the remedy which God proposes,
to prevent their death and ruin; namely, to repent, v. 30. and to make them a
new heart and a new spirit. Here God speaks as one who insists upon performance
of Articles, thus, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and
with all thy soul, Deuteronomy. 6.5.
and with all thy might. But, says God, that ye have not done, wherefore make
you a new heart and a new spirit, to enable you to perform what hitherto has
been wanting, for why will ye die O house of Israel? He commands them to do it
themselves which they are able to do, no more than to repent, because all is a
gift of God, Psalm. 51.19.
which David knew well when he prays thus, Create in me a clean heart, O God,
and renew a right spirit within me. Let us take notice of two different methods
of God upon this account; here God commands things to be done as they ought,
as performance of conditions, but he promises nothing: Do your duty, which for
them it is impossible to perform; wherefore he has another way of speaking for
those whom he is graciously pleased to favor, he does not command to do, but
promises himself to do for them: Ezekiel. 11.19.
And I will give them one heart, and I will put a new spirit within you: and I
will take the stony heart out of their flesh, and I will give them an heart of
flesh. Which is repeated with this addition, Chap. 36.27.
And I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and
ye shall keep my judgments, and do them. To the same effect speaks another
Prophet, Jer. 32.39.
And I will give them one heart and one way, that they may fear me for ever.
Here are the most gracious promises of a Gospel Covenant, what we cannot do our
selves he will do for us; he will give us that heart and that spirit, whereby
we shall be enabled to keep, and do his judgments, and fear him for ever;
hereby we are secured from the danger of a final Apostasy. The same Prophet
just the Chapter before, says, Verse. 33.
I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and
will be their God, and they shall be my people, and they shall not teach, etc.
and that this is the true Evangelical sense of the place, it appears out of the
application of it made by the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, who does
quote the very same words, and concludes all in these, Heb. 8. from 6. to 13.
For I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins and their
iniquities will I remember no more. This is God's way with those whom he is
pleased to save from dying and perishing, as all must do whom he leaves to make
themselves a new heart and a new spirit; for Man's Will, far from being free
and able to contribute to Conversion, the new Creation and Salvation, is a
perfect Slave to Sin, till God be pleased to work upon and turn it, which once
being effected, there is no danger of a final Apostasy, for thereby we are
secured against a total falling from grace, and that is the Subject of the
following Chapter.

CHAP. VIII. About Amissibility of GRACE.
AS one depth calls to another, so does one Error to another; our Adversaries
are not satisified to make Man, if he be willful and obstinate, stronger than
God, when he has a mind to take possession of a Soul; but they go farther, and
assert, That after God is actually in possession of that Soul, he may be turned
out of possession; which is their true sense of the point we are now going
upon. The Question is, Whether a Man truly converted and regenerated, can to
the end persevere in the state of Salvation he is actually in? And whether it
be possible for such a one who is Elected in Christ, called with an effectual
Calling, totally and finally to fall from God, and be Damned? This is the true
state of the case; and not whether the Elect and true Believers can fall into
great sins, which they do too often, as it appears out of Scripture and
Experience.

We say, That God makes to persevere and go on to the end, all the Elect and
true Believers, whether their Faith be strong or weak, provided it be true,
that when once they are in the right way of Grace, they shall infallibly come
to Glory, it being not possible for the Elect to become Reprobates, to
Apostatize, and finally, fall to Damnation. Our Adversaries affirm the
contrary, though Arminius himself finding the stream of Scriptures and Fathers
run so strong against the total and final Apostasy of Saints, durst not openly
declare for it, yet his Followers have strongly set themselves against this
Article, which is the chief ground of all the comfort the Soul has in this
World; to know, it is not in the power of the Devil, or any other creature
whatsoever, to separate us from the love of God in Christ Jesus our Lord.

Now to prove this Doctrine, we can begin no better than with that place of St.
Paul's, who in Romans 8.30. ver. 31.
that Chapter, from verse 28. to the last, gives us the greatest grounds of
assurance that can possibly be expected, grounded upon our Election, Calling,
Justification, etc. whence he proceeds to a defiance to all: Verse. 33, 34.
which is taken out of Isai. 50.7, 8, 9.
If God be for us, who can be against us? And Ver. 32.
who shall lay any thing to the charge of God's Elect? It is God that
justifies; who is he that condemns? Now if Christ has loved us, which is
clear in that he has given himself for us, and Ver. 35.
God delivered him up for us all. After this, the Apostle argues from a thing
impossible, Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation or
distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? Verse.
37, 38, 39.
Nay, in all these things we are more than conquerors. Take notice with what
assurance he speaks in the two next verses, for I am persuaded that neither
death nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present,
nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be
able to separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord: I
would be loath to lose one word of these, wherein the Apostle speaks so fully,
so clearly, and so much to the purpose; that if to confirm this Doctrine, we
had had the penning of the words, we could not have done it with so good
effect, to prove that God's Elect, and Believers, cannot finally fall, and
totally be separated from Christ; and we know, Joh. 13.
whom Christ loves, them he loves unto the end. Christ prayed to the Father
Luke 22.32.
that the faith of his believers fail not, as we see in the case of Peter, and
the success shows he was heard, for St. Peter came again to himself, and
Christ says to the Father, Joh. 11.42.
and I know thou hear me always; but our Savior's Prayer was not for Peter
only, and the other Disciples, but Joh. 17.20.
for them also which shall believe on me through the Word: So that he prayed
for all Believers. Now for Believers, and Elect, naturally to fall from God,
and Mat. 24.24.
to be seduced, it is not possible, for the expression if possible, imports an
impossibility, not for all the Wonders of Antichrist, the most pregnant means
that Men and Devils can use to make the Elect fall away do not prevail.

Christ says, Joh. 10.28, 29.
He gives his sheep eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall
any man pluck them out of his hand: no man is able to pluck them out of his
fathers hand, who is greater than all. Nothing can be more positive upon the
present Question, christ's Sheep are those who believe, he assures them all of
life Eternal, and they shall never perish, because kept by his strong hand, the
Father having put them in the hand of the Son to be kept, and the Fathers hand
is also about them; so they cannot miscarry, except there be some enemy
stronger than God. If such a thing were possible, for the Elect to perish, what
would become of God's truth, when he says, by the Prophet, Jer. 32.38, 39, 40.
I will be their God, and they shall be my people. And I will give them one
heart, and one way, that they may fear me for ever. And I will make an
everlasting covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them, to do them
good, but I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from
me. Here God promises to all whom the new Covenant is made with, that is,
Believers, that he will give them an heart to fear him, not only for a time,
but for ever, that the Covenant shall not be broken of either side; he assures
not only for himself, that he shall never change, but for them also, for he
will put his fear in their hearts, that they shall never leave or depart from
him. So that we are sure on both sides, for God says, Heb. 13.3.
He will never leave us, nor forsake us; the reason is by Malachy, drawn from
his Immutability, I Mal. 3.6.
the Lord change not. Not only in his Nature, but also in his Gifts, such as
Effectual calling, for Romans 11.29.
The gifts and calling of God are without repentance. One Text more I will make
use of, which can afford us a reason against any instance out of Scripture of
any said to be fallen from the Truth, or to have denied the Faith; this is it.
1 John 2.19.
They went out from us, but they were not of us; for if they had been of us,
they would, no doubt, have continued with us: but they went out, that they
might be manifest that they were not all of us. Who are those that do not
persevere, but fall away from Truth and Grace? They who never had it, for if
they had been true Members of Christ, they certainly would have always
continued so, but God let them go, to let Men know they were not sound, nor
build by Faith on the Rock, for if they had been, they would have continued
steadfast amidst temptations, and the Gates of Hell could not have prevailed
against them; like those fiery vapors in the Air, which the Eye would take to
be Stars, but by their fall they show what they were. Thus God not only
publicly punishes those Hypocrites, but makes them an example for others to
take warning by; and let this be a rule, that they who fall so, either they
never were Elect, nor had true Grace, or else they are not fallen finally, but
God will restore them again. 2 Timothy 2.19. Ephesians. 1.13. Jer. 32.40. Ps. 37.23,
24. Joh. 6.14.39.40. 1 John 3.9.
Many other places of Scripture I could bring to confirm this Doctrine, but
because I already made use of some before, which would be sit for our purpose,
I omit it, only I set some in the Margin to be perused by the Reader.

Against this Truth it is objected, If the Elect cannot perish, then they need
not forbear sinning to avoid everlasting Death, let them take what course they
please they are sure of Heaven. This Argument is grounded upon Impiety, it is
rather of a Reprobate than of an Elect; if the Saints should, against their
conscience, obstinately continue in sin, no doubt but they should perish; but
God, who will not suffer his chosen to perish, does not leave them to continue
in impenitency, but through repentance brings them again to himself, and
restrains them with putting them in mind of their Duty, for a final obstinacy
in sin and impenitence; do no more consist with Election, and true saving
Grace, than a final perseverance in Faith does consist with Reprobation. In the
2d place they object the examples of David, Solomon and Peter, who fell into
abominable sins of Adultery and Murder, of Idolatry, and the denying of Christ.
We ever granted corruption to be so strong in the best of God's People, that if
for a while he withdraws the exercise of his Graces, they are apt to fall
into the worst of sins; however, we deny that the three named did wholly and
totally fall from Grace, only for a time, Grace did still continue in them like
fire under Ashes. Two reasons we have to believe they did not finally fall; the
first, Because they sinned out of weakness and human frailty, not with a full
consent of the Will. Secondly, Because they seriously repented, which is a true
sign of Faith. As to the repentance of 2 Samuel 12.13. and Psalm. 51 Mat. 26.75.
David and Peter, it is expressly set down in Scripture; as to Solomon, most
Divines are of opinion, that for a token of repentance, he did write his Book
of Ecclesiastes.

They argue farther, our Savior says, Luke 8.13.
Some for a while believe, and in time of temptation fall away; therefore some
may fall from the Faith. The question is not about temporal, but saving and
justifying Faith, which temporal Faith is not: Now in this place it is clear our
Savior speaks of temporal Faith; They believe but for a time. And out of the
Parable it appears, that of the four several sorts of ground which the Seed
falls into, there is but one that is good; so of four kinds of hearts, there is
none good but the honest and good heart, which having heard the Word keeps
it, and brings forth Fruit. Now such hearts as these keep Grace, do continue
and persevere in it, and never lose it totally. The temporal Faith spoken of
here, is only an outward profession, and not the power of true Religion; in
this same sense is to be taken what St. Paul says, 1 Timothy 1.19.
of some who concerning faith have made shipwreck. They made an outward
profession of the Gospel, which at last they fell from; so that whenever
mention is made of falling from Grace, from Faith, from the Truth, it is only
mentioned of the outward profession of it, or of a temporal Faith, but not of
true saving Grace; when it is said, 1 Cor. 10.12. and Romans 11.20.
Let him that thinks he stands take heed lest he fall. The Apostle does not
say that any fall from the Faith, but he teaches them how they ought, and can
prevent falling from it, namely, to have a care not to run into Carnal
security; such warning are effectual means whereby the Holy Ghost keeps
Believers upon Duty, and does preserve them from falls. Though our first
Parents fell, it does not follow the Saints should do so too, the reason is,
God gave them only the Grace whereby they might continue in Innocence if they
would, but the Will he gave them not, but to Elect and Believers is given
Grace, whereby not only they can, but also they are Philip. 2.12.
willing to persevere. But St. Peter speaks of some 2 Pet. 2.21.
who have known the way of righteousness and depart from it; but there is a
great difference between turning from saving Faith and Grace, and turning from
the way of righteousness, which the Apostle in the same verse calls the holy
commandment; that is, the Doctrine of the Gospel.

CHAP. IX. About Universal Sufficient GRACE.
NOW we must proceed to another Head, wherein also Arminians join with Papists
against us; this Universal Sufficient Grace, the whole Fabric of Arminianism,
does center upon. Though several Sects are combined to assert such a thing, yet
they somewhat differ when they come to say what it is; to Pelagians it is
Nature, to Papists Free Will, to Quakers the light within, to Arminians it is a
general influence superadded to the Natural faculties of every Man whatsoever,
whereby, without any particular concurrence of God's Spirit, and without any
special Grace, they are sufficiently enabled to embrace Jesus Christ, and apply
his Death and Merits to themselves in a saving manner, which are offered alike
indifferently to all Men, to convert, regenerate, and to save their Souls, if
they will themselves, which is merely Free Will baptized with the Name of
Grace, a thing unknown to Scripture; but if it be Grace in Truth as in Name,
how is it equally derived unto all Men, and in the same measure? When Grace is
that which makes one Man to differ from another. Mercy distinguishes one from
another; for 1 Cor. 4.7.
What has a man more than another but what he received?

There is much to be said upon this matter, but I will endeavor to restrain it
within as narrow bounds as I can; and I state the question thus: Whether there
be any such Universal Grace indifferently given to all Men, at all times, and
in all places, sufficient to convert, to regenerate, and to save? We say no,
they say yea: Let us examine who is in the right, and let Scripture be the
Judge. The Word of God, not in one, but in many places, takes away from an
unregenerate Man the power of doing good, and of being converted: Jer. 13.23.
Can the Ethiopian change his skin, and the leopard his spots? then may ye
also do good that are accustomed to do evil. Mat. 7.18.
Neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit. chapter 12.34.
O generation of vipers, how can ye being evil speak good things? Joh 3.5.
Except a man be born of water, and of the spirit, he cannot enter into the
kingdom of God. Joh. 6.44.
No man can come unto me except the father which has sent me draw him. Joh.
15.5.
And without me ye can do nothing. Romans 8.7.
The carnal mind is enmity against God; it is not subject to the law of God,
neither indeed can be. Farther, 1 Cor. 2.14.
The natural man receives not the things of the spirit of God, for they are
foolishness unto him, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned. 1 Cor. 12.3.
No man, says the same Apostle, can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the
Holy Ghost. 2 Cor. 3.5.
We are not sufficient of our selves to think (much less to do) any thing as of
our selves, but our sufficiency is of God. All these places are so clear and
positive to show there is no such a power in Man as to convert himself, that it
were needless to make any enlargement upon them; therefore we proceed, and say,
how can there be such a power in men dead in trespasses and sins? for such were
the Gentiles before God had quickened us together with Christ: Nay, Ephess.
2.^; 5, 12.
we were strangers from the Covenant of promise, having no hope, and without
God in the world. Ephesians. 2.3.
And we are by nature children of wrath even as others. Therefore, what Will
and Power to do good is in us, it comes from God, and those whom he is not
pleased to bestow it upon, they never have it; this is the reason assigned, why
the People of Israel had not well seen and perceived the great things God had
done for them; Deuteronomy. 29.4.
Yet, says Moses, the lord has not given you an heart to perceive, and eyes
to see, and ears to hear, unto this day. If without the gift of God they could
not well know and perceive things obvious to their senses so palpable and
visible to them, how could they, or any other, see and understand things of a
Spiritual Nature of an eternal concernment, to be seen only with the eye of
Faith? Joh. 3.12.
If I have told you earthly things, and you understand and believe not, how
shall ye believe and understand if I tell you of heavenly things?

This they must own, Men cannot be saved without a Savior, then they also must
grant there is no other Savior but Christ, no means to come to him but by
Faith, what then will become of those who never heard of Christ? as the wild
and ignorant Americans, before the discovery of that Country, and of so many
Millions both before and after, but chiefly before his coming, who never heard
one word of a Savior, and so could not believe in him; for Romans 10.14, 15.
how shall they believe in him of whom they never heard? and how shall they
hear without a Preacher? and how shall they Preach except they be sent? Before
Christ's time, we do not hear of any general Mission; indeed, after his
Resurrection, he gave his Disciples Commission, but their number was but small,
they could not at once Preach all the World over; then they died, the
Candlesticks were removed from the places where at first they were placed. We
see, by experience, the Gospel to be ambulatory, from one place to another;
Asia, which first received it, is at present, and has, for these many years,
been overspread with Heathenism and Mahometism, where is then this Universal
sufficient Grace? For at this very day, in the greatest part of the World,
there is no sign nor step of it, so that there is no such Universal Grace as to
Persons, Places, and Times; besides, Experience and Scripture runs against it,
there are but Mat. 20.16.
few elected to salvation, they are but Romans 4.27.
a remnant, Romans 9.29.
a seed, Luk 12.32.
a little stock, Mat. 7.14.
a very small number in respect of those that perish, 2 Pet. 2.5.
one Noah amongst a World of ungodly, 2 Pet. 2.7.
one Lot amongst a multitude of unclean Sodomites, 1 King. 18.22.
one Elijah amongst four hundred and fifty false Prohets one Joh. 6.23
Rahab in all Jericho and Canaan; one Nation of the Jews amongst all the world,
and in that Nation sometimes but 1 Kings 19.18.
seven thousand chosen ones, to many hundred thousands, sometimes Isa^. 1.9.
a lesser remnant, and sometimes Jerem. 5.1.
hardly one, this scarcity we met with after the Ascension of our Lord as
before his coming, Christ had but a Rev. 3.4.
few names in sardis: Few are the names Chap. 15.8.
written in the Lambs Book of life, when all the world runs after the beast to
worship him: 1 Cor. 1.26.
not many wise after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called and
few are chosen: Christ's people in respect of others have been always few, yet
none but these are elected, adopted, effectually called, justified sanctified,
glorified or endued with any grace sufficient to Salvation; and if this be
true, as it is, can there be any universal grace? to prove this paucity or
few-in the judgment of all Protestants, rather than multitude and universality,
has, Being comparatively taken, been a Character of Christ's Church.

Thus far we have considered this pretended universal sufficient Grace in the
extent thereof, as to Times, Places and Persons, which does relate to the means
conducing to Salvation afforded unto men. Now we must consider it in Man
himself, as it is in the Soul: I would find to know how it comes in there, is
it a natural inherent faculty of the Will? If so then it is no grace, for in
relation to spiritual things and to Salvation, Nature and works are opposed to
Grace; by Nature we are Children of Wrath, but through Grace we are Sons of
God, and to make it natural is mere Pelagianism (which our Adversaries dare not
openly to own) for Pelagius used to cloth Nature with the name of Grace. If
this universal grace be not natural then it must be adventitious or accidental,
either acquired, derived or infused: If acquired by any art or industry of our
own, then it becomes particular, and cannot be universal, it being originally
proportionable in none. If acquired, it is only in those who seek after and take
pains to purchase it, which certainly whole mankind does not, if not acquired
then it may be derived: but it must either be so from our Parents, and so from
Adam the first Parent; but if from Adam it is nature and not grace, or if not
from Adam, then if from any it is derived from Christ and from his Spirit the
spring of all graces, but they derive grace only to their believing and living
Members, not generally to all Men, and this not by immediate inspiration from
Heaven, but by the word and means of grace which are neither common nor
effectual to all. But if they say this universal grace is infused by a divine
immediate influence, let us have some Scripture to prove it, or else no body
must believe it, but as there is no word for it, let them show when and how
this is done? This universal sufficient grace of Arminians is the Quakers
inward light and the reason of Socinians.

But to forge an universal sufficient grace without a power of doing good,
without Christ and without God, without a (...) by the word of God, as without
heart to understand, eyes to see, without a faculty to know the mysteries of
the Kingdom of Heaven, and without knowledge and sense of our misery, is to set
up a defficient not a sufficient grace: That cannot be called sufficient to
act, which has not every thing necessary to acting; and that Cause which has
all things necessary to act must needs produce its effect, for in vain is that
Power to act, which does never act, so that pretended grace supposed to be
sufficient to convert a Man, and bring him into the way of eternal life, and
yet never does it, is but an insufficient power and an imaginary grace. They
would have Christ to have made God reconcilable to mankind, procured a
possibility, which not being reduced to an act signifies nothing, and
derogateth from the power and efficacy of his death; for he has by his death
made a real and perfect reconciliation, and all those he dyed for, he actually
reconciled them to his Father, and all they and none else shall be saved.

They would ground their opinion upon what the Apostle says of the Gentiles.
Romans 1.10.
That which may be known of God is manisest in them, for God has showed it
unto them. Therefore they have a sufficient grace; but the knowledge of God
spoken of there, is such a one as the Devils have as well as they, and I hope
no man will dare say the Devils have a sufficient grace, that the knowledge
which St. Paul speaks of was not saving, consequently not sufficient, it
appears because they did not know God as Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
neither did they know Christ as Savior of the World, without which no saving
nor sufficient knowledge. But however say they, Romans 2.14.
They do by nature the things contained in the Law. But they must take notice
how the Apostle does not say they do, not by grace, but by nature; so that
except they will have nature to be their universal sufficient grace, the Text
says nothing to their purpose. Besides, we own that some amongst the Gentiles
had great and extraordinary parts and natural gifts; great Philosophers, great
Orators, etc. Yet for want of Faith the virtues of the Heathens were, says
Austin, shining sins, splendida peccata. But we deny those gifts to have been
an universal sufficient grace, the same may we say in that, Acts 14.17.
God left not himself without witness amongst them, not in that there is a God,
for, as it is said in the same verse, He gave rain from heaven, and fruitful
seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness. But all these are common
mercies, though great, which come short of saving and converting grace; it is
not every manifestation that there is a God, which must be called a sufficient
grace; amongst the Devils themselves, God has not left himself without witness.

CHAP. X. Of Universal Calling.
AND now we are upon this, let us view another branch of this universal grace,
for they say God according to his Decree does universally call all Men,
Reprobates as well as Elect, to receive and believe in Christ, and this by the
means of the word preached to every Man: What we already said may also serve in
answer to this; namely, that before and after the coming of Christ, millions of
Men are dead, who never heard Christ preached unto them, yet we may charitably
believe that God showed some of them mercy; for though they were deprived of
the outward ordinary means, God who is not tied to second causes, might by the
inward call of his spirit have revealed unto some of them his saving knowledge.
We may say of this Ordinance of the Word, as is said of Baptism, which is
another: Mark 16.16.
He that believes and is baptized shall be saved; but he that believes not
shall be damned: He does not say, and is not baptized shall be damned; so he
that hears the outward preaching and believes shall be saved, we may say
that though the outward hearhing of the word be the usual means to breed Faith,
yet he that wants it may be taught inwardly, and believe and be saved. However
things be, those are secrets of God which we ought not to dive into. Our
Blessed Savior is positive against universal calling, when he says, Matthew. 20.
many are called, he does not say all, but many, we may say very many or the
greatest part are not called; for as we see he comes to narrower bounds, if few
be chosen, many are called, so by a gradation we may say, if many be called,
more are not called. Indeed David says Psalm. 47.1.
Let all the earth fear the Lord, let all the inhabitants of the world stand in
are and O clap your hands all ye people: shout unto God with the voice of
triumph. But this is no such an universal vocation to all the Inhabitants of
the World as the question is about: all the earth, besides the reason of saving
grace, has cause enough to fear the Lord and to praise him: All the world
could not hear what David said and did write; but the question is to have
Christ offered to every Man in the Gospel, by the ministry of Men.

This leads us to another question between Remonstrants and us; namely,
supposing every Man in the world had been called by the preaching of the word,
yet it does not follow, they should have been converted and saved without God's
special saving grace, because in Adam men lost the power of believing the
Gospel. This question, these innovators started up to show how God is bound to
give every Man a sufficient grace to believe in Christ if they will. So they
say the grace of believing in Christ was not given to Adam, therefore he could
not lose it, and so God may no justly require of Man faith to believe in
Christ, except he gives him sufficient grace to believe: But we say, God gave
Adam that grace, and he lost it: For whatsoever Adam received from God for
himself and Posterity, that same through his fall, he lost for himself and
Posterity too; now that with other privileges he received also the power of
believing the Gospel, it appears, for he received for himself and Posterity
the power of loving God and believing his word, whatsoever it might be in time
to come, this is proved because without this power the image of God had not
been perfect in him, neither had he been, without it, provided with a
sufficient grace to avoid all manner of Infidelity: In the state of innocence
God might have revealed him future things, and in case of a fall, have promised
him a gracious restoration by the means of his Son. Who can deny but that Men
in the state of Innocence might and ought to have believed such a promise of
God.

Let us hear what they say for themselves. Adam in the state of Innocence stood
in no need of Faith in Christ, therefore God gave him not power to believe in
Christ; but though in the state of innocence he had no need of Faith, it does
not follow but that God might give it to him; strength and power is not always
given to nature for use, but sometimes for perfection: In this sense it is said,
Matthew. 3.9.
God is able of these stones to raise up Children to Abraham. Yet there is no
need of doing it; God had given Adam strength to travel all the world over,
which he never did; neither was there any occasion for him to do it. Again they
object, God gave Adam the Law, therefore he was not bound to believe in Christ,
because Faith is not commanded by the Law, but though the Law was given unto
Adam, yet he was bound to believe in Christ, for although Faith be not expressly
commanded in the Law, yet it is implicitly, because by the Law a Man is bound to
believe every word of God which in time to come should be revealed unto him.

We have already showed there is no such universal vocation as they are for:
However it is granted several Reprobates have an outward calling, but seeing
they are not converted, the question is put, to what purpose, and for what end
are reprobates thus called? Our Adversaries say, it is to the end they should be
made partakers of everlasting life. This we cannot agree to, because they do
not attain to it. Whence necessarily follows, that (as I said heretofore) God
is frustrated of his end, which is a sign and effect of want of Power and
Wisdom; which must needs be so, if in what God does, he proposes to himself an
end which he foreknoweth he cannot and shall not attain unto, no Man of sound
mind will do so, and of God it cannot be affirmed without blasphemy. This
consideration is so pregnant that they think to shift it off with a
distinction; God does not absolute, say they, intend they should be saved; but
upon condition they shall obey and come in at the call, and persevere therein:
now this condition not being performed by Reprobates, they say, God is not
disappointed of his end: but what a pitiful coming off is this, shall a Man not
deprived of his wits, make an end, which he in earnest aims at, depend upon a
condition which he is sure shall never be. God foreseeth Reprobates will not
obey the call, much less continue in obedience. I farther say, no Man who has
his wits will make an end which in earnest he proposes to himself, depend upon
such means, as none but himself can procure, and which he is resolved never to
procure: But to incline to obedience the hearts of those that are called, and
to turn stony hearts into hearts of flesh, none can do it but God alone; but
experience teaches he will not do it in Reprobates, a sign he has decreed not
to do it. And let the nonsense of their Hypothesis and Assertion be taken
notice of, which is thus. God in calling reprobates intends to save them, in
case he gives them effectual grace to obey the call, which he resolved never
to do. God does not intend the effectual calling or conversion of every one
whom the Gospel is preached to, and have only the outward means of Salvation,
as it appearet out of the fore-quoted places. Ezech. 2.5.
For sometimes a Prophet sent to a people or to a person, is a stumbling block
to that people or person; so of some other Providence. John 15.22.
And this is God's own doing for he says, Ezech. 3.20.
when I lay a stumbling block before a man, whether righteous or otherwise; or
when God's own Son came into the world, 'twas, as said before, to take from
unbelievers all manner of excuse, to make them unexcusable, for says the
Apostle, as to them that believe he is a chief corner stone, elect and
precious, so unto those that are disobedient, he is a stone of stumbling, and a
rock of offense. 1 Pet. 2.6, 7, 8.
And this is the Lord's doing, Psalm. 118.22.
says David, wherefore it is mavelous in our eyes. John 8.43.
Our Blessed Savior said to the Jews, Why do you not understand my speech? In
the same verse he gives the reasons, even because ye cannot hear my word. His
word they heard, and the meaning they understood, but it did not work upon
them, neither could they effectually understand it of themselves, they could
not do it, neither did God intend they should, or else it had been effected.
Gamaliel spoke well the truth, Acts 5.39.
when he said, if this counsel be of God ye cannot overthrow it: For it is
beyond any Man's power to disappoint God, of his ends, wherefore, whenever he
intends by preaching of the word to convert any one, he shall certainly be
converted, but if he be not, it is a certain and infallible sign, that God
thereby never intended his conversion, or that he should believe.

To what end then, are Reprobates called? I answer, to know their duty, and at
last to own they are justly punished for having neglected it, and herein God
does attain to his end. Romans 9.7. out of Exodus 4.21. and 9.1^. and 1^.20.
St. Paul showing how God called Pharaoh, not to the end he should obey, but
that he should be hardened, and should not let the people go. In several
places, Holy Scriptures show how God in calling and offering means of grace to
wicked and reprobates, does not intend their Conversion, but to make them
unexcusable, and to have Witnesses and Testimonies against them, (...), that at
the last day every wicked man may hear this, Thou art unexcusable O man. When
God gave Ezechiel his Commission, and commanded him to go to the people, he
gave him no hope of success, nor seemed to intend their conversion, for says
he, Ezech 2.34.5.
they are a rebellious nation that has rebelled against me; they and their
Fathers have transgressed against me, even unto this very day, for they are
impudent children and stiff-necked, to what purpose then does God send him to
them? God declares it, and they whether they will hear or forbear; et shall
know there has been a prophet amongst them. There is an Evidence and a Witness
against them, I have given them warning, and they cannot pretend ignorance or
any ground of excuse. God does not declare to the Ministers at first whether or
no they will hear, but to do and obey what is commanded. When our Blessed
Savior sent his Disciples to preach the Gospel, he gave this charge, Mark 6.11.
and whosoever shall not receive you nor hear you, when ye depart thence shake
off the dust under your feet, for a testimony against them. St. Paul did it,
for he shook his raiment and said, let your blood be upon your own heads: To
the Jews that opposed themselves and blasphemed, Acts. 18.6.
as a testimony against them, for verily it shall be more tolerable for Sodom
and Gomorah in the day of Judgment than for such. And elsewhere, but upon the
same argument does beforehand tell his Disciples, and ye shall be brought
before governors and kings for my sake; but to what end and purpose? Matthew.
10.18.
to convert them? not: for if it was to that intent they would be converted;
for who has resisted his will? Luke 10.11.
but for a testimony against them and the gentiles. And according to another
Evangelist, the Lord directs them what to say, even the very dust of your
City which cleaves on us, we do wipe off against you; notwithstanding be ye
sure of this, that the Kingdom of God is come nigh unto you: As if he had said,
this shall be the ground of the charge against you at the last day, and this
dust shall rise in Judgment and as a witness against you. Our Savior says,
how before the end of the world, this Gospel of the Kingdom shall be preached
in all the world, Matthew. 24.14.
not with an intention in God to convert the whole world, for then God would be
disapointed of his purpose. For Scripture and Experience teach us the contrary,
that all shall not answer the call and be converted: In the Text the Lord Jesus
declares, why the Gospel shall be preached in all the world, for a witness unto
all nations.

At the last day, shall be the general Assize, where every Man shall be called
to an account for his sins; the Causes shall not be between Man and Man, but
between God and Man, and the Lord Jesus shall be the visible Judge, for by him
God will judge the World: Now as matters of fact do require proof by Evidences,
so God makes sure of Witnesses to convince and confound the wicked, for as St.
Paul and Barnabas said, to those of Lystra, God left not himself without
witness, in that he did good, and gave us rain and fruitful seasons. Acts 14.17.
These mercies though common will be Evidences against those that abused or
remained unthankful under them. So shall the outward means and offers of grace
against those that neglected and rejected them, though God never intended they
should thereby be converted, for God's secret will was unknown to them, and the
revealed they ought to have obeyed, as Abraham did when commanded to Sacrifice
his Son, so ought all when commanded to repent and believe. Now those witnesses
of God are of two sorts: First, those that are of his own immediate
appointment, as were the Lord's Disciples, to whom he said, John 15.27.
ye also shall bear me witness, because ye have been with me from the
beginning, which he repeated after his Resurrection, Ye shall be witnesses unto
me both in Jerusalem, and in all Judea and Samaria: Acts 1.8. and 13.31.
Of whom it is said in the same Book, who are his witnesses, unto the people.
And as they were witnesses unto the people of what they had seen, so on the
last day they shall be God's witnesses against the people of what they had done
and preached to them.

The second sort of witnesses are from or within men themselves that are
guilty. Wherefore says our Savior to the Jews, ye be witnesses unto your
selves that ye are the children of them which killed the prophets. Matthew. 23.31.
And with the Gentiles, their conscience also bearing, Romans 2.15, 16.
and shall bear, witness, and their thoughts the mean while accusing or else
excusing one another. I a word, God can never want witnesses, for if these held
their peace, says Christ, the very stones would speak, and be witnesses
according to what Joshua said, J^sh. 24.27.
This stone shall be a witness. Thus to our present purpose God does outwardly
call reprobates, and commands them to repent, not with an intent they should do
so, for he denis them the grace of repentance and faith, without which they
cannot repent and believe: For if God would effectually have it so, it should
infallibly be according to what we have in a place of the prayer book. Whose
power no creature is able to resist, grounded on St. Paul's saying, who has
resisted his will: But God does it to show them their duty and leave them
without excuse, seeing they had Christ offered to them. Here they object a
place I answered before about Jerusalem, but because they lay a stress upon the
comparison, as the Hen gathers her Chickens, a sign, say they, that Christ
intended their Salvation; to what I said I shall add, that Christ does use the
comparison of his being willing to gather Jerusalem as a Hen gathers her
Chickens, Matthew. 23.27.
not in relation to the end and intention, but as to the effect if their
affection had been answerable. They say farther, if when Christ calls
Reprobates to come to him, he does not intend thereby to save them, then the
outward vocation does differ from his inward purpose, which we deny. For by the
outward calling God actually does with Reprobates what in the call he proposed
within himself, for God purposed to call reprobates, to promise them Salvation
upon account of Obedience; to the end they should learn the way to Salvation,
to know their Duty and at last confess they are justly Damned, and he obtains
the end he aimed at. But here follows a high charge. God promising Salvation
to reprobates upon an impossible condition, which he is not willing to give
them grace to perform, does but mock and deceive them. We answer the promise of
Salvation made to reprobates upon an impossible condition, is no delusion, but
a denial of Salvation, for want of performance of the condition, without which
no Man can be saved even according to God's Decree; for as in time God denies
reprobates Salvation by reason of impenitency, so from eternity he decreed to
damn them for impenitency, the end of the Promise and of the Vocation are the
same. When God commands all men every where to repent, it is not meant the end
of the declaration; as if it was God's purpose it should be so, but it is the
thing commanded, and which those who are called ought to do. We must in this
matter have a care not to confound the intention of the Minister with that of
God, who from eternity knows every individual reprobate, the Minister not so,
for being not able to know reprobates from the elect, he must have a real
intention in his station to save every one that hears him, and if he be
mistaken and disappointed of his end, he being neither All-mighty, nor
All-knowing, there is no absurdity therein; but here we speak of the end of the
vocation of reprobates in relation to God.

Two things more I am to answer. First, That God is not an hypocrite, though he
does not intend the Salvation of all those whom he calls to it, an hypocrite
would seem to be what he is not, but there is no such intention in God, only he
points at and shows reprobates the cause why he denies them Salvation. The
second thing I am now to do is to show that God in his outwardly calling of
reprobates is not unjust, though he requires of them impossible things: But
before, I must answer an Objection I had omitted, to show that it is in Man's
power to save himself if he will, it is taken out of St. Paul's words. Philip.
2.12, 13.
Work out your salvation with fear and trembling: But this goes from the state
of the question, which is about Conversion before it be effected, but in this
place the Apostle speaks to regenarated Men, for he says, they always obeyed;
now as in the act of Conversion we are merely Passive, after it is effected,
and there is the new Man created in us, we are not like Stone and Stocks, we
move as we are acted by the spirit of God. This is an Exhortation to Holiness
and every good Work, but to show how the Apostle does not think it is in their
power to work their own Salvation of themselves, in the next verse, he adds,
For it is God that works in you, both to will and to do of his good pleasure:
This explantation he gives, for fear they should misunderstand what he said
about working their Salvation, and we see how to keep them from Pride and
Presumption, he says, work it with fear and trembling. But now I must return
where I left, and say, of things unpossible, some are so, absolutely and of
their nature, others are such only in some respect and accident, that obedience
which God requires of Men, is not of absolute impossibility, for if there was
any injustice in the case, here it would lay, but what God requires of Men was
once possible, but man through his own fault lost that power, what in the state
of Innocence (namely obedience) was possible for Man, is by his fall become
unpossible to him, yet for all this, he still is bound to do his Duty, the more
because he has no excuse to plead for in relation to God, who neither enticed
him, nor commanded or compelled him, but rather expressly with threatenings did
forbid him to sin, so that God is most just in calling for his own. This is as
if a Man had lent me Money, when it was lent I was able to pay, but since
through my own ill management I ruined my whole Estate, and made it unpossible
for me to pay the Debt, must my Creditor suffer for my evil Courses, after I am
become a prodigal Son? Is he unjust to call for his Money, and make me pay the
Debt? No surely, as you see the Matthew. 18. from 24. to 35.
Lord did by that servant of his, who had no mercy upon his fellow servant, for
though it was unpossible for him to pay the ten thousand talents, yet he
delivered him to the Tormentors, till he should pay all that was due, that is
for-ever, for he could never do it; here the torments of Hell are meant, so God
may justly do with every Man, whom he has no mind to be merciful to. I do add
one thing more, how the Law promised life upon unpossible conditions of a man's
own perfect obedience; yet we do not read that any of the Jews ever said the
Law was unjust, on the contrary we find the Law was confessed to be holy just
and good, Romans 7.12.
and let some men say what they will, we all know and must own, that faith the
condition upon which eternal life is promised in the Gospel is unpossible for
men, because it is a gift of God. Let therefore God be owned to be just in all
his ways, 2 These. 2.12.
though all may be damned who believe not the truth: God sent them strong
delusions to believe a lie, that they might be damned, as if he had said that
there might be a just cause of their damnation.

CHAP. XI. Of FAITH.
NOW we must come to the chief and most excellent Gospel Grace, which is Faith;
concerning which also, Arminians do teach many unsound things, we intend, by
the Grace of God, to speak of every one of them in order, Satan ever raised his
strongest batteries against this Ephesians. 6.16.
shield wherewith we are able to quench his fiery darts.

To have a right understanding of this matter, we must know Scripture does
mention four kinds of Faith. First, Historical, whereby we believe the Word of
God to be true as it is revealed in Scriptures, and God to be the God of Truth;
the Devils have this Faith, Jam. 2.19.
for they believe and tremble. Secondly, The Faith of Miracles, which at first
was granted; thereby to confirm the Doctrine of the Cospel; for 1 Cor. 14.22.
tongues a sort of Miracles a^^ a sign not to believere, but to unvelievers;
it is a certain persuasion grounded upon some Revelation, or a special Promise of
some miraculous work to be done: Our Savior granted it to the Apostles, but it
ceased long ago. Thirdly, Temporal Faith is a knowledge and assent to Truth
contained in God's Word, but only for a time, hence called Temporal, attended
with some joy arising out of the consideration of some worldly advantages, or
of the thoughts and bare notion of a future happiness, which at last vanish
away: Some Reprobates have this Faith. This our Savior speaks of, when he
mentions that part of the Matthew. 13.20, 21.
Seed which fell into stony places, where it is received with joy. Thus Mark.
6.20.
Herod heard gladly John the Baptist; and went farther, for he did many things,
and observed him. Whether this, as Acts 26.28.
Agrippa's being almost persuaded to be a Christian, may be said of Temporal,
or only of Historical Faith, I will not dispute, it being nothing at all
material for my purpose; but this I say, that this Temporal Faith sometimes
goes so far, that they who have it, are said Heb. 6.4.
to have tasted of the heavenly gift, and been made partakers of the holy
Ghost. The spirit of God sometimes bestows grace upon some, which graces are
not common nor saving neither; our Savior says to the man in the Gospel who
had discreetly answered him, Mark 12.34.
Thou art not far from the Kingdom of Heaven, for a man may go far on the way,
and yet fall short of it: All that came out of Egypt, though they went far into
the wilderness, nay, some came within sight of the Land of Promise, yet never
entered into it, so, many Matthew. 7.14.
strive to enter in at the straight gate who cannot find it. We read of one
Mark. 10.20, 21.
who observed all the commandments from his youth, and in part he spok the
truth, for it is said, our Savior beholding him loved him, which he would not
have done if he had told him a lie. This I insist the more upon, to make this
temporal Faith better known and how far it bordereth upon true faith, because
our Adversaries do confound it with the true faith, which is the fourth kind of
Faith.

This is the only true faith otherwise called saving and justifying faith,
which does consist not only in knowledge of things necessary to Salvation, and
also in an assent to all truths revealed in Gods word which reprobates may
have, but also in a trust and confidence and relying upon Christ and in a
special way applying unto the Soul the general promises of God, without this
there is no true faith, and here we are to do two things. First, To show the
difference between temporal and justifying faith, and then prove that assurance
is essential to true faith without which it cannot be such: As to the first,
saving faith is attended with a real spiritual joy, not arising out of any
humane consideration, but only out of the sense of God's mercy; this, temporal
faith has not, nor the following signs of saving faith. Secondly, True faith
has a love of Christ overcoming all difficulties, which love is attended with
a religious fear of offending God; and with a studying how to promote his
glory. Thirdly, A sense of a future happiness amidst the greatest troubles and
calamities. Fourthly, A hope of glory which makes not ashamed, raised within
us by the spirit, Romans 8.15.
which bears witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God.
Lastly, A special unmovable trust and confidence in the mercy of God, and an
application of Christ's merits. Temporal faith has nothing to do with these,
but they are proper to true saving faith. Hence may appear, the error of our
Adversaries, or rather of the truth, who would have temporal and saving faith
to be the same in nature, and to differ only as to duration of time.

Now as to the other thing, that a trust and confidence in God is of the nature
of faith, it does appear from the names given faith in the word of God. It Is
called boldness and confidence. (...) Ephesians. 3.12.
In whom we have boldness and access with confidence: by the faith of him, or a
strong persuasion: A liberty of confidence. And (...) Heb. 3. and chap. 10.19.
and 1 John 5.14.
If we hold fast the confidence, and the rejoicing of the hope firm unto the
end. A full assurance, (...) Heb. 10.22.
Let us draw near with a true heart in full assurance of faith. A (...) H^ 11.1.
substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen. Also
confidence, (...) John 16.33.
This is the confidence we have in him, that if we ask any thing according to
his will, he hears us; 1 John 5.14.
which confidence does not leave those to whom God has given the earnest of
the spirit, that is believers: 2 Cor. 5.6.
we are always confident, says St. Paul, which argues it to be essential to
faith. St. John also calls it boldness, 1 John 4.17.
herein is our love made perfect, that we may have boldness in the day of
Judgment. Such a frame arises out of faith, without which no true and well
grounded boldness and confidence, nor being hearty and cheerful as our Savior
says to his disciples, they ought to be. Be of good cheer, I have overcome the
world. Peter as St. John says, makes certitude and assurance go along with
Faith, for in his name and of the disciples he declares thus, Joh. 16.33. John
6.69.
We believe, and are sure that thou art that Christ, the son of the living God;
to believe and be sure is the same, neither could they or any other believe,
except they were sure it is true, but it is more or less, for as there are
degrees of faith, so of assurance which is an essential part thereof. Heb.
6.11. and chap. 10.22.
As Scripture speaks of a full assurance of hope, so it does of a full
assurance of faith; we are fully assured there is a promise for those who do
their duty, and the promise is from the God of truth, of all this there is a
full assurance he hears us. These words certainly go beyond common knowledge
and assent, and let this be the first reason.

Farther Christ is received by Faith. Joh. 1.12.
But as many as received him, to them he gave power to become the sons of God,
even to them that believe in his name, bare knowledge and assent are not
enough; or else Devils and Reprobates could be made Sons of God. Again, they
who truly believe in Christ, know they have eternal life. 1 John 5.13.
These things have I written unto you that believe on the name of the Son of
God, that ye may know that ye have eternal life, out of bare knowledge and
assent, no man can know he has eternal life, for despair may consist with
both, it is so in all Devils, and in many Reprobates. Lastly, Habak. 2.4.
By faith we live. Rom 11.20.
By faith we stand. Romans 5.1.
By faith we are justified. Ephesians. 2.8.
By faith we are saved, and through faith we obtain forgiveness of sins,
heavenly Blessings, Adoptions, Victory over all spiritual Enemies, in a word,
Christ and all his benefits we receive by faith, which cannot be an effect of
bare knowledge and assent. Several other Texts I omit, which are much to may
purpose, but this is sufficient.

Now follows the question between Papists, Arminians, and us: Whether says
be common to all, Elect and Reprobates, which they affirm, but we say, it is
given only to believers, and it is proper to them. But still we mean true
justifying faith. Scripture speaks clearly for us in the case, for it is called
Tit. 1.1
the faith of God's elect, God's Elect and Christ's Sheep are one and the same;
but none believe but Christ's Sheep, he says to the unbelieving Jews, Joh.
10.26.
but ye believe not, because ye are not of my sheep. Faith is an effect of
Election, for it is said, Acts 13.48.
as many as were ordained to eternal life believed, as many and no more. And
seeing Romans 8.30.
only the Elect are justified and glorified, they only have faith, because
believers only are justified, and they only that are justified, are glorified;
none but the Elect are members of Christ, and we become such only through
faith: Now God has Ephesians. 1.5.
predestined none but the elect unto the adoption of children by Jesus
Christ. There must be a certain mark of distinction between good and bad, or
else the one could not be known from the other. Now faith is the
characteristical note of God's children, and our election is known to us a
posteriori only by the effect, whereof faith is the chief, and it is so
essential that it gives a general denomination, the whole world being divided
into believers and unbelievers, this is of so high a concernment that St. Paul
earnestly exhorts the Corinthians to 2 Cor. 13.5.
examine themselves whether they be in the faith, prove your own selves, know
ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be
reprobates. Now Christ is in us by faith, for it is the instrument whereby we
receive and apprehend him, and not otherwise. Against this they would have
something to say out of that Text where St. Paul Romans 11.17.
speaks of some branches broken off the tree, whence they conclude that some
reprobates had been engrafted in Christ through faith; but if any for unbelief
were ever cut off from the tree of life, we deny that ever they were in Christ
indeed by true faith, but only outwardly they seemed to be so, they are said to
be broken-off, when by reason of unbelief and hypocrisy, either they are
fallen off themselves, or have been put out of the society of the Church, as it
formerly happened to the Jews, whom the Apostle speaks of in that place. Let
this be observed, that when in Scripture faith is attributed to reprobates,
it is not meant true saving faith, which they never had, but only historical or
temporal, an outward and hyp critical prosession of faith, or of the doctrine
of the Gospel, and this calls to my mind that place of Scripture about the
parable of the talents, the talent was taken from the man, when it is said,
Matthew. 25.29.
from him that has not shall be taken away, even that which he has. How can
that man have that which he has not, or that be taken away which he has not:
The matter is explained by another Evangelist thus, Luke 8.11.
whosoever has not shall be taken away even that which he seems to have, he
had it in appearance, but not in reallity, so reprobates have faith but in a
show, and when they have lost it, it is only that which they seemed to have, but
never had it really. They lost the outward show and profession.

Another point concerning faith, wherein we differ is this, about the certitude
of faith: They deny believers can know whether or not they have true faith, we
say they can know it, and begin to prove it, with that Text already quoted. 2
Cor. 13. Upon examination they may find and know whether Christ be in them; he
would not have advised them to that examination, except they could have found
out the truth of it: Which truth we are a^^ured of by our Savior, when he
says to his Disciples, Joh. 14.20.
ye shall know that you are in me and I in you. Seeing then we are in Christ
and Christ in us by faith, and they can know it to be so, then they must be
sure of their faith; that is, have a certitude of it. In the case of the two
blind men, Matthew. 9.28.
our Savior asked them, believe ye that I am able to do this? they said unto
him, yea Lord. When believers are seriously asked whether they have faith? They
may well and do confess it in conscience to the Lord himself, which must arise
out of a certitude of it. Then, 1 Cor. 2.11.12.
the spirit a man which is in him knows the things of a man, and in the next
verse, he adds, we have received the spirit of which is of God, that we might
know the things that are freely given to us of God. And we can distinctly
perceive the proper acts of faith, as when one out of a sincere and pious
affection finds himself ready to deny the world and himself, to serve and
obey God according to his holy will.

To the question, how can a man know when he is elected? And how see he has
Faith? I say, Election is evidenced by effectual calling, by Faith and
Repentance, so is Faith by the fruits and effects thereof, as are good works,
as certainly-as one may conclude where a fire is there is heat, and when the
Sun shines, it is daylight: Thus the cause is proved by the effect, and the
effect by the cause. Where is motion either natural or spiritual, we may
confidently assirm there is life accordingly. Thus we need not to go up to
Heaven to dive into the secret Council of God; nor to turn the leaves of the
Book of Life, to see whether our names be written in it, but to search into our
own souls and examine our own Thoughts, Affections and Actings, if there be
holiness, love and other fruits of the spirit.

Now they object, that this certitude must be expressed or employed in the word,
and thence drawn by a consequence, but we say, it does not arise out of the
letter of the word, but out of the inward testimony of our understanding being
enlightened by the holy Ghost, which bears witness to our spirit that we are
the Children of God, and consequently that we have true faith: This is not
written in the Book of Scripture, but in the Book of our Heart with the very
finger of the Holy Ghost; hence it is that we do not believe we do believe, but
we feel and perceive it, as we do not believe we think of God when we do it, but
we know and feel it in our minds. One thing here I must take notice of upon the
matter, in relation to that Exhertation of St. Paul to the Corinthians, to
examine themselves; that it is a great deal of pity that many (I dare say good
people) do not set themselves upon that trial, but do either wholly or in part
neglect it, but if they be of God's Elect, at one time or other they must come
to it, the sooner the better, and the more often to known what progress they
made in faith, what degrees of strength it has gotten; and for neglecting this
so necessary a duty, they thereby deprive themselves of much comfort which
would accrue to them. To make an end of this matter, I shall add that this
certitude is very much improved, when we can clearly make out we have an
interest in Christ, and are Christ's: For says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 3.22.
Ye are Christ's, and Christ is God's. To know whether we be Christ's, we have
a certain rule to know it by; that is, if the spirit of Christ be in us: Romans
8.9.
For if any man have not the spirit of Christ he is none of his. How then to
know whether the spirit be in us? St. Paul gives a rule, by Gal. 5.22, 23.
the fruits of the spirit, as love, joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness,
goodness, faith, etc.

Now we are come to a great question, why of so many that hear the word of God,
there are so few that believe? What may be the cause of it, at the same word,
and under the same Ministry, so different and contrary effect is produced,
some like Wax at the fire are softened and melted when others at the same time
like Clay and Dirt are hardened, whilst some believe others continue in
unbelief, and harden themselves, some are the better, others the worse for it:
Like Joh. 13.27.
Judas, into whom the Devil entered after our Savior had given him the sop. The
word is a wholesome Physic to some, and as deadly poison to others; the Lord
Jesus is a 1 Cor. 23. and 2 Pet. 2 8.
stumbling block and a rock of offense and foolishmess to some, and the 1 Cor.
2.6, 7.
wisdom of God in a mystery to others, so that this word and they that preach
it, are unto some (those that are saved) 2 Cor. 2.15.16.
a Savor of life unto life, and to others (to them that perish) a Savor of
death unto death. All this is truth, Scripture teaches, and Experience confirms
how all that hear the word of God, do no believe, for all men have not Faith, 2 Thessalonians. 3.2. Now we are to inquire into the reasons of it.

First, It Is not for any Dignity, Merit, Natural Capacity or any other quality
in the hearer, seeing the 1 Cor. 2.14.
natural man (such we are all by nature) receives not the things of the spirit
of God, for they are foolishness unto him, neither can he know them. Which the
same Apostle does confirm in another place. Romans 8.7.
The carnal mind is enmity against God, for it is not subject to the law of
God, neither indeed can be. Neither is it for any depth of knowledge, learning,
eloquence, or other abilities in the Minister who preaches the word. 1 Cor 3.6.
Paul may plant, Apollos may water, but neither of them can give the increase:
2 Cor. 2. 2 Cor. 4.7.
Who is sufficient for these things? For says he in another place, this
treasure we have in earthen vessels, that the excellency be of God, and not of
us. The most fervent and excellent Servants of God commonly complain of the
hardness and impenitency of their hearers; and let Isaiah speak for all, Isai.
53.1, 16.
Who has believed our report? And our Blessed Savior should (if any) have had
cause to expect a good success of his outward teaching; yet how often does he
complain of the hardness, stubbornness, impenitency and unbelief of his
hearers? How few of the great multitudes he taught were converted to him? So
that we must not seek in the dispensers of the word for the cause, why some
believe and others do not. The cause why all do not believe, is not, as the
Adversaries would have it, because they do not all they can, and do not make
use of all the power remaining in them out of their natural corruption, that
they do not go to Church, do not hear, nor read the word as often as they
ought; that the spirit of God is ever ready to give faith to all that do these
things, which is most false, for though we own men are in the wrong to neglect
those Christian duties; yet though they would perform, all that and more, it
would not do, for God gives faith to none but to those whom from eternity he
decreed to give it to: How could God have decreed, by the word to give faith
unto every man? when as experience shows, and we already have proved it, he
does not afford every man that outward call. We own that usually God does not
give men come to years faith without hearing or reading of the word; but
Scripture and experience do teach, God does not give it to every one that
hears and reads it; so that it is false to say the neglect of the word is
the only cause, why God gives not every one faith; for several do read, hear,
meditate, preach and write Commentaries upon the Word, who yet never have true
faith. Yet we own how God blesses the Ministry of some more than of others.

Now to come to the true cause of it, it is because God has decreed to give it
only to the Elect, for faith is an effect of our Election: Acts. 13.48.
As many as were ordained to eternal life believed, as I quoted before, and our
Savior says, all that the father gives me (has elected in me shall come
unto me, and none else, Joh. 6.37.44.
for no man can come to me except the father draws him. The good pleasure of
God is the cause of the decree and of Faith too, wherefore it is called the gift
of God, nothing more free than what is given. Our Savior says plainly to his
Disciples, Ephesians. 2.^.
It is given unto you to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, to them
it is not given: Grace puts a difference between them. After his resurrection
our Matthew. 13.11.
Savior opened the understanding of his disciples that they might understand
the Scripture, without which they could not do it, as afterward was Luke 24.45.
opened the heart of Lydia, and this made her attend unto the things which were
spoken of by Paul. So that to believe or not to believe, Acts 16.14.
is not of him that wills, or of him that runs, but of God that shows
mercy. Romans 9.16.
God prepares the heart of the humble, says David, without it nothing can be
done, it is his work. First, In relation to those that believe, for our Savior
says, Matthew. 11.25.26.
I thank thee, O father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou have hid these
things from the wise and prudent, and has revealed them unto babes. If in this
God had been accepter of persons, or had been moved by any qualification in the
persons, he would have done the contrary of what he acted, he would have
revealed it to the Wise and Prudent, and hid them from Babes: This to a carnal
reason seems strange, yet it is true; and in the next verse, our Blessed
Savior assigns God's will as the only cause, and ought to be sufficient for
any one. Even so father, for so it seems good in thy sight. They who are
become the Sons of God, and believe on his name, Joh. 13.
are born not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man,
but of God. Here our Coversion and Regeneration are attributed to the will of
God, exclusively to the will of the flesh or of man.

Now God does act on both parts, not only he makes those believe who do, but
also others cannot believe, because Joh. 12.39.40.
he has blinded their eyes, and hardened their hearts, that they should not
see with their eyes, nor understand with their hearts and be converted, and I
should heal them. In consequence of this, they are delivered up to Satan, who
acts his part upon them in the way exressed by St. Paul. 2 Cor. 4.3, 4.
If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost, in whom the God of this
world has blinded the minds of them whieh believe not, lest the light of the
glorious Gospel of Christ who is the image of God, should shine upon them. Of
these speaks the Prophet, Isai. 43.8.
Bring forth the blind people that have eyes, and the deaf that have ears: they
shall continue blind and deaf, no Faith for these: On the contrary side, Isai.
32.3.
The eyes of them that see shall not be dim; and the ears of them that hear
shall harken; these shall have Faith. After this we adore the actings of God;
and with St. Paul cry out, Romans 11.33.
O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out? Now as begetting
of Faith in us, is an effect of God's Election, and of his good-pleasure, so is
the increase and improvement of it; for the more it feeds upon Christ, the
stronger and the more lively it grows: There are degrees of Faith, so that
though all Believers have the same Faith, as to the substance, and to the
parts, yet there is a great difference as to the degrees, upon which account we
are said 2 Pet. 3.18. Ephesians. 4.15.
to grow in faith, or grace: There is weak Faith and strong Faith, yet both
true; that Man's Faith who said to our Savior, If thou Mark. 9.22.23.
can do any thing have compassion on us, was a weak and languishing Faith,
and seemed to doubt whether Christ could cure his Child; after Christ had said
to him, Mark 9, 22.23.
If thou can believe, all things are possible to the believer, as if he had
said to him, I can do it, but can thou believe? whereupon the Man prayed for
supply and strength of Faith. Lord I believe, but help thou mine unbelief; he
was much weaker in Faith then he who said, Lord, if thou will, thou can make
me clean, Luke 5.12. And then the Centurion of whom our Savior Matthew. 8.10.
says, I have not found so great a faith, no not in Israel; and that of the
Woman of Matthew. 15.26.27.
Canaan, who for all the repulses which our Savior did outwardly give her,
even comparing her to a Dog, yet she would not give over, till our Savior had
said to her, Matthew. 8.10.
O woman, great is thy faith, and cured her Daughter; so of the woman who had
the Issue of Blood for 12 years: If I may but touch his cloths, Mark 5.28
I shall be whole; all effects and signs of a great Faith, the increase whereof
we ought ever to pray for, thereby in time of trial to be able to resist the
temptation. Now as Christ is the true and only object of our Faith, so it is a
hindrance to it when we look upon any thing in the Creature, when we seek
amongst men that which we can find only with God, this makes our Savior say,
Joh. 5 44.
How can ye believe, which receive honor one of another, and seek not the
honor that comes from God only? Thus we have done with this great Subject as
much as relates to our present purpose.

CHAP. XII. Christ dyed not for All.
WE are now come to another Point, about the extent of our Saviors death: This
is a matter of very great importance, both in it self, and in the consequence
thereof; and because the deciding of a question does sometimes much depend upon
the right stating of it. I will endeavor so to do in this, in order to it in
few words, I here lay down what Papists and Arminians say, it is thus: They
teach that Christ by his death intended the universal redemption of all and
every particular Man, whether Elect or Reprobate without distinction, that by
his death he actually obtained for all, the grace and favor of God. That the
application of these graces thus obtained, depends only on the free will of
Man; some according to their liberty making use of that purchased gift, others
to whom that Grace and Salvation was alike purchased and intended on God's
part, do by their own contempt and neglect according to the same liberty of
their will, reject it. But we say that the Lord Jesus did not give his Blood
and Life for all, only for the Elect, his Members, and that by his death, he
has satisfied Gods Justice, only for those who get good by it, that is all
Believers before his death, in the time of or after his death, to the worlds
end.

In the beginning of this Treatise, I made use of a kind of argument, which
here I shall not repeat, only say that Scripture reduces it to many: and who
are to be understood by the many, I instanced out of several Texts of
Scripture. Now we proceed to other proofs, and argue thus: He who will not do
the least thing for one, will not do the greatest for him. He who will not
speak a good word for a man, surely will not dye for that man; but our Savior
would not pray for the world, for Reprobates, therefore he would not dye for
Reprobates. Our Savior is plain upon this, Joh. 17.
in that Prayer of his, which makes up a whole Chapter, just before he was
taken, where after he had prayed for himself, he prayed also for them whom the
Father had given him out of the world, for his Elect and Believers. He solemnly
declares he excludes the wicked from his Prayer. Verse 9.
I pray for them, I pray not for the world, but for them which thou have given
me out of the world: This he says, (if I may so say) upon his death bed, when
he was about going to dye, it is as good as if he had said, I dye not for the
world, the world of Reprobates, for that is the signification of the word in
that place, as anon by the grace of God we shall make it appear.

Again, those for whom Christ dyed, he loved so as that he could love them no
more for he says himself, Joh. 15.13.
Greater love has no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his
friends: But it cannot be said that Christ loved Reprobates, so, that he could
love them no more, therefore he dyed not for them. I say farther, surely Christ
would not dye for those whom he will never own nor suffer to come near him: but
he says, and we ought to believe him, how at the last day, Matthew. 7.23.
He will profess unto them, I never knew you: Depart from me ye that work
iniquity. It Is not to be supposed he would dye for those whom he will use so at
last; as to deny he ever knew them, with that knowledge which is joined with
special love and favor. Farthermore, Romans 5.10
They for whom Christ dyed were reconciled to God by his death, and being
reconciled shall be saved by his life. But it cannot be said that Reprobates
were reconciled to God, or shall be saved; therefore Christ dyed not for them:
Now, sins are not imputed to those who thorough Christ's death are reconciled
to God, but sins are imputed to all that are damned, wherefore none of those
that are damned were reconciled to God by the death of his Son. The major or
first part of our argument is grounded upon Scripture. 2 Cor. 5.19.
God was in Christ, reconciling the world to himself, not imputing their sins
unto them. Neither does the Lord Jesus as we said before, cause his death to be
preached to all; for it is said in relation to this, Ephesians. 2.12.
That the Gentiles were without Christ, aliens from the common wealth of
Israel, and strangers from the covenants of promise, having no hope, and
without God in the world. If so, then certainly he dyed not for all, if his
death was not published to all, and it was not to those that were without
Christ; and there can be no benefit by Christ's death for men come to age
except that death be preached; but it is much less and more easy to have a
death preached to one, than to die for him. Lastly, I say if Christ be dead for
all and every man without exception; then he dyed for those that were in Hell
long before his death, and to whom he knew his death would do no good: And do
we take that precious Blood of the Covenant to be so slight a thing as to be
shed in vain, for those who could not be the better for it? Nay, for Heb. 10.20.
those who had trodden, or should tread, under foot the Son of God, and count
the blood of the Covenant an unholy thing. This were too much to profane it,
that this holy blood should be shed for Judas, who, as our Savior said, John.
6.70.
was a devil, John. 17.12.
the Son of perdition, against whom he pronounces a woe, Luke. 22.22 and
Matthew. 26.24
Woe unto that man by whom he is betrayed, it had been good for that man if he
had not been born: Christ then had dyed in vain, if for those that were in
Hell, out of which there is no redemption, and this with an intent to procure
them Salvation. What an Opinion is this? How injurious to the wisdom of Christ?
So the word all is to be restrained, as when John's Disciples said, John 3.26.
of Christ, all men come to him, surely not every individual man.

All the Arguments whereby they endeavor to oppose this Dectrine, may be
reduced under two Heads, for they lay a stress chiefly upon two words in
Scripture, the first is the word world, the other the word all: Under the first
come in several Texts of Holy Scripture, as these, John 1.29.
Behold the lamb of God which takes away the sins of the world. And John
3.16.16.
God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son, that whosoever
believes in him should have everlasting life. And this, 1 John 2.2.
He is a propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but also for the
sins of the whole world. Again, God sent his son into the world, not to condemn
the world; but that the world through him might be saved. And some others to
the same purpose, whereof these are the chief, whence they would conclude that
the Lord Jesus died to take away the sins of every man in the world.

In answer to this, we are first of all to observe, that the word world and
whole world have several significations in Scripture, which I reduce chiefly to
four First, it is taken for the whole work of Creation. Heb 1.2.
By his Son also God made the worlds, in the plural, so John 1.10.
the world was made by him, Jesus Christ. Heavens, Earth and the Sea are meant
by this. Secondly, It signifies all men, whether good or bad: in this sense
it is taken by David. Psalm. 33.8.
Let all the inhabitants of the world stand in awe of him, of God; in the
beginning of the verse it is called the earth, as it is also in another place:
Psalm. 96.13.
The Lord comes to judge the earth, he shall judge the world with
righteousness, and in the Gospel it is so taken, Matthew. 13.
the field is the world, the good seed are the Children of the Kingdom, but the
Tares are the Children of the Wicked one. So in several other places; but these
two significations are not very much to our purpose. Thirdly, It Is taken
restrictively, and only for the reprobates and wicked of the world: As thus,
Luke. 16.8.
The children of this world are wiser in their generation than the children of
light, where you see the opposition between bad and good: so in that place,
John. 1.10.
and the world knew him not, Jesus Christ, we are to take notice that commonly
when the word world signifies the wicked, the particle this is joined to it,
as in the fore quoted Text, and in the following, Romans 12.2.
be not conformed to this world. 1 Cor. 1.20. Chap. 2.6.
Has not God made foolish the wisdom of this world, and in the next Chapter,
We speak not the wisdom of this world, nor of the Princes of this world: And
therefore the world is opposed to God. ^am. 4.4.
Know ye not that the friendship of the world is enmity with God? etc. And the
Apostle says, the spirit 1 John. 4.3, 4, 5. Chap. 5.19.
of Antichrist is in the world. And again, They are of the world, therefore
speak they of the world, and the world hears them. And in the next Chapter he
adds, the whole world lies in wickedness. Take notice, it is called the
whole world, yet only of reprobates; for to lie in wickedness is not by
Scripture attributed to the Elect; so when the word whole is used to represent
the world of Believers, it is to be restrained to them as here it is to the
wicked. But fourthly, The word world in Scripture signieth only Believers, and
is more strictly taken, either for the whole universal number of the Elect and
Believers in all Ages dispersed all the world over, divided into Jews and
Gentiles: Or for a particular company of them in some particular Ages or Places
of the world, and in this sense only it is used in all the objected Texts of
Scriptures.

Thus the word world is sometimes used in the same sense as it is taken in that
place quoted before: 2. Cor. 7.19.
God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself, not imputing their
trespasses unto them. Surely none but Elect and Believers are reconciled to
God, and to them alone their sins are not imputed. In the same sense it is also
taken, when Abraham is called ^om. 4.13.
the heir of the world: And the following too in St. John's Gospel, Christ
faith he is cha. 9.5. Chap. 14.31.
the light of the world, not the world of wicked which lay in darkness: But of
the Elect, and the world may know that I love the father, they, only they,
John. 17.7, 8, 23.
have known that whatsoever the father had given Christ was of the father, and
they have known surely that the son came out from the father. It Is that same
world that knows that thou have sent me; in that same sense also it is taken by
St. Paul, Romans 11.12, 15.
The fall of them (Jews) is the riches of the world, and the casting away of
them is the reconciling of the world. And in his Epistle to the Colossians it is
very full, Colo. 1.5.
For the hope which is laid up for you in heaven, is come unto you as it is in
all the world. The word all is in too. Neither can the same expression be
understood in any other way than this, in that other place. 1 Timothy 3.16.
Great is the mystery of godliness, God was manifested in the flesh, etc.
believed on in the world. It must be then the world of Believers, for it cannot
be believed in the world of Unbelievers. So then in Scripture the word world is
taken for the whole world, the greatest part, the worst part, or the best part
of the world.

Now after this it is easy to answer their Objections out of the fore-quoted
Texts of Scripture, for in them by all are not understood all and every
singular man whether Elect or Reprobate; but only the Elect dispersed all the
world over, who at last receive the gift of Faith, and through the application
of Christ's satisfaction, are saved. And I hope this is made clear enough to
any who impartially desires to be informed of the truth. However, because they
lay a great stress upon that place of 1 John 2.2. I shall now say in particular
something to it, we already have taken notice how there is a world of Believers
taken out of the general world, who by these means is divided into the world of
Believers and of Reprobates: hence it is that our Savior says, John. 15.19.
I have chosen you out of the world. And this number of chosen men though
comparatively small as to the wicked world, yet it is great enough to deserve
the name of world which is a Scripture phrase restrictive as we read it in the
Gospel. Luke. 2.1.
There went out a decree from Caesar Augustus, that all the world should be
taxed: Not every part and corner of the world, for many either never heard of
or had any thing to do with the Roman Empire; and the Pharisees said of our
Savior, Behold the world is gone after him! 'Twas but a very small part of the
Jewish world. Thus in this place of St. John is to be taken, John. 12.19.
the word the whole world, as in the other, all the world. The Church, which is
thereby meant, is a world by it self: Hence it is called Catholic, or
Universal, having a King and Laws by herself; but because this would engage me
too far, I turn again short upon our Text, whereof the words confirm what we
say; for it is said, that Christ is the Advocate and the Propitiation, not only
for the sins of the Believers he writes to, for the word our sins imports thus
much, but also for that whole world of Believers, for Christ may not be called
the Advocate and Propitiation for the wicked: So that if the Lord Jesus be
equally Advocate of Elect and Reprobates, and Propitiation for the sins of both
sorts, we must conclude that either the Elect shall be damned or the Reprobates
saved, for all whom Christ has undertaken for, shall certainly be saved, so
that in consequence of this opinion there shall be but one place, all Heaven,
or all Hell. Cyril of Alexandria, Beda, and other Ancient Orthodox Authors give
the same interpretation of the place, as we do, by the whole world of Believers.

Now I come to the other branch of their objection, which runs upon the word
all, but before I give a particular answer to the several places of Scripture
to prove that Christ died for all, I must say something in general toward the
clearing of the point: No man can deny but diverse Scriptures which are
conceived in universal terms must be expounded with restrictions, as when it is
said, They shall all be taught of God. I will pour my spirit on all flesh.
Jerem. 31, 34.
When I am risen I will draw all men unto me; God is Joel 2.28. Joh. 12.32.
all in all: they shall all know me from the highest to the lowest. Matthew. 3 5.
All Judea went to John: All men seek for thee. Mark 1.37. Surely not every man
in the world. Children are commanded to obey their parents, and servants their
masters, in all things. Certainly in all these and many more which I could
quote, there may and must be a restriction, as in this last just and lawful
things, for Children and Servants if bidden to Kill, to Steal, etc. must not
obey. This truth being so clear that it may admit of no difficulty in all the
foregoing Texts, there is the same reason for those which they object against
us. We say then Christ died for all; that is, the Colos. 3.20.22.
brethren of whom he is the first born. Romans 8.29.
For those whom he begat with the word of truth. Jam. 1.38.
For the seed of Abraham according to the promise. The chosen Romans 9.8, 9. Gal.
3.29.
generation, a Royal Priest hood, and Holy Nation, a peculiar People. 1 Pet.
2.9. All these are usually styled Saints, Believers, God's People, etc. But he
died not for the Matthew. 13.25.
Tares, Math. 3.12.
the Chaff, Matthew. 25.33.
the Goats, Psalm. 119.119.
the Thorns, the Stones, Matthew 13.20.22.
the Dross, 2 Samuel 23.6.
the sons of Belial, John. 17.1.12.
the son of Perdition, Matthew. 7.6.
the Dogs and Swine.

Now we come in particular to answer some of the Texts they bring against us
with the word all. Pet. 3.9.
God is not willing any should perish, but that all should come to repentance.
Here the Apostle speaks of the Elect; the occasion is, in the latter days some
shall come questioning the promise of Christ's coming, because things continue
as from the beginning, but says he, The Lord is not slack concerning his
promise, but is long suffering to us ward: That is to us Believers, and toward
us he is patient, allowing them time of repentance, for he is not willing that
any, of us Believers, should perish, but that all should come to repentance.
Certainly by the word us, he means himself and those he does write to, and who
are they? See the 1. verse of the 1 Chapter. Them that have obtained like
precious faith with us through the righteousness of God and our Savior Jesus
Christ, but those who have not that precious faith, etc. Neither does God stay
for their repentance, nor did Christ die for them, the long patience of God is
toward the Elect; and God stays till their number be filled up, Rev. 6.11.
for the world subsists only for their sake, when all are come in, it will
presently come to an end; but God does not wait for the repentance of wicked,
for he knows they shall never come to it, for he has decreed not to give it.
As to the Elect, it is not the will of your father that any one of those little
ones should perish. Matthew. 18.14.

Another place is this, 1 Timothy 2.6.
Christ gave himself a ransom for all; and Heb. 2.9, 10.
he tasted death for every man, therefore he died for all, the word all is
meant for all Elect and Believers and those that are saved, as Verse 10. or
brought unto glory. And to show it is not our own Exposition, but of the spirit
of God, we read it Rev. 5.9
Thou have redeemed us to God by thy blood out of every kindred, and tongue,
and people, and nations.

And Nations, which is confirmed chap. 7.9. agreat multitude which no man could
number of all Nations, and Kindreds, and People, and Tongues stood before the
Throne, and before the Lamb, etc. And on the contrary side, I mean of the
wicked, by the word all or every one, are understood the several ranks and
qualities, as we read, Rev. 6.15, 16. thus, and the Kings of the earth and the
Great men, and the Rich men, and the chief Captains, and the Mighty Men, and
every bondman and every freeman hid themselves in the dens and in the rocks,
etc. In the same sense it is expressed Chap. 13.7. and power was given him (the
beast) over all Kindreds and Tongues, and Nations: And again, the Angel had the
everlasting Gospel to preach to every Nation, and Kindred, and Tongue, and
People. Rev. 14.6. So that in relation to good or bad, by the words all and
every one, we must not understand all and every individual person. So that we
must not understand every individual person in the world; but men out of every
Quality, Sex, Age and Nation, as Rich and Poor, Great and Low, Men and Women,
Old and Young, and in this sense with Scripture we own Christ dyed for all, not
singula generum, as Schoolmen say, but genera singulorum. This same
interpretation is of St. Austin, De correp. and gratia cap. 14.
whose words I shall here turn into English, By all men, says he, we
understand all kinds of men divided by whatsoever distinctions, Kings or
private persons, Noble or Ignohle, High or Low, Learned or Unlearned, Whole or
Sick, Wise or Simple, Foolish, Rich, Poor, Indifferent, Men, Women, Babes,
Children, Youths, Old Men, of all Languages, of all Dispositions, of all
Trades, of all Professions, and according to their diverse inclinations,
innumerable ways diversified. I am not used to quote Authorities of the
Fathers, though I could easily show that the Orthodox Men amongst them, do
about all these controverted points speak as we do, but besides that those
Quotations would fill too much Paper, we must give them no farther credit, than
as they agree with the infallible rule, the word of God, therefore we keep
close to it, only this passage is so much to our purpose that I thought fit to
set it down. However we shall hereafter have occasion to make use of such
Authorities.

The same answer may be returned to this, God will have all men to be saved,
and to come to the knowledge of the truth; that is, Men of all sorts and
qualities, and that the Apostle means it so, in this place it appears out of
the scope very clearly, for St. Paul exhorts 1 Timothy 2.1, 2, 3, 4.
prayers, supplications, etc. to be made for all men. He proceeds to the
distinction, when he says, for Kings and all that are in authority, and gives
the reason, That we may lead a quiet life in all godliness, under their
Government; for this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior,
who will have all men to be Saved; that is, of the several states and
conditions, whether they be Kings or any in Authority, as well as those that
live under them. The Adversaries themselves must own how restrictions must be
made of those general terms, as in the last Text, God will have all men to be
saved, they will not deny that is expressed under condition of Faith and
Repentance, and yet the Text does not explain it self, so the like we may say
of other places which tend to the same effect, if men could but part with
prejudice which they are prepossessed of, and seek after truth, for truth's
sake, there would sooner be an agreement. They Object farther, 1 Cor. 15.22.
As in Adam all die, so in Christ shall all be made alive: therefore by his
death he has obtained life for all; we deny the Consequence, the scope of the
place is not to show the extent by way of parallel, of the number of those that
were dead or alive; but the ground of death or life, for the sense of the place
is (and St. Austin explains it so) as all those who die, die in Adam: So all
those that are made alive, are made alive in Christ, out of him there being no
Salvation. Acts. 9.12.
Neither is there salvation in any other, for there is none other name under
heaven given amongst men, whereby we must be saved. It is most clear out of
Scriptures, how all dead in Adam are not quickened by Christ, but some are left
in the state of death, for Math. 7.14.
few find the way to life. This very comparison between Christ and Adam was by
Pelagius urged against Austin. But say they, if Adam has more destroyed than
Christ has restored, then Adam had more power than Christ, which is a gross
mistake, for the restoring to life one dead Man, requires a greater power than
to kill a Million.

Another place of Scripture they bring, 1 Timothy 4.10.
God is the Savior of all men, but there St. Paul does not speak of
deliverance by way of Salvation, but of Preservation, and of God's Providence
in this world extended upon mankind; and to show it is so, it is added in the
same verse, specially of those that believe, in matter of redemption there is
no speciality, God takes care of preserving all men in general, but Believers
in a special manner.

They make use of another place, Romans 14.15.
Destroy not him with thy meet for whom Christ died. Therefore Christ died for
those who may be damned, but the Apostle does not say that he may be damned for
whom Christ died, but his scope is to forbid giving offense or matter of
scandal to a weak Brother with eating things which he thinks to be unlawful and
unclean; neither is one destroyed upon any occasion of offense, though his
Conscience be thereby wounded, for the hand of God does uphold those whom his
Son has redeemed. Of this same nature is another place they bring against us.
2 Pet. 2.1.
Some deny the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves swift
destruction. But this Text is not about true redemption from eternal death, but
only a deliverance of the error and ignorance of the times, by the means of the
light of the Gospel, which happens sometimes to the false Prophets which the
Apostle speaks of, not that they were so in truth, but only in appearance, they
lived in the Church with them that were truly redeemed whose number they seemed
to be of, but were not really so.

I now come to the last Objection, which is that all to whom Christ's death is
preached are bound to believe Christ died for them, or else they would be bound
to believe a lie; but, as many Reprobates are hearers of the Word, so they
ought to believe that Christ died for them: But it is not true that all those
whom the word is preached to, ought absolutely to believe Christ died
effectually for their sins; but only in a qualified and restrictive sense, if
God enableth them by his grace to repent and believe, not that repentance
should be the cause of that death of his; but a most certain and infallible
sign of it, Scripture does indeed bind all the Faithful and Elect to believe
that Christ effectually died for them, because it is so; but for those who are
yet out of Christ there is no such Precept, they must first really be ingrafted
in Christ, and then believe it, not first believe it, and then be ingrafted,
else they should believe a lie in believing their sins are actually purged;
because a Man must be first in Christ before his iniquity can actually be
washed away. Then Scriptures enjoin no reprobate and unregenerate Man to
believe at first that Christ effectually died for his sins, only as I said upon
condition of Repentance and Faith, which the reprobate shall never have, and
the unregenerate who is Elect, is not absolutely bound to believe it, till the
time of his conversion be come. And suppose every private Man were obliged to
believe Christ effectually died for his sins; yet it does not follow therefore
that Christ died effectually for all Men, because knowing nothing to the
contrary, every Man may be bound particularly to believe for himself, but not
for all besides, it is not well argued to say, every Man must particularly
believe he is Elected, therefore he must believe all are Elected, or he must
believe particularly he shall be saved, therefore he must believe all shall be
saved; this Argument from the individual to the species does not hold: The
revealed will of God obliges Man to believe such things as God in his secret
will never intended to accomplish. So Abraham was bound to believe, as also he
believed it, that God surely intended the Sacrificing of his Son, because he
commanded him to do it. Yet God intended to try his Faith; The Ninevites were
bound to believe and so they did, the Prediction of Jonah. Joh. 3.4.
Yet forty days and Nineveh shall be destroyed; yet God intended their
repentance not their ruin.

It is a mistake to think that every one whom Christ is preached unto, is bound
to believe that he died for him, which not being he is bound to believe a lie,
which to understand the better, one must know the several degrees of Faith in
this case. Upon hearing the Gospel preached, there is a general Faith required,
namely, that the Lord Jesus came into the world to save sinners; the next thing
for a Man to believe is, that if I repent and believe, Christ came into the
world to save me; so this is but conditional and many a wicked Man can believe
thus far, but the third and last degree is proper only to the Elect, and it is
this, when upon self examination and inquiry, a Man finds that he repents; as
thus, formerly I delighted in sin, now I hate it, heretofore I did eagerly run
after the occasions, now I avoid them, and also does find and feel that he
believes, thus I know and am sensible of the desperate condition I am in by
nature, and see there is but one way to come out of it, namely, through the
Lord Jesus, for there is no Salvation in any other, wherefore I hope and trust
for mercy in him, I lay hold upon and believe in him, and do feel within me a
comfort and inward assurance in the holy Ghost whereby I am sealed, and which
is the earnest of the Inheritance, and assures me that I am the child of God.
Now a Man in such a condition is bound to believe that Christ died for him, and
believes it, and so believes the truth; according to this method, St. Paul
makes this declaration, Tim. 1.15, 16.
Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am chief; how be
it, for this cause I obtained mercy. Ye see he has the general notion
wherefore Christ came into the world, then he proceeds to apply it unto
himself: Lastly, he is sure and believes he obtained mercy: This is the case
of every Elect and Believer, for there is for all but one way to Salvation.

Some go another way to work, and say, all are bound to believe Christ dyed not
effectually, but sufficiently for all, if thereby be meant that the death of
Christ as to the value and Merit, be sufficient to save all, we agree to it,
for if there had been ten thousand worlds, Christ's death had been a sufficient
value and price to save all; but that distinction of effectually for the Elect
and sufficiently for Reprobates, does not well become the dignity and merits of
Christ's death, wherein the design and wisdom of God and Christ are concerned,
to dye for one is properly so to die on his behalf, as that he thereby may be
delivered from death, and this as our Savior says, Joh. 15.13.
Implies the greatest love that can be: Now to say that Christ dyed
sufficiently not effectually, is as good as to say, Christ out of his infinite
love for Reprobates dyed in their stead, that they should be sufficiently
delivered from death, but noteffectually, that is, that they should never be
actually delivered.

To say that Christ dyed for Reprobates, not to the end they should actually be
delivered, but only put in a possibility of being so, it is in a manner to imply
(or else what they say is to no purpose) that it lays in their power to receive
Christ by Faith, seeing without it they cannot be saved, which all comes to
this, that God decreed from Eternity to save all and every Man upon condition
they shall believe, which smells of Pelagianism and Semipelagianism: These are
a new late sort of Arminians, who would have minced and mitigated things; but
did not God from Eternity foresee many would not believe, and decreed not to
give them Faith, which except he does, they can never have? Why then should God
have made a decree upon a condition, which he knew shall never be performed,
having decreed never to grant the means to do it? when a wise Man will not
become guilty of so much imprudence. But let this be enough upon the matter
which in our hands is swelled beyond what we at first intended, but it is so
copious that it is almost unavoidable, and yet how many things more might have
been said. Now we will proceed to something else.

CHAP. XIII. That the Doctrines we hold concerning these Points, are the same
as Austin and other Orthodox Doctors maintained against Pelagians and
Semipelagians.
WE have been at the Spring of all Truth, and out of it, I hope clearly and,
sufficiently proved all the Doctrines in question. Now by the grace of God only
to satisfy some, we will come to something of humane Authority, which indeed,
after God has in his word passed a sentence, is not necessary nor much
material. However, (...) show we are not singular, and that those high truths
are not our particular opinion; we shall make it appear how many hundred years
ago some Heretics having published their corrupt phancies against these
truths, God raised those who powerfully and successfully stood up in defense
thereof. Our Adversaries like prostitute Women, which in a scolding fit, hasten
to call Whore first, are gone about falsely to asperse us with innovation,
giving the points controverted between us, the name of Calviaian Doctrines, as
good and as fit for them to call a Calvinist, Austin, who lived much above a
thousand years before Calvin, which in effect is to overturn the world, and
make last first, and first last. Hence it is that in a fit of rage, some of
them brake loose upon that worthy Servant of God, who has been an Eminent
instrument in his hand to beat down the strength of that Roman Antichrist, to
which so many pious and learned Men have given their Evidence: Yet no Papist,
though never so violent, spoke against him more unbecomingly, and with greater
fury than some Arminians have; but we must not wonder at it, the Cause he
fought against, is common to Papists with them, and so they look on him as
their Common Enemy. However amongst Enemies, if there be any sense of
Christianity and Humanity, there should be something more of Moderation and
Generosity, if they were capable of it. Cannot we dispute about the things we
differ in, and let persons alone? Forbear making reflections upon the Dead, who
in their Generation were better Men than we are in ours, we should mind the
merit of the Cause, and not pick an unjust quarrel against the person.

And here before I proceed farther, I have an occasion to say something on the
behalf of that faithful Servant of Christ, in whose Written Life, the world
has such a Character of him, as becomes a Pious, Laborious and learned Man;
and though I am not sworn to his or any Man's words; yet for truths sake, I
shall speak some few words relating to us here in Queen Elizabeth's days, a
Convocation at Oxford approved the Book of Calvin's Institution, and appointed
it by Tutors to be read to their Pupils, an infallible sign of a perfect
agreement of our Church with the Doctrines therein contained, which was to join
it with our Articles: That Book indeed is a Masterpiece, and deserves well the
Commendation following given it by a learned Pen.

Praeter Apostolicas post Christi tempora chartas,
Huic peperere libro secula nulla parem.
Whereof the sense is: Since the birth of Christ, no Age has after the
writings of the Apostles produced so excellent a Book, as is Calvin's
Institution.

Johannis Stormius an Eminent Divine of Strasbourgh, who with his Brother,
through their singular Prudence and Eminent Piety, did by the grace of God,
prevail without any Tumult, to have the true Religion at the beginning of
Reformation received in that City, gives the following Character of Calvin.

John Calvin, Joannes Calvinus homo acu^issimo judicio, sum maque doctrina and
Egregia Memoria praeditus est, etc.
a man endowed with most acute judgment, of very great learning, and of an
excellent memory, in his Writtings are variety, plenty and purity, witness
whereof is his Institution of the Christian Religion, which having first began,
then enlarged and enriched, and at last finished, he has published this year.
Neither do I know in this kind any thing better or more perfect to teach
Religion, to Reform Manners and remove Errors: And let any man think himself to
be therein very well settled and grounded, who has attained to the things
contained in that Book.

Beza says, he read it one and twenty times, and at every time, out of it he
learned something. Our first Reformers had a great respect and value for him;
amongst the several opinions about the Lord's Supper, they received his as the
true; and they sent over for three Men that had been influenced by him, Martyr,
Bucer, and Fagius, to help them in the Work of Reformation. Archbishop Cranmer
did kindly write to him, and desired his assistance in things tending to a
farther settlement of the Church, and acquainted him he could do nothing more
profitable than to write often to the King. Bucer at Cambridge, where he was
Professor in Divinity, hearing his Letters prevailed upon the Protector Duke of
Somerset, desired him to write to that Noble Lord concerning some matters. And
Bishop Hooper valued him so much as from his Prison to write to him, calling
him vir praestantissime, and subscribing himself pietatis tuae studiosissimus,
Jo. Hooperus. When Calvin did write to the Duke of Somerset, it was very kindly
taken: Mr. Thomas Rogers in his Analysis of the 39 Articles does speak
honorably of him in the 2d page of his Preface.
and the first Letter he did write to the King, was very well received, and the
whole Council whom the King showed it to, was well pleased with it. This
shows at that time he was not such a monster in the eyes of great and good
men, as Arminians have since traduced him; he was a Man of great and good fame,
for all the malice of his enemies and of the truths, who from first to last
thought they might write or say any thing against him. I shall instance only
one who called him a pragmatical Fellow, etc. who died Bishop of Parket.
Oxford, but such a Man's standers strike no blow, for after he had by Mr.
Malvile been reduced to a nonplus, and to have nothing more to the purpose to
say for himself, in our struggling here against Popery, made himself
sufficiently known to the world before his death. Such virulent Pens and
Serpentine Tongues, must spue out their venom against the Works and Memory of
Pious Learned and Extraordinary Men, whose Books, they never were worthy to
carry.

But we must not wonder that sort of people does speak so ill of the Eminent
instruments of Reformation, which they were and are enemies to, and to friends
of Reformation. Heylin Histay of Reformation, Preface, page 4.
Does not one of their chief Men, abominably say, whose death, Edward 6th. I
cannot reckon for an infelicity to the Church of England, for being ill
principled in himself, etc. None but Papists can account it an infelicity that
so good a Protestant Prince should die so soon, if so then it was no infelicity
to England, that he was so soon succeeded by such a Bloody Persecutor of
Religion as Queen Mary was: After that, they are licensed to speak ill of any
Man. The most pious hopeful and knowing Prince for his Age that ever sat upon
an English Throne, comparable to Josiah in his Zeal for the glory of God; his
loss the more to be pityed that he did not go off the Stage without suspicion
of being poisoned, which very reason should have stoped such foul-mouths, for
fear of being thought to approve of such abominable courses, which were not
only suspected at home, but also reported and credited abroad as mentioned by
an Sleid^^.
Author of very good reputation, who gives a worthy and deserved Character of
that young King, which an English Man will not afford him. The Court intrigues
in his Reign are well known, how at first through the Division, then the ruin
of the two Brothers, his Unkles, he was laid open to the attempts of his
Enemies. As a violent Arminian attempted to tread upon the memory of that
Excellent King, John Goodwin.
another stiff that way has in print justified the death of King Charles, they
spare no body: Hear how the same Heylin in his quin-quarticular History, speaks
of that worthy Primate Usher, the Irish Articles, says he, were drawn up by
Doctor Usher a professed Calvinian, who not only thrust in the Lambeth
Articles, but also made others of his own, etc. But let us return to our
immediate Subject about Arminians.

Pelagius was their Grandfather, whose Errors Austin overthrew with Scripture
and Reason, God at that time having raised him up to be Champion for Grace, who
in this matter handled the word of God so powerfully and like a wise
Master Builder, and in so successful a way that the unsound Tenets were beaten
down, and the upholders thereof highly discountenanced: But after Pelagius his
death his Sectators appeared, but under another shape, not altogether so
hideous, for they did not positively deny Original Sin, but so had however,
that the same Doctor took up the Cudgels against those Semipelagians. Arminius
in his days renewed the dispute on the behalf of the Semipelagians, in a time
when all the Reformed Churches both here and abroad quietly and without
disturbance taught the truth of all those Doctrines: The truth was then in
possession of the Pulpits, of Divinity Schools and of Presses, but what when
this Man appeared, the most Famous and Learned Protestant Divines at home and
abroad opposed him, and did write against him: If any one has a mind to know
the shifts and tricks of that Party to strengthen themselves and undermine
their opposers, and to prevent the calling of a General Synod which was sued
for as the best way effectually to maintain truth and oppose falsehood, let him
read the Acts of the Synod of Dort, with the Preface to it, where they had all
the fair play that might reasonably be wished for. But because about these
matters in the eighth Century, disputes did break out again, as it appeared in
the case of Gottescalk, wherein Hinemarus of Rheims and Remigius Archbishop of
Lions with the Churches of his Diocese were highly engaged; these last for, and
the other against Gottescalk, which if any one desires to be well informed of,
let him read the Honest and Excellent account of it given by that worthy and
Eminent Prinate of Ireland, James Usher, which I quoted before.

A thing much to be taken notice of in all these disputes; and which is the
chief Subject of this Chapter, is this, that Arminius and his Followers do hold
the opinions of Pelagians, and Semipelagians; and that Calvin, whom they make
the head against their opinions, and we, hold the same with Austin, Hilarious,
Prosper, Fulgentius and other Orthodox Doctors of the Primitive Church; we
hitherto have sufficiently declared ours; what remains is for me to show what
those Fathers of the Church did hold about these points; but that shall be
briefly, because the trouble of proving it has been saved me by others, who
make good out of the writings of those ancient Fathers, the things now in
question.

First, As to Predestination, Justin. Martyr. dialog. cum Triph. Sect. 2.
God elected us, and was made manifest to them that sought him not. And do you
think O man! that we could ever have understood these things in the Scripture,
except we had received grace by the will of God, of which grace ye (Jews) being
destitute have understood none of them. Another says, Cyprian. de Mort. number. 2.
there is no need of Money, Industry and Man's Hand, but it is the free and
ready gift of God, as freely as the Sun shines, the Fountain waters, the
shower moisteneth, so does the heavenly spirit power it self into us. The great
asserter of Christ's Divinity speaks thus, Athanas. cont. A^^^^n. 4. Page 175.
The Apostle James has taught, of his own will begat he us, with the word of
truth. Therefore of all the regenerate, yea and of all that by creation were
generated, it is the will of God, by the word of God that does create and
regenerate whatsoever pleases him. Let us hear what says another, Ambros. in
Psalm. 118. Sermon. 10.
Perseverance is not in him that wills, nor in him that runs; for it is
not in the power of man, but in God that shows mercy, that thou should be
able to accomplish that which thou have began. Another says, Hieron. ad Ruff.
lib. 1.
Paul and those that are like him, are not elected because they were holy and
unspotted, but they are elected and predestined, that afterward in their
lives in good works and virtues they may be unspotted and holy. These Doctors
attribute it to grace, to the free gift of God, to his own will and pleasure;
perseverance is not in the will or power of man but in Gods mercy, neither were
we elected for our Faith or Holiness, but to be unspotted and holy, all this is
the sense of the fore-quoted Doctors, which agrees with what we said.

But because in Austin's days chiefly, that Heresy sprung up, and that he was
the man who most laid it to heart, and made it his main business to oppose it,
he has written against it more clearly, and most to the full of any. Out of so
many Treatises he has written about it which are so well known, we shall quote
only one or two places. August. de praedest. and great. cap. 13.
Out of those to whom the severity of Justice adjudgeth punishment, according
to the unexpressible mercy of his secret dispensation, he chose out vessels
which he might fit unto honor, both delivering some from wrath to come, and
leaving others to the sentence of Justice. Enchirid. ad Laurent. cap. 99.
And in another place, he has mercy with goodness, he hardens without
injustice, so that he that is freed, may not boast of his merits, neither he
that is damned may complain of any thing but his merits, for grace alone makes
a difference between the redeemed and the lost, whom one common cause derived
from the root, had united together in one lump of destruction. With this
concurred another, when he says, Prosper ad except. genu. resp. ad dub. 9.
Austin by a godly and constant doctrine has abundantly proved that
predestination was to be preached to the Church, in which it is the preparation
of grace, and grace is to be preached, in which is the effect of
predestination, and the foreknowledge of God, wherein he fore-knoweth before
all ages on whom he would bestow his gifts. Which preaching whosoever is
against he is a most open defender of Pelagian Pride. And in another place he
says, from himself, No Catholic does deny the predestination of God. The
faith of predestination is established by many authorities of holy Scriptures;
yet unto it, Ad capit Gall. cap. 1.
it is not lawful to attribute any of the sins of men, who came to their
inclination to sin, not by God's Creation, but by their first Fathers
transgression, from the punishment whereof no man is free, but only by the
grace of our Lord Jesus Christ prepared and predestined in the eternal
counsel of God before the foundation of the world. An excellent testimony about
all these Doctrines by Austin asserted, is given by Hormisda a Bishop of Rome
to a Bishop of Africa, who desired his advise about the Books of Faustus the
Semipelagian, in these words. Epist. ad Possessor.
They know how not only the Roman and African Church, and all the Sons of
promise through all parts of the world do agree with this man's, (Austin)
Doctrine; as in the whole Faith, so in the confession of Grace. But let us come
to another, Fulgent. de incar. and great. in fine.
God who made man, by his predestination, fore-appointed to whom he would give
the gift of illumination to believe, and the gift of perseverance to profit and
persevere, and the gift of glorification to reign; who no otherwise performed
indeed, then he has ordained in his unchangeable will: The truth of which
predestination by which the Apostle witnesses that we are predestined in
Christ before the foundation of the world. If any man refuse to receive with
the belief of the heart, or to speak with the confession of his mouth, if
before the last day of this present life, he does not cast off the stubbornness
of his error, whereby he rebelleth against the true and the living God; it is
plain, he does not belong to the number of those whom God has freely chosen in
Christ, and predestined before the foundation of the world.

There is a two fold predestination, says one, Isidor. Hispalensis.
either of the Elect unto rest, or of the reprobate unto death, both are done
by the Judgment of God: So that he ever causes the Elect to follow heavenly
and inward things; and by forsaking the reprobate, he suffers him to follow
earthly and outward things. Another speaks thus: Anselm. de cencor. praes^. and
praedest.
Predestination is not only of good but it may also be said of evil, as God is
said to do the evil he does not, because he permits it, for he is said to
harden a man when he does not soften him, and to lead into temptation when he
does not deliver; therefore it is not unfit that he should thus predestinate,
whilst he does not amend evil men nor their evil deeds, but yet he is said more
specially to foreknow good things; because in them he makes that they be, and
that they be good: But in evil things he makes but their being, not the evil of
their being. The same Author says farther in another place to this purpose. In
Romans 9.
God did not therefore take mercy on Jacob, because he willed and runned, but
therefore Jacob willed and runned because God had mercy on him. Let it be
enough for thee who yet live by Faith, and not seeing perfectly, but knowing
only in part, to know and believe that God does save none but by free mercy,
nor damn none but by most righteous justice. But why he saves or saves not,
this man rather than that man? Let him search who will look into the great
depths of God's judgments, but withal let him take heed that he does not fall
down headlong. But to come to lower times, let us hear what says Bernard a
good and famous Writer, Bernard. in Cant. Sermon. 14.
My right is the will of the Judge, what more just for merit? What more rich
for reward? May not he do what he will? Mercy indeed is showed to me, but to
thee is done no injury; take that which is thine, and go thy way: If he has
decreed to save me also, why will thou destroy me? take what thou will of thy
merits, extol thy labors, the mercy of God is better than life.

If we descend to the Schoolmen, we can hear them speak at the same rate,
first the Master of Sentences, Pet. Lombard. lib. 1. did. 41. lit. d.
God elected whom he pleased by free mercy, not because they would be faithful,
but that they might be faithful, and he gave them grace not because they were
faithful, but that they might be, for the Apostle says. 1 Cor. 7. I obtained
mercy that I might be faithful; He says not because I was faithful: grace is
indeed given to the faithful, but it is also given first that he might be
faithful: So also he reprobated whom he pleased, not for any future merits, yet
by a most true justice, though hidden from our eyes. The next says, Thom.
Aquin. part. 1. quaest. 23 Art. 5.
It is manifest that grace is an effect of predestination, and that cannot be
put as a cause of predestination which is shut up under predestination: God
would show his goodness on some whom he predestined, in sparing them by way
of mercy, and on those whom he reprobateth in punishing by way of justice, and
this is the reason why he chooses some and reprobateth others, but why he
chooses these unto glory and reprobateth those, there is no reason to be given
but the will of God. Another speaks thus, Bradward. de causa dei lib. 1. cap.
39.
There is no such cause either forbidding the will of God or causing it, by
which an answer may be given, why he loved this man, or hated that man. Two or
three more I shall add, then I have done with this. He concludes, out of St.
Paul, Gorran. in Romans 9.
That both Election and Reprobation depend on Gods good-pleasure, saying
therefore he has mercy on whom he will, because he has freely loved Jacob and
rejected Esau, he has mercy on whom he will by giving grace, and he hardens
whom he will, not by imparting wickedness, but by not giving grace; whereupon
St. Austin, as the Sun in departing far from the earth does harden Ice not by
imparting coldness, but by not giving heat. The next says, I Thom. Campensis
de imit. Christ. lib. 2. cap. 63.
am he that made all Saints, I gave them grace, I bestowed glory, I knew all
their good works, I prevented them in the blessings of my sweetness, I
fore-knew my beloved before all ages: I elected them out of the world, and they
did not pre-elect me; I called them by grace, I drew them by mercy, I led them
thorough many temptations, I poured into them glorious consolations; I gave
them perseverance, etc. I am to be blessed and honored in them all, whom I
have so highly glorified and predestined without any foregoing good works of
their own. The last is one whom some of our Adversaries do set a high value
upon, his words are these, Cassand. consult. art. 18.
The grace of predestination is so greatly commended in the word of God and
Ecclesiastical writers, that those who are endued with faith in Christ and with
good works springing from that faith, may not ascribe these things to
themselves, but unto God and to the grace of his divine predestination and
election, and so may glory in the Lord and not in themselves.

Surely all these men were Calvinians, Irenaeus lib. 1. cap. 24. ad 38. ad lib.
3.33. Hiliar. in Psalm. 48. Pet diacon. de incarn. and. great. Christ. Gregr.
mag. moral. in Job lib. 29. cap. 15. Beda in Romans 9.
and may be by a Metempsycosis he had the Soul of some of them transmitted into
his body, if so, that of Austin was the likeliest, for both were great
asserters of these truths; yet Dr. Tailor says, Austin is the first that
stirred the mudd, if instead of Austin he had named Pelagius he had spoken the
truth, but it is usual for the Wolf to say, the Lamb has troubled the waters.
However it is but an idle notion, but withal spiteful and malicious to give
these Doctrines the name of Calvinism* But we have with us men of all Ages, and
they very considerable: To the same purpose we could bring in others whom for
brevities sake we quote, in the Margin and if I went about to make use of more
quotations on this point I should weary my self, and I am afraid, the Reader
too: Besides that I make this the least part of my plea, but because I promised
it I must perform and that in two parculars more I shall do, first about
free will, to show the judgment of ancient Doctors agreed with ours therein,
the Second shall be about Perseverance.

As to the first we begin with Cyprian, Cyp. cap. de orat. domin.
When we pray that we do not enter into temptation, we are admonished of our
own infirmity and weakness by this prayer, least any man should insolently
exalt himself; Least any man should proudly attribute any thing to himself:
Epist. 1.
And else where, it is God's, it is God's I say, all that we can do, thence we
live and thence is our strength. Another says, Basil. de vita solitar. cap. 17.
We must take heed that whatsoever is well done of us, our soul does ascribe
the causes of our virtue unto the Lord, attributing nothing to our own power. A
third one speaks enough to this purpose, but I shall mention only this, Greg.
Nyssen. de or^t. demin.
Because humane nature being seduced by subtilty, erred from the true judging
of good, and inclined our will to the contrary, all mischief invaded the life
of man, and brought it into the power thereof, etc. And again, man changed the
freedom and power of himself and his own will, with the heavy and noisome
slavery of sin. The next says, Ambros. in proaem. Lucae.
The will of man is prepared of God, and it is God's grace which causes that
God is worshipped of a Saint. It is added by another, Hieron in 6. Joh. 44.
When Christ says, no man can come unto me, he breaks the proud freedom of
will, which if it should go unto Christ, unless that be done which follows
(except my heavenly Father draw him) it shall be in vain and strive in vain.
St. Austin is copious upon this point, yet let this be sufficient: August.
Enchir. ad Laurent. cap. 30. de correp. and great. cap. 12.
Man abusing free will, lost both it and himself, etc. And in another place,
Their will is so much kindled with the holy ghost, that therefore they are able
to work because they will; and therefore they will because God works that
they will. And much more to that purpose, Fulgent. de incarn. and great. cap. 19.
When sin reigns man has free will, but free without God, and therefore
miserably and slavishly free, because not made free by the free gift of God's
mercy, this the Apostle does evidently insinuate, etc. Again, God works that
we work, by whose working in us, all the good that we do, is wrought, of whom
it is said to the Hebrews, let him make you perfect in every good works working
in you that which is pleasing in his sight. Let us hear what Prosper says,
Prosper de voc. gent. lib. 1. cap. 9.
It is most fully declared that all things which belong to the obtaining of
eternal life, without God's grace can neither be began, increased, or
perfected; and any election that boasts of free will, that sentence of the
Apostle does most invincibly withstand, when he says who has made thee to
differ? But we must not omit the evidence of a whole Council: Council. Arausic.
cap. 4.
If any man do affirm that our will does seek God, that we may be purged from
sin, and does not confess that by the infusion of the holy ghost and his
working in us, it is wrought that we should will to be purged, he resists the
holy ghost, saying, by Solomon, The will is prepared of the Lord, and he
resists the Apostle wholesomely teaching, It is God that works in us both
to will and to do of his pleasure.

God says Gregory the Great, Gregor. in Job. lib. 18. cap. 22.
Coming to an unworthy Soul, makes her worthy by coming to her; and works in
her those works which he may reward, though he found nothing in her but that
which he might punish. He is not alone of this opinion, Isidor. sent. lib. 2.
cap. 5.
The profiting of man is the gift of God. Neither can any man be amended of
himself, but of the Lord, for man has not any thing of himself that is good,
whose way is not in his power as the Prophet witnesses, I know Lord that the
way of man is not his own. What Bernard says is very well: Bernar. de lib.
arbit. and great.
they are not my words but the Apostles, who attributes all the good that may
possibly be unto God and not to his own will; even to think, to will and to do,
if then God works these three things in us (that is to think good, to will
it, and to perform it) he works in us, the first indeed without us, the
second with us, and the third by us, for by sending in a good thought, he
preventeth us; by changing our wicked will, he joins it to him by consent, and
by giving power to our consent: This inward worker shows himself outwardly in
our manifest work. A Great Schoolman speaks very well upon the matter. P.
Lombar. ex. Hug. de Sanct. Vict. lib. 2. did. 25. grand lib. 2. did. 26. A.
After sin and before the restoring of grace, the will is oppressed and
overcome by concupiscence, and is weak in evil, and has no grace in good; and
therefore it can sin and it cannot choose but sin, and that damnably. Again,
working grace is that which preventeth the good will, for by it the will of man
is freed and prepared that it may be good, and that effectually it may will
good: But cooperating grace follows the will when it is good in helping it.
This Point we conclude in Cassander's words. Cassan. consult. art. 18.
By which grace there is not created a new will, neither is the will forced
being unwilling; but the will being sick is healed, being depraved is
rectified, and is changed from evil into good, and by an inward kind of motion
is drawn that of unwilling it may become willing, and may freely consent to the
divine calling; and afterward the same grace cooperating it may obey the will
of God, and by the same grace persevering in good works, may also thorough the
same grace enter into the inheritance of the heavenly Kingdom; this Doctrine of
grace and free will, the sounder Schoolmen strongly defended against the
Pelagians, amongst whom was Thomas Bradwarden, called in his time, the profound
Doctor, who wrote an Excellent work, which is called A Sum against
Pelagianism, etc. But I am almost tired out with these Quotations, whereof all
the Authors are for free grace against free will, which is our Plea. They who
have a mind to see more about it may do it out of the Quotations in the
Trenaeus lib. 3. cap. 19. Tacianus Assirius Orat. cont. gentes Chrysolog. Sermon.
114. P^^. diacon. de incarn. and great. cap. 6. Anselm. in Romans 8. Bradward.
causa dei lib. 1. cap. 40.
Margin.

Now we must come to the third thing, The perseverance of Saints, and certainty
of Salvation, wherein we do agree with the Doctors of the Primitive Church.
That Trenae. lib. 5. cap. 9. and 10. and 11.
the Temple of God which is inhabited by the Spirit of the Father, and that the
members of Christ should not be partakers of Salvation, how is it not a most
great blasphemy, etc. Cyprian. de m^r^. lit. and de ^rat. domin. nam. 6.
It is written, says Cyprian, the just shall live by faith; if thou art just
and live by faith, if thou truly believe in God, why since thou art to live
with Christ, and art sure of the Lords promise? Do thou not rejoice that
thou art called, by death unto Christ? And elsewhere, He that has believed in
his name, and is made the Son of God, from that time must begin, both to give
thanks and to profess himself the Son of God. Another says, He Clemen^. Alex.
paedag. lib. 1. cap. 6.
that believes in the Son has eternal life, if then we who have believed have
eternal life, what remains beyond the possession of life eternal. Again, He
says thou art no more a Servant but a Son, if a Son, then also an Heir,
thorough God; what then wants to a Son when he is an Heir? This certainty of
Salvation works an assurance and comfort, which makes one say, Hilar. de
trin. lib. 1.
The soul knowing her own safety, rests in quietness, rejoicing in her hopes,
so much not fearing death, that she accounts it as the way to eternal life. Let
us hear what says another upon the matter: Ambr. in 2 Cor. 1. and Sermon. 15.
He has sealed us, by giving his spirit to us for an earnest, that we may not
doubt of his promises, for if when we were in the state of death he gave us his
spirit, it is not to be doubted but that to us being made immortal, he will add
glory. And in another place, He says well I am confident, for confidence is
the strength of our hope, and an authority of hoping: Therefore hope still, and
no man can make thee ashamed of thy expectation. Our expectation is life
eternal.

As for Austin, he has written at large upon this Subject in his Book, De
Perseverantia Sanctorum, and De Correptione and Gratia: But here we shall only
quote few words, August. in Psalm. 122. and 123.
For we are saved by hope; but because our hope is certain, it is so spoken of
us, as if it were already done. Hereunto we do join what another says,
Bernard. Epist. 107.
O man thou have the justifying spirit for a teacher of this secret, and in the
same witnessing to thy spirit that thou also art the Son of God. Take notice of
the counsel of God in thy justification, for the present justification of thee,
is both a revelation of God's counsel and a certain preparation unto future
glory. The Doctor called profound, having argued and proved perseverance to be
a free gift of God, concludes thus: For these and the like motives it seems
more probable to me, and more to agree with reason and Catholic Doctrines,
that perseverance is not given to merits, but is freely given of God according
to his free grace, free-predestination and free-purpose, as the first working
grace that justifies a sinner. Lastly, to make an end of this, one having
spoken of the Elect and Believer says, Ferus in 1. Joan. 5.
Satan cannot touch him: He may indeed dare to tempt the godly; so likewise he
durst to tempt Christ. Yea, sometimes he drives just men unto a fall, as we see
in David and Peter. But finally, as in Christ he could have nothing, so neither
can he prevail over the Saints, for none can take Christ's sheep out of his
hands, wherefore going to his passion, he recommended all that believed in him
unto his Father. The words of others I omit to quote, only their Basilus de
Spiritu. Sancto. cap. 15. Prosper in Psalm. 114. Cyrill. Alex. Comment. in Isa.
lib. 3. and in Joan. lib. 9. cap. 44. Gregor. in Job lib. 11. cap. 20. and lib.
16. cap. 2. A^selm. in Romans 8.
Names and places I set down in the Margin.

I think I have done enough in this kind to prove that in the matters of grace,
we have the Doctors of the Primitive Church with us, and others in some of the
late Ages; and consequently Calvin is not the Author of such Doctrines, and
that we brought no Innovation into the Church, which aspersion we may justly
retort upon our Adversaries. And to show the more that conformity, we have with
the ancient Catholic Church, I must say in short, how the very same aspersions
by Arminians cast upon us, were by Pelagius and his followers laid to the
charge of St. Austin and they are these. First, That they take away free will
and bring in a Stoical fatality. Secondly, That the make God the author of sin.
Thirdly, They open a gap to despair and slothfulness. Fourthly, They take away
all use of Precepts, Promises, Threatenings; yea and Prayer it self. Fifthly,
That they make God an Impostor, seeing he commands men to repent and believe,
yet does not seriously will their repentance and faith, nor their Salvation,
unto which only faith and repentance can entitle them. Sixthly, That their
whole opinions are against the stream of Antiquity. These were falsely fathered
upon the Doctrine of Austin and other Orthodox Doctors of the Church, as easily
I now can and upon occasion shall ever be ready to prove out of their own
writtings; but this I now omit, not to fill up so much Paper with Quotations,
neither thinking it so material to know what those Fathers believed, as what
the word of God which we have not been wanting to make use of, does declare
upon the matter. Nay, to go up higher, I have showed how it was against St.
Paul's Doctrine objected, Romans 9.
and the Objections by him answered of making God unjust, and men excusable,
out of the necessity of God's Decree; and as these were falsely fathered upon
St. Paul's, afterward on Austin's Doctrine: So with the very same, the truths
we teach are aspersed by our Adversaries, who are men of the same Principles as
the others were. Indeed it is very sad, that whilst a considerable Body of
Papists followers of Jansenius Bishop of Ypres, joined with us in defense of
those matters of grace, a Party of our own should make a desertion and join
with Papists against us: And some of them with as much gall in the Heart and
bitterness against us in Tongues and Pens, as if we were the greatest
Unbelievers and Miscreants in the World; and all this for no other cause than
our asserting of the truths plainly and fully, contained in God's Word.

CHAP. XIV. Of the absurd and dangerous consequences necessarily arising out of
their Doctrines.
AFter they have done their worst against us; they must now give us leave to
retort upon them, but on much better and truer grounds.

First, Their Doctrine of Predestination does quite overturn the Eternal and
Unchangeable decree of God, about Election and Reprobation; for if every man
may believe, repent and be saved if he will himself, then it unavoidably
follows that every man is left unto himself without the bounds of any decree
set unto him; then there can be no eternal, immutable, positive decree binding
either way, Election or Reprobation.

Secondly, It makes the unconstant will of man the ground, of all God's Eternal
and Unchangeable Decrees concerning man: Whereas God only Ephesians. 1.11.
works all things after the counsel of his own will, not according to the
natural inclination of our will, whereby God is subordinated to man, and his
will made to depend upon the will of man.

Thirdly, This makes the Creature Absolute, Independent from the Sovereign
disposing and overruling Providence of the Maker, and makes God a bare
Spectator, not an orderer of humane Actions. Hereupon God must wait upon Men
and not Men upon God, so God is deprived of all disposing Power and overruling
the wills and works of men: His absolute Supremacy over them to save or not,
will be abolished; thus men may save themselves when God will damn, and damn
themselves when God would save: This is to constitute an absolute independent
eternal Being in the wills of men pre-existent to the eternal will of God, both
in Nature and Time, for if the foreknowledge and Decrees, do result from the
will and inclinations of men, then man's inclination and will, does necessitate
and predetermine the most absolute and most free Decrees of God, and raises a
self dependence, which is to make a god of the will of man.

Fourthly, It takes away from God the Praise and freedom of his grace, for if
every man may thus convert and save himself because according to them, those
only are saved who take care to improve the general common grace derived
equally upon all men; what thanks to God then for any special favor, man may
thank himself not God who does no farther save him than he saves himself. This
indeed destroys the nature of the grace of God, in that it does indifferently
communicate it to all. Hence Election, Vocation, Adoption, Justification,
Sanctification, Faith, Conversion, Repentance, Charity are called graces,
because bestowed upon few, and that without any merit of the person. Thus when
a Prince bestows freely a Place, an Office, a Pension upon a man, it is grace
and favor, because not bestowed upon all or upon some other man; farther this
makes Grace and Heaven a purchase of our own, and not a free gift of God, and
makes it subordinate unto our will confining the receiving or rejecting of it
to times and seasons of our own: When alas John 3.8.
the spirit does breath when and where it lists, and subjecting it to several
alterations at our pleasure, whereas it is perpetual and unchangeable in it
self.

Fifthly, It suspendeth the fruit and application of Christ's death, the
effectual working of the spirit, the saving power of God's Ordinances, with the
beginning and progress of Grace; so by these means, our whole Salvation is in
our hands. It gives man liberty to make all inward and outward means of grace
either void or effectual at his pleasure, which overthrows the whole
foundation of Scriptures, which attribute our whole Salvation to God alone, and
gives the lie to God's word, which says, Ephesians. 2.1, 5.
we are dead in trespasses and sins, and so cannot exercise any functions of
life; Joh. 15.5.
That God has quickened us, and not we our selves; That without Christ we can
do nothing, that is without his special grace: And Philip. 2.1^.
God works in us both to will and to do of his good pleasure, and not
according to our will and inclination. That it is 1 Cor. 4.7.
God that makes us to differ one from another. And that we have nothing but
what we did receive: That 1 Cor. 15.10.
by the grace of God only we are what we are; and so many more places to the
same purpose, which wholly overthrow universal sufficient grace.

Sixthly, This puts mankind in as good if no better condition after fall than
before; Adam had only a possibility not to fall, but not to rise after the
fall; but we though naturally born in sin, may after this rate rise, if and
when we please; he had a free will not to sin, yet he did sin, and was not born
in sin, but we who are sinners from the Womb can save our selves if we have a
mind to it, if so, no hurt is happened to us by his fall: On the contrary we
are put in a better condition than before, for thereby Election, Vocation,
Conversion, Faith, Repentance, and every other saving grace are put in our
power, that all these divine soul-saving graces do depend upon our corrupt
wills, and contrary to Scripture are not the Matthew. 13.11. Romans 5.15, 16, 17.
and chap. 11.29.
gifts of God, and does not this give men just occasion to boast and glory in
themselves, whereby the chief end of grace is destroyed, which is to Romans 3.27.
take away boasting from men, and have Ephesians. 1.12, 14. Philip. 1.11.
all things to the praise of the glory of God. Another evil effect of these
errors of theirs is, that they frustrate our Prayers and Thanks-givings and
make trifles of them, for in vain we beg of another that which comes from us,
and is in our own power; in vain we give thanks to another for that which we
have, without him; so we need not thank God for any of his graces, seeing it is
in our power to receive or reject them.

In the next place this unavoidably draws many inconveniences with it. First
of all, it brings in all manner of profaneness and licentiousness, for what
needs a man to care how wickedly he lives for the present if it be in his
power to believe and repent when he will, is not this an encouragement for
profane men to continue longer in sin? Secondly, These opinions are able to
engage a man that has no truth of grace in him, in any villainy and desperate
attempt; he that wants true grace within to restrain him, will quickly run upon
any evil act or course, upon this false presumption that he may presently of
himself repent and be saved after all his sins. Thirdly, This encourages men
to delay and put off repentance, and for the present to neglect the means of
grace and all Christian duties, for what is the chief ground of the common
neglect both of means and works of grace? But this unhappy delusion, that they
may undoubtedly be converted, repent and be saved when they have amind to it;
thus this doctrine of free will, universal sufficient grace opens the door to
all such profane and wicked licentiousness and security, as the hearts of men
can admit.

Farthermore, this makes all men equal, puts them in the same condition whether
Elect or Reprobate, Heathen or Christians, Godly or Ungodly, since all of them
may be saved or damned if they will, for thereby their Salvation is laid in
their hand. Now what can be more derogatory to God's special grace and love,
more uncomfortable to all good Christians, more acceptable to all licentious
persons, more advantageous to Satan and pernicious to mankind, than to remove
the bounds of God's all limiting and immutable decrees, and throw down the
walls, hedges and partitions he has made himself of his special love, and to
lay them common unto all without distinction, and as much as in them lays, to
ruin the order which God has settled and thereby bring in a general confusion?

Again, this takes away repentance and salvation it self, also the hopes and
possibility of repentance, for if our conversion, grace and Salvation, depend
upon our unsettled corrupt wills, who can be saved? If Adam in a state of
Innocence could not preserve himself from falling, when he had power not to
sin, how can we who since his fall, lay under a necessity of sinning, even in a
regenerate state, by any sufficient universal grace or any power of our own,
raise, convert, or save our selves? St. Paul in whom the grace of God did
abound, thought he could not do it: Romans 7.14, 15, 17, etc.
To will is present with me, but how to perform that which is good, I find not:
for the good that I would I do not; but the evil which I would not that I do.
If our Salvation was in our own hands it should soon be lost and forfeited, but
thanks be to God it is in sure hands: John 10.28, 29.
My sheep shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand.
Our saving graces cannot be lost, for they are Acts 13.34.
the sure mercies of David. This also does exclude Infants from Salvation, for
they want knowledge to discern, and will for to desire it, because they know
not what it means.

Moreover, this revives the old Pelagian Error, that a man may live and keep
himself without sin, for if men have such an ability of will, of universal
grace to convert themselves when they are in the state of nature, much more
shall they in the state of grace, when they enjoy the help of God's spirit,
keep themselves free from sin; if once through their strength men have mastered
sin, much more may they totally suppress it being wounded; but Scripture
teaches there is no perfection to be attained to in this life, no perfect man
in the world, Jam. 3.2. and chap. 2.10.
for in many things we offend all, and though we should offend only in one, he
who offends in one is guilty of all. The beloved disciple of Christ and in
whom his grace abounds, says, 1 John 1.8.
If we say that we have no sin we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in
us. Their opinions do cross one another, for to put in man's will to keep
himself from sin if he wills, does not agree with their doctrine against
perseverance, for it is to be supposed no man is willingly damned; the desire of
well being is in the Creature, and to be against perseverance does continually
bring a servile fear upon men, and always keeps them under uncertainty as to
their future state, contrary to that of St. Paul, Romans 8.15
Ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear: Now says another
Apostle, 1 John 4.18.
Fear has torment, he that fears is not made perfect in love, for perfect
love casts out fear.

This also makes grace of a larger extent than the decree of God's Election
and the inward or outward means of grace; That is, the effect is more general
than its cause, which is a very great absurdity, God has not actually decreed
to save, nor by a call to offer soul-saving means of grace to all men; for if
it were so as they would have it, I see no reason but that all men should be
converted and saved, because God's decrees and his words are always true, and
never fall to ground for want of execution; but Scripture and Experience teach
the contrary. Wherefore either we must admit an universal Election of all men
to life, which necessarily implies an universal Salvation of all Men, or else
we must, disclaim a Chimaera of universal grace which may well be called a
Monster in Divinity. Another ill consequence of this universal grace is, that
it makes this pretended grace (which is not sufficient to Salvation, seeing it
does not produce it) Mother to true saving grace which is of a quite different
nature; but such is the cause, such the effect. Matthew. 7.16.
Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? Either this universal
grace is saving grace which cannot be, for all men would be saved by it, or
else it cannot be the Mother or Author of true saving grace, which so far
differs from it in kind or nature: We own there are God's common temporal
favors, whereof Reprobates are made partakers, because living in the visible
Society of the Elect, they thereby receive some outward benefits which in that
respect may be called universal graces; but the question is about effectual and
saving grace, such as inward calling, Conversion, Justification,
Sanctification, Faith, Repentance, etc. which are peculiar to God's Elect and
not extended to Heathen and other Infidels, who are no part nor members of the
visible Church, much less of the universal Church which, promises and saving
graces do only belong to; so that without the Pales of it, no true saving grace
to be had: to the end that universal grace be sufficient it must contain other
particular graces as Faith; if it be Faith it ceases to be universal, for it
does not belong to all, or else what our Savior says, Luke 18.8.
when the Son of Man comes, shall he find faith in the Earth? Were but a tale,
if it be not faith it signifies nothing, and will do no good; it is not
sufficient, for Heb. 11.6.
without faith it is unpossible to please God.

If this be a true universal grace, it must be a grace for every thing, or else
it is not universal, it must unfold to us all the mysteries of God's
proceeding's, specially those which relate to Salvation: as for us who do not
believe it, when we inquire into things, the last reason that can be given us,
is the will of God; no higher can be assigned, therewith we are satisfied and
do acquiesce, we go no further, for thereby a stop is put to all our queries:
But for them, that universal grace gives an apparent cause even in men
themselves, besides the absolute disposing will of God; namely the prevision of
their Faith, their perseverance, their good use of grace received, their
original and actual sins and final impenitency; why one man is predestined to
salvation not another? So it unveils to them those high and unsearchable
mysteries of Gods decrees which put St. Paul to a nonplus, or else he had not
been stricken with such amazing admiration as made him cry out, Romans 11.33.
O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding-out. Surely he wanted
that universal grace, or else he would not have thought those judgments so
incomprehensible, though I would have the Adversaries of the truth to know,
that St. Paul wanted no grace, he had a sufficient grace, 2 Cor. 12 9.
My grace is sufficient unto thee: But that sufficient grace in Paul was for
another end, it never went so far as Arminians pretends theirs does; yet they
must give us leave to think, he was inferior in grace to none of them, nor
David who says, Psalm. 36.6.
thy judgments are a great deep.

I showed how Arminians have renewed several of Pelagius his Errors; but I did
not fasten upon them his denying Original Sin, which I must now do. Contra
Tilen. page 388.
Corvinus one of their great men says, that, with Arminius, orginal sin has
not the nature of sin or fault properly so called, and Arminius himself
affirms that it is wrongfully said, Page 174.
That original sin makes a man guilty of death. And one of our own, who is
highly esteemed by his own Party in his Book Vnum Necessarium does expressly
deny original sin and the imputation thereof, and takes a great deal of pains
to answer arguments drawn out of Scripture, and experimental reasons to prove
it; and what he had written, he goes about to justify in his answer to the
then Bishop of Rochester's Letter which he had written to show him his Error.

Here and there I showed how about these matters Arminians do join with Papists
and Pelagians against us: Now I say, they do so with Socinians; so no wonder if
they have and still usher in Socinianism: For both Arminians and Socinians do
affirm that the causes of predestination are not in God but in us: That he does
not predestinate to Salvation any certain or particular persons, and that
predestination may be changed and frustrated; also that the^e is a free will to
good in us. And as to Providence, that God has not determined contingencies,
nor foreseen future contingents and such others as Arminians have borrowed from
Socinians, as in the mistakes concerning the high point of justification,
Christ's satisfaction, etc. Then they deny the knowledge and confession of the
mystery of the Trinity to be absolutely necessary to Salvation, and that the
Doctrine of the three persons of the Godhead, specially of Christ's being God
from Eternity, are not a fundamental Article of our Faith, as affirmed in their
Apolog. Vindic. and Respons. ad except. Leyd. nay in vindic. cap. 7. lib. 1.
page 37, 38. With Socinians and some Anabaptists they falsely say that the
Doctrine of the Trinity began in the time of the Council of Nice, and they are
so good friends that in the same Apol. and Vindic. they affirm Socinians to be
Pious, nay most Pious Men, whom all Protestants ought to take for example of
Piety; wherefore no wonder if they say we ought to keep Communion with them;
that is, Socinians: Some of them say the Father to be Essentiantem and the Son
Essentiatum and subordinate to the Father. In few words that most of the
Arminian Doctors do in the Article of the Trinity, which they make to be of no
great moment go hand in hand with Socinians, has clearly been made out by
Vedclius, Part 2. Arcanorum Armin. and what I have here charged them with and
other things too, I am able to make good out of their public writings, as the
Apology, Vindic. and out of the works of their most approved eminent Authors,
as Worstius, whom they would have had promoted to be Divinity Professor at
Leyden after Arminius's death, Episcopius the chief manager of their Affairs in
the Synod of Dort, Curcelaeus, etc.

But all these and more too, ill consequences in matters of Doctrine, I now
must conclude with the bad influence it has upon life and conversation. It is
too true as we find it by experience, that there are multitudes of wretches
kept in their carnal security, by a persuasion that there is an universal grace
offered unto all, by which they may repent and believe when they will; this
makes them resolve to enjoy the pleasures of sin a little longer, and then they
will receive and entertain grace, and so, easily get to Heaven, which is a
great encouragement to all wickedness; but it suits with the nature and desire
of wicked, presumptuous and profane sinners, who though they were not fully
persuaded of it, yet for them it is a pretense to continue in sin. It Is said of
one Thompson, a great propagator of Arminianism, that when he was in his fits
of intemperance, if any one minded him of the wrath of God threatened against
such courses, he would answer, I am a child of the devil to day, but I have
free will, and to morrow I will make my self a child of God. Jansenius has
made this general observation, that the Pelagians were generally loose in their
lives which he takes abundance of good Pains to prove; and I conceive it
cannot be too much considered in this controversy, because Pelagius urged
nothing more vehemently than this, that the extolling of the grace of God and
lessening the liberty of man's will, is the readiest way to destroy all Piety.
By those that for a considerable time have conversed amongst Papists, it is
observed how the Jansenists are the best moral livers amongst them, of a much
better life and conversation than the rest; so it cannot but be taken notice of
that amongst us the greatest sticklers for Arminianism, even amongst some of
the Clergy, are the proudest most vicious, Ambitious, Voluptuous, Drunkards,
profane, livers of any, making little or no conscience to seek the glory of
God, to feed their flocks, amongst which they seldom are resident, except in
sheering time, for to feed they care not so much as to fleece the Flock, making
not much conscience of performing Pastoral Duties, being more for wealth and
preferment, than for the good of souls: If their Doctrine be good, why are
their lives and actions so vicious? I speak for the generality, their practice
contradicts what they would have us to believe of their Doctrine; their bad
lives they would shelter under the notion of a good Doctrine, the goodness of
their Religion must be a cloak; but we with a good life would, as much as the
frailty and corruption of our nature can permit, endeavor to credit the
doctrine we profess, and because we will not run into the same excesses as
others do, we presently are by them branded with the name of precise and morose
Puritans. If they do well, they attribute it to themselves, to the right use
they make of their free will, to their own will and inclination: But if in us
there be any thing better than in others, we wholly (as it is most due)
attribute it to free grace, the glory of all we return to God and not to any
will of ours, for no good is done in or by us, but what comes from God's
free grace, to which, specially in matter of Salvation, we can never attribute
too much, nor too little to our own strength: So that whilst their principles
lead them to looseness and licentiousness, ours, or rather Gods in us, lead us
to holiness and virtuous practices, and if thorough the corruption of our
nature they do not as it should, we confess it ought so to be. Let them show us
their faith by their works, for by the fruit we judge of the Tree. Now bad
actions and a vitiout life do naturally and necessarily flow from their
principles, and whilst, as I said before, 2 Pet. 2.19.
they promise others liberty, they themselves are the servants of corruption.

Now if there be such an universal sufficient grace imparted to all men,
whereby they may be saved if they will; why then from the Creation till now
have not the effectual means of saving grace been imparted alike? which if so,
then all or most had been saved; which not being it must proceed from a want
either of will or of power; I cannot believe it is for want of a will, for
though people, out of their own corruption, be willing enough to procrastinate
repentance, and like Sampson, be lulled a sleep in their Dalilah's bosom, yet
when they hear or see the Philistines, Judge. 16.19.
the approaches of death, dangerous sicknesses, heavy afflictions and terrors
of Conscience are coming upon them, surely none are so prodigal of their own
Souls, or so desirous of damnation, but would unfeignedly desire to be saved,
Numb. 23.1
let me die the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like his, was
the desire of that wicked false Prophet, Balaam. And as Sampson would have
drawn up together all his forces, to have overcome his Enemies, he found his
strength was gone; The Lord was departed from him. So those sinners who were
lulled a sleep with those pretty fancies of a power to repent, believe and be
saved, when it comes to the push, they find there is no such thing in them as
they were made to believe. In Sampson, his strength was gone, for once he had
it; but that free will and power which Arminians do brag of, no man ever had:
Therefore at last they must be convinced how in man is no such a power whereby
to be saved when he will.

Now to sum up all in few words: Horrible absurdities follow on the Arminian
opinions, some whereof they acknowledge, and others are bound on their back by
unavoidable consequences: Namely that the fruit of Christ's death does
absolutely depend upon the accidental assent of man's free will, that
notwithstanding his death, it was possible and very contingent that all men had
perished, That no soul had been free from Hell by his Blood; That God should
never have had any Church at all; That now by virtue of his death, true grace
is given to all; That all Pagans as well under the Law as the Gospel, who never
heard of Scripture, are truly reconciled to God by the death of his Son; That
all Infants, even of Heathens, who die before the years of discretion are saved
by Christ; That in no man is any original sin, but every one when he is born is
put in the state of Innocence; That Baptism is not necessary, for no sin is
therein remitted, because there is none then to be remitted.

CHAP. XV. How Arminianism is contrary to the Doctrine of the Church of England.
WIth a sort of men, namely, those that are zealous, for the Religion of their
Fathers, and true Sons of the Church of England, I make no doubt but that this
will be a weighty and prevailing Argument, which for their sake and information
before I have done, I hope by the grace of God to make good, and thereby to
show the disingenuity and design of those who to impose upon several people,
have the face to affirm Arminianism to be the Doctrine of the Church of England
which is so contrary to truth.

To understand this well, it must be explained what is meant by the Doctrine of
the Church; it is not the opinions of some corrupt Members of the Church, whom
that Mother disowns as spurious, because fallen from her Principles and having
set up Errors of their own, which she never taught them, though they would
father them upon her; she has fed them with pure and sincere milk, which their
own ill constitution has turned into Poison. But what we call the true
Doctrine of the Church is that which was received, believed and taught in the
very beginning of the Reformation from errors and abuses of the Church of Rome,
and without alteration by her self, lasted for above threescore years after,
till a party here combined to bring in erroneous innovations of their own: In
few words we call that the Doctrine of the Church of England, which concerning
these controverted points is contained in the 39 Articles, in the Common Prayer
Book, the Book of Homilies, and the Catechism of Edward the 6th. These are the
general, public, and authentical Records and Evidences of the Faith and
Doctrine of the Church of England; and we shall not want the Testimony of the
most Eminent and famous Doctors thereof to prove what we say. So then we shall
make it appear, how Arminiamsm is contrary to all this, I mean, in every one of
these we shall find Testimonies against it.

First of all, to begin with the Articles of Faith. We have the 17th. about
Predestination in these Words. Predestination to life is the everlasting
purpose of God, whereby before the Foundation of the World was laid he has
constantly decreed by his Counsel secret to us, to deliver from Curse and
Damnation those whom he has chosen in Christ, and to bring them unto
everlasting Salvation, etc. Let the whole be read with Attention, and what we
have asserted about that Point will be found therein to be contained; as the
eternity of God's Decree, everlasting Purpose, its immutability has constantly
decreed, etc. But because, if I should point at every Word confirming what I am
about proving out of this Article, it would take up too much time. To do it
more effectually, I shall make use of another Man's Pen, I mean of Mr. Thomas
Rogers, a Man beyond exception in the Case, who was a Chaplain to Archbishop
Bancroft. He has written an Analysis upon all the 39 Articles which he does
dedicate to the Archbishop, and the Book is licensed and printed by Authority.
The Doctrines contained in every Article, he reduces under several Heads and
Propositions, which he proves out of Scripture; and these Propositions he, in
his Epistle Dedicatory, affirms to be maintained by the Church of England;
which, if it had not been true, he would not have had the Face to have said so
in Print to the Primate of the whole Kingdom. To add a greater weight to what
he writes, I must warn the Reader he was no Puritan, nor Friend to them, as it
appears out of his Book, and so no Calvinist, to make use of their Words. He
out of this 17th. Article draws ten Propositions; the 1st. That there is a
Predestination of Men unto everlasting Life. 2. Predestination has been from
everlasting: Here is the eternity. 3. They which are predestined unto
Salvation cannot perish: This is Perseverance, and against the Apostasy of
Saints. 4. Not all Men, but certain, are predestined to be saved: Here is a
certain number of Chosen and Elect 5. In Christ Jesus, of the mere Will and
purpose of God, some are elected, and not others, unto Salvation: Here are
Election and Rebrobation, and no outward Motive in God but his mere Will and
Purpose. In the 6th. and 7th. Propositions, he makes the outward Calling by the
Word, and inward by the Holy Ghost, the Justification by Faith of those that
are predestinate, their Sanctification by the Holy Ghost, and Glorification in
the Life to come, to be infallible Effects of free Election. Take notice also,
how in his Proofs of the first Proposition, he makes use of the Examples of
Abel and Cain, Isaac and Ishmael, Jacob and Esau, as Examples of Election and
Reprobation. And amongst those whom he condemns as Adversaries to this Truth
(for of the Truth he asserts in every Proposition, he names those that are
against it,) he expresses those that say, how some are appointed to be saved
but none to be damned. And upon the 4th. Proposition he condemns those who
say, no certain Company be fore-destined unto eternal Condemnation. Upon his
5th. Proposition he condemns of Impiety (that is his Word) those who say, that
Man makes himself eligible for the Kingdom of Heaven; those who say, that God
beheld in every Man whether he would use his Grace well, and believe the Gospel
or no, and as he saw a Man affected, so he did predestinate, choose, or refuse
him. And those that say, that besides God's Will, there was in him some other
Cause why he chose one, and cast off another. O Arminians! here by a true Son
of the Church, according to the Doctrine of the Church, you are charged with
Impiety for your Opinions. More of this is to be seen in the Book, which for
Brevities sake I omit. One Evidence more of a true Son of the Church, I shall
make use of upon this point, which also proves our 13th. Chapter in the very
Words: Reply to Fisher, p. 275.
Although our Tenet concerning predestination, be no other than St. Austin and
his Scholars maintained against the Pelagians, says Dr. Francis White, Dean of
Carlisle. As to Mr. Rogers's Book, something else I shall add, how therein in
matter of Predestination he says, as do all the Churches Militant and Reformed
with a sweet consent testify and acknowledge. Then all such Churches agree
against Arminians in these points.

For Free Will we must read the 10th. Article. The Condition of Man after the
fall of Adam is such, that he cannot turn and prepare himself by his own
natural Strength and good Works to Faith and calling upon God; wherefore we
have no power to do good Works pleasing and acceptable unto God, without the
Grace of God preventing us, that we may have a good will and working with us,
when we have that good will. This is plain enough as observed by Rogers, how
Man cannot do any good Work before he be regenerated and converted: And he
declares Adversaries to this Truth, all such as hold, that naturally there is
free will in us; and that Man has freewill to perform spiritual and heavenly
things. Again, that Men believe not, but of their own Free Will: That it is in
a Man's Free Will to believe, or not to believe, to obey or disobey the Gospel
of Truth preached. This is the Doctrine we assert, in as plain and proper Words
as can be expressed. And on his 3d. Proposition upon the same Article, he
brings in the very same Texts we make use of for that purpose: As, Acts 15.^.
God purifieth man's heart; Phil. 2.13.
works in us both the will and the deed; Romans 8.2^.
the Spirit helps our infirmities: for we know not what to pray for as we
ought. 1 Cor. 6.7.
Such were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are
justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God, etc. All
this against Free Will, and for God's free effectual Grace.

As to the certainty of Salvation and for Perseverance, it is contained in the
already-quoted 17th. Article, where it is said, God has constantly decreed by
his Counsel secret to us, to bring those he has chosen in Christ and by Christ
to everlasting Salvotion. Whence it does follow, that certainly and infallibly
such shall be brought to Salvation, or else God could not execute that which he
has decreed to do, which is Blasphemy. Now the Adversaries are for Mutability
and in constancy of Salvation, which certainly this Article does cross; for it
induces a certain and constant Salvation, and a constant Decree of Election,
constantly bringing to Salvation; which must be by way of Perseverance in the
State of Grace: But they by inducing this Apostasy, and that Men, though
elected, may have leave to fall from Salvation if they will, make an Election
which follows a Man upon condition of his foreseen Perseverance, a strange
Election that waits upon Man; to see whether he will give to himself a final
Perseverance by his own Free Will; an Election by which no Man is actually
elected until he be no more, that is, after his death. In this Article the
Church has another way to teach the certainty of Salvation, which is, to go
upon the same Grounds St. Paul does, when he says by Particulars to make the
General sure. Romans 8.29.3.
Whom he did foreknow, them he also did predestinate to be made like to the
Image of his Son. Whom he did predestinate, them he also called; whom he
called, them he also justified; and whom he justified, them he also glorified.
According to this Foundation in the said Article are these Words: Wherefore
they which be endued with so excellent a Benefit of God, be called according to
God's purpose, by his Spirit working in due season, they through Grace obey the
Calling: They be justified freely; they be made Sons of God by Adoption; they
be made like unto the Image of his only begotten Son Jesus Christ; they walk
religiously in good works, and at length, by God's Mercy, they attain to
everlasting Felicity. Here are also the Particulars by which that general
bringing to Salvation is perfected: so that to join both together, it is but
one and the same; and from first to last there is such an indissoluble
Connection, that he who is elected to eternal Life shall infallibly have it.
Upon this certitude and assurance it is, that St. Paul concludes nothing can
deprive us of eternal Life, because nothing can separate us from the love of
God, which is the Ground of our Happiness. Wherefore he defieth any thing or
person to do it, though Arminians undertake to accept of the Apostle's
Challenge, not caring how they come within his Defiance: For they seem to
answer, that there are many, or some things, that can separate us from the love
of God in Christ; though after and before a long Enumeration, St. Paul concludes,
In all things these we are more than conquerours: And Job will trust in God,
John 13.15.
though he kill him. Now that which makes us to Conquer is not our own
Free Will, but it is God that loved us. In conformity to this, in the same
Article it is said, The consideration of Election does greatly establish in the
Saints, and confirm their Faith of eternal Salvation to be enjoyed through
Christ. And the same Interpreter upon the 17th. Article, in his 3d.
Proposition, out of the Words constantly decreed, does infer this; Wander then
do they from the truth, which think that the very Elect, totally and finally,
may fall from Grace and be damned, etc. I think this is very clear for us. And
in the latter end of his 8th. Proposition, he condemns those who call the
Doctrine of Predestination a licentious Doctrine.

As to the point of Justification, which is a Fundamental Article of our
Religion, and much corrupted by Arminians; the xi. Article of the 39. says, We
are accounted Righteous before God, only for the Merit of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, by Faith, and not for our own Works and Deservings. These last
Words do reach Arminians as well as Papists; for free Will, Faith,
Perseverance, right use and improvement of Means, do come under the Word
Deservings. There is then nothing of Man; and Rogers, in the Proofs of his 1st.
Proposition, explains it thus, By his only Righteousness we are justified. It
expresses only Christ's Righteousness, and excludes any thing else. But I must
not be too long upon this. Out of what has been said, I hope it does appear,
how of the 39 Articles, those which speak about these Matters, are clearly for
us against Arminians.

Now we must come to the Liturgy or Common Prayer Book, which now and then, and
in several places, does strike against those Errors, and for the Truth. And as
the Church teaches us those Doctrines by Articles of Faith, so in the Liturgy
she does confirm it by Practice. But before I come to it, I must take notice of
some Passages in the Catechism, which is also a public Record and Evidence of
the Doctrine of the Church: Know this, that thou art not able to do these
things of thy self, nor to walk in the Commandments of God, and to serve him
without his special Grace. See also the Answer to the first Question about the
Lord's Prayer, I desire, etc. Read the Answer to the 4th. Question, and by
God's help so I will, etc.

Now to come to Particulars out of the Prayer Book. In one place we have thus:
Collect on Christ's Nativity.
Grant that we being regenerate, and made thy Children by Adoption and Grace,
may daily be renewed by thy holy Spirit. Those Benefits we receive as effects
of Grace, not of our Free Will; and our being renewed is by God's Holy Spirit,
not by our Will: If it be by one, it is not by the other; because in Matters of
Salvation, Grace and natural Strength are opposed. In another place. Collect
upon Ash Wednesday.
we beseech God to create and make in us new and contrite Hearts. Then we
cannot have it of our selves; and the Word to create, shows it to be beyond
the power of any Creature, it is the Work only of the Creator. Elsewhere we
own, Collect on 2d. Sunday in Lent.
to have no power of our selves to help our selves. If we have a Free Will we
have a Power. Again, Collect on Monday and Tuesday in Easter week.
As by thy special Grace preventing us, thou do put into our Minds good
Desires, so by thy continual help, we may bring the same to good effect. This
is plain and full against Arminians: If there be good Thoughts in our Mind,
good Desires in our Heart, it is God alone that puts it therein: By what
Motive, and upon what Account? Not for any thing in us, but by his Grace; nay,
his special, not a common universal Grace, not for our Faith, Repentance, good
Works, right use of Means, but by his special Grace, preventing Grace, before
we can think and desire. But this is not all; for as the beginning is from God,
as are Desires, so is the Progress; for we pray for his continual help, so also
is the end, that we may bring the same good Thoughts and Desires to good
effect: Without that help nothing does, or can come to any good. We have more
than this to show: Collect on 4th. Sunday after Easter.
Almighty God, who alone can order the unruly Wills and Affections of sinful
Men, grant unto thy people, that they may love the thing which thou
command-est, and desire that which thou do promise. We are all sinful Men,
even God's People: Our Wills and Affections are unruly; where then lays their
Freedom? They are obstinate Slaves to their Passions, therefore called unruly:
None but God can order them; nothing under a Divine Power can influence them to
what is good; nay, in things that are natural to them, as to love, and to
desire. Nothing seems more natural than Love and Desire, nothing more free; yet
here we see our Wills cannot love that which God commands, or desire what he
promises, except God makes them do it. Surely these are mortal Wounds to
Free Will. Furthermore, we cannot so much as to think any good thing but by the
Spirit of God: For St. Paul says, of our selves we cannot have a good Thought;
so the Church which believes his Doctrine, says to God, Collect on 5th.
Sunday after Easter.
Grant to us, that by thy holy Inspiration, we may think those things that be
good. This is of Grace, and not by Nature; therefore, Collect on 1st. Sunday
after Trinity.
we can do no good thing without thee; grant us the help of thy Grace, that we
may please thee both in will and deed. God puts into our Hearts to do Duties
and to perform them well: Collect on 3d. Sunday after Trinity.
Thou have given us a hearty desire to pray. We pray God to grant Collect on
Ascension day, and Collect on Annunciation day, in the Prayer in time of War
and Tumult, amongst the Thanksgivings.
that we may in Heart and Mind ascend into the Heavens. Surely it is to deny
those Prayers, if one denies the effectual Power of God on the Will of Man. In
another place, Almighty God, etc. whose power no Creature is able to resist, in
Spirituals as in Temporals.

But I must not much longer stand upon this, for the Stream runs strong that
way: only few places more I shall quote; as that wherein we own Collect on 4th.
Sunday after Trinity.
God to be our Ruler and Guide, and beseech him to be so. In another we say,
Collect on 6th. Sunday after Trinity. and Collect on 7th. Sunday after Trinity.
Pour into our Hearts such Love toward thee. And we pray Collect on 14th
Sunday after Trinity.
for increase of Faith, Hope and Charity. And almost in every Collect we pray
to God to rule our Hearts; and in one place to work upon and move our Wills, in
these Words: Collect on 25th. Sunday.
Stir up, we beseech thee, O Lord, the Wills of thy People. They are not free,
nay they are asleep and dead to every good thing, except thou be pleased to
stir them up. The Question is about the Will, and here the Will is named. God
may well rule the Heart; for 2d. Collect on Good Friday.
by his Spirit the whole Body of the Church is governed. In the Church-Prayers
we own he rules the Hearts of Kings: 1st. and 2d. Collect on the Communnion.
Rule the Heart of thy Servant the King: The Hearts of Kings are in thy Rule
and Governance, and thou do dispose and turn them as it seems best to thy
godly Wisdom: We humbly beseech thee to dispose and govern the Heart of thy
Servant, our King, that in all his Thoughts, Words and Works, he may ever seek
thy Honor and Glory. If Men have Free Will and Power to do those things, as to
purify themselves, why do we pray for them? It Is in vain for us to pray to God
to do for us that which we can do our selves. But if therein we want his
Assistance, then we must need want that Power. I shall conclude with two or
three places out of the Litany; where it is prayed for the King, That his Heart
may be ruled in the Faith, Fear, and Love of God. In another place, That the
Church may be called, and universally governed in the right way; and, That God
would bring into the way of truth all such as have erred and are deceived. Here
the Church does plainly acknowledge the Efficacy of God's Grace on the Wills
and Hearts of Men; for when we pray that God's Grace may work such Effects,
it is owned such Effects to be the proper Works of God's Grace. One thing more I
shall take notice of, and it is this: In a Prayer are these Words; We beseech
thee for all sorts and conditions of Men, that thou would be pleased to make
thy ways known unto them. Hence we see, how Men cannot of themselves know God's
Ways, but it is God that makes them known unto them; therefore we therein
beseech God to do it: Which if it were not proper for God alone, the Prayer
would be in vain. Hence we also learn the Sense of the Church, as to the
signification of the word all used in Scripture, as it ought to be the Object
of our Prayers, and then by a consequence apply it to those for whom Christ
died, against an universal Redemption in their way; for in the Collect it is
not said, for every single and individual Man, but for all sorts and conditions
of Men.

Now to proceed. We should bring something out of the Book of Homilies, and of
the authorized Catechism of Edward the 6th. As to the first take notice of the
following places out of the Edition quoted in the Margin. London, 1623. Part.
1. page 8. Ephesians. 2.
St. Paul in many places painteth us out in our own Colors, calling us the
Children of the Wrath of God when we were born: Saying also that we cannot
think a good Thought of our selves; much less can we we say or do well of our
selves, etc. And we be of our selves of such Earth, Page 10.
as can bring forth nothing but Weeds, Nettles, Brambles, Briars, Cockle and
Darnel; we have neither Faith, Charity, Hope, Patience, Chastity, nor any thing
else that good is, but of God; and therefore these Virtues are called there,
the Fruits of the Holy Ghost, and not the Fruits of Man.

In another place: Of our selves and by our selves, we have no Goodness, part
1. p. 11. and Part 2. p. 181, 182, 183.
Help nor Salvation, but contrariwise Sin, Damnation, and Death everlasting --
Our Salvation comes only by Christ: We are all become unclean, but are not able
to cleanse our selves, nor to make one another of us clean. We are by nature
Children of God's Wrath, but we are not able to make our selves the Children
and Inheritors of God's Glory, etc. He is the God, who of his own Mercy saves
us, and sets out his Charity and exceeding Love toward us, in that of his
own voluntary Goodness, when we perished, he saved us, and provided an
everlasting Kingdom for us: And all these Heavenly Treasures are given us, not
for our Desert, Merit, or good Deeds, which of our selves we have none, but of
his mere Mercy freely. Does not this wholly and only attribute our Salvation to
the free Grace of God in Christ, and consequently excludes any thing in or
from us, to move God to be so gracious to us?

As to the great point of our Justification before God, in the Sermon of the
Salvation of Mankind by only Christ our Savior from Sin and Death everlasting,
are these Words: But our Justification does come freely by the Mercy of God of
so great and free Mercy, that whereas all the World was not able of themselves,
to pay any part toward their Ransom, it pleased our heavenly Father of his
infinite Mercy, without any our Deserts, to prepare for us the most precious
Jewels of Christ's Body and Blood, etc. And further, to show there is nothing
of ours, Part 2. p. 172.
it is said elsewhere, It is of the free Grace and Mercy of God, by the
Mediation of the Blood of his Son Jesus Christ, without Merit or Deserving on
our part; Part 2. p. 81, 82.
that our Sins are forgiven us; that we are reconciled and brought again into
his Favor, and made Heirs of his Heavenly Kingdom. And as to the Certainty and
Immutability of our Election, it is said in another place, Let us by such
Virtues as ought to spring out of Faith, show our Election to be sure and
stable, Part 1. p. 28.29.
etc. And elsewhere we read this: The holy Man, Simon, says, Part 2. p. 152.
that Christ is set forth for the fall and rising again of many in Israel. As
Christ Jesus is a fall to Reprobates, which yet perish through their own
Defaults; so is his Word, yea the whole Book of God, a cause of Damnation unto
them through their Incredulity, etc. Furthermore, Christ Jesus, the Prophets,
the Apostles, Page 16.
and all the true Ministers of his Word, yea every jot and tittle in the Holy
Scripture have been, is, and shall be for evermore the Savor of Life unto
eternal Life, unto all those whose Hearts God has purified by true Faith, etc.
God of his mercy and special Favor toward them whom he has appointed to
everlasting Salvation, has so offered his Grace especially, and they have
received it so fruitfully, that although by reason of their sinful living
outwardly, they seemed before to have been the Children of Wrath and Perdition;
yet now the Spirit of God mightily working in them, unto the obedience to God's
Will and Commandments; they declare by their outward Deeds and Life, in the
showing of Mercy and Charity, which cannot come but of the Spirit of God, and
his special Grace, that they are the undoubted Children of God, appointed to
everlasting Life, etc.

For a further confirmation of this, it is said, The reasonable and Godly, as
they must certainly know and persuade themselves, Part 2. p. 172.
that all Goodness, all Bounty, all Mercy, all Benefits, all Forgiveness of
Sins, and whatsoever can be named good and profitable, either for the Body or
for the Soul, do come only of God's Mercy and mere Favor, and not of
themselves. So, etc. p. 199. we have thus: It is the Holy Ghost, and no other
thing, that does quicken the Minds of Men, stirring up good and godly Motions
in their Hearts, which are agreeable to the Will and Commandment of God; such
as otherwise of their own crooked and perverse nature, they should never have
-- Man of his own Nature is carnal, corrupt, and naught, sinful and disobedient
to God, without any spark of Goodness in him, without any virtuous or godly
motion, only given to evil thoughts and wicked deeds; as for the works of the
spirit, the fruits of faith, charitable and good motions, if he have any at all
in him, they proceed only of the holy ghost, who is the only worker of our
sanctification, and makes us new men in Jesus Christ. And page 219. his power
and wisdom compel us to take him for God Omnipotent, having all thing in his
subjection, and will have none in Council with him, nor any to ask the reason
of his doing, for he may do what likes him, and none can resist him, for he
works all things in his secret judgment, to his own pleasure, yea even the
wicked to damnation, says Solomon.... David would make answer for all, know
ye, for surely even the Lord is God, he has made us and not we our selves....
Not to us, O Lord! not to us, but to thy name give all the thanks, for thy
loving mercy.... Verily the holy prophet Esaias bears record, and says, O
Lord, it is then of thy goodness that has wrought all our works in us, not we
our selves.... St. Paul brings in his belief, We be not, says he, sufficient
of our selves as of our selves once to think any thing; but all our ableness is
of God's goodness, for he it is in whom we have all our being, our living and
moving. And page 228. It is he that preventeth our will and disposes us
thereunto: That is, as said before, Faith, Charity, and Repentance. And p. 229.
For without his secret and lively inspiration, can we not once so much as speak
the name of our mediator... It is he that purges and purifieth the mind by his
secret working.... He lightneth the heart, etc. And p. 263. We must beware and
take heed, that we do in no wise think in our hearts, imagine or believe that
we are able to repent aright, or to turn effectually unto the Lord by our own
strength... For this cause although Jeremiah had said before, If thou return, O
Israel, return unto me; yet afterward he says, Turn thou me, O Lord and I
shall be turned, etc.

Why should I longer insist upon this which is so full and so clear; let those
that have a mind to know more of it read the First and Second Parts of the
Homilies of the misery of Man, with the Homilies of Christ's Nativity, Passion,
and Resurrection. The first on Whitsunday, the First, Second and Third part of
that on Rogation-week; and the First part of that of Repentance. And as to the
points of our Election, Vocation, Justification, Sanctification and Salvation,
besides the foresaid, let them read the First, Second and Third parts of the
Homilies of Salvation and Faith. And out of all they shall find that there is
an eternal and immutable predestination of certain Men unto eternal Life out of
mere grace and free-mercy; and a passing by or reprobation of others to eternal
Death out of Gods mere pleasure. That there is no free will or sufficient grace
communicated unto all men, whereby they may convert and save themselves if they
will; on the contrary that Man without the special help of Gods spirit, and
grace is so weak that he can neither think any thing that is good, nor prepare
his heart to seek for grace. That Christ dyed intentionally and effectually for
none but the Elect, that Gods grace and spirit do always work effectually in
the hearts of the Elect in the act of their Conversion, which they can never
totally nor finally resist; and that the same Elect do never, nor can wholly
and finally fall from the state of grace. In these Homilies which for the most
part were compiled by the learned Martyr Cranmer, does appear the spirit of our
first Reformers to have been wholly for free grace against free will, or any
thing of merit or strength in man.

Another Authentic proof, of the Doctrine of the Church against Arminianism is
taken out of a short Catechism published in the time of good King Edward 6th.
It was Composed by John Ponet Bishop of Winchester, and before its publication
was presented to the King, who committed the perusal thereof to some Bishops
and other learned men, who assured his Majesty it agreed with Scripture and the
Statutes of the Kingdom, whereupon by his special command it was not only
Printed in Latin and English, in the Year 1553, The next after the first
publishing of the 39 Articles: So that we may well look upon it as a perfect
Comment on them, but he also prefixed his own Epistle, wherein he did command
all Schoolmasters within the Kingdom, carefully and diligently to teach it in
all their Schools: There in one of the Scholars answers to the Master, it is
said, But as many as are in the faith steadfast were fore-chosen, predestinate
and appointed to everlasting life before the world was made. And in another
thus; The first, principal and most proper cause of our Justification and
Salvation, is the goodness and love of God whereby he chose us for his before
he made the world, after that he granted us to be called by the preaching of
the Gospel of Jesus Christ, when the spirit of the Lord is poured into us by
whose guidance and governance we be led to settle our trust in God... From the
same spirit also comes our sanctification, the love of God and our Neighbor,
justice and uprightness of life, finally, whatsoever is in us or may be done of
us honest, pure, true and good, that altogether springs out of this most
pleasant Rock, from this most plentiful fountain the goodness, love, choice and
unchangeable purpose of God, he is the cause, the rest are the fruits and
effects.... It is meant thereby that faith or rather trust alone, does lay hand
upon, understand and perceive our righteous making to be given us of God
freely: That is to say, by no desert of our own, but by the free grace of the
Almighty Father.... For not by the worthiness of our deservings were we either
heretofore chosen or long ago saved; but by the only mercy of God and pure
grace of Christ our Lord, whereby we were in him made to do these good works,
that God has appointed for us to walk in... And fol. 68. Immortality and
blessed life, God has provided for his chosen, before the foundation of the
world was laid.

To what has been said, out of fol. 7, 8, 12. I shall add few words more. The
image of God in man by original sin and evil custom was so obscured, that man
himself could not sufficiently understand the difference between good and bad,
between just and unjust, etc. And from these and other actions of Christ two
benefits do accrue unto us, one that whatsoever he did, he did it all for our
profit; so that they are as much ours if so be we cleave fast to them with a
firm and lively faith, as if we our selves had done them....

Out of all this I made it appear Arminian Tenets to be contrary to the
Doctrine of the Church, and upon occasion I shall be ready to make enlargements
not only out of all the same Springs and Authentic Records; but out of others
too, which now for brevities sake I do not mention, though they be considerable;
however before I make an end of this point, I must not omit taking notice of
the Catechism of Predestination or some certain Questions and Answers about
that matter in opposition to Arminianism, and as a preservative against it when
here it began to appear in the Year 1607, they were Licensed by Authority, and
Printed by Robert Barker, which then were bound up and sold with the Bibles. I
shall take notice only of three or four things in it, The answer to the
question, What is the reason why men do so much vary in matters of religion? Is
this, Because they only believe the Gospel and Doctrine of Christ, which are
ordained unto eternal life. And to the next question, Are not all ordained to
eternal life? The Answer is, Some are vessels of wrath, ordained unto
destruction, as others are vessels of mercy prepared to glory. And to the
question, How stands it with God's justice that some are appointed to
damnation? The Answer is, Very well, because all men have in themselves sin
which deserves no less, and therefore the mercy of God is wonderful, in that
he vouchsafed to save some of that sinful race, and to bring them to the
knowledge of the truth. And to the following question, If God's ordinance and
determination must of necessity take effect, then what need any man to care?
For he that lives well must needs be damned if he be thereunto ordained. And
he that lives ill, must needs be saved if he be thereunto appointed. The
answer is this, Not so, for it is not possible that either the Elect should
always be without care to do well, or that the Reprobate should have any will
thereunto, for to have either good will, or good work is a testimony of the
spirit of God, which is given to the Elect only; whereby faith is so wrought in
them, that being grafted in Christ, they grow in holiness, to that glory
whereunto they are appointed, etc. And as to another question, Cannot such
perish, as at some time or other feel these, spiritual motions within
themselves? It Is answered, It is not possible that they should, for as Gods
purpose is not changeable, so he repents not of the gifts and graces of his
adoption: neither does he cast off those whom he has once received. If we had
had the penning of these words, we could not have set them down otherwise than
they are.

Hence appears the sweet and perfect harmony between these public Records of
the Faith and Religion of the Church of England; let those that have a mind to
look farther there into among the 39 Articles, to peruse the 9th. about
Original Sin, the 11th. of the Justification of Man, and the 18th. of obtaining
eternal Salvation only by the name of Christ: With Mr. Roger's Exposition upon
every one of them, specially the 17th. about Predestination.

I hope we hitherto have out of Public and Authentic Records, sufficiently
demonstrated Arminianism to be contray to the Doctrine of the Church: We ought
to take notice how these 39 Articles, Common Prayer Book, etc. were compiled
before Arminius and his errors were heard of here, for I make no doubt but if
they had been spread before, we should have had other things more directly and
positive against them: for certainly the spirit of the first Reformers was
altogether for free grace against free will; wherefore to prosecute my Argument
I now must show how strongly and generally Arminianism was opposed here when it
first appeared: Which can more and more confirm it to be against the Doctrine
of the Church. But this affords matter enough for another Chapter.

CHAP. XVI. How Arminianism did meet with a strong and general opposition here,
when it began to appear.
HEre the sparkles of that unhappy Fire, did at first (except once which I
shall have occasion to mention) break out in Cambridge, where one Doctor Baroe
a Divinity Professor, and one Barret in a Sermon of his, having published some
Arminian Tenets, a speedy course was taken to suppress it; for the
Vice Chancellor and Heads of the University-Colleges met together, and declared
those opinions to be Innovations and contrary to the Doctrine of the Church
professed in that University. Whereupon they sent up Doctor Whitaker and
Tindal, two Members of their own, to Archbishop Whitgift, who forthwith called
to him several learned and worthy Divines, amongst whom were the then Bishop of
London, the Elect Bishop of Bangor, and others in and about the City, and upon
due Examination and Debate upon the matter, on the 20th of November 1595, drew
up unanimously the 9 Articles, called the Lambeth Articles, wherein they also
had the concurrence of the Archbishop of York, and of several Divines of that
Province; which Articles are a sentence past against Arminianism, as the fit
and proper remedy for the Disease; the Antidote was specifical, and composed
against the Poison, which because they are few, short and altogether to our
purpose, I shall here set down in English as they were in Latin.

I. God from Eternity has predestined certain men unto life, certain men he
has reprobated to death.

II. The moving or sufficient cause of predestination unto life, is not the
foresight of Faith, or of Perseverance, or of Good works, or of any thing that
is in the persons predestined; but only the good will and pleasure of God.

III. There is a predetermined and certain number of the predestinate, which
can never be augmented nor diminished.

IV. Those who are not predestined to Salvation, shall necessarily be damned
for their sins.

V. A true living and justifying Faith, and the spirit of God justifying, is
not extinguished, it falls not away, or vanishes not away in the Elect,
either finally or totally.

VI. A Man truly faithful; that is, such a one, who is endued with a justifying
Faith, is certain of the full assurance of Faith; of the remission of his sins,
and of his everlasting Salvation by Christ.

VII. Saving grace is not given, is not communicated, is not granted to all
men, by which they may be saved, if they will.

VIII. No Man can come unto Christ unless it shall be given him, and unless the
Father shall draw him: And all Men are not drawn by the Father, that they may
come to the Son.

IX. It is not in the will or power of any Man to be saved.

These Articles upon serious debate and mature deliberation, having been agreed
on by the persons before named very Eminent and Considerable Men, were
afterward sent to the University of Cambridge by their Deputies, where they
were received with the unanimous approbation of the whole University, with such
success, that of the two Arminians, Baroe not long after left the University
and went away, and Barret was forced solemnly to recant, which recantation was
Registered. Thus a full stop was put to those Innovations; and since that time
till Laud's Faction got the upper-hand, this and no other contrary Doctrine was
taught there as being the true Orthodox according to Scriptures and the Church
of England's; but since that time, the Party have done what they could to
suppress and discredit it. Yet though sometimes truth be driven into corners,
we doubt not but at last it will prevail notwithstanding the opposition of Men
and Devils, as it happened in the case of Arrianism. An Heresy against the
person of Christ, as Arminianism is against his grace: though to our great
grief we see Arrianism revived in Socinianism, as Pelagianism is in Arminianism.

But we must go on in our design: In these 9 Articles we see the true Sense and
Doctrine of the Church explained by those that by their office and learning are
the fittest Interpreters thereof, so we may conclude that to be at that time
the Doctrine of the Church which we have asserted. But we have farther proofs,
which to bring in I must skip over some passages, but with an intent to make
use of them in due place; the reason I have to do so, is because what I am
going upon, carries along with it the stamp of Public Authority and Influence,
I mean the confession of Faith and Articles of the general Convocation of
Ireland held in Dublin 1605; That is 20 years after the Articles of Lambeth. By
the grace of God I shall here set down those Articles of that Convocation which
are to our present purpose, and so shall begin with the Eleventh.

XI. God from all eternity did by his unchangaeble Counsel, ordain whatsoever
in time should come to pass, yet so as no violence is offered to the wills of
the reasonable Creatures; and neither the liberty nor the contingency of the
second causes is taken away, but rather established.

XII. By the same eternal Counsel, God has predestined some unto life, and
reprobated some unto death, of both which there is a certain number known only
to God, which can neither be increased nor diminished.

XIII. Predestination unto life is the everlasting purpose of God, whereby
before the Foundations of the World were laid, he has constantly decreed in
his secret Council, to deliver from Curse and Condemnation, those whom he has
chosen in Christ out of mankind, and to bring them by Christ unto everlasting
Salvation as vessels made to honor.

XIV. The cause moving God to predestinate unto life, is not the foreseeing of
Faith, or Perseverance, or of good works, or of any thing which is in the
person predestined; but only the good pleasure of God himself, for all things
being ordained for the manifestation of his glory, and his glory being to
appear both in the works of his Mercy and his Justice: It seemed good to his
heavenly wisdom, to choose out a certain number, toward whom he would extend
his undeserved mercy, leaving the rest to be spectacles of his Justice.

XV. Such as are predestined unto life he called according unto God's purpose
(his spirit working in due season and through grace they obey the calling, they
be justified freely, they be made Sons of God by adoption; they be made like
the image of his only begotten Son Jesus Christ; they walk religiously in good
works, and at length by God's mercy they attain to everlasting felicity: But
such as are not predestined to Salvation, shall finally be condemned for
their sins.

XXV. The condition of Man after the fall of Adam, is such that he cannot turn
and prepare himself by his own natural strength and good works, to faith and
calling upon God, wherefore we have no power to do good works pleasant and
acceptable unto God, without the grace of God preventing us, that we may have a
good will, and working with us when we have that good will.

XXXII. None can come unto Christ unless it be given unto him, and unless the
Father draw him, and all men are not so drawn by the Father, that they may come
to the Son: Neither is there such a sufficient measure of grace vouchsafed unto
every Man, whereby he is enabled to come to everlasting life.

XXXIII. All God's Elect are in their time inseparably united unto Christ, by
the effectual and vital influence of the holy Ghost derived from him, as from
the head unto every true member of his mystical Body; and being thus made one
with Christ, they are regenerated and made partakers of him and of all his
benefits.

XXXVII. By justfying Faith we understand not only the common belief of the
Articles of Christian Religion, and a persuasion of the truth of God's word in
general. But also a particular application of the promises of the Gospel to the
comfort of our own souls; whereby we lay hold on Christ with all his benefits,
having an earnest trust and confidence in God, that he will be merciful to us
for his Sons sake; so that a true believer may be certain by the assurance of
Faith, of the forgiveness of his sins. and of his everlasting Salvation by
Christ.

XXXVIII. A true, lively, justifying Faith, and the sanctifying spirit of God
is not extinguished, nor vanishes away in the regenerate, either totally or
finally.

The members that composed the Convocation which passed these Articles, were
for the most part English Divines of great learning, who had made their studies
in our Universities, true members of the Church; so that it is the same as if
they had been agreed here, and the Lambeth Articles were inserted; withal we
look upon the Church of England and Ireland to be but one and the same. The
famous and for Piety and Learning eminent James Usher, afterward Primate of
that Kingdom, was present at the Convocation and had a hand in penning the
Articles which were approved of by King James, Licensed and published here by
Authority. Our 39 Articles agreed upon in the Reign of Edward the VI. by the
Convocation in 1552, several years before Arminianism was broached and appeared
abroad, could not be so plain and so full against it as are those of Lambeth
and of Dublin: For then the evil being broken out, a fit and proper remedy was
applied against it. Hence it is that in both we see those Errors so clearly and
fully condemned, that if we had been the Penmen thereof, we could not have
drawn them otherwise than they are.

I must now return to my more ancient proofs, but not generally public as this
last, the first that broke the Ice, as far as I have read, upon these matters
was one Samuel Harsnet, who upon the 27th of October 1584, having at Paul's
Cross preached a Sermon concerning those points, his Sermon was censured and
condemned, and he at last declared his sorrow for it. The ground of the
complaint was that he had preached contrary to Truth and to the Doctrine of the
Church. About this time something having appeared abroad to favor those
Errors; amongst others one Veron did well handle the points in a Book called A
Fruitful Treatise of Predestination, with the Apology for the same, against
those who appeared in Cambridge, and he Dedicated it to the Queen, and it was
received with approbation and applause: But why should I stand upon naming of
persons? Seeing all our first Reformers sufficiently expressed their judgment
in the 39 Articles, the Common Prayer Book and Homilies, which they compiled:
So we must name Bishop Cranmer, Latimer, Hooper, Jewel, Ridley, Grindal, and
Martyr, Bucer (who though Foreigners were Divinity Professors, one at Oxford,
the other at Cambridge, and were made use of in the work of Reformation)
Tyndal, Friths, Barnes, etc. and since that time Edwin Archbishop of York, the
Bishop of Chichester in 1576, John Bridges, Bishop of Oxford, Babington Bishop
of Worcester, the forenamed Whitgift Archbishop of Canterbury, and Hutton of
York. The Bishops of London, of Bangor, Dr. Will. Whitaker, and since that time
Perkins, not excepting Mr. Hooker, and who not? Which it were too long to
number, we can bring a List of 300 English, Scotch or Irish, yet most English,
or thereabouts, with whom in the controverted points agreed all the
Considerable and Eminent Instruments of Reformation as others beyond the Seas,
Zuinglius, Luther, Calvin, Beza, Bullinger, Zanchius, Piscator, Chamierus,
Paraeus, Vrsinus, Junius, Molinaeus, Rivetus, Gomarus, Scultetus, Macovius, etc.

But we must not go abroad, we have enough at home to carry on the argument,
which I shall reduce within the time of King James's Reign, and maybe go little
after: Every one may know he was a learned Prince, and a true England
Churchman, during his life the Arminian Sect durst not appear here at least
publicly: For a Sermon in the year 1616 having been preached at Royston before
the King, concerning points of Arminianism, a recantation was imposed upon Mr.
Sympson, who had preached it, and he recanted; and about six years after at
Oxford, one Mr. Gabriel Bridges having in the University Church preached a
Sermon against the absolute Decree of Predestination, he was accused for
preaching contrary to Truth, and to the Articles of Religion established in the
Kingdom, and was ordered to maintain in the Schools the contrary of what he had
preached in the Pulpit, which he did.

Now we will come to a Royal Evidence, and that is King James in his own
writings; at the conference at Hampton Court about predestination, he delared
against the Arminian opinion, and was approved and applauded by all present: He
said how Predestination and Election depend not upon any qualities actions or
works of Man, which are mutable, but upon God's Eternal and Immutable Decree
and Purpose: And before we leave off, we shall by the grace of God show his
judgment about Arminius and his Errors. First he calls Arminius a seditious and
Heretical Preacher; an Enemy of God; the first in our age that infected Leyden
with Heresy, a man whom all the Reformed Churches of Germany had with open
mouth complained of. An^n we shall see what he says of his Followers. But let
us see something of what he writes against his and their opinions.

As to Predestination he expresses thus much: Meditation the Lord's Prayer.
God has two wills, a revealed will toward us, and that will is here
understood; he has also a secret will in his eternal Counsel, whereby all
things are governed, and in the end, made over to turn to his glory: oftentimes
drawing good effects out of bad causes, and light out of darkness, to the
fullfilling either of his mercy or his justice, etc. The first Article of the
Apostles Creed teaches us that God is Almighty, however Vorstius and the
Arminians think to rob him of his eternal Decree and secret Will, making things
to be done in this world whether he will or not. And in his Declaration against
Worstius, he says, Protestatio Antivorstiana.
We do not doubt but that their Ambassadors, of Holland, which were with us
about two years since, did inform them of a fore-warning, that we wished the
said Ambassadors to make unto them in our name, to beware in time of Seditious
and Heretical Preachers, and not to suffer any such to creep into their State.
Our principal meaning was of Arminius, who though himself were lately dead, yet
had he left too many of his disciples behind him, which he mentions in what
he adds. We had well hoped, that the corrup seed which that Enemy of God,
Arminius, did sow amongst you some few years since, (whose disciples and
followers are yet too bold and frequent within your Dominions) had given you a
sufficient warning afterward to take heed of such infected persons; seeing
your own Countrymen already divided into factions upon this occasion, a matter
so opposite to unity (which is indeed the only prop and safety of your State
next under God) as of necessity, it must by little and little bring you to
utter ruin, if wisely you do not provide against in; and that in time.

As to the point of free will and effectual grace, he expresses his mind thus:
The only way for enabling us for to do it, Meditation on the Lord's Prayer.
(namely the will of God) is by our earnest prayer to God, that he will enable
us to do it, according to that of St. Austin da domine quod jubes, and jube
quod vis. And upon the petition against temptation, and lead us not into
temptation, the Arminians, cannot but mistake the frame of this petition, for I
am sure they would have it, and suffer us not to be led into temptation, etc.
St. Austin is the best decider of this question, to whom I refer my self. And
indeed he quoteth in the Margin of his Books de Praedesi inatione Sanctorum,
and de Dono Perseverantiae, contra Pelagianos and passimalibi, this is a proof
of what I asserted in another Chapter, how our doctrine about these points is
the same with that Doctors of the Church. In the same Book of his Meditation on
the Lord's Prayer, that King says, It is enough for us to know that Adam by his
fall lost his free will, both to himself and all his posterity, so as the best
of us all, has not one good thought in him, except it come from God, who draws
by his effectual grace out of that tainted and corrupt lump, whom he pleases,
for the work of his mercy. And elsewhere he declares thus. Protest. Antivorst.
The nature of man, through the transgression of our first parents, has lost
free will, and retains not now any shadow thereof, saving an inclination to
evil, those only excepted whom God of his mere grace, has sanctified and
purged from this original leprosy.

For certainty of salvation and perseverance against the Apostasy and falling
away of true Believers, his mind he declares thus. Protest. Antivorst.
About the same time one Bertius a Scholar of the late Arminius, ( who was the
first in our age that infected Leyden with Heresy) was so impudent as to send
a letter unto the Archbishop of Canterbury, with a Book entitled de Apostasia
Sanctorum; And not thinking it enough to own the sending of such a Book (the
Tittle whereof only were enough to make it worthy to be burnt) he was moreover
so shameless as to maintain in his Letter to the Archbishop, that his Doctrine
contained in his Book, Our Arminians are this man's Disciples.
agreed with the Doctrine of the Church of England. Let the Church of Christ
then judge whether it was not high time for us to be stir our selves? when as
this gangren had not only taken hold amongst our near neighbors, so as non
solum paries proximus jam ardebat; not only the next house was on fire, but it
also did begin to creep into the bowels of our own Kingdom. O the care care of
a Prince, Nursing-father to the Church, never enough to be commended, would to
God the like was now taken to oppose Socinianism as was then to prevent the
coming in of Arminianism. But that Prince goes on thus: It is true that it was
our unhappiness not to hear of this Arminius, before he was dead, and that all
the reformed Churches of Germany, See how all Protestant Churches opposed
Arminianism.
had with open mouth complained of him: but as soon as we heard of that
distraction in your State, which after his death he left behind him, we did not
fail taking the opportunity (when your last Extraordinaray. Ambassadors were
here with us) to use some such speeches unto them concerning this matter, as we
thought fittest for the good of your state, and which we doubt not but they
have faithfully reported unto you, for what need we make any question of the
arrogance of these Heretics, or rather Atheistical Sectaries amongst you, when
one of them at this present remaining in your Town of Leyden, has not only
presumed to publish of late a blasphemous book of the Apostasy of Saints, but
has besides been so impudent as to send the other day, a Copy thereof as a
godly present to our Archbishop of Canterbury, together with a Letter wherein
he is not ashamed (as also in his Book) to lie so grossly as to avow that his
heresies contained in the same Book do agree with the Religion and Profession
of the Church of England. For these reasons therefore have we cause enough very
heartily to request you to root out with speed, those Heresies and Schisms,
which are beginning to bud forth amongst you, which if you suffer to go on any
longer, you cannot expect any other issue thereof than the curse of God, infamy
throughout all Reformed Churches, a perpetual rent and distraction in the whole
Body of your State. And all this was his Majesty's special order, backed with
the earnest and frequent solicitations of his Ambassador in Holland, where
they have been since so sensible of the spirit of that Party, that though they
have given them an indulgence, yet are not admitted to have a hand in the
Government.

Hence it clearly appears how earnest that Prince was to have Arminianism
suppressed, and what opinion that wise and learned King who had studied the
points, had of their Errors which he calls Heresies and Schisms, and them
Heretics and Atheistical Sectaries, specially upon the occasion of Bertius his
Book, the title whereof he says makes it deserves to be burnt; he calls it a
blasphemous book, and by his Ambassador says to the States, not to suffer the
followers of Arminius to make their actions an example for them to proclaim to
the world that wicked doctrine of the Apostasy of Saints.

And as herein we see that King's opinion about Arminian Tenets, so by him we
are informed how false it is to say that they agree with the Doctrine of the
Church of England, which after him, we may speak to the Arminians, that to say
Arminian Heresies agree with the Doctrine of our Church is a gross and impudent
lie, and that King knew very well what is the Doctrine of the Church of
England; and a third thing we learn hence is, the dangers that arise from this
kind of Doctrine, in three particulars. First, The Curse of God. Secondly,
Infamy throughout all Reformed Churches. Thirdly, A perpetual rent and
distraction in the whole body of the State, where it is tolerated, for Arminius
left behind him a great distraction in the state, out of which considerations
we see that King took a good resolution; when he says, it was high time to
bestir our selves, when as this Gangrene had not only taken hold on our nearest
neighbors, but did also begin to creep into the Bowels of our own Kingdom.
Arminian Opinions he compares to a Gangrene, but he is not satisfied to take
good Counsel himself, but he also gives it to the Hollanders; therefore for
these respects, says he, we have cause enough very heartily to request you to
root out with speed these Heresies and Schisms which are beginning to bud forth
amongst you. We must not omit giving the King the due commendation he deserves
for the pains he took to write against Worstius.

After all this, let Arminians for shame leave off the Plea that their Errors
are the Doctrine of our Church, which is as true and no more than when Papists
do pretend their Religion to be the true Apostolical Faith, even in those
Articles that are so contrary to it; but farther to show how persuaded King
James was of the mischief of those unsound opinions, he was very active in
suppressing them, to prevent those evil consequences that might happen thereby,
and this not only at home but also abroad, upon this account he did write to
the States general, and ordered his Ambassador there to be instant and to
follow the business close; and we may say, the meeting of the general Synod of
Dort, is in a high degree, due to the King's earnest solicitations: So to
encourage and countenance it, he sent thither Divines from hence, whereof Dr.
Field, Bishop of Landaff was the chief, Dr. Davenant afterward Bishop of
Salisbury, Dr Hall was there at first, but upon account of indisposition of
health he came back, Dr. Ward, Dr. Goad and Balcanquall instead of Dr. Hall, in
all they were five who signed the Acts of the Synod, of Condemnation of
Arminianism.

We have more witnesses to bring in, if we would, but we want them not, though
they be men of note, but what need bringing in particular men after the whole
body have declared against our and the truths Adversaries: We might bring in
Exposition on the Creed.
Dr. Babington Bishop of Worcester, Certainty of Salvation against Dr. Bishop.
Dr. Abbot Bishop of Salisbury, Answer to the Rhemish Testam. on Romans 8.
Dr. Fulke, Of the Church lib. 1. cap. 3. and cap. 17. and in his Digres. 41
and 43.
Dr. Field, Reply to Fisher.
Dr. White, Descript. and Eccles. These. ^.
Dr. Reynolds, though some may happen to except against him, yet what he says
in the quoted place is approved by the forenamed Dean of Carlisle, Dr. White.
Nay in this case we have for us Discouse of Justification.
Hooker, with some a man without exception, all whose evidence is much to our
purpose, but to quote all their words it were too long after so many other
Quotations, yet they who have a mind and leisure may peruse them as quoted in
the Margin.

So then during K. James's time Arminianism had nothing to do here, and
continued so in Charles Reign, till Laud came into favor and was made
Archbishop, and yet at first those Errors were ill looked upon, for Mr. Richard
Mountague in his Appeal, having written for Arminianism, his Book was answered
by five or six of the most considerable men in the Nation, all agreeing he had
departed from the Doctrine of the Church; he was thrice about it before the
Parliament, and his Book condemned as contrary to the Articles of the Church.
Under his Hand and Seal he renounced his Errors in a letter of his written to
the Archbishop of Canterbury, he thought he stood in need of a Pardon, which
King Charles gave him for all his writings, and at last called in his Book as
the great occasion of many unnecessary troubles. After him, Dr. Thomas Jackson
came upon the Stage, but for those Arminian Books of his, was censured in
Parliament, and excepted against by the Convocation and in the following
Parliaments, Complaints even by some of the best Sons of the Church were made
against those Innovations and Errors in Doctrine, under the name and notion of
Arminianism: Yet under the favor of Bishop Laud and his Faction being
encouraged with Protection and Preferments, got much ground and corrupted many
members of the Clergy, who became rotten branches of a sound and wholesome
tree, yet for all the violent stream, some had the courage and zeal to appear
in writing against it, though they smarted for it, they charged Arminians of
being favorers and maintainers of Popery; of renouncing the Doctrine of the
Church of England, of being pestilent Heretics, Enemies of God and of his
grace, for the most part licentious, proud, vicious and bitter Enemies to the
practical power of godliness, whereof some turned Papists, Innovators, and
disturbers of the Peace of both Church and State: And any impartial Reader that
will take the pains to read some of those Books may find the charge well proved.

Indeed the serious consideration of these things, does afford matter for sad
thoughts, and sufficient cause of grief to those who love the glory of God, and
the good of his Church, after so much pains taken by the first instruments of
our Reformation to remove abuses in Doctrine, and bring things into the true
Primitive Channel, who left us Articles and other Works in writing, according
to the true Apostolical Doctrine contained in the word of God, believed and
professed by the Orthodox Primitive Church, which these first Reformers sealed
with their own Blood; for they were Martyrs not only for refusing to join with
the Church of Rome in her Idolatry, but also for the testimony of the grace of
God in Christ to exclude all humane help, power, strength, abilities from
working our Salvation by means of any dispositions, free will, improvement of
graces and merits of our own; these things they laid down their lives for, and
to maintain that our whole Salvation comes from the free grace of God alone,
and from nothing at all of our own. For to believe one is and may be saved by
his own merits and workings, or by those of another, or even in part through
grace, and in part through our care and endeavors, in the bottom it is all one,
for thereby Salvation is divided between God and Man, when God alone will be
owned to be the sole Author and Finisher of it; Well, those directions for our
Faith left by those eminent instruments of Reformation were Dr Abb^^ (...), in
his Discourse De Perseverantia Sa^ct. in the Epistle dedicated to King Charles
the 1st then Prince of Wales, complains of some of our Divines that, foll
wing the bypath of Arminius, Dogmate etiam nunc destruunt articulos
Religionis, quos ^^sus propria manu confirmerunt. They destroyed those very
Articles of Religion which they had subscribed before.
subscribed by those who in and about the time I mentioned before embraced and
promoted Arminianism, and by those who now own it, in as much as they could
wresting the Sense of those, thus doing what they could or can to poison the
very Springs. But let them do their worst, the Truth and meaning of those Rules
of our Faith is still the same; but they are bad Children of a good Mother,
from whose Counsels and Directions they are degenerated, and about things in
Question apostatized: So that in this respect they have cruelly divided, rent,
and torn Mother Church; which, if we should look only into that rotten part of
it, we might well say of it, with the Prophet, Isa. 1.21.
How is the faithful City become an Harlot? and apply to it what is spoken of
the Church of Sardis, I know thy works, that thou have a name, that thou
live, and art dead: be watchful, and strengthen the things which remain, that
are ready to die. Thou have the name of the Church of England, but thou art
not, as to that thou art dead, thou art such only in a Show: Soundness in
Matters of Grace is one of the Vitals of true Religion, and of a true Church:
There are some things remaining in thee, thou art not altogether Pelagian, thou
art not a thorough-paced Papist, thou mincest the Matter, and ownest something
of Grace; but have a care, Rev. 3.1, 2.
for those things are ready to die, if they be not strengthened.

Though the Corruption in these points of Grace be very Epidemical, and too far
spread amongst those who pretend to be the Sons of the Church: Yet Thanks be to
God, all are not infected; all along there have been, and still are, some who
receive the Mother's Counsel, and follow her Directions, in the same sense and
meaning thereof, and continue obedient Children, which others do not: For by
what I already said, it does appear, how Arminianism, far from being the
Doctrine of the Church, as constituted in the beginning of Reformation, and
long after, is contrary to, and condemned by it. One thing more I shall add, to
show, as I said but just now, that for all the great and general Corruption
crept amongst the Members in those and late Days. There are, and have been,
some eminent Members of the Church not ashamed of the Truth, nor afraid to own
it: And for the truth of this I appeal to the Author Anonymus, and nameless, of
the Book called, Several Conferences between a Romish Priest, a Fanatic
Chaplain, and a Divine of the Church of England. His Evidence must be the more
received, that he is no favourer of Dissenters, but declares himself an Enemy
to them, and to Puritans, in that he most undecently traduces the Chaplain for
a Fool, and does ridicule him to such a height, as if he wanted common Sense
and Reason, and could speak nothing but Nonsense for himself.

Well, he says thus, P. D. for he makes himself the Protestant Divine: Page
76. at the latter end.
Very wonderful Proofs; as though many of our Church against the Puritan Party,
had not been inclined to Calvinism in the point of Predestination, specially in
that moderate way wherein R. Abbot asserted it; as though it were not possible
for Men to be zealous for our Liturgy and Ceremonies, if they held the Doctrine
of Election and Perseverance. But we do not want those of the highest Order in
our Church at this day, who are eminent for Learning and Piety, and Zeal for
the Church, who would take it very ill from T. G. upon the account of those
Opinions, to be thought Enemies of the Church of England, as the Puritans were.
So that although that Truth of late Years was much opposed and abused, God
never left it without Witnesses. Here, besides the eminent Doctors and Prelates
we named before. Amongst those that have succesfully taken great pains in Latin
to vindicate this Truth, we must reckon Dr. Ames and Dr. Twysse, and beyond Sea
Peter Molienaus, in his Anatome Arminianismi, Wedelius's Arcana Arminianismi,
with the Acts of the Synod of Dort, etc. All which, as to matter of Fact, as of
right, do give impartial and reasonable Readers, a full satisfaction.

In the mean time, seeing Matters of Grace are Fundamental to our Salvation, we
are highly concerned to mind them. Let this Question be put to any, or to every
Man, Would you go into Heaven, or into Hell? I think there is none so
desperately wicked, but that if the thing depended upon a Wish, without
wavering he would answer, Into Heaven. Then, if he has the least sparkle of
Reason, he must grant, he cannot go without a Way, and a Guide to lead him
thorough; for the Way is thorny, and full of Difficulties. In the choice of a
Guide let him come to this Dilemma, choose either God or Man: Surely he may
easily determine, I had rather to trust to God than to Man. About Means and
Ways the Arminian says, if you have a mind, you can go to Heaven; you have
within you a sufficient Grace and Light to carry you thither; you have a free
Will, you can go if you please; for you can repent, believe, make a good use of
Means, and persevere if you will. But on the other side, let us hear what God
says: Thou can not see, for thou art blind; thou can not hear, for thou
art deaf; thou can not speak, for thou art dumb; thou can not walk, for
thou art impotent and lame; thou can not move, because thou art dead. In
prosecuting of this Argument, I shall not do as Arminians, who frame in their
Heads some pretty and pleasant Notions, and deliver them in as plausible a
manner as they can, and take us to be so credulous as to take their bare Word
for it, without any Scripture Proofs. But first, in general we say, in matters
of temporal Deliverance or Salvation, much more as to eternal Salvation, God
reserveth it only to himself: For, Psalm. 3.8.
Salvation belongs unto the Lord; and Jon. 2.9.
Salvation is of the Lord; and Isa. 26.1.
Salvation will God appoint; for Luke 1.69.
he has raised up an Horn of Salvation for us. We know who said, Psalm. 37.39.
The Salvation of the Righteous is of the Lord; and Romans 6.23.
the Gift of God is eternal Life; which is the same with Salvaion: That is a
Gift of God, not a Word of Man in it. God is the only Physician of the Soul;
that is his Right and Property, which no Man may invade or encroach upon,
without making himself liable to the Curse of God.

But let us come to Particulars. I need not to prove a thing granted, that
there is Blindness, Darkness and Ignorance in the Mind; Hardness, Stubbornness
and Deadness in the Heart, with Perverseness and Rebelliousness in the
Affections: But I am to show how to cure these is the proper Work of God. Psalm.
119.125.
God, and no Man, gives us understanding to know his Testimonies; and when he
is pleased to v. 144.
give us understanding we shall live. Thus Christ Luke 24.45.
opened the understanding of his Disciples, that they might understand the
Scriptures: It Is Psalm. 146.8.
the Lord, and none else, that opens the Eyes of the blind, and raises them
that are bowed down. Here also he upholdeth, and strengthens the weak: Isa.
35.5.
The eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the ears of the deaf shall be
unstopped. Here is a Promise and a Remedy for the deaf, as for the blind: Not
only so, but he will be a Guide to the Blind: Chap. 42.16.
And I will bring the blind by a way that they knew not; I will lead them in
the Paths that they have not known; I will make darkness light before them, and
crooked things straight: these things will I do unto them. I know this may also
be understood of Miracles by our Savior wrought on the Bodies; but it is
chiefly meant of the spiritual Cures upon the Souls of Men: It Is not so much of
the Eyes of the Body, but as St. Paul explains it, Ephesians. 1.18.
the eyes of your understanding being enlightened. To this relates the
Eye Salve by the Lord Jesus, mentioned in Scripture; who in the same place
offers poor Sinners Riches, Raiment, and Eye Salve. Rev. 3.18.
I counsel thee to beg of me gold tried in the fire, that thou may be rich,
and white raiment, that thou may be clothed, and that the shame of thy
nakedness do not appear, and anoint thine Eyes with Eye Salve, that thou may
see. So then, no Remedy but in God for the blindness of our Understanding; 2 Timothy 1.7.
for God alone can give the Spirit of Power, and of true, Chap. 2.7.
and of a sound Mind and understanding in all things.

As for the Heart, God is also the sole Physician thereof; Psalm. 10.17. and
86.11.
God does prepare it, and causes it to fear his Name. Take notice of God's
working upon the Heart: Jer. 32.39.40. and chap. 24.7. and chap. 31.33.
I will put my Fear in their Hearts, that they shall not depart from me; and I
will give them one heart and one way, that they shall fear me for ever.
Moreover, I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their
Hearts. And by the Mouth of Moses God promises, Deuteronomy. 30.6.
And the Lord thy God will circumcise thine Heart, and the Heart of thy Seed.
But God goes beyond, for he gives a new Heart, and a new Spirit; Ezec. 11.19,
20.
and I will give them one Heart, and I will put a new spirit within you, and I
will take the stony heart out of their flesh, and will give them an Heart of
flesh, that they may walk in my Statutes, and keep mine Ordinances, and do
them. God, and none else, must give, or else we cannot have it. See how
positive and full Moses is upon this: Deuteronomy. 29.4.
Yet the Lord has not given you an Heart to perceive, and Eyes to see, and
Ears to hear unto this day. They had it not because God had not given it; it
did not depend upon their free Will to have it, for then they had not wanted
it. God renews, changes, and restrains the Heart: Ezec. 39.7.
I will not let them pollute my holy name any more: And when it is wounded and
Psalm 147.3.
broken, he heals it, and binds up the wound. And when it is in a good
Frame, he does 1 These. 3.13. Psalm. 27.14. and Psalm. 31.24.
stablish it unblameable in holiness before God; he strengthens it. Out of
these, and many more Texts which we omit, appears the absolute power,
disposal of, and ruling, which God has over the Heart: How can, after this,
Arminians deny it? when they say, it is free to obey or disobey, to reject or
receive that which God offers; in few Words, to disappoint God, and do what
it will in spite of God: Is not this to make a God of it? To this I add, we
cannot so much as mind or attend unto the Word of God preached, except he be
pleased to open our Hearts, as he did that of Acts 16.14.
Lydia.

As to our Lameness and Impotency to walk in God's ways, we must depend only
upon God to be cured of it. Wherefore David does beseech him, to order his
steps, Psalm. 25.4, 5.
to show him his ways, to teach him his paths, to lead him in his truth, and to
to teach him. And God says, Hos. 11.3.
I taught Ephraim also to go, taking them by their Arms: For they could not go
of themselves, they wanted a Guide and a Helper: Jer. 10.23.
For the way of man is not in himself, he cannot direct his steps. Psalm. 63.8.
It Is God's right hand that upholdeth us: Than every thing else conducing to
our Salvation God does it for us; Psalm. 143.10.
he teaches us to do his will; he draws and turns us when we go astray, when we
are dull, slow, and weak he quickens us. How many times does David in that
119th. Psalm, pray God to quicken him in his ways, in his Righteousness? etc.
but the great Work is to Ephesians. 2.
quicken us when we were dead in trespasses and sins.

Let us in very few words with admiration and thankfulness take notice of God's
way and method in his gracious actings for us. First, He begins and prepares,
Isai. 57.14.
Prepare the way, take up the stumbling block out of the way of my people, then
Chap. 26.12.
he works in and for us, afterward he Psalm. 68.28.
strengthens that which he has wrought for us, Psalm. 3.5.
he 145.14.
sustaineth and Psalm. 57.2.
upholdeth, Psalm. 138.8.
he performs all things for us. But God is not content to do so, he also Heb.
13.21.
does perfect that which concerns us, and as the Apostle says, he 1 Pet. 5.10.
makes us perfect in every good work to do his will, working in us that which
is well pleasing in his sight. St. Peter is full upon the matter, he prays God
to perfect, stablish, strengten and to settle believers. In a word, God, says
David, is the God of our salvation, from whom we receive blessing and
righteousness. Psalm. 24.5.
I must not omit that admirable Text wherein God promises to plant the Gospel,
which is concluded thus. Ezech. 17.24.
And all the trees of the field shall know that I the Lord have brought down
the high tree, have exalted the low tree, have dried up the green tree, and
have made the dry tree to flourish: I the Lord have spoken and have done it.
God alone has done it all.

To conclude these Evidences; it must be granted how without faith and
repentance we cannot be saved, but with them we shall surely be: For the
substance and declaration of the Gospel is repent and believe. Now it is easy
out of Scripture to show how both repentance and says do not depend upon the
will and power of man, but they are the gift of God. As for repentance it is
clear: Acts 5.31.
Jesus has God exalted with his right hand, to be a prince and a savior, for
to give repentance to Israel and forgiveness of sins. Repentance and
forgiveness of sins which go together, are not in the power of any man, but God
alone can give it, which in another place is confirmed, 2 Timothy 2.25.
If God peradventure will give them, that is men, repentance: And as repentance
is merely a gift of God, so is says, if we must believe St. Paul, Ephesians. 2.8.
For by grace ye are saved thorough says and that not of our selves, it is the
gift of God. Our salvation here is not attributed to free will or any thing of
our own. The Apostle is not satisfied to say by grace ye are saved through
Faith, but he excludes himself and all, and that not of our selves, but that
Faith which is the Instrument whereby Christ is received and applied is a gift
of God, not of Nature or any Parts. Abilities or Free Will in us. And another
Apostle comfirms it very much with a general rule he gives how not only the
gift of Faith, but Jam. 1.17.
every good gift, and every perfect gift is from above, and comes down from
the Father of lights. We must not look for any grace to grow here below, no
such thing to be found upon Earth, but what does originally come from Heaven:
We must not seek for any in Man, in any faculty of his Soul which is a
bondslave of sin, and naturally dead in sin till God has been pleased to
quicken it. 1 Pet. 1.9.
The end of our faith, says an Apostle, is our salvation. And Jesus Heb. 12.2.
says another, is the Author and finisher of our faith. Thus our whole
Salvation comes from Christ alone exclusively to any man.

This work I thought fit to conclude with the several Proofs drawn out of
Scripture, to show how our Salvation not only as to the general, but also as to
particulars in every part and degree thereof does wholly and only depend upon
God; and in case there be any good in or done by us, we must own God to be the
Author of it, through the immediate and effectual working of his holy Spirit:
to trust upon himself or in any thing in himself, 2 Kings 18 21.
It Is to trust upon the staff of a bruised reed, on which if a man lean, it
will go into his hand and pierce it. To seek for salvation and power to repent
and believe within himself, in his Mind, in his Will, in his Heart, it is Luke
24.5.
to seek the living amongst the dead. By God's command we are Rev. 18.4.
come out of the Roman Babylon, if we are God's people; so that except we have
a mind again to be partakers of her sins, and so to receive of her Plagues, we
must return thither no more. When God had brought his people out of Egypt, by
the mouth of Moses, he gave this command, Deuteronomy. 17.16.
Ye shall hence forth return no more that way: This command is addressed to and
concerns us; for we know Rome is the great City, Rev. 17.8.
which spiritually is called Egypt and Sodom too. It Is called Babylon by reason
of her Idolatry, Egypt upon the account of slavery, and Sodom for her
abominable wickedness, thence God has graciously brought us out, why should we
like some of the Children of Israel or Lot's Wife, incline and desire to return
thither? we read as of the sin of the punishment of those that did so, for
their carcases fell in the wilderness, and the Woman became a Pillar of Salt,
which we are commanded to remember. Luke 17.32.


Now I say, that the Arminian Errors do lead men back into the Church of Rome,
I hope I sufficiently demonstrated how in these matters of grace they join
hands and agree together against us, that when Arminianism began to settle
here, a design was carried on to meet with and be reconciled to that See. If
then we be not willing to return to it again, we must avoid falling into the
way that leads to it, to escape the danger. These points about grace are not
indifferent and inconsiderable, but of the highest nature and concernment that
can be, for our eternal Salvation does wholly depend upon God's free grace, I
mean our Election, Vocation, Faith, Repentance, Conversion, Justification,
Sanctification and at last Glorification: These are such fundamental truths as
no Martyr can lay down his life upon a better account; wherefore no man ought
to be ashamed or afraid to own and suffer for, if called to it. But self-denial
is a hard thing to be obtained, and self-love so deeply rooted in man's corrupt
heart, that they will not part with boastings, they are pleased with the
thoughts of their own worthiness, and are fond of an imaginary power and
abilities which they fancy to be in themselves, instead of giving God the
glory. Yet, O Lord, to thee belong honor and righteousness, Dan. 9.7.
but to man nothing but shame and confusion of face.

FINIS.

