SOME OBSERVATIONS ON THE FABLES OF AESOP: As commented upon by Sir Roger
L'Estrange, Knight.

Yet not on all, for some need not any Addition or Review, and there be many of
them which are coincident as to the Individual Scope, I mean the same Moral
Instruction, which is couched in them.

Illustrated with several pertinent Stories of Ancient and Modern History.

By a Divine of the Church of Scotland.



EDINBURGH, Printed for Mr. Andrew Symson, and are to be sold by Him at the
Foot of the Horse-Wynd in the Cowgate; And by Mr. Henry Knox in the
Lucken-Booths. M. DCC.

THE AUTHOR'S PREFACE:
HE (...) be very injurious to Truth, (besides the great Reflection upon his
own Judgment) who does not acknowledge that the Morals and Reflections ^f the
said Author, are penned with a great deal of (...), yet they might have
appeared the more pleasant and profitable to the (...) Reader, If they had been
(...) with pertinent little Stories, which would have abun^antly Compensed for
(...) the Bulk of the Book: Thus the Essays of Sir ^rancis (...) would be found
full of (...), and strong (...), suppose not any parcel of History were sound
there, but his exemp^ (...) these (...) with such notable Hints of Story, adds
an Ornament to his Book, (...) is bot^ (...) and (...). The same may be said of
some other Essays and Resolves. Therefore its (...) to Point ^ery briefly (^or
verbum ^apienti sat est) at (...) Historical Illustrations of these (...),
which I be^eve the Author would have done both more (...) and elegantly, if
either his Leisure or (...) ha^ (...) him.

For that Effect, I shall (...) the (...) with the numericall Figure of the
^logue; yet first a word or two concerning the (...) of (...), as it is
delivered by the Commentator.

Page 5. It Is said there is a (...) on the Chronology of the Story, (...)
(...) alleged a Passage out of (...), which famous Greek Poet was not born
when Aesop was murdered; but in my weak (...), (...) may be easily answered, by
saying that it was a common Proverb among the Greeks in Aesop's time^ though
afterward adopted by Euripides in his Poems.

Page 6. He passes over (and not without reason) seaverall (...) and Gests
which were fathered upon Aesop: But I wonder he forgot that story concerning
the eating of his masters Figs by his fellow slaves, and then charging the fact
upon Aesop alone, who begged this favor of his new Master, that all of them
might be ordered to drink a large draught of hot water as himself should do
before them, which brought up the new eaten green Figs from all their stomachs,
except Aes^p alone, who indeed had eaten none of them, by which witty conceit
he manifested himself some what versed in the art of Medicine over and above
his natural and Moral Philosophy; Lukewarm Water with Oil, being one of the
gentle vomitors prescribed by Physicians, But the recent Figs being naturally
oleaginous did serve instead of Oil.

Likewise the Author has (...) to narrate that Circumstance, concerning the
Murder of Aesop, which Plu^arch declares at length viz. That those vile
Assasin^s were ordered by the Oracle, to seek for some living Relative of the
Desunct, that his Remission, in the name of Aesop, might consummat that
Expi^tion; and having enquired long in vain, at last they found a poor
Tradesman in Athens, who made it appear that he was a Cusine of witty Aesop,
tho very remote; him they addressed with humble (...), and caressed with many
Gifts, whereby he was persuaded to pron^nce an Absolution for that most
treacherous (...); and thus we have an end of that (...) Tragedy.

Let us now come to the brief (...) upon his Fables.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER:
THe Occasion of the (...) Scotland) his writing these (...), (...)* (...) sent
him ^he first (...) Roger (...)* ^ly after (...) in England, upon (...) some
Hi^orical Observations thereon, (...) that they should become publi^i Juris;
for then (...) ^ (...) English Garb, and made them much fa^er, (...); (...) the
Reader is to look upon them only as the Result of some few (...), and that for
the particular Satisfaction of his Friend.

I received a written copy of them from an acquaintance of the Reverend (...),
who procured the same ^om him, with a Design to (...) them: which accordingly I
have done. The Author dwells above (...). (...) (...), and did not see one line
of the Print till the whole impresion was wro^ (...), which was done before
(...) could hardly imagine that (...) begun; and (...) tho* the critical reader
(...) pretend to es^y any material saults, Yet ^e oug^ not to impute them to
the Author, who no doubt (^f any such ^ad been) would have esp^ed and amended
them himself if ^e had ^ad the Opportunity to have attended the Press and
perused his Observations when printed sheet by sheet.

I doubt not but the ca^did Reader may reap both Pleasure and Profit by them;
But, upon both these Accounts, the Advantage will be the greater, if together
with them He peruse also the Fables on which they are ^ounded, as they are set
down by the truly learned Sir Roger L'Estrange. in the first Edition of his
^ook, to which they only relate. As for the Typographical Errata, the judicious
^eader is desired to pardon the same, and to correct the more material ones
thus,

ERRATA CORRIGENDA.
Page 13. Line 30. for left read lost. p. 23. l 28. for Calbinus r. Albin^. p.
27. l. 34. for inconsiderable r. inconsiderat. l. 36. for thereof r. whereof.
p. 30. l. 29. r. which so overmatched. p. 34. l. 32. for Figellinus r.
^gillinus. l. 43. for Thais r. Lais. p. 40. l. 27. for Creum^ius r. Cremutius.
p. 43. l. 10. for triffled r. trysted.

ADDENDA.
Page 5. Line 7. after Materials; add The same being done by the ^pitomator of
Trogus Pompe^us, as many suppose. p. 8. l. 16. add afterward Knights of the
Rhodes, and now of Malta. p. 9. l. 22. after besides the Scots, add S^ro sapi^
Phryges, being a true Satyr long before our Nation had a Being, though the
old^st in Europe; To the last line of this page, add St. Paul having observed
the same of those who are unequally yoaked in matters of Religion, the many
Inconveniences of such fatal Conjugations (especially among Sovereign Princes)
being so obvious that We need not insist upon. them. p. 15. l. 27. add Whereas
Nicias, by a superstitious Dread of the Eclypse of the Moon, ruined both the
Athenian Army and Navy in the Haven of Syracuse. p. 24. l. 17. add Not
considering that there, they need 100 00 Gondalo's to ^erry them from one Isle
to another. p. 27. l. 43. after Paregoric. add for in lieu of six Grains (which
is the mos^ should be given at once, even to a frantic person of her Sex) he
had given her no less than thirty six. p. 41. l. 3^. after hanged thereon, ad
Thus Diogenes the Cynick (...) a Gra^ of that Tree, on which an ill natured
wi^e had hanged herself, in Hopes (as he alleged) that it would bear Fruit of
that same Kind.

SOME OBSERVATIONS ON THE FABLES OF AESOP.
FABLE I. Page 1.
AESOP's Cock, in preferring a Barley Grain to a Diamond, is an Emblem of such
Fools as Mid^s; who valued the Pipe o^ Pan, above the Harp o^ Apollo; and of
these much greater Idiots, who prefer the Profits, Ple^ures, and Glory of this
World, to that Pearl of inestimable Value: I mean all the Blessings of the
blessed Gospel. The same may be said of the Dog and the Shadow, in the 8th
Fable.

There being a better Demonstration, than that of a Circle in a Triangle (for
as Mathematical as it is) that there is nothing hereaway which can thoroughly
satisfy the Soul of Man, and consequently cannot make him perfectly happy; and
that is Carentia entitatis debitae, or the want of the due Ingredient; for
there must be a proportion betwixt the Ingredient and the Recipient; the
stuffing and the Capacity, otherwise a thing cannot properly be said to be
filled: Thus a Well is termed empty, though it be full of Air, because there is
no water in it; as also the heads of some Men are said to be empty, though they
be filled with vapors, because they have very little or no wit in them: Even
so, though the World were set into the heart of Man, (as Solomon phraseth it)
it could not fill the heart, because there is carentia entitatis debit^; For we
may as rationally attempt to fill a Glassbottle with virtue, as the heart of
Man with wealth; it being GOD alone who made it, who can fill it, because He is
infinite, for nothing less can satisfy it is infinite Desires.

But let us for once make ^n impossible Supposition, viz: That the blessings of
this Life could fully satisfy the Soul of M^n; yet they could not possibly
make him eternally happy; it being most obvious to the Eye of Reason, that
whatsoever pretends to make another thing happy, it must be commensurable in
its Duration, to the Existence of that Object. But who knows not, that all the
imaginary Felicities of this World, are vain and frail like to the Mortal Body?
Whereas the Soul is an Immortal Substance, whose ^ate must be either
everlasting Happiness, or endless Misery in another World*

FAB. IX. Page 8.
The Ingratitude of the Snake, teaches us, That it is very dangerous to trust
one of an ill Nature, or that is come of an ill kind. Iugurtha the Son o^ a
Concu^ine, is a sufficient instance for both, he being so ingrate to ^is Uncle
the King of Numidia, who had adopted him, that he never rested till he had
murdered both his Sons, to get the Kingdom entirely to himself, as is
expressed at great length by Salust. de Bello Iugurthino. But the most ^inable
Monster of Ingratitude, and who directly resembles the Snake, was (...) Cera^s,
he being chased away by his Father Ptolemens Lagus for his ^ll Nature, and his
younger Brother Ptolomens Philadelp^us preferred to the Kingdom of (...); This
abdicated Prince was not only shelte^d by (...) (the last of Alexander's
Captains, who made any (...) in the World) but also assisted by him to seize
upon the Kingdom of (...): Yet this Prodigy of Ingratitude, murdered his
Bene^or, that he might forsooth become his Haeres ex ass. But the Judgment of
GOD did shortly overtake him: Neither could this wretched Criminal possibly d^e
a worse death than he deserved, suppose he had not been guilty of any other
Villainy, than the C^eatry of (...), and Murder of his Nephews, I mean his
Sisters Children, who should have been Heirs of the (...) Kingdom.

FAB. X. Page 9.
Illustrated by Non ^ignus Caesari^ira. For such was the As^ in the eyes of the
(...), Thus Ca^o the Cen^or having received a Blow (even in Public) (...),
would not honor him so ^ar, as to let him know that he needed a Pardon.

FAB. XI. Page 10.
The Epi^urean Sect had been tolerable, if their Master had taught the Wor'd no
worse Doctrine, than Qui clam vixit ben^ vi^it, which is the sole Import of
this Fable, and of many other of these Apologues. For we may find that the
solidest and wittiest of all the Roman Poets, vi^: Virg^ (...), Horace, Iuvenal
and Martial, do frequently ex^oll a private Country Life, far above the
Contentment of Cities and Courts. Who then can doubt of Seneca's Applause of
it^ since he so often approves that Maxim of Epi^urus, though himself had not
the good luck to retire in time from the Inhumanity of a most ingrate Pupil; he
also magnifyes that freedom of Diogenes; Aristotle dines when Alexander
pleases, but Diogenes dines when Diogenes pleases.

There is also to this purpose a celebrated Expression of the Emperor Trajan,
That if a Man saw the Cares and fears, wherewith the Crowns of this World are
lined within, suppose one of them were lying at his foot, for all the outward
Splendor of it, he would not be at the pains to stoop down and take it up; And
that this is not a mere politic Fetch of great Men, to shun the envy of the
World (as some imagine) may be easily confuted by Experience; For during the
Saxon Heptarchy, many Princes in Britain abandoned their Thrones, that they
might enjoy GOD and themselves the more in a private Life, and in a Monastic
Cell. This Charity is due also to Christian Emperors, such as Charles the Vth.
But I am sure it was not our holy Religion which was Dioclesian's Prompter, and
yet to enjoy himself in his Gardens at Salonae in Dalma^ia, he willingly
resigned the Roman Scepter. Not to speak of that cruel Sylla, who by a
voluntary Resignation of his perpetual Dictatorship did no less, long before
him.

FAB. XIII. Page 13.
It was a wise saying of one of the seven wise Men of Greece (besides Diogenes
the the Cynick) That the worst of ^ame beasts is ^ Flatterer; because, a
persidious Friend is the worst of Enemies. And such is a base Parasite who like
a Pro^us or Vertumnus, transforms himself into a^l shapes, the he may betray
his misshapen Confident to all his Lusts; yet sometimes it may do well with a
well natured Prince, who has some Principles of Goodness in him, for ^audanda
praecipimus. But whosoever has the Curiosity to know a F^atterer from a true
Friend, let him read that excellent Treatise of Plu^arch, so entitled in his
Morals.

FAB. XIV. Page 14.
This might have been illustrated by Dionysius the Younger, Sejanus once the
great Favorite o^ Tiber^us, and by the miserable sat o^ Andronieus the Elder,
Emperor of the East; and by many other Princes whose Exits were no le^s
Tragical. But when our Author mentions the grateful Sacrifice to the Rage and
Scorn of the Common People, which is made of those who have raised themselves
on the spoils of the Public, I wonder that an English Man should have forgot
E^pson and Dudley, who were the great Instruments of the Extortion and Avarice
of Henry the Seventh in his old Age, whom therefore his Son in the very
beginning of his Reign put to death, not only to gratify his People (whom they
had so cruelly oppressed under the pretense of Law) but also to squeeze these
Spunges for his own Interest by their Forfeitures, as if they had been
Turkish-Bassa's, for they were very rich.

FAB. XVI. Page 16.
Here he had Occasion by the Foretop, to have illustrated that fable by that
grateful Lion to Androgeus the Roman Slave, who was termed by the people of
Rome, The Lions Physician, but this Story is so well known, that We need not
insist upon it.

FAB. XVIII. Page 18.
The true Moral is this Distich,

Principtis ob^a, sero Medicina paratur,
Cum mala per long^s invaluere mor^s.
Or that other single verse,

Front capilla^a, post est Occasio calva.
FAB. XX. Page 21.
Here He had a fair Opportunity to have shown the great Danger of calling in,
too powerful Auxiliarys to the Aid of a prince either against his own
Subjects, or Strangers; which may be exemplified from the Disaster of the old
Brittons, who being oppressed by the Scots, and Picts, invited the Saxons, to the
Ruin of themselves; So it fared with the Irish, when the K. of Leinster
implored the succor of Henry Il. of England, against the K. of Mead; Naples
experimented this Folly (in the End) by employing the Normans: but the implored
succor of Ferdinand the Catholic, against the French, was more fatal to the
Neapolitans; for that ^ly Fox (who had allways a catholic Appetite for his
Neighbors dominions) under Pretense of aiding an oppressed Cadee of the House
of Aragon, basely betrayed his Cusin under Trust, and at last took all to
himself: Likewise some kings of Indostan, or Hither- India, by calling in the
Mongull against their Neighbors, made the whole Country a Prey to the
Tortarian Race: And in this same Age, the Chinese by inviting the Tartars to
assist them, against their own masterfull Robbers, paved the way to their own
Ruin, for now the Tartar is their Lord and Master.

FAB. XXIV. XXV. Page 24.
Here He might have taxed (as many Historians do) Cato the Censor, who (for all
his great pretenses to Morality) did most ingenerously turn off his old
Servants and laboring Beasts to shift for themselves, if He could get no money
for them, and that merely because they were old, and could not work as
formerly (...) that needed such a superior as (...) Prince of Calabria, who
ordered (under the pain of his highest Displeasure) one of his Captains who had
turned off his old horse to shift for himself in Frost and Snow, to afford him
sufficient Provender so long as he lived, for said the Prince to the Captain,
You are prodigiously ingrate even to that dumb beast, for I was Witness to his
saving of your Life, (under GOD) when you was hotly pursued by a multitude of
Enemies.

FAB. XXX. Page 29.
Here he had Occasion to admire (but not to approve) the too great Confidence
of the famous Marishal Les Dig^erres, who having a Valet de Chamber for many
years whom he used as a friend, and trusted alone in his Chamber all Night, yet
having certainly found that he had been hired by the Papists to murder his
Master, when he was sleeping (for the Marischal was then Protestant) he not
only pardoned him, but trusted him again, just as he had done formerly: He may
be said to have acted the part o^ a good Christian, in giving him a Remission,
but not of a prudent Man in remanding him to his former Charge; for he who was
once guilty of so much baseness, ought not to have been trusted with any life
which was much more valuable than his own.

FAB. XXXI. Page 30
Non patitur ludum, Fama, Fides, Oculus; It Is nothing to the advantage of the
English, what some strangers have observed of them; that they will loose their
Friend before they will loose their Jest; which accords not well with one of
their own Maxims: play with me, but hurt me not; Jest with Me, but shame me not.

FAB. XXXIII. Page 32.
He might have added that there be some Plagiarys who steal so unhandson lie
that they have not the Sense to alter the Dress. i. e. They retain both the
Matter and Words of a borrowed Author, and vent all for their own. These are
little better then they who father other men's Books, as if they had been the
entire Work of their own brains, prefixing their Names to them (like a man's
putting his Mark upon another Horse) Thus a pious Minister in Wales, having
composed that Treatise so well known under the Name of The practice of Piety,
and having given it in to his own Bishop; named Lewis Ba^ly, to be revised, the
said Bishop (who was far from practical Piety) set it forth in his own Name,
whereupon the true Author dyed of Melancholy; as his Wife complained to the
long long Parliament, if we believe R^shworths Collections.

But as for these who only cut large thongs of other men's Leather, and adopt
them for their own; Me thinks (for Reputations ^ake) they should be very sure
that none in the World (save themselves) have ever seen these Founds of their
The t, yea and that it were in their Power to destroy them all, that they might
not be traced in them (as is alleged of Polydore Vergil, that after he had
compyled his English History, he burnt all those Books which had furnished him
Materials;) as for the Destruction of 2000. volumes of Law made by Tribon^anus,
Dorotheus, and Theophilus, after they had compyled the Corpus Iur's Civilis out
of them, it was done by Order of the great Justinian, that young Students might
not be deterred from the Study of the Civil Law, by such a vast number of
bulksome Books; otherwise it were more ingenously and generously done to ^mply
with that o^ the (...), (...) P^cloris est fa^eri per q^em proseceris: But of
all the Plagiarian Work that ever I saw (and I have met with eneugh in my time)
that of Thomas Aquinas raised the greatest Admiration, who was certainly a
great Soul, of a most solid judgment and copious Invention, who may be said to
have gathered all the scatered limbs of Absyrtus together, I mean he reduced
that monstrous bulk of Popery, into one body, yet his Secunda Secundae (which
is unquestionably the best Parcel of al his ^umms) is found to be transcrived
Verbatim out of Vincentius Bellovacensis his Speculem Morale; Bellarmine makes
a vain attempt for his vindication ( L^b. de Script. Ecclesia^.) but it is
certain that Vine^ntius was out of the World before the Angelical Do^tor had
passed the first Age of human Nature, and he must needs be a Call who can
imagine that he should have penned that excellent piece of Morality in his
Infancy, who was nicknamed Bos by his Condisciples, he appearing to them
(though not to his Master) so stupid when he was a Schoolboy. But to shut up
this Point; certainly the most innocent Plagium (of this nature) is when a Man
borrows something of a former Treatise to illustrat a latter, for they both
being his own, it cannot properly be termed Theft. For a Merchant may air his
Goods whenever he pleases; and this has happened to many renowned copious
Writers, such as Plutarch and Seneca, Aquinas, and the great To^tatus, Joseph
Hall, Joseph Mede, Iere^y Tailor, and many others, without any Dread of having
an Action of Injuries commenced against them for doing with their own what they
pleased.

FAB: XXXVIII. Page 36.
To this largest of his Comments (wherein He traceth human Envy and Pride from
its Infancy) He might have added for illustration, that Observation of St.
Augustine in his Confessions, that he has seen a sucking Child look as
fiercely upon another Infant that was brought to the others Teat, as if it had
been a young Gladiator: Among his Huffing Sparks tumlbed from the Ruff of all
their glory, under the Wheel of the Victors Chariot, he might have instanced
^ajazet the great Turk, and 1st of that Name, couped in an Iron Cage, on which
Tamerlane mounted his Horse; as the Emperor Valerian was served long before in
that same manner by Sapores K. of Persia; Such a sudden Degradation being
patheticaly described by Seneca the Tragoedian, in the person of Sejanus;

Quem Dies vidit veniens superbum;
Hunc Dies vidit fugiens jacentem.
He was adored in the morning as a God (says the Philosopher of that same
Name, (if not the Author of both) but e're the evening, was so torn by the
enraged Multitude that there was not a Mammock of flesh left upon his Bones for
the Hangman to fix his Hook in; and thus the Greek Historians descrive the
Tragoedy of Andronicus the elder, who was Emperor of the Bast.

FAB. XL. Page 42.
Mentioning the Neutrality of the Batt, (whom he calls a time-serving Trimmer)
he might have added Solon's severe Law against all Neuters dureing the great
combustions of a State; that they ought to be condignly punished as self
seeking People, who make themselves alone the center, and circumference of all
their Desires and Endeavors.

FAB. XLVI. XLVII. XLVIII. XLIX. Page 47.
To so pitiful Bussiness and so small a thing (which may prove at last so much
as a man's Life, Honor, or Estate are worth) he might have added the
Observation of the great Lord Verulam; that there be many Men, who think it
nothing to give Letters of Recommendation to any who im^ortune them for that
Effect: not considering that if they recommend unworthy persons, to the ^avour
of great Ones, they loose so much of their true Honor by the Mi^demeanures of
a naughty Favorite; as Plutarch instanceth in the Recommendation of a young
Philosopher to his Friend Polysperchon, by the famous Zenocrales, that old
Captain of Alexander reproved the old Philosopher ^or his Indiscretion, though he
gave all the Money that the young ^ool sought, at the very first sight of
(...), and it amounted to no less than a Talent, but whether it was of Gold or
Silver, is not ex-pressed.

FAB. LII. LIII. Page 52,
In his Comment he might have added these two English Proverbs* The Masters Eye
makes the Horse fat, and the Farmers foot ye^lds the best Compo^ or Dunging to
the Land. As also that of the Proverbs of Solomon; An ignorant or a Simple
Prince void of all Under landing, is also a great Oppressor. For many Tyrants
(under the (...) of his Authority) lift up their heads, and miserably oppress
the People when in the mean time these petty Tyrants have barricado'd his Ears
from hearing their Clamours, so that they are apt to say, much better be
oppressed by one Tyrant than many. Thus Demetrius (Son to the great Antigonus
(was cast out of the Kingdom of Macedon, by that People whose Petitions he
would not hear. And it cost another of their Kings his Life, because he would
not do Justice to one of his Subjects; I mean Philip, the Father of the Great
Alexander, was openly murdered by ^ausanias, in regard that the King would not
punish his Minion At^alus, who had most unnaturally abused the Body of the said
Complainer. But on the contrary, there was nothing that so effectually
recommended the Great Augustus to the favor of the People, as his Readiness to
hear their Grieveances, even when he was tied to his Bed. And I dare say, his
descending to the Bar to plead the Cause of an Old Soldier (who bad received
many wounds for Augustus) without a Deputy, endeared him more to the 40 Roman
Legions, than a Donative of forty Million of Crowns would have done.

FAB. LIVE. Page 54.
He might have subjoined that excellent Poem of Horace, to the same purpose.

Olim quod vulpes aegroto (cauta) Leoni
Respondit, referam; quia me vestigia terrent,
Omnia te adversum spectantia, nulla retrorsum.
which Verse was the usual Answer that Rodolph of Habsburg (the first Founder
of the Austrian Greatness) gave to all those who demanded of him (after he was
elected Emperor) wherefore he went not to R^me, (in Imitation of his
Predecessors) to receive the Golden Crown from the hands of the Pope: His
meaning was, that many of his Predecessors, especially the Fredericks of
Swa^en, and Henry's of Franconia, had been so ill treated in Italy, that it was
much safer for him to sit at home, and let the Popes domineer in Italy as they
pleased.

FAB. LV. Page 55.
He might have added that old physical Aphorism, Vinum moderate sumptum acuit
Ingenium: but when it is taken excessively; it may be granted that the grand
Impostor Ma^omet once spoke Truth in his Alcoran, when He said, that there is a
Devil in every Grape, for that hellish Ingredient either stupifies or distracts
the foolish Recipient.

Likewise wholesome Meats (if temperatly used) beget subtle Spirits, which
dispose a thinking Man either to Contemplation, or Action, as opportunity servs;
whereas a gross Belly makes a gross Understanding, and a crass Devotion. Thus
that luxurious Emperor Vitellius having embogued his Wit in the Superfluitys
of Ceres and Bacchus, He became a most easy Prey to his mortal Enemies. And
that prodigious Drinker Bonosus having hanged Himself in Despair, because his
usurped Empire was not like to thrive with Him, his own Soldiers justly
derided Him, when they said, that it was not a Man, but a Tanker that was
hanged up there.

FAB. LVIII. Page 58.
It was one of the worst Laws which Lycurgus gave to the Spartans, whereby
young men were allowed to steal from their Neighbors, providing they did it
neatly and subtily, but if they were deprehended in the fact, they were
severely corrected; it was certainly a most unjust Ordinance, because it inured
Youth to lying, and fraudulent Habites, neither could the immorality of it be
counterpoysed by their pretended learning the Stratagems of War by such
childish Circumventions; it being indeed the grand Design of that Legislator to
make all his Laws subservient to Mars and Bellona.

But the main Scope of this Fable is to show us that the cunning Imposturs of
men put a Necessity upon the injured, to appeal to the Justice of an omniscient
GOD who sees the Thoughts of the Heart afar off, even long before they are
thought; no doubt Atheists (both in Judgment and Practice) are apt to deride
that Appellation, as to a very long Day; and questionless that general
Judgment must needs be very far off in the Eyes of these faithless souls, who
do not believe that ever such a Day will come; neither do they consider how
nigh they are by such Provocations to a particular Judgment, of which I shall
subjoine one or two Instances in Lieu of many.

When the grand Master of the Knights Templars was tied to the Stake in France
to be burnt alive, with diverse of his Order, He first craved Pardon of God and
of the Brethren of his Order for the wrong He had done them in confessing those
Crimes to be true which were charged upon the Order in general, and that through
the Vehemence of Torment: for being shortly to appear before the righteous
Judge of the World, He not only appealed to Him for their Innocence, but also
cited Pope Clement V. and Philip the Fair, then K. of France (for it was mainly
by the Authority of those two great men with their Influence on other Princes,
that this horrid Massacre was carried on, through all Europe:) He summoned them I
say to appear within a Year, before the impartial Tribunal of GOD, there to
answer for the great Injustice done to his Order. And it is most certain that
both these summoned Pannels dyed within the prefixed Time, which induced many
to believe that the Templars were not guilty of these execrable Crimes which
were laid to their Charge. The Jews have a Proverb Cum Elias venerit solvet
nodos; and Me fears this is one of the Mysterys which the Day of Judgment
shall fully unriddle. There was indeed some little discovery made of that
Intrigue, even in the Age wherein it was acted; For some Historians report,
that Philip of France would have all the Templars destroyed, per fas aut nefas,
that his German Brother might enjoy the Forfeitry of the whole Order, and no
doubt he had become one of the greatest Princes of the Western World (as to
Revenue) if that Design had taken effect. For the Templars had great
possessions almost in every Kingdom of Europe. But though King Philip thought he
had the Pope upon his Finger ends (for he was indeed his Creature) yet his
Ghostly Father with his Council at Vienna disappointed him, by making a Gift of
all the Temple Lands to the Knights Hospitallers, called otherwise, The Order
of St. John at Jerusalem.

I hope the Reader will pardon this small Digression, (if any so account it) to
give my Sentiments concerning that cruel Method practiced in some parts of the
World, in order to the finding out of an obscure Truth, as is pretended, the
same being usually termed Torture: And that either by the formidable Rack,
Boots, Thumbikins, Water, Oil, or any other manner of way whereby human Nature
is tormented. I join issue with the great St. Augustine, That it is the
greatest Injustice to inflict the greatest bodily Torment imaginable upon an
innocent Person, for such are all in the Construction of Law, till they be
proven guilty; It being an approved Maxim both of the Civil and Canon Law, and
of Divinity also, praesumitur esse bonus qui non probatur esse malus. And I
must needs say it, they who judge such an Extorted Confession a sufficient
probation, have never sufficiently considered the Frailty of human Nature. So
that I think Torture should never be admitted in any Case, except the
Confession can instantly verify it self.e. g. Suppose there were great
Presumptions against a Man, that He were guilty of Crimen Peculatus, by robbing
the public Treasury of a vast sum of money, I would lay no stress on his
tortured Confession, till he had brought the Judge to the place where he had
laid that stolen Treasure: then the Ocular Inspection justifies the
Confession. This had been the case of that bold Caudiot, who alone pilfer'd one
of the richest Treasures in the World, I mean that of Venice, laid up in the
Church of St. Mark; if his new Confident had not made the Indication for him:
Therefore such a Case should be reduced to that Maxim of Law, concerning the
Examination of Witnesses, who are suble^lae fidei. That if it be done at all,
it should be done ad eruendam Veritatem, sed non ad faciendam fidem.

There remains yet a more admirable instance of these Appeals to Heaven from
unjust Sentences on Earth, which may be found in the Spanish History penned by
Mariana. There was a Nobleman of Spain found privately murdered, neither was it
known who had done that villainous Act, the King was the more diligent in making
Inquisition for that Blood, because the murdered Person had been his principal
Minion. At last it was suggested that there were two Castilian Brethren, who
were picked at this Nobleman, so that it was very probable they were the
Malefactors, and merely upon this presumption, they were sentenced to be thrown
down from the top of an high Rock, that by their Death they might expiate their
Crime. The Brethren indeed confessed, that they were sensible of a great wrong
done them by that Nobleman, but withal appealed to the Omniscient GOD, that
they had no hand in his death, neither directly nor indirectly. They further
declared, that as Christians they would never have been so wicked, and as
Persons of Honor (for they were Gentlemen well descended) they could not have
been so base, to murder any Man of what Quality soever. But when all their
Prote^cations were made in vain, one of them (upon the top of that Fatallock)
in the Audience of many thousands of People, cited the King to appear before
the Tribunal of the King of kings, and Lord of lords, there to abide the just
Sentence of that unerring Judge, for the great Injustice he had done both to
him and his Brother, and that within the space of thirty days. No doubt many of
the Spectators deemed him no less than mad, to prefix so short a time to the
King, who was but a Young Man, and in good Health at the time neither was there
at that time any fear of Intestine Commotion, or Foreign Invasions. Yet it is
a most certain Truth that the King dyed of a Fever within the 30 days; which
Providential Dispensation was judged by many, a more weighty presumption of the
young Men's Innocence, than that whereon the King had founded their Guilt.

FAB. LIX. Page 59.
To his Adages, he might have added that other Diverb, That few are wise before
the hand like Prometheus, but too many resemble his Brother Epimetheus, in
being wise behind the hand, (for so fares it with some other Nations besid^s
the Scots) which in plain English imports, That Experience is the Schoolmaster
of Fools, Insipient^s (...) d^cere non putavi. Yet better late wise than never.

FAB. LXI. Page 60.
It might have been farther illustrated with that of the Poet;

Quisquis ama^ Ranam, Ranam put at esse Dianam.
As also, Difficile est exuere naturam. Yea,
Naturam expellas furca tamen ipsa recurrit.
FAB. LXII. Page 62.
The ^able is grounded on a true Story, viz. the Practice of (...) a Turtarian
Prince, who had LXXX. Sons of diverse Venters, who tried every one of them with
a great Bundle of Arrows, etc.

FAB. LXIV. LXV. Page 64.
To this might have been added that of the Poet,

Si qua voles apt nubere, nube pari;
And that mystical Counsel of the Philosopher to the young man at Athens who
demanded his Advice whether he should mary a very rich Woman, but very old: or
one of his own Age, but of a mean Fortune. The Philosopher bid him go and
over-hear the Schoolboys at their Play and tell Him what was the most usual
Expression among them, and then he should resolve his Doubt. At his Return he
told the Philosopher that the words He most frequently heard among them, were,
I will not play with. You, for you are not my equal, These Schoolboys, said
the Philosopher, have taught you how to resolve your own Case.

FAB. LXVI. Page 65.
Gods withholding Sleep from K. Ahasuerus (such a Night) was a wonderful
preventing Providence for a poor Mordecai: and such was the preservation of
innocent David, for being almost wholly surrounded by a more powerful Enemy, a
Letter (in that very Nick of time) recalled his implacable Father-in-Lavv to
oppose the Philistines that had invaded the Land. No doubt there was an
extraordinary Providence in the Curiosity of the people at Constantinople, in
running out of the Church to see their young Emperor Arcadius passing by, for
they were scarce well all gone out, when the Church fell, and without a miracle
would have smothered them all if they had not thus seasonably removed.

Such wonderful Providence have attended some Pagans; was not the Life of K.
Croesus preserved by the Vehemency of his Sons affection, which loosed that
tongue which had been Dumb from his Infancy, in that very Instant when one of
Cyrus his Soldiers was lifting up his Hand to kill the King, whom he no more
knew to be the King in that Crowd of Fugitives, than the Turks did (long
afterward) know Constantine Paleolo^us to be the unfortunate Emperor, when He
was flying with many others toward the Gate of Constantinople.

But Examples of this nature are almost infinite, especially among observant
Christians: so that the Poet Claudian, though a Pagan, did admire the singular
Providence that attended Theodosius the Great in his Wars against the Tyrant
Maximus, and the Usurper Eugenius, which excited Him to celebrat them in
excellent heroic Verse, The Poem thus begins,

O nimium dilecte Deo! Cui fundit ab antris
Aeolus armatas Hyemes; cui militat Ether;
Et conjurati veniunt ad Classica Venti.
FAB. LXVIII. Page 66.
That Distich contains the Moral of this Fable,

Dico tibi verum Libertas optima rerum,
Nunquam servili sub Nexu vivito Fili.
To which may be added that of another Poet,

Quod sis esse velis, ne te quaesiveris extra.
And, Alterius non sit, qui suus esse potest.
FAB. LXXII. Page 71.
Here he had Occasion by the Foretop, to have instanced diverse, who by
snatching a Collo^ from GOD's Altar, had their Nests, and all burnt up at last;
It Is the Opinion of some very judicious Divines, that Sacrilege was the primary
Guilt of human Nature, our first Parents having too liquorish an Appetite after
that forbidden Fruit which GOD had reserved to Himself; And that God did
severely punish Sacrilege, the Examples of Achan in the Old Testament; and of
Ananias and Sapphira in the New; are sufficient Evidences thereof: And if We
consult the Books of Maccabees, and the Roman History, we will find strange
Judgments that befell some of the Syrian Kings, and Marcus Crassus the Roman
Consul, for presumeing to robb the Temple of the true and living GOD which was
at Jerusalem.

Yea it is very observeable that GOD permitted the Devil to punish signally
those ^agans who made bold to rob their Heathen Gods; (for it was Sacri^ge as
to them.) Thus Cambyses lost 50000. of his Army in the Sands of Lybia, for his
Design to (...) the Temple of Jupiter Hammon; and the almost miraculous
^unishments which were inflicted upon Xerxes with his Pers^ans, and on (...)
with his Gauls, for attempting to rob the famous Temple of Apollo at Delphos,
are so well known that we need not insist upon them. But the most extensive
Judgment that ever I read or, did befall the Consul Caepio with his Romans,
for robbing the Temple of Toulouse in Languedoe, it being observed by the
Romans that there was not one of that Army, that had the least hand in that
Sacrilege, but dyed a violent Death; so that it became proverbial at Rome, when
they saw any man in extreme Misery, Aurum habet Tholousanum, He has the Gold
of Tholou^e.

But I shall shut up this desolating Point with such a strange Contrivance of
Revenge (upon the Acceunt of Sacrilege) that there was never a more subtle
vindictive design hatched in hell itself which being a sufficient Indication of
the sentiments of the generality of Christians (in that Age wherein it was
acted, which was the XIII. Century) that it has induced me to narrate it at a
very considerable length: Frederick the second of that Name (Emperor of
Germany, etc. K. of Naples) had (for many Years) entertained in his Service a
Noble Neapolitan named Petrus de Vineis, as his principal Consident and
Counselor, and in regard of his great Knowledge and Prudence He was generally
deemed worthy of that great Trust; for it was he who defended the Cause of his
great Master (before the Council of Lions,) to the Admiration of all the
hearers: But I believe the Eloquence of Cicero and Demost^enes (blended
together) would not have broke through the implacable malice of Pope Innocent IV.
Therefore de Vineis (after the Excommunication of the Emperor in that Council,
with Bell, Book and Candle) wrote an Apology for Him: which was entitled, The
Complaint of Frederick II. against the Pope; wherein He gave abundant
Demonstration, both from the Civil and Canon Law; from the Law of GOD and
Nature, that his pretended Holiness had acted contrary both to Reason and
Religion; so that We need not doubt of the Pope's Carefulness to suppress that
unanswerable Book; ^ut after all this, an unhappy jealousy possessed the Heart
of this unfortunat Emperor, as if his chief Minion had secretly conspired with
the Pope against him; whereupon in a Rage he commanded to pull out the Eyes or
de Vineis, but that B^rbarity was scarce well acted, when the Emperor repented
and being fore put to it by the Pope (who had caused Germany fall off from Him)
begged the Advice of his ^inded old Favorite, how He should come by Money to
levy an Army sufficient to oppose his Enemies; this blind Devil inwardly glad
of the Occasion of Reveng^, answered that a Tree is best cloven with a Wedge of
its own Timber, and since, said he, it is a Churchman that has so straightened
You, and impoverished You with a long lasting War: It Is my opinion that You may
lawfully seize upon all the Utensils of all the Churches of Naples, meaning the
golden and si^ver Chalices, Ewers, etc. and make ready money of them; but how
soon as He was certainly informed that this hellish Counsel was put in
Practice, then He solemnly declared, that now He was sufficiently avenged for
his two eyes because he was sure GOD would not fail to inflict some
extraordinary Judgment on Him that had robbed his God so frequently. Thus this
wicked Councelour directly acted the part of the Devil, by first tempting, and
then accusing, yet he did not live to hear the Event of his Prediction, for He
had no sooner uttered his insernal Io Paea^, but he dashed his Head against the
Wall to prevent a more tormenting Death; But what He foretold, shortly came to
pass, for the Emperor became very despicable and was at last most unnaturaly
poisoned by a Bastard of his own. His sad Destiny was much to be pitied, for He
was a Prince of extraordinary Knowledge, and a great Justiciary: and like
another Iu^nian, He made many excellent Laws, which are subjoined to the Corpus
Iuris Civilis; as for any exorbitances he committed during his most troublesome
time, I bel^eve i^ Solomon had been his Contemporary and seen how He had been
vexed and perplexed with diverse very ill natured Popes* He would thus have
apologized for Him, that, Oppression makes a wise Man mad.

FAB. LXXIV. Page 7^.
Here He might have told that Vitellius the Roman Emperor was a greater Fool
in the other extreme for He prohibited* (and that under the Pain of Death) any
at ^me to say that V^an was advancing toward the City with a formidable Army;
so that His u^e Negligence and most foolish Security (even when the Enemy was
at the G^s) brought that sensual E^re to an unpitied, though a most ignominious
Death.

FAB. LXXV. Page 74.
Here he might have mentioned the pertinent Answer of the Schoolmaster who
would not dispute his best with Him who commanded (...): for it was the
Emperor Adrian who was ^o vain as to fancy an Excellency in all the liberal
Arts, and in Grammar among the rest; neither (in my Judgment) was that in
^irect reproof which a Musician gave to Philip of Macedon (for contending with
him in his own Art) void of Prudence, when He thus spoke to the Father of the
great Alexander; The Gods ^orbid that your Majesty should ever be brought so
low, as to know these triffleing matters better than I do. Sure I am that the
Master Carv^r of K. I^mes the (...) of great Britan, was more pedantick than
they both, for having enquired of his Majesty if He would have the Wing of a
Rabbet? The K. merrily answered, Did you ever see a ^abbet flee? To which the
Carv^r most foolishly replied, that the Wing o^ a Rabbet was as proper language
in England, as the ^arther Leg of a Capon in Scotland; for which saucy
Competition the King never rested till He turned him out of his Office; Here
the ^esentment was greater, though the Crime less, than that of a Schoolmaster
at Alexandria in Egypt* who being demand^d by Ptolomens Lagus, who was
Socrates's Father* The impertinent Pedant enquired of the King who was Lagus's
Father (which embosomed a tacit Reflection on the meanness of his Decent) for
which Insolency the Courtiers advised to hang him, But the mild Prince
answered, that he who will jest, must resolve to be jested withal. As for that
Secre^ary to Emmanuel K. of Portugal, I think his Royal Master was very
injurious to him, for the King having received a Letter from the Pope
concerning a weighty Affair, He called for His Secretary and ordained him to
frame an answer so well as He could, against the next morning, and I will (said
the King) draw up an Answer too, and what We both judge to be fittest, shall be
sent; the Secretary obeyed: but when the King read his Draught, He threw His
own into the Fire, because it was so far exceeded by the other, and me^rly for
this threw His Secretary out of his Place, which without all peradventure was
male judicatum, for the King ought to have considered that His Secretary was
bound to be faithful to his Prince, as one of His Subjects; and that it was no
part of the Regal Office, but only of a Clerk, to be a good Formalist: and if
he had consulted the Prince of the Latin Poets, he would have taught Him more
Prudence in these excellent Verses,

Exeudent alij spirantia mollius Era, etc.
Tu regere Imperio Populos Roman memento
Hae Tibi erunt Arts etc.
FAB. LXXVI. Page 75.
This Fable minds Me of the Perverseness of the Tartars, who being contiguous
to diverse Parcels of good Land, which also border either on Pol^ or Muscovy*
they (like the Dog in the Manger) will not suffer their Neighbors to cultivat
that interjacent earth, nor will they be at the pains to labor it themselves.

FAB. LXXVIII. LXXIX. LXXX. Page 77.
Here he had Occasion to mention that blasphemous expression of Alphonsus the
Xth of that Name, K. of Castile, He was accounted a great Astronomer, at least
it was by his Authority, and on his expense that the ^amous Tabulae ALPHONSINAE
were framed and published to the World; his parasitical Subjects gave him the
Epithete of ALPHONSUS the WISE, but Mariana was more just to Him in writing
that He was more Knowing than Wise, neither judge I it an Act of Injustice to
aver that he was a most insolent FOOL, in presumeing to say, that if He had
been at God's Elbow when He made the World, He would (forsooth) have suggested
a much wiser Contrivance; But in his blasphemous Folly, and disastrous Fate, We
may see how dangerous it is to be handling edged Tools, for after that most
impious Expression He never prospered more in this World, but became despicable
both abroad and at Home, for going to take Possession of the German-Empire, (to
which diverse of the Electors had called Him) He found another placed upon the
Throne, before He came the length* Yea (like the Dog snatching at the Shadow
o^ Flesh in his Teeth) in seeking a Crown abroad, He left his own Diadem at
home, for his unnatural Son had taken possession of the Throne of Castile
before his Father returned to Spain, tho he had gone no further than to Avinion
in France.

FAB. LXXXIV. Page 81.
Here He might have mentioned that witty reproof which Demoratus of Corinth
gave Philip of Macedon for his domestical Janglings, for he had turned off his
Wife Olympias, and his Son Alexander a little before Demoratus came to his
Court, whom having received very kindly, and at last enquireing how the States
of Greece were agreeing amongst themselves, and regrating there should be such
Animosities among these who were all of one Nation, it being much better for
them to a^ee together against the common Enemy (meaning the Persians) and at
last the King protested that he would use all the means that lay in his Power,
to cement their Divisions: It becomes you very well to talk of uniting states
abroad (said Demoratus) when you cannot so rule your own Family at home as to
keep Divisions out of it; which plain expostulation proved the way to the
Return of the Mother with her Son.

FAB. LXXXVII. Page 84.
Here We have a spiritual Disease which is an Emblem of that bodily Distemper
called a Dropsy, for as an hydroped Person the more he drinks, he thirsts the
more, so it fares with a covetuous Wordling, the more he gets, the Appetite of
his Soul is the more enlarged; Crescit habe ndi Cupido, and so he is still the
farther removed from true Contentment, which cannot possibly be attained unto
in this life, till our Hearts be brought down to our Conditions; according to
that of the Heathen Poet, Quod sis esse velis; Iuvenal in very few words having
(though a Pagan) truly told us the nature of Contentment both in Heaven and Earth
(if they be taken in a right sense) viz. Men's sana in Corpore sano.

FAB. LXXXIX. Page 85.
This Apologue of the Beaver minds me of the Expression of that Roman Knight,
who being one of the Proscripti, dureing the bloody Triumvirat at Rome, said
that he was not personally criminal, but only domestically guilty; meaning that
their coveting that stately house which he had lately built in Rome would be
the sole Cause of His Death.

FAB. XC. XCI, Page 86.
I do not find in any History a more tragical Dissipation of a Family by that
hellish Passion of Revenge, than that which fell out in Spain in the preceding
Age, as is testified by Mariana: There was a Spanish Cavaleer who had a Moor to
his slave, he having offended the Lady, she caused scourge him for his fault;
now as his nation is generally treacherous and vindictive, so most cruel in
their Revenge: therefore this resenting slave did beat his Brains Night and
Day how to be avenged on the Lady; reflecting at last (as the Devil would have
it) upon the too great Kindness betwixt himself and the Chambermaid, he
engaged her in that Diabolical Plot to accuse her Lady to her Lord, viz. that
she was guilty of Incontinencie, and so base therein, that it was with her own
Gardener; and all this he told his Master under the pretense of great
good will, and that he could not endure to see so kind a Master so dishonored,
and then appealed to the testimony of the Chambermaid, and was so confident of
the truth of the Indictment, that he assured his Lord he should cause him
deprehend the violator of his Honor in the very Clos^t with his Lady; to which
(as the Villain said) he came but too frequently: so that the very next morning
he caused that unhappy wench call for the Gard'rer to come and speak with her
Lady; then that black Moor of Hell ran to his Lord and told him that if he made
have he would find that Rascal presently with his Lady; the enraged husband
believing the whole treacherous Series to be true, finding the Gardener comeing
out of the chamber door (for no doubt the lady had told as^ that She had not
called for him) he instantly stabbed him to the heart, and with the same
bloody Poynard (breath and sury) dispatched his innocent Wife (for Jealousy
is cruel as the Grave) but while his hands were thus smoking with innocent
Blood, God Almighty, who will not fail, sooner or later, to vindicat the
guiltless, awakned the Conscience of one of these great Criminals, and that was
the Chambermaid, for she fell down at her Masters feet, and with many tears
declared the Innocence of her Mistress, and confessed all their hellish
contrivance against her, whereupon the unhappy Husband being mad with the Rage
of a guilty Conscience, instantly dispatched that wicked Woman, and the more
wicked Moor; and Himself at last, as the greatest Criminal.

I know not any Narrative so para^lel to this most lamentable Story, as that of
Othello the Moor of Venice, which we find at great length in Shakespeare's
Trag^dies, for He was trepaned almost the same way, and from the same
principle, to murder an innocent wife, even the fair Desdemona, but since it is
not to be found in any Venetian History, neither do I think any of them would
have been guilty of such a palpable Omission, if it had been true; for it makes
that unfortunat Moor General of that famous Republic in Cyprus, therefore I
shall give it a Dimission, with the Title of a most tragical Romance; but both
of them afford Us that same moral Instruction, even to try well before we trust
in any weighty matter, especially in matters of Revenge; yea suppose private
Revenge were lawful (as there is nothing more contrary to the blessed Gospel)
yet for any man to be precipitant therein, he may do such an ill turn in a
minut of time, which will give him an Occasion of Repentance so long as he
lives, though he should outlive the Age of Methusalem.

FAB. XCII. XCIII. XCIV. Page 87.
He might have told that Story mentioned by Josephus the Jewish Historian,
concerning a Roman General who marching with his Army in some part of Syria, an
Augur instantly advised him to halt, because, said he, there is a little Bird
which by the Motion of its Wings progonsticats ill luck to the Roman Army, if
we go any further that way; the General desired to see the ominous Bird, and
being a dextrous Archer, he shot it dead with a Dart; then turning toward the
Soath-sayer, he said, we are very great fools to imagine that the silly Bird
should have known our Fate, since it understood nothing of its own Destiny;
therefore he immediately advances with his army and found not the lest
misfortune in that way.

There is also another notable Story to this Purpose (which abundantly
deciphers the Vanity of such Impostures) After the shameful Defeat of the
Roman Army under Marcus Crassus, and the most ignominious Death of their
General for all his Wealth. Cassius (even the same who afterward with Brutus
assasinated the great Caesar) aving brought off a considerable part of the
Cavalry, now though their safty consisted in their flight; yet a foolish
Astrologue had the confidence to say to him that it was mighy dangerous for
them all to proceed one-foot further, till the Moon had gone out of the Sign
Capricorn, O^ said Gassins, (for He was a great Scholar) I fear that of
Sagittarius much more; alluding (by the Name of that other Sign of the Zodiac)
unto the Parthian Arrows; so that by making no stay in the Vieu of the Enemy,
He brought off that Remainder of a miserable Army, without any further
prejudice from their more powerful Pursuers.

I shall shut up this point with a witty Reflection of Cato the elder upon all
such Impostures at Rome, for he many times admired that when the Aruspices, the
Augurs and Star-Gazers (all which passed under the general name of
Soothsayers) did meet one another, that they did not laugh heartily for their
deluding and cheating the World so long with their manifold Fopperies, Lies and
Deceits.

FAB. XCV. Page 89.
Nero was fed with such false Intelligence to his ruin; for they made him
believe that his Army in Spain were bringing Galba a bound prisoner; and thus
the Parasits of Vitellius talked of the Army under Vespasian; neither an a
thinking Man want Instances of such dreadful and destructive amusings in this
very Age wherein we live; Our Author's putting these words in the Mouth of an
empirick Statesman, viz. That Is as We Would have it; puts me in mind of Olivares
the great Favorite of Philip IV. of Spain, who being first informed of the
revolt of Portugal, Anno 1040. (which had continued under a foreign Yoke the
space of 60 Years, according to the prophecy of S. Bernard) He instantly
resorted to the King, and demanded Albricias (which word among the Spaniards
imports a great Reward given to those who bring great and good Tidings) O! said
he, Portugal is revolted, and now You may make a province of them, yea justly
make them all Slaves for their base Ingratitude, and most odious Rebellion: but
if the Albricias be delayed till that be done, I suppose that Reward will never
rescue the Receaver from pinching Poverty.

FAB. XCVII. Page 91.
This minds me of the Spaniard who being at Sea in the time of a great tempest,
vowed to the Virgin Mary (if She would bring him safe to Land) a wax candle to
burn in her Chapel of Loretto as big as the Mast of the Ship; a neighbor of
his, standing beside, said, take heed what you vow, for you are not able to
perform it, for their Vessel was of considerable bulk, then he whispered his
comerad in the Ear, If I were once at Land, I will make her rest content with a
Candle much less than my Arm: But the true and living God will not be mocked.

FAB. XCVIII. Page 92.
Here the Jewish Proverb may find place, that A Father who puts not his Son to
an honest Trade; when he is young: teaches him to steal when he is Old. As
also that smart Answer which the Pyrat gave Alexander the great, that himself
was but a petty Thief who pilfered for mere Necessity, but such as He, robbed
whole Provinces and Kingdoms through mere Ambition, and finaly that of the Poet.

Ille Cruoem, pretium seeleri^ tulit; Hic Diadema.
FAB. C. Page 94.
The eldest Son of K. Cr^fus was lost with such a Dream, Vision, or Response of
an Oracle to his Father; and who knows not the (...) of the Poet (...)? who
having got a Response that He should die by the ^all of an House, he still lived
in Ten^s; but the Oraculat House was the shell of a Torro^se, which an Eagle
threw down upon His bald Pate (taking it for a Stone) and so killed Him: for
that shell is called the House of a To^toise.

There is nothing more admirable in the Providence of GOD, than the most
wonderful Disappointment of the most (...) of Men and Devi^s to (...) at the
Determinations of Heaven, by making their counteracting Designs and Endeavors,
the principal means (if not the role secundary Causes) of effectuating the
Divine Decrees; many instances could be given to this purpose; but for (...)
sake I shall only (...) one Example, but a very observable one, both forth
rarity of the matter, and its attestation by so many Greek and Latin
Historians. There lived a young Nobleman in the days of the Emperor
Constanti^s, who dreamed that a Child wrapped in Pur^ (...) out of his Side;
the next Day the simple (...) told if as a Sport to the (...) who (...)
naturally a very jealous Prince, and being con^ in his suspicion by some
Sooth-(...) about him that the Night-Vision did prognosticat one of that
Dreamer's Posterity to be destined for the Imperial Throne, upon some srivolous
Pretense He put the innocent Nobleman to Death (for Tyrants have allways vain
Pretensions in store) Neither did his Injustice rest there, but did also
consiscat his great Fortune to the Crown, yea his malice would have been
further extended even to the birth of a Posthumous Child, which his Wife
afterward brought forth, if it had been a Male, but finding it of the other
sex, He did not regard the Dream any more. The distressed Lady died shortly
after that production, full of Penury and Melancholy, yet before Her Death
she recommended the poor Orphan to the Care of a relative of her own, who was
Wife to one Valentinian, one of the Captains of Constantius's Army. Little was
He then dreaming of the Empire, and much less when He was cashiered and
relegated to a Castle in Cappodocia, by Julian the Apostate, for giveing a
Priest a box on the Ear, for sprinkleing some of his Aqua lusiralis on His
Face, when He ushered his Master into one of the Pagan Temples; bur Iovian
having succeeded that impious Apostate, He retrieved Valentinian with great
Honor, and advanced Him in the Army; and living not many months, Valentinian
for his Gallantry was chosen Emperor, by the souldierie; whose Election was
approved by the Generality of the Christian People, because He had been a Noble
Consessor; Then having settled his Brother Valens Emperor in the East, He fixed
at Rome, the old Imperial Seat; and after 2 or 3 Years of His Residence there;
the noble Orphan committed to the Care of his Wife, was then become a Woman,
and being one Day in the Bath with the Empress, the too simple Wife told her
Husband at Night that the poor Child whom she had entertained so long, out of
Charity, was the greatest Beauty, in Her Judgment, upon the Face of the Earth;
for Her self had seen Her naked in the Bath that very day; This awakned the
curiosity of the Emperor to see with His own eyes that Paragon of Nature that
so affected his Heart, that at any Rate He would mary the young Iustina, for so
she was named at the Font: (By such a vain Aspect the Kingdom of the Goths in
Spain was ruined by the Moors, under that licentious Prince Roderigo) yet the
amorous Valentinian had so much kindness for his first Wife, that He would not
repudiat Her, but did not bogle at Polygamy, though He was otherwise a much more
Orthodox Christian than His Brother; On this young Paramour He begat a Son who
succeeded the elder brother Gratian (by another Venture) His Name being
Valentinian II. Thus We find at last the Mystery of the purple Dream
unriddled; and to conclude, if Constantius had considered and believed that
Maxim of an old Philosopher, That it is simply impossible for any Man to Kill
his Successor, He would not in all probability have endeavored by such
inhumane Means to interrupt the current of that stream, which may easily
overflow the greatest, but cannot be stopped by any.

FAB. CX. Page 103.
Here He might have taken occasion to narrate that story of the Golden Tripos,
which some fishermen haled to land in their Net, instead of a fish, in the Time
of the seven wise men of Greece, which being successively refused by them all,
it was at last dedicated to the Priestess of Apollo at Delphi, to be set upon
that Chasma of the earth from whence they had their Oracular Evaporations.

FAB. CXIII. Page 106.
It was an usual expression of Aristotle, (...); and the Truth thereof is
verified by the far greatest part of the World who are mightily afraid of
Death; especially voluptuous Persons, (who make their Bellies their Gods) are
most unwilling to have that sensual Idol torn from them, when they are in full
possession of all its endearing Circumstances; O Death! (says Syracides) How
bitter is thy Remembrance to him who is sitting at Ease in his own house, and
enjoyes the World at Will? But it is much more admirable to find a Man that is
surrounded with Misery to be unwilling to go to that Place where the weary be
at Rest; Yet I my self knew one who was as miserable as any man in this World
can be supposed to be, for he was in the further side of LXXX. and besides the
usual Infirmities of a decrepit Age, He was most pitifully tormented with
Nephritical pains, yea with such frequent and violent Fits of the Gravel, that
He has been heard crying at a great Distance; and as for his external
Condition in the World, He was a most indigent Beggar, who would undoubtedly
have starved many a Time, if charitable Neighbors had not succored Him; I did
visit Him on his Deathbed, and well knowing all his deplorable Circumstances,
I doubted not in the least but that He was very glad of the Approach of Death
to rescue Him out of the Jaws of extreme misery, and having demanded the same
of him, I heard Him with great Admiration say, That if it were the Will of God,
he could be content to live yet a while longer, for all his misery; which I
could not possibly impute to any other Principle, than the Natural Horror of
Death, and that more Spiritual one of a bad Conscience.

Yet I judge the Conclusion of the Commentator too general, as to all those who
improve the lawful means in order to their Recovery, as if they were most
unwilling to die, who call for Physicians, Apothecaries and Surgeons; He
fancies them to resemble (for all the World) Lewis XI. of France, who had such
an infinite Dread of Death, that (if We believe Philip de Comines) there was
nothing that sounded so terribly to his evil Conscience, as the very mention of
that Fatal word. But he should have considered that they Sin against Nature who
spurn at the Means, when they are in a Capacity to use them, it being a true
Maxim of the Casuists, That the means are ours, but the event is Gods; for I
have known some good Christians that were so weary of the Fable of this World
(as Epiphanius usually said) and had so little Kindness for this natural Life,
yea were so desirous To be dissolved, and to be with Christ, that if their
Consciences had not commanded them to use the Means, they would have rather
chosen to have dyed more than once (if it had been possible) than to have
endured the Fatigue of medicinal Applications; which minds Me of the famous
Consul Marius, who being both pained and deformed in his legs with that
Distemper that Physicians term Varices, He having (to all outward Appearance)
suffered most patiently the Lanceing and Cutting of one of them, when the
Surgeon addressed to the other, He told Him that these Incisions and
Amputations were not worth the while, and since Death was the worst of it, He
would choose rather to die, than undergo so much Trouble again.

Yea more than so, if all true Christians were not convinced that the Lord of
Life, has fixed Us here away as a Sentinel, at a post, who must not remove
without his Captains Order, I am fully persuaded that some of them (for any
Dread they have of Death, would not be shy to imitate that Roman Senator who
being informed that the monster of Nature named Nero, had determined to put Him
to a tormenting death; He resolved to anticipat the Tyrant's Malice, by
starving Himself to death, and having entirely abstained from all Kind of Food,
the space of five or six Days, one of his Friends came and told Him that he was
misinformed, For the Emperor had no bad Design upon Him, therefore, subjoined
he, all your Friends are resolved to come and sup with you this Night, and we
will make a merry Night of it for your escapeing so great a Misfortune: He
answered that his Friends should be allways welcome to him; but when they were
assembled, all their Oratory could not persuade Him to take one Morsel of
Bread, nor one Dram of Wine, though some of them urged him with that Aphorism of
Hippocrates, Famem Vini Potus solvit, and for His Pertinacy he gave them this
Reason, That He was now within the Confines of Death, and had already a full
Vieu of that King of Terrors, and since He knew infallibly that He behooved
once to pay that last Debt to Nature, He would not be at the pains again to
begin his passage through that dark Trance of Death, but hoped within 2 or 3 Days
to grapple with his Adversary, though He knew before hand what the Event would
be, even to be laid flat upon the Ground by his invincible Enemy.

FAB. CXV. Page 103.
They who are curious, may find many other pertinent little Stories to this
purpose in Plutarch his Treatise of Brutes having some Use of Reason, whose
general Topic is very plausible; it may appear (says He) to be the general
Sentiment of Mankind in calling Dogs, Horse, etc. mad, which undoubtedly in Man
imports the Privation of the Use of Reason.

FAB. CXVI. Page 108.
In my weak Judgment this Fable militats as much (if not more) against the
unhappiness of Successive, as of Elective Kingdoms; it being very rare to find
Electors so infatuated as to make choice of an Infant, of a Female, of a
deformed Creature, of a mere Simpleton, who is deformed both in body and mind,
or of a notorious Coward, or finaly of one that is odicus in the Eyes of the
World for brutish Sensuality and Excess; Germany once stumbled upon such a
disastrous Election, When Wenceslaus K. of Bohemia was chosen their Emperor,
to the mighty Prejudice of the Empire, both in the Election, and by his male
Administration; For His Father Charles IV. counteracted to his own Golden BULL,
in bribeing the Electors so palpably, to make choice of such a Calf to be their
Caesar; but such monstrous Births are very seldom seen at Francfort in Germany,
or Cracow in Poland; as for hereditary Kingdoms, People must be content to
receave what the Hand of Nature reaches to them, whether it be bountiful or
hydebound, and that without Remedy, unless they serve a Breve of Idiotrie
against their Prince, when he becomes another Nebuchad^ezar, so that they are
constrained to give Him an Administrator or Protector, as it fared with Charles
VI. of France; or if He be an incorrigible Fool, to turn Him off, as was done
in this present Age, to one of the Kings of Portugal.

FAB. CXVIII. Page 110.
They have infallibly the more generous Spirits who glory in being The Sons of
their own right Arm (as the Spaniards phrase it) for that sober Acknowledgement
of their own base Original, embosomes this Insinuation allways in it, that they
owe their Rise either in Church or State, rather to their own Virtue, then to
the Gifts of Fortune; Thus Sixtus V. (as smart a Pope as ever had the Honor to
sit in that Chair of S. Peter) usually vaunted that he was Oriundus Domo
illustri, alluding to his Fathers house, which was so poor a Cottage, that the
Roof of it was not totalie covered; Likewise one Willegese who was Archbishop
of Mentz, and one of the Prince Electors, caused paint Cart Wheels on all the
walls of his Palace, to mind Him that his father had been but a poor
Cart-Wright: and who has not heard of Agathocles K. of Sicily, though otherwise
a most cruel Tyrant, but in one thing he was generous, for whereas he might
have been served in Go'd and Silver Vessels, he would use none himself but
earthen ones, to mind him (said he) of his original, because his Father had
been but a poor Potter, and in his younger Days he had practiced that Trade
himself; but there was another Potter's Son of far greater Virtue than
Aga^ocles, and that was the gallant Eumenes, who was not ashamed to own his
original, even then when He was opposeing (with great Courage and Conduct) that
great K. of Asia, Antigonus: who was another of the Captains of Alexander the
Great.

FAB. CXXI. Page 113.
Why may not a Beast lust after a Woman, as well as a Woman after a Beast? For
not to speak of the Golden Ass of Apuleius, the common Story of Pasipha^ (wife
to King Minos) with her beloved Bull, is sufficient evidence that we may
believe the same was literaly practicable; Martial (that obscene latin poet,
and of a kin it seems to the greek Anacreon) has an Epigram to this same
purpose; Iun^am Pasiphae, etc. (for I will not honor it with a repetition) yet
there he plainly tells us, that he saw this brutish pageantrie reacted before
the beastly Emperor Domitian in the Amphi^eatre at Rome.

And that Love serves to mollify most cruel natures, may appear from Polyphemus
his wooing of Galataea, (if we may believe the amorous poet Ovid) or Knoles
his turkish history, who tells us that Mahomet the great was softened by the
fair Irene almost to the degree of Eff^minacie, but after a 1^ month his
fiercenes returned, and that butcherly Tiger with his own hand cut off her
Head: In fine the most admirable Influence I read of this passion was the
transforming (as it were) of a Brute into a Man, I mean the eldest son of a
Roman Senator, who was so stupid from his Infancy, that he was accounted by
all that knew him but a two legged beast, so that His father being ashamed to
have him seen in the City, confined him to a country house and the fields
thereabout; it being his good fortune to espy a very beautiful young Lady,
who, with some of her attenders, was lying sleeping in a Wood, this beautiful
object which he still gazed upon till she awaked, was so far from Inhauncing
his stupidity like a Gorgons head, that it may be said this sight put instantly
a new Spirit into that most simple youth, for from that day forward he so
speedily increased in knowledge and virtue that within a short time he was
accounted one of the greatest Wits and Gallants, yea the greatest Virtuoso in
all Rome, so that all who knew him judged Him most worthy of the greatest
Beauty in the world, and the reader needs not doubt but that she who had
wrought such a Wonderful happy alteration upon him, with all Her friends, were
very glad of the honor of such an alliance.

FAB. CXXIV. Page 116.
He might here have instanced that of Medaea in the Tragoedy: who when she was
about to murder her own Children, because her husband Jason was ready to marry
Creusa daughter to the King of Corinth, the poet introduces her speaking thus
against that most unnatural design,

-- Video meliora, proboque
Deteriora sequor. --
FAB. CXXVIII. Page 119.
A parallel Deportment to this honest Carpenter did happen at Rome not long
ago, which is most worthy of the recording and noticeing. A good Cardinal
lived there, who was very famous for his Charitable deeds; in the time of a
great dearth, a poor Widow resorted to him and made her moan, that for diverse
years by gone she and her daughter had lived honestly upon their domestical
Virtue, without being burdensome to any; but now (said she) there is such
scarcity of all things necessary for Humane life, that we have enough ado to
hold in our lives by our handie work so that the Chamber-Rent is unpayed, and
the Lands-Lord is threatening to cast me out; but, subjoyned she, that which
anguisheth my spirit most of all, Me fears mere penury shall make my daughter
run into a brothel-House: the Cardinal demanded what the Chamber mail amounted
to, she answered 5. Crowns, he gave her a precept to his Chamberlain (who lived
in the City) to give her the Money, for upon the production of the Cardinal's
precepts he sitted his accounts at the years end, the Chamberlain told down 50.
Crowns to the poor widow, she told him he was mistaken for she sought but 5. O!
said the Chamberlain, here is the express Order of my Master which I dare not
disobey; neither, said she, dare I disobey my Conscience, for I sought no more
from his Eminence, and I know he appointed me to get no more, therefore I will
have no more; well, subjoyned the Chamberlain, I find few supplicants of your
Kidney but since every Man is the best Interpreter of his own orders, let Us
go both to the Cardinal that we may hear himself: when the matter was thus
represented to him, the good Cardinal declared that he designed no more when
he signed that order; but only the little sum the Widow had sought; but when he
saw the cipher added to the fifth figure, either (said he) some extraordinary
providence has conducted my hand, without my knowledge, or a much better hand
has added that Fair cipher, whereupon he called again for pen and ink, and
added a new cipher, which made the same 500 Crowns; Now said he to the poor
Widow, go and receive all this money, and pay your Chamber Rent in the first
place, and see if you can provide some honest Match to your daughter by giving
her the Residue, that she may not become a whore.

FAB. CXXXI. Page 121.
It may also afford this Morality, That some times favor is s^owen where no
good is exspected, for who would have looked for any good at the hands of a
serpent: thus a barbarous Prince restored King Lysimachus after he had yielded
himself and Kingdom for want of Water, and a turkish Prince long afterward
did no less to a Greek Emperor.

FAB. CXXXIII. Page 123.
Here he might have mentioned that poetical story of Hippomenes and Atalanta,
for the cunning Man did out wit the swist-running Maid, by throwing three
golden Apples out of the way at several times which she stepping a side to take
up, and thinking for all that to overtake him, (and as it were flee before him)
yet his policy at last obtains the prize: For Tardus in via, pr^venit
Cursoreni extra viam.

FAB. CXXXVIII. Page 126.
Here it might have been told that a man gave admirable good Counsel one day in
the Senate of Sparta in a very weighty matter, which concerned the honor of the
state, but in regard he was a very profligat person, it was advi^ed that one
of the gravest of the Senators should the next day propose the same expedient
in other words, that it might not reflect any dishonor o^ the state, that such
a vile person (as the first suggester) had been so much regarded.

FAB. XLII. Page 12^.
Here he might have mentioned the exclamation of Lysimachus that great King of
Thrace, and one of the Captains of Alexander the great. O! what an excellent
Kingdom have I lost for a little fleshly pleasure! this he spoke when being
straightened by a barbarous Prince, he was forced to yield himself with His whole
Army, because they were like to pyne with thrist where they were couped in; no
doubt the intrinsic value of a Cup of water is far below that of a Kingdom;
yet as Necessity has no Law, so the Belly has no Ears.

FAB. CLVI. Page 141.
The Trag^dy of Zeno Emperor of the East may be termed a parallel to this
fable, but with disadvantage to the Imperial husband, whose wife caused bury
him alive in on of his fitts of the Epilepsie, which befell him frequently by
his excessive drinking, so that his Unnatural spouse suffered him to starve to
death in His sepulcher for want both of meat and drink and though he cried most
ruthfully to be releived from that dark prison, when he came to a sense of
himself; yet the Inhumane Hagg would not permit it; that a younger and much
handsomer Man might succeed him, both in his bed and Throne, and that was
Anastasius the principal Secretary of State.

FAB. CLVIII. Page 142.
This Fable is grounded on a Fable, viz. That Swans sing, especially before
their Death; But whosoever desires to see the Nullity of this common
Tradition, let them consult Dr. Brown, in his Vulgar Errors.

FAB. CLXIII. Page I follow the Mistake of the Printer.
137.
A generous Man is so far from insulting over the miserable, suppose he be a
dead Enemy; that He is rather prone to water the Adversaries Horse with his
Tears: Therefore I am apt to believe that Lucan in His Poems was both
uncharitable and Injurious to the great Caesar, by insinuating, it was for joy
he weeped over Pompey the great's head, when it was presented unto him; I^
Caesar being one of the most clement Princes that ever reigned in this world*
givs us reason to conclude, that the serious consideration of the sudden fall
of Pompey from so great glory, into the power of some base slaves, did draw
abundance of Tears of real grief from the eyes of his Father-in-Law: and I find
it one of the greatest Reflections upon the honor of his grand Nephew Augustus
Caesar, that he should have caused cut off the head of Brutus to be sent to
Rome, and laid at the feet of his uncles Statua, even after Marc Antony had
covered his dead Body with his own Purple Garment; yet the same Augustus weept
amain for the Death of Marc Antony (if we believe Plutarch) though He had been
more injurious to his Family, than ever Pompey had been to that of Julius.

But Antigonus of Macedon (the Son of K. Demetrius) was much more generous than
Augustus; for when that restless spirit Pyrrhus the Epirot, came to his (...)
and at (...), though he had once dispossessed (...) of his Kingdom, and even at
the time of his death was in war against him, yet when the head of the famous
(...) was presented to him, he was so far from insulting over a dead enemy,
that he sharply rebuked some of his nearest relations for their insolency, and
ordered both the h^nd and body of his enemy to be given to his son, that he
might give his father honorable burial: Thus when Marcus A^relius (surnamed
the Philosopher) heard that his army had defeated the enemy, and killed his
rival; and though he was apparently, his competitor for the empire, yet this meek
and most clement Prince regrated unfeignedly, that they had not brought him
alive unto him, that he might have tasted of his mercy: The best parallel I
find to this benign disposition, was that of the royal Martyr, K. Charles I.
of great Britain, who had the same merciful sentiments in reference to The
fate of the Hothames, as we may perceive from a section of his incomparable
Book, so entitled.

But all the Roman Emperors were not so generous, as this Antoni^ or Aurelius
the Philosopher, for long before his time Vitellins manifested a great deal of
baseness in his deportment in reference to the dead soldiers of the defeated
Army of the Emperor Otho, whose unburied and naked bodies he would needs fee,
and when it was told him that he would never be able to endure the noisome
stench of them, (for they had been killed in the plains of Lombardy before
Vetellius himself had crossed the Alps) that vile beast most ingenerously
answered* That there (...) nothing so savoury to him, as the smell of a dead
enemy, but especially of a Citizen; notwithstanding his rival Otho had cast
hi^ a much fairer copy; for though he might easily have recruited again, yet he
did voluntarily dispatch himself, that he might ob^ the Effusion of any more
Roman Blood, suppose it were wholly of his enemy* But (...) Severus neither
learned this generosity from Otho, nor Marens' Aurelius, though they were both
before him, for having politicaly given the Title of (...), to Calhinus in the
North, that he might not interrupt his Progress against Pescenius Niger, in the
East, how soon he had discussed that Syrian Competitor, he immediately turned
his Forces against his other Rival Albinus, who being killed in Battle.
Septimius gave an apparent Demonstration to his whole Army that He was a Native
of Africa (they being generally Vindictive and most cruel in their Revenge) for
he did tread again and again, with his Horse Feet, upon the dead Body of his
new slain Competitor.

Many other Instances of this Nature might be given; but I shall shut up the
Point with an Observation of the great Historian Thuan in reference to the
famous Duke of Guise (who was the great Promoter of that pretended Holy League
of France) He was reputed (says the Historian) a very generous Prince,
especially in his Behavior toward the Captivated Prince of Conde, but his
Deportment in reference to the no less famous Admiral Coligni, sullied his
Memory exceedingly, for that Admiral being trepanned by that perfidious Prince
Charles IX. He was basely and barbarously murdered by His supposts in his own
Lodging, notwithstanding of the safe Conduct the King had given Him, and of all
His pretended great Resentments for the shooting of Him through the Arm, his dead
Body being thrown out of the Window: the Duke of Guise walking in the Court,
having viewed it with Torch-Light, that He might not be mistaken in His
Insulting, He most basely struck the dead man, in the Face, with his Foot,
which had been too insolent, says Thuan, suppose He had been upon the Plot of
killing the Duke's Father, at Orleance, by Poltrot, from which Fact He had
frequently vindicated himself by Oath, and to his Son in particular; But little
was the Duke then dreaming how His own murdered Body would afterward be abused
at Blois, notwithstanding the ^afe Conduct He had from K. Henry III. and that
the infinite Wisdom and Justice would make Him read his Sin in his Judgment,
in that same Place where Himself had first contrived that execrable Massacre at
Paris; so that they are the wisest and best of Men, be they never so great, who
in their Prosperity mind frequently and seriously that of the chief of the
Roman Orators, Homo qui in Homine calamitoso misericors est, meminit S^i; And
that notable Di^h of the Prince of the Latin Poets,

N^scia Mers Hominum Fati Sortisque futur^,
Et servare Modum Rebus sublata secundis.
FAB. CLXIX. Page 141.
Here he might have told the ridiculous answer of that vaunting Traveller, who
pretended to have been in all the cities of Italy, and in Venice among the
rest, and being desired by one to give a Description of the famous Church of S.
Mark: The return He made, was, That he had not stayed at Venice no not one
Night, but galloped through the City at Night, so that e're the Morning Light, He
had rode through all the streets, and was gone a good way from it.

FAB. CLXX. Page 142.
The vain curiosity of Mercury minds me of Cicero the famous Orator, whose
Vanity may be said to have gone pari passu with his Oratory, and consequently
it was great enough; especially after the Disappointment of the Con^piracie of
Cataline against the State, because He had been Consul then, and had managed
that Affair pretty dexterously; I dare say He imagined there was never so wi^e
nor so good a Patriot of Rome before, nor would any such arise after Him, for
almost in all the Orations that He made to the People, after that Exploit, He
failed not to harp upon that string, Usque ad Nauseam; Yea before he was
Consul, being sent Quaestor to Sicily, where He abode above a twelve Month, in
his return through Italy, before he reached the City, he rancountred an old
cquaintance, and almost the first Quaerie He proposed to Him, was, what Talk
had been at Rome concerning his Government in Sicilie? never doubtiog but that
He should instantly hear, that all the Senators, all the Knights, and Body of
the People, were frequently magnifying his wise Conduct, and great
Achievements in that Gran^rie of Rome; But I believe there could not an Answer
imaginable be more mortifying to a man of so vain a Temper, than the return
which was made in these words; Sir, (said his acquaintance) You have prevented
my Apology for not paying a visit to you, this twelve months bygone, at your
own house, at Rome; for this is the first time that I did hear of your removal
from our City.

FAB. CLXXXVIII. Page 158.
The Metamorphoses mentioned so frequently both by the Greek and Latin poets,
whereby the Witch Circe transformed Men into Beasts, by the Touch of her
inchan^ing Rod, ought to be expounded in that same sense as judicious
Commentators interpret the dissaster of Nebuchadnezzar; for as that great King
lost not his shape, (when he became obnoxious to that pitiful disease
physicians term Lycanthropia) but only his Understanding, in im^gining himself
to be a Wolf; so all these men, on whom their brutish affections have a mighty
predominancy, are justly said to be transformed into Beasts, though thy are still
two Leg^ed beasts, and only symbolize too much with the noted predominant bad
qualities of diverse wild creatures; and by the Moly which Mercury gave to
Ulysses as an Antidote or countercharm to all the ^rceries of Circe, we may
understand the strength of Reason and divine Grace, which have sufficient power
(if sufficiently improved) to subjug^t a^l our extrav agant Passions and
exorbitant Affections.

FAB. CXCIV. Page 164.
Here he might have pertinently celebrated the due praise of the Roman Consul
Fabricius* who was so generous as to hate the Treason no less than the Traitor;
for when the persidious Physician of King Pyrrhus sent a missive le^ter to the
Consul, proffering to poison his master for a certain sum of money,
notwithstanding Pyrrhus had already prevailed much over the Romans (they being
unacquanted with Elephants at that time) yet the noble Fabricius sent the
letter to Pyrrhus, and in the cover of it upbraided him that He knew neither
his friends nor his enemies, for you may perceive (said He) from the enclosed,
that you are sostering snakes in your bosom and know it not, whereas you have
declared enmity against those who never did you any wrong: but as for Us Romans
we judge it just enough to kill a malicious Enemy in the open field, if he
will not hearken unto reason, but we deem it the height of baseness to take
away the life of any man by Treachery: Would to God all Princes (whither
In^ideles or Christians) were endued with such true generosity; But we must
know that this was the Age, wherein the true Roman Gallantrie (I mean their
excellency in all the four Cardinal Virtues) was in its (...) or Zenith.

FAB. CXCV. Page 165.
It would be tedious to the reader to enumerat all the Examples of those
unfortunate Princes, who have in a manner hatched snakes to sting themselves to
death: thus the gigantick Tyrant Maximinus de^lt with Alexander Severus and
Philip with the Emperor young Gordianus; and that villainous Fatherin-law
Arrius Aper with that excellently learned prince Numerianus, so that the
mnrderer was most deservedly stabbed to death by Diocles^, for He was the Boar
meant by one of the Dr^des in France* and that, two or three Ages ago, Charles
the warlick (that restless Duke of Burgundy) nourished such a snake in his
bosom, when he entertained in his service that persidious Italian Count named
(...) Basso; and who has not heard that the Ma^or Do^o in France overturned
his Masters house, that the M^rovingian Race might give place to the
Carolovingian, which within two or three Ages became a preparative to the
Capaetian family: But who^o desires variety of Instances to this purpose, let
them cross the Mediterranean S^ to Africa* and there they will find many
deleterious snakes fostered in their masters bosom to their utter ruin at
last* Neither need we go so f^rr back to the bastard Iugurt^a, who ruined the
two sons of his U^kle and adoptive ^ather Hiempsall the King of Numidia; no^ to
retrograd so f^rr as to the Caliphs of Egypt; for the Kings of Fez and Moro^co
(without speaking one word of the Mamalues of Egypt, who came after the
Caliphs) afford us abundant instances to this purpose, even of these that have
ruined their Foster* Fathers, (with the whole Royal Family* under the pretense
of Religion; I mean that damnable Superstition of Ma^omet; to which that of
(...) Poet Lucretius may both truly and pertinently be applied, Ta^um Re^gio
potuit (...) malorum.

FAB. CXCVII. Page 168.
They who are destitute of Children (I mean who had never any) if they want the
Comfort of them, so do they the Cross; and its a most certain Truth, that
children are uncertain Comforts, but certain Troubles; it being very rare to
find a numerous Issue without some Viper (either among the Males or Females)
who is ready to tear out the bowels of the parents Contentment; and they who
have many, and find no more but one such, have great reason to bless Heaven for
it; for the greatest of Saints recorded in H. Scripture, were not privileged
from that Cross, and some of them had their patience exerciz'd by more than one
Viper, whom they had fostered in their bosoms, as is evident from the
respective stories of Noah, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; old Eli the High Priest,
Samuel the Prophet, and David the King; the generality of the last three being
undutifull both to their Heavenly and Earthly GODS; for Grace goes nor by
Generation, but by Re-Generation; otherwise it may be supposed that so Gracious
Kings, Priests and Prophets, would have entailed some drams of goodness upon
their posterity.

And that domestical Crosses are justly accounted amongst the most anguishing
Afflictions of this World, We may perceave from the Concern of one of the
greatest that ever reigned in it, and that was Augustus Caesar, who enjoyed all
the Comforts of this Life in great Abundance, yet He was so affected with the
shameless Prostitution of his daughter Iulia, and her no less l^bidinous Brats,
that the great Emperor o^en wished, either he had never Married, or never
Begotten Children, yea He would not ^erm them his legitimat Issue, but the
Impostumes of his Body; or ^res Vomi^as, and tria Car^inomata: Marcus Aurelius
was as moral a Prince as ever sa^e upon the Roman Throne, and having but one
Son (who was that Incommodio^s and naughty Commodus) the Father declared on his
death bed that He would have dyed a happy Man, if he had not begotten such a
Phaeton to the (...) Empire. Lewis the Godly, the first of that name, who was
King of France, and Emperor of German^e, had very u^godly Children, who often
rebelled against their Lord and Father; so had Henry the Il. of England,
undoubtedly a gallant man, though never honored with the Epither of Pious* for
he dyed Cursing all his male Children; and there was a visible Curse followed
them even in this life, which is the usual fate of a stubborn and perverse
progeny, whether their parents Curse them or not; for either they dye young,
(as is insiuuated in the fifth Precept of the Decalogue) or if they enjoy a
longer life, they live in great misery, and die at las^ of a loathsome disease.

FAB. CC. Page 170.
Some good men have sometimes found reason to bless God as cordially for their
disappointments, as for their enjoyments, because he hears them in mercy, when
he seeme^ not to hear them; as he hears the wicked in wrath when their desires
are granted; for there have been many in the world who have been necessitated
to unwish a thing more fervently than they formerly desired it; that Covetous
King of Phrygia, is a notable Emblem of this, though it is but a Poetical or
Romantic Story* for i^ the foolish Wish of Midas had not been seasonably
^etrived, he would shortly have dyed of mere hunger, for all his meat and drink
became Gold; and for all the talking of Aurum Potabile* I take it to be a much
better Cordial in the Purse than in the Stomach: But its the fate of some
unhappy creatures to r^semble Se^ele, the mother of Bacc^, ^ven to be consumed
in the first instant of the fruition of their rash and inconsiderate desires.

FAB. CCIII. Page 174.
The author tells us he has seen a tame S^ider but I believe he never saw (nor
any m^n ^or him) a tame (...), though the same is given as the Symbol of
Impudence.

FAB. CCV. Page 176.
This impertin^nt Doctor minds me of the English Proverb; When I am dead, mak^
Me a Caddell; But it is a more rational Apology (as many Doctors have Reason to
complain) that the Patient was not obedient enough, nor the attenders so
circumspect as they ought to have been, in observing his orders, which were
neither excentrick, Unnecessary, nor Tyrannical, but thoroughly consonant to
the most approved rules of Art; and for this they have the authority of the
great Hippocrates, in the latter part of his first Aphonis^, Nequ^ enim Medicus
ita se comparare debet, ut faciat quod factu Opus est; s^d and Aeger and
astantes, and quae for as incid^nt. But the most relevant of all these Excuses
is the unseasonable Call of the Doctor; for the best Physician under Heaven, is
but the Minister of Nature, so that when the natural strength is quite gone,
all attempts to restore it are in vain, without a miarculous power: so that the
Doctor (who consul^s his own reputation) ought not in such a case to meddle, let
the patient be never so wealthy, unless it be to aleviat the great pain of the
dying person: and to preserve a man from a tomenting death, is undoubtedly a
very good office, and worthy of a great Honorarium. Now let us suppose a
Physician to have sufficient ground to undertake the cure, yet if He would not
have it said, that the patient dyed of the Doctor rather than of the Disease;
let him in all dangerous distempers, trust his own eye^ above all others, both
in the composition and application of his Druggs; for as an Ignorant or
Cheating Apothecarie may commit a great ^rrour in the first Concoction, so the
attenders may be guilty of great mistakes in the application, especialy in the
matter of Catharties and Phlebotomy; for I have known some weak Patients purged
to Death, by a double or tripl^ Dose above that which should have been given:
as also some rash (...) to send their patients out of the world by drawing too
much of their bl^od in it: for example, in the beginning of an Hectic Fever,
when the vigou^ of nature is no ways decayed, its fit to evacuat so much
Blood, as may sensibly abate their preter-natural Heat and Drought, but if ane
inconsiderable Surgeon draw no less than is usually due in a Pleurisy; He will
hurrie the Patient the more speedily to his Grave; In fine, since there be some
specificks, the due proportion thereof is confined to some few Grains, let the
Doctor trust no other hand with the Scales than his own, for I knew an ignorant
(...) who gave such a prodigious quantity of La^ to a poor frantic Woman, as
might have killed an Horse; and would undoubtedly have caused ^he Patient (in
lieu of 4 days) to sleep to the sounding of the last Trumpet, unless that
drugg had been found to be very old and corrupt in the Apothecaries pot*
whereby it had lost much of the natural Virtue of a Paregoric.

FAB. CCXI. Page 182.
This Vultur is a lively Emblem of a Ly^, ^ (...), a ^olyphemus, and of the old
inhabitants of Tauriea Chersones^s; all which were ^o inhuman as to murder
their guests* a good man who is naturally apt to believe protestations and
semblable practices of kindness (cred^lity b^ing the great unperfection of
honest hearts) is no doubt brought into a great (...) (as our Author has well
observed) when suspicions of the dishonesty of his friend are suggested to him.
Yet great souls have judged it inconsistent with true generosity to distrust
their old friends, and it framed well with some of them; Thus Alexander the
great (as Quintus Curtius informs at large) being advertised by his eldest
captain Parmenio, that His principal Physician had been bribed by Darius
Codomannus with a very great sum of money, to poison his royal Master, the
first time he gave him any Physic, yet Alexander took the medicinal potion
with the one hand, and gave his Physician the said line with the other to read,
and in the mean time drunk the Potion to the bottom; such was the confidence of
this royal patient, neither did his trustee disapoint him; a parallel to this
great confidence we find long afterward in the Emperor Trajan, who being
informed by some that his old friend, a Roman senator, had a design upon his
life, he went the next day to the senators house privately, without any of his
Guards, and told him that he was come to supp with him: but before supper (said
the Emperor to his friend) I must make use of your bath and of your barber;
and having come home very late, He called for those informers; now (said he)
you may perceive that you are all guilty of a caluminous accusation, for if my
old friend had any design upon my li^e, he had never a better opportunity than
was afforded him this day, for by his Slaves He might have smothered me in the
bath, by his barber He might have cut my throat, or by his Cook he might have
poisoned me; so that, I having returned safe and sound, ye may perceive the
falsehood of your information. But the famous Dion (who was the principal actor
in dr^ving D^onysins the younger, from his Tyrannical nest at Syracuse) ruined
himself with his too great confidence in Calippus the Athenian, whom he trusted
above all the world; and being informed by his nearest relations (and that
again and again) that Calippus had a design upon his li^e, yet he still
answered them that he would rather choose to dye a thousand deaths, than to
distrust his old friends; he was I confess the more inveigled by the many
tears and oaths of Calippus to persevere in his former trust and good opinion
of his friend; yet notwithstanding of these reiterated protestations, that old
treacherous villain (when he found opportunity) dispatched that brave and good
man, in hopes to obtain the Principality of Syracuse to himself, but i^ this He
was not only disappointed, but shortly afterward justly killed with that same
dagger where with Dion had received his mortal wound; as is reported by
Plutarch in the History of His life.

FAB. CCXIII. CCXIV. Page 184.
The Crow thinks Her own Issue fairest, is an old proverb; which the
Commentator does well extend not only to the Fruit of the Body, but also to the
productions of the Brain; it being very observable that all the pretenders to
those faculties which depend mostly on the imagination, such as Po^sy, Music,
and the Art of Limning or painting, be they never so great Bunglers at them,
they imagine themselves to be excellent; so did Dionysi^s the old Tyrant of
Syracuse, as to Poesy, though he was the worst at it that ever did it, for who
knows not the bantering of that rigid Philosopher, Carry me back again to the
Quarries, how soon He heard Him read but a line or two of a new Poem he had
made, and believed it to be much better than the former which the Philosopher
had derided; and, I dare say, that pitiful Scots Rymer Mr. Zachary Boyd,
thought Himself as good at the Poetical Trade, as ever his Countryman Buchanan
was deemed to be, though the one was as good as could be found in any nation (if
we believe the famous Ios. Scaliger) and without breach either of Truth or
Charity, it may be said that a worse could not be found any where than was the
other.

For all Nero's divine voice (as his parasites termed it) with his incomparable
dexterity in handling the Lute (as his Sycophants also soothed Him) and His
Quantus Artifex pere^ (which were the last words He spoke in this world) yet if
he Had been as poor as some Fiddlers are, I dare say He would have earned less
daily wages than some of them have done; and its very possible that Ves^asian
(afterward Emperor) would have heard them, more placidly than He did His Lord
and Master in the Amphit^eatre at Rome, for it had almost cost Him His Life,
because that Divine Voice, forsooth, had not preserved Him from sleeping; A
S^ythian Prince was justly deemed a beastly Dun^: for preferring the Neig^ing
of his own Horse, to the ravishing Music of the famous Musician, ^smenius: but
if Nero had been the Competitor its very probable He should neither have been
termed a brute nor a blockhead.

Paulus Iovius tells us that it was one of the great Divertisements of Leo X^
to call for the worst of Poets, of Musicians, and Painters, that were to be
found in all Italy, and to make them believe that they excelled all the World
in their respe^ive Professions; which did so effectually send their Wits a
Woollgathering, that some of them became perfectly mad: neither needed the Pope
pretend the Infallible Chair, to persuade them to those wild Fancies, for their
own vain Imaginations, with that large natural Dose of Self-Love, did easily
unhinge all the little Wit that ever they were Masters of.

FAB. CCXVIII. Page 191.
This fable minds me of the gallant Sertorius who was marching to Spain in
great have, to make good the remainders of Marius's party against Syll^ that
cruel Dictator, being stopped in his way by some barbarous Nations that
inhabited the straits and fastnesses of the Pyrenean mountains, who sent Him
word that he behooved either to fight for his passage or pay them a
considerable sum of money, He did choose rather for speeds sake, to let them
have the money; whereat some of his Captains being highly offended, as if it
were a great disparagement to the noble Romans to buy their peace of
Barbarians, and to become as it were Tributarie to them; hold your peace (said
Sertorius) for I have only bought Time.

FAB. CCXXIII. Page 195.
The best Moral (as I suppose) of the Fable of the Sun and Winds striveing for
a travelers Cloak, is briefly this: That prosperity is a much greater
temptation than adversity; This moralists make appear, by comparing the proper
virtues of both states together; but on this we have not time to insist.

FAB. CCXXVII. Page 198.
Alexander the great his holding his Head a little awry, and Pompey the great
his scratching his Head with his little finger, became Patterns of imitation to
their p^rasiticall followers; but if they had been mean men: I believe they
should have been derided for their e^eminate affectation.

FAB. CCXXVII. Page 199.
This fable, with some amplisication, was narrated by the Emperor Frederic
III. (as Philip de Comines tells Us) to the Ambassadors of Lewis XI. of
France, when, in their Masters name, they promised (that the Emper^ and He
joining their forces against Charles the Hardy that great D. of Burgundy) They
might divide all his Dominions betwixt them; for He makes the fellow say, that
the Bear whispered in his Ear, beware of dividing or selling the Bear's Skin so
long as He is alive and has it on his Back: yet I believe, if the Emperor had
been persuaded to engage, He should have had His recourse at last to his old
Motto, Rerum irrecuperabilium optimum remedium esi Oblivio.

FAB. CCXXVII. Page 200.
A Satirical Poet (being picked at the wise and virtuous Philosopher, Socrates)
acted a Comedy before the people of Athens wherein He so palpably derided
Socrates that all who were present knew that the Invectives were levelled
against Him, but He was no whit abashed, and laughing as heartily as the rest,
said, he was very glad to have given occasion to the People of Athens, to
become so joviall tand merry as he perceived them to be.

FAB. 230. 231. 232. 233. Page 201.
Plutarch reports of Timotheus the Athenian General, that being sent abroad by
the State, upon some Expedition, He having prospered well in his attempts he
arrogated the praise of all to his own good Conduct, or to use the scripture
phrase He sacrificed to his own Net, and burnt Incense to his own Dragg,
meaning of those who give not the praise to GOD, but impute all theri good
success to their own wit and virtue, yea to their own merit; for Timotheus, in
his giving the people an account (at his return) of his prosperous attempts
against the enemy, still subjoyned to every period, In this, Fortune had no
part; but as that wise Historian well observes, He never prospered one Hour
after that most insolent Oration, but decayed palpably both in his reputation
and action; and though S^ylla the Roman Dictator was a proud and bloody man, yet
Plutarch commends Him for assuming the Epi^et of Faelix Scylla, rather than any
other, whereby he ascribed his Happiness (says the Historian) rather to the
Gods, than to his own merit.

FAB. CCXXXV. Page 204.
Milo (another Sampson among the Pagans) met with his match betwixt the
branches of a sturdy Oak, which overmatched him that he was starved to death in
the place; but the story being so well known, I shall not insist upon it.

FAB. CCXLI. Page 209.
My Lord Montaigny in his Essays has another story of a young gentlewoman in
Gascony that was so much inclined to this infamous Vice, that the ^ather turned
out of doors that naughty Girl as a disgrace to his family, so that she was
constrained to betake herself to service, but the father and only brother
dying at last, she became the Inheretrix of a great estate and got a competent
match on that account, without stealing of Her; but even then she could not
forbear her old trade, to which she was so strongly inclined by Nature, and a
vicious Habit, so that she would entreat her own servants, to lock up out of
her sight any thing that did belong to them, telling them plainly that she
could not forbear from putting their effects into her Co^ers, not for the value
of the thing, but for the Love of Theeving.

FAB. CCXLVII. Page 214
Pythias that rich Lydian Prince (even he who entertained that numerous army of
Xerxes for the space of three days upon free cost, for which he was very ill
rewarded by that Tyrant in the end) was documented into some sobriety in his
great Thirst after Gold, by the wisdom of his Wife; for having found our a gold
mine in his own Territories, He so constantly employed all the Inhabitants of
his dominion in digging thereof, that the Land remained uncultivated, and a
great Famine produced among them; at last having gone from home, his wife
caused a skillful Artist make the Effigies of the most excellent Dishes of Meat
in pure Gold, which being presented to Him at his return, the sight at first
pleased Him very well, but having called for some meat, his witty wife, caused
present another course of Golden Viands; what, s^id the hungry Husband, do you
mind to starve me with a Necroman^ers feast? ay, said the Wife, You must
content your self with what your Land produces, for you and your tennants,
though sore against their Wills, have labored for nothing else these diverse
Years bygon, but for this golden product, and now see if you can fill your
hungry Belly therewith.

FAB. CCXLVIII. Page 216.
This minds me of the s^art Reflection of that famous Sir Thomas More upon his
Lady (as is narrated by Sir Francis Bacon in his Apothegms) who having prayed
frequently for a Male Child, at last she got one; but, whether through natural
Infirmity, or too great maternal Indulgence, I know not, when He came to the
Stature of a Man, He was a Dwarf in his Understanding; Therefore Her Husband
used to say to Her, You prayed long for a Boy, and You will find Him a Boy so
long as He lives.

FAB. CCXLIX. Page 216.
This minds me of the Canniballs in the Caribee Islands, who sed their
captivated enemies deliciously, and most plentifully, but it was only to fatten
them for the shambles; and thus prosperous villainy is but a fa^ing of them
like a fedd Ox for the slaughter; or if we transferr the Moral to some Court
favorites, the poet has given us their destiny in few words,

-- Tolluntur in altum,
Ut Lapsu graviore ruant. --
FAB. CCLIII. Page 219.
There is a story to the same purpose, and uttered (upon such an occasion) by
that Prince of Greek Orators, Demosthenes, for when the people were not
attentive to a very serious matter which he was insisting upon, one day in his
oration, he told them the story of the contest betwixt a Man who had hired an
Ass to ride a journey, and the Owner thereof, who would also be paid for the
Benefit of the Asse's Shddow which the Rider made use of, when he was scorched
with the heat of the Meridian Sun, and all this hot debate, said the Orator,
was about the shadow of an Ass: and with that silly parable He brought the
inadvertent Mob to due attention.

FAB. CCLIV. Page 220.
The story of Pacuvius his policy in rescuing the Senators of Capua from the
fury of a discontented People, falls in here very pertinently, but its so well
known that we need not insist upon it.

FAB. CCLV. Page 220.
The Laplander who preferred his own country to France (though there can hardly
be a worse, found in the whole Terraqueal Globe) may be said to have outvyed
this Mouse in contentment, even in the change of places, yet it still remains
a true Maxim, Omne solum Fortiest patria.

FAB. CCLXII. Page 228.
Its well observed by P. Heylen in his Cosmography, that the Mesopotamians were
always adjunctives, but never substantives, save once when GOD raised them up
to be a plague (and the first foreign scourge too) unto his own ingrate people
in the Land of Canaan; The Metaphor is patt enough to the purpose; Though
somewhat pedantick, for they were frequently overrun and overcome by the
Persians, the Romans, the Saracens, the Turks and Tartars; by all these and
from all these they have been Conquered and reconquered; the Natives as it were
sitting still like Spectators beholding the Gladiators in the Amphitheatre, and
little concerned what side had the better, because they were sure to become
slaves in the end, who ever were Masters; and that the Ass could not bear a
greater burden than had been formerly laid upon him: such was the case of their
Neighbors the Syrians, frequently and easily subdued by other Nations, but
especially by the Seleucidae in Asia, and the Ptolomees in Egypt; for no sooner
did any of those respective Princes advance toward them with an Army, but up
slew all the Gates of their Cities, to welcome the new Comer rather than the
new Conqueror; or if it may be in propriety of speech called a new conquest,
sure it had not age to become old; For it may be within a Month or less, the
other party totally prevailed, without any opposition made by the inhabitants,
who set their mind at rest to be Asses and Slaves still, who ever prevailed.
As for Egypt, since the days of their Pharaohs, the Persians, the Greeks, the
Romans, the Saracens, the Turks, the Mamalues and Turks again, made an easy
prey of those tame slaves, who from the time of Ham and Mizraim have been
inured to bear Burdens: and for the same reason the fertile isle of Sicily,
(not to speak of their many intestine Tyrants, or of Pyrrhus the Epirot) was
frequently overrun by the Greeks, the Carthaginians, the Romans, the French,
and the Spaniard: And how easily (upon the same account) was the Kingdom of
Naples with the Duchy of Millan, taken and retaken by the French and
Spaniard, is well known to those who are not strangers to the histories of the
two preceding ages.

FAB. CCLXX. Page 236.
There be many restless and impudent Souls (like this Fly in the fable) who are
bussie bodies in other men's matters, but supinely negligent in their own, yet
have the vanity to arrogate that to themselves, wherein they had neither head
nor hand (I mean Deliberation and Execution) such an Imaginary pragmaticall
Fly, was at Florence in the time of the famous Cosmo the D. thereof, who coming
one day after Dinner to the Palace of this Prince of the House of Medicis, upon
some pretended hasty business, He found this renowned Potentate lying upon the
top of a Bed: O! said this pragmatical Animal, Who would think that the great
Wit of Italy would be found in Bed this Time of Day, when other Men are
walking in the Streets about their Business; Away, said the D. You feiking
Fool, I can do more here in half an Hour, than You can do in half an Year: for
all Your traversing the Streets of the City both Day and Night; for the
Character of the Echo does fitly belongto suchas You, -- Vox est, praetereaque
nihil; There be also many such Court-Flys even, vain and empty Minions
(Ministers rather of Pleasure than of State) that impute all the prosperous
State Politics to their own wise Suggestions, and what outward Respect they
meet with from People (for their Place Sake, and Master's Cause) they instantly
ascribe it to their own great Merits, not considering that no Man will regard a
Dyal, how soon the Sun cease to shine upon it.

FAB, CCLXXI. Page 237.
Veterem ferendo Injuriam, invitas novam, is mostly verified as to those Briars
and Thorns, which prick and scratch because they cannot do otherwise, till the
Law pair their Nails; but to a generous Soul, there is no greater Pacifick,
than a patient Sufferer; The God of Peace having also promised to all those
that truly fear Him, that He will make their Enemies to be at Peace with them*

FAB. CCLXXII. Page 237.
The Commentator writes strong Sense in few Words, whereby He sufficiently
discovers the Folly of that unwarrantable practice which trencheth too nigh
upon Idolatry, I mean the Adoration of Saints and Images, which is a mighty
Stumbling Block to the Jews, Mahumetans and Pagans; but whosoever desires a much
larger Discovery of that Scandalous Impiety, let them consult the Profoundly
Learned JOSEPH MEDE, in His Apostasy of the latter Times, founded on that
Doctrine of Demons (foretold by S. Paul, 1 Timothy 4 at the beginning) where He
makes ^uch a copious and judicious Detection of those damnable practical
Errors, that Defiance may be given to all the Idolaters in the World, to answer
Him in Reason.

FAB. CCLXXIII. Page 238.
Out of the Drying Pan, into the Fire, is most fitly applied to those most
miserable desperate Wretches who dispatch themselves that they may be ridd of
the sting of an evil Conscience, not considering that (in all probability) they
hurrie their Souls into that most deplorable Region where the Worm dies not,
and the Fire shall never be quenched; That eminent Pattern of Divine Iusti^,
Francis Spira, who for seven Years space was griveously afflicted in
Conscience, attempted many times to become Felo de Se, notwithstanding He
firmly believed that Hell would be his everlasting Portion, neither was it in a
Fit of madness that he was restrained from becoming his own Butcher, for never
Man pleaded more rationaly for Himself, than He appeared to do against
Himself; But whither these Desperado^s apprehend that they cannot possibly be
worse in another World than they are in this, or that its possible they may be
some better, I cannot determine.

FAB. CCLXXIV. Page 239.
Monach^s in Oppido, ut Pis^is in arido, was an usual saying of that Egyptian
Antony, the father of the Monks; and I believe if he had seen the four Orders
of the Mendicant Friars, so frequently begging in the Capital Cities, it would
have turned his stomach no less, than Alexander Severus was affected when he
perceived an unjust Judge.

FAB. CCLXXVI. Page 240.
Magistratus indicat Virum, is an old Maxim, and verified apparently in the
Emperor Galba, whom all men thought worthy to reign, before He did reign; as
also of Henry III. of France and some others since his time: but as for
alterations to the better there cannot be a better instance given, than that of
Titus Vespasian, for during his Fathers life, the people of Rome so dreaded him
that it was more than whispered amongst them that he would be as Libidi^ous an
Emperor as Caligula, and no less cruel than Nero; but he was scarce warm upon
the Roman Throne, when He was generaly celebrated to the outmost Bounds of that
vast Empire, with that glorious Epithet, D^ciae humani generis: Neither need we
cross the seas for another example of this nature, since Britain affords a
notable one in the person of Henry V. of England* It Is well known that during
the life of his Father he was the ignominious associat of that prostigat
Knight, Sir John Falstaff and such Debauchees as he; but he was no sooner
elevated to the Throne, than he became a most stayed, temperate and just
Prince, so that there was not a wiser and gallanter King in Europe than he was
(only King James I. of Scotland his contemporary, had the advantage of him in
point of Knowledge) but if this Henry had out lived his madd father in Law for
some years, it is highly probable that he would have secured the English
interest in France most rationaly, so that they should not only have had Ius ad
Rem but also Ius in Re to this very day.

FAB. CCLXXVII. Page 242.
Here He had a fair Occasion to have mentioned that most laudable Law of
Lycurgus, which ordained all Young Men to reverence and give Place to Old Men
of whatsoever Nation or Quality they were of, of whose Obedience We find an
excellent Instance in Plutarch, of a de^ripit Old Man (with a long gray Beard)
who neither lived nor was born in the Lacedemonian Territories, yet having the
curiosity to see the Olympic Games (which were celebrated every fifth Year in
Greece) comeing behind Time, when He approached the stations of the Athenians,
the Boeotians, the Corinthians, the Argives, the Arcadians, and many other
Greek Nations, no man took Notice of him, but when He came to the apartment of
the Spartans, all the Young Men arose to Him; whereupon He cried out, I
perceive that Old Age is no where reverenced but in Sparta; which was indeed an
implicit Reflection on the Athenians, who pretended to be the great Masters of
Morality, but it is evident from their Practice, that They were better
acquainted with the Muses, than with the Graces.

FAB. CCLXXIX. Page 244.
Sejanus to Tiberius, Pallas to Claudius, and Figellinus to Nero, were indeed
such Magpies, Ministers to those vicious Emperors, both for their Pleasures
and Cruelties, and for a Reward of their Villainies advanced to be the greatest
Ministers of State.

FAB. CCLXXXI. Page 246.
Here He might have mentioned the ingenuous Confession of S. Hierom, that in
his solitary Retirement to the Deserts of Syria, He was frequently molested
with vain Thoughts concerning the vain Dances at Rome; and if any desire to
know the strange story of the Apparition of the Devil in the shape of a most
beautiful Woman to John the Holy Eremite, let them consult Ioh. Major for it.

Our Author from the List of that indictment which the Corinthian Thais gave in
against the greek Philosohers of her knowledge, should have excepted Xenocrates
who was as free of Lust, as of Avarice; For as He rejected the 50 Talents which
Alexander the Great sent Him, (a very great Sum in those Days, every Talent
being 700 French Crowns) so He contemned that celebrated Corinthian Beauty,
without any Temptation from Demosthenes's grudging at the Price of the
Enjoyment, when He said, Non ^mam tanti poenitere; or regard to that proverbial
Verse,

Non ^uivis Homini contingit adire Corinthum.
For which we have the testimony of one who may be very well credited in such
a matter and that was the infamous Courtesan her self (all of that sex being
much more apt to give an account rather of those who admire than who despise
their beauty) for being hired by some of his scholars to ly with him all night,
that they might learn how he would behave, she declared the next morning that
he no more turned his face toward her, than if she had been a cold Statua of
Marble laid down beside him.

FAB. CCLXXXII. Page 246.
The author should have given a more particular designation of that Scotus who
gave such a bold Repartee to an Emperor, lest he be taken for the Subtle*
Doctor, who is usually termed Scotus (...), and more particularly Ioannes Duns
(but whether he was a Scot, an English, or an Irish man is controverted to this
Day) But its certain that it was Johannes Scotus, ^rigena, (or born at Air in
Scotland) who so smartly accoasted that King of France and Emperor of Germany;
He being about 400 Years previous in time to the other.

FAB. CCXCVII. Page 259
Here might have been mentioned the strange interrogatour of Pope Julius III.
to a Cardinal; this Pope how soon he was elected by the Conclave, gave (in
conformity to an inveterate custom) his own Red Hat to a Minion of his own, who
was so far from having the least tincture of any Liberal Art, that he was a
disgrace to human nature; if it be true what is recorded of him; a Cardinal who
had been intimat with this Pope before his advancement to the Triple Crown, had
the confidence to ask his Holiness in private, what he had seen in such a man
to make him a Cardinal? and I pray said the other, what did you that are
Cardinals see in me to make me Pope* The great Thuan narrates it as the
wittiest Reflection that ever was made by their Henry III. when some Bishops
heard that he was about to prefer one to that eminent station in the Church who
was most unworthy, they told their King that he would be excluded by the Canons
of the Church; and so would all of You, replied He, i^ the election had run in
the old Channel; for the King had nominated them all.

FAB. CCXCVIII. Page 260.
Here he might have hinted at the ridiculous luxury of the Emperor
Heliogabalus, who (as Lampridius reports in the history of His infamous Life)
when he was nigh to the sea, or any river, or Lake of fresh waters, he would
eat no fith at all, but would have his Table served with variety of the most
delicate fleshes that could be found in the world; but when he was far from
the sea, then nothing could please him but the most delicious fishes of all
sorts; so that it is most just with providence to reduce such foolish
voluptuous Brutes into such a starving condition as to be glad of the Mus^y
Crumbs which did sometimes fall from their own superfluous Tables.

FAB CCXCIX Page 260.
There be too many selfish Creatures in the world who resemble the Hedge-Hogg,
which roules it self in it is own soft Down and turns out it is Bristles to all
the world beside: like to that fatt Abbot in the days of Henry VIII. of
England, who hearing his Monks lamenting that they were about to be robbed both
of their subsistence and religion by that Tyrannical Prince; The selfish Abbot
stroaked down his own fatt belly and overgrown paunch, then subjoyned Modo hic
sit been; i. e. provyding it fared well with his own sensual appetite, he
cared not whether religion did sink or swim: for the reader must know that he
had received assurance of a large pension dureing his own life therefore he was
the less concerned with the livelyhoods of others.

FAB. CCCI. Page 262
Fox in his volum^nous Martyrology, tells of a Blacksmith in England who in
the days of Edward VI. was very zealous in promoting the Reformation according
to his pith; and having been isntrumental in proselyting a young man to the
reformed religion; the said youth being ha^ed to prison in the days of Queen
Marie, he wondered when He heard that His Ghostly father was still working at
liberty in his Forge; Therefore he sent and expostulated with him; why he was
not become a Confessor in expectation of that glorious Crown of Martyrdom; to
whom he returned this unchristian answer that himself was as sincere a
Protestant as ever, but that he could not burn; yet he, who would not willingly
suffer for the Truth, was shortly after brunt alive against his will, and that
in his own house, none knowing how that fire was kindled.

FAB. CCCX. Page 272.
Here we have an expression of the judicious Commentator; That, It Is impious
for any man to call for death in earnest: which indefinit proposition as
equivalent to an universal; I cannot approve, unless I should condemn S. Paul
of impiety, when he said, I desire to be dissolved and to ^e with Christ, which
is best of all: neither find I any man blaming Epiphanius (a zealous Primitive
Father) for saying frequently that He was long ago weary of the fable of this
world, and no doubt whosoever is weary of a heavy burden, he desires to be
ridd of it; far less do we find any reprehending, S. Augustine, who when he
heard that Genseri^k, with his Vandalls, was designing to lay siege to Hippo
(his Episcopal See) prayed earnestly to the LORD of Hosts that either he would
not suffer that Arrian Senacherib to raise a bank against his City; or
secondly, that the Enemy should not prevail over it; or thirdly, that GOD would
be pleased to close His Fyes that he might no^ see the the great calamities
that were coming upon his people. Now the Almighty having graciously granted
the last petition we have good reason to conclude, that his prayer was not in
any part of it displeasing: neither find I any taxing that excellent christian
Philosopher and Poet, named Boethius Sever^n ^s, for wishing frequently (in
imitation of Job) to be ridd of an evil world, declaring that ^e had death in
desire, and life but in patience: Yea in that notable little treatise De
Consolatione Philosophiae, He very plainly insinuats, that Death was
distasteful unto him when he enjoyed his liberty and honor in the court of
Rome; but regrates that it fled from Him in his prison at Pavi^, though he had
called for it more than once, as we may perceive from the first Stanza of his
excellent verses,

M^rs hominum foelix quae nec se dulcibus an^is
Inserit, and n^oestis saepe vocata venit.
Dum levibus male^da bonis Fortuna faveret
Paene caput tristis mors erat ^ora meum;
Nun^ quia fallacem mutavit nubila vultum,
Protrahit ingratas impia vi^a moras.
I never found any judicious Casuist condemning of Impiety, any sincere
Christian for praying frequently and seriously for Death (yet always with a due
submission to the Will of GOD) that he might be totaly and finaly put without
the reach of sin and temptation to sin; especially those Foedae Tentationes (as
Divines call them) which for many years have been forced in upon them by the
Devil like to flashes of lightning violently and suddenly: for such a prayer
is equivalent to that Lamentation of S. Paul, Ah wretched creature that I am,
who shall deliver me from the body of this death! This notable expression
implying a vehement desire after a present communion with Christ, which He knew
would not be enjoyed so long as there was any remainder of sin or corruption in
the Soul. Yea when a true Christian from long and sad experience has ground to
compare his own leprous soul to some leprous houses under the Law, which could
never be thoroughly cleansed till they were pulled down; and to conclude, that
till the clay tabernacle of the body be dissolved, that he fears he shall
never be thoroughly cleansed from that spiritual leprosy o^ sin and corruption;
I am so far from apprehending that a prayer (merely on such an account) is
displeasing to GOD, that on the contrary, its very acceptable to Heaven,
because its motives directly aim at the Glory of GOD.

But finally, I readily grant, that to pray for death seriously, allanarly to
be ridd of misery, is not acceptable to GOD, because it proceeds usually from
those, who would keep Heaven only as a reserve, that they may enjoy its
Felicities, when all worldly happiness is gone; this is in effect nothing else
but an efflux of a discontented mind with the providence of GOD, because the
Sun of prosperity has ceased to shine upon their Earthly Tabernacle. Yet when
a good Man (in conjunction with the former spiritual motives) is prompted by
vehement Arthriticall or Nephriticall pains to wish for death, I cannot condemn
such a prayer, since the almighty has commanded us to call upon him in the day
of trouble, which (in my weak Judgment) imports not only to pray for the
divine assistance to support and comfort us, and for a proportionable measure
of patience; but also that it would please GOD (in his own good time) either to
take the burden away from us, or to take us away from the burden: There was a
good and a learned man, one of our own Country, who being pitifully tormented
with the torturing sits of the Gravel, (whereof he at last died) it was His
ordinary Petition in every Paroxism of that formidable Distemper, LORD, take
out this silly Life of mine, that the better Life of GOD may enter in! Whereat
all good Christians were so far from taking Scandal, that they firmly believed
He dyed in the Fear and Favor of GOD.

FAB. CCCXVII. Page 277.
That bad Event of the discontented wish of the foolish Ass, was justly applied
by Cyneas (that wise and faithful counselour of Pyrrhus K. of the Epirots) to
the restles Spirit of his master; for Cyneas being against his attempt upon the
Romans, when he saw the King would not be dissuaded, because he thought it a
work of charity to assist the oppressed Tarentines: Then said the servant, if
the Gods prosper you, I hope you will then be at rest; no, replied the master,
if it be my good fortune to overcome the valiant Romans, I will easily become
master of all Italy, and cannot fail to subdue the adjacent Isle, I mean
Sicily, which has been always famous for its fertility, but never for
produceing men of courage: well, said Cyneas, what next* Then, said he, I will
make an attempt on the rich Carthaginians, who already command much more of
Africa, than does exceed by many Millions the dimension of their old Ox Hyde:
and from thence I will turn toward the East, and take possession of that
plentiful country of Egypt, which had never yet any great plenty of
martial Spirits; Then I will turn my conquering Arms against the luxurious
(...), and I hope also to make all the Nations of the Greeks have as great
deference for me and dependence upon me, as ever they had on Philip of Ma^don,
or hi^ son Alexander the great. The sage Counselor heard this vain
Braggadocio with great patience, then he said to him, You will have
extraordinary good luck i^ all those great designs of yours take effect, as
you have projected, for I perceive you grasp no less in your imagination, than
the slaverie of all the civilized and barbarous nations in the world, yet the
Gods alone know whither your projections shall be prosperous or disastrous; But
let Us suppose You such a Favorite of Heaven, as that good Fortune shall still
accompany You till You have obtained a speedy Accomplishment of all your
Desires and Designs: What will You do then? Then (said Pyrrhus) We'll eat and
drink, and make merry with our Friends; Alace (good Sir) rejoined Cyneas, why
may You not do that just now, without troubling Your ^elf and the World so much
as You purpose to do? for your ancient Kingdom of Epirus may furnish you
abundantly with all delicacies for your Table, and I will assure You of
Friends enough to share with You in that Abundance, and to bear You constant
Company in all your jovial Humors. But little was this vain ambitious Soul
dreaming that not long afterward He should see (even before He had fully
conquered any of these Nations) a Bull and a Wolf fighting together (which was
given as a prognostic of his approaching death by the Oracle) for when ^e saw
the Effigie^ of those Animalls (I mean their Sta^es in Brass) in a fighting
posture upon the market place of Arg^s, this great soul utterly disponded, yea
the prediction was so nigh the fulfilling, that thi^ Masculi^ spirit was killed
that very day by the feeble hand^ of a Woman.

FAB. CCCXXI. Page 281.
There is an old Maxim, Hell is full of the Ingrate; and, no doubt, ^o is this
sublunary World, but all such (whether in Hell, or upon Earth) are judged
Devils cl^athed with Flesh; it being the part of a God, to render Good for
Evil; Of a Man, to render Good for Good; Of a Beast, to render Evil for Evil;
But of a Devil, to render Evil for Good. I have known some Men very charitably
disposed both by Nature and Grace, who have been tempted to forbear the doing
of good Works, not only by the uncharitable Construction which hide-bound Souls
put upon it (as if it had flowed merely from a Principle of Pharisaical
Ostentation) but mostly in regard of the prodigious Ingratitude of his
Beneficiaries, who were so basely unthankful as to render their benefactor
evil for good; yet there were two considerations which persuaded him to
persevere 1. the most wise GOD permits it to ^e so, that m^n may learn to
expect the reward of well doing from Heaven and not from Earth, for if but once
the Holy spirit intimate that word of comfort to the conscience of a
benefactor, Gratia mea sufficit, he has but little Faith who does not firmly
hope for a superabundant reward from that inexhaustable treasure.

The other Consideration is briefly this; Let Us suppose a Man to have 20.
Beneficiaries, and that nineteen prove ingrate, yet GOD can easily put the
twentieth person in a willing Capacity to compense abundantly (yea even to
Excess) for the defects of all the rest, so that the Benefactor shall at last
have abundant reason to say with the famous Themistocles, Periissem nis^
Periissem.

FAB. CCCXXVII. Page 285.
If a good moral Pagan, viz. S^ipio Africanus, had reason to say, Nunqua^ (...)
solus, quam cum solus; sure a devout Christian Student may with much more
reason speak so, for his solitariness cannot ^e better employed than in making
frequent oblations of spiritual Sacrifices to the Lord para^ount of heaven and
earth, and in perusing the extant works of many Spirits of just men made
perfect; so that I am fully persuaded that the conversation of naughty
company, for the space of a Natural Day is more tedious to a truly
contemplative Soul, than to converse with the dead (I mean to be immured in His
study among his books) for a twelve month upon end; so that when there is an
indispensable obligation lying upon such students to triffle away so much
precious time, as a whole day upon such an unedifying company; in their
evening reflection, they are not only ^eady to say, M^ltum in^ola fuit Anim^
(...) h^die; but also (with Cato the Censor, and Titus Vespasian) Heu perdidi
(...)! and to mind that of the excellent Senea, Non panum temporis habemus sed
(...) p^rdinius, aut nihil agenda, aut aliud agendo, aut mal^ agendo, and (...)
H^ (...) ^ollocando. It Is s^ill judged a witty repartee and a deserved (...)
which S. Augustine gave to the blasphemous inquiry of a too cu^ious person,
who urged him to tell (if it be true that the world had a beginning) what could
GOD be doing so many millions of ages before the creation of the world* That
great soul instantly answered him, He was making Hell for such curious h^ads
as yours: but the proper resolution of the Case is, that Sapiens nunquam est
(...); now GOD being infinitely wise, He cannot possibly be idle for one minute
of Time.

FAB. CCCXXXII. Page 289.
There be some who judge it a point of policy to divert people from prying into
their serious affairs, by giving them occasion to talk of them for some acts of
Levity; as did Alcibiad^s by cutting off (close to the rump) the Tail^ of his
well known D^ at At^ns; but its a most certain truth that they who lay up their
contentment on other m^ns Tongues, build their Happiness upon a very slipperie
foundation; What other men say of us (said that (...) Greek Father, Gregory
Nazia^en) is nothing else but what other M^n dream of us; if (said a
philosopher) I had all men's ^ongues in my possession, they should say no more
than I pleased, but since God and nature have give^ every man a tongue to talk
at random; let them say what they will, I will do what I think just and fit: it
being simply unpossible to please all m^n (ye^ the almighty himself cannot do
it, till first he make all men good) and usualy he who endeavors to please the
most, displeases the best, even GOD an^ his own conscience; but if a man have
these two great witnesses for him he may easily commence a Process of
Exsculpation against all the world; for which we have the sage council of two
heathen Poets, -- Ne Te quaesiveris extra, (said one of Them, and the Other)

-- Hic (...) ^eneus est^,
Nil cons^ire tibi, nulla palles^ Culp^.
Its as evident a matter of fact as Sacred and human History can make it, that
the best of Patriarchs and Kings, the most (...) Prophets and Apostles, and the
greatest Luminaries of the Primitve Church, have had their good Names sullied
with the rank Breaths of the wicked; yet never any of them broke their hearts
for calumny and reproach, and good reason for their generous Patience, for the
servant is not greater than his Lord; and I desire any to find in church
History, that such vile Aspersions were thrown upon Narcissus, Eustathius,
Athanasius, S. Basil, Gregory Nazianz. S. Cyprian, S. Hierom, or S. Augustine,
(though all of them were most basely traduced) as were ^ast upon Innocence it
self; so that the good Christian who is too much concerned for being tossed so
frequently upon the raging billows of slander, has this to solace him, that
he is embarked on that tempestuous sea with very good company.

Yea it is very observable that the most stayed Pagan Princes judge it only fit
for Plebeian Heads to notice the rumors of the Vulgar; Thus Philip of Macedon
being informed that the Lacedaemonians spoke every where ill of him,
notwithstanding he had done them many good offices, which rendered them the
more criminal and inexcusable: if, said he (to those who advised to punish
them) they speak ill of me when I do well, what will they do, when I do
otherwise: It was from the wise Augustus that his adopted Son Tiberius had that
sentence frequently in his mouth; In libera c^vitate linguam mentemque liberam
esse debere: And learned in the beginning of his Reign to inhibit the Roman
Senate from searching after the authors of calumnies and Satyrs, for said he, if
once you plunge your self into that Abyss, you will hardly find leisure for
any thing else* The best confutation of calumny being well doing, and the most
effectual suppression of it is to look down upon it with contempt: The Cynick
Philosopher having given a notable Advice to a man that is most unjustly
traduced; labor, said he, to be most eminent in the virtue which is most
opposite to that vice wherewith you are taxed, and this will make your
calumnious Accuser be accounted a notorious Liar by all the World: But this
crafts master in dissimulation, spoke all this strong sense to the Senate in
great hypocrisy* which Tacitus (that grave historian) as also Suet onius, make
appear from many instances besides that of Creumtius Cordus; at least he was
far from the practice of it diverse years before he dyed: but Titus Vespasian
was more sincere, when he said Bona agere et mala pati, Regium est; For he had
his own ill willers who spoke evil of him, though He was generally accounted the
Darling of mankind; but the vileness of his unbrotherly successor heightened
his Excellency in the Judgments of all Men, long after He was dead; as the
Poet said of a good man who was ill spoken of by some so long as he lived;
Extinctus amabitur Idem.

It Is worth the while to know (before We put a Period to this Particular) that
some Greek Pholosophers fell upon a strange Expedient, as a most effectual
Amulet and Antidote against the Poison of Columnie; and that is to lay it down
for an inviolable conclusion, that to a truly virtuous man, it ought to be more
mortifying, to be well spoken of by the vulgar than ill reported, because that
beast with many heads, the Mobile, is much more enclyned to ly than to speak
Truth; and more apt to magnify vice than virtue, and that they are but at the
least Species Virtutibus similes which merit their esteem: as for true
heroical virtues, as they are infinitely above the knowledge of the Mob, so
above their due valuation of them: It was upon this account that Phovion (the
last of the Grecian worthies at Athens) having one day made a solemn Oration
that highly pleased the Athenian people (which was far from being ordinary with
him) when he perceived this by their shouting applause, he turned to some of
his friends and said, what evil have I spoken that this foolish and ignorant
people does seem to approve it.

FAB. CCCXXXV. Page 293.
I do not think that the impious advice which Job's wife gave her husban
imported a desyance of GOD, but that the meaning is, if he was so desirous of
death, and unwilling to become Felo de Se; Let him only utter some blasphemous
expression and the law of the land would put him to death; but this fable minds
me of a wonderful act of divine Justice recorded by a late English traveller,
named Mr. Gage, of a Spanish Lady in America who hearing that her Husband
(Governor of a province of that new found World) with their only son were
killed in a certain expedition they had made against the ^multuating Natives,
she presumed to utter that blasphemous expression, What worse can GOD do to Me
than He has done? Whereupon there gushed instantly such a Torrent of Waters
from the Side of an adjacent Hill, that it not only overturned the House where
that wicked Lady lived, but also a great Village beside it where many Thousands
were overflowed, so that the accursed Place (like another Sodom) is become a
Lake of stinking waters to this day.

FAB. CCCXXXVII. Page 294.
This may bring to our Remembrance the story of Timon of Athens, generaly
termed Misanthropos, or the Man-Hater, who was indeed much more unhappie than
the man mentioned in the Fable; for this prodigal Nobleman had really wasted a
great Estate upon Hospitality; apprehending that His Trencher-Friends would
help him at a Dead-Lift, But when He came to a great Decay of his fortune, all
these precarious Flies were gone, because there was no more Fire nor Meat
handled in His Kitchen, so that He hated all Mankind, and for many Years
shunned the Company of all the world; therefore it is no wonder that the People
flocked about Him, when He came one day from the Country (whether He had
retired) to the Market Place in Athens, where He made this strange
Proclamation; That having an old Tree in his Orchard which He was about to cut
down, Therefore He thought* fit to warn them seasonably, that if there were any
of them who had a design to hang themselves, let them come for that effect to
his Orchard, and He should spare that tree two or three days longer upon that
acount since many had been formerly hanged thereon.

FAB. CCCXLVI. Page 302.
It seems the Grand Seigniours (or Great Turks) have consulted this fable by
employing the most despicable of their Infantry to to blunt their Enemies
Weapons.

FAB. CCCLIV. Page 324.
To this Taylor's Wife, the Queen of Corinth (espoused to Periander one of the
seven Wisemen of Greece) and that infamous Xantippe, married to Socrates, may
be said to have been Cousin-germans, for their Husbands had as often served
Inhibition against them, not to overturn their Tables, Meat and all,
especially when Strangers were their Guests, as the Tailor had prohibited his
Wife to call Him Prick-Louse; Yet all in vain, Hinc Inde, But we need not
travel the length of Greece for such exotic Plants, since our own Country
affords Us but too many noisome Weeds of that Nature; Yet I cannot but approve
the judicious Observation of the Commentator, That there be as many shrewd
Husbands, as there be female shrews in the World; and that the Man is more to
blame, because he ought to have more Knowledge and Wit than the Wife; and if we
believe the H. Scripture, It Is the Glory of a Man to pass by Infirmities, and
to cover the Imperfections of a Wife, if possibly they can be palliated.

FAB. CCCLXIV, Page 335.
Here is Occasion enough for Raillerie upon the Ignorance of Priests before the
Reformation, for though I suppose the Romanists had never the Civility to thank
Protestants for it, yet it is a most certain truth, that by their frequent
preaching they awakned them out of their Lethargic Stupidity of Ignorance; it
being most ridiculous to hear a Priest expound that Article of his Creed,
Passus sub Pontio Pilato, He passed under the bridge Pilate; and the other who
would prove from the Scripture, that GOD made at first ten worlds by these
words of our Savior, Nonne december fact^ sunt Mund^? which was easily confuted
by the subsequent question, sed ubi sunt novem* I might also instance Dimissus
est per portam, The Priest not having latin for a basket: and the undertaking
of another to prove by divine Testimony, that the People of his Parish were
bound to pave the Church; but not himself; by citing the words of the Prophet,
Paveant illi, non ego; but examples of this nature are almost infinite; which
gave occasion to those who had some stock of latin to say, Loquere latin, ne
intelligant Sacerd^tes.

But as its lamentable so also edifying to read the pitiful account of an
ignorant Priest in Bavaria, which Bontface (called the Apostle of Germany)
gave to Pope Zachary; that the said Priest for many years in the destitution
of better latin had thus baptized; In nomina pa^rua filia and spiritua Sancta;
For this instance alone holds forth sufficiently the great Inconveniences of
public Liturgies in an unknown Tongue.

But there is far greater danger to the Church of GOD in absurd reasonings
(either from scripture or any other Topic) than in the frequent wounding of
Priscian's head, be the Solaecisms never so gross in any language; and whose
desires a large Catalogue of such ridiculous P^ralogisms; let him read a full
account of the Acts and Canons of the second Council of Nice (as it is termed)
and he will find a shoall of them Usque ad nauseam, and all forsooth to buoy up
that idolatrous and most scandalous practice in their Adoration of Images; but
we have not spare time to insist any longer on such Trumperies.

FAB. CCCLXVII. Page 338.
Ludere in re seria, seldom misseth of being an indication of a fool in
earnest; and among things serious, I account not only sacred matters, but also
the approach of death as a most serious adventure; for if a man mistell a stepp
then, he may resolve upon it to step in upon an Eternity of remediless
Misery; where bantering and lampooning, Jibing and al kinds of Jesting are
quite out of fashion; so that they who give themselves to this kind of levity
(when death is looking them in the face) it seems they have never seriously
and seasonably considered that of the wise man; There is a time for all things;
and though some through excess of Charity are apt to impute it to greatness
of spirit, yet it savours either of Atheism (as if they did not believe the
immortality of the Soul) or at least of too great unconcernedness with the
present state both of Soul and body; Sir Thomas More (Chancellor of England)
was undoubtedly a great Soul, but I believe there is no sober person, who will
approve his jesting humor, when He was ascending that fatal Theater, far less
the continuation of it when he laid down his head upon the block.

FAB. CCCLXXXII. Page 352.
Plutarch in his descrintion of the ban^t of the seven Sa^s tells this story
at greater length* though there be many who question the Truth of Arion's escape
by such means, because that Fish which is usually termed a Dolphin, appears so
little and feeble, as that (without a miracle) it could not possibly have
sustained a man upon its back, so long a way at sea; but whither it be fabulous
or not, one thing is certain that diverse men have been most wonderfully rescued
out of the jaws of death; and even some infideles as well as Christians (for
the divine providence reaches over all) We had occasion to give some examples
of this nature already, but what I am now to ad, imports that their
preservation was but a reservation to a greater misfortune, or let it be called
a greater judgment on some wicked persons, who triffled notwithstanding at
first with such an extraordinary Providence.

How admirable was the preservation of Theramenes, one of the 30 Tyrants at
Athens, for being called but for one word to be spoken to a Friend at the Gate,
in the midst of a great feast, he was scarce well over the threshold, when the
house fell, and smothred all the rest of the Guests; But when his Friends
flocked about him to congratulate with Him as a Darling of Heaven; he answered
very modestly, Nescitis O Amici, ad quae Fata Dij me reservarunt; Neither was
he disappointed of his fears, for within few days he was tortured to death by
his cruel Associats, whose tyranny he thought to have dissolved by restoring
the ancient liberty to his People; but his good design was thus disappointed,
providence having reserved that Glorious work for another patriot named
Thrasybulus.

The next instance is more wonderful, both as to the preservation and
destruction of the person concerned, who could not be taxed with any
Immorality, because he was not come to the years of discretion; and that was
the grandchild of that famous Saracen Prince named Almansor, whom not one that
ever reigned in this world, exceded for morality, if we believe S. Walter
Raleigh in the History of his life, which that judicious Historian says that
He compyled out of two very ancient Arabian Manuscripts: This renowned
grandfather, recommended the infant successor to the Tuition of one that he
judged a very trusty friend and servant; but the old villain, having a design
upon that great Empire for himself, thought to have dispatched His Pupil most
subtily by a most gorgeous coat that he had tinctured inwardly with Poison;
which had certainly taken effect, had it not been for a dream of the mother of
this young Prince, who was so fond of that splendid Vesture, that He was just
ready to put it on, when she made a shift to put it upon another by whose death
the Treason was discovered; but though the Prince was wonderfully preserved at
this time; Yet within few days the infant lying in his bed in good Health,
there descendeda Spider, one morning, from the Top of it, and did bite his
Lipp, which so inflamed, that it produced a Fever, and a speedy Death; and
with Him ended the Glory of the Saracen Empire, which was then at the Height:
By an exact Geographical Computation it will be found that there was never any
Monarchy in the World preferable to it for Vastness of Dominion, no not the
Roman in the days of Augustus; For they had a considerable Interest in Europe
(beside the Continent of Spain) a far greater Portion of Africa than ever the
Romans had, and the whole Kingdom of Persia, which the Romans never subdued.

The former Instance verifies that of the H. Scripture, that GOD's Judgments
are a very great Depth, though always just; but there is no man who has the Use
of Reason, but will be ready to justify the Judgment of God in the succeeding
story, which concerns a wicked Robber and Murderer in France; This villainous
(...) having bereaved many Innocents of their Lives, did fall asleep one
Summers Night, at the Foot of an old Wall, when He dreamed, that a reverend Old
Man came to Him, and bid Him instantly remove from the Place, otherways the
ruinous old wall would fall on Him, which He had no sooner done, than the wall
did fall; but the impious wretch was so far from making a good use of that
wonderful mercy, that He did blasphemously imagine that the infinite Justice
did approve his wicked Courses, so that He went about His old Trade, and the
very next Night murdered a Man; then falling asleep, though not under a wall, He
dreamed again that his old Monitor came to him, and said to him, Ah you ingrate
wicked Wretch, is this the thank You give GOD Almighty for your late wonderful
Deliverance, to return again to that inhumane trade of murdering of men made
after the Image of GOD! But now know for your terror, that it was out of no
kindness to You, that I warned You of Your danger, but that your preservation
might be a reservation to a greater Judgment, even an ignominious Death before
the World, which within few Hours will be inflicted upon You; This profligat
Villain was scarce well awakned from this terrible Night-Vision, when the
Officers of Justice seized upon Him, so that the very next Day he was publicly
broken upon the Row, as he well deserved.

FAB. CCCCI. Page 375.
The exactest Parallel I know to this Cobling Doctor with the discovery of the
cheat, is that remarkable story which fell out in this same age, concerning a
Jew named Sabbatai Sevi, who became such a grand Impostor, that I believe the
like of him did not arise since the days of Mahomet that Prodigy of Impostors,
for He had so deluded that long obdured Nation with a pretense of Miracles and
divine Revelation, that they verily believed He was their promised MESSIAH,
whom they had so long expected, so that the generality of the Jews became
perfectly mad, for they sold all their effects here and there at very easy
rates, and were all upon wing for Jerusalem in expectation of that universal
monarchy; but when the Grand Seignior (Mahomet IV.) was informed that Sabbatai
gave out he would lead the great Turk in Chains to Jerusalem, and upon his
ruins begin the erection of his new Empire, he caused bring him chained to
Adrianople, and then told Him that He behooved to stand naked within a very
small distance from six of his guard who were to discharge their Harquebuzes
upon him; and if (said the Grand Seignior) You catch no harm, I will then
believe that you can work mirrcles, otherwise you must instantly be circumcised
and turned Mussleman, for there is no other safety for you, The poor fellows
faith failed so that he made as ingenious a confession as the Cobbler did to the
Governor, and instantly became Turk, and here is an end of that noysie
pageantrie, of which I have given but a very brief extract; but whosoever desires
to see it at large, he will find it in a particular treatise made by Paul
Ricaut for that effect; or in the addition to Mr. Knall's Turks History,
composed by that same Author.

FAB. CCCCVIII. Page 384.
In the life of Thales Milesius one of the seven sages of Greece, there is a
true story almost to the same purpose; This Philosopher had an Ass, which from
a certain place used to carry a load of Salt for the Masters behove; now there
being a river in the way, she once stumbled and fell therein, so that a large
quantity of the salt was dissolved by the water, she finding her burden to be
thereby considerably lightened, had so much of a bru^ish sagacity as to commence
a spontaneous falling more than once for her own ease but to her Masters
disadvantage; which being observed by that wise Philosopher, He caused load her
with a great pack of wool, so that finding her burden once and again augmented
by her plunging, she was afterward very careful to keep her feet straight
when she entered into the water: And that there be some old resty Jades (call
it policy or what you will) who counterfit the Spavin or Halting (that the
ryder may spare his spurs a little) is well known by the experience of the world.

FAB. CCCCXIII. Page 388.
Here might have been minded the witty answer which Apollonius Tyanaeus gave
the Emperor Vespasian concerning the government of that Monster of nature
Nero; Nero (said the Philosopher) could tune the Harp well; but as for his
political government, he sometimes wynd up the strings thereof too high, and
at other times suffered them to fall too low, so that Themistocles was much
more to be commended, who though He could not fidle at all, yet he had the proper
art of making a little burnt City, a great State; and of preserving the interest
and honor of Athens in wooden walls.

FAB. CCCCXIV. Page 390.
Ne suitor ultra crepidam, is the true moral of this fable in very few Words;
and as such ignorants ought not to be found tampering with heterogeneall
matters, which are far above their Sphaere; so they are not better than fools
who consult or employ them in any excentrick business: though that Apocryphal
book called Ecclesiasticus is no part of canonical scripture (for which some
pregnant intrinsic Reason might be given beside the Testimony of the Jews)
yet Syracides has set down many excellent moral Instructions therein; among
which is found a large and notable advice to this purpose, which thus begins:
Consult not a coward in matters of War, etc. the curious will find the rest in
the author himself.

FAB. CCCCXVI. Page 392.
This Apologue minds me of that unkingly answer which the Emperor of Iapan
made to some Jesuits not long ago; for that polypragmatick Sect having, by
the presents of many curious Clocks and Watches, obtained a license from that
Prince to preach the Gospel within his dominions, how soon he had drained them
of all their gifts, he then revoked that license he had granted them: and when
the Jesuits had the confidence to insinuate, that it was no better than
perfidious dealing, which was unsuitable in any man, but abominable in a King,
whose Word ought to be equivalent to another Man's Oath; He most impudently
replied, that his tongue was not made of bone: now whither there be a greater
repugnancie in this short (but vi^e) answer to morality or the regal dignity,
it can hardly be determined; for a King's word ought to be no less sacred than
his person, and when He is found to make no bones to violat his word of honor,
there is no more intrinsic honor due unto him, and he will have a better luck
then he deserves if the external ceremonies thereof be long continued with him.

When the Emperor Sigismond had promised to give a considerable Sum of money
to an old soldier at a certain day; before the time of performance came he
repented of it, and told the Promittee that he could not spare so much, Sir
(said the bold son of Mars) you ought to have considered that before you made
the promise, but now Promissum cadit in Debitum, and without a palpable
violation of your honor, you cannot ^esile from it: Is it so (said the good
Emperor) I will chose rather to part with my money than to lose mine honor
any more: by the last words he alluded to the violation of the safe conduct
granted to John Huss when he went to the council of Constance, which gave
occasion to many to reflect on Him as a Prince regardless of his Honor;
therefore he was become more sensible of that tender point; which reflection
had its own influence on his successor Charles V. for about an hundred years
after the burning of that Goose (for Huss signifies no less in the Bohemian
language) there rose a Swan out of its ashes (as I. Huss had truly prophesied)
I mean Martine Luther (for his name imports the same in that Language) he being
called by Charles V. to the city of Worms with a promise of free e^ try and
issue, when some bigotts about him (who had a Zeal but neither according to
Knowledge, Justice, Charity nor Truth) urged Him to put in execution that
odious Canon of the council of Constance, that no faith should be kept to
Here^icks; the noble Emperor answered, though Faith and Truth were lost, they
should be found among Kings and Emperors; The generous Prince hating ( Cane
and Angue pejus) that most detestable Canon as a mighty scandal and disgrace,
both to Christianity and Morality.

FAB. CCCCXVII. Page 394.
Witty Lucian in that Dialogue betwixt a poor Cobbler and his Cock (which at
last, forsooth, He found to be a new Metamorphosis of the Philosopher
Pythagoras, who had made a transmigration from Euphorbus to Chanticleer) He
exemplifies the anxious Cares and Fears of a covetous rich man in most lively
colors, which the curious may see at large in the said Author; but a rich
Miser needs no more but look into his own Breast, and there He will find (next
to a poor desparing sinner) as absolute an image of Hell, as can be found in
this World.

The Author might have illustrated what He says at the end of his Reflection on
this Fable, by that story of the Poor Widows two Mites, which were more
acceptable to Him that sees the Heart, and will reward according to the sincere
intention thereof, than all the great Gifts of the rich Men which were that day
cast into the Jewish Corban, for She threw in all She had, and the greatest
King upon Earth could do no more; Yea all generous Souls in this World do
regard the Heart of the Giver (so far as they can guess by their Frankness)
almost infinitely above the Gift it self; as We may perceave from the great
Reward Artaxerxes Longimanus bestowed upon a poor man for a Cup of cold Water:
and the no less Guerdon which a country man received from Theodosius the
youngr, for an extraordinary big Apple; not to speak of that extraordinary
Favor shown by Artaxerxes Mnenion to him who brought him a Dose of puddle
Water, which was the best that could be found to supply the present necessity
of that Persian Prince.

FAB. CCCCXVIII. Page 394.
That story of the unruly Horse of the Prince of Orange that killed the Lion
with a back blow of his hinder foot upon the Lions Front, is so well known
through all Europe, that We need not insist upon it; Only I shall ad that the
Ass in the fable had a better fortune than the Horse in theh istorie, for the
Ass became no whit less than himself by his victory over the Boar; But the
dreadful pursuit made by this lion (though he lost his life in the cause) did so
stun the spirits of the Horse, that he who was so sprightly before as that he
would suffer none to back him, became such a tame jade, that a Child might
mount him, and he was judged fit for no other employment, than the drawing of a
Cart.

FAB. CCCCXXVII. Page 40^.
Titus Livius would almost cause an Heraclitus to laugh at the event of Fae
minine Futility, when there was no ground in Nature for it: Papyrius Curser
(famous enough in the Roman history) when he was but a young stripling, was
importuned by his too curious mother to tell her what had kept the Senators
sitting so long beyond their ordinary time; at last under great Secrecy He
told Her that there had been great contest among them concerning Polygamie, and
that the final Determination was referred to the morrows diet, but in his weak
Judgment they who were for Plurality of wives, would carry it by plurality of
voices; she was so far from keeping this supposed secret to herself, that the
very next morning she assembled a great Brigade of all the Roman matrons at the
senate house door, who told the admiring senators, that they were come to
protest against that unjust act, till they were heard for their interest: Ex
malis moribus bonae oriuntur Leges; for whereas the senators sons (though very
young) were formerly permitted to be present at all their serious debates; this
was inhibited for the future till they should ascend to a competent Age; having
reason to judge that all Women were of the same mold with the mother of
Papyrius, yet in regard he had manifested extraordinary discretion by his
fiction he alone was privileged to sit though far within the competent age, and
therefore surnamed Praetextatus. But A. Gellius makes it more ludicrous on the
Female Side, for he says that Papyrius represented it as if the Senators were
in doubt whither every man might have two wives, or every woman two Husbands,
and makes the Roman matrons protest rather for the latter than former
alternative.

The a. instance is Roman too, and no less comical than the former, by the
pleasant Jest put upon a futile wife, by the husband, who was a Roman Senator,
and having stayed one day long from dinner, the wife was very curious to know
what weigty matter they had been about; The Husband appeared very shy, because
(said he) it is a matter that may cost me my Life if it be known that I have
revealed the mysteries of the state, and on the other hand, I know that it is as
easy to grasp the Air in our fist, or to take hold of a vanishing shadow, as to
fix a woman to secrecy, yet upon so many protestations he was at last
persuaded to trust her for once, Then out comes the mystery, that there had
been a strange prodigy seen of late, which by the Angures was judged to be a
portentous Omen to the City, and that was a Lark flying above it with an
Headpiece and a Javeline at it is side, so that the Senators have been
devising long what expiation to make for the City to divert the wrath of the
Gods which is apparently threatened by that wonderful prodigy: The wife was the
more apt to believe him, not only because she knew her husband to be a serious
man and that he had told his tale with a great deal of seeming Gravity, but
also in regard that Rome, whither Pagan or Christian, has been always too
superstitious; but for all her protestations for Secrecy, all her Gossips
heard it long before Sun-sett; for the Husband walking toward the Forum in the
Cool of the day, was accoasted with many of his acquaintance, all saying, we
pray you Sir, what think you of that prodigious Lark, with a Cask and Javeline?
He returning to his house appeared to His Wife to be in a mighty Passion, to
whom He said, If I had not been a Fool, I would never have put it in your Power
to undo me by your Madness in divulging that great secret committed to You, for
now the Town is full of it; It Is well known that women have very ready Wits, so
that Her Apology was not ridiculous, fit had not had its Rise from a Fable;
Husband (said she) are there not 300 Senators of You, and the generality of
them have Wives no less curious than I, and as bad Secretars, why then should I
be challenged more than the rest? You speak strong Sense, said the Husband, if
any of the rest had known it as well as You, but I will assure you that there
was not any Senator but my self alone who knew it; so that none of them could
tell their Wives; and to be short, He unridled the mystical sport to Her, and
then concluded* since I perceave (by thus feeling of your Pulse) that You have
an incureable Lienteria in your tongue; though You would take a Razor in your
Hand, and do no less with it than the Wife of Brutus did in the absence of her
Husband, yet I will assure you that I will never any more trust you with an
important secret, for eve^ie wife is not the daughter of Cato.

The last story was also acted upon the scene of Rome, but most Tragical in
the event, for it ended in the violent death both of Husband and Wife, and thus
it was ushered in: The Emperor Augustus after the death of Agrippa, made
choice of one Fulvius a Roman Senator to be his intimat friend and
counselor, supposing him more close than Macenas (whom he had sometimes taxed
for not keeping council) but a Scylla in Charybdem, for having revealed under
great Secrecy to Fulvius his design of retryving young Agrippa from that Isle
to which he was relegated; tho* he be but a profligate Youth (said the
Emperor) Yet being the Son of the most worthy and gallant Agrippa, and mine
own grand child, it is more natural that my own blood succeed me than a
stranger, though my adopted Son (meaning Tiberius) The futile friend no sooner
went home, but he acquainted his wise with the Emperor's design, and she could
not rest one minute at home, till she had disgorged that Seccret in the bosom
of Livia, who came in like Thunder and Lightning upon the poor Husband
upbraiding him to have no less design in that releasment than to cut her Son's
throat and her own: the next morning, Fulvius having made his ceremonious
salutation to the Emperor; All that Augustus answered, was, GOD send you more
wit Fulvius, he instantly apprehending the meaning of that satyr, came home and
called for his wise, to whom he said, since by your folly I have lost the
Emperor's savor I am resolved to live no longer, therefore pulled out his
dagger to dispatch himself; hold said the wife till I speak some thing for my
own vindication: You are more to blame for this discovery than my self, for
knowing me these twenty years bygone that I could not keep council, you ought
not to have entrusted me with any weighty matter, which you would have
concealed, but since I am the principal offender, it is reason I be the first
sufferer; then she instantly pulled the dagger out of the Husbands hand, and
sheathed the same in her own bowels.

FAB. CCCCXLVI. Page 422
The French Libertines conceat, reported by the author, is an allusion, or to
say better, the real account of a Dialogue betwixt a Libertine, and the famous
Duke Ioyess, whereof I shall give a more ample narrative for the Honor of that
great man: when he was but younger Brother He had turned Capuchin, but the
elder being killed in the civil Wars* by the Martial Conduct of Henry King of
Navarr; The younger brother was constrained by the Pope, for the good of the
Catholic Cause (which in their opinion justifies a dispensation for any thing)
not only to succeed his brother in his estate but also in his office of
General under Henry III. Thus we find the honest Capuchine transformed into a
Duke and Peer of France, and into a man of war; But how soon it pleased the
LORD of Hosts to restore Peace to France by the settlement of Henry IV. in the
capital city, the new Duke instantly abandoned all the pleasures of the court
with all his great Estate and Ti^les of Honor and returned to his old order of
Capuchine; and it was on the streets of Par^s* in a cold winter day, that a
lice^tious droll (a modern Dei ^, or to say better, a real Atheist)
rancountred this religious father bare legged and bare footed, save only that
he had sandalls under his soles: But the duply of that truly religious noble
Soul ought not to be forgot: As I believe those regions of Bless and mar^sions
of eternal Glory, to which I hope GOD of his infinite Mercy* and for the
infinite merits of holy Jesus, will bring me, when it is his good pleasure that I
be delivered from a vain, a sinful and miserable life; so if there be a ^ell
where incorrigible sinners shall be eternally tormented (whereof I am fully
persuaded, because the Justice of GOD requires it) then, Sir, you will be found
to be the greatest fool of the two.

FAB. CCCCLII. Page 428.
Rondelitius a French Physician has a story somewhat to this Purpose, of a
cheating Rogue in France who gained no little money by countersitting that
strange Disease named the Catalepsy (whose real stupefaction does so resemble
the Insensibility of a dead Body, that the People of Cullen buried the Subtle
Doctor alive) but Rondelitius having good ground to suspect the counterfit
Cataleptic as an Impostor, He said that He had cured many o^ that Disease by a
very easy remedy, yet so effectual, that they never relapsed into it again,
and that was only to bastinado them soundly from head to foot; (...) how soon
the Eck statick Cheat heard this, he gat up and away, and ^o the Disease was
cured.

FAB. CCCCLVIII. Page 434.
Plutarch, in his Moralls, reports a Parallel story to this Miser with his
rotten Apples; Of a Merchant in Chios who had many sorts of Greek Wines to
traffic with; Yea the Isle of Chios is famous for produceing naturally very
generous wines; this merchant was a great miser, and having bought a slave in
the morning he ordered him to taste his serveral sorts of wine, and to (...) by
themselves any bottles which contained sour or vappid wine; but when the Slave
perceived His Mister to make Use of those (and of ^one (...)) at his Meat, he
showed Him a fair Pair of Heels after Dinner; but being brought back again, and
told that it was death by the Law for a slave to become Fugitive; I know no
less, replied he, for I would rather choose death than serve a Fool; a Fool,
said his overtakers, He is accounted a very wise man who is your master; he
must either be a fool or a madman, said the slave, who having many good Wines
in his Possession, and the Propriety of them also, that will still take the
worst to his own Use.

FAB. CCCCLXIV. Page (...).
The most lamentable Story that ever I read of an Outrage of this Nature
committed in cold blood (not on a beast, but on a man; not on a stranger, but
the man's own Son, and the eldest too) was perpetrated by Sha Ab^as K. of
Persia, who lived not long ago; he was a Prince of great parts. but very
Tyrannical, as generally the Asiatick monarchs are, and when their people come
to a general grudging and a murmuring against the Government, it is an infallible
evidence that it is highly Tyrannical, for it is well known to Historians, that
the Asiaticks have been generally slaves since the days of Nimrod; though some
of their Princes are less severe than others: We need no other Evidence of
their being so inured to slaverie (that they affected these chains) than the
proffer which the Romans made to the Cappadocians, even to set them at liberty,
that they might become a Commonwealth, since their Kings had so tyrannized
over them: but their Answer was surprising to the Romans, who expected great
Thanks for tendering that to them which is acounted the greatest Blessing upon
earth next to bodily Health: We have been so accust ^med to Kingly Government,
said the Cappadocians, that We will choose rather to have a King (let him be
never so great a Tyrant) than to have none at all.

But let Us return to Sha Abbas, who had a Son (and his first born too) that
was a Prince of great Virtue, and greatly beloved by all Ranks of People, and
never a Son honored his Parents more than He did His Royal Father; He was
also arrived at such an Age, as to have Wife and Children; This unfortunate
Prince found one day a little Schedule of Paper lying in his chamber unsealed
and unsubscribed, with very odd contents, the sum thereof was this, that if he
were willing, he should be put in present possession of the administration of
the government, since neither the nobility nor body of the people could any
longer endure the intolerable Tyranny of his Father.

We may easily imagine how surprising this paper was to an innocent Soul who
had never harbored such unnatural thoughts* Yea abhorred them as he did the
Devil and Hell it self; so that in a true filial rage he was once resolved to
throw that treasonable paper into the fire as most worthy of Hell fire; till he
began to reflect on two things, 1. that it might be a politic Fetch of his
Father to try how he would behave, for he knew Him to be of as Jealous a temper
as any man living; Or supposeing it to be a real effect of the conspiracy of
the nobles against his father, yet he judged it probable that some pick thank
among them, or a timorous Soul might reveal the combination to the King, with
the circumstance of that dropped paper, so that the Maxim of Law might be
applied to himself, Qui tacet, consentire videtur, Therefore he finaly
determined to acquaint the King with that unhappy emergencie, and withal to
make infinite protestatons of his own ignorance of the matter, and His fitter
Abhorrence of so vile a Design: The father was well pleased with the prudent
Conduct of his Son, and thoroughly convinced of his innocence, Yet that fatal
paper had raised such suspicions of the Nobles in his head, and such sinistrous
suppositions concerning His own Son, that it was possible he might yet be
prevailed upon to comply with that treasonable design (since a great Crown is
a great temptation) or that it would satisfy the conspiratours that his Son
were only passive in the matter, and in fine this unhappy Father, no less
jealous than the Roman Emperor Tiberius (and too like him in his
dissimulation) began to entertain that same suspicion of his Son, that Tiberius
had done of Germani^us, who thought Him not innocent for all his moderation in
refusing the Empire because He was judged capable of what had been offered to
him; so that He could get no rest day nor night till he had assasinated his
innocent Son; yet within few hours he repented of that unnatural villainy, and
had abundant occasion to repent so long as he lived, but in the resentment of
his irreparable loss, he most justly wrecked his wrath on that too officious
Nobleman who made too great have to put in Execution that inhumane and most
wicked order: Thus We have an end of this most woeful Tragedy, where both
innocence and extraordinary merit suffered.

FAB. CCCCLXXVI. Page 449
There is a parallel story to this of Si^nides in the deportment of the Philo
sopher Stilpo after the taking of Megara by the army of King Demetrius, the
said King meeting the Philosopher, and knowing that his dwelling house had been
in Maegara, demanded of him if he had lost many of his goods, at the sacking of
that City, insinuating that he was heartily sorry that he knew it not sooner,
that he might have given a protection to his house and all that belonged to
him: Stilpo answered him that he had lost none of his goods in Magara, for I
never esteemed the triffling gifts of fortune as my goods, for these are
Knowledge and Virtue, of which Intellectual and Moral goods I cannot be
bereaved by all the Tyrants under Heaven, Yea suppose they take this frail life
away, these immortal goods will not fail to accompany me to a much better
world.

FAB. CCCCLXXXVI. Page 462.
It was an usual expression of the famous Aristotle, O my friends, how rare is
it to find a true friend in the world! There were not many pairs of friends
celebrated by the ancients; We read of Daman and Pythias; Theseus and
P^rithous; Achilles and Patroclus; Pylades and Orestes; Alexander and
Ephestion; Scipio and Lelius; Augustus and Agrippa; Vespasian and Mutianus;
Severus and Plautianus; with some few others: and yet among those few we have
mentioned* an entire reciprocal Amity will not be found, there being some
flawes observed in some of the four last mentioned pairs: And it is no wonder to
find such deficiencies among Infidels, when one of the most celebrated couple
of friends that are recorded in Holy Scripture are taxed with a palpable
defect; for that amity ought to be accounted but a dead friendship, which dies
with the immediate Object* and descends not to his posterity, and so may David's
be said to have done in reference to his dear and most generous friend
Jonathan, when he proved so injust to his Son Mephibosheth as after due
information of the cheat put upon himself and his friend's Son, to say, you
and Ziba divide the land; for a just judge (not to speak of a faithful friend)
in lieu of any other dividend, would have ordered the head of that lying and
Treacherous slave to have been divided from his body, for abusing his master
and the son of such a ather; but hence we may justly in^er that here away Nihil
est ab omni part beatum.

FAB. CCCCXCVII. Page 475.
In the life of the profoundly learned Joseph Mede, we have an instance of such
an Hypocrite: This good man having lent to a neighbor in the city of Oxford a
considerable sum of money to be paid at such a day, without any interest;
Before the day came the debtor was turned Anabaptist, and when the Creditor
required his money, as having use for it himself, he did meet with this strange
kind of payment; there is no money due to You; what said the Doctor, did I not
lend you money to be paid at this time? That Is nothing said the new proselyte,
for now I know that you have no right to that money, because You are not a Ba^e
of Grace* for Dominion is only founded therein, the promise of inheriting the
Earth being made to none (...) but the me^k, of which number you make not one.

Mr. Herle, a judicious english Divine, encountered with such a Bigo^as to his
own frantic notions; this poor creature was become one of the mad Sect of
those who are called Fa^ilists; and being of Mr. Herle's congregation, he one
day endeavoring to reclaim him from his errors, and to reduce that strayed
sheep to the church, did meet with nothing from the de^uded soul but perfect,
nonsense, still in^erlarded with two blasphemous terms Godded and Christed: at
last the Minister entreated him to explain those terms, for he did not
understand them; O said the poor soul, though thy darkness cannot, yet my light
does sufficiently comprehend them. But instances of this nature are almost
infinite.

FAB. CCCCXCVIII. Page 476.
We find as ridiculous scruples of conscience told of some others: as of that
Neapolit^n Gentleman, who making his confession to a Priest, said that the Sin
which ever troubled his conscience most was the taking of a drink of whey upon
Good Friday. The Priest knowing that he had been one of the Bandit* (and that
he had not yet abandoned that cruel crew of outlawes) pray Sir said he did you
never robb nor murder any upon the mountains betwixt Naples and Rome; Yes,
Yes, (said the Schriving Penitent) I have done that very often; then the Priest
said, I suppose murder or robbery is a far greater Sin than what you have
mentioned, because the^e are direct violations o^ the Laws of GOD; and the
other at most but of the canons of the Church: Sir said the Gentleman, you do
not considder that to be our trade, and every man may lawfully live upon his
own ^ade. I shall also subjoyn a story of my own certain knowledge to this
same purpose; There descended from the Hills a pack of barbarous inhabitants
with a formed design to rob a ministers house in the country where I once
lived, and though the minister was himself at home and all the time preached to
them about justice and equity yet it was, Canere surdis, for they were so
diligent in carrying away his g^ods, that they left nothing portable before day
light: The Captain of those Highlanders having at last espied a Box in the
ministers chamber (with two locks upon it) demanded what was in it? The
minister ingenously declared that it was the Kirk-Box, which kept the poor's
money not doubting in the least but that it would become a prey with the rest:
GOD forbid (said the conscientious Captain) That we should become guilty of
Sacrilege, we will not for all the World wrong the Church; how comes it then,
said the minister, that you have no scrup^e to ro^ a Churchman, yea suppose I
were none, how is it that you make no conscience to violat the V* II. precept
of the Decalogue which so expressly forbids Theft and Roberie? (the minister
pressed the point more home upon* ^m because he found him much more intelligent
than his associats, and a considerable master of the Latin Tongue) O Sir!
replied the Captain, you mistake yourself, for that is our Trade, and every
man must live by his proper occupation* and thu^ ended; (but never mended)
Oportet vivere and Unde.

FINIS.

