A Just and Sober VINDICATION OF THE OBSERVATIONS UPON THE Thirtieth of January
AND Twenty ninth of MAY.

Now let them put away their Whoredoms, and the Carcases of their Kings, far
from me, and I will dwell in the midst of them,

John 43. 9. Answer not a Fool according to his Folly, least thou also be like
unto him.

Answer a Fool according to his Folly, least he be Wise in his own Conceit,

Prove. 26. 4, 5. By J. G. G.

LONDON Printed. And are to be Sold by Ric. Baldwin at the Oxford-Arms in
Warwick Lane, 1694.

A Just and Sober Vindication of the Observations upon the Thirtieth of
January, and Twenty ninth of May.
I NOT out of any Peevish Humor, but in my Judgment, being Dissatisfied with
some Yearly Practices, not about Trifles, but such Matters as I conceive the
Honor of God and Welfare of the Nation to be concerned in, as not to Defile
the Worship of God with any Mixture of the Creature, and to remove such things,
as being made standing Monuments, do continue, and will perpetuate Divisions
and Animosities, have taken the Freedom to publish my Thoughts thereupon,
without design of wronging any Man, as I hope I have not, but have spoken forth
the words of Truth and Soberness: Yet it seems what I have written, has
somewhere lighted upon a Sore place, which cannot endure to be touched; and
this has made the Party not only to Start, but to fly out; a Sound Part can
suffer to be handled, when an Unsound one does not; and sometimes one Wasp
makes as great a Noise as the whole Nest.

Well, the Matter was Combustible, therefore no wonder if it so easily has
taken Fire, and has broken out into a Flame, like those Firebrarnds by Samson
put to Judges 154. 5.
the Fox's Tail, all intended to Ruin and to Destroy, as those did in the
Field; but these shall do no Harm, except it be at Home, and upon the
Contrivers: Some Vapors from the Spleen and low Parts, do sometimes cause great
Fumes and Disturbances in the Head, as do Exhalations from the Earth in the
middle Region of the Air, but at last after some Lightning and Noise of Thunder
and Wind, they return and fall upon the Earth in Hail, Rain or Snow: So that
windy and stormy Noise in the Head, after a while cease, and, to make use of
Solomon's words, is as the Cracklings of Thorns under the Pot. Eccles. 7. 6.


Though the Pamphlet in question be not in any thing worth a Reply, and the
Pamphleteer deserves to be answered otherwise than with a Pen; yet for it I am
content to stand the Judgment of any Rational and Impartial Man: But least he
should be pussed up (as many of that Spirit are apt to be) with a Conceit of
himself, and least some People should think the worse of the Cause for my
Silence, I must say something in answer to it, and if he has any thing to
write against my Reasons, let him do it as a Gentleman and as a Scholar (though
his Pamphlet proves him to be neither) and then I hope in God to cut him Work
more than he shall be well able to compass.

Reason and Experience do teach us, how in this World all Men cannot be of one
Mind, no more than all have the same Features: Rational Men will Discourse and
make use of Arguments to find out the Truth, yet without coming to Sword and
Dagger; the striking of two Flints one against another does produce Lights, so
sometimes Debates and Disputes bring out Truth, and make it known; nay, with
greater Light and Certainty than it was before; as the Sun appears Brighter and
more Glorious after it has dispersed Clouds that stood between it and our
Aspect. For my part I declare, I love not Dispute for Dispute sake, but to find
out the Truth: I am always, and so every Rational Man ought to be, ready to
receive better Information; and if any one convinces me to be in the Wrong, I
will thank him and follow the Truth, if made appear to me; and if in any thing
I be otherwise minded, with St. Paul I hope God will reveal it to me. I most
fully am persuaded of Phil. 3. 15.
the Truth of what I have written; and though I do not believe there is in any
one Man or Society, a Spirit of Infallibility; yet I am most sure, the Rule I
endeavor, as much as God enableth me, to follow, namely his Word, is
Infallible; there I stick, if any one out of it does convince me, I shall yield
to the Conviction, or else continue to assert my Opinion: And in this case,
what the Emperor Charles the Fifth used to say in another, I assert, Fortune
and I, said he, against any two: Yo y la F^^tina contra dos otros.
So upon a much better account, say I, Truth, that is the Word of God, and I,
against any two Adversaries whatsoever.

But must in this World the Will of one Man be the Rule of another Man's Will;
and the Judgment and Opinion of one, be the Measure of that of another: I
declare I have not such an Implicit Faith, (that is the Prerogative of God's
Will) and because I will not yield to it, must my Throat be cut for that? Or at
least, must I be reviled with ill Language? It argues a very bad Cause that
needs being defended by such Means, let Arguments and not ill Words be used,
for commonly they who employ Injuries and fly into Passion, do want Reason;
Arguments as hard as you please, but soft words; certainly they who do
otherwise, in the Opinion of Moderate Men, do prejudice their Cause: Against
such our Blessed Savionr has put the Word in my Mouth, If I have Spoken Evil,
bear witness of the Evil. John 18. 23.
Show me out of the Word of God the Falsity and Fallacy of my Arguments; Does a
Man think it below him so to do? Or rather, Does he not find he cannot do it,
that he betakes himself to Slanders and Injuries: Truth wants no such help, and
by the Grace of God I am neither ashamed nor afraid to own it. None ought to be
ashamed of the Gospel of Christ as St. Paul was not, nor of the Truth of the
Gospel which is the same, though some in these Corrupt Times, would put God's
People out of Countenance, and make them afraid of owning the Gospel.

Some Men in the World do little think upon that Precept of St. Paul Let your
Moderation be known unto all Men, and the Reason is, the Lord is at hand, to
observe Phil. 4. 5.
and to judge: Violency and Impetuosity, too strong in some, is much opposite
to that Calmness required not only in a Christian but also in a Reasonable Man;
they who so highly do act contrary to this, and make themselves Drudges and
Slaves to their Wrath or Passion, do not deserve to Converse with or enjoy the
Society of the Civilized World, but only that of Brutes as their most proper
Company: If that be an Effect of their Temper and Constitution, they ought to
strive against and endeavor to overcome it, or else they must expect sometimes
to hear of it: High Storms do commonly leave behind some marks where they have
been, and grounds of Complaints too: It Is but a Word and a Blow with some, but
the Wrath of Man works not the James 1. 20.
Righteousness of God.

If here I would take Advantage of the Law Talionis, and requit, it would carry
one very far; but I have rather out of Scripture, whence I endeavor to draw my
Rules and Comfort, to obey the Apostles Precept, Let all your things be done
with Charity; whereof it is an Act sometimes to redress those than Wander in a
wrong 1 Cor. 16. 14.
way, provided there be nothing of Hatred or Vengeance in the Heart; Solomon
does direct us how to do it, when he says, Answer not a Fool according to his
Folly, that is, in the same Extravagant Manner and Degree, Prove. 26. 4, 5.
least thou be like unto him, for if thou do, thou shall be as Fool as he,
and be looked upon as such: However, Answer a Fool according to his Folly,
least he be Wise in his own Conceit; Consider him and not thy self, something
must be done or said to him, least he grows Proud and Vain, for such are apt
to abound in their own Sense and not see their Folly; wherefore show him his
Error, and that he is no Wise nor Good Man, (for in Solomon's Style, a Fool is
a Sinner or a Bad Man) though he fancieth himself to be Wise and Good: It is a
higher degree of Folly in one to proclaim himself such, and to publish it
abroad, than if he could confine it within his own Doors; and if one through
Infirmity cannot master it, yet he is to endeavor in some degree to curb and
keep it from breaking out: However answer him, says the Wise Man, though not
according to his Folly, and as Severely as he deserves, yet he must not go
unanswered, least he should think he has done well and failed in nothing. And
if when one is about such a Work, the Man should happen to Vex, and Fret, and
fly out, as it is usual with such, it were proper to put to him the same
Question as the Apostle did to the Galatians, Am I therefore become your Enemy,
because I tell you Gal. 4. 16.
the Truth.

The chief and I may say the only end I herein propose to my self, is to bear
record unto the Truth, and to such a Truth as deserves in a special manner to
be regarded: But in order thereunto, I would have Men to shoot at the Mark and
keep to the Point, and not to go straggling here and there, and so miss the
aim: Let us search into the Merits of the Cause, laying aside all by and cross
Questions and Discourse, except they do contribute to the Clearing of the
Matter we are about; and when that is over, in God's Name we may proceed to new
things, but let us make an end with one before we begin with the other, and
that is the likeliest way to clear the Truth; on and off, fast and loose, cannot
do it, but sticking to the Point can; but ever forbearing to give ill Language.

If I wanted a Witness for some things I said in the Observations, I have him
now, and is seasonably come in from amongst our Adversaries, by his own Example
to demonstrate what manner of Spirit some of them are acted by; I leave those
whom this belongs, to apply it to themselves, how little Salt and how much
Mercury there is in them, how Fierce, Fiery and Violent a Temper they are of;
and I refer it to the Judgment of Sober and Impartial Men; such Principles, if
reduced into Practice, are enough to work Confusion and Ruin, and to overturn
whole Nations and Kingdoms: These, in Imitation of Papists, they would with all
their Heart promote with Fire and Faggot, whereof too many have had a Sad
Experience, which has afforded continual grounds of Complaint: And this I
desire the Moderate Reader to take notice of, and consider whether Lives, or
any thing else we have, could be Safe, if it should again be in the Power of
such Men to Persecute, of such Men I say, for I am not so Unreasonable as to
Father it upon all. We know how those that amongst them are Moderate, and will
not come up to that Violence as themselves are for, they be Angry against and
Revile them with the Names of Trimmers and the like: So that a Pen between the
Fingers of such Hot-spirited Men, is as a Sword in the Hand of a Furious
Person, who strikes on all sides, and spares neither Friend nor Foe, except
to a Hairs breadth they come up to what they would have them.

How Brave and Generous Champions of the Church are these, the Honor and
Ornament thereof? with how much Credit do they Promote and Maintain that Cause?
Revilings, Injuries and False Aspersions are their Weapons; in their whole
Carriage they be very Angry, yet without any Ground but their own Temper, which
must needs be very Choleric: Against such Solomon gives a necessary Warning,
Make no Friendship with an Angry Man, and with a Furious Man thou shall not go:
Prove. 22. 24.
But in this World we sometimes meet with that kind of Company, as there is now
an Instance in the Case. I am sure such an Unhandsome and Uncharitable
Carriage, cannot be justified either by Gospel or Law, no not that of the Land;
but them we leave to their Competent Judges, who are or certainly ought to be
concerned in such loud Miscarriages, and to the Judge of the whole Earth, who
has appointed a day in the which he will Judge the World in Righteousness, by
that Man Acts 17 31.
whom he has ordained; and he is no Excepter of Persons.

But we must examine what is written against the Observations, and so shall by
the Grace of God begin with the Title Page, which is so stuffed and filled up,
that the Pamphlet should be very bulky, if it held a Proportion with the Title;
but it is like that sort of Trees that have more Bark than Body: So that take
away the Abusive Language and Nonsense, it will remain very Empty: And as we
all (as our Blessed Savior says) shall be Judged and Condemned by our Words,
so I shall make use of the Author's own Words, for he puts them into my Mouth.
His Title is, The Reformer Racked: A Man who so much pretends to the Law, would
bring in a thing which the Law of the Land does not admit of; but Tyrannical
Spirits can find no bounds to their Cruelties, he brings in a Patient, that is
the Reformer, the act Racking; he must give us leave to find out the Agent, and
that is himself which he cannot deny: To Rack and put Men to the Torture, is the
Office of the Hangman, and whosoever puts Men to the Rack, does act the part
of the Executioner, who is ever paid beforehand when he is to do Execution;
whether our Man has his Fee, some good Preferment already; or whether he
intends to deserve it or more, we do not therein concern our selves: However
like another Demetrius, he makes a Tumultuous Noise for his Diana, which is no
more in Danger than was that Acta 19.
of Ephesus: Here is our Man who would extort things, and force out that which
is not, for the Violence of the Torment, makes sometimes Men say that which is
not true, nor was ever intended; so Men may find my Writing has been put to
the Rack: The very name of Racks and Tortures sound very ill in the Ear of a
True Christian: We read of those that were Tortured, and had trial of cruel
Mockings and Scourgings, Heb. 11. 35, 36
of Bonds and Imprisonment: This very same, England has cause to remember,
when it was in the Power of such Men as our Adversary to Persecute their
Brethren: But these things of new Date and fresh Memory we leave off, by the by
to mention things of an older standing; thus John Hus, Jerome of Prague, and
Thousands more of Faithful Witnesses were Racked to Death; our Wickliff, Forty
one Years after his Death, his Bones were taken out of his Grave, and were
Racked as far as they were capable of: And I am apt to believe upon good
ground, that if Calvin, and others of the first Instruments of Reformation (for
indeed God was the Reformer) were now alive, and should fall into the Hands of
our Rackers, they would have Racked them to the Purpose; they would not have
been better used than if they had been in the Hands of the Romish Inquisition;
if they had not been Burned, they had at least been Hanged: Oh such Spirits,
such Principles, Dispositions and Cruel Practices, should be left for the Whore
Drunken with the Blood of Martyrs: What kind of Hearts do some Men discover to
be in them, as if Rev. 17. 6.
possessed with Rage and Fury: Our Blessed Savior says well, Out of the
Abundance of the Heart the Mouth Luke 6. 45. and Matt. 12. 35.
speaks: Cruel Men, and Tyrant's Brains, are so full of Idea's of Torment,
Tortures, Racks, Fire and Sword, that they can hardly think or speak of any
thing else.

Now we must come to the Patient: The Rack is not for those who Deform, but for
the Reformer: Does not this here justify what I said in my Observations, how
there are some who hate not only the thing, but also the very Name of
Reformation, Reformed and Reformer, for this is pointed at as an Odious Name,
and as a common Enemy to his Party, though it be a Scripture word which
speaks of a time of Reformation: Heb. 9. 10.
Some of them are bred with an Hatred of Godliness, and of the Professors
thereof: We have too many of those who hate Reformation in Doctrine, Worship
and Discipline, in the Heart which is most necessary, and in Manners and
Conversation; Thus they will say, What need we Reformation? We are Whole and so
need no Luke 5. 31, 32.
Physician, We are Righteous and so no need of Repentance: Let us see what a
Character God gives, and consequently what will be the Doom of those who hate
Reformation, But to the Ungodly, says God, Why do Psalm. 50. 16, 17.
thou preach my Laws, and take my Covenant in thy Mouth, whereas thou hate
to be Reformed?

But to the purpose of our Reformation here, I must not omit mentioning, how a
Parliament being holden in the Thirteenth Year of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, some
Prelates and others were sent from the Convocationhouse, to Exhibit her a
Subsidy according to Custom: The Queen took occasion to speak well and
favorably of the Good of Christ's Church, affirming, she had heard of many
things in the Church which 'twas necessary should be Reformed, and which if she
came but to understand, she would not give sleep to her Eyes till she set up
Reformation, and would never give over till she had done it indeed: And if
they, being the Eyes, would not reveal the Truth, let the Blame and Blood be
upon them. But they, instead of answering so Good and Pious a Motion, for a
Work so worthy of so Excellent a Princess, put a false Gloss upon things,
disguised the Matter, and said Omnia Been, all was well: And thus they put a
stop to that which was their Duty to have promoted; thus ever the Church of
Rome was afraid, and hated to hear of Reformation in Head and Members, so loath
are all Worldlings to part with any thing of their Pomp, Pride, Power and
Pleasures: However we must know that the best Kings of Judah were the
Reformers, and that Reformation was not the Work of one day or of one Man, but
was wrought by degrees and at several times; and as nothing in this World is so
perfect, but that at one time or other Abuses happen to creep in, so it is the
Duty of those that are concerned, to see Abuses Reformed: And if God had not
been pleased to infuse that good Spirit of Reformation into the Hearts of some
Princes, and of Pious and Learned Men, we had still continued in the Darkness,
Ignorance, Idolatry and Superstition of Popery; and some Men in the World are
little Thankful for so great a Mercy which so many of our Predecessors sealed
with their Blood and Lives, yet to many Reformation is a Noli me tangere, come
not near, why? because they love themselves, their Ease and Pleasure, more than
the Glory of God and the Good of his Church, if they can but quietly enjoy
them; that is their chief Desire in this World, with Peter saying, It Is good for
us to be here, but they no more than he at that time, know what they say, when
they talk as if Luke 9. 33.
there was no need of Reformation; would to God it was true, but there is a
great need of it (as it has been proved at several times) and now as much as
ever, as upon occasion it may plainly be demonstrated: It is strange, yet too
true, that a Name which ought so sweetly to sound in the Ears of true
Christians, should in the Ears of some strike a kind of Horror and a Hatred in
their Hearts; may be they are possessed with the Pharisaical and Popish Opinion
of a Perfection in this Life.

We read how hainously a Pope took it, when one day a Minister of the Emperor
Charles the Fifth speaking Sleidan.
against transferring the Council of Trent to another place, made use of the
word to Protest, because those who in Germany withdrew from him had before used
it; but it is a sad case, that Antichrist should be imitated by some who pretend
to be fallen out with him: It Is true they agree about the ground, and they all
have the same Reasons, namely their Interest; O that Interest, the God of this
Wicked World; there is at this time too much cause to repeat St. Paul's
Complaint, Phil. 2. 21.
how most, if not all, care for themselves, love this present World, but few
care for the things of God: Can any one deny the great and general Apostasy in
these late Times, from the Power and Practice of Godliness? Can any one deny
the Corruption that is in the Sanctuary as well as in other Bodies of the
Nation? And that bad Examples and ill Rules too, come from whence we might look
for better ones.

At a Diet at Worms, where Luther appeared before Charles the Fifth, his
Protector the Elector of Saxomy asked Erasmus, then in the same public Room,
what he thought of Luther's Books; he in his jesting way said, Luther was to
blame: The Prince replied, Wherein? Because, said Erasmus, he has meddled with
two very Nice and Dangerous Things, namely, the Pope's Mitre, and the Priest's
Belly; if that had been let alone, said he, a way of Accommodation might have
been found out. Thus if Reformation would not be extended upon the Power,
Jurisdiction and Authority of our Churches Heads and Governors, and the Fat
Livings, and a more equal Distribution of Church Preferments and Incoms, and a
bringing in a laborious Preaching and Praying, and well-living Ministry, which
flow Bellies and lazy Laborers do not like (this, let it be spoken with
relation only to some) then Proposals about Reformation might happen to meet
with a better Reception. It Is a sad case when they would make Men ashamed for
speaking Scripture Phrase as Predestination, Presbytery and now Reformation; it
seems if one would speak to them the Language of the Beast, they could better
understand it.

But why should I any longer stand upon so copious a Matter, which affords so
much of Consideration, into which a thinking Man may see very far, things being
so palpable and visible to an unprejudiced Eye? And there may be an occasion in
the Continuation of my Discourse to take notice of it, and to own, that though
Reformation be some Men's Aversion, yet there is a just Necessity for it, as in
several Instances and Particulars it may easily be made to appear. Thus much
for the poor Racked Reformer, whose Limbs must need, after this Terrible
Execution, be quite broken, or at least wholly out of Joint.

To return to our Racker, whose Head runs so much upon Martyrs and Confessors
(which we may interpret King Charles Martyr for Hierarchy, and the late King
James Confessor for Popery) that he can hardly, save ill Language, speak any
thing else: When he talks of the Reformer's Confession, to which we might say,
What, of Faith or of Fact? He has done well to explain himself, Or
Observations considered, for we are so dull, as not well to apprehend things at
the first sight; yet we know what we must expect, for in the very Title he
declares his Writing to be a Reflection, taken, as I conceive, in a bad Sense,
for it is an Invective, but he says it is a brief one, for one long-breathed, as
he is in such Matters, and nothing else, but a Reflection: Well, reflect, but I
will not say, and be reflected upon for we have not so learned Christ.

To which is added a new Discovery of Old England: A new Coat made of an old
Cloak; whilst we could wish these Old Things to be made away and buried in
Oblivion, they would daily revive, to what good purpose I cannot see; he
declares himself to be an Additioner; if it was only to Titles of Books, one
would not mind it; but Additions to Institutions and Ordinances of Christ we
must not admit of, and that is one of our greatest Complaints that they do it.
The Authority of his Quotation with the two Greek half words '(...). is
Apocripha to us; I never said any thing that may give Offense, relating to the
Person which the words quoted, are by some attributed to; neither will I
concern my self whether or not he be the Author of it, it is but a Dispute De
lana Caprina, about a Trifle, whereby old Grudges are revived, which indeed I
am very sorry to see, and wish Men would once for all leave off these things.

Before I proceed farther, I declare I would never in this way have meddled with
these Matters without a very Just Cause; but who can forbear, after the high
and continual Provocations they give us; they kill Men, yet would not have them
to cry out Murder; let them hold their Hand and Tongue, and we shall stop our
Mouth: Here in one respect they would use us worse than the Damned shall be in
Hell amidst their Torments; leave shall be given them to Complain, but they
would deprive us of it; as long as they still follow that Trade, and yearly
Preach and Print such Passionate, Violent, Uncharitable and Seditious Sermons,
they must look for Returns, and expect that one or other will answer them: They
are not content to do amiss in that, but also for want of Reasons, they
vindicate it with Slanders and Injuries: Who would ever have thought, that one
of them, may be, after Racking of his Brains to find out a Title for a
Pamphlet, would make choice of a Metaphor drawn from the Office of a Hangman,
who is a Man of Blood, applied perhaps to a Clergyman, of whom the Saying is,
Ecclesia non novit Sanguinem, The Church meddleth not with Matters of Blood.

My Design was to speak against a Practice which I not only take to be
Unlawful, but also attended with Dangerous Consequences: The occasion of that
Design was given, by so many Bitter and Violent Sermons published every Year: I
gave my Reasons against those Anniversaries, and I answered what I hear and
read to be spoken for it, and proceeded to some of the near and remote Causes
of such Abuses; and as this keeping of such Days is a Ceremony, so it is Obvious
from that Species to proceed to the Genus, and to go up to the Spring whence
that Stream is derived; so that effectually to say something against that
Ceremony in particular, it was very proper to speak somewhat about Ceremonies
in general, though the former was the immediate subject of my Book: Hence I
deduce this Argument, that if no Ceremony of that kind in general ought to be
introduced into the Worship of God, consequently this keeping of a Holy Day
must not be admitted into the Church; and at the very beginning I declared I
would not insist upon the Civil but the Religious Page 2.
part of keeping those days. Now any Ingenious Man that had been dissatisfied
with my Notions, if he had had a mind to meddle, would have gone about to
convince me with Reasons and Arguments that I am in the Wrong; but the Author
of the Pamphlet against my Observations, as if in him had been a Storehouse of
Bombs, Grenades and Carcasses, and whatsoever else is more Combustible, took
Fire; and from the beginning does as good as say, I will hear none of your
Arguments, you are a Rogue and a Rascal, I would Stab you if I could; and the
Hand that strikes being Invisible, he curses it and bites the Stone. God knows
I had no other End or Interest, but to bear record for the Truth.

In answer to him, we shall, by the Grace of God, first of all take notice of
his Phrases, how Prettily, Wittily, Judiciously and Christian like, he
expresses himself; afterward we shall proceed to some material things; those
we shall divide into several Classes, the first shall be about his mean and
unbecoming Language, having from the very beginning sung his Triumph over his
Antagonist, as he calls him, whom he affirms to be sure to be worsted for his
Pains; for proof thereof, he sends us to Lincolns-Inn-Fields, where we do not
trifle our time, as may be he does his amongst the Mob: Methinks, says he,
they might have learned from the Wrestling of Lincolns-Inn-Fields, Page 2. Much
to be learned there indeed. He speaks of the Levitical Augaeus, a proper
mixture of Scripture, and Heathenish Fables, ibid. In his
Postscript-Advertisement he speaks of Assassines, which name does belong to
himself, for he says, the Author of the Reproachful Observations deserves the
deepest Stab from a Poyniarding; a word of his own coining; Scurrility, a rare
piece of Rhetoric, Page 3. And it is pity, says he of another, but he had his
Teeth and Brains dashed out of his Head, Page 16. O excellent Frame of a
Christian: He to show himself more and more to have the Nature and Office of
the Executioner, talks of Flame and Smoke in Palace-yard, Page 4. Formerly it
might have been so, and would be so still, but I thank God we live in better
Times, and are not under his Power. In another place he talks of Ropes, Page
17. and of a Gallows, Page 34. all these smell of a Hangman; alas if we were in
his Power, he would kill us all with the Jaw Bone of an Ass. Elsewhere he talks
of Sacred Ashes to Caper in the Air, and of Bagpipes and Tunes, P. 5. Surely we
shall not say to him as Festus did to Paul, Much Learning makes thee Mad;
neither Acts. 26. 24.
are we afraid of his Blocks, Halters, Gibbets, P. 18.

The second Classis is about his Immodest and Unclean Language, The Impudentest
Crack-Brothel-house-Pander, is able to match Pimping and Prostitution with her:
It is the Bawds own Jealousy that makes her cry Whore first, P. 20. And in
another place, After this rate a Ladies Beauty must not be commended, least he
twit us with Romish Adoration; whereas no question but the Flattering Letcher
could Italians say, La lingua va dove duole la b^cca. One does scratch where it
itches him.
Smuggle up a Buxom Sister with his Holy Kisses, and Vow his closer Embraces
and Debauch, etc. p. 20. These Lines of his do much edisie a Reader; one who
has the Fear of God can but nauseate, wherefore there we leave it off: Has
the Man never read what St. Paul says, But Fornication and all Uncleanness,
lei it not be once Ephesians. 5. 3. 4. and chapter 4. 29.
named amongst you as beccmeth Saints, neither Filthiness nor Foolish Talking
nor Jesting, which are not convenient, but giving of Thanks; and let no corrupt
Communication proceed out of your Mouth.

The third is concerning his Ridiculous Language, as thus, His Living may be
his Delphos, and his Pluralities his Tripos, p. 9. Countries tolly Polly, hoite
cum toite, p. 14. Swing a Swang a, p. 32. The Story of the Cock and the Glass,
ibid. He should have said of a Cock and a Bull. Their whole Service is stuffed
like Beef, and larded like Bacon, p. 23. Mastiffs of Law and Divinity, p. 25.
Dick the Butcher: Run the risk of a dozen broken Heads: Their Bear-Garden
Adventures, and the Ho go; Hoggish and Nasty Reformation, p. 2, 3. His
Dissentership has not been the Subject of one Oxford Jest and Laughter yet, p.
14. What? is Oxford Famous for Jesting and Laughing? Or do they Jest or Laugh
any way different from what is done in other places? He ought to be ashamed to
give such a Character of a Famous University, of Jesting and Laughing at
Serious things; he thereby discovers himself to be an Oxford Scholar, so he
would make himself the Representative of the whole University, the Scum whereof
he must needs be, and he would have us to take his Scurrilous Language to be
the Sense of the Famous University of Oxford; such a Plant is of no Credit and
Honor to the University, no more than to the Church. Another Expression of his
is, Tantivee Who-o-o-up, p. 42. other words he has, as Contrasto's, Cargo, p.
19. Querpo, p. 10. Capricios, p. 13. Lurdans, p. 11. Rhodomantade Heaven,
Sancha Pancha. He has read Don Quixot, or heard of him, so no Wonder if he
has such Romantical Ecstasies and so right Notions of things; once at least let
him speak as a Christian: His whole Pamphlet is nothing else but a Mixture of
Bedlam and Billingsgate Language, which puts a Man to a stand whether to Laugh
at or to Pity him, for certainly in his Brain, as well as in his Heart, things
are out of order, he acts the part of an Insipid Buffoon upon the Stage, his
Notions and Expressions are so much unbecoming a Serious Matter.

The next is, his Scurrilous Reviling and Slandering Language, as a Foolhardy
Fellow, p. 2. Fanatics, p. 4. But those who make the Word of God the Rule of
their Faith, of their Life and Conversation, and of Gods Worship, are no
Fanatics; they are such who follow their own Inventions and Fancies,
Schismatical Squeak, p. 5. Tantony-Pig-Israelite, p. 5. all one to him a Pig
and an Israelite: Presbyterian Scriblers, p. 11. Myrmidons or Emmets of
Presbytery, p. 12. Reveries and Enthusiastic Convulsions, p. 6. Banditi,
Raparies of Religion, p. 12. the Predecessors of his Jack-Catch-Kidney. And
there is much more Bumbast P. 5. Singular Chymera's, Subtle Maggoticism,
Zealous Phrensies or Whimsies, p. 13. the Presbyterian Cant, Passionate Folly,
Spleen of Malice, Billingsgate Scold and Railery, p. 3. Here indeed, to make
use of his own words, he calls Whore first; I leave any Impartial Reader to
judge, whether I said any thing that may be called Scold and Railery, but it is
all one to him, whether or not I have said it, he magisterially will have it to
be so; but why should I any longer trouble my self with quoting such Speeches
of his, his Pamphlet is wholly stuffed with it: These and more things has he
said and done, but says God, I will reprove Psalm. 50. 21.
thee, and set them in order before thine Eyes.

He is not content with this, but like a Furious Man strikes on all sides
abroad as well as at home; Geneva Rant, p. 3. the Scotch Eloquence, p. 5. the
Brawlers of Amsterdam Cut, p. 10. he Dutchifies, p. 25. So he proclaims War,
and sets at Defiance all the World, except the Dear Sister Popery; he spares
not that which is most Honorable amongst us, when he says, the Waggish Jacks
were at that time mightily taken with the Pun, Burn it, Burn it: He knows well
enough in what place this was said, so should not be wanting in his Respect;
but he would not lose his Jest, let it cost what it will, P. 4. He is not
content with all this, his Sweet Language he turns upon a more Honest Man than
himself seems to be, Mr. St -- ns, who has set his Name to what he said, Page
7, 8. then upon Mr. Dan. B -- s, whom he uses alike Page 11 and 25. And in the
next Page he, without any ground, bringsin and falls foul upon Mr. Par -- es,
whom he calls a State Prophet, a Chimney Augur, must foretell a smoking
Disaster. Quousque? How far? How long? Shall there be no end of all this? Here
lies the Sore; any one who said or acted any thing in the late Happy Revolution
he cannot endure; Jacobitism and Popery are his Darlings: Let him remember who
Slanderers and False Accusers are, they are Devils: By St. Paul 'twas foretold,
how in the last days Men, amongst other evil things, would be False Accusers,
Devils is the (...), 2 Timothy 3. 3. (...), Tit 2 3. John 8.
word of the Original; and the same speaking how Old Women ought to be in their
Behavior not false Accusers, not Devils: Here is a great name purchased God
knows at what rate, let those who do, seriously think upon it: The Devil is a
Liar from the beginning, and the Father of Lies, and they are his Children who
take pleasure in telling Lies.

But we must come to some Instances of his Impious and Profane Language,
Braying in Predestinarian Ecstasies for Whining Raptures: I take no notice of
P. 5. Providence hoising the Sails -- convinced our Statists that he was
predestined neither to be Drowned nor to be Hanged, P. 34. where he adds,
It is pleasant pleading a Divine or Eternal Decree for an Exemption: Here is
another, Preach Mince-Pies and Custards to his Babes of Infallible Grace, p.
24. They use to Reprobate whatsoever we Elect, p. 42. Inigos Lanthorns
squeeking, it is not so, in a Dispute with his Puppet in a Bartholomew Fair,
may be a very satisfactory and decisive Answer to a Discourse of Scripture, p.
8. His Gods mighty intimate and Chrony, or Election, Huckster to his cullied
Disciples, p. 11. to trick and bilk God's waking Vengeance, as a cullied Coach
man is sometimes served; what an ingenious Comparison? p. 3. how high does he
rise, and how soon and low does he fall? Let us suppose for Example, the word
Egg in a Text of Scripture, the Presbyterian would interpret it an Hen-egg or
Goose-egg, p. 26. Is this to ridicule the Word of God? And in another place
squeeze us to Death and Reprobation, p. 24. and Gormandize on our Savior, p.
30. But I am weary and sick of these evil things; who is that True Christian
which will not be moved with such detestable Prophanations, as if we were
allowed to Jest with God, and Mock at his Works and Attributes? Thus he Jests
at Holy things, Providence, Grade, Decrees, Predestination, Election,
Reprobation; a wiser Man than he said long ago, Fools make a Mock at Sin: He
Prove. 14. 9.
must give us leave to offer him a Looking-glass to see himself in, and these
Rhetorical Speeches of his: I let all the rest go, but this, this deserves the
Lash; What will become of Religion, if these things are allowed of, and
suffered to go unpunished? If Men do not punish it God will, for our Blessed
Savior says, We shall give an account of every Idle word in the Day of
Judgment. How Matt. 12. 36.
many Idle and Evil Words is this Man accountable for? There are strange
Dispositions in the World, the Be makes Honey out of every Flower, but the
Spider turns every thing into Poison: This Man seems never to have read what
St. Paul says, Let your Speech be always with Grace, seasoned with Salt, that
ye may know how ye ought Col. 4. 6.
to answer every Man; not with Revilings, Injuries and Slanders; for if we must
believe Solomon, He is no Wise Prove. 10. 18.
Man that utters a Slander.

Passionate Expressions and Injurious Language, argue an ill and a boisterous
Temper, God was not in the great and strong Wind, nor in the Earthquake, nor
in the Fire, but in the still small Voice: But Satan was in the 1 Kings 19. 11,
12. Chap. 1.
great Wind, as we read in the Book of Job: High, blustering and violent
Spirits, often do themselves and others Harm, but never no Good: But however
Unhandsomly and Uncharitably they behave themselves against their Neighbor,
let them have a care how they meddle with God: This very Consideration stopped
the Acts 5. 39, 40.
Rage and Malice of the Jews; surely they who thereby will not be wrought upon,
must needs be worse than they were.

Now this Rubbish and Dung being laid out of the way, we must come to something
else; all his Spirits he has spent in Ranting, Huffing and Hectoring, bare
words, nothing besides, but we are not afraid of words; when he Reviles he
speaks his own Language, but we have not learned it; he sometimes speaks in
such a Strain as none but himself can understand, and I much doubt whether he
understands every thing he says: I expected such a Man would fairly have
refuted my Arguments, and opposed my Reasons, which are still in force, his
rough Wind could not blow them off: As to the Solid Part he has given his
Cause for lost: I thought in things of this nature, he would have made use of
Scripture, the only Judge in such Matters, to have showed I am in a Mistake and
in an Error; but I perceive the Word of God is to him an unknown Land which he
has not traveled into, except upon Mount Ebal to learn Deuteronomy. 11. 29.
to thunder Curses; he draws nothing out of Scripture, but instead of it
borrows much out of Fables and Stories, but with us upon such an account
that is no current Money; and does he think we are so Credulous, as to take his
bare word with a Magister dixit; if once we give over Rambling, and come to
close in the Solid part, he is no Dangerous Adversary, Periculum fiat, we shall
soon try by the Grace of God; but he, instead of answering any Reasons, flies
off, and starts aside like a broken Bow; he falls upon a general Accusation of
Reformers and Reformation; he ought first to have answered my Charge, and then
brought in his; his manner of Proceeding makes me call it Charge, though I
intended nothing else, but in the Spirit of Meekness, to represent the
Necessity of laying aside those things that prove a Stumbling Block and hinder
Union and Reconciliation In the Land.

His Fit is long and dangerous, for it holds him from the beginning to the
latter end of his Pamphlet, as any one that will give himself the trouble to
peruse it shall find; in some of the first Leaves after his Vaporing and
Threatening, the Smatterers in Controversy, whose Condition must needs be
desperate, seeing they can or are likely to have no hope to escape the Lash and
Baffle of a Church of England Pen, which can do them no harm, as long as it is
in such Hands as his; however he must sing high Achievements, how often the
Non Con's (how often Nonsense) have been encountered by our Irrefragable Clergy;
and beaten to Dust; he means so, but Quae genus aut proavi aut quae non fecinus
ipsi -- Vix ea nostra voco. Therefore do not attribute to your self the
Exploits of those Invincible Predecessors; however let me tell you, that all
other Reasons to convince were short and deficient, the strongest Weapons, for
want of better, were made use of at last with a Witness; if you will not be
convinced, believe and do as we would have you, we shall beat it into your
Brains, or dash them out of your Head; and what our Reason, such as it is,
cannot do, the Cannon shall; therefore you doughty Antagonist, Foolhardy
Fellow, fling off the Belt, or thou shall come off with the Foil, and thrown
out in the Struggle. There is indeed cause to fear this great Disputant, who
has found out a new way of deciding Controversies, namely, with his ill
Language to Hector Men out of their Principles; he may Bark, but cannot Bite
nor Fasten, for his Teeth are broke; however he loves to talk of Bears, Lions
Whelps, Foxes Cubs, Hogs, which he makes Adjectives to Reformation, a fair
Jewel for such a Ring; it is pity these Geneva Rants, or Aetnean Eruptions and
Distractions at home (whereby he means he is Distracted within himself) should
trouble his Heart and Head so much, for Vexatus toties, says he, to some
Tempers those Vapors of the Lake Leman, the Exhalations of Mount Aetna, are
very Dangerous; wherefore to ease himself, he must now, like Mount Vesuvius,
break out, not into two words of Juvenal, Nunquamne reponam, but into a Roaring
Noise and Emission of Smoke, Flames, Cinders and Stones: After this Evacuation
our Poliphemus will somewhat be at ease; but what must one look for, that stirs
up these Humors? What can be expected from an injured Loyalist, it is a Fault
in the Printer, for he meaned Loyolist, for we know him by his Spirit to be a
Son of Father Ignatius, and if we doubt of it, here is the Proofs he is known
by, his Language, a disturbed Privado, this is Loyola's Motherly Tongue, for he
was a Spaniard, and more and more to justify his Genealogy, in his Father's
Dialect he speaks of Stabbing and Poyniarding, not only private Men, but also
Kings have in a manner been made away by that Generation of Vipers.

This Stuff is contained in his first, second and third Pages, but for variety
sake we shall see some change in the Scene, a Sweat abates the hot Fit, and at
last Tears allay the Fume, for a just yearly Tribute of streaming Tears must be
paid to the Memory, etc. yet the hot Fit is not off, for in the next Page 4.
Revenge and Tears must burst from his compassionate and vexed Soul: This Soul
of his, no doubt, suffers under these two Passions of Vengeance and Sorrow,
which makes him look upon things with a Multiplying glass, for he fancies to
see a hundred things where others see but one; for in the same Page his
Imagination represents unto him Mines full of Powder, and Fire to kindle it, to
blow up Mitres and a thousand Churches, just so many and no more: But I doubt
the Fault of this Multiplication of Objects does lie in his Organ more than in
the Glass: However, after these Streams of Tears, we must surely Dance
Intentionally to the Tune of Tings and Twangs of clashing Destruction. Only I
find he likes not the Musician nor the Instrument, Jack Presbyter's Merry
Bag-pipe, nor the Music; for, says he, they would sing us a joyful elevated
Venite Exultemus instead of a Sobbing Air, sad Obit: And no other certainty of
or ground for this Elegant Discourse, but it is Cross and Pile. However Sir,
give us leave to say, that though you deny in some other place, any thing of a
Papist to be in you, your speech Matt. 26. 73.
bewrays you, you bring into the Church an Unknown Tongue, which you know is
thrown out: Cannot you say, Come let us sing unto the Lord, which every one may
understand, and not Venite exultemus, which is the Language of the Romish
Beast: So you do give us in Latin the Title of every Psalm, Is it not as good
in English? Except you would have it in the Original Hebrew: I let the Obit
alone, but you know whose Language are the words Matins, Vespers and Anthems:
This in P. 5.

In the same Page he makes an Elegant and Pathetick Description of his new
fiddling Modeller, as he calls him, but his words are no Slanders, with his
saying, this is he that would, not Slander and falsely Asperse, as you do, nor
Damn to the Pit of Hell those that are not of his Mind, as you if you could:
But by Gods Grace he is one who has learned to wish no Man no Ill, Nor to
render Evil for Evil, or Railing for Railing, nor to think ones whole Drift
centers wholly to Subvert those things 1 Pet. 3. 9.
which he daily prays God to preserve; who wishes for Reformation of Abuses,
and not for Destruction of good things, all for the Glory of God according to
the only Rule of his word; may be you do not know how Charity thinks no Evil,
though sometimes it suffers from such Enemies to it as you are; we are surely
to blame for 1 Cor. 13. 5.
bringing you to so sad a Dilemma, as you cannot solve whether we would throw
the Church out at the Windows, or turn her Admirable, not (as in our
good-natured Reveries and Enthusiastic Convulsions) Superstitious
Constitutions topsie-turvy, like Passus 's Picture of the Horse in Lucian with
its heels upon a Bank, p. 6. Pray Sir, give me leave to ask you a Question,
Those Comparisons, do you bring them to prove or only to illustrate your
Discourse, for certainly they are a great Ornament to it? Specially being drawn
out of so pure a Spring as Lucian is, and be not angry if I ask you a second
Question, Whether, may be, you do not read those sort of Virtuous Books more
than the Holy Bible? For some things, besides which I find in the Pamphlet, do
represent the Question as reasonable; for my part I humbly conceive it very
improper in such Matters as relate to the Worship of God, to make use of Lucian
and the like Authors; and I declare I would be very Sorry, in any serious
Matter, to admit of such Impertinent Comparisons, Illustrations, Enlargements
and Explanations, of which the whole Pamphlet is a Rapsody: I can want no
Instance for what I say, I do not go far, for it is just but two Lines below the
name of your Lucian, by you quoted more than once, this is it, It is a
Monstrous Imagination or Wonderful Fancy of his, with him all Monsters and
Wonders, to represent the Vicar and his Parishoners as one great Incorporated
Centaur: Where is here the Imagination and Fancy, in himself who brings a
Chymera, a non ens, in his word Centaur, or in me who speak of nothing but real
Things and Beings?

Our Pamphleteer, says he p. 6. for I am his as he is mine, has done his Good
Old Cause infinitely more Hurt than Good, by his Impertinent Ramble and
Cobweb-reasoning: Surely I am very Happy to be hugged and embraced with such
Arms; well, if I be such an one the better for you, if you can take Advantage
of my Senseless and Breathless Discourse, but sometimes Men are mistaken in
their Notions, as of two Men fighting, one having an high Opinion in handling
of his Weapon, is so intent upon the Ruin of his Enemy, that he neglects his
own Preservation, and therein gives an Advantage against himself, laying his
Body open to his Enemies Sword, or rashly running upon the point of it, Let not
him that girdeth on his Harness, boast himself, as he that puts it off, 1 Kings
20. 11.
let no Man sing a Triumph before he has gotten the Victory; so let none say
he has the better, before the Dispute be ended, Habemus fatentem reum; for in
your Postscript you say, you leave it to some Persons more Hawk sighted than
your self.

This Extraordinary Man I would endeavor to please, but it is a hard thing, and
I cannot tell how to effect it; I said I believe no Anniversary should be kept
for King Charles; then he flies at me, and would tear me to pieces if he could;
and when I affirm on the other side, that the Fact or putting him to Death was
Unlawful, and Horrid Murder, etc. then for my Pains I hear this from him, That
what I say is Dissembling Innuendo's of my Charity, p. 6. he does protest I am
an ugly squinting wide-mouthed Fellow; how long a train of Titles he gives me,
well, my Mouth and Face are as God pleased to make them, therewith I must be
content, I own it is better such as it is, than I deserve at God's Hands;
afterward p. 6. he does quote my words, how I believe God showed him Mercy;
that the taking away of his Life was an ill thing, etc. This as he says is as
good as if I had called him a Rogue and a Rascal, and arraigned him for a
Malefactor: What can we say or do to this? K. Charles.


Well, as I hinted something a little before, here he gives me a very great
Advantage against himself, which I must not lose, for it is of too high a
Concernment for me; he quoteth my words in Page 1, 3, 5. about the Fact, which
though they be as positive as can be, yet in his Page 43. he affirms I say,
The Martyr was Guilty, and that Justice was executed on him: How can these two
things agree, the former words I own, the last I never said or thought: It is
Matter of Fact, and what would it be if it was upon Matter of my Life or Death?
Well, I shall unriddle the business, and show where the Mistake lies; Mistake I
call it, or Over-passionateness, for I thank God I have for him more Charity
than he has for me; others would call it a Rank Malice, but I call it a
Mistake, but a very gross one; for what in my Book I say of Justice executed
upon the Guilty, of his Death, that is upon his Judges, he would in his Book
make me speak it of King Charles; at this let him blush and be ashamed: Now we
may see who, he or I, be guilty of Imputations as Scandalous as False, as he
expresses p. 43. God forgive him: And to declare my Mind more in general upon
such Points, I say two things, First, When a Man suffers, though never so
unjustly, yet in relation to God he has nothing to complain of, for as David
says, God is Just in all his Ways, Psalm 145. 17.
and Holy in all his Works. Secondly, I say, the Righteousness of God never
excuses the Wickedness of Men.

After he has as it were tired himself upon me, and may be in his Opinion made
me very Sore, Black and Blue, he leaves me for a while, as it were to feel my
Pains, Sentiat se mori; for Variety sake, like a Famous Runner at Tilt, having
disabled one, he is ready for, and falls upon the next; so the next turn is Mr.
St -- ns, to whom he imparts some of his Caresses in the same kind as to me,
But the Tender Mercies of some are Cruel. Prove. 12. 10.
He begins with taking notice of much Dust, like a Cloud, beat out of the
Cushion at St. Mary leBow, and does not mind the Dirt and Dung of his, which he
is in over Head and Ears; we could say more if we did but see him thoroughly,
that Spring must be very Corrupt, whence proceed such stinking Streams, the
very Breath whereof is so Loathsome; Pray let us hear his Rhetoric upon the
Subject, His Sermon's, foul and false Aspersions, sound more like the Accents
of Rotten Eggs: What, Eggs in a Sermon, and Rotten too, they stink, away with
it. I think Mr. St -- ns will say nothing but what he can justify, but is
withal too Wise to trouble himself with answering a Giddy-brain'd Fellow, who
would have every one else to Weep or Laugh when he does, or else will be very
Angry if they will not Fast on the Thirtieth of January, and Feast on the
Twenty ninth of May; and would upon those days Force Men to Church whether they
will or not, only because he goes himself: We read of one who always Laughs,
and of another who ever Wept, this Man would act both parts, and be one day
Democritus and on the other Heraclitus. Others look for better grounds than he
has to do so; he speaks unworthily of that Person when he says, I leave him
to play Fast and Loose with his Function, perhaps may be his Interest, p. 9.
This Man is very little or not at all acquainted with Wise Solomon, for he
breaks many of his Rules, one of which is this, Strive not with Prove. 3. 30.
a Man without cause, if he has done thee no harm: He is of a provoking
Spirit, I would have him give a good Reason why he thinks such a one is lead by
Interest and not by Conscience; and p. 25. he declares, he is of Opinion that
we might stop any of their (Nonconformists) Mouths with a Bishopric: I shall
not say he is mistaken in all, but I dare say in some he is; this interested
People are apt to judge of others by themselves, but they measuring themselves
by themselves, and comparing 2 Cor. 10. 12.
themselves amongst themselves, are not Wise: So against the Rules of Prudence
and Charity this Man judges rashly of others, though our Blessed Savior said,
Judge not that ye be not judged: Of David did his Brother Eliab judge unjustly,
when he said to him, I know thy Matt. 7. 1. 1 Samuel 17. 28.
Pride, and the Naughtiness of thine Heart: That same was a Man according to
God's own Heart; and yet his Brother pretended to see into and be the Searcher
of his Heart, a Right which God has reserved for himself; when God at that
time had sent him to destroy the Philistine, and be an Instrument of
Deliverance to Israel; was not this a very hard and an unjust Censure, and that
from a Brother: To make Application of this, I leave it for those whom it may
concern, Si accusare sat est quis erit innocens? Who can be Innocent, if to
accuse be enough to make one Guilty? This I must say, the Man has not yet
learned the Apostles Lesson, To speak Evil of no Man: At last at his parting
with Tit. 3. 2.
Mr. St -- ns, he declares why he is Angry with him, because he seems not to be
over passionately concerned for his K. Ch -- 's Death; it is very unreasonable
that he would have others to be so because he is; to be overpassionate is his
Quality we know, but it is contrary to Reason and Religion, it is a dangerous
Excess to be avoided.

Seeing, as he says, that Digression is pardonable in all the Rules of
Complaisance, we will pardon it: What, now talk of Rules, and talk of
Complaisance? Alas, Quantum mutatus ab illo, he is no more the same Man; but
can the Ethiopian change his Skin, or the Leopard his Spots: Now he has shook
hands with our Cousin-German, he will presently be upon us; but he also has a
Compliment for our Eldership, how kind he is, I never expected so much from
him, May it please his Eldership, would it not have been rude, not to have
passed a Compliment upon so near a Relation of his by the way. Sir, I thank you
for your Love; but between the two Acts there must be an Intermede of something
Comical to make People Laugh, for which I refer the Reader to his Page 10.

After the Perusal of two or three more of his Pages, I begin indeed to be
concerned that I am to deal with one, whom upon reasonable grounds I look upon
as much out of order, I speak seriously and in earnest, there are shrewd
Symptoms of it, for though I would not mind those frequent strange Notions and
Expressions of his, yet we must take notice how in Maximis, and things of the
highest as of the lesser Nature, he strikes all alike; his Idea and Knack of
things is not very commendable: His Page 11. he begins with saying, He is
amazed at the Negligence of our most Orthodox Clergy: It Is true some are so,
but all like him are very Heterodox, he wonders others are not as Mad as he;
thus all are Fools in the Opinion of a Self-conceited Man, that are not
altogether as he: Nay he seems somewhat to be Angry at, and calls it a
Levitical Slug: What manner of Man is this, that gives the name of unlearned to
Asserters of all Opinions but his own, nay, Scandalous both to the Palace and
See, does he mean of Rome? At first he talks of Triumphant, now of a Militant
Vigilance, all this to give a Character of himself; as first, That he is a
Statesman, for he takes care of the Interests of the Palace; he is a
Churchman, for he minds the Concerns of the Sea; a Solder, by his talk of
Military Vigilance, and a great Scholar too, seeing he speaks of defeating the
Illiterate Force of a few Presbyterian Scriblers; so that to defeat the Force,
are Terms of War, Illiterate Presbyterian Scriblers, Terms of Art; so he would
promiscuously be a Jack of all Trades; but it is past my Skill to find how these
few Presbyterian Scriblers should form a numerous and formidable Rapparism,
there my Politics fail, and I would desire him to help me out, for, if their
Mobility, says he, once get a Head, 'twill be hard to disperse them; this is
to speak like a Man of Experience and a great General: But a Question I would
ask, Why he does speak so Figuratively, and in a manner different from that
usual way of other Men? When others speak, it is to signify their Thoughts, and
with a design to be understood, but he speaks to puzzle other Men; unhappily
Mr. Daniel B -- s lies in his way, so he must have a Flurt at him: Thus I
remember to have seen Children, when they had nothing else to do, with a Stick
to strike at every Stone that laid not only in but also out of their way, nay,
they a purpose stepped out of their way to do it, not out of any Necessity, but
only to please their Humor and Fancy.

Our Man is very kind, Not to deny those Spirits of Faction, the Gracious and
Pacificatory Favor of the State; but we thank him for nothing, he leaves that
which he cannot carry away; but then let their Preachments move within their
own Orb, and the Sweet Singer of Israel Humm and Buz within his own Sphere: And
let Fools hold their Peace, for better to say nothing than to speak amiss: But
to speak in Solomon's words, Every Fool will be meddling, because as he says
in the same Book, It is Prove. 20. 3.
a Sport to a Fool to do Mischief: So let Mr. Par -- es look to himself, for
somebody is a coming upon him, but Ch^p. 10. 23.
that is not worth minding, and nothing to the rare Discourse he makes in his
Page 12. toward the latter end of which he would have the Dissenters called by
the Sweet Names of Banditi, Moss-troopers and Rapparees of Religion, and their
Overtures, or Capitulations for surrendering themselves to our conquering
Communion and winning Liturgy, very proper Epithets, to be accepted; his
greatest utinam should be utinam saperem, for then with Solomon we might tell
him, If thou be Wise, thou shall be Wise for thy self: but if thou Scornest,
thou also shall bear it: But Prove. 9. 12.
his Utinam is, That he were able to book that Glorious Pacificatorium or Happy
Eirenicon which may heal our Breaches beyond relapse: I would be glad to hear
he is willing to a Reconciliation which he detests when we proposed it, but he
would have it wholly upon his own Terms; so he would both divide and choose the
Spoil, and at last with the Lion have all under several Notions.

Upon his Considerations, p. 13. he could not hold for magging his Finger in
this Quarrel: What, for a Man so Zealous for the Cause only to wag his Finger,
is but a small thing, except he thinks his little Finger stronger than another
Man's Loins; he thought with wagging his Finger to make all his Enemies afraid;
his own words I make use of, here is a Quarrel, here is the Approach of an
Enemy, here is an Army of our Church, here is himself a Scout of that Army; all
this Vision is but an Effect of a Wounded Imagination, he makes in one place
use of Sancha Pancha's name, and here I bring in his Master Don Quixot, whose
Optics were so disturbed, that he took a Windmill for a Giant, and a Flock of
Sheep for an Army of Men; our Scout will have us to know what he has done; is
he not like the Fly upon the Coach-wheel crying out, See what a Dust I raise:
Yea, and such as may fly into his own Eyes: Yet he says, what he does is to
excite some Nobler Soul; he would have us to know his Soul is noble, though
there be Nobler in the Hierarchy; but to what purpose? What is the Dust he
would excite? A warmer Discourse upon this Topic; Wiser he should have said,
for Warmer it cannot be, for it is seven times Scorching-hot: In this same Page
he gives a taste, as of his Charity, so of his Inspired Language, Omnium
gatherum, Hotch potch, Humble jumble, risum teneatis; How much Pageantry, how
much Pedantry from first to last?

All along he has a mind to Quarrel, for he cannot give over renewing old
Grudges, which we all, if there be in us any true Principle of Christianity,
Love and Charity, ought to forget and forgive, and allay those Heats of Hatred
and Vengeance which continue boiling in some Men's Veins; and though hitherto I
have been Silent, upon the account of our former Unhappy Troubles, yet here,
upon a new Occasion, I cannot avoid taking notice of his breaking loose upon
those who acted therein; he calls them Page 14. a Hub-bub of Massanello's or
Mob of Mechanics, Mole-workers, Handicraft-men, the Fraternity of the
Sanctified Awl, or Louce-stabbing Lance, the Qualifications of Religious
Button-makers, and the Wits of the Company of Inspired Manufacturers, which at
last slingingly sneak into an Auger-hole, Cobler's Stall, or Loomshop. Is not
this the Language of a Hater and Despiser which is unworthy of any Answer? No
better refuted, than with Silence and Contempt; and truly to make his Spirit
better known, I wish with all my Heart every Sober and Serious Man would give
himself the Trouble of perusing his Pamphlet: I cannot forbear once more to
say, Have we not reasonable ground to think, such a Man is in a Gall of
Bitterness, and in the Bonds of Iniquity? However something I must say to him,
how he Acts 8. 23.
is mistaken in his Intention and in his Assertion; in the first, For he does,
as we use to say, whip a Horse to make him kick, but the Horse will not, his
words do not wound: In the second, I say it is true, several Men of low Quality
in the World were engaged in that Cause, but in that we ought not to despise
Men: When Samuel was to anoint David, and he thought Eliab to have been the Man
whom God had chosen, God said unto him, Look not on his Countenance, or on the
height 1 San. 16. 7.
of his Stature, because I have refused him, for the Lord sees not as a Man
sees: For Man looks on the outward Appearances, but the Lord looks on the
Heart: This was upon the account of a calling to a Temporal Office; and so it is
in relation to a Spiritual Calling; a thing of a Transcendent Nature, if we
must believe St. Paul, For you see your Calling, Brethren, how that not many
Wise Men 1 Cor. 1. 26.
after the Flesh, not many Mighty, not many Noble are called. In things of this
Nature we do not depend upon any high flown Notions, but do bring our Proofs
out of God's Word; I wish our Author would have done so, for then that Method
would have produced Instruction, Comfort and Edification, instead of Heats,
Wranglings and Injuries. But withal, I must tell him he is highly mistaken in
talking as he does, for several of the Prime of the Nobility and Gentry in both
Houses, and many considerable Persons besides, for Parts, Quality and Fortune,
in the Nation, were concerned in that Unhappy Quarrel.

In his 15, 16 and 17 Pages he goes on at random, fluttering at his old rate of
Passion and Railing, which I do not mind, being already pretty well used to it,
only shall give a touch that is not digressive as he calls his, and as indeed
they are: He says, No Bishop, No King, is a Maxim might be written in
Indelible Purple: This is for the present a thing out of my purpose, therefore
shall avoid entering upon it; however thus much I say, A Bishop Domineering over
his Brethren or his Flock, that minds Fleecing more than Feeding it, and
neglects taking care of the Souls committed to his Charge, such a one, I say, I
have no Value for; but for such a Bishop as does Faithfully and Carefully
perform his Pastoral Office, and is such as St. Paul mentions; I 1 Timothy 3. 2, 3,
4. and ^it 1. 7, 8, 9.
declare I highly Honor, Value and Esteem such. But as to the Maxim, I think
it ought rather to be thus, No King, No Bishop, for the Bishop must depend upon
the King, and not the King upon the Bishop, for he is the King's Creature as
all England knows. And here I must explain that Saying of mine, which our
Author has done what he could to Wrest, and give it a Sense contrary to my
Intention, for when I said, They are the King's Creatures, I never intended to
assert it ought not to be so, but thereby I meaned to show, that Bishops, as
Diocesan Bishops, are not Jure Divino, because they are a Man's Creatures, for
the King makes them, which I take to be undeniable.

I am weary (and so I suppose my Reader to be) of the Drudgery I hitherto have
been at, to follow this Man thorough stinking Dirt and Mire; not that I thought
the Work to be worth my Pains, but only to give a true Light of his Spirit and
Principles; a Desperate Man indeed, who is not only for Racking, Burning and
Hanging, but who would go thorough every part of a Hangman's Office: But now we
are come to his Digressive Touches, which go so much out of the way, as hardly
any more to come in; we must prepare to find such Stuff as we had before; for
Uniformitysake all must Hang together: This Man has a singular Gift of
Mistaking, whether it be out of Malice or otherwise, I am not so positive as to
determine: I already have given one Instance, now there is another, he is so
blinded with Passion, and so Impatient, as not to allow himself time, well to
understand what he reads, thus he slumbles at the very beginning of my
Observations, he quotes the words, yet wholly mistakes the Sense, my words are
these, For either it, that is, the Occasion of the Day, looks upon the Act of
some Men against the Living, or upon what others have done, and still do, for
the Dead; the former is unlawful, and the latter contrary to true Religion.
Here we must put the Fescue in his Hand to point at a thing as visible and
obvious as can be: He cries out first, Why Unlawful? And then giddily runs on
with Invectives, which he illustrates with a Comparison of a Sermon against
high Commoding and Top knoting Stomachs, my Lady all Pride; and so goes on at
that rate not knowing where, as far from the Point, as East is from West; he
quarrels at my Expression, The thing has two several Aspects, and knowing how
Fabulous he is in his Discourse, I wonder he does not compare it to Janus; but
to come to the thing, The occasion of the Thirtieth of January is this, Either
to remember the Act of some Men upon the Living, which King Charles was when by
some Men put to Death, which is Unlawful: The other part is, What the Living
do, that is, to keep an Anniversary for the Dead: And this I believe to be
contrary to true Religion, this is very clear, yet that which is spoken of one,
he does misapply to the other, Page 18.

What he says in two or three Pages following is mere Trash and not to the
purpose; I give Reasons why I think the Day ought not to be kept; the Answer he
gives is, speaking of me, His Resolve is, to be no longer an anything Arrian,
but a thorough-paced Dissenter; and this he backs with a silly Story of a
Town-Fool: When I say, It were better to forget those things, than to renew the
Memory of them which continues Divisions; his answer is this, Is this Christian
Logic? Whether or not it be Logic, I am not concerned, but I take and
maintain it to be Christian Doctrine, though may be not to such Christians as
he, for there are such in the World, who have a Form of Godliness, but deny the
Power thereof; 2 Timothy 3. 5.
there are such in the World, that profess that they know Tit. 1. 16.
God, but in Works they deny him: To Forget and Forgive is the Second
Commandment of the Law, by our Savior expressed in the Gospel; this is the
great thing Matt. 22. 39.
we are commanded to Practice; we have with us the whole Scripture, and out of
it he has nothing at all against us; but observe his Reason why he would not
obey herein, Were it better, says he, to wrap up our Gospel-Talents in an Idle
Napkin of Silence and Oblivion, than to Preach and Evangelize the Jews out of
the Pale of the Christian Church. So then their Talent is to Preach the Jews
out of the Christian Church, when the Commission of Ministers is to invite all
Unbelievers to come into it: This indeed is a Ministry, to turn out those whom
Christ has commanded to call in; we know well enough whom he means by the
Jews, but we do not stand upon his calling us so; for in another place he calls
us Miscreants, he calls us so, because we will not own and believe King Charles
to be a Martyr, and an Anniversary-day to be kept for his Death, and another
for the Birth of his Son: Whence screwed he this Article of his Faith? Who gave
him Authority upon such Grounds to proclaim us Unbelievers and Miscreants?
Which does not make us such: However let us be Jews, though thorough God's
Grace Baptized in the Name of Christ: Did not Peter Preach to some of those
very Jews, who had taken, and by wicked hands curcified our Acts 2. 23.
Savior, and he afterward Baptized them; and at another time invite those who
denied the Holy one and the Chapter 3. 14, 15, 19
Just, and desired a Murderer to be granted unto them: And who had killed the
Prince of Life, to repent and be converted: O Shame! O Scandal! To say that the
Gospel-Talent does consist in Preaching Jews or others out of the Pale of the
Christian Church; Is there but a day, two, or few more to Preach, and nothing
else to be preached, no Sins but that in the Nation? He says the Truth, when
he speaks of wrapping their Gospel-Talents in an Idle Napkin; there are, I
fear, too many of those Unfaithful Servants who hide the Talent; a Gown and a
Surpliss are sometimes the Napkins wherein the Talents are hid; if they will
not improve it, they should suffer it to pass into better Hands, of those that
would: The Talents of Prayer are too often buried; But hark our Master of
Divinity, for I think in this case I may well Retort, remember that at one time
or other Matt. 25.
you shall be called to an account for those Talents which some of you do
sometimes bury in Idleness and Vice. Another answer of his is this, The Sequel
is, we must never hope to Proselite them by Reproof, or telling them of their
Sins. Whether you hope or not it is your Duty, therefore do it; but hitherto no
answer to my Argument, Whom they cannot Proselite by Reproof, they would
Destroy by Force.

Something is said Page 20. What Divisions can this day of Humiliation enlarge
or continue, but those the Espousers thereof dethroned and vanquished Majesty
to a Grave. These are the same we desire should cease, they that were guilty of
the Fact are all Dead, and a new Generation is come on, though some of this
Generation have in matter of Ceremonies, Worship and the like, a Conformity
with the Opinion of those that are Dead; yet King Charles's Death is a thing of
another Nature, wherein they who are now alive had no hand: Why do you involve
them in the Guilt, as if they were to answer for the Faults of their Fathers;
and as if, like so many Toads, Vipers and Spiders, they had brought Venom from
the Womb? Do not you think it to be a provoking thing, for Men every Year to be
told, your Fathers, Uncles, Grandfathers and other Relations were Rogues,
Traitors, Rebels, Murderers, etc. Grant this to be true, which yet cannot be
said of all, you may think such things are not pleasant but cause Heats,
Hatreds, enlarges Divisions; and that this is the Subject of Discourses from
the Pulpits, and the proper Work of the day, I appeal to those many Sermons
that have been published, full of Invectives, Abusive Language, and Railing
Accusations, as if Ministers had nothing else to say, Repentance, Union and
Charity they ought to Preach, and not such things so contrary to the Rules of
true Christian Religion: There are those who have had the Face to Preach them
before the Honorable and Famous Assemblies of the Nation, whose Hearts, we
hope God will move to see the present Evil, and prevent for the future the
Dangerous Consequences of such Sermons preached and published: If some are so
Bold and Confident to speak at that rate before their Governors and Judges,
what do you think may be said up and down in so many Corners of the Kingdom?
The Reasons I have given for my Judgment in these things, arise from a
Principle, and tends to an End of Peace, Union and Quietness; for I humbly
conceive, that to keep such a Day for ever, may happen to prove an occasion of
much Evil.

But says he, Our Tears, somewhat Sincerer than the Crocodile's, may perhaps
avert the Judgment which has not yet discharged it self in Plague or Fire upon
the present Fautors of that Rebellion. How can Men act before they have a
Being? Can a Man be Accessory to a thing (for such are all Fautors) before he
be born? Or can a Natural Effect exist before its causes? You speak of Tears, I
dare say there are not many shed upon those days, there is more Fire than Water
in the case; and give me leave to say, that Men of your Principles, so Violent
and so Bitter Enemies as you profess to be against those whom you think to be
the present Fautors of that Rebellion, do not meet upon such days to Pray to
God to avert his Judgments from those same Fautors; neither what you Write nor
what they Preach, can persuade me you have so much Charity for them; whatsoever
we are with Men, let us be Sincere with God, not to Pretend one thing and
Intend another, For I know, says Ezekiel. 11. 5.
God, the things that come into your Mind, every one of them: And, all things,
says Paul, are naked and opened Heb. 4. 13.
unto the Eyes of him with whom we have to do: And there is not, says David, a
word in my Tongue, but thou know Psalm. 139. 4.
it altogether.

In answer to these words of mine, After Acts of Oblivion for such things are
passed, the Memory thereof ought to be forgotten: He says P. 21. Is he assured
that that Act is Engrossed in the Book of Life? Or that an Omniscient Mercy
has Recorded our Indemnity? By what Angel? Yea, Sir, I am assured of God's
Infinite Mercy, He is slow to Anger, Psalm. 103. 8.
ready to Forgive, and plentious in Mercy; and if we doubt of it, we are
Unbelievers; he is a God, Forgiving Sins and passing by Transgressions; and
when he has given us Repentance unto Life, whereby we are delivered from
Eternal Death and Damnation, surely if he thinks it good for us, he will also
deliver from Temporal Punishments: But the ready way to have the Act Engrossed
and the Indemnity Recorded, is to put on Bowels of Charity, and leave off
Hatred, Variance, Emulations, Gal. 5. 20.
Wrath, Strife, and other Works of the Flesh: We have an Instance of God's
Mercy in a case of Murder, infinitely more Abominable than yours, I mean the
Death of his Son the Lord Jesus, who is God Blessed for ever; God engrossed in
the Book of Life, the Act of Pardon, and his Omniscient Mercy, Recorded the
Indemnity of many of those who had Crucified the Prince Acts 2. 23, 41. and 3.
15, 19.
of Life: This God has declared, but with much Assurance I can say, That if
you continue in your Hatred and desire of Vengeance, there is no Pardon for
you; and if you ask me by what Angel I came to know so much, my answer is
ready, By the Angel of the Covenant, who has declared in the case of the
Servant who would show his Fellow no Mercy, wherefore he was delivered to the
Tormentors; So likewise shall my Heavenly Matt. 18. 35.
Father do also unto you, if ye from your Hearts forgive not every one his
Brother their Trespasses. Let us but have a care to forgive those by whom we
think our selves to have been offended, and trust God's Mercy (provided you do
not become unworthy of it) for your Pardon, for God is not Angry for ever, he
visits the Iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children, but unto the Third and
Fourth Generation: But have a care not to take any Pretense to continue in your
Animosity, or do any thing tending to Superstition: You would require of Men
more than God does, namely, to repent of a Sin which they have not committed; I
already said, those who put King Charles to Death are dead themselves, they
that now are had no hand in it; if in some things they differ from you, know
your Carriage toward them is in part the cause of it; but have a care not to
attribute to the Work of that day, any thing whereat God may be offended:
Repentance ought to be daily and continually, and not Anniversary; of the first
we have a Command, and we have Sins enough of our own and National to Mourn
for, but of an Anniversary Repentance we have no President in the Word of God,
which in such things ought to be our Rule. He asks P. 2. Is the Sin expiated?
Is the Crime attoned for? I suppose he means of the Guilty, for God never
punishes the Innocent for the Gullty; for the Soul that sins, it shall die:
It were contrary to Ezekiel. 18. 20.
his Justice to think otherwise; so they that are Innocent are in no Danger, as
to that they need no Expiation nor Atonement; but for the Guilty, either they
now have or shall never have it; a Temporal Judgment has been executed upon
several of them; how after this Life God has dealt with them, we are not to
inquire after, nor concerned.

But, Must future Ages have no nobler Tradition of his Goodness and Justice,
than what Execution can convey, P. 22. Why, raise Monuments and Mausolees,
write his History, get his Statues in Brass and Marble, Medals of him in Gold
and Silver, his Head ingraved on Precious Stones, several of his Pictures
copied and dispersed abroad; by that means the Memory of Alexander and of the
Cesars has been transmitted to Posterity: I suppose what he seems most to
Lament, is his loss, and not for the Sin of those who condemned him to Death;
if it be his loss, he might have been killed in a Battle, died in his Bed of
Sickness or of Age, he was not Immortal; we ought in that case as we must in
this, have submitted to the Will of God; he is Happy, better in Heaven than
upon Earth; why so much and so long to Fret and Vex, and be Ingenious to
Torment our selves and others; and be Angry with those that will not Weep as
long or as much as we; Parents, Relations and Friends must be content with the
Loss of any thing near and dear, when it pleases God it should be so. St. Paul
would not have the Thessalonians to Sorrow for those that are asleep, as 1 Thessalonians. 4. 13.
others which have no Hope. I think, that after all these Considerations, to
continue such an Anniversary, is to retain Occasion of Trouble, and Matter of
Division.

I find something I said makes him uneasy, for he repeats it more than once,
it is this, To Mourn for King Charles 's Death once had been enough. He says,
His Tongue tied Malice would not let him speak out, to have celebrated the
Martyrdom with a Devotional Remembrance. I thank God I am thus far able to
command my Tongue, as not to let it speak against my Mind; it is not out of
Malice, for I speak of him and his Memory as reasonably as may be expected from
one who is not doting upon a Dead Man; but for me to have said, Celebrated the
Martyrdom, etc. it had been a Lie, and contrary to my Thoughts; I own no
Martyrdom, much less with a Devotional Remembrance; my Devotion is only, wholly
and directly for my God, he is graciously pleased to allow me coming to him at
any time, without any Introductor or Master of Ceremonies: I declared I thought
his Death unlawful, I approved once Mourning for it, and one Humiliation-day,
but not for ever. But Why not twice, says he: Nay for once or twice more I
would not stand out with him, if only occasionally, but once every Year at a
certain fixed day turns it into Abuse, once is no Custom, one Act may be
Harmless, when an Habit makes it a Sin, and of all Sins the Customary ought to
be avoided. But why once for all, says he. My answer is, Once, because our
Nature may be allowed to vent out her Sorrow; it is an Infirmity of Humane
Nature, to be grieved for Losses and Crosses, and it eases one to unload
himself of that Affliction whereby the Heart is affected: Thus a Father or a
Friend may express a Trouble for the loss of a dear Son or of another Relation,
as I instanced in the case of Jacob and Joseph: But once for all, because all
Excesses must be avoided, Afflictions ought not to be Immortal, when once we
have paid the Memory of Friends that Tribute, we ought to mind better things;
we are not placed in this World evermore to Sorrow for the Death of others,
though never so Sensible to us, either in it self or for the manner of it, but
to fit and prepare our selves for our own; or rather, as much as in us lies, to
promote the Glory of God; and as far as God will enable us, to work our own
Salvation with Fear and Trembling; and when we have a mind to Mourn, there is
in us cause enough for it, namely, our Sins. I do not mind his taxing me with
Repetitions, what he calls so, are but Enlargements and Explanations, which
being a new Charge, makes him concerned thereat.

Now are we come to that which is most material in the Point, How it is
contrary to true Religion to keep the Thirtieth of January: Let us take notice
how he answers, This is the Scarecrow that keeps the Rook out of our Vineyard:
It Is just as a Nurse cries to the Child, Pah, Pah, does he take us for a
company of silly giddy Larks, or Weather cocks, unstable Rushes, this call
sounds sweetly, like the Hyena's Voice, etc. At this rate he fills up a whole
Page, which no doubt is very convincing, only I must own he says, This grand
Charge he groundlesly advances, when Page 11. and from my Page 27 till 40. I
give Reasons, and chiefly discourse upon that Matter which I must not trouble
my self to repeat; what follows is as convincing as what went before, King
Charles has with a Judicious Foresight given a brave Counter-Cuff to our Round
head Disputant: That Authority, he thinks, can frighten us all out of our Wits,
there it lies, whereupon he brags thus, Here is a Rowland for his Oliver; and I
say, Here is a David for his Goliath, who comes indeed with a Sword, with a
Spear, and with a Shield, when we come in the Name of the Lord of Hosts: I mean
1 Samuel 17. 45.
his word, whence we draw our Weapons and our Strength (which he neither does
nor can do,) to decide these Matters, I do not mind what K. Chapter and he do say,
but what God says: For a further answer to the Charge, within six Lines he
gives us an Hercules and his Foot, a Lion and his Paw, a Jackall, and a Monkey
with her young ones, besides Mince-Pies and Custards, and the Battlements of
Heaven which is so easily unbuttoned, a Saw-pit, Daniel 's Den, his Tippling
Hostess, railing against Candles and Burnt-Claret; then comes the Cowardly
Bully, Roaring, Hectoring and Fighting. Who can or dares answer these
Convincing Arguments, delivered with an affected Singularity, in a Language of
his own? And more of that kind, to prove how keeping the Thirtieth of January
is not contrary to True Religion: This is all we are like to have of him in the
Point.

But that which ought undisputably to decide the Question is this, That the
words he has quoted out of the Book of his new Gospel, I mean the Royal
Portraiture, are the words of a King, a Scholar, and an Orator, but for my part
I am for the words of the King of Kings and Lord of Lords, who says by the
Mouth of a Prophet, which has something more of Weight and Authority than the
Pamphleteer, that which is much to our Purpose, and admirably fits our case.
Now let them put away their Whoredom, and the Carcases of their Kings Ezekiel. 43.
9.
far from me, and I will dwell in the midst of them for ever: These Carcases of
their Kings were some Monuments of Idolatry erected to Manasseh and Amon, who
in his own 2 Kings 21. 23.
House had been killed by his Servants: In the seventh Verse God takes a
special notice of the Carcases of their Kings in their high places: And in the
eighth Verse he complains, They have even defiled my Holy Name by their
Abominations that they have committed, Wherein? In their setting their
Thresholds by my Threshold, and their Posts by my Post, that is, their Idols by
his Worship, and the Wall between me and them, for there was but a Wall between
it, for which God was so Angry with them, wherefore I have consumed them in
mine Anger: But you will say they committed Idolatry about the Carcases of
their Kings which we do not; I do not say you do, and hope you do not; in the
Text Idolatry is not so much as named, but may be implied in the word
Abominations; but you see the ground of God's Complaint is, Their setting their
Thresholds by his Threshold, and their Posts by his Post, as if he had said,
Why do you bring these Carcases near me? The Carcass and Idol are nothing to
God, they neither hurt nor influence him, but he says he will not have it so,
nor any thing like it; Is it not Just he should be obeyed? Has not God
honored us with great Lights against Idolatry and Superstition? Has he not
declared himself to be a Jealous God, Why then do we provoke him with bringing
an Idol of Jealousy into his House? Nay, in one respect we do worse than the
Jews, for there was a Wall between their Thresholds and his Threshold; but we
bring in the Carcass barefaced within the Wall of God's House, where we have a
Pulpit standing as it were between Mounts Gerizim and Ebal, with Blessings,
Panegyricks and Flatteries of one side, with Injuries, Revilings, Threatenings
and Curses on the other; besides, as I noted in my Observations, we have a
Collect an Epistle and a Gospel, as well as upon Christmas and Easter. God
indeed is a most Gracious God, but he takes Vengeanee on Men's Inventions: Yet
for all this they Psalm. 99. 8.
will not own they do ill, they Scorn it, but no reason they give for it,
Sinegare sat est quis erit reus? If to deny it be enough, who can be Guilty?

But we must proceed, in his Page 25. he is pleased to say, Yet this I must say
for the Champion of Dissension, that he is no Coward or Faint Heart: With one
Arm he would throw me down, and with the other lift me up. I leave any
Impartial Reader of my Observations to judge, whether all along I am not
pushing for Moderation, Quietness, Union, Reconciliation, Peace and Truth: It
is usual with the Remoraes of Reformation, which must be the Basis of Reunion,
to cry out with open Mouth, that Reformers are Troublers of the State: Thus
Ahab called the Prophet a Troubler of Israel, but he was in the wrong: I think
Zephaniah was no Troubler of the 1 Kings 18. 17. Zeph. 1. 4.
State, in putting on Josiah to cut off the Remnant of Baal and the Name of the
Chemarins; and did our Savior disturb either Church or State, when he whipped
Matt. 21. 12.
the Buyers and Sellers out of the Temple. Beza did in 1572. write Queen
Elizabeth a Letter for a thorough Reformation, which was kindly received; and
though some about the Queen were not pleased with it, yet she took well the
Advice; and though thorough other Men's Suggestions she did not follow it, yet
she did not look upon him as a Disturber of the Peace of her Kingdom: But anon
I shall, by the Grace of God, say something more to this Charge, in the mean
while I will have them to know, that we desire the Word of God, not Man's
Fancies and Inventions, to be the Rule of the Reformation we have been speaking
of; and that our Religion comes to be Good, Pure and Evangelical, because it is
grounded upon the Gospel; he calls it Conventicle-Religion, he knows we were
driven out of Churches, and had no more Liberty in public to serve God, than
the former Christians had under the Roman Emperors, and of late than the Poor
Protestants in France: They cannot be ignorant how their Severe Persecution did
drive us into Corners and by Places to serve God, for fear of being Fined and
dragged into Prison.

The word Presbytery, as I perceive out of his Page 26. is to him as Loathsome
as that of Reformation; and though this is a Matter copious enough, and which
I, having other things more to our purpose, am unwilling to engage in, yet a
few words I must bestow upon it, least he should think we avoid it. They
misinterpret the word Presbyterian in the Fathers: Methinks the true Fathers of
the Church, such as Peter, Paul and Luke, speak clearly of it; the first calls
himself a Fellow-Elder or 1 Pet. 5. 1.
Presbyter; and Paul left Titus in Creet to ordain Elders in every City; and
the Gift that was in Timothy was Tit. 1. 5.
given him, by laying on of the Hands of the Presbytery. Luke tells us, how St.
Paul, from Miletus, sent to Ephesus, and called the Presbyters, which is
translated Elders of the 1 Timothy 4. 14. Acts 20. 17. 28.
Church; and the same which in that Verse are called Elders, in the 28th he
calls Overseers, or Bistops, in the Original, and Pastors or Feeders of the
Flock; where it appears those Elders, Bishops and Pastors, though under
different Names, to be the same Persons, exercising the same Office: St. Paul
does mention two sorts 1 Timothy 5. 17. 1 Cor. 12. 28.
of Elders, some who Rule, others who besides do labor in the Word and
Doctrine; so some Teach and others Govern: Thus some of the Fathers he means,
as Cyprian, Austin, Jerome, etc. interpret the word Presbyter, and thus far have
I been led out of my way; but to prove our misinterpreting the word Presbyter,
Julius Caesar, with his Positis Speculis, not to be understood of
Perspective-glasses, but his Watch or Sentinel, are brought in for Witnesses;
nay, Castor and Helena, the Lacedaemonians, with the word Egg in a Text of
Scripture, which the Presbyterians would interpret an Hen egg or Goose-egg; all
this with Mr. Selden's Facetious and Comical Table talk, with two Doublets, one
plain, that is mine, the other fringed, that is his, for he and I are now the
Actors upon the Stage; and the Conclusion of this Learned Debate is, That it is
plain we have both a Doublet, and we might happen both to have given a Doublet
to our Souls, but he says, It Is not Tailors work to take measure of our Souls.
All these, I say, in this pretty and ingenious Discourse, are brought in to
evidence we misinterpret the word Presbyter in the Fathers. What a pretty part
am I, with this Nonsense, put to act upon this Stage? I intended to have
answered him in a more Serious way, but one who Converses with Men that are
Singular, must out of Complaisance sometimes comform himself to their ways.

After these Irrefragable and Convincing Arguments, is he not in the right to
ask, Will they still persevere in Ignorant Obstinacy, and differ from us in
Religion and Unity of Performance? P. 27. And this attended with his usual
Flourishes of Eloquence A-la-mode du Paree, a Geneva Starchness: I thank God
out of this Barren Field he brings us into one that is more Copious, which is,
Bowing to the Altar: As for a time I am his humble Servant, so I must follow
him wheresoever he goes, as I perceive he would by his saying, How gladly would
he Malice us into Popery, so that here I shall fix for a while, and neither the
Jangling of a pair of Tongs, nor the Harpsicles, nor his Organ, nor the Blind
Fidler's Tunes, shall draw me off the more, because Page 29. he speaks of a
great many Joint stools, as I guess, for me to rest upon; now we must be more
Serious.

Take notice I never did nor do I now say you are Papists, I am neither so Rash
nor so Uncharitable as you are, or as you take me to be: But this I affirm,
That you retain Popish Rites and Ceremonies; and though I had no mind to
meddle, yet seeing you put me upon it, I hope to make it out, for all your
Flashy Wit in your Page 30. stay till last of all to declare me a Lunatic, a
mad Misrepresenter, with my Bedlam Observations; it is not your insipid Jest,
that if ye eat Plum-pudding and Roast-beef in a Cooks shop, we may perhaps call
it a Papistical Ordinary: It seems he always has a good Stomach, for great
part of his Talk is about Kitchin-stuff, Bacon, Sugar, Plums, Mince-pies,
Custards, etc. However I say, If ye eat that which is Sacrificed to Idols, I
may call things by their Name, and say you eat that which is Sacrificed to
Idols; and if you know it, according to St. Paul's Rule, you ought not to eat:
These Matters are not to be ridiculed, for no Wise Men would do so. I shall
begin with the Tale of the Countryman in Spain who would not Pray to St.
Nicholas's Image (he is one of your Saints, as of Papists) he might as well
have called him St. Neptune, because he knew it was made of his own Plumtree;
yet I have known Picture-drawers, who in the Church have fallen upon their
Knees before Pictures of their own Drawing; what the Spanish Countryman would
not do, yet some of yours do, Bow to, though they Pray not to the Altar; I do
not say you adore a Moulding Carcass, but if you bring it, or a Picture of St.
George on Horseback, or a Cross into the Church, and do Bow, Kneel, or show
any such Respect to it; I say you therein do countenance Idolatry, or at least
Superstition: Does not the Second Commandment positively forbid to bow down
before any Image, or likeness of Exodus 20. 4, 5
any thing in Heaven, in Earth, or in the Water, whether it be of St. George or
of a Cross it is all one, God forbids it, will he have me to believe his Story
of the Countryman, against two (for I have no less) places out of God's Word;
The Carpenter, he heweth him down Cedars, Isa. 44. from 13 to 20.
and takes the Cypress and the Oak: Then shall it be for a Man to burn; for he
will take thereof and warm himself; yea he kindles it and baketh Bread: Yea,
he makes a God and worshippeth it, he makes it a Graven Image and falls
down thereto: He knows what it is, namely, his Workmanship, yet he boweth to
it: O sad! They have not known nor understand: For he has shut their Eyes that
they cannot see, and their Hearts that they cannot understand, v. 18.

My second Instance, to show he goes upon a wrong Principle, when he says, Do
you think there is in us such an Ignorant Rusticity, that we should bow either
to King Charles's Carcass or to the Altar? We have no Exodus 32.
such Design or Intention, I will believe it, in the mean time they bring those
Carcases into the Church, which you are forbidden to do, and bow to that Altar;
it is no matter what your Intention be, whilst you perform External Acts of
Worship: Do you think the Children of Israel in the Wilderness could believe
the Golden Calf to be the God that brought them out of Egypt, no certainly, for
they had given Aaron the Golden Earrings of their Wives Sons and Daughters, out
of which the Calf was made; yet for all this they worshipped it, not
terminatively, for they said, These be the Gods, O Israel, which brought thee
out of the Land of Egypt; and there was a Proclamation, to morrow is a Feast
unto the Lord, they worshipped God under the Figure of a Calf, yet it is known
what an Abominable Idolatry it was; and this was by Jeroboam followed, when he
made the two Golden Calves: O let us keep to the Rules in a Religious place as
is the Church; or upon any Religious Account not to bow to an Altar: Matter of
God's Worship is a nice thing, his Directions must be followed, and nothing of
Man's devising brought in.

As good to bow to him that made the Altar as to the Altar it self, for it may
be accounted a Civil Respect, but to the Altar it is a Religious one; yet there
is as much reason to bow to the Pulpit as to the Altar, for from thence the
Word of God is preached to us; herein we are not to give the Altar the
Preference, except with Papists we believe there is the true Body of Christ
either kept under a Wafer, or made at the pleasure of a Priest. I would
willingly know, wherein the Reverence we pay to the Altar, does differ from
that which Papists with bowing their Heads and putting off their Hats, do
render to the Cross: If upon or under those Altars, there were Relics, they
might say that Honor of Bowing is directed for the Relics; but by good chance
they have not the Relics of many Saints and Martyrs to place there, or else
they might happen to do it. Some of their Authors do not disapprove of Relics,
for Dr. Burgess In his Rejoinder for Dr. Morton.
upon the Argument out of a Carthaginian Council, how certain Altars erected
for the Memory of Martyrs should be abolished, and all Monuments of Idolatry be
utterly destroyed; he with his Friend answers, because those Altars were
noted to be destitute of the Relics of Martyrs; but adds, that by those
Altars destitute of such things, the Church was mocked: Would not a Papist give
the same Reason? Well, the same cause, though by different Persons, must be
defended by the same Reasons: Thus, provided there be Relics according to his
Opinion things are well enough: How far into Dirt and Mire do Men tumble
themselves over Head and Ears, when once they are engaged in the Defense of a
Cause, not mattering whether or not it be Good, True and Just.

I hope none will deny that God's Precepts ought to be the Rule and Measure of
our Obedience; what God immediately commanded must be obeyed, though it should
seem unreasonable and contrary to his other revealed Will, I mean in Man's
Apprehension; as in the case of Abraham to Sacrifice his Son, of Ezekiel to
make Genesis 22. 2. Ezekiel. 4. 12. Hos. 1. 2.
himself Bread with Man's or Cows Dung, and of Hosea to take unto him a Wife of
Whoredom; so must that be obeyed which the Lord has immediately commanded by
the Ministry of his Servants; and as he likes the Service we render him with
Heart and Sincerity, with a willing Mind in obedience to what he has
commanded; and this indeed in St. Paul's words we may call our reasonable
Service; so he likes none of the Services he has not commanded, but are only a
Production of Man's Brain and Fancy; so are all Ceremonies in question, and
this in particular, whereby the Upholders of them give Papists so great an
Advantage even against themselves; as we see in a Book I was lately reading,
wherein the Author does Handsomely and Ingeniously handle the Charge of Idolatry
against the Church of Rome; but the Papist-Priest does entangle him in this
Point of Bowing to the Altar, with this Argument, The Church of England-men do
Bow to the Altar, and yet they say they Worship not the Altar, but God before
the Altar. So say Papists, We worship God before Images, but not Images: What
an intricate Labyrinth does this bring him unto, only to defend an Idle and
Superstitious Ceremony, not to speak worse? Papists and they do the same thing,
for both bow to the Altar, and both give the same Reason, They do not bow to
the Altar but to God, so their case is but one and the same: This Argument of
the Papist does engage them in so many Distinctions as are Superfluous and not
directly to the Point; if they would but part with that Ceremony, that
Objection would soon fall and cease; but they have rather to bring upon
themselves nettling Difficulties, than to part with an unwarrantable Ceremony.

The Wisest amongst the Heathen pretended they looked not upon their Images as
Gods, but as Symbols of that Being to which they gave Divine Worship; our
Churchmen will not own they render the Altar any Worship, this would be openly
to declare themselves Idolaters to worship the Creature, as none can deny an
Altar is (as they after the Roman Style are pleased to call it) or the
Communion Table; nay it is less, for it is but the work of the Creature, so a
Creature in the lowest Degree; by the Bowing down forbidden in the second
Precept, is signified any manner of Religious Worship, or Service to any
Creature whatsoever: The distinction of Civil and Religious, is Idle and
Superfluous; for here the question is about Religious Worship: The Altar is in
the Church, which is God's House, the place appointed only for his Service: To
say not the Altar, but God before the Altar is worshipped, and to give for
reason, they believe not the Corporeal Presence, are but bare Shifts: As well
as they, we know how Reverence is due in going in and coming out of God's
House; but if every time one passes before the Altar, though never so many, as
sometimes there is occasion for some of them to do it, is not that to have a
special regard to that very place? For else why not as well to bow to the
Pulpit, except they would make the Holy Word of God, that makes the Sacrament,
to be less than the Sacrament, for the one is preached from the Pulpit, the
other administered at the Communion Table: Let then our Man confess there is
something remaining of the old Leaven of Popery, they deny Transubstantiation,
but herein they act as if they believed it, and they make the Altar the Holiest
part of the Church, which is all equally Holy, because wholly appointed to an
Holy use, namely, the Worship of God: This is to look East and West, and so
bring us back to the Ceremonial Law.

Is not the whole Church the Local Circumstance of Worship, seeing the whole is
the place for it? This is to carry us back into the Tabernacle where was the
Sanctuary and the Holiest of all; thus we make the Church the Sanctuary, and
the Altar railed about the Holiest of all; but this while we do not consider
how by Christ's Death the Vail of the Temple was Rent, and the Partition pulled
down: It Is to no purpose for them to say there is an Invisible Object of
Worship, when all Christians know that the only Object of Worship is Invisible;
we also know, that God requires of us a Bodily as a Spiritual one, though this
chiefly; but God does not require we should be stinted to a certain place
within the Church, according to the Fancy and Prescription of Men, this were a
Bondage indeed: But Papists do always worship toward the Altar, except when
sometimes they go about to Kneel before some Image: It Is to make a Ridiculous
Parallel to say, It may be objected Men worship their Hat, because at Church in
Prayer they hold it before their Face; there is no such Canon to command or
commend Praying with the Hat before the Face, it is a free act left to a Man's
Liberty, and who knows not, it is to prevent having ones Thoughts distracted and
diverted by Objects, and to recollect all the Spirits with more Fervency and
Application to perform the Duty one is about.

The same Arguments they bring against Papists in point of Idolatry, we make
use of against them about Altar-worship, for they say that External Acts of
Worship are capable of Idolatry, however the Intention of the Mind be directed,
as I observed not much before; Is not this appliable to them as to Papists,
about bowing to the Altar? Why should they herein be more privileged than
Papists are? This External Act, let the Intention be what it will, is capable
of Idolatry, or at least of Superstition, in them as it is in Papists; God has
revealed his Will about outward Acts of Worship, and we must consider the
Revelation he has made of his Will in this Matter, for since God has the
Power to determine our Duty, and he knows best what makes for his Honor, it
is but Just and reasonable, that we should judge of these things according to
his Will: This Argument is certainly good, as against Papists, so against
Protestants that bow to the Altar. Our Savior's Rule, Thou shall worship the
Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve, does forbid all external Acts
Matthew. 4. 13.
of Worship applied to any besides God: Bowing to the Altar is always, upon all
occasions, to that Place, and to none else; so it must needs be applied to it;
it is soli, semper and omni, which the Philosopher calls Proprium quarto modo,
the most essential Propriety and Attribute. Now that which is sin in one, in
Heathens and Papists, is sin in another, though Protestant: To say, For such a
one to lie with another Man's Wife, is Adultery; but for me, it is not so; is to
be much in the wrong: And to make Idolatry and Superstition depend only upon
the inward Intention, is all one as if one should say, Adultery is to lie with
another Man's Wife, with an intention to Cuckold the Husband; but if a Man
commits that Wickedness out of love to her Person, then it is not Adultery. A
rare Doctrine indeed! So to worship the Altar, whereof to bow is an external
Act, though not with an intention to worship the Creature, is still a
worshipping of the Creature. This outward act of Bowing, forbidden of God to be
done to any Creature, must need be appropriated to the Altar. It Is not enough
to deny to clear themselves from it; else Papists denying they worship Images,
would be a good Excuse. We cannot judge of Man's Intentions but by his Actions.
In God's Words to Elijah, quoted by St. Paul, Romans 2. 4. two things are
observable to good purpose: I have reserved seven thousand Men (he says not,
they reserved themselves) who have not (he does not say worshipped in their
heart, but) bowed the knee to Baal. The Intention is not mentioned, but the
outward Act is, which God takes special notice of.

To compare the Circumstance of Worshipping toward the Altar, to that of the
Jews Worshipping toward the Ark, where were the Cherubims, is to make a very
lame Parallel, till they can prove two things: First, That as the Cherubims, by
God's special Command, were about the Ark, in such a place of the Tabernacle;
so the Altar is with them, by the same Authority, in such a place of the
Church, facing such a Point of the Compass, and railed about. Secondly, That
God has commanded them to worship toward their Altars, as he did the Jews to
worship toward the Ark; which we defy them ever to do. But I am in this Point
gone further than I intended; though more might be said upon it, and upon Cross
and Surplice; but this is enough to show, that the Author has no cause to be
angry; for we do him no injury, when we say they have amongst them the practice
of some Popish Ceremonies, which in the other Points I can clearly demonstrate;
and I take him to be one of those, who have been heard to say, They would
sooner be Papists than Presbyterians; but that against some other time.

Now I find him in an Ecstasy, and doting upon, or admiring at some places of
the Royal Portraiture; but with us, that is no Argument to prove the keeping an
Anniversary: I love to read good things, and to make a right use of them, only
in every thing we do, let us keep within bounds. He bestows his page 27. upon
these Quotations; but as I speak not against the Person, so I say nothing
against the Book; let it be whose it will, I am not concerned, though I believe
it is for him a cause of great grief, that others cannot have of both the same
Opinion he has; but he must excuse us, for I live by Rules more than follow
Examples. This Point I have spoken my Mind about, in my Observations, so at
this time shall trouble my self no more concerning it; I do not, nor ever
intended, to wrong the Reputation of any Man, dead or alive, God forbid. I do
not think that King Charles's Rest and Credit does in the least depend upon
that Book, being his or another Man's; and when I speak against his
Anniversary, I think not in the least to derogate from his Memory; for that is
not his act, and so has nothing to do in it. It Is not any thing I have against
that King that makes me dislike the keeping that Day, but only because we
believe God is thereby offended.

Now, I thank God, he begins to draw toward an end, and then one would think
his Venom should be somewhat spent; but upon the account of the other
Anniversary, which he does begin to speak of page 34. we find the contrary, as
foolish and violent as ever; but we are already well used to his ways; nay, we
observed it from the beginning; for in him has been verified Solomon's Saying,
A fool's Wrath is presently known. Here he continues his old way of arguing,
first, as good Prev. 12. 16.
as this: Except this Birth and Restoration be kept, all Proceedings in
Westminster -Hall, as the Act for the Attainder of several Persons guilty of
his Father's Death, are repealed and reversed: A rare Consequence from the
Premises; then he is very liberal as usually of his ill Language against
Parties and Persons, all which we might forgive him if he would stop there, and
not Spue out his Venom against Heaven, which certainly shall fall upon his
Face, and arraign God himself for his Decree, and ridicule that adorable
Counsel of his Predestination, as he does in the same Page, and which I took
notice of before, seeing he has a mind to be Unjust and Filthy, Let him be
Unjust and Filthy still; but upon his account with David we must say, The Works
of God are very great, Rev. 22. 11. Psalm. 92. 5, 6.
and his Thoughts very deep, a brutish Man knows them not, neither does a
Fool understand this. It Is not I but the Spirit of God that says so: For a
further Ornament of his Discourse, and setting forth that rational Argument of
his just now mentioned, he brings in one of his usual Stories, of a Surly Rogue
that has been licked, etc.

If he would and could he might well have observed in my Page 11. and other
places, we are not against but for days of Humiliation and Thanksgiving,
attended with such due Circumstances as are consonant with the Word of God,
wherein these Thirtieth of January and Twenty ninth of May in my Observations I
proved to be deficient; I love not to rake out things, for I made it appear, I
am for Acts of Oblivion, specially relating to Dead Men, for I know it to be
contrary to the Will of God, and to the Rules of Charity and Prudence; I meddle
not with Persons, only I speak of things: I know King Charles II. had some good
things in him, and as the good things that are in a Man shall never make me to
approve of or commend the Evil that is in him; so the evil things that are in a
Man, never make me condemn the Good that is in him, let Blame and Praise attend
their due Objects; but withal, the greatest Admirers of that King must own,
that as he was a Man so he had his Failings; those that arise out of Humane
Infirmity may be excused, if they are of such a Nature as to admit it, or at
least to be pitied, but truly those that are effects of a strong Corruption in
Nature, Presumptuous, Willful, and contracted into an Habit, must no ways be
approved, flattered or commended; these last things I speak of as modestly as
can be, and the whole Nation knows what I mean; but those strong and different
Streams of Vice which I complain to have overflowed the Nation, are not Slander
nor mere Fancy, being obvious to the Eyes of all People; and I think it to be
no Sin to desire it may be restrained and suppressed, as I do again and again;
I do not, as he falsely accuses me, Libel that King at random, God forbid, if
that had been my design, which never was, I had gone on in a contrary way to
that I have taken, but I have forborne naming so much as one Instance of many
which several in the Nation know of: If our Author's edge had been turned
another way, then indeed we could have heard of many things with Enlargements,
but the World may know he and I go upon different Ground and opposite
Principles; for, as far as God is pleased to enable me, I follow good Examples
and avoid bad ones: But because he presses me so much with blackest Scandals,
etc. he forces out of me a thing which I was willing to be silent in, though so
public as the whole Nation knows, that he stained the latter end of his Reign
with shedding Innocent Blood, which perhaps, for I adore all Dispensations of
Divine Providence, was the cause of his days being shortened: As to what he
says of his great Clemency and Kindness after his Restoration, to those who
had been against his Interest, who, he slanderously says, Hypocrited their
Actions and Dissimulated a Joy. I must tell him, he is grossly mistaken, for his
own Friends, before he was restored, dared not to appear, if I may so say, they
might not lift up their Hands any where but at the Bar; those who had been for
the Parliament were the great and chief Instruments to bring him in, whose
Names are well known, and we very well remember that which those of his Party
may not forget, of the Attempt to bring him in not long before he was, wherein
many ventured their Lives, and some lost them, which at that time in the
Printed Gazettes was, to my certain Knowledge, called Bellum Presbyteriale, the
Presbyterian War; and that King himself after, in one of his first Speeches in
Parliament, inviting them to settle things, said thus, My Lords and Gentlemen,
Except ye help me to disperse the Fear which possesses the Hearts of People,
you will hinder me from performing my Promise, without which neither you nor I
had been here; wherefore let us not deceive those that brought us together, or
suffered us to meet here: This Authority is authentic for the Man, and I know
where that Speech is to be seen. After this I shall not trouble my self with
the very few foolish Lines remaining of his Pamphlet, nor with his Impertinent
new Discovery or Vision, he has enough surfeited up another way, only I add,
Let him if he can, disprove what in my Pages 13 and 14, I say of Charles II.

As to the Point of Anniversaries, I shall very briefly bring in a new Matter
to the Charge, it is about a third Anniversary which once we had, and should
have had continued, if one Man, now in France, and been here still, that is,
the Sixth of February, called the King's-day, or King James's Coronation day, a
Man, who being a professed Papist, was thereby become a declared Enemy to our
Religion; it was attended with the same Materials and Workmanship as the other
two, that is, Collect, Epistle and Gospel, as we have it in the Prayer-books
Printed in his time; these Anniversaries are of a good Breed, of a multiplying
Nature, within thirty Years or thereabouts we had three, and no doubt if things
had held in that Channel, a kind of a Miraculous Birth of a Supposed Prince of
Wales had been a just ground for another, for such a signal Mercy of an Heir
Male to the Crown, surely would have deserved an Yearly Thanksgiving-day; thus
the Prayer Book had been swelled with new Rubricks, Collects, etc. and the
Nation been overgrown therewith, and so from time to time we had never wanted
Occasions or Pretentions of multiplying to an Infinite. I dare say our Author
is an Observer in private of that Sixth of February; thus there had been no
end, for Superstition will not be kept within Bounds or Measures; and here I
must make the Author, who in several places does unjustly brand us with
Innovations, see how such Anniversaries are Innovations, for here we had no
such thing before King Charles's Restoration, wherefore let there be no more
such a Scuffle about Dead Bodies.

Now, with the help of God I must proceed to some few Observations, and that as
briefly as I can: First, He has not returned me one Text of Scripture for so
many I have given; yet the Word of God is to be judge of these Controversies;
but indeed his way of Discoursing is altogether inconsistent with that Holy
Word; then I say, most of my Reasons are untouched, and hardly any thing
answered, and nothing to the purpose; nothing said against my Position, That
for such Anniversaries there is no Precept nor President in Scripture, the
three pretended out of the Old Testament I refuted, and not one word of the
Refutation taken notice of, nor nothing said either to excuse or justify that
violent Spirit in those Sermons I complained of, only this, Their
Gospel-Talents must not be wrapped up in an Idle Napkin of Silence and Oblivion;
which how Satisfactory an answer it is, I leave any Rational Man to judge; and
indeed he had no room for Sober and Serious Discourse, his being wholly stuffed
with Invectives; I could instance several other Particulars in my Observations,
which he has not taken notice of in the least, whereby one may see he has
lost his Cause: But not to trouble my self any longer as to this, I leave it to
any Impartial Reader to compare his Book with mine, which I do earnestly
desire, and it will be found in many things he quite flies off from the Matter,
and seeing I now am upon my Confession, I declare I could never have thought
there could in one Man meet so much of ill Nature, of ill Breeding, and so much
of Brutishness, that one should be so Unreasonable and Unrational, for he
cease to be a Man, and a Christian too, if ever he was such; he would bite
and devour if he could, but cannot, and it is hardly worth throwing a Stone at
him: I am sorry he has so much forced me out of my way of writing, which ever
was, as every Honest Man's ought to be, with Moderation and Meekness, not with
Ferocity and Brutishness, as I found his to be.

But there is worse than this, for he strives in the most odious Terms he can,
to traduce us as Enemies to Church and State, but believe him not, for I find
he is used to Lie: As to the first we subscribe, to the Doctrinal part of the
Thirty nine Articles, and are for a Government and Discipline in the Church,
for a Ministry by way of Office and in a lawful Calling, contrary to his false
Aspersions Page 6 and 24. We say Doctrine is the Soul whereby the Church
lives, and Discipline the Sinews by which Feeling and Motion is conveyed, and
the Church thereby maintained; and yet we find some, as this Man, who hate
Discipline, except it be their own, without considering whether or not it be
Christ's, and the very name of it, as they abhor Reformation; Discipline keeps
things in order, and Reformation restores them to a due State after Abuses and
Disorders: So that whosoever is an Enemy to Reformation, proclaims himself to
be such to Order and Discipline in the Church, and is thereby a Favourer of
Confusion; and it is not enough for one to pretend to it, for good Desires
signify nothing without earnest Endeavors; do ye the Work and leave the
Success to God; and first begin at home: Is the Heart affected? Do you speak
feelingly? Do you make Conscience of your ways? If so, then let me say, as long
as we have such Members, and such Governors of a Church, we shall be sure not
to want Order and Discipline in it.

As to the things wherein they and we do differ, let us, according to the
several Rules about it we have in the New Testament, in Charity and the Spirit
of Meekness, endeavor to Instruct and Inform, but chiefly to Edify one
another, and not put out one another Eyes, or have no other Terms but the Law
of the Conqueror over the Conquered; we shall be ready to meet you in that
Spirit, and though we were the strongest, it were unreasonable if we should
attempt to prescribe you any thing, we never pretended to give any Frame of
Worship or Government but what are set down in the Word of God, that indeed we
stand for, and desire to have nothing settled in the Church but what is
according to the Rule of Scripture; let there be nothing but what there is a
Warrant for out of it: In order thereunto all our desire is, that Cause with
Cause, Ground with Ground, and Matter with Matter, be compared and determined,
not to see things managed with Partiality, Faction and Interest, as in the
Council of Trent, for then that which is intended for a Remedy strengthens the
Disease; and to speak with Nazianzen, dissolveth not, but fixes Evil; at first
a Council by Emperor and Princes asked of Popes was a Terror, chiefly a free
one, for it is certain a guilty Man will never be, if he can help it, for coming
to his Trial for fear of being condemned; so they that are Conscious to
themselves of Abuses and Corruptions, will, as long as they can, avoid coming
to a Reformation, which is desired in a quiet and peaceable way, the Word of
God alone being the Judge.

We are content in the Enjoyment of the Indulgence which they envy us, and some
have preached against before the highest Assemblies, and, as we ought, give God
Thanks for it, if they will but let us alone, and not go about as they do to
provoke the Superior Powers against us, by means of those Violent Sermons they
preach every Year upon those Anniversaries, when for fear old Divisions should
be forgotten, they renew the Memory of them with a Witness. In several places
he charges us with Hypocrisy, the Plague of the Heart, whereof God alone is
the Searcher and ought to be the Judge: This is between God and us, and not
between us and him: But the Objection I answered in my Observations Page 41. he
breaks loose upon us with so much Bitterness, as to call us Champions of
Dissension, P. 25. Miscreants, P. 33. Assassines in the
Postscript-Advertisement, and fathereth upon us, Slander, Rebellion, Lies,
Perfidiousness, Villainies, Treacherous Conspiracies, and what not? Any thing
that comes into his Head, in his Eye we are the Horridest Monsters in Nature,
not to be suffered to live, as bad if not worse than the Devil, who if God gave
him leave would not blacken us so much as he does, as it appears out of his
Method, when before God he suggested what he did against Job. Job 1 and 2.
Thus were the first Christians misrepresented by their Enemies, such
Picture-drawers deserve not to be allowed a Pencil in the Hand, for they never
make the Copy to resemble the Original. Such Language as this, and such Sermons
as we complain of, we have reason to look upon as so many Bartholomew Bells
rung for a Massacre: In things we differ about, let us argue like Men, and not
tear like Beasts. But it is not enough to make us Enemies to the Church, the
Design is to proclaim us such to the State; first, as if we were Innovators,
which in some places he would charge us with, in relation to Church as to
State, as in Page 9. If by Novelties in Church he means Reformation, we own we
desire that Innovation as was from the Ceremonial Law to the Gospel, such an
Innovation as happened when the Gentiles forsook their Idols to serve the Living
God and believe in Christ; such as when our Fathers came out of Romish Babylon,
such Innovations and Reformation we are for, and of what remains amongst us
of that Spiritual Sodom, we are for; to desire to go to the Spring is no
Innovation; we are for that Good Old way mentioned in Scripture, for that which
was from the Beginning, as it is our Savior's Method in his Sermon upon the
Mount, to Reform and bring things to the old Channel, and to what they were at
first; one said well, Illud verum quod primum: But all Innovations against the
Doctrine of Christ, or of his Apostles, were much against, and look upon them
as Pernicious; so when there creeps any Abuses into the State, we could
heartily wish to have them redressed in a Legal and Parliamentary way; and we
think it not blameworthy, when in a due Course it is asked by those that have a
right to do it.

To make us Odious to Authority, they call us Commonwealth-men, we own it in
some Sense, that is, for the Common Public Good, in Opposition to Private
Interest; and we think he is not an Honest Man, who is not of that Principle,
but a Democratical and merely Popular Government, or any contrary to that
settled by the Laws we are against: They say we are not for Monarchy, not for
such as overthrows the Laws, illegally dissolves Charters, invades the Subjects
Properties, opens Popish Chapels all the Nation over, sets up Papists in
those places which by Law they are excluded from: In a word, A Tyrannical and
Absolute Monarchy we do not love, but such a one wherein the King has his just
Prerogative, Parliaments their Privileges, and People their Rights and Liberty;
and the Law of the Land is the Standing Rule of Government; such a Monarchy,
with Hearts, Hands and Purses, we will Stand, Live and Die for: And none but
Villains will call us, as Page 33. Implacable and Impenitent Adversaries to
Monarchy and present Majesty; and to be for a Fantastic Anarchy, P. 34.

Another thing, and that is very Important, we must speak of, He has not been
satisfied to abuse us in relation to things already mentioned, he has, as it
were to defy God himself, reviled our Holy Faith; I am apt to believe, one
word which dropped from my Pen, and that is Arminianism, has hit him to the
quick, for now and then he is Spewing out his Venom concerning those Points
against Grace, about those Matters which I look upon to be so Fundamental to
true Christian Religion, if there was an occasion he should find me very
Severe, but that is a large Field not to be entered upon at this time: The place
wherein he chiefly foams out his Rage is Page 11. The Stander by may see us
thrown, at their Will and Pleasure, into Socinianism, Arrianism, Anabaptism,
Calvinism, Commonwealthism, or any other Hereticalism. Methinks Pelagianism
might well have come in and made a Rhyme with the rest; but he has his Reason
to the contrary, he must not bring in one of his Ancestors amongst Heretics,
for Pelagius was Arminius's Grandfather, for Arminians are Semi-pelagians,
this is no place to speak of that Genealogy: Calvin he places amongst
Heretics, and makes his Opinions as abominable Heresies as Socinians, etc.
This Man who pretends to such a Tenderness for the Memory and Reputation of the
Dead, does here clearly show us, how to say is one thing, and to do another;
that eminent Instrument of Reformation from Popery, has a name settled amongst
all Reformed (except Arminian) Churches, beyond the reach of some Despicable
Wretches in the World; it is well known how high a Value and Esteem, as might
appear by several Instances, our first Reformers here had for him, but I want
room for the present to vindicate his Person and Doctrine; it may very well be
said of him, what St. Paul speaks of another, The Brother, whose Praise is in
the Gospel throughout all the 2 Cor. 8. 18.
Churches. It cannot be said that he was Socinian, Arrian, Pelagian or
Anabaptist, for he has powerfully written against those Heresies: If he was an
Heretic, seeing he will have him to be one, he must call him an Augustinian,
for in Matters of Grace, none can deny but that he goes hand in hand with Austin

Is not this a pretty return of the Man to what I said, that some of our
Churchmen would, in my Opinion, do better, instead of being so Hot upon a
Dispute about a Book whose it is, to write against Socinianism, which is riding
in Triumphantly. I know a Worthy, and one of their chief Members, has written
something well upon that subject, but another has done it in such a way, being
Ambitious to tread new Paths and be Singular, as has started up Disputes
between him and some Brother of his, who is, upon good reason, for keeping in
the old way; I do not say that our Author should concern himself against
Socinians, for what Affinity he may happen to have with them, I cannot tell, I
am sure some of his Arminian Gang have; but in case he had not, he would not be
proper for it, in that he has no Convincing way; he answers Arguments only
with ill Language, he would Rant and Hector, and if he could bring down Fire
from Heaven to consume whom he loves not, we have a fresh Experience of it,
and amongst other places in his P. 13. As I perceive, this Man has undertaken
to be the Champion not only of the Church of England, but also of that of Rome,
for indeed in this very thing he takes up the Cudgels for them against all that
are withdrawn from her Communion; and this is the Cause of all Protestant
Reformed Churches: What is meant by Calvinism, I conceive it to be the Doctrine
and Opinions of Calvin, and do not all Protestant Churches beyond Sea, except
Lutherans, which have Transubstantiation and Ubiquity; nay, do not we our
selves agree in the Doctrinal part with Calvin? Let us peruse the Body of the
several Confessions of Faith of those Foreign Churches, and compare them with
our Thirty nine Articles, as to the Doctrinal part, and we shall find they all
agree in Doctrines of Faith: Is not this to bring in Popish Batteries amongst
us, and plainly to betray the Protestant Cause? Is not this to help our Enemies
and the Wicked? We know how Jehoshaphat was reproved for having joined with
Ahab, after he was returned in Peace to his House, Jehu the Son of Hanani the
Seer, went out to meet him, and said to King 3 Cro^. 19. 1, 2.
Jehoshaphat, Should thou help the Ungodly, and love them that hate the
Lord? Therefore is Wrath upon thee from before the Lord. This Man calls Calvin
an Heretic, but does he make it appear, he says but does not prove, we are
not Sworn to his words, does he think we will take his bare word for it, there
is no reason, Principles of Truth we stand upon, but he understands it no more
than Pilate, who asked what it was. John 18. 38.


I say this false Accusation is a Libel against other Protestant Churches, he
does erect himself into a Goliath, who despises and defieth all the Armies of
the Lord: This is highly and openly to appear for the Romish Canse, after this
rate down with all Protestant Churches and up with Popery, O! Tell it not in
Gath, publish it not in Askelon, least the Daughters of the Philistines
rejoice. 2 Samuel 1. 20.
What a Joy for Papists, both at home and abroad, to hear one in London has in
Print condemned for the worst of Heretics all Churches that are withdrawn from
that of Rome, Is it not a Shame to hear it? And will it not be a greater Shame
to suffer it? It is very well worth the Pains of those that are concerned to
look to it: The Laws do forbid all Commerce with the Romish Church, and it is
Treason to be reconciled to it, or to Seduce others to do so, to write against
that Churches Enemies is to write for it, to write for it, is to go about to
Seduce People to be reconciled to it, which is Punishable by the Laws; this is
too much to favor Rome: Did the greatest Stickler of the Church of Rome ever
call our Holy Religion worse than Heresy; herein he justifies the more Violent
Papists, amongst whom have been many, who in this case had more Moderation and
less Impudence than he; we call Heaven and Earth to record, and do Solemnly
declare the Protestant Cause to be herein Perfidiously betrayed.

There are those in the World, who being so Hardhearted as never to be willing
to forgive them that really, or in their Opinion only, have offended them; when
they say the Lord's Prayer, do leave out the fifth Petition, because they are
not willing to forgive them that Trespass against them, though they would have
God to forgive them their Trespasses; but our Blessed Savior, in his Divine
Wisdom, has so twisted them, that they must go together: There is no Pardon
for us, except we forgive others. Thus our Author, as we may reasonably
believe, does not join with the Church, though a pretended high Churchman, in
that Prayer of the Common Prayer Book, wherein we Pray God to forgive our
Persecutors and Slanderers; May be he will give the Reason why he does not?
That he has not nor ever had, as to himself, occasion to use that Prayer, for
he never was Persecuted or Slandered, having always been, and desirous to be,
on the Persecuting and Slandering side. This Man I produce as a Witness to
prove what I said of the Violence of the Spirit, and the Principles of some of
them, and I think his Evidence speaks home, and what I also said of their
Practice against Dissenters: In my weak Apprehension this Learned Pen had done
better and a more Praiseworthy thing, to have written against Socinians, but
them we do not mind, they are our Friends, and to make use of his words, herein
we are in a Levitical Slug, but as soon as a Nonconformist's Book, exhorting to
Union and Reformation, comes out, then Tooth and Nail against it, and would
condemn it to the Fite.

The long and the short of the Business is this, They are for Vengeance, we are
told P 3. something we must expect from an Injured, or so thinking himself,
Loyalist, and disturbed Privado: They are not for Peace or Reconciliation, as
P. 13. Trespasses of the first Magnitude must not be forgotten, nor petty
Injuries forgiven, P. 17. It Is no Christian Logic, to say it were better to
forget those things than to renew the Memory of them which continues Divisions;
for, Their Gospel-Talents must not be wrapped up in an Idle Napkin of Silence and
Oblivion, they must Preach and Evangelize the Jews (and Miscreants, and
Exquisite Impostors, and Assassines, or such Furious Assailants as
Presbyterians are, as they call us P. 33. and 43.) out of the Pale of the
Christian Church, P. 19. Schismatics and Factious, ibid. We are for Clashing
Destruction in Church and State, P. 5. In short, We are Rogues, Murderers,
Enemies to the Government, infected with Seditious Doctrines, P. 23. And what
else worse can be conceived of Men: He says much, but proves nothing at all;
he has learned the Maxim, Calumniare fortiter and aliquid haerebit: Do but
Slander boldly and something will stick: If he had given any Grounds, which he
cannot, for such things, we would have endeavored to answer him; but our true
and short answer to such Men is this, formerly made use of by another, Mentiris
impudentissime, Thou art a most Impudent Liar. In such a case, when Reason does
not prevail, these are the last Weapons to be made use of, we are for Peace,
but when we speak they are for War. Psalm. 120. 7.


Hereupon we have cause to make a Serious Reflection, we are traduced for what
we are not; they themselves declare they breath out after our Ruin and
Destruction, and we cannot but see what we must expect from them, if ever it
was in their Power to Undo and Murder us; this is clear out of several places
of the Pamphlet, If there be any Secular Care of the Scepter, if any Pious
Regard for the Mitre, if there be any Security for their present Majesty's, P.
3. Whence does all this arise, and to what does it tend? See Page 25. I am
afraid, he would say, I hope, e're long they will both, that is, both divided
Church-Parties, be upon the Bear, that is, the Dissenters. This is a Healing
Spirit, a Hellish one rather, which is the Author of Jealousies, Divisions and
Animosities; this threatening Noise would awake us if we were asleep, but latet
anguis in herba: For what we know there is a Design to work Troubles, thereby
to make way for a Beloved King James; they had rather Popery and Tyranny should
come in, than that we should be at Peace and enjoy our Liberty; Quietness we
are for, and they for War, for which I appeal, as before, to all their Sermons
upon such days; nay, we must be a Sacrifice to Love and Loyalty, Honor and
Honesty, Courage and Constancy, P. 4. Herein all is right, and nothing amiss:
The Wise Man often speaks of a Fool, one of the Characters he gives of him is
this, The way of a Fool is right in his own Eyes. Prove. 12. 15.


To speak such Language, is it not to move Sedition, to foment Division, to
blow the Trumpet of Civil War, and to be a Firebrand? It Is indeed to have a
Virulent Tongue; well has the Spirit of God spoken of and described such a
one, The Poison of Asps is under his Romans 3. 13, 14, 17.
Lips, his Mouth is full of Cursing and Bitterness, and the ways of Peace has
he not known. I am apt to believe, this Occasion about Anniversaries is but a
Pretense to vent out Malice, for it is hardly possible for a Man to be so
Idolizing and Doting upon the Ashes of one whom likely he never saw, and may be
never heard much of, but by means of biased Tongues and Pens: Observe him
well, and it will easily be found out, how all this Zeal of his, has for
Object the Living more than the Dead; that all his Affections are concentered
in one Male remaining in the Family, and that there is a King James in the
bottom; for one that has but common Sense and Reason, may perceive, how most
if not all these high-flown Churchmen are Jacobites, and shelter their Hatred
of the present Government under that Pretense. They now see, how of themselves
they are not able to bring him back again, therefore they would, if they can,
cause Disorders and put things in a Convulsion, that Confusion may accomplish
their Ends, and they to Fish the better in Troubled Water: But we hope, from
the Prudence of those that are concerned, they shall not carry the Point to the
Prejudice of those who once were so cruelly used by the Means and Influences of
that Abdicated King, that between him and them, there is necessarily an
unreconcilable Enmity: So that upon the account of and in Conformity to their
Hearty Affection and Interest, they will ever be ready with Lives and Fortunes,
and whatsoever is Near and Dear unto them, to oppose the Popish Tyrannical
Interest of that Man, and of all his Adherents, amongst whom, I think upon
reasonable Grounds, we may reckon our Author, who no doubt is not alone, but
there be many more that are of his Principles, though many be not so as he
seems to undertake for. Now I have done with him, and leave him to his Keeper.

I once more declare my Grief, that I have sometimes been engaged to speak
plainly; indeed hard words are quite out of my way, and contrary to my Nature,
but Necessity and the Rack have extorted them from me: However the Party that
brought it upon himself, may happen to be the better for it; and it may prove
to be no Injury, to pull a Man by the Hair, to save him from the Fire or
Drowning.

FINIS.
INstead of raking old Tales, as he does in his new Discovery, etc. which I am
not concerned to take notice of, and which only does Exasperate old Wounds and
Soars: I here set down something more to the purpose, namely, The Opinion of a
Sensible and Moderate Gentleman, whom I declare I neither know nor he me, as I
think, concerning our Author's Pamphlet and Behavior.

Of the Divisions and Animosities we speak of, we have but a very late Instance
in two Pamphlets lately published, viz. Some Observations upon the Thirtieth of
January and Twenty ninth of May; and the answer to it under this Title of, The
Reformer Racked, etc. I shall not presume to enter into the Merits of the
Cause, and whether such days ought to be kept in aeternum, the Public
Authority that ordered their Observance, is the best Judge of it: But I must
confess that I cannot but be grieved to hear from the Pulpit on those days
(generally speaking) nothing but Invectives, Railing Accusations and Abusive
Language, instead of Christian Exhortations to Repentance, Union and Charity: I
appeal to all the Sermons that have been published on that Subject -- Such I
may call the two Pamphlets I have but now mentioned, though I make a great
difference between them too: The Author of the former, though very much
mistaken in several of his Notions, and especially in Church-Ceremonies, seems
to be a good Man; but the Author of the latter, has broken all Bounds and Rules
of Humanity with Mankind; and perhaps never was there in a Pamphlet so much
Nonsense, and so much of Abusive Language, as in this; but what can be expected
from a Man, who in his second Page looks upon Calvinism as an Heresy, as
Damnable as Socinianism, Arrianism and Anabaptism? Such a Champion of our
Church deserves, I am sure, to be taken notice of some other way than by an
Observator, etc. Observator Vol. 7. Numb. 24. Saturday June 30. 1694.


