THE TRUE CHARACTER OF THE Spirit and Principles OF SOCINIANISM, Drawn out of
their Writings.

WITH Some Additional PROOFS of the Most Holy Trinity, of our Lord's, and of
the Holy Ghost's Divinity.

By J. GAILHARD, Gent.

They changed the Truth of God into a Lie, Romans 1.25. Therefore, Give them, O
Lord, What will thou give? Give them a Miscarrying Womb, and dry Breasts, Hos.
9.14. LONDON, Printed for J. Hartley, over against Gray's Inn in Holborn,
MDCXCIX.

THE PREFACE TO THE Christian READER.
ALL Prayers and Endeavors against the Abominations of the Times, have not
altogether been in vain, a kind of Curb having by the late Act been put upon
it; and if the Offenders be strictly punished, through God's Blessing we may
hope to see the Sins really suppressed; the Law, if not well kept, is but a
dead Letter, and becomes contemptible, but a strict Execution makes it useful
and effectual, which we promise our selves to see, by the Pious Care of a
Prince, whose Chief and most Glorious Title is, Defender of the True Christian
Faith; whilst Violent and Cruel Persecutions are raging abroad, and sad
Antichristian Impieties at home, who knows whether he be come to the Kingdom
for such a Time as this, to be an Eminent Instrument in God's Hands, to do that
Work?

God in an extraordinary manner has raised him upon the Throne of these Three
Kingdoms, and as he does nothing in vain, so we may well conceive it to be for
some extraordinary Ends. Therefore I now upon my Knees do most humbly beseech
Him, by whom Kings Reign, in a plentiful measure to give the King the Spirit of
Wisdom, Knowledge, and Understanding, and of the Fear of his Name; that he may
truly know what God, after the great things he has done for him, does now
expect from him, and to guide, direct, and with his helping Hand support Him in
bringing those Great Ends about.

HIS MAJESTY has given us Peace with Men, and we now humbly desire he would
endeavor to procure it with God, and cause the War we are at against Heaven,
to cease; which we cannot so much as hope for, as long as God's Great Name is
Profaned, his Son Dishonored, his Holy Spirit Blasphemed, his Word wrested
and Impiously ridiculed by a sort of Men in the World, who not only in private,
but openly with Tongue and Pen go about to pull our Holy Religion up by the
very Root, and to overthrow the Fundamentals of Christianity; who not only
proudly despise the Judgment of the whole Primitive Church, but that which is
infinitely worse, through their Impieties and Blasphemies, they Crucify again
the Lord of Glory, make the Wounds of Christ to bleed afresh; and who, to speak
in the Apostle's Words, Have trodden under Foot the Son of God, and counted the
Blood of the Covenant wherewith we are Sanctified, an Unholy thing, and have
done Despite unto the Spirit of Grace: That Holy Blood which at other times
speaks better things than that of Abel's, does now upon this Occasion cry loud
for Vengeance, because it is abominably profaned, and by the denial of the
Causes and Effects of its being shed, undervalued.

We thank God for the Prospect we have to see the Evil remedied through His
Majesty's wholesome Influences: The Life of our Laws, without which they are
insignificant, we hope to see derived from him; and, if I may be allowed to
make a Comparison in a thing which admits of none, as the Spirit of God moved
upon the Face of the Waters, to quicken and make them fruitful, so the
Breathings from the Throne, and the Motions of the Royal Authority, can infuse
an effective Virtue into our Acts of Parliament: For, as of a Bill to make a
Law, the King's Assent is necessary, without which it is but a dead Lump without
Form, and signifies nothing; so when it is passed, the Executive Power,
Originally in the King, is that which gives it Life and Strength, or else it is
dormant and languisheth. Now upon the present Account, far be it from us to
think that for want of commanding a due execution of the Laws, His Majesty will
ever suffer Blasphemy, Idolatry, Profaneness, and Immorality to be Blots and
Stains in his Reign.

His Majesty's Word we have for, and may depend upon it; insomuch that in case
the Act does not produce it is due Effect, as considering the Spirit of that
Odious Sect, some are of Opinion it will not, no doubt but that His Majesty,
without being prompted to it, will of himself be pleased to mind the Honor of
God, and of Religion. The Ground of our Hope and Confidence is this: At the
opening of the last Session of Parliament, the King in his Speech to both
Houses, promised to take care to suppress Profaneness and Immorality; which
afforded the Honorable House of Commons an Occasion to Address to His Majesty
concerning it; and His Majesty's Answer when 'twas presented, deserves to be
written in Letters of Gold: Thus it was -- Gentlemen, I cannot but be very well
pleased with an Address of this Nature, and will give immediately Directions in
the several Particulars you desire: But I could wish some more effectual
Provision were made for the suppressing those pernicious Books and Pamphlets
your Address takes notice of. The Work of Reformation is great, but the time
short, so it is necessary to begin it betimes, and follow it close.

No Man, as our Savior says, having put his Hand to the Plough, and looking
back, is fit for the Kingdom of God: Therefore no one that in his Station has
concerned himself in this good and just Cause, must draw back, but within the
Sphere of his Activity, must go on to promote it, and not be weary in well
doing: Before Men engage in a Matter, they ought to know why, and upon what
Grounds? But once being satisfied with its Justice and Goodness,
notwithstanding Difficulties and Oppositions, they are bound to continue for,
and not forsake it; for God in his due time will bring all to a happy end: Men
either must not believe, or else must own what they believe, and profess what
they own: He that comes with God's Word in his Mouth, needs not be ashamed or
afraid: For my part with the Royal Prophet I may say, I will speak of thy
Testimonies also before Kings, and will not be ashamed.

Books Printed for and sold by John Hartley, over against Gray's Inn in Holborn.
THE Blasphemous Socinian Heresy disproved and confuted: Wherein the Doctrinal
and Controversial parts of those Points are handled, and the Adversaries
Scripture and School-Arguments answered: With Animadversions upon a late Book,
called, Christianity not Mysterious. Humbly dedicated to both Houses of
Parliament. By J. Gailhard, Gent. 8 vo. Price 3 s. 6 d.

The Epistle and Preface to the Book against the Blasphemous Socinian Heresy,
vindicated; and the Charge therein against Socinianism, made good: In Answer to
two Letters. By J. Gailhard, Gent. Price 1 s.

Herodian's History of the Roman Emperors, containing many Strange and
Wonderful Revolutions of State in Europe, Asia, and Africa. Also their most
remarkable Embassies, Speeches, Antiquities, etc. Together with the most solemn
Ceremonies used at the Deification of the Roman Emperors; with a Character of
the Ancient Britains. Done from the Greek, by a Gentleman at Oxford.

Catalogus Universalis Librorum, in omni Facultate, Languaque Graeca
praesertim, insignium and rarissimorum non solum ex Catalogis Bibliothecarum
Bodleianae, Lugduno-Batavae, Ultrajectinae, Barberinae, Thuanae, Cordesianae,
Tellerianae, Slusianae, and Heinsianae, sed etiam ex omnibus fere aliis praelo
impressis, magno labor and sumptu, in usum Studiosorum collectus. Cura J. H.
Bibliopolae Londinensis.

The History and Fate of Sacrilege, discovered by Examples of Scripture, of
Heathens, and of Christians, from the beginning of the World continually to
this Day. By Sir Henry Spelman, Knight. Wrote in the Year 1632. A Treatise omitted
in the late Edition of his Posthumous Works, and now published for the Terror
of Evil Doers. To which is added, An Historical Account of the beginners of a
Monastic Life in Asia, Africa, and Europe. By Sir Roger Twisden, Knight and
Baronet. Price 4 s.

* There is now going to the Press, and will be speedily published, JVSTIN's
Abridgment of Trogus Pompeius's Universal History: With some Geographical and
Critical Annotations, and a Dissertation about the Author. Done into English,
for the Use of His Highness the Duke of Gloucester. By Mr. T. Brown.

THE True Character OF THE Spirit and Principles OF SOCINIANISM.
SOme Men in the World, without any ground but their own Fancy, presume to make
Panegyricks for themselves, and Mock-Apologies for Parliaments: But if such
have (not to say worse) the Confidence, which only that kind are capable of, to
give their Pamphlets the Titles of An Apology for the Parliament, humbly
representing, etc. I think I might upon better grounds now be allowed, before
these few Sheets, to prefix the Name of a Panegyric for the Parliament, by
reason of what that Honorable and Noble Assembly have lately done for the
Cause of God in general, the Interest of his Son in particular, and for the
Good of his Church: But as I know such returns to be below their Merits and
Desires, and far above my Skill to do it well, as 'twas not fit for every
Artist, only for Apelles, to draw Alexander's Picture; so I leave it for them
who will venture upon so Noble and hard a Task: For as I have a singular
Veneration for the Name of a Parliament, for fear of undervaluing it with not
answering the Dignity of the Subject, I shall content my self with mentioning
the Piety of those worthy Persons, who, having adopted that Cause, have
notwithstanding all Difficulties, Delays, and both direct and indirect
Oppositions, with so much Zeal, Care and Diligence carried it on, and been
instrumental in the Success, for which they justly deserve the Thanks of the
whole Christian Church, especially of that part which is within this Kingdom:
But that which is most of all, the great and gracious God, whom no Man ever
served in vain, will according to his Truth and Promise, (as I most humbly
beseech him to do it), plentifully reward them for the good Service, which,
according to their Power, they have done him: And as in this World there is
nothing so good, but it may admit of some Additional Degrees of Perfection, so
we hope, hereafter, God, who, when he will, can easily incline the Hearts, and
overruled the Counsels of Men, will be pleased further to make use of them as
happy Instruments in his hands, to work a thorough Reformation both in
Doctrines and Practices. In the mean while, we must not be like those who are
so intent and greedy after what they desire and have not, that they are
unmindful to give God thanks for what they enjoy: But seeing, through his
Mercy, there is a step toward putting a Curb and Restraint upon Christ's
Enemies, so that we hope, if a due Care be taken to execute what has been
Enacted, and prevent every way the increase of Fuel both at home and from
abroad; Blasphemy, Impiety, Profaneness, and Immorality shall be compelled to
stop their mouth, and hide their face: Therefore, for what we have for the
present, and hope for the future, let us join our Voices in that Heavenly
Consort of Angels upon the Account of our Savior's Birth, which the last Act
ought to renew the Memory of, Luke 2.14.
Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men.

It Is usual in the World sometime to be disappointed, at least to fall short of
one's Expectation, chiefly when the things we are about do cross the Sins and
Humors of the Times; for by reason of a natural Antipathy between Good and
Evil, Truth and Falsehood, the best things meet often with the greatest
Oppositions, and upon all occasions there is between those two Extremes a
Conflict, till God turns the Scales, which he never fails to do, but will have
us to wait for it, and not be weary in well doing; we must never be so
presumptuous, as to go about prefixing God a time, or prescribing him Ways and
Means, or attempt to put him out of the Course of his wise Providence, because
he does so to try the Faith, and exercise the Patience of his People, as he did
formerly, by sending false Prophets among them, and thus to make them depend
upon him; yet in the mean time, he will have them to use Means, and to omit
nothing that may contribute to bring to a happy end those things which belong
to his Service, which we ought to stick to, and upon any account whatever, not
to suffer our selves to be moved therefrom; one Beam of God's Favor, is
infinitely to be minded more than all the Smiles and Frowns of the World.

Let not Christ's Adversaries say, that what is done against them is by Power;
for though it be by Authority, still it is according to Justice, there have been
Reasons and Arguments enough, which yet remain unanswered, offered, if they had
been disposed to receive them; that Great God, whose Person and Grace they
despise, and whose Patience they tired out, has begun to make use of that
Humane Authority under him, which they would have excluded from meddling with
them about Matters of Religion, in some degree to vindicate his Honor, and
assert his Truth. In what follows, I hope abundantly to make the Parliament's
Panegyric, when I have showed what a horrid, and upon many accounts,
abominable Monster of complicated Heresies they fought against and wounded: And
herein I must beforehand prepare the pious Reader to see such things as will
strike him with Horror, I am sure, it has in many places made my hair stand
on end; all drawn out of their own Writings; and though I shall avoid being long
in Quotations, for as to that, I could say much more than I do, yet I shall, by
the Grace of God, say enough to make good upon them the Charge of Blasphemy in
the highest degree, and nothing in it but what I do or can prove, and leave it
to be judged of by the Reader; and withal I solemnly declare, as in the
Presence of God, that I do not write out of any Self-end, or Worldly
Consideration whatsoever, but merely out of Conscience, Love to the Truth, for
the Honor of God, and the Cause of the Lord Jesus; for it is our Duty as we are
Christians, to abhor all that is said or done against our Savior, and to look
upon all that do so, to be Enemies to God, and Seducers of Souls. Christ is the
Object of my Faith, the Ground of my Hope, and the Desire of my Soul.

God's Nature and Essential Attributes, I intend by the Grace of God to begin
with, which Nature is Spiritual; for, Joh. 4.24.
says our Blessed Savior, God is a Spirit: therefore Moses gave the People
this strict Warning, Deuter. 4.15.
Take ye therefore good heed unto your selves, for ye saw no manner of
similitude on the day that the Lord spoke unto you in Horeb, Ex. 20.4.
etc. therefore make not any likeness of him, of any thing that is in Heaven
above, in the earth below, or in the water under the earth; upon this. Account
God does more than once expostulate thus, Isa. 40.18. and 46.5.
To whom then will ye liken God, or what likeness will ye compare unto him? But
against this sprung up a sort of Heretics called Anthropomorphites, because
unto God they really and properly appropriated the Shape and Members of Human
Body, when they should know how such things are improperly spoken of him, only
thereby to condescend to our weak Capacities, and to signify some of his
Proprieties, or some special thing he does effect; as Eyes and Ears to denote
his Omniscience, his Hands his Power, etc. For all this, Socinians have not
been ashamed to give God a Body; thus Conrad. Vorstius de Deo and Attrib. p.
210.
one of them says, Caeterum nihil vetat, etc. Nothing forbids us to attribute
a Body to God, if we take the word Body in a larger Signification.

There has also been another kind of Heretics called Anthropopathites,
because unto God they appropriated Human Passions, and thought they were really
so in him; a thing so much against the Analogy of Faith so absurd and unworthy
of God, which is to affirm there are actually in God Afflictions, Disturbances,
and Commotions, as are Anger, Grief, to repent, etc. which is improperly said,
to condescend to our Weakness, and make us understand the Effects of Justice,
Power, Mercy and Wisdom of God upon the Creature, and not any such Affections
upon him, which in our Nature are Effects of Frailty and Imperfections: What
God speaks (...), improperly and after the manner of Man, must by us be
understood (...), in a manner becoming and worthy of God; however one of their
greatest Crellius de Deo and Attrib. page 321, 323.
Men says, That the Passions in Scripture attributed unto God, are certain
Stirrings and Motions of his Will, yet so that when he is said to be grieved,
angry, and to repent, such unpleasant things without, do not so affect and
trouble him, but that he still continues in that Eternal Pleasure which he
enjoys in himself. Though he be not so brazen-faced as to deprive God of the
Pleasure he has in himself, yet he would insinuate, as if he really was moved,
stirred and disturbed at some things; this he farther adds about Grief, Est
affectio, etc. There is in God a displeasing Sense and Affection arising out of
this, That his good Actions through the Fault of others, have a most unworthy
Success: What sort of impious Notions of God are these? Sometimes in Scriptures
are such improper Expressions as ought not literally to be taken, or else
Contradictions and Absurdities would follow; a thing not without Blasphemy to
be thought of the Spirit of God, who is the Author of infallible Truth, by
whose Direction they were written: This I could out of the Word, in several
Cases, give Instances of, but now shall do it only in one, which is that of a
Prosopopoeia, or Fiction of Persons, as we read in the Prophecy, where here and
there are several Flowers of Divine Rhetoric, Hear, O heavens, and give ear, O
earth: Heaven and Earth have properly no Ears, Isa. 1.2.
so cannot hear, but this is a figurative manner of speaking, and as they
cannot hear, so one would think it to be in vain to speak to inanimate things
without Soul, and Understanding; yet God in his infinite Wisdom thinks it fit
to use that way, which Men, who are not wiser than God, may not gainsay; Also,
thou son of man, Ezekiel. 36.1.
says God to his Prophet, prophecy unto the mountains of Israel, and say, Ye
mountains of Israel, hear the word of the Lord; and somewhat lower the word is
also directed to the hills, to the mountains, to the rivers, to the valleys,
ver. 4.
etc. Certainly this is not literally to be understood, no more is it when
Members of the Body, or Passions of the Soul are attributed unto God.

These Opinions of Members and Passions in God, do overthrow his Simplicity,
which is an Essential and Incommunicable Attribute of Divine Nature, whereby
it is free from all manner of real Composition, which is that whereby, out of
several really different things, a thing is really made one, whereof
Philosophers assign many kinds, as of Matter and Form; Thus a Man consists of
Soul and Body: Then of Subject and Accident, as is Color upon a Wall, or
Learning in a Man; the third is of Act and Power, as in every Creature which
may be made what it is not, and cease to be what it is: Another is of the Genus
and the Difference properly so called, as when a generical Nature is added to a
Difference which reduces it to a certain Species or Kind: The last is a nice
one, called, of Esse and Essentia, or of Being and Essence, when a thing is
said to be by her Essence: But in God are none of all these, for all that is in
God is God himself.

This making God subject to Passions, does also overthrow another Attribute of
his Nature, namely, his Immutability; for if sometimes he be pleased, sometimes
angry, and at other times grieved, he ceases to be what he was before, and
becomes what he was not, which is to father Changeableness upon the
Unchangeable God with whom is no changeableness, Jam. 1.17.
neither shadow of turning: Who is such in his Nature, which always is
Immortal, Eternal: In his Place, for ever he fills up all things, and never
goes out of himself: But to be short, these Passions in God overthrow his
perfect Happiness, Self-sufficiency, and Independency, which all are Essential
Attributes of the Godhead: What an Impiety then is it, for Socinians to shoot
at so high a Mark as God is?

But they go further, and blasphemously deny God's Omnipresence, and
consequently his Infiniteness and Immensity: Now God is present every where;
first by his Essence, 1 Kings 8.27.
for thereby he fills up all things, the heaven, and heaven of heavens cannot
contain him: And whither shall I go from thy spirit? Psalm. 139.7, 8, 9, 10.
or whither shall I flee from thy presence? etc. God is also every where by his
Knowledge, Heb. 4.13.
for nothing is hidden from it, for all things are naked and opened unto the
eyes of him with whom we have to do: God is also every where by his Power and
Operation, 1 Cor. 12.6.
for he works all in all: Yet for all these, a Socinian Crellius de Deo, p.
278.
Author denies God to be every where, for he would not have him to be amidst
filthy and defiled things, as if his Holiness was thereby in danger of being
defiled: But, I ask, is the Sun less pure, or is it stained for shining upon
Filth and Dunghills, or is it thereby infected? God they would confine in
Heaven, which indeed is the Chief Seat of his Glory, and as the Word says, Is
his Throne, and the Earth is his Footstool. And as God in his Glory is in
Heaven, Isa. 66.1.
in his terrible Justice is in Hell, so in Earth he is both in his Mercy and
Justice: Thus he is every where.

God's Eternity they dare not openly to deny, but the Nature of it they very
much corrupt, for God's Eternity is his own Existence, which is necessary, and
by reason of most supreme Perfection cannot not be; Vorstius in not. ad These.
7. disp. de Deo.
therefore what one of the worst of Men writes, is false, Inanis Logomachia,
etc. It is an idle dispute about words for any one to deny Eternity to be the
same with eternal time; for Time is a Contingent and Duration, but Eternity
does denote a necessary and unmeasured Duration, therefore Crellius runs upon
as bad ground, when he says, That God's Eternity has Parts; when it is
altogether indivisible, and seeing God's Eternity is God himself Eternal, it
admits of no Accident, and therein is no Priority nor Posteriority, as it is in
time.

As to God's Omniscience, they would confine it within certain Bounds, for,
says one of them, Crellius, cap. 24. p. 202.
it is not extended unto things which cannot be known by Nature: So he denies
the Determination of future Contingents: And Praelect. Theol. p. 547. and alibi.
Socinus, though he owns a Divine Prediction of some things to come, yet will
not attribute it to God's Prescience, but only to a Divine Decree. But their
abominable Impieties about these Matters are plainly and abundantly to be seen
in Protest. Anti-Vorst page 361, 362.
one of their Authors, whose Book King James caused to be burnt here by the
Hangman: Against the Author and Book he published something of his own, and did
write to the States General, to turn him out of his Place of
Divinity-Professour at Leyden, and to banish him, for he knew it to be the Duty
of Princes to suppress Blasphemy, and punish Blasphemers: He made an Extract,
written with his own Hand, of some of this Man's blasphemous Impieties, and
sent it to his then Ambassador in Holland, by him to be presented to the said
States General, Vorstius, p. 112.
as we find them among his Works, one of which is his giving God a Body, as
already mentioned. The 2d. is this, Non satis igitur, p. 232.
etc. They who affirm God both in Essence and Will, wholly to be unchangeable,
want a due circumspection. Further, p. 237.
nusquam Scriptum legimus, etc. We read no where God's Substance to be simply
Insinite, but many things there are which seem to have a contrary sense:
Another is this, Magnitudo nulla, etc. No Magnitude is actually infinite,
therefore God himself is not. There are three things more of the same Stamp
observed by that King; p. 308, 441, 171.
one about the Determination of future Contingents from Eternity; Another for a
general Science of God, without the special one, of things to come: And the
last is, That many things may happen in the World without God's Foreknowledge.
Thus those Wretches do meddle not only against the Persons of the Godhead, but
also against the Nature and Attributes of it. But the Orthodox and Learned King
James, to suppress Blasphemy and Heresy, burnt the Books that contained it;
for besides that of Vorstius, he caused that of Bertius, for the Apostasy of
Saints, also to be burnt; whence we may infer, That if the Authors had been
within his Dominions, he would have punished them. And some Years after the
Racovian Catechism, which is the Socinian Gospel, was by the Parliament
condemned to be burnt.

They write and act against the Three Persons both singly and jointly; first,
against the Father, with denying him to have been such from Eternity; for they
affirm he had no Son from Eternity, without which he could not properly nor
actually be a Father; thus by a new Relation of Paternity, in time he was made
that which he had not been from Eternity. Secondly, against the Son, by denying
his Divinity and Eternal Generation, which is the Foundation of Christian
Religion, 1 Cor. 3.11.
and other foundation can no man lay than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ.
Not that he is a mere Man, for the Church of God is not built upon Man, Matt.
16.18.
but that He is the Son of the living God: For upon that Truth which Peter made
solemn Confession of, he said, Upon this rock, that I truly and properly am the
Son of the Living God, I will build my Church; wherefore the Apostle calls him
the chief cornerstone. 1 Pet. 2.6.
Thirdly, Against the Holy Ghost, whose Divinity and Personality they also
deny, though Scripture appropriates to him (as I showed elsewhere and somewhat
lower shall speak of) the Names, Attributes, Works, and Worship proper to the
only True God: We know that in Scripture the Name Holy Ghost and Spirit of God,
are sometimes improperly taken for the Gifts of the Holy Ghost, or for the
Virtue of God, but withal when it is properly spoken, which happens often, then
it signifies the Third Person of the most Holy Trinity, therefore he is
represented as the Father's and Son's Ambassador, whose secret Councils he
knows, and by whom he is said to be sent, and so Faithful one, that he speaks
not of himself, but what he hears, that he speaks, and he is called the
Comforter, Paraclete and Advocate, to signify a Person and not a Virtue.

But as those Blasphemers are not satisfied to prevaricate against every Person
of the most Holy Trinity, separately, they also do it together and jointly
against the Three, for though the Word of God affirms that in the Unity of
Nature there are Three, Named, the Father, the Word, and Holy Ghost, where by
the Word, John 5.7.
the Son must be Understood, for Father and Son are relatives, and as the
Father is a Person, so must the Son, so must the Holy Ghost; yet they deny the
most Holy Trinity asserted in Scriptures, and confirmed to have been the belief
of the Whole Primitive Church, as contained in the Apostolical, Nicene and
Athanasian Creeds, and in the Constantinopolitan, wherein the others were
Comprehended, and owned in the Confession of Faith of all Christian Churches in
the World, which was and is still made the first Article of Faith, of One God
in Three Persons, yet against these great Lights they impiously say, Catech.
Racov.
Sententiam eorum, etc. the Opinion of these who do Attribute Divine Nature
unto Christ, is contrary not only to sound Reason, but also to the Word of God,
and they do grossly err, who affirm that not only the Father but also the Son
and the Holy Ghost are Persons in one Godhead, and Vorstius.
one says, the Arguments by the Ancient Fathers and Modern Divines made use of
for the Eternal Generation of Christ, are either Fallacious or Frivolous, and
Smalcius ad nov. monst. part 2. c. 22. p. 198.
another calls them Ratiunculae Nugatoriae Trifling words; the same in another
place affirms that Exam. 100. Err^r. Er. 26.
Christ before his Resurrection, was not perfectly Christ, or Son of God, or
God. And elsewhere that Christ's Divinity consists in his sitting at the Right
Hand of the Father, Sessio Christi ad dextram Dei, est Christi divinitas.

I begin to tremble when I think of what I am just now entering upon, but it is
fit they should be known in their own Colors: Here with Horror, read how
Blasphemonsly those Hellish and Abominable Monsters, as are Servetus,
Dudithius, Socinus himself, and several others of those wicked Men, so much
admired by Unitarians, writ of the most Holy and most Blessed Trinity; they
call it, Monstrum, Tricipitem Cerberum, Tricorporem Gerionem Deum fictitium ac
Sophisticum, Idolum novum, Fabulosam Chymeram, humanum Commentum, Diabolicam
Idaeam, Babelis Turrim; of many more, I shall add the following, which makes
the Pen drop out of my Hand: The most adorable Trinity is called, Blasphemum
dogma ex imo orco per Filium perditionis virtute Satanae, gentium Ecclesiis
obtrusum. I am at a stand, whether or not to put this in English, which though
it makes my Heart ache, and defiles my Pen, yet to the end every one which
understands no Latin, may abhor such transcendent Blasphemies, I say, The most
Holy Trinity they call a Monster, a three Headed Cerberus, a Geryon with three
Bodies, a Forged and Sophistical God, a new Idol, a Fabulous Chymera, a Human
Invention, a Devilish Idea, a Tower of Babel, a Blaspemous Doctrine by the Son
of Perdition, and power of Satan, drawn out of the very bottom of Hell, and
obtruded upon the Church of the Gentiles. After this, Socinians must not find
it strange, if I, who through God's Grace am a Christian, do abhor and detest
those Principles which do overthrow the Christian Religion, to set up a new one
of their own, and if I cannot be much in Charity with those, who are for such
Impieties and Blasphemies. Though what I have already said be too much, yet to
show how they break all Rules, and do more and more sink into the Mire, and if
not worse, yet are as bad as the Devil himself, for Non audet Stygius Pluio
tentare quod audet, Effraenis Socinus; there they will not stop, for he must
run fast whom the Devil drives. I shall upon the matter add one thing or two
more out of their Hellish Writings, one of them writing against one of his
Adversaries, takes an occasion to fall upon Austin Dudi^h. Epist. ad Bezam in
Socin. Oper. Tom. 1. p. 525.
Tuum tibi Augustinum, etc. I shall speak to thee of thy Austin. -- For having
said many things quite contrary to the Gospel, he also has Published this
Eostatical Fancy of three Gods, -- they the first drunk of this Wine,
afterward they made others drunken with it, so to them is happened what
usually befalls Men, who when their sight is troubled, instead of one they see
three or more. The same in another place says, Epist. ad Petrum Carol. p. 538.
Tricipitem Ter geminum etc. The Apostles never knew this three Headed and
threefold God, nor the whole Orthodox Church; this is impudently to tell this
lie; who can without Indignation read such things? Do such Miscreants deserve
to breath God's Air? What that Man says, Socin. Animadv. 10. in assert. Theol.
Coll. posnan.
Socinus Subscribes to when he says, Deum quidem, etc. The whole Universal
Church owns that there is one God, but that it does reverence Unity in Trinity,
and Trinity in Unity, no Church of God may by any means own, seeing it is
altogether a Humane Invention, which Divine Truth does every way speak against:
After this, ever since our Savior's days the Church has been in Ignorance and
Darkness, nay, in a great and damnable Error about these Fundamentals of our
Religion, but this is not all.

For as to our Blessed Savior's Incarnation, or the Son of God being made
Flesh, they impiously Ridicule and Revile it: Ostorod. Instit. c. 17. p. 96.
One calls it Purum, etc. A mere Porgery of Superstitious Men. Then the
Evangelists and Apostles, by whose means the Holy Ghost conveyed those Divine
Truths to us, were Forgers of Lies; thus they set Hand and Seal to what said
that Impious Pope Leon X. the Fable about Jesus Christ has procured the Church
great Riches. Another calls that high and adorable Mystery Smalc. Refut.
Graveri de Incarn^t.
Dogma, etc. A most Monstrous Doctrine, unworthy to be received by the
Christian Church: And the same in a direct opposition to what St. John says,
The Word was made Flesh; has this, Exam. 100 Err. Err. 49.
Verbum non est Caro factum; the Word was not made Flesh, and to say the
contrary, is an Error; and that vile Man thinks he can say any thing against
Christ, and in opposition to Scripture, for in the same Book he adds, Christus,
etc. Christ from his Birth was not full of Grace and Truth: Again, Christ at
his Death ceased to be Son of God, Error. 50.
and therein he calls it a Fable, Tanta est Fabula, etc. So great is this Fable
of the Union of two Natures, also, a Dream of old Women; Somnium anile.
many more such Impieties I could quote, but it makes my Heart sick and amazed
thereat, strikes me with Horror, and makes the Pen drop out of my Hand.

About the Holy Ghost they hold three Fundamental Errors: First, They deny him
to be God, though in several places Scripture simply and absolutely calls him
so. Acts. 5.3, 4.
Peter said to Ananias, Why has Satan filled thine heart to lie to the Holy
Ghost; in the next verse it is said Thou have not ly'd unto Men, but unto God:
These last Words explain the first, how to lie to the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 3.16.
is to lie to God. Paul is another Evidence, when he says, Know ye not that ye
are the Temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells in you. That Spirit
which dwells in them, is the same true God, whose Temple they are; farther,
as God is every where, Psalm. 139.7.
so is the Holy Ghost. Whither shall I go from thy Spirit, says David, which
comes to this, I can go no where but there he is; so the Holy Ghost is
Infinite, and none but God is such, Romans 8.9.
and the Spirit of God dwells in you, as he does in every Believer, and as
there are Believers of all Nations, Ages, Sexes, Qualities, etc. in the World,
so the Holy Ghost, who is in them all, is all the World over, and so God;
absolute Eternity belongs to God, and the Holy Ghost is Eternal too; as we have
it thus, Heb. 9.14. 1 Cor. 2.10.
Christ through the Eternal Spirit offered himself; and who but God can know
all things, whether of Men, or of God? But the Spirit searches all things, yea
the deep things of God. The Work of the Creation is proper to God, and
incommunicable to the Creature, which cannot be both Creator and Creature, to
Create, imports in him that does, an infinite Power to fill up an infinite
Space between a nothing and something, which no Creature is capable of, he who
is to all others the Author of their Beings, must need have his own of himself,
and that is God, for he that built all things is God; Psalm. 33.6. Job. 26.13.
now the Holy Ghost made the World, for as, By the Word of the Lord were the
Heavens made, so all the Host of them by the breath, Spirit of his Mouth; to
this purpose it is said, by his Spirit he has garnished the Heavens. And in the
History of the Creation, Genesis 1.2.
we read how that same Spirit moved upon the face of the Waters to give Life,
Motion, and make them Fruitful; besides, none but God can bestow the Spiritual
and Heavenly gifts of Grace, but the Holy Ghost is the Distributer of them, for
he divides to every Man severally as he will, 1 Cor. 12.4, 11.
that is independently as of his own, and without giving any Accounts;
farthermore, the Ruling of the Church, appointing of Apostles and other
Ministers, and accordingly he endu'd the Apostles, and on the Day of Pentecost,
filled them with Gifts to qualify them for their work, and the Holy Ghost
said, separate me Barnabas and Saul, for the work whereunto I have called them.
Acts. 13.2.
'Twas God's work, and 'twas God who appointed them, so he not only gave them
Commission to go, but also appointed them the Field where to sow the Seed of
the Word, Chap. 16.6, 7.
for the Holy Ghost did forbid them to preach the word in Asia, though they had a
mind to it, then they would have gone to Bithynia, but the Spirit suffered them
not; again, Paul tells the Elders of the Church of Ephesus, that The Holy Ghost
had made them Overseers over that Flock. Chap. 20.28.
In sew Words, all Offices and Gifts in the Church he absolutely disposes of as
to him seems good. Besides, we must take notice of the Glorious Titles given
him in Scripture applyable to no Creature, as are the Spirit of Truth, the
Spirit of Adoption, John. 15.26. Romans 8.15 Chap. 1.4. Tit. 3.5. Matthew. 12.28.
Romans 9.1. Matthew. 18.9. 2 Cor. 13 14. John. 5.7. Matthew. 12.31.
the Spirit of Sanctification, and the Spirit of Renewing or Regeneration, and
by whom Miracles, as Casting out of Devils, are wrought, furthermore, how
Divine Worship, Honor, and Prayer is due, and rendered unto the Holy Ghost;
thus Paul calls upon him, as he who knew the Hearts: And in the Form of
Baptism, in the Apostolical Blessing, he is equally called upon with the Father
and the Son, and equally concerned with them in bearing Record in Heaven;
besides, the Holy Ghost must be God, seeing The Sin of Blasphemy against the
Holy Ghost shall never be forgiven, being the most Abominable and Damnable of
all; hence I conclude the Holy Ghost equally to be God with the Father, and
with the Son.

Their second Error is to deny the Holy Ghost to be a Person, but seeing, as we
already proved he is God of the same Nature with the Father and the Son, he
must be a Person, as indeed the Proprieties of a Person are Attributed unto
him, for in our Savior's Conception he Acted and Sanctified the Virgins Womb;
in his Baptism he appeared in the visible shape of a Dove, and of cloven
Tongues in the Day of Pentecost; in his name we are equally Baptized with the
Father's and the Son's. He sent the Apostles; Romans 8.26.
He makes intercession for us; besides that, he does create and work Miracles,
and to none but a Person it does belong, and is proper so to act and so to do.
Of this Error of theirs, there is another branch; for they would not have the
Holy Ghost to be a Person of the Godhead, distinct from the Father and from the
Son, but the contrary does appear, John. 15.26.
for in Scripture he is called the Spirit of the Father and of the Son, he is
sent by the Father, and by the Son; he is distinguished from the Father, and
from the Son, by a personal Property to proceed, as he is expressly called
another from the Father, and from the Son, The Father will give you another
Comforter, Chap. 14.16.
Says our Savior, that is another from the Father and from me.

The Heretic Macedonius denied the Divinity and Personality of the Holy Ghost,
and affirmed it to be only a Virtue and Power whereby the Smalc. Exam. Err. 157.
Err. 132. and 137.
Father and the Son do work, which Fundamental Error Socinians borrowed of him,
Spiritum Sanctum, etc. says one of them, The Holy Ghost is in God a Propriety,
or Attribute, as are Wisdom and Justice. Furthermore, The Holy Ghost is not
one, but many, of inequal Dignity; because there are different Gifts he would
set up different Spirits, 1 Cor. 12.4.
though the Apostle says positively, There are diversity of Gifts, but the same
Spirit. We own as we did before, how according to an unusual, improper and
figurative way, sometimes the word Spirit signifies the Gift and Workings of
the Holy Ghost, but when it is properly taken, then it signifies the third
Person in order of the Godhead, partaker of the Nature, therefore called God,
as proved: Another Socinian calls the Holy Ghost Virtutem illam, etc,
Schlichting. in Simbol. p. 99.
That Virtue whereby God particularly sanctifies those Men which are dear to
him. And so all along he runs on upon that perversely contrived Notion.

Their third Error about the Holy Ghost, is to deny him to be the only
sufficient cause of our Conversion and Regeneration, though as said before, he be
called, the Spirit of Regeneration, John. 3.5.
and our Regeneration is by our Savior called to be born of the Spirit; but
Socinians, who mostly cross Scriptural Truths, are of another mind, for says
one, quod; etc, What Frantzius says, Smalc. cont. Frantz. disp. 8.
that the Holy Ghost alone by his Virtue and Operation does all these ( viz.
the inward assent to God's Word, our Conversion to God, the knowledge of
Christ, and Faith in him) is false. How easily do that People give one the lie,
that same says, that our Regeneration may not be called the work of God alone,
but it depends upon Man's Will and Acting. So that great work of Conversion is
divided between God and Man, whereof all the advantage is made to be on Man's
side, for Man has the Negative Vote, he may receive or reject, but God not so;
thus Man's Salvation is at his own command.

Thus far we have spoken of the Nature, Volkel de Creat. Morosov. cont. Smiglec.
Attributes and Persons of the Godhead; now as to God's Works: Him they deny to
have made the World out of nothing, but of a Matter without Form, which is to
bring into Divinity the Materia prima of Philosophers; but I ask, did that
Matter exist before the Creation of the World? If so, then it was from
Eternity, for in Scripture to be before the World, and to be from Eternity, are
Synonimous, and signify the same, and this is to join in Opinion with those
who hold the World to have been Eternal, which is a part ante to match God's
Eternity, and also to make it Eternal a part post. This also strikes at his
Almightiness, as if he could not have made something out of nothing, which
properly is Creation.

I elsewhere discoursed abundantly against their over boldly presuming upon
God's Word, with submitting it to their Fancies, by them mis-called Reason:
When they consult it, it is not with an intent thereby to be guided, and submit
their Judgment to its Decision, but only with wresting it, and forcing unusual
and not natural Senses, to make of it a Stalking-horse, and to serve their
wrong Ends; and herein they are so self-conceited, and so much abound in their
own sense, as to reject the help of other Men's Learning, Labor, and Industry;
For, says their Socin. Tom. 1. p. 344.
Master, Non attendendum est, etc. We must not mind what Men teach and believe,
or what heretofore they taught and believed, whatsoever, or how many soever
they are or have been: What a pride is this? Neither Prophets nor Apostles, or
Evangelists excepted, though immediately inspired of God; and elsewhere he
would scorn to own any Judge of Controversies, whether single Man, or such a
body of Men as the Church is, which certainly God in these Matters has left
some Authority with, according unto his Word; but he is of another mind when he
says, Quod quaeris, etc. Epist. 3. ad And. Dudith.
To what you ask, who is to be the Judge of Controversies about Holy Things? I
answer, without us there is no need of another Judge than God and Christ: This,
in plain terms is to make themselves the sole Judges, for God and Christ speak
to us by the Prophets and Apostles. Their Endeavors of reconciling Jews,
Mahometans, and other Anti-Trinitarians, to the Christian Religion, with
removing what therein gives them offense, though never so much to the
Overthrowing of the Fouudation thereof, is a clear Evidence of their setting up
themselves as Judges in those Matters: If they had gone about to convert them,
it had been very well, and Christian-worthy, but not so, when for sinister Ends
of their own, they would only mince, and trim with them.

Scripture we Christians call the Infallible Rule of Faith and Practice: Now in
Obedience and Regard to God, and according unto sound Reason, to the directive
and decisive Authority of this Rule, we who are so fallible ought to submit our
Judgments to, and yield Obedience of Faith: It Is very unreasonable to make
every one's Reason a Judge in Matters of Religion, thus there shall be so many
Men, so many Judges: yet in the World are so many ignorant unlearned, carnal,
prepossessed with Prejudices, blind, wordly, obstinate, wicked and deprived of
the Spirit of God; here is a great Number and Diversity of Judges, but how can
they be Judges of things which they do not understand? about these Matters
another Error of theirs is, That they would not have the Doctrines of Faith to
be drawn by Consequences out of Scripture; for, say they, it requires Reason
which all are not capable of; therefore say I, we do not allow every one to
draw those Consequences: Neither is their Argument good, because, though Reason
be necessary to Knowledge, yet it is not as if it were the Foundation, but as
it is the Instrument of knowledge, therefore the Word is not Preached to
Children, to mere Naturals, and Mad People: besides that the Light not of
Nature but of Grace is the Principle of this Knowledge of Divine Matters, which
the Unlearned as well as the Learned do Understand, not by the Light of Natural
Reason, but of Divine Revelation. Now I say, that a Conclusion well deduced
from premises is also true, because virtually contained in the premises, and
it is most certain that in the Word several great Truths are proved by deduced
Consequences, as is one of the Fundamental Articles of our Faith, Matthew. 22.31,
32. Out of Exodus 3.6. Matthew. 22, 44, 45. Out of Psalm. 110.1. 1 Cor. 2.13.
the Resurrection of the Dead, so our Savior proves his Divinity, so does
Paul, and many more such things, and Scripture we must compare with Scripture,
for according to the saying -- quae non prosunt singula, juncta juvant; for
that which is darker or seems so in one place, will appear clearer and plainer
in another; comparing says Paul of himself, spiritual things with spiritual.

But here upon the point of Holy Scripture, I must not omit to take Notice of
the Blasphemous expressions of one of their great Men and a stiff stickler for
his Master Socinus's Opinions, Smalc. Exam. 100. Err. err. 16.
Christians ought little to care what the Prophets say of the Worship of one
God: according to this we must not mind what Prophets say, though never so
Important, as is the thing in question the Worship of one God; so there is a
door made open for Idolatry, and a breach of the first precept of the Law: but
those setters forth of strange Gods, affirm we may Worship one who by Nature is
not God, not supreme nor independent: but I intend by the Grace of God to speak
more at large of this in another place of my discourse; but the Man would not
have us to mind what the Prophets, or what God says by the Prophets; this is a
bold stroke of a pen against the Old Testament, he that is so saucy with the
Old, can soon be so with the New, and so against all Revealed Religion: but
because it is fit for me to show upon what occasion he says it, I must pass to
another point and say few Words to it, the more because this hits our Socinians
who call themselves Unitarians, in that place the question is between the
strict Socinians and the sect of Davidians, whether or not Christ should be
Worshipped and Prayed to, which Socinus was for, though indeed to little
purpose, only as a Medium, as Tom. 2. p. 772.
he says and in Relation to God, but Francis David against; now Socinus and
his Adherents were very strict and positive for their Opinion such as it is,
Epist. 3. ad Radecium. Tom. 1. p. 391.
he himself is large upon it, and there says, de re omnium maxima, etc. it is
the greatest point of all in our Religion, and somewhat lower he adds, noli
igitur rogo and obsecro, etc. do not I beseech you oppose a most clear Truth,
but own the most excellent Mystery and foundation of Christian Religion, here
by the by, take Notice how contrary to some of the Gang, he calls Mystery
something in our Religion: and Epist. ad Synod. Waegrov.
elsewhere to an Assembly of Antitrinitarians he says, they ought in their
Churches to maintain the Adoration and Invocation of Christ, for, says he, if
it be despised, Judaism nor Epicurism or Atheism cannot be kept out, and their
Catec. Racov. p. 115. eos prorsus non esse Christianos
Catechism says of those Men who pray not to Christ and hold he must not be
adored, they are no Christians at all, seeing they really have not Christ, whom
they deny in deed, though dare not do it in Words. This hits home the
Unitarians, let them Answer it as they can. But to say all, though Socinus had,
as you read, so strongly pressed that point, yet Epist. ad Enjedin. Tom. 1. p.
485.
elsewhere he reckons it among indifferent things such as God in his Word has
neither commanded nor forbidden, and so not altogether necessary.

It is very strange how one can be for the Adoration of Christ, yet
Blasphemously to call him, Smalc. exam. err. 100.
a made God or a deisied man, a God of the second order, a God subordinate to
the supreme One; but after what he says in the same Book we must wonder at
nothing from him, Err. 8.
non est certum, etc. it is not certain that God is precisely to be adored for
his Divine Nature, and elsewhere Err. 15. non est certum, etc.
to Worship one Only God who is supreme God by Nature and independent, is
somewhat to Judaize and deny the Christian Religion; nay he goes further and
says, Err. 17. Angelis qui sunt dij. etc.
No man may deny that Divine Worship may be, and has under the Old Testament,
really been rendered to Angels which are heavenly Gods. After this distinction
there are also hellish Gods. Further, God may Command that every Angel, be
Worshipped for a God, but I am sure God never will, for he never contradicts
himself, is not this perfect Idolatry which we charge Socinianism with? but I
must get out of this stinking Blasphemous and Idolatrous dunghill, the Devil,
John 8.44.
says the Lord, is a liar, and his Children are liars, and this Man is such
one with a Witness, for he gives God the lie.

But before I leave off this point, to come closer upon some of our Socinians
here, I must with a stroke of my Pen hit their great Master Francis David, who
to show his want of sincerity and his perverseness of Heart, does so wretchedly
wrest the Protomartyr's Prayer to the Lord Jesus, when being stoned to death he
said, Acts 7.59.
Lord Jesus receive my Spirit, which, with his ignorant and unsound
Interpretation, the Heretic would thus depravate, O God the Father who art the
Lord of Jesus, receive my Soul. Did any wretch ever screw up his hellish brains
to force such a sense upon Words so plain, without the least shadow or
appearance of ground for it, only because he would have him by no means called
upon; was ever any Text worse mangled than this by the Additions of that Wicked
Man? This is the Spirit of those who call themselves Unitarians, and I
Socinian-Davidians, but to the thing: There is a phrase which answers this,
Chap. 9.14.
viz. All that call on thy Name, which can admit of no such sense as the
Heretic would force upon the other, for there Ananias speaks to the Lord Jesus
of those who prayed to and believed in him: there is besides a prayer of St.
John, to our Blessed Lord, which leaves not in the least, place to quibble or
cavil at, Amen, even so, come Lord Jesus, Rev. 22.20.
which as to the Object fully and plainly answers that of Stephen, Lord Jesus
receive my Spirit, when Paul besought the Lord thrice, he certainly thereby
prayed to him who answered and said, my grace is sufficient unto thee, and that
this was the Grace of Christ who thus answered his prayer, in plain Words he
declared it, 2. Cor. 12.9.
I will Glory in my Insirmities that the power of Christ may rest upon me, so
that the Divinity and Invocation of our Blessed Savior is clear enough out of
Scripture, so it is out of the Faith and Practice of the Christian Church at all
times. That by the Primitive Christians he was believed to be true
Consubstantial God and adored as such, it appears not only out of the Writings
of the Doctors of the Church, both before and after the Nicene Council, who
Condemned as Heretics all that did speak or writ against it, but also by the
Testimony of their Heathen Enemies as Pliny in what he did write to the
Emperor Trajan about the Christians, who gave of them this Character, that
they owned Christ to be God, and as such, Sung hymns in his Praise.

Now we must go on and speak of other things: concerning Adam, they hold many
bad and dangerous Errors: as Scripture says, Genesis 1.27.
he was Created in God's own Image, which consisted not in one but in many
things, in Soul and Body, and in the Union of both in his Person: the Soul is
in the Image of God, First, As to her Nature which is Spiritual and Immortal,
Secondly, As to the Faculties, namely the Understanding and Will, Thirdly, As
to the habits of those Faculties, that is in Wisdom and Righteousness, for as
God is Spiritual and Immortal, so is the Soul; as to Understand and to Will are
Proprieties of God, so he endued Man's Soul with an Understanding and a Will,
as to the Body, though there be less of God's Image in it than in the Soul,
because God is a Spirit without Body, yet some Conformity there is, for it
affords some Organs which are subservient to the Actions of the Soul, and so
the Body is in its manner an Image of Divine Perfection, it does hear and see
and is a Symbol and Instrument of the Perfections of the Soul, and of the
Maker, for the Wisdom, Power and other Attributes of God are commonly
represented by the Members as the Eyes, Ears, Mouth and Hands of the Body.
Lastly, The Image of God did consist in the whole Person in Relation to the
dominion which God gave Adam over all other Worldly Creatures, also as to
Happiness, and Immortality, for as God is Lord over the whole Work of Creation
and Enjoys a Supreme Felicity, so he constituted him Lord of other Creatures
and placed him in a State of happy Immortality.

But several of these they deny or have corrupted: they would not have God's
Image to have consisted in Immortality and Righteousness, for they, affirm Adam
to have been created Mortal, and that he had died though he had not sinned; but
if so, then God's Threatening his Disobedience with Death, had been in vain and
to no purpose; if he had died whether or not he had sinned, then Death had been
no Punishment for his Sin, yet the Apostle says, Romans 6.23. Chap. 5.12.
the Wages of Sin is Death, he said before, By one Man Sin entered into the
World, and Death by Sin. Though his Body was made of a frail matter, yet
thorough God's Gift it might have been Immortal as it shall be after the
Resurrection; that Immortality of our first Parents we call a power and faculty
of not dying, which to them was Natural, for if they had continued in their
integrity, they had not died, and in that State 'twas as Natural not to die as
not to Sin; Death necessarily follows Sin, and no Sin no Death: as to that
holiness and Righteousness wherein chiefly consisted the Image of God in which
they were created, the Apostle speaks of it when he says, Epes. 4.24.
that ye put on the new Man which after God is created in Righteousness and
true holiness, which in the verse before he called to be renewed in the Spirit
of your mind, which implies that once in us there was such a thing, but was
since decayed and lost in Adam, we had and lost it in him, but in Christ were
restored thereunto: but Socinians who pretend to a right of making all things
to be as they would, laugh at it, primum, etc. to affirm, says one, Smalc.
exam. Err. err. 104.
That the first Man received in his Creation holiness and supernatural gifts is
an Old and stinking Fable. They also would have the pains which Adam and Eve
underwent, to have been natural, Genesis 3.16, 17, 18, 19. Chap. 1.31. Chap. 2.17.
V. 20.
when we read they were a Punishment for their Sin, this in them imports a
reflection upon God their Maker, and it is to give Scripture the lie, when it
says, and God saw, that every thing he had made was very good; and also when
God said to Adam, in the day that thou Eatest thereof thou shall surely Die.

They say farther, that he had not the excellent and certain Knowledge of the
Creator, nor of the rest of the Creatures, which if true, then he had been an
imperfect Work of God; but seeing God, who was a competent Judge of the thing,
left it for him to give names to all Cattle, and to the Fowl of the Air, and to
every Beast of the field, which God approved of, we must believe he had that
certain Knowledge, Se statu prim. hom. c. 6. v. 23.
though Smalcius be of a different Opinion: and we also read, he knew his Wife
to be bone of his bones and flesh of his flesh.

Now when I am upon this point about Knowledge, I shall pass to another which
they oppose; it is this, That there is a Natural Knowledge of God, whereby we
mean that Men who have the use of Natural Reason, may without special
Revelation, by the consideration of God's Works in the World, know that there
is a God, a first Cause of all, who has his being of himself, and has given
all things theirs; but they being used to gainsay Scripture, affirm, that by
the light of nature Men cannot know that there is a God, though Paul says,
that which may be known of God is manifest in Men, Romans 1.19, 20, 21, 28.
for God has showed it unto them; and it may more appear in the Verses quoted
in the Margin, and this knowledge is such as to leave them without excuse, and
this carries them so far, as that by nature they do the things contained in the
law, which show the work of the law written in their hearts, Chap. 2.14. 15.
their Conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts the mean while
accusing, or else excusing one another: an evil Conscience attended with
terrors for fear of punishment, and a good one with joy, do demonstrate there
is a God revenger for evil, and rewarder of good: but what is that to them, let
Scripture speak never so positively and plainly, things must be as they will
have them to be.

The next thing is about Original Sin, that is, the stain and corruption which
we bring into the World, and as it is in humane nature: it is so called because
it has it is spring and origin from Adam, and also because it is originally and
naturally from the Womb in every Man, Woman and Child; it consists in the
privation of that original righteousness wherein the first Man was created, and
in the corruption inherent in our nature, whereby we are averse from good and
inclined to evil, which Socinians who are a line of the generation spoken of,
Prove. 30.12. Isa. 65.5.
that are pure in their own eyes, even from the Womb, and so being righteous in
their own conceit, think they may say to others, come not near to me, stand by
thy self, for I am holier than thou; yet it is said, they are not washed from
their filthiness; of this Sin there are two parts, the imputation and the
inherency: as to the first, Adam was a public Person, the representative of
all Mankind, which was in his Loins as Levi was in Abraham's, when to
Melchisedec he paid the tenth part of all, Heb. 7.9.
upon which account, as the Apostle observes, Levi paid Tithes in Abraham; by
the same reason, whole Mankind which were in Adam's Loins when he sinned, are
accounted to have sinned in him. God's Promises and Threatenings, were not
confined in him, but extended to his whole Posterity, which would have enjoyed
the benefit of his Obedience, if he had continued in his integrity, as they
have smarted for his Disobedience: as it is usual among Men to see, the Blood
and Family of Traitors to suffer for the Crimes of Parents, and thereby to
forfeit Estates and Dignities: this imputation of Adam's Sin, is by the Apostle
plainly and fully proved, Romans 5. from v. 12. to the end of the Chapter. Psalm.
145.17. 2 Samuel 24. Chap. 21.1.
how by one Man sin entered into the World -- for that all men have sinned,
that is in that one Man, and by the offense of one man, judgment came upon all
men to condemnation. This is all without any injustice in God, for we find in
Scripture how without any injustice in God, who is just in all his ways, and
holy in all his works, sometimes the Prince's Sin is imputed to and punished
upon the whole People, as in the Case of David's numbering the People, and of
Saul for killing the Gibeonites, and in the particular Cases of Korah and Achan.

The other part of this Sin is the inherency, or hereditary corruption,
thorough the Fall of our first Parents, naturally propagated in us, whereby we
become guilty and filthy, having in us the Seed and Spawn of all Sins, whereby
we deserve temporal and eternal punishments: as at first the Person infected
the nature, so has ever since the nature infected every Person; thus
Experience shows how the Plague, Leprosy, and other contagious diseases, do by
Communication corrupt the Constitution of the whole Body, as a poisoned Arrow,
Sword, or Bullet, will, and how easily are diseases in the Blood, by Parents
propagated to Children, thus we see certain distempers and Vices inherent in
some Families, but besides this Reason and experience, Scripture the Competent
Judge of it says so, for who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? not
One, and David says, Job 14.4. Psalm. 51.5.
behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in Sin did my Mother conceive me, this is
not only his own, but also every one else case, upon the said consideration of
and his Contrition for his Sins of Adultery and Murder, he goes up to the very
Spring of all namely Original Sin, whereunto he does Attribute that cause of
all Actual ones, and we all are called Transgressors from the Womb, and before
we have done any Good or Evil, Isai. 48.8. Rom 9.11. Ephesians. 2.3.
for we were by Nature the Children of wrath even as others. This is plain
enough, yet one of the Socinians here, according to their usual way, does
ridicule Original Sin, and our Saviors satisfaction, he in Mr. ^irmin's Name
would argue, The Charitable Samar. p. 21.
how could any redemption be necessary to atone for Adam's Transgression, whom
millions had never heard of, and no one had ever Commissioned to Transact for
him? In that place and under the same name he brings in his own Opinion about
Sacrifices, which though this be not the proper place to speak of, yet before I
leave him, I shall; he says, he could never be induced to believe them to be
of Divine Institution; but being used by all the Neighboring Nations, to have
been indulged the Jews (as the Kingly Government was afterward) upon the
account of their stubborn and obstinate Temper, which was much delighted with
pomp and show. If this were true, as it is false, then the whole Ceremonial Law,
was but a human invention. Moses had been an impostor, and the great and wise
design of God thereby, as by Signs, Figures and Types to represent the bloody
Sacrifice which Christ was to make upon the Cross, were only to humor the
stubborn Temper of the Jews, the like might be said of the Tabernacle and
afterward of the Temple, where these Sacrifices were offered, and also of the
institution of the Priestly and Levitical offices, in that way of Sacrifices,
to serve at and about the Altar of God, and Moses was very complying with Men
and presumed very far with God, only to please the Jews, to give such strict
laws and directions as in his four last Books we read he did about Offering,
Sin-Offering, Peace Offering and other sorts of Sacrifices: but did not God
institute all these by his Ministry? In the Tabernacle there was not so much
as a Pin but what was by God's Immediate institution and direction, for God
said to Moses, Heb. 8.5.
see that thou make all things according to the pattern showed to thee in the
Mount, and in the begingning of that verse, the Apostle says, these things
served unto the example and shadow of heavenly things, Does he not say also,
Chap. 9.22.
almost all things are by the Law purged with blood, and without shedding of
blood is no remission: what a presuming Generation of Men is that which pretend
to be wiser than Paul, and Moses, yea than God himself: this same Blasphemer
not to come short of any that went before him says, Sacrifices, specially the
expiatory, seem to have been invented by a superstitious or designing
priesthood. What an impiety is this to affirm that a Divine institution as the
Ceremonial Law was by the Ministry of Moses who was faithful in all God's
House, Chap. 3.5.
was invented by a superstitious and designing priesthood; O these busy and ill
designing Socinians, think others to have been and be like themselves: however
their wicked design in saying so, tends to derogate from the Sacrifice by our
Savior made of himself upon the Cross; therefore they would make People
believe there was neither meaning not design of God by the Sacrifices made
under the Law, which as Paul says, was a schoolmaster to bring us to Christ,
Gal. 3.24.
who is the Body of all those shadows, and the Antitype of all those Types: But
what care they for the Holy Sacrifice of Christ, or any other thing in him
toward our Salvation, whilst they think to have theirs in their Pockets, and
all things necessary thereunto in their own power. Reason is their Universal
Grace, or rather Natural Allsufficiency, it is pity such Men should be suffered
to be so saucy with God, and permitted with their Impieties to infect a
Christian Nation.

But I would have them, and all the World besides, to know, that the Ceremonial
Law was not forged in Moses's Brain, but was of God's immediate and special
Appointment: Hence it is that so often in the Books of Exodus, Leviticus and
Numbers, we read And the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying, Speak unto the Children
of Israel. The Moral, Civil and Levitical Laws he immediately received from
God's own Mouth, either upon Mount Sinai, as we read in Exodus, from Chap. 20.
to the last; or out of the Tabernacle of the Congregation, Leviticus 1.1. to
the Children of Israel Moses spoke that which God commanded him, and what he
did, was by the Lord's direction: And therein God owned him before all the
People, as we have it in the Case of Korah, Dathan and Abiram, for before the
terrible Judgment fell upon them, Moses said, Numbers 16.28.
Hereby ye shall know that the Lord has sent me to do all these Works, for I
have not done them of mine own mind. And did not God call by name Bezaleel,
Exodus 35.30.31.
fill him and Aholiab with his Spirit, to work the Tabernacle, the Sanctuary,
and all things thereunto belonging, which was the place where, till the
Building of the Temple, all those Levical Ceremonies were performed; so this
Ceremonial Service, was no Priestcraft, as most wickedly called, but a most
Wise, Divine Institution: Nay, all the Pins of the Tabernacle, and of the Court
round about, which seem the least things about it, as before observed, were of
God's own immediate Appointment and Direction, Exodus, 27.19. as executed chap.
38.20, 31. The Apostle says, Col. 2.16.
all these Ceremonies were a shadow of things to come, but the Body of Christ:
Therefore no vain, nor idle things, but Types and Figures, as were Gideon's
Fleece, and the Brazen Serpent, which contained much of Gospel in it.

Paul in the case of some Legal Ceremonies, says, that thereby the Holy Ghost
signified things, Heb. 9.8.
and if in that case, we may well conclude in others too, whereof in that same
Epistle, chap. 13.11. is one, That the Bodies of those Beasts whose blood was
brought into the sanctuary, were burnt without the Camp. One would think there
had been no meaning in it, but in the following verse the Apostle says the
contrary, Wherefore Jesus also that he might sanctisie the People with his own
Blood, suffered without the Gate. So without the Gate, and without the Camp
answered one another, as the Antitype and the Type; and it is so certain that
Moses received those Laws from God himself, that by the last of the Prophets he
owned it, and put them in mind to observe it as his own, Mal. 4.4.
Remember the Law of Moses my servant, which I commanded unto him in Horeb, for
all Israel, with the statutes and judgments. The Apostle Paul who had been
brought up in Jerusalem at the Feet of Gama^iel, a great Doctor of the Law, and
who better than any Socinian, understood the nature, use and end of the
Ceremonial Laws, declares how The Priests that offered gifts according to the
Law, Heb. 4.5, 6.
served unto the example and shadow of heavenly things; which are no vain
things, nor Moses's Invention, for it is added, As Moses was admonished of God
when he was about to make the Tabernacle, for see, says he, that thou make all
things according to the pattern showed to thee in the mount. So it is no less
than Blasphemy to say, God's Institution is Man's Invention, but what care they
for it, Blasphemy is their Element, which they cannot live without. This
Samaritan has led us somewhat out of our way, therefore we must return where
we left, about the Imputation and Inherency of Original Sin.

But against this truth sprung up as detestable an Heresy as ever was broached
by Man; for Pelagius said, All the harm which thereby befell Mankind, was only
an ill Example given, so that Nature is as whole and sound as ever, whereby the
excellency and necessity of Grace is wholly annulled, and to what purpose a
Savior and Mediator? for where is no Distemper there needs no Remedy, and if
there be no Original Sin, yet Death is an effect of Sin, how is it then that
Children dye, though they committed no actual Sin? Now Socinans have espoused
that Cause, and value nothing of what Scripture can say, or Arguments thence
deduced conclude. Socinus in his Exposition of Romans 5.12. says, De stratu
primaevi Homin.
Apostolus nequaqam, etc. The Apostle does not in the least affirm that all
have sinned in Adam; which is the very thing that there Paul does affirm; but
Socinus makes nothing of that Sin, for he says, Praelect. c. 4. in c. 10. p.
195.
Vnum illud peccatum, etc. That one sin had no power within its self to corrupt
Adam himself, much less all his Posterity: To the same purpose speaks the
Racovian Catechism, and in the last quoted place of Socinus, he confidently
says, Peccat. Origin. nullum prorsus est, etc.
Ex peccato, etc. From that sin of our first Parents, there is no necessity
that any stain or pravity should have been propagated in whole Mankind. To this
we join what the Racovian says in the fore-quoted place, Original sin is
nothing at all, therefore it could not hurt free will -- neither does scripture
teach that Adam's fall was a punishment imputed either to him or his Posterity:
But as I showed, Scripture abounds in proofs to the contrary.

That Heresiarck denies also Socin. praelect. c. 4. non fuisse etc.
Original Righteousness to have been in the first Man, which is as positive as
are the Words by another used, to maintain that Humane Nature was not in the
least Prejudiced or Corrupted through Adam 's first sin. But one carries on the
thing farther, saying, Small. contr. (...) 206.
Illum ab omni, etc. To say that God for that first sin of Adam, punished all
his Posterity, whilst then they were Innocent, is very far from Equity and
Justice, therefore it cannot without Blasphemy be attributed to God. Here they
challenge God's Justice, as elsewhere they have his other Attributes, and they
slight one of the most important things in our Religion.

As they sacrilegiously presume upon the Nature and Person of our blessed
Savior, so they do upon his Office of Mediator, and would Rob us of the
Advantages and Benefits which he thereby purchased for us: And indeed, they go
about to corrupt the whole work of our Redemption, and overthrow our
Deliverance from Sin and Death; for to omit here what they (...) against his
Royal and Prophetical Offices, which ^ mentioned elsewhere. I shall take notice
how they (...) either wholly deny, or partly corrupt what Scriptu^^ says about
his Propitiatory Sacrifice, his Priesthood, Merits, Death, Resurrection,
Glorification, sitting at the Right Hand of the Father, and his Intercession
for his Church: His Sacrifice they deny to be true and real, only allow it to
be Metaphorical; thus, as they make of him a Metaphorical God, so he must be
only a Metaphorical Mediator, or Savior and Priest. Christus, etc. says one,
Small. resp. ad n^va Monst. par. 2. c. 3. p. 129.
Christ our High Priest was appointed to make an Offering, improperly so
called, and he is improperly Metaphorically, and Allegorically called by the
name of Priest. Thus after this, we are Improperly and Metaphorically saved,
which is a strange sort of Salvation; Paul calls Christ proprerly A Priest for
ever, Heb. 5.6. Psalm. 110.4.
after the Order of Melchisedeck. So had David long before, the Lord has not
barely said, but sworn thou art a Priest for ever after the Order of
Melchizedeck: To be a Priest after an Order, is really and properly to be a
Priest; yet let David and Paul say what they please, Smalcius is of another
Opinion, when he says, Err. 57.65. Heb. 3.1. and 4.14. 15, and 5.5.10, etc.
He is not a Priest for ever after the Order of Melchizedeck: shall we believe
David and Paul, or Smalcius? How often is our blessed savior called an
High Priest in one Epistle? And in his kind of Priesthood, he was as much a
Priest as ever Aaron was in his, and he offered himself as really as ever any
expiatory and propitiatory Sacrifice were offered under the Law; therefore his
precious Blood which was shed upon the Cross till Death intervened, is so often
mentioned in Scripture; chap. 9.12. ver. 14.
By his own Blood he entered in once, etc. and the Blood of Christ, which
through the Eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God, even to Death:
Again, Now once in the end of the World has he appeared to put away sin by the
sacrifice of himself, ver. 16. ver. 26. Ephesians. 5.25. Acts. 20.28.
thereby to save and sanctify his Church; for he loved it, and gave himself
for it, and so has purchased it with his own Blood, which could not be done
without a Sacrifice and a Priest; there is no true, proper and real Effect,
without a true, proper and real Cause.

As the Article of Christ's Satisfaction is one of, if not the most Fundamental
of our Salvation, so the Holy Ghost has in Scripture taken special care to
confirm it in both Testaments, Isaiah. 53.10. read the whole chap.
His Soul was made an Offering for sin, says Isaiah, and the Lord has laid on
him the Iniquities of us all; thereby the Prophet alluding to the Ceremony of
the escape Goat Asasel; Levit. 16.21. 1 John 2.2. 1 Pet 2.24.
which was loaded with the Sins of the People; so in several places of the
Psalms, etc. in the New Testament he is said to be the Propitiation for our
sins, and who his own self bare our sins in his Body on the Tree; with several
others to the same Effect, full and plain enough, 2 Cor. 4.4.
except to those in whom the God of this World has blinded the Minds: Yet
Smalcius, as if once had not been enough, Exam. 100 Err. Err. 57.66.
said elsewhere, That Christ is Metaphorically, and improperly called a Priest,
and that he never offered a true, but only a metaphorical sacrifice: Again,
it is false that Christ upon Earth purged our sins; therefore they utterly deny
the Merit of our Savior's Death, and thus impiously would overthrow the
Foundation of our Salvation, whilst St. Paul in several places of his Epistle
to the Hebrews, does plainly demonstrate the Necessity, Excellency and Efficacy
of our Savior's Sacrifice of himself for our Deliverance from God's Wrath, the
Curse of the Law, and from Sin and Death: Here I may show an instance how far
in an Impious way, Men can go when God has left them unto themselves; These
are the Words, Et si nunc Vulgo, etc. Racov. Cat. p. 177.
And though now it be the Common Opinion of Christians, that Christ by his
Death has deserved Salvation for us, and fully satisfied for our sins, yet
that Opinion is Deceitful, Erroneous and very Pernicious. Where is that Fear of
God, Modesty, Soundness and Humility, which that worst sort of Men would in
their Opinions and Expressions seem to pretend to? But to omit so many other
Evidences of their Blasphemous Writings, I shall only add some Words of the
same Smalcius Exam. Err. 47.72
Christum nobis, etc. Christ has not reconciled God to us, nor when offended,
appeased him toward us; God of himself, and of his own Will, is become
favorable to Men without any ones Reconciliation. -- Christ has not obtained
the Forgiveness of our sins by the shedding of his Blood for us: So then with
Paul we may say, the Preaching of the Gospel is vain, 1 Cor. 15.14.15.17.
our Faith is also vain, we are yet in our sins, and the Apostles are found
false Witnesses of God; at one blow they with denying Christ's Satisfaction for
us to Divine Justice, would blast our whole Joy, Comfort and Assurance in this
Life, and hope of Happiness in that which is to come, It Is certain, that in the
Work of Redemption to give and receive, are Relatives, for as a Man cannot
properly be said to receive a thing except it be given him by another, so no
Man can properly be said to give, except there be another to receive: Thus in
the Work of Redemption, the price which Christ gives, the Father receives it,
as Scripture says, Rev. 5.9. Ephesians. 5.2. Heb. 10.5.7.10. 1 Pet. 1.18.19.
Thou have Redeemed us unto God through thy Blood, and Christ has loved us,
and given himself for us an offering and a sacrifice to God, for a sweet
smelling savor: Again, Ye know that ye were not Redeemed with corruptible
things, as silver and gold -- But with the precious blood of Christ, as of a
Lamb without blemish and without spot.

The Blood of Christ, and his Death by the Sacrifice of himself, is the
Meritorious Cause of our Redemption and Salvation; This Gospel-Doctrine should
not be scoffed at by Men, who would pass for Christians, yet thereby make
Heathens of themselves, in joining with Heathens to mock God's Institutions of
the Ceremonial Law, which represented Christ's Sacrifice upon the Cross; let an
Heathen, who knew no better, say, Cat. Distich. de Morib. l. 4.
Stultitia est morte alterius Sperare Salutem. It Is a Folly to look for
Salvation by another Man's Death, but no Christian should say so, I am apt to
believe that Roman was not a mere stranger to the Custom of the Jews, but as
well as Ovid, he might have read Moses's Books, whereof, the Translation by the
Septuagint was then Extant; and long before, for by what that other in his
Metamorphoses says of the Flood, of the Tower of Babel represented by the
Giants attempting to scale up to Heaven, and some such other things, we have
ground to believe that he had read the Book of Genesis, so might also Cato,
who, though accounted a Wise Man by the World, if he, by the Verse of his
already Quoted, intended any thing against the Ceremonies of the Law about
Sacrifices which represented that of the Messiah's Death, whereby Salvation to
Mankind was to be purchased, according to the Prophecies of David, Isaiah,
Daniel, etc. then we may reckon him to have been one of those whom Paul speaks
of, who professing themselves to be Wise, became Fools, Romans 1.22. 1 Cor. 1.23,
24.
(so we may all others of his Opinion,) because as the Doctrine of the Messiah
or Christ, was to the Jews a stumbling Block, so to the Greeks or Gentiles it
was Foolishness, but unto them which are called both Jews and Greeks, Christ is
the power of God, and the Wisdom of God; but we find Socinians to take part
with those who barely are Jews and Greeks, but not with them which are called,
so are more unexcusable than Cato, and other Heathens, who never had the
Gospel Light shining upon them, as they have.

As they deny Christ's Satisfaction, so wholly to deprive him of his Priestly
Office, they also would take away his Intercession, which is the other part of
it; and though Paul says that, Romans 8.34.
Christ is at the Right Hand of the Father, where he makes Inetercession for
us; yet one, without giving any reason to the contrary, which is their
Magisterial way of deciding Controversies, says, Christ in Heaven only,
improperly does intercede for us. So of him they would make only an improper
and figurative Intercessour: But we mean, not that Intercession of his to be
with Tears and upon his Knees, as in the Days of his Humiliation when he was
upon Earth, but he offers our Prayers to God, and by virtue of his Merits,
makes them acceptable to the Father, therefore our Prayers to God, we offer in
the Name, and by the Merits and Mediation of the Lord Jesus.

They in every thing to show themselves against him, Joh. 2.19. and 10.17.18.
though in several places he says, that he can and will, raise himself and
others from the Dead; yet when we say, he raised himself by his own Power, they
laugh at, and ridicule it, for says Socinus, Disp. de unius fill. exist. quid
enim, etc.
what does more deserve to be laughed at, as more contrary to Truth, or can
seem, or be so, than to say Resp. ad nov. Monst
that he who is Dead can call himself again to Life. And that wicked Scoffer
his Disciple Smalcius, like another Lucian does bluntly declare, It is a Fable
to say that Christ manifested any Power in his Resurrection, which as it is
false, so it destroys it self; and in the part. 2. c. 21. fabula est, etc. p.
216.
Racov. Cat. it is thus, They are extremely mistaken, who say that Christ raised
himself from the Dead. But they think it not enough for them to strick at him
in his Grave, for they pursue him after his Resurrection, they say, Ostorod.
instit. c. 41.
Immediately after his Resurrection his Body was not Immortal, only after it
was taken up into Heaven. So says Socinus himself, De stat. prim. Hom. c. 8.
p. 203.
The Body of Christ attained to Imortality and Glory, only after it had been
carried up to Heaven. This is not grounded upon any Reason only screwed out of
their shallow Brains and rotten Hearts: Nay, they pursue him into Heaven it
self, and amidst his Glory they would have it to cease from being a true Humane
Body, for there they strip him of Flesh and Blood, without which, it cannot be
a true Humane Body, for this reason, that he would be Imperfect and Defiled, if
he had any Blood: Whereupon they would misapply the Apostles saying, Flesh and
Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God. Whereby are meant the Corrupt
Affections of Humane Nature; so they, who therein indulge themselves, are
wholly governed by, live and die in them, shall not be saved. As to the Body, I
say, it is true, Corruptible Flesh and Blood, as now we have, shall not go into
Heaven, but not so when Corruption shall have put on Incorruption; it is a
different Body as to the quality, not as to the substance: But our Savior has
the same Body he had upon Earth, in the Grave, and after his Resurrection, with
this difference, that now it is an Immortal, Incorruptible and Gloryfied Body.

Socinians make a Dispute about the Duration of Christ's Kingdom, for they
affirm it will last no longer than the World's end, for says one, Ostorod. l.
c. 6. n. 2.
Civibus hujus Regni salutem, etc. Salvation, Glory, and Joy shall be given the
Citizens of this Kingdom when this Spiritual Kingdom shall come to an end;
which is directly against those Texts, Luke 1.33.
wherein it is said, he shall Reign over the House of Jacob for ever, and of his
Kingdom there shall be no end, and I will Establish the Throne of his Kingdom
for ever; 2 Samuel 7.13. Dan. 2.44. and 7.14.
again, that Kingdom shall never be destroyed; further, his Dominion is an
everlasting Dominion, which shall not pass away, and his Kingdom that which
shall not be destroyed. As this Kingdom had no beginning, so it shall have no
end, when I say it had no beginning, I mean not as to the Administration, for
in that sense it had, but I mean as to the Right and Title, for from Eternity
the Father appointed him to be a King, He had a Glory before the World was; he
also had at that time, if so we may call Eternity, a People given him, for in
him the Father has chosen us before the Foundation of the World; and he began
to exercise his Royal Authority over his Subjects as soon as they began to be:
So this Kingdom of his he had before he was Born of the Virgin, but than that
King had only Divine Nature, though in that sense he was not King as God, for
therein he had submitted to the Father, but as soon as God was made Man, Humane
Nature became Partner of this Royal Authority, to this effect he answered
Pilate's question, whether he was a King? thou says that I am a King, to this
end was I Born, John 18.37. Psalm. 5.1, 2, 3, and 20, 1, 9.
and for this cause came I into the World. Under the Old Testament believers
called him their King and their God, and as such prayed unto him and he was
born King of the Jews, and by the Wise Men adored for such. The time of
Christ's Kingdom has three several Periods, the first from Adam to Moses.
Second from Moses to his birth of the Virgin: And the third from his birth to
the World's end; Matthew. 2.2. Zechar. 9.9. Rev. 7.17.
yet then this Kingdom shall not cease, for to all Eternity he shall rule over
his People in that State of Glory, for the Lamb which is in the midst of the
Throne, between the Father and the Holy Ghost, shall feed them and lead them
unto living Fountains of Waters. The Kingdom shall be the same, Rev. 7.17.
but with a different administration, the believers shall not then, as now they
are, be governed by his Word, no more Promises nor Threatenings, no Pains nor
Rewards, no defending against Enemies, for there shall be none.

As to matters of Grace, though Scripture takes away from Man all Power and
Disposition by Nature to do Good and what is acceptable to God, yet in that
State, wherein he is but a slave of Satan, sold under Sin, who cannot cease
from Sin, they allo a free will and power to fulfill the Law, for they say,
though Racov. Ca. p. 197.
commonly in Men by Nature, the strength to do what God requires, be but small,
yet the Will to do those things is naturally in every one: Farthermore, Smalc.
de perfect. justit.
although by reason of the infirmity of the Flesh, it be very difficult for a
Man to come really to that perfection of doing what God requires, yet it is not
altogether impossible. But he goes further, for he affirms it to be possible
for a Man after the knowledge of the Truth, never to Sin; for, says he, Resp.
ad frantz. disp. 6. de bon. oper. these. 43. 1 Kings 8.46. Jam. 3.2.
neither Scripture nor sound Reason, nor any thing else hinders, but that he
who Sinned before, may come to that degree of perfection as never to Sin
hereafter. This is to set up a Perfection, in this life and freedom from Sin,
whilst Scripture does abundantly affirm that there is no Man that Sins not,
that after the knowledge of the Truth and after Conversion, in many things we
offend all, even the best, all are under Sin, Romans 3.23.
and all have Sinned and come short of the Glory of God. One said well,
Remigius in Cens. Act. Synod. Caris. c. Go. tescal.
vivere absque peccato, etc. To live without Sin in the World, belongs not to
the state of the present Life, but to the happiness of that which is eternal:
during our Life, some Canaanites are still left to be Thorns in our Sides, and
the best Men have a Thorn in the Flesh. So that freedom from Sin is certainly
part of the Glory of God, which in this World no Man whatsoever can attain
unto, and to pretend to it, is the Sin of the Devil, and of our first Parents;
namely Pride and an Ambitious desire to be like God and equal with God; their
steps do Socinians follow, who though they would seem to be great Enemies to
Popery, they in matters of Grace, in every thing are a bad, and in some worse
than Papists: By this principle of theirs they also make Salvation an easy
thing, though the Apostle says, 1 Pet. 4.18. Jerem. 13.23.
the Righteous is scarcely saved: and the Prophet, it is no more possible for
them to do good, that are used to do evil, then it is for the Ethiopian to
change his Skin, or for the Leopard his Spots. There is a natural impossiblity,
by reason of Sin reigning in every Reprobate, and dwelling in every Believer; 1
John 1.8.
wherefore we are commanded daily to pray to God to forgive us our Trespasses,
for indeed, if we say we have no Sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is
not in us.

The Orthodox Doctrines about the Sacraments, Faith, Justification, and in sew
words, every Article of our Holy Religion, they more or less do depravate; thus
they set up a new one of their own making, as it has plainly been demonstrated
by several Protestant Divines. They set up two ways of Salvation, one under the
Old Testament, the other under the New: We own there are several ways to Hell,
yet there is but one, and that strait too, Heb. 10.20.
leading to Heaven, which is the new and living way, which he (Christ) has
consecrated for us thorough the Vail, that is to say, his Flesh. This in
Substance, though under different Circumstances, was for his People under the
Old, as it is under the New Testament: The whole Church of God, though
consisting of Jews and Gentiles, is but one Church, so there is but one Head,
Lord and Savior, and so but one way to Salvation: Now that Church (God) Christ
has purchased with his own Blood, that is by the Merits of his Death: Romans
3.25.
God has set forth the Messiah Jesus Christ to be a propitiation thorough
Faith in his Blood, for his People, under the Old, as under the New Testament,
and we are justified by his Blood: Chap. 5.9. Ephesians. 1.7. Col. 1.20. Heb. 10.19.
Also we have Redemption, thorough his Blood the Forgiveness of Sins: Withal,
he has made peace thorough the Blood of his Cross: And the boldness we have to
enter into the Holiest, it is by the Blood of Jesus. So then under both
Testaments Men are justified and saved by Virtue of the Death of Christ
Mediator, and thorough Faith in him (as it is at large expressed Heb. 11.)
whether to come with the Jews, Acts 4.12.
or already come with Christians, for the Apostle's words are full, plain, and
general; neither is there Salvation in any other, for there is no other name
under Heaven given among Men, whereby we must be saved: Yet this clear truth
they will not yield to, for says Smalc. cont. frantz. disp. 4. these. 8.
one of them, what Frantzius Writes, that the Ancients believed in Jesus to
come, and thorough that Faith were justified, ought to be reckoned among the
grossest errors. -- Justification by Faith was never proffered to Men before
the coming of Christ, neither was it promised that Man should be justified by
Faith; yet Abraham was justified by Faith, Gal. 3.6.
for Abraham believed God and it was accounted to him for righteousness,
wherein did he believe God? Not only in the promise that his Posterity should
be very numerous, but also chiefly at the promise that the Messiah should come
out of his Seed, Genesis 12.3.
and in thee shall all the Families of the Earth be Blessed, which was a
renewing of the Promise made to our first Parents of the Woman's Seed, which
then God fixed in Abraham's Family; now this Seed of his in whom all the
Families of the Earth should be blessed, is what Abraham believed, and that
Faith of his concerning it, was to him accounted for Righteousness, and there
is no doubt to be made, but that God who so familiarly conversed with him as
with a Friend; for so Scripture calls him, Isai. 41.8.
in a special manner revealed to him the Mystery of his coming in the Flesh,
for it was the Son of God, the second Person of the most holy Trinity, who at
several times under the name of an Angel, and in the shape of a Man appeared to
Abraham, who, as our Lord says, rejoiced to see his day with the Eye of Faith,
that day or time when he appeared in the Flesh, which Abraham who lived so long
before did see, not as actually present, but as to come; and that Faith whereby
Abraham believed in a Savior to come, he was justified by, and as he is called
the Father of all them that believe, so all believers must have the same Faith
which he had; Ephesians. 4.5.
for there is but one Faith, and one Lord, which imports one and the same
object of that Faith only with this difference upon the account of time, that
Abraham believed in him that was to come, and we in him who is already come.
Now to the later part of what Smalcius says, that there is no promise that Man
should be justified by Faith; I say if it be not by Faith, it must be by Works,
for there is no middle, but seeing St. Paul in several places of his Epistle to
the Romans does so positively exclude Works, not only those of the Law, but
also those called Evangelical; with the same Apostle we must conclude Man to be
justified by Faith without Works: but they are thorough paced, Romans 3.28.
for regeneration and other good works, Love, Invocation, Obedience, Hope,
Charity, etc. far from being the effects of Justification, that without them
there can be no Justification, that is, they are the cause of it, as Smalc.
ibid.
one of them is not ashamed to write.

Tho Scripture in so many places says that Christ's passive obedience was for
us, is imputed to us, and we thereby are justified; Isa. 53.5, 6. 1 John 1.7.
Romans 3.24, 25. and 5.19. Galat. 3.13.
for he was wounded for our Transgressions, he was bruised for our Iniquities,
the Chastisement of our Peace was upon him, and with his Stripes we are healed.
Also the Blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all Sin, so in other
Texts quoted in the Margin: Yet for all this, these Wretches with a brazen-face
do thunder against this Holy Doctrine as Socin. de servat. l. 4.
absurd, impious, forged, and contrary to Divine and Human Reason; yea, so
filthy and execrable, that he believes since the beginning of the World there
was not a more pernicious error. And that Man's Socin. de justif. p. 77.
Ephesians. 2.8. Ibid. Heb. 2.10. Chap. 12.2.
Disciple impiously calls it, an Imposture of Satan. But they go further and
say God justifies Man for his Obedience and own Righteousness, for says the
Smalc.
Heresiark, to be justified of God is nothing else but to be declared just
which must necessarily be when the Precepts, whatsoever they be, of the Law he
has given, are kept. Thus Men need not seek in God for what they have in
themselves, for which they would make him accountable to them; but they sink
deeper and deeper into the mire, for Faith which the Apostle calls the Gift of
God, with an exclusion, and that not of your selves, they affirm God not to be
the only cause of, seeing Man of himself by strength of his own Will may
receive it, for thus he goes on, out of what has been said it appears what is
in Man the cause and foundation of his Faith, namely the love and desire to do
Good and to avoid Evil: And as they overturn all Divine Means of our Salvation,
so that pernicious Man would strike hard as the Captain of it, and the Author
and Finisher of our Faith. Isa. 63.3.
And in that great Work which he alone has effected, for he has trodden the
Wine Press alone, and of the People there was none with him, yet blasphemously
he would therein make a Tool and Instrument of him, for he says Socin. cont.
Wiekum. c. 4. 1 Cor. 1.3. Heb. 5.9. 1 Cor. 6.20, and 7.23. 1 Timothy 2.6. Matthew.
20.28. Ephesians. 5.2.
but we must not so trust in Christ Man, as if he were the Author of our
Happiness, that is the first and only cause -- but only as in the second and
instrumental; so not the principal efficient meritorious cause, yet Paul in his
Epistles wishes equally Grace and Peace from God the Father, and from the Lord
Jesus Christ, whom all other inferior causes do depend upon: For he became the
Author of eternal Salvation unto all them that obey him; all this confirmed by
the many Glorious Titles given him in Scripture: and in plain words we by Paul
twice in the same words, are said to be Bought with a Price which Christ
himself paid; for he gave himself a ransom for all, whom he laid down his Life
for, and that was the end of his coming into the World; he came to give his
Life a Ransom for many, and he has given himself for us an Offering, and a
Sacrifice to God. Several other things in the word there are to this purpose,
but this is full and plain enough.

When according to several places in Scripture, we say, we are justified by
Faith laying hold upon Christ, and thereby applying his Merits unto us, that
wise, modest, and humble Man calls it merum humanum commentum, etc. Socin. de
Serve. part. 4. c. 11. Esphes. 2.8.9. Socin. de Serve. part. 4. c. 12.
a mere invention of Men, and a most vain dream: this and many more things he
says, but proves none, no Scripture to confirm what he says. What the word
does attribute only to God's Mercy, to his free gift Faith and not to Works,
least any Man should boast, he does to Man's honesty, ex probitate, it is Man's
probity that makes him believe the Gospel: but to show how they stumble at
nothing, they say that an unbeliever and unregenerate Man can do good Works,
which positively they affirm, certum est, etc. Smalc. cont. frantz. disp. 1. de
bon. Oper.
it is certain that an unregenerate man, by nature and his reason, can do good
works? but how can they be good except there be a good Principle, a good
Matter, a Right manner, and a good End, which are the four necessary
Circumstances to denominate a good Act, if but one of these be wanting it may
not be called a good Work, besides that every one of these parts must be within
a due degree whereof the want makes the Action defective and so hinders the
goodness and perfection of it, besides that what good of any kind is in us, it
comes from God, for says the Apostle, God works in us both to will and to
do, of his good Pleasure: how can an unregenerate and unbeliever do good works
and acceptable to God? seeing Scripture assures how without faith it is
impossible to please him, Heb. 11.6.
they also would have our Conversion and Regeneration, which is God's proper
Work, to be in Man's Power, when alas the second Creation is no more than the
first, that is not at all, within the Sphere of any Man's Activity, for it is
altogether incommunicable to the Creature.

As they meddle with every material thing in Religion, so they spared not the
Sacraments, whereof first and in general they deny the necessity, of Precept,
and as of means which God has appointed to convey divine Graces to us, which
to affirm says cont. frantz. disp. 9. p. 422.
Smalcius, is fabulous, and worse in another place, per sacramenta, etc. to say
Exam. 100. Err. err. 93.
that by the Sacraments, grace is conveyed to men, is next degree to Blasphemy.
How soon would they turn Blasphemy upon us if ever they had the upper hand. In
particular of Baptism they say, that the Doctrine of Baptism is not a
fundamental or necessary article of Faith, but such as Christian piety may,
consist without, and concerning which every one may abound in his own sense,
Socin. disp. de bapt. c. 17.
nay, ipsissimam falsitatem, etc. Smalc. exam. err. 100. Err. 9.
It Is falsehood it self to say that Christ has under pain of losing Eternal
Life, tied men to the use of them: we do not say they are absolutely necessary,
for God is not tied to means, but they are Ordinances of God's own Appointment,
which he has tied us to as means conducing to bring us to the end of our
Salvation and is it not a great Sin, to disobey God with neglecting and
slighting his Ordinances? Sure I am a great threatening was Thundered against
such in the case of Circumcision, Genesis 17.14.
The uncircumcised man Child was to be cut off from his People; for he has
broken my covenant, which was the Reason of it, and we have a notable Evidence
of the danger which in the inn Moses, was in, for having neglected it in one of
his Sons, Exodus 4.24, 25.
when the Lord met him and sought to kill him. Now Baptism is an introduction
into the Church whereby we are made Members of it admitted into God's Covenant,
and take upon us his Badges and Livery: the washing of the new Birth and the
renewing of the holy Ghost; Tit. 3.5.
which in the matter of our Salvation is no small thing, yet they say,
Scrivierus de bapt.
it belongs to our Sins no more than Noah's Ark, Jeremiah's Yoke, and King
Joash's Arrows, without special command of God: but do they every day look for
a Command? did not Christ once for all say, go and Teach all Nations Baptising
them? Did not after that precept the Apostle's baptize Persons and whole
Families? Matthew. 28.19.
but Socinus, Disp. de. bapt. c. 16. baptismum aquae, etc.
as if he had known Christ's mind better than himself and his Apostles says,
the Baptism of Water was not Commanded by Christ, but only freely used by the
Apostles. And that the Baptism of Water was only for a time, not perpetual, so
it does not belong to those who come after; the Command of outward washing
given by C. 5. p. 53.
Peter, Acts 2.28. was not for ever, but only for a time: thus he and others of
his Kidney go on after that rate. They also slight infant Baptism as of no
advantage, which may as well be left off as used. They positively say, Racov.
Cat. p. 151.
Infants do not at all belong to the Ceremony of Baptism, for neither is there
any Precept for it in Scripture, nor have we any example of it. This to favor
Anabaptists: yet the Baptism of Infants is a Divine Ordinance, and this is to
Unchurch and Unchristianise them. It Is an error, says one of them, to think
that the Baptism of Infants is a Divine Ordinance, or really a thing that
agrees therewith. Many more things of that nature we read in their Writings.

As to the Lord's Supper, they are against the name, for they would not have it
called Sacrament, and have very wrong Notions of the thing, for they make of it
a bare empty Ceremony which neither effects any thing in us, not does God
thereby bestow any grace upon us, only we thereby return God Thanks: yet Paul
calls the bread which we break the Communion of the Body of Christ, 1 Cor.
10.16.
and the Cup of Blessing which we Bless, the Communion of the Blood of Christ.
Therefore the Elements in that holy Sacrament, are no empty signs, for therein
the Lord's Body is to be discerned, and he who does not, Eats and Drinks
Damnation to himself, not discerning the Lord's Body. Chap. 11.29.
The word Sacrament they call barbarous, invented by idle Men, containing
something of superstition or in part of Idolatry, and has been made use of to
conceal the fraud: But the word has abundantly been used by the Orthodox
Fathers and Doctors of the Latin Church; among the Latin profane Authors it
has several significations, as first the Money in the hands of their pontifs,
in loco Sacro, deposited by those that were at Law: also it signified an Oath
which was taken upon the invocation of God, hence in Cicero's sense, Sacramento
contendere, and jure jurando affirmare, to take a Sacrament or an Oath, are the
same: among the Ecclesiastical Authors, sometimes it is taken in a large sense
for every Secret or Mystery of Christian Religion; at other times in a stricter
sense for a sign instituted of God whereby he does Seal his graces and benefits
unto his People as here it is. Sacrament a Sacred, because it is a Sacred thing,
and also therein we take an Oath to Christ to own him as our head and to fight
under his banners; Now the signification of words is what use makes them to be,
and it is received in all Orthodox Schools as appears by the several Confessions
of Faith: so though it be abused and misapplied by some as Papists, it is no
just cause to wrangle with the word, nor for me here to say any more about it:
the Greeks call it (...), Mystery, which is no less Ambiguous than that of
Sacrament.

But to the thing: nobis in coena, etc. says one, Smalc. disp. de Coena, these.
106.
it is the veriest and purest truth of the Gospel, that in the Supper nothing is
conferred on us, only we thereby give God Thanks: to say that in that action
Christ does communicate to us his Body and Blood, is a doctrine to be rejected
as absurd, pernicious and an old Woman's Tale, and the very Children may
understand how much they dote and are near upon running mad, who in the eating
of Bread and drinking of Wine, seek for the Body and Blood of Christ: thus
these Wretches do ridicule and impiously profane the high mysteries of our
Faith: and though we explain it to be not in a corporeal manner, as Papists
say, but in a spiritual, yet they will not be satisfied, for say they, Racov.
Cat. p. 146.
sunt qui, etc. there are those who in the Lord's Supper think to be truly
partakers, though spiritually, of the Body and Blood of the Lord, which Opinion
is with the rest, deceitful and erroneous. And it is added, haud animadvertunt,
etc. Lib. quod Regni polon, etc. Cap. 4. Err. 5.
they do not take notice how in that Sacred Ceremony, there is nothing
belonging properly to any singular advantage for us in the matter of Eternal
Salvation, but only it tends to the glory of God and of Christ. They destroy
the nature of the Sacrament which by a visible sign represents an invisible
grace, for as Bread nourishes our Body, so does Christ's Body Spiritually feed
our Souls; and as Wine quickens and chears up the Body, so the Blood of Christ
works the same effects upon our Souls, which to deny is to make the Seals of
the Covenant to be insignificant and unprofitable, and to deprive us of the
Spiritual Joy, Comfort, Assurance, and increase of Faith, which thereby we
receive, for the Lord's Supper, is a comforting and a strengthening Ordinance.
disp. 12. de coen. these. 78.
How can it be true, says Smalcius, that in the use of the Lord's supper,
Faith is strengthened and increased, seeing some who receive it, may happen to
be most confirmed before they receive! Socinus, Morosovius, etc. say the same,
but there is no Man so much strengthened and confirmed, but he may admit some
farther degree of strength and of grace, and according to the Apostle's
exhortation we must daily labor to grow in Grace and in the Knowledge of our
Lord. 2 Pet. 3.18. Luke 22.19.20. 1 Cor. 11.24.
They also deny that Believers by the right use of this Sacrament do obtain
this sealing of God's Promises and the Remission of their Sins, though our
Savior says, this is my Body which is given for you, and this is my Blood
which is shed for you. But according to them 'twas in vain and to no purpose,
yet Paul assures he said this is my Body which is broken for you: But this
Doctrine, that we have advantages by the receiving of that holy Sacrament, when
it is worthily done, is by them called Smalc. disp. 11. de Coen.
great errors, which it is time to own, and not to deceive ourselves and the
People of God, with trusting to such forged Consolations. Thus according to the
Profane Spirit which they are acted by, they despise both God and his Holy
Ordinances.

But let us pass to other things. As Socinians would overthrow the foundation
of the Church, namely, that Christ is the proper Son of the living God, so his
Church they would make unknown and undiscernable, and so confound those who
would find out, which and what it is? Because every one who is desirous of
Salvation, which is to be gotten only in Christ's Church, would go about
clearing to himself whether or not he be a Member of that true Church, because
also there is the Synagogue of Satan; therefore there are some certain proper
marks and characters whereby to know it; these make a great Controversy between
Protestants and Papists: But Socinians would have us not to mind or trouble our
Heads about such things, for say they, Rac. Cat. p. 234. non multum juvat.
it is no great matter for any to inquire after the signs of the true Church,
etc. but is it not a convincing Argument to make us know the true Church when
the true marks are found, and to assure us we are Members of it, as for the
Saving Doctrine which therein he mentions, he would have it to be the Socinian
Heresy. Disp. de Eccles. Sect. 6.
Smalcius plainly denies the sincere preaching of the word and the right use of
the Sacraments, (which all Protestants affirm) to be the true marks of Christ's
Church: he also affirms that the right use of Sacraments may be among some who
are not God's people, a strange doctrine indeed, for there is no right use
without a sound mind and an upright heart, which can be found only among God's
people.

Another great error they have about the Church is this, the Church says
Socinus, may totally fail for several Ages, and has actually failed; this, as
I am apt to believe, and I elsewhere have given my reason for it, tends to
suggest that the true Church was lost till he came and did set it up: we own
that at sometimes of great Persecution to Man's Eye it was invisible, yet for
all that there was a Church: 1 King 1.19.14.18.
though Elijah thought, he only was left, yet God had seven thousand left in
Israel who had not bowed the knee unto Baal, whom the Prophet during that Cruel
Persecution by Ahab and Jezebel, could not see: this of the Jewish, the like of
the Christian Church, which is well called Catholic or Universal, in relation
to both times and places; and as it has been so from the Apostles time, so it
shall be to the World's end; there have been Believers in all Ages, and of all
Nations, though sometimes more, and sometimes less.

Furthermore they attempt bringing a Confusion into the Church (for they are
Enemies to all settled Churches) with going about to destroy in it the Ministry
by way of Office (...) witness these words of Socinus denying a necessity of
Ordination in the Church. Non video, etc. I see no reason why a Man versed in
Scriptures, and of probity, may not take that office upon himself: so say the
Quakers and Anabaptists, but nothing weaker and less pertinent than this can be
said upon the matter, especially by one who so highly pretended to be Master of
reason: because he see a not, will not, or by reason of prejudices cannot see,
therefore it is not; this I may well call a proud way of Arguing, what he sees
not, others do; must all others be deluded and in the wrong, and only he in the
right? one would think Scripture is plain enough upon the matter, for there is
a Commission under the Gospel to exercise the Ministry as there was under the
Law, Heb. 5.4, 5.
and no man takes, ought to take, this honor unto himself, but he that is
called of God as was Aaron; so also Christ glorified not himself to be made an
high Priest, but he that said unto him, thou art my Son, to day have I begotten
thee. Therefore upon the change of the Ministry, when after his Resurrection
our Savior appointed his Apostles to Preach the Gospel, he gave them their
Commission, and laid that which he had received from the Father as the ground
of theirs, as the Father has sent me, even so send I you. John. 20.21. Chap.
17.18. Romans 1.1.
And to the Father he says, as thou have sent me into the World, even have I
also sent them into the World: so the Commission of the Ministry of the Church
came at first and Originally from Heaven: thus Paul when he speaks of his
Apostleship, mentions his calling thereunto Paul called to be an Apostle: it is
true his Vocation was extraordinary, therefore he says, Paul an Apostle not of
men, neither by man, but by Jesus Christ, and God the Father: 1 Cor. 1.1. Gal.
1.1. Acts 9.17.
yet we read how the Lord Jesus sent Ananias who laid his hands on him and
said, the Lord Jesus that appeared unto thee in the way, has sent me: there
must be a mission; neither went he to the Gentiles till the Lord said to him,
depart, Chap. 22.21. Romans 10.15.
for I will send thee far hence unto the Gentiles: so then a mission is
necessary, for how shall they Preach except they be sent?

Thus he Sacrilegiously intruded not himself into that Office, but a Lawful
call he had, at first that call of Ministers was extraordinary, the Apostles
who had it, being immediately called, and extraordinarily endued with Gifts by
the Holy Ghost, but when things began to be settled there was an Ordinary
Vocation or Ordination called the laying and putting on of the Hands: thus said
Paul to his Disciple, 2 Timothy 1.6. 1 Timothy 4.14.
stir thou up the gift which is in thee, by putting on of my Hands; and
elsewhere he does exhort him, neglect not the Gift that is in thee, which was
given thee by prophecy, with the laying on of the Hands of Presbitery. Thus the
seven were chosen, and when the Apostles had prayed, they laid their hands on
them. This calling and Ordination was from hand to hand to pass to after Ages,
for the things that thou have heard of me, Acts 6.6. 2 Timothy 2.2. 1 Timothy 5.22.
says the same Apostle, among many witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful
men, who shall be able to teach others also; and upon this account he gives him
a Caution to lay hands suddenly on no man, till after a due examination about
the Doctrine whether sound, and a competent knowledge to teach, and a strict
inquiry about Morals, a Good Life and Conversation: Moreover, does not the word
positively affirm, 1 Cor. 12.28. Ephesians. 4.11.
that God has set some in the Church, First, Apostles, Prophets, Teachers,
etc. again, he gave some Apostles and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and
some Pastors and Teachers; So in the Church there is a Ministry by way of
Office, which no Man may take upon himself, but he who is lawfully called to it:
The Church is God's House, who is the God of order; therefore to prevent
confusion and usurpation therein, he has appointed not only the spiritual
bread and food for his Children, but also the Stewards and Ministers who are to
distribute it: And verily verily I say unto you, he that enterreth not by that
Door into the Sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a Thief
and a Robber. Thus it is visible enough, how dangerous to the Church are
Socinian Principles, seeing they tend to ruin her Doctrine, and allow every one
a liberty to give God's Word what Interpretations they think fit, also to set
up any one for Ministers of the Gospel, and thus to destroy the Order and
Economy which God has settled in it: whence Confusion will necessarily follow.
About these things, and in all Disputes concerning Religion we ought to have a
rule to go by, and that is Scripture well explained and understood, that is
according to the true signification of the Words and Sense in the Original, the
scope of the Place, and the analogy of Faith; this rule must be true and
certain, which cannot be as long as every one is allowed to turn it to his own
Sense and private Interpretation: Jonah Schlich. ting. in Symb. Epist. ad loct.
p. 3.
One of their Authors in his Exposition of the Creed, says, that it is most
ancient and most simple, and from the beginning no Man doubted but that it
contained the Apostolical Doctrines. But he says not enough, for that Creed
must be received not only as to the words, but also in the sense wherein the
primitive Church took it.

It is very unreasonable in them to go about setting up their own private
Opinions over and above, and to the prejudice of the public and universal
ones, it is too much to abound in their own sense, and to despise the general
consent of the primitive Church, as if excepting a number of Heretics, all the
World had been blind and in darkness till Socinus came, so before there was
not, nor is there now any true Church but of their own Sect: they refuse to
join with those who went before, because, say they, they were fallible, yet
they would have us to join with them, so it is but reasonable for us to ask them
to prove their infallibility; it argues a great pride in them that in matters
of Religion, even as to the Fact, which cannot be proved merely by the light of
Reason; they will not in the least submit to the judgment of others, who are
witnesses of the times, yet take upon themselves to frame a new Religion, make
new Articles of Faith, and set up for Judges whether or not, at their pleasure,
to receive or reject matters of Faith, and the Doctrines hitherto received by
the Universal Church: it is true they have been cunning enough to enlarge much
the pales of their Society, therein to receive more Men and of all sorts, to
that effect Socinus's System is compiled of a Rapsody of complicated Heresies;
therefore to avoid the name of Innovator, he says, nullum, etc. Apolog. Epist.
ad Martin. Vadovit.
In my public writings I asserted no doctrine, which before my coming hither
(into Poland) had not been owned by others in this Kingdom or elsewhere. Yet
his Uncle Laelius (who had been his Teacher, and whose Opinions he defended) in
the Preface of his Explication of the 1st. Chap. of John's Gospel, declares his
Interpretation to be new, the true sense whereof, says he, had been mistaken
by all Expositors that were before. It Is true, that generally most of his
Heresies were broached before him, whereunto his Uncle and he after, added some
few things, and thereunto gave a new form, which to give a greater Authority
unto, he says, how Epist. ad Squarcilupum. Tom. 1. p. 382.
in what he had written in answer, ad palaeo-logum de Magistratu, he owned no
other Master or Teacher but God and Scripture, besides his Uncle Laelius, dead
long before, or rather some few Writings or Annotations of his; this in the
same place he also extends to the universal knowledge of Divine Things: And tho
he owns there be still some things which he might learn, yet hitherto he met
with none therein able to teach him. And this Man who seems to scorn to learn
any thing of others, has forged and framed a new Body of Divinity, and
squeezed what he could out of his Brains, that very same he published and would
have us to believe as Divine Truths, as if to the exclusion of the whole
Church, he had been constituted the only true Interpreter of God's Word:
however this must be said, that to gain more Men to himself, he allowed others
the same liberty he took, to Interpret Scriptures as they pleased; yet he
insinuates, how in his Interpretations are the fitter rules for them to go by:
and to please many Men about this, they give leave to bring in commodam
Interpretationem, as they call it, that is not the truest but most to their
purpose, the easiest, most commodious, or convenient, under which cloak they
wrest it to a contrary sense; and in matters of Salvation Socinus is so
complacent as to say that though one believes things contrary to Scripture,
Tom. 1. p. 502.
as to believe some things therein to be forbidden or commanded, which are not,
he is thereby in no danger of being deprived of Salvation, or excluded from
Heaven. Yet Men should know how the Gospel and Christian Religion is a
Depositum, a thing given in trust, whereof the Ministers are the keepers, for
says the Apostle to his Disciple, 1 Timothy 6.20.
O Timothy, keep that which is committed to thy trust; it is then a thing
delivered to, not invented by thee, not thine own but Christ's; it is not of thy
contrivance, but like a Steward thou have received it and must dispose of it,
not according to thine own fancy, but according to the rule prescribed thee,
without any alteration.

But as their Principles are dangerous to the Church, so they are to the State,
for they would not allow the Magistrate, either in the legislative or executive
part of the Government, in matters of Religion to punish any, though never so
great offenders, yet by the Laws of God, Blasphemy and Idolatry were punished
with Death, and as they agree with the Donatists against the Magistrates
punishing for Heresy, and for leaving every one to enjoy his own Opinions; so
for all their fair pretenses, they are with them for a liberty in practices,
and against compelling any Man to a Godly Life, which is an inlet to all manner
of Immorality, as the other is a gap to every Heresy. In relation to the
Magistrate, Socinians do join in most of their wrong Notions about it, and
though they do not positively and absolutely say the Christian Magistrate to be
incapable of bearing the Sword, yet they say as good, for they would not have
him to draw it out of the Scabbard, meaning against them, though for never so
just and necessary a cause, especially about matters of Religion, which they
wholly exclude from his Jurisdiction, yet as the Anabaptists did at Munster, so
there is sufficient ground to believe, that if the Socinians could snatch the
Power out of the hand of the Christian Magistrates that are against them, and
lodge it in their own, no question but they would use their utmost endeavors
there to keep it; and like the Circumcellions, a sort of Donatists in Africa,
destroy all that are not of their Religion.

In few words, these are the right Notions we must have of the Magistrate,
first that God is the Author thereof, whom he constitutes as his Vicegerent
upon Earth, thus he gave his People Captains, Judges, and Kings, who are all by
his own appointment, for, says the Apostle, the Powers that be, are ordained
of God. Secondly, Romans 13.1. Psalm. 82.6.
Christians may be Magistrates, because it being an Ordinance of God; it is
good, therefore Princes who are Head-Magistrates, are called Children of the
most High. Which is to be understood as of Monarchys, so of Aristocracies, and
Democracies, according to the several forms of Government in different
Countries. Thirdly, Though the Authority of Magistracy may sometimes happen to
be wrongly used, when it answers not God's end in the institution, yet God made
it for a good end, for the preservation of peace, order, and honesty, in humane
Society; therefore the Apostle exhorts that Prayers be made for Kings, 1 Timothy
2.1, 2.
and all that are in Authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in
all godliness and honesty. And Fourthly, the Magistrate's Office is extended
over matters of Religion, and by his place he is bound to take care that his
Subjects do profess the true Religion according to the Word of God, and do what
he can to promote his Glory, and their Spiritual Good in the ways conducing to
it, as also to discourage, discountenance, punish and suppress all that is
contrary thereunto, whether in Doctrine or Practice: Romans 13.4.
the reasons are these, first because he is the Minister of God for good: Now
it is God's Ministers duty, every way to promote his Glory, which is never
better done than when a due care is taken of true Religion; secondly, the
Magistrate like a Father is bound to bring up his Children in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord. Thirdly, he is the keeper of both Tables of God's Law,
so that he ought to punish the breakers of the first as are Idolaters, Cursers,
Blasphemers, as well as those of the second, as Murderers, Adulterers, etc.
Moses was chief Magistrate over the Children of Israel, and into his hands God
put them, thereby to him Committing the execution thereof; according to this
the pious Magistrates and Kings under the old Testament as Joshuah, Samuel,
David, Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah, and Josiah took care of true Religion, and of
God's Worship; but if they would not mind those things, then they would bear
the Sword in vain, Romans 13.4.
contrary to Scripture, which says, he is a Minister of God, a Revenger to
execute wrath upon him that does evil. But to corrupt the true Doctrines of
Religion, is certainly to do Evil directly against God, which is worse than
against Men, and this was the practice of the Constantines, Theodosius, and
other good Christian Emperors against the Manichaeans, Priscillianists, etc.
besides, we read in plain terms that the Magistrates ought to punish crimes,
Job says it, first in the case of Adultery, Job. 31.11. v. 28.
this is an heinous crime, yea, it is an iniquity to be punished by the Judges.
Then upon the account of Idolatry, this also were an iniquity to be punished by
the Judges; so we may say, Blasphemy no less Sin than is Idolatry, but greater
than Adultery, is an iniquity to be punished by the Judges. Acts 13.20. Ex
Stegman. p. 42.43. ob id ipsum, etc.
Now no Man may deny that Princes and Chief Magistrates are contained under the
name of Judges, seeing for the space of about 450 years God governed his People
by several Persons called by that name.

Against this Socinians say, that upon no account any violent means should be
used in matters of Religion, for says one of them peremptorily, no Judge is
permitted to use them in religious matters: but not to look back, this Doctrine
is every day maintained in Print in those Pamphlets at any time to be seen in
Westminster Hall, P. 32.
and in every Bookseller's Shop. Among others in Mr. Toland's Letter to a
Member of the House of Commons in Ireland, he declares, he is a perfect
stranger to any such Power claimed by that Honorable Body. And another in a
Pamplet lately published, upon the matter has these words, The grounds and
occasions of the Controversy concerning the Unity of God. p 48.
God reserves the execution of vengeance to himself, and therefore allows the
Civil-Magistrate no-Coercive Power, farther than to preserve the public Peace:
this comes close upon the Parliament, which thereby they would exclude from
meddling with things of Religion: Men may know what they would be at, by their
petulant carriage toward some of the Honorable Members, when according to
their Judgment and Conscience, they have spoken their Mind in the House, as it
will appear by a Letter which I think fit here to insert, and which was made
public before: it is thus.

Honored SIR,
KNowing you to be a Person of Morals, and one that loves not Superstition nor
Arbitrary Power, Dated. Lumbard-street Jan. 11, School. and directed for J.A.
Esquire; to be left at the Lobby of the House of Commons. Received from the
Doorkeeper of the House Jan. 11. and opened before us. C.S. C.T.
although your Voting in the House, and Arguing out of the House for a Standing
Army, in Coffee-Houses, which indeed was for Chains for your self and Friends;
and the evil Character you give, and some Reflections you have made on the
Worthy, Learned and Pious Mr. Toland, makes me doubt your Reasons being clouded
by Priestcraft and Court-craft: To-redeem you from both, I sent to be left at
your Lodging in the beginning of the last Week, two Books, as a Specimen of Mr.
Toland's Labor and Parts: They will (I hope,) if you will not wilfully shut
the Eyes of your Reason, convince you of the Errors that Education, and a
Superstitious standing Army of Black Gowns, (worse by far than a standing Army
of Red Coats,) have wrought in you; the last will only take away your Liberty,
but the first, your Reason, the last will only settle Arbitrary Power, the
first Nonsense; Contradictions, Suspicion and Blasphemy against the only true
God, who is, and will be most jealous of his Honor, I pray to him, and him
only, to give you this Grace and Understanding in all things; your Friend if
you will be your own.

Tho. Firmin Redivivus.


This betrays no Wit nor Wisdom in the Scribler; but on the other side, can any
thing more rashly, maliciously and insolently be Penned? It affords sufficient
Matter for Observation; I have only time to take notice of that Spirit of
theirs, which makes them charge those who differ from them with Nonsense,
Contradictions and Blasphemy; and as they so falsely and easily, charge the
Orthodox with Blasphemy, so as sharply and easily there they would punish it,
if once they had the Power in their Hand; as for the Learned, and Pious Mr.
Toland, I doubt, he would make his own Panegyric, which is indecent and fulsom
in a thing not true, nor to the purpose. But they go farther, and presume to
deprive the Magistrate of the Authority which God has given him, (and this
should make him concerned to look to himself,) for they deny him the Right to
put any Man to death for any Cause whatsoever; thus the State is pestered with
these Vipers in its Bosom; Ostorod. inst. c. 28. praecepta Christi, etc.
Christ's precepts allow no Man to take away another Man's Life, says one,
they make no difference between a private and a public Person, no private Man
indeed, ought to do so, but it is otherwise of the Civil Magistrate whom God
has Constituted to do Justice: Nay, they come to Particulars, and would not
have Thieves, Adulterers and Murderers punished with Death, which is to settle
such a Society of Men as Romulus called to set up his new State: How can People
live with, and be safe among such a Generation? yet one of theirs is plain
enough; Smalc. Disp. de rebus Civil. Sect. 2.
Quemadmodum, etc. As Christ commanded not to put murderers to death, much
less, may we say he ordered thieves and adulterers to be put to death: Yet
before the Law, Adultery or Whoredom (for the Woman was a Widow,) was punished
with Death, Genesis 38.24.
as we read in the Case of Tamar, (which Frantzius in his These. 30. brought in
for an instance,) who should have been burnt; but it is all one to them, for
says the same Author in the same place, As well the things before, as those
under the Law, we must look upon to have been abolished by Christ, as far as
they relate to Judgment; which is as if he had said, Christ by taking away all
Penalties and Punishments from Malefactors, has by this Impunity encouraged
and allowed them to commit Thefts, Adulteries and Murders, etc. Is this the
Gospel of Christ, who came to destroy sin, and reclaim Men from their evil
ways, and plainly tells us He came not to destroy, Matthew. 5.17.
but to fulfill the law? Nay, that Man spares not the Moral Law, for he adds,
Ib. Resp. ad These. 47.
Legent Divinam Moralem, etc. The divine moral law, and with it the law of
nature ought to be reformed, limited and moderated by the law of Christ. What
Reformers are these? this is a very great step toward Antinomians, if they be
not such already; but such Principles lead not into Holiness, Righteousness,
Good-Life and Conversation: But the Law of Christ is not contrary to the Moral,
the abuses of which, he indeed, went about to Reform; for the Jews had through
their Inventions and Innovations brought in many, but the Law it self, he never
Reformed; we find the contrary, when he said to the Man, If thou will enter
into life, keep the Commandments, Matthew. 19.17, 18, 19.
which are, thou shall do no murder, thou shall not commit adultery, thou
shall not steal. These are the three he mentions to be Reformed and Moderated,
yet our Savior far from mitigating them, and bringing in a moderation, puts a
higher tie thereupon, when he says, Whosoever looks on a woman to lust after
her, chap. 5.28.
has committed adultery with her already in his heart: So to the same purpose
he speaks about Murder, wherein he appears very far from dispensing from the
strictness of the Law, whilst he presses the inward Obedience in the Heart;
but to return to the Socinianp-rinciple about abolishing and moderating the
Moral Law, and putting no Man to Death for any Crimes, it is of a dangerous
Consequence, for after this rate, it is not lawful either for the Prince by Arms
to stand in the just defense of himself or of his Subjects, nor for the
Subjects to take up Arms to defend themselves and their Prince: Thus if
Socinians had the upper hand, and were about to destroy those who oppose them,
then they would not have the Magistrate make use of Arms against them, though
Blasphemers and Seditious: there are several things more of that nature, which
I omit for fear of engaging too far in so fulsome a matter, leaving it for
those whom it does concern, to make farther Observations upon it.

However, as to the use of forcible means, I say we are against it, thereby to
promote and propagate, but not to defend Religion, if by Arms it be assaulted,
by the same it may be defended, for Vim vi repellere licet; an unjust Violence
may justly be repulsed; yet we by no means do approve of the Popish
interpretation given that Text, Compel them to come in. Those that are without
may not well be forced, but invited and persuaded co come in; but the case is
very different for those who are in, for being Members of a Church, or of a
State, or of both, as they enjoy the benefit of the Laws, so they must not
presume to break them; but in things not against God's commands, they must be
made to yield Obedience thereunto, curbed and punished when they do the
contrary, and when gentle and fair means have been tried, but prove
ineffectual; this is not to violate the Conscience, but to break the obstinacy
of the Mind about Fundamentals in Religion. I own this was not practiced by the
Apostles, nor in their time, because, indeed it was not their work, nor their
Commission, which was of another nature, but at that time there were no
Christian Magistrates, all Jews or Gentiles; but the thing went otherwise, when
Emperors and other Men of Authority in the World became Christians, then they
became Nursing Fathers to the Church, defended and maintained it against her
Enemies, by Arms against those who therewith assaulted it, and by Councils
against those who would have undermined her Doctrines. And so it ought now to
be against those who impiously Blaspheme that God whom the Christian Church
ever owned and worshipped, whereunto the Adversaries agree, for says Tom. 1.
Sol. Scrup. 30. ad eum. p. 327.
Socinus, Constat Justinum, etc. It is certain that Justin and Irenaeus had a
different Opinion from what we have of the Person of Christ. Therefore Men who
wilfully recede from such Fundamental and Universal Truths, and Blaspheme
there-against, may very well be restrained and punished; and by an Argument, ad
Hominem; here upon the matter, I return Socinus's own words upon himself, for
says he, Epist. ad Mart. Vadovit.
The Heresiarcks who raise Seditions, and in promoting their Heresies mind only
their own conveniences, ought most severely to be used, as those whose Fault
and Vice lies not in the Understanding, but in the Will: He farther adds, How
the Heresiarcks whose Frailty lies only in the Mind, ought to be dealt with as
furious Men, and out of their Senses, because though they be pity-worthy, yet
when found to do mischief, are restrained, and though these like the others,
may be pitied, yet if need requires, their endeavors to propagate their
Doctrine ought to be suppressed, even, if otherwise it cannot be done, with
Bonds and Imprisonment: That is, in plain English, if they had the Power in
their hand, thus they would use those who differ from them, and by them are
called Heretics; so upon themselves they pass a Sentence of Condemnation: This
Coercive Power at several times, has by the Magisttrate been made use of; it
was for an instance, when several Bishops of the East met together to get
Paulus Samosatenus, an Heresiarck, well known to Socinus, removed from bis
Bishopric of Antioch, for his Heresy, and addressed to the Emperor Aurelian,
who effected it. But to go much beyond the time of Christian Emperors, we have
a remarkable example of what is the Duty, and ought to be the Care of Princes
and Governors, to make use of the Power which God has put into their hands to
promote his Glory, and suppress all that is contrary to it. Dan. 3.29.
Nebuchadnezzar's Decree which he made after Shadrach and his two Companions,
had miraculously been delivered from the fiery Furnace, that every, not only
Person, but Nation and People that should speak any thing amiss, or as it is in
the old Translation, Blaspheme against the God of Shadrach, should be cut in
pieces, and their houses be made a dunghill. If this Heathen King would not
leave Blasphemy unpunished, but moved by God's Spirit, made a Law, and
appointed a Punishment for such Transgressors, much more ought all who profess
the Christian Religion, take care to see such Impieties suppressed, or else as
their Knowledge and Charge is greater, if therein they be wanting, they are in
danger of suffering double Punishment. What Treason is in Humane things, that
in some kind Blasphemy is in Divine; for as Treason is against the King's
Person or Government, so Blasphemy is against God's Nature, or his Works, now
as Treason is justly punished, so there is a Punishment due to Blasphemy.

But to come to other things, I say that for all their pretenses to Piety and
Virtue, their Principles lead quite to the contrary, and what I am going to
say, though there was nothing else can bring it home upon them; here I
positively charge them by means of some of their damnable Opinions to encourage
Vice, Profaneness, Immorality, with all manner of Wickedness, and this, by the
Grace of God, I can make good, so that it shall stick, and let them wash it off
as they can: They are for the Mortality of the Soul after Death, like the Body,
they would have her to be incapable of Pleasure or Pains, she neither acts, nor
is acted by, but is asleep, together with the Body till the Resurrection-Day,
to this purpose speaks Epist. 5. ad Volk. So. Epist. 3. ad Dudith. p. 507.
Socinus, which was Def. Puccii ad Resp. Soc. tom. 2. Oper. Soc. p. 264.267.
Fr. Puccius's Charge against him: Non me latet, etc. says Puccius, I know
that thou deniest the Immortality of the Souls of those who are not Christians,
in the Resurrection, so with the Epicureans, thou believe the Impious
Doctrine that the Souls dye with the Body, and are both Annihilated by Death.
We use to say, sins are linck'd together, and go by couples, so one Error
draws into another; thus by a good consequence, they deny there is now a
Triumphing Church, consisting of the Souls of those who enjoy God's presence,
when Scripture says, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, from
henceforth; yea says the spirit, Rev. 14.13.
that they may rest from their labors. Upon this Subject Calvin has written
an excellent Treatise, called Psychopannichia, about the condition of Souls
after this Life, to be seen at the beginning of his Opuscula's, which I refer
the Reader to, not to trouble my self with refuting the Dream of the Soul
falling asleep after Death, till the Resurrection.

They also deny that there shall be a Hell, being for a total Annihilation,
that is, after Judgment the Wicked shall be reduced to nothing, as if they had
never been, then no Torments for them to suffer; upon this, Epist. 3. ad
Dudith. nec de Immortalitate animae etc.
Socinus speaks plain enough, I don't believe that any where in the whole Old
Testament any clear mention is made, either of the Immortality of the Soul, or
of any other Life: Here is your Saducee; but what is become of the Soul after
Death? Solomon speaks to the purpose, Then shall the dust (that is the Body,
Eccles. 12.7.
) return to the Earth as it was: and the spirit shall return unto God who gave
it; now in God's presence is fullness of joy, and at his right hand pleasures
for evermore. Psalm. 16.11.
Certainly the Soul when it is with God in that special manner, must feel Joy
and Comfort; but Socinians are of a contrary Opinion, for they affirm, Smalc.
Err. 100. Err. 81. Err. 98.
Animae Sanctorum, etc. The Souls of Saints after Death feel nothing, and enjoy
nothing: Nay, they deprive them of the blessed Vision of God, for he adds, The
Souls of Saints do not see God before the Day of Judgment; yet Scripture speaks
of a place of Ease and Rest, called Abraham's Bosom; and though Parables be not
Argumentative, Luke. 16.22, 25.
yet they are Illustrative, to make us understand as far as we are able, a
thing that is, and that same place without any Parable our Savior calls
Paradise, when speaking to the repenting Malefactor, chap. 23.43.
with a strong Asseveration he says, Verily to day shall thou be with me in
Paradise. Which is evidence of his commanding Power there, hereupon the words
of an ancient Doctor are remarkable, Hilar. lib. de Trin. p. 77.
Habes conquerentem ad Mortem Relictum se esse, quia Homo est: Habes eum qui
moritur, profitentem se in Paradiso Regnare, quia Deus est. Thou have him
complaining to be forsaken at his Death, because he is Man; thou have him who
dying, declares he Reigns in Paradise, because he is God, for none but God the
King of Heaven has Right and Power to dispose of places in Paradise. When Paul
says, He has a desire to depart, and to be with Christ. He therein declares,
Phil. 1.23.
how when God's Servants are departed this Life, they are with Christ in
Heaven, a place of Joy and Comfort.

That there is a Hell, we by the Grace of God shall prove it out of Scripture,
but before, I must follow the charge how to make the Soul insensible after
Death, and the total Annihilation, which is plain denial of Hell, do take out
of most part of the World all manner of Virtue, and open a wide Door to all
sort of Licentiousness, Immorality and Wickedness; for if the greater part of
the World be as they are, contained in their Duty more out of Fear of
Punishment than love to Virtue; what then will not the Covetous, Ambitious,
Unclean, Revengeful, etc. Men and Women dare to do to satisfy their several
Passions, if once they are persuaded that after this Life no Punishment shall
be inflicted upon them for all their Wickednesses? Are not Thoughts of Impunity
an encouragment for them to commit Crimes? For the fear of a Judgment and
Torments to come, are a Curb upon and Terror to the Wicked, as we read that
Paul's reasoning of Judgment to come, made Felix tremble, Acts. 24.25.
After this rate they will fear nothing from God after Death, and being free
from the terrors of Hell's Torments, their only care shall be how to avoid the
Justice of Men, which they can more easily do than that of God, who cannot be
imposed upon as Men are, if they can but hide themselves from Man's Eye, they
will think they are safe enough, 1 Cor. 15.32.
and say, Let us eat and drink for to morrow we die: However, let them do what
they can to free Men from the Thoughs of Hell, yet I defy them to free them
from the Terrors of an Evil Conscience.

Such false Teachers who would persuade others that there shall be no Hell, can
hardly be able to persuade themselves of it, no doubt, but they wish it were
so, neither God nor Hell: Acts. 24.15.
Scripture says, There shall be a resurrection of the dead, both of the just
and unjust. After Resurrection shall follow Judgment, for the Dead shall rise
to come to Judgment, which shall pass upon all, both Just and Unjust; certainly
that Judgment and Sentence shall be executed upon both, and as for some it will
be Eternal Life; so by the Rule of Contrarles, for others 'twill be Eternal
Death; for as Felicity shall be Eternal, so shall Misery be. The Word of God
speaks of Hell and of Heaven, of Goats and Sheep, Reprobate and Elect, as we
read in the description of that Judgment made by our Savior, where mention is
made of an everlasting fire, and the Eternity of those Torments for Soul and
Body, Matthew. 25.41. Mark. 9.45, 46. Matthew. 13.42. chap. 25.41.
are expressed by a worm that never dies, and a fire that never shall be
quenched; and a furnace of fire, there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth.
Hence we see, First, there are after this Life Torments prepared for the
Wicked, for the Devil and his Angels, for his Children. Secondly, those
Torments are great, being represented by what can be conceived and expressed to
be most painful, as is Fire, with a mixture of Combustible Matters to make it
more fierce, therefore called, Rev. 19.20.
A lake of fire burning with brimstone, which the beast and false Prophets were
cast alive into. Whether it will be a material Fire we may not well determine,
for we must not presume beyond what is written, but a fire it is, for in many
places God's word calls it so. Matthew. 18.8.
Thirdly, Those Torments shall be eternal, for Scripture, says it, and we must
not pretend to be wiser, and know more or better than God, who in the
fore-quoted places, calls it An everlasting fire that shall never be quenched;
Jude. 7.
it is elsewhere called eternal Fire, suffering the vengeance of eternal Fire,
otherwise called Everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and
from the Glory of his power, and it is to last to all Eternity; for it is said,
that the beast and the false prophet, with the wicked shall be tormented day
and night for ever and ever, which latter words plainly show the continuation
without intermission of those Torments, and besides Scripture, we have reason
for it, if the joys of Heaven be Everlasting so must the Torments of Hell be:
now both the justice and Truth of God, which are two unshaken Pillars, require
that there be a continuation not annihilation of the wicked, for is it not just
that the Soul and Body, which together sinned against God, should also together
suffer the pains due to Sin? there must be an adequate punishment for offenses
against an infinite Eternal Majesty, but the finite Creature cannot
intensively, suffer an infinite Torment, therefore must extensively, that is of
an infinite duration, and whether or not the fire be Material, the wrath and
curse of God can supply it with Fuel for ever and ever; now, that there is a
judgment to pass and be executed upon all, I am sure it is the Apostles
doctrine when he says, for we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of
Christ, 2 Cor. 5.10.
that every one may receive the things done in his Body, whether it be good or
bad: the same Reason there is for bad as for good, and our Savior speaks home
when upon account of the Resurrection of the last day he says, they that have
done good shall out of their graves come forth to the Resurrection of Life, and
they that have done Evil unto the Resurrection of Damnation: but damnation is
not Annihilation; John 5.28, 29
and can men be so impious as to think that the threatening of Hell is but a
scare Crow, a forged Tale, or the Man in Clouts.

Another error of theirs about Resurrection is this, that the same Bodies
which are buried shall not raise, the question is not about the quality but
about the Substance, which shall be the same but of different quality: God, say
they, will give Spiritual ones instead of those we had here, which is a forgery
wholly destructive to the Resurrection of the dead, one of the Articles of our
Faith, for if there be new ones it is no Resurrection of the old ones, but a
Creation of new ones? Smalc. exam. 100 Err. Err. 88.89.
Corpora haec, etc. said one, these bodies which now we have, we do not believe
they shall rise from the dead, but that God will give us others. Which make him
add, that Exam. 157. err. Err. 103.
after the Resurrection we shall be like unto God, Job 19.25, 26, 27.1 Cor.
15.53, 54. V. 43.
as to the Bodies: but Job whom I will believe sooner than him says, though
Worms destroy his body, yet in his flesh he shall see God, and his Eyes shall
behold, and not another: and Paul affirms this corruptible must put on
incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortallity. The same body that was
buried shall rise again, for in the fore quoted place the Apostle says, it is
Sown in dishonor, it is raised in Glory, it is sown in weakness it is raised
in power: so he still speaks of the same: and as the bodies that shall be alive
at the coming of our Savior shall be changed only as to the quality, in
substance remaining the same as expressed in the word, 2 Cor. 5.1.4.
so shall the Bodies at that time lying in their graves, etc. thus we see it
shall be the same in substance, only a change in the quality; for it is just
that the same Body which for the cause of Christ was upon Earth exposed to
ignominy, Phil. 3.21.
should with him be glorified in Heaven, 2 These. 1.5, 6, 7.
and that the bodies of Wicked men who sinned against God and deserved
Punishment, should suffer it according to what the Apostle says: But take
notice of the Blasphemy in the Acts M. S. of their Racovian Assembly
Conference, animadvertendum est, etc. men must take notice how Christ and his
Apostles, were in some manner forced to comply with the Opinions of men which
then were prevailing, as it appears plainly, enough by the parable of the rich
Man and of Lazarus for to be tormented in hell or be in Abraham's Bosom are
only fictions, like those which the Poets writ of Ixion, Sysiphus, and
Tantalus, as if Christ and his Apostles had brought upon us as Truths of the
Gospel. The Fables of the Heathen Poets: that only the pious are to live
forever, Smalc. disp. de baptism.
is it not drawn out of Scriptures, which do comfort only Believers with the
Promises of Eternal Life? Now if hence we infer that the wicked shall not live
forever, it is not to be attributed unto us, but to Holy Scripture, the like of
the Death and Destruction of Devils: cannot we hence well conclude that they
shall be reduced to nothing: but how this is to be, therein, in our judgment,
every one may abound in his own sense; the like must be said of the Torments of
Devils and Wicked Men: we know that Eternal Life promised the Godly, is a
Blessed Life, which alone is worthy to be called Life, whilst the Pains and
Torments that take away the Happiness of Life, both in this World and that
which is to come, are in several places of Scripture well known, called Death
comparatively.

They farther teach that the pious men who died before Moses, knew neither
Catech. Rac. c. 11. de proph. munere. Christ.
Christ nor Volkel. l. 4. c. 3. and l. 3. c. 11
his Salvation, that indeed Crell. de. deo.
God forgave their Sins, and gave them Eternal Life, Rac. c. 5. q. vi. volk.
1.3. c. 11.
yet without any promise, thus according to them, men were saved without a
Savior and without Faith, for no promise no Faith, furthermore they say, that
Racov. c. 5. q. 3. and c. 19. sub sin. Heb. 11.8, 9, 14, 15, 16.
Eternal Life and the Holy Ghost were unknown to Moses's Law; thus they were
without Faith, without hopes of a better Life, and without inward joy and
assurance in the Holy Ghost, yet the law contained promises of a Messiah to
come, not only Temporal but also Spiritual and Eternal: the Seed of Abraham,
especially that according to the promise, had a share in the promises made to
him, renewed to Socin. l c. ad quest. utrum fides ista, etc.
Isaac and Jacob, heirs with him of the same promise, now they had Faith, and
thereby desired a better Country than that they came from, that is, as the
Apostle calls it, an heavenly one. They farther say, that by the Covenant of
Moses, neither was the Messiah promised, nor were they commanded to believe in
Christ to come, But let this chiesly be taken notice of,* multa poterant, many
things might be said by the prophets, which the people was not bound to
believe: there are too many more such erroneous things which it would prove too
tedious to relate, and upon occasion I could abundantly produce, but they are
nauseous, and so for the present shall say no more about it.

Thus far have I Characterized the Socinian spirit, and drawn it in its own
Colors; which I hope may thorough God's Blessing open the Eyes of People, to
see the cloven foot, and make men with just indignation to abhor the Devil and
his Works, yet after all this it is wonderful to find how a number of People
have been so bewitched as to receive for doctrines such impieties and
blasphemies, but sometimes in his just judgment, God, as the Apostle says,
does send a strong delusion that men should believe a lie: 2 Thessalonians. 2.10.11.
however, there was a great opposition against this Sect when at first it began
to appear, especially after Socinus's publishing his wicked Book de Servatore,
one Covet, a Protestant Minister in Paris, was the first that answered it: in
and about Poland, where he went to settle, Zarnovecius, Volanus, and others in
those parts, and elsewhere, did write against him. The assertions of the
College of Posen de Trino and uno Deo, compiled by Eutropius came out in
opposition to his Heresies: but that which is very remarkable is this, that in
Poland all the reformed Churches of three several Confessions, namely the
Bohemian, Helvetick and Augustan, or Lutheran, Unanimously joined together, and
declared against those damnable Heresies, and in the year 1570. came to that
famous agreement called of Sandomir, from the place where it was transacted,
and afterward confirmed in several other Synods of theirs, as at Posen in the
same year, at the general one at Cracow in 1573. in the particular one of
Xansens, and of Wlodislaw: afterward in the general of Petricovia in 1578. in
the general of Wlodislaw in 1583. and at Thorn in 1595. in the Preface before
the Articles of those several Synods are these expressions, Syntagmaa Confess.
fidei p. 283.
Nos qui in Poloniae regno, etc. We who in the Kingdom of Poland have rejected
the Idolatry of Antichrist and all Heresies contrary to the Apostical Creed,
and to those of Nice, and of Athanasius, etc. which is plain enough against
Socinians; and in the beginning of the agreement at Sandomir are named
Tritheists, Ebionites, and Ari-Anabaptiss, this Universal consent of theirs was
in writing presented to three of their Kings, Sigismond Augustus, Henry and
Stephen, all which Circumstances made the thing the more considerable, and set
the Hearts of many against Socinus, upon the account of his Blasphemies, in so
much, that in Cracow where he then resided, there was a great tumult by the
Scholars and others, who hurried him out of his Chamber half Naked, though
Sick, and he narrowly escaped being torn in pieces which made him leave that
Town, and go to Lokowicts where he died not long after.

To the character which elsewhere I gave of that Heresiarks Person, The
blasphemous Socinian Heresy (...).
I think now 'twill not be amiss to add Something more and show by what means,
and upon what account his Blasphemous Heresies got so much ground: and as (...)
the Socinian Doctrines, so I hope now to discover their Spirit in their
practices. The Polonian Kinght who has Written S^^inus's Life compares him to
Ignatius Loyola, yet whilst he does it only upon some accounts, as their good
extraction, pregnancy of parts, etc. he omits the main wherein the comparison
is very fit and proper, and it is this, both have been Authors of pernicious
Sects, whom what Augustine once said of Faustus the Manichaean, that he was
magnus diaboli laqueus, a great snare of the Devil, does fitly belong to,
besides the conformity of the name, for that Manichaean, and this Socinus were
both called Faustus, unhappy Wretches: ill meaning Men and Seducers have both
ends and methods to carry on those ends different from those who follow the
rules of God's Spirit; these here do unto themselves propose the Glory of God
and his Service in asserting his Truths, wherein they are guided by his Word,
but the others aim at their own Vain Glory, and seek themselves not the things
of God, or of Christ; then it is no wonder if they choose contrary means to come
to contrary ends: when our Blessed Savior came into the World, his end was to
save it; therefore he proposed the ways conducing thereunto, as is a conformity
to God's Will and Nature; thus because God is gracious, merciful, holy, and
pure, he commanded Men to endeavor to be such, if they would please God, which
is the ready way to happiness; he went not about to suit his Rules and Doctrine
with their corrupt Inclinations; on the contrary, he crossed them with teaching
them Repentence, Self-denial, to take up the Cross and follow him thorough the
way of Afflictions and Tribulations, things in no wise pleasing our natural
Affections; yet this is the way to Heaven.

But the Devil, though he be God's Ape, and would imitate him, for as God has
his Church, so Satan has his Synagogue, his Laws and Ministers; yet instead of
bringing Men to Heaven, as he sometimes with his false suggestions would
pretend, puts them in the ready way to Hell, and with his Snares does cheat and
trick them into it, in order thereunto he studies the temper and constitution
of those Men whom he would draw to himself, and offers suitable baits and
temptations to effect it, Genesis 3.6.
thus with the offer of a Fruit that was good for Food and pleasant to the Eye,
Eve was overcome by his Temptation: Contrary to what our Savior practiced, he
does what he can to please Man's humor and corrupt nature, wherein he makes
use of his Instruments: thus that great Impostor Mahomet, to satisfy his
ambition, lust, and other carnal affections, he knowing how much, under
pretense of Religion, Men are apt to be misled, went about to set up one,
whereof some things of Paganism, Judaism, and Christianism were the
ingredients, but he adapted it to the inclinations, manners, and customs of
those whom he intended to bring into it, and finding how in those Countries Men
were extremely given to sensual pleasures, and loved Gardens, Fruits, and the
like; he not only allowed all here, but also promised after this Life those
pleasures which suited with their Affections, namely handsome Women, fine
Gardens, and such other things, as they in this World liked best of all.

Thus among Christians, some wretches, whom, being puffed up with self-conceit
and desire of vainglory, God left to themselves to fall by their own council,
soon fell into the Devil's Snares, who gave a wrong edge to what natural parts
they had, and qualified them for his drudgery: and as Self-denial is the first
thing which our Savior prescribes his Desciples, so on the contrary Satan
begins with infusing and promoting Self-love; his instruments do follow his
steps, and by all means go about to gratify it: among such I reckon Socinus,
who to gain Proselytes, first of all to make the Religion he was setting up
easy, prescribed very few things to believe and to do, accommodated and fitted
them to the natural inclination and corrupt nature of Men, which are very
dangerous snares; withal to draw Men of all Sects and Sorts, he made such a
mixture, that most, if not every Heretic, might therein find something for his
Opinions; he makes the way to Heaven wide and easy for a Man of any Sect,
without departing from his errors to come to it: there is in Man a repugnancy
to be gainsaid, and a strong desire of liberty in our opinions of things,
discourses, and actions; accordingly Socinus allows it to the full, for in his
School, you may believe what you please, make new Arcicles of Faith, reject old
ones, undervalue Christ, and rob him of his due as much as you can and dare,
and have the liberty to censure the Opinion of others, which is very plausible
to flesh and blood: Gal. 1.16.
but Paul says, how after his Conversion he conferred not with flesh and
blood. And as to their presuming so much upon Scripture, with giving their own
interpretations such as they please: he tells, I say thorough the Grace given
unto me, Romans 12.3.
to every Man that is among you, not to think of himself more highly than he
ought to think, but to think soberly, according as God has dealt to every Man
the measure of Faith: The Old Translation has it thus, that no Man presume to
understand above that which is meet to understand, but that he under stand^th
according to Sobriety.

As when God has a work to do he never wants Instruments, for he fits them for
his Work; so when he has some Judgment to execute, he gives the Devil leave to
prepare the evil instruments to be made use of; in this bad design, Socinus had
suitable qualifications, as being of a good Family, good natural parts improved
by the refined Italian Court-way, especially that of Florence, where he lived
several years and got experience, and thereby became skilled in the way of
insinuating himself into Men's Affections with his being Civil, Affable, and
Courteous, by which means he in Poland, where that cunning and craftiness are
more strangers than in Italy, which is, I may say, the chief center of it,
endeared himself to the friendship of some great Men in that Kingdom, who by
their example and authority spread and propagated his Errors: also by the help
of, whether natural or counterfeit Patience, Meekness, and other affected
Virtues, which all are dangerous qualifications when made use of for bad ends:
Satan is never so dangerous as when transformed into an Angel of Light, so his
Ministers ought carefully to be avoided when in Sheep's Clothing, and when they
have a show of Innocence and Candor, for then occasions are offered them to
execute their woolvish ravenousness, to tear and devour the Sheep: but though
God suffered this impious blasphemer to do a great deal of mischief, as to
admiration in his just judgment he did Mahomet with his absurd, nonsensical,
and extravagant impostures, yet by raising oppositions against him, he would
not permit him to do all the evil he intended, for several pulled off his
Vizard and made him appear in his own Colors.

In some of his Writings, disputes and discourses, though naturally hot enough,
yet he seemed mild, patient, and moderate, knowing how our nature can more
easily be enticed and gently drawn then forced, by which crafty means the
Poison of his Errors more easily crept in, and was by him insinuated into the
Minds of Men, as formerly the Pelagians and other cunning Heretics had done
before him, such Men as the Apostle says, by good Words and fair Speeches
deceive the Hearts of the simple, and as said in the same place, Romans 16.18.
do not serve the Lord Jesus but their Belly, now such as cause divisions and
offenses contrary to the doctrine which we have learned, we ought diligently to
mark and avoid them. Hereupon we must take God's warning to the Prophet, Jerem.
12.6.
believe them not, though they speak fair words unto thee, which we ought the
more to mind because Socinians by means of deceitful words were first admitted
and received here: when all Europe as Switzerland, Geneva, Germany, etc. proved
too hot for them, and being turned out of Poland, then they sent hither to
supplicate in the name of poor persecuted Prostants, upon which account they
were pityed, and coming over some of them thorough Holland, where they met with
too many Friends, they unhappily were here received for such as they had
represented themselves to be, though when in time they came to be known, they
cunningly held their pace, because they were watched. But of late, upon what
encouragement, God knows, they are broken loose upon us both at home and from
abroad; whence some of that outlandish cursed stock are come in and now live
here, till God be pleased to disperse and suppress them, in the mean while they
are like so many Vipers in the bosom of the Nation; upon this account we may
observe two things, which usually happen and are the effects of a Corrupt
nature, the first, that men in a wrong way are more diligent, careful and
industrious to promote those hurtful ends of theirs, than others who are for a
good cause, and which may do good, are to forward it, commonly one in a evil
way, will go farther than another in a good one, the Truth is, he must go fast
whom the Devil drives. The second thing is the general disposition in men to
fall into those snares, and contrary to the dictates of Truth and sound Reason,
to entertain false Notions, because they seem left to their choice to the
prejudice of those Truths which have along with them a Command over our consent
and belief: thorough such pretenses and outward appearances of Modesty,
Humility, desire of the Truth and the like dephts and devices of Satan, which
the Apostle says we are not ignorant of, and by these shares of the Devil,
Rev. 2.24. Cor. 2.11.2 Tim. 2.
Men are by him taken captive at his will.

A thing which very much helped Socinus to set up his errors, is this: when he
came into Poland, he found that Country rent in pieces by several Factions and
Sects of Antitrinitarians who were more intent to destroy the Opinions of their
Antagonists than to confirm their own: so he being a subtle and Crafty Italian,
newly come among them, acted his part so Cunningly as to get himself to be the
head, wherein he was favored by the State and Constitution of that Kingdom
where great Men have much Power, and great Influences, that Nation being styled
Martialis ferox upon the account of the fierce and Arbitrary Spirit of Men of
Quality, and the ordinary people very much kept under by them, not daring to
oppose, he being there, to strenghten himself, made a Rapsody of most Heresies
before him and of others then on Foot in those parts, which he would never have
attempted in Italy for fear of Fire and Faggot, nor in Switzerland, whence he
was forced to fly away; and to please Heterodox Men of all sorts, he therewith
compiled that unhappy System of his, wholly or in part to engage greater
Numbers of Men to defend it. At that time Poland abounded in Monstrous Opinions
which he cemented and joined together, and notwithstanding some divisions, did
set up for head of all, this Man from his Youth began to be fitted to produce
Monstrous things, for besides his Uncles Directions, he being born within the
State of Toscany which generally brings forth the most refined Wits of all
Italy, and so I may say of Europe, had working brains of his own, which
prompted him to new things, and as Italians, are very apt to indulge their
natural Genius, which by experience I know in these late times, commonly to
lead them to mischief, as we have a late instance in the person of Borri who
among other Extravagant alterations, which he made in some Articles of the
Popish Religion, for which he was in the Inquisition, and is now, if not lately
dead, under confinement during Life, in the Castle San Angelo in Rome, he made
the Virgin a Goddess, of the same Nature with God; so Socinus had several
Contemporaries and Compatriots whom I named elsewhere, who with him acted their
parts upon the same Stage. Now I say, Socinus being a busy Man of an active and
stirring Spirit, and in his time matters of Religion, being the general
discourse of the World, he applied his Wits that way, and though may be at
first, he was not altogether so bad as he proved at last, he began by degrees,
so published with a disguised name Castellio's Pelagian Dialogues, afterward
his Book de Christo Servatore; as when an Enemy goes about to besiege a place,
he begins with the outworks and so by degrees comes to the Body: thus Christ's
Enemies begin with acting against his Grace, and at last do attack his Person.

He and his followers use to slight and unconcernedly to speak of Holy things
and of Religion thus, it seems to me, I see nothing, and the like: according to
that Spirit they little care what interpretations they make of God's Word,
which thus they impiously make a stalking Horse of to their wandering Thoughts
and for sinister ends of their own, namely, as they and our modern Socinians
here say, to improve theit Parts, promote Learning and make (...) discoveries,
that is in plain English they may be profane at God's own cost: if they have a
mind to improve their parts, let them make choice of other matters, as
Philosophy, Mathematics, and of what other humane Arts and Sciences they
please, and not for their Pride and Vain Glory to profane God's Field; and
therein sow their own Tares, and to make Religion and the Church subservient to
their Evil intents and purposes.

Another thing they do, as may be seen in most of their late Pamphlets (which
indeed is neither fit nor decent) is often to commend themselves, and bring in
others who speak well of them, but it had been much better not to have brought
themselves under a necessity to need Begging or Borrowing such Certificates of
their good behavior. This puts me in mind of what our Savior said to the
Pharisees, ye are they who justify yourselves before Men, but God knows your
Hearts. Luke 16.15.
It Is true there has been some who may be, out of a Principle of Charity and a
Spirit of meekness, would have invited them out of their Errors, but these are
so far gone in that way as to stand in need to make some kind of Apology for
themselves, yet that method of gentleness is ill bestowed upon Men of an
obstinate and stubborn Spirit, and hitherto has proved uneffectual, for by the
abuse of the thing they are grown Haughtier and Prouder, so that sometimes they
make their own Panegyric, as I P. 27.
observed in the Vindication of the Epistle and preface to my Book. And in a
place of the mock Apology against me, one of them says, one P. 20, 21.
of our Learned Bishops does not think the Unitarians would dishonor Christ,
only they think that to make him equal with the Father is a disparagement to
Almighty God. Such a passage may be, though I do not remember to have read it,
yet I am apt to believe with passing thorough their hands it has gotten a
tincture of Socinianism, but what makes those Men so busy as to decide, that to
make the Son equal with the Father, is a disparagement to God Almighty? when
the same in several Texts of Scripture quoted elsewhere makes him his equal,
Zech. 13.7.
and in one place calls him my fellow, and in many Texts of the New Testament,
Christ makes himself equal with the Father. But let me warn those who have a
favorable Opinion of them to have a care of what they Write, for thereby we
see how apt they are to take Advantage of any thing, so every stroke of a
Charitable Pen they would use as an Argument of their good and sincere
intentions and of their being in the Right, for as they make of it a Trade to
wrest Scriptures, so they do the Writings of others which I have a particular
cause to take Notice of, because I said that some Arminians went Hand in Hand
with Socinians, presently, as well observed by In his Letter to Dr. Edwards.
Mr. Lobb, and in the P. 12.
remarks on a Paper sent by some Eminent Presbyterians to the Congregational,
etc. They looked upon it with a multiplying Glass and would bring under their
Banners not only almost all the Church but half of the Presbyterians, etc.
Which in my Answer to the two Letters I take Notice of as of their want of
sincerity, and to speak plainly, I now may call it one of their Tricks which
they are so full of.

As indeed in their whole Carriage one may easily perceive it, for it hangs
altogether, and in the bottom it appears in their Doctrines and Practices so
contrary to Faith and to the Rules of the Universal Church: besides the
Self-Conceitedness and Pride of their Penmen who despise all that are not of
their Mind, and with Blasphemy deride true Religion, and to that purpose make
use of lies and Calumnies, but when hard pressed, are reduced to pityful
shifts: their zeal for Christ and Gospel Truths which as much as they are able,
they pervert, may be looked upon as mere Hypocrisy, and in defense of their
Errors, they show a great hardness of Heart and disingenuity, and as they
betray the Truth, so spare not those who defend it against them, and load them
with invectives full of gall and bitterness, which is an effect of Passion, so
contrary to the Meekness and Moderation which they would seem to pretend to, as
we find Socinus doing against Puccius, whom he sharply upbraids Epist. (...)
^^lith. (...) 1. P. (...).
for (...) much relying upon his Opinions, which exactly was Socinus's Original
and inherent Sin: the extraordinary care also which he took to publish, and
every where to disperse his Works, argues in him no small Vanity and Ambition:
as for his Passion when he disputed, which then he could not command so well as
at other times; we have the Evidence of a familiar Friend of his in these
words, Squarcial. Epist. ad Socin.
Scio non suspicor, etc. I do not guess at, but know thine immoderate hate in
dispute, how often have I warned thee, when thou wast about disputing, or
wrangling concerning light matters, and disturbing all things with the greatest
Clamourousness? This Man who against the proper and natural sense of
Scriptures, would force his own upon them, Assert. posnan. 10. in oper. Soc. p.
510.
to fill up his measure, does scornfully speak of the Nicene and Athanasian
Creeds, received by the Universal Church: but what need we go so far backward
as Socinus's time for these things, when now among us we have a fresh Evidence
of that Spirit of theirs in a late The Charitable Samar.
Pamphlet; how unworthily does that Scribler speak of the Council of Nice,
which, says he, was principally Composed of a pack of wrangling contentious
Grecians, Men bred up in Controversy all their Life, and perpetually
quarrelling one with another; all this he says gratis, and as his own deluded
Opinion: that among them there might have been some such ones, I will not
dispute, but he cannot say all were so: that Council was summoned by a great
and Christian Emperor, Constantine, who was present, and upon that account,
things must be thought to have been managed with good order; besides that, what
he says is not to be purpose, the question being not about their Temper, but
about the Matters lying before them; Acts 15.39.
a cause is never the worse in it self for the frailties of those that own it;
may any one disparage the Gospel preached by Paul and Barnabas, because they
fell out and parted about a thing of no moment, whether or not they should take
Mark with them. But it is fit I should say something in vindication of that
Famous and first Christian General Council, summoned by a Christian Emperor,
now when by this occasion I am put upon it.

We must not wonder if some Heretic condemned by the Council, such as Sabinus
at that time the head Man of the Macedonian Heresy, and now our Samaritan would
reflect upon it, but the account we have of the qualifications of those who
were in the Council is much different and contrary to what he would insinuate,
there were Men of great Learning, Piety, Exemplary Life, Wise, Eloquent, Sober,
Discreet, Modest, and of Courteous Behavior; some considerable for their
sufferings, and others respected for their great age, and as that Assembly was
notable for Quality, so for number, there being above 300 Bishops, of which
number were Paphnutins, Spiridion, Eusebius of Cesarea, etc. Men of great Fame,
with a vast number of other Divines, with several Laymen, good Philosophers to
assist them, therefore not so despicable as unworthily and falsely he would
traduce it, so consisted not of wrangling Greeks, but if we may believe
Constant. l. 3.
Eusebius, there were Divines out of Egypt, Lybia, Theboea, Arabia, Palestina,
Phoenicia, Syria, Cilicia, Galatia, Pamphilia, Cappadocia, Pontus, Persia, Asia
and Phrygia, one from Scythia, and Hosius Bishop of Corduba in Spain, much
esteemed by the Emperor: also there were some from Macedonia, Thracia, as out
of Achaia and Epirus. This I mention not only to show his want of Sincerity and
Truth, and that the Council was not contemptible as to the quality and number
of Persons, as he would make it, but to demonstrate how weighty, upon several
accounts, was Arius's condemnation by so Eminent an Assembly, with the Emperor
at the head, who was a Pious and Wise Prince, as his Carriage during the whole
time of the Council, declared him to be. Besides that, every one was allowed to
say and defend his Opinion, so things were not rashly carried on, but seriously
sifted and debated, as for instance in the explanation of the word homoousius
of the same substance which admitted of great debates, wherein the cautious
Eusebius Pamphilus appeared much, it was agreed that the Son is of the Father,
but not part of the Father: after all, the Council at last by a free and
unanimous consent, agreed upon the Creed from the place called Nicene, which
was signed by no less then 318 Bishops: well by that Council so lawfully
assembled, and after the debates which upon such occasions are usual, was Arius
and all of his Opinion Anathematized, he in particular forbidden to go into
Alexandria, where he lived before, and by the Emperor banished. Now People may
see what kind of Assembly was that famous Council, which our present Samaritan
would revile: had it been Socinus's case as 'twas Arius's, he should have
undergone the same Condemnation, who in one point chiefly is worse than Arius,
who said our Savior had by way of Creation a Being before the Virgin's time,
and was the first of the Creatures, which, after Paulus Samosatenus, Socinians
deny. The Council in their Synodical Epistle to the Church of Alexandria, calls
Arius's Tenets his impious opinions, or rather madness and blasphemous
expressions. So do Socinian Heresies deserve to be called.

Here I shall add how the Council condemned not only the Heretic and his
Opinions, but also a Book of his called Thalia, to show how one of the ways to
suppress Heresy, is also to suppress Heretical Books: after this came in the
civil Authority and acted its part; first the Emperor did upon the business
write an excellent Letter to the Church of Alexandria, and after into other
parts; also he ordered that if any of Arius's Books could be met with, they
presently should be burnt, and farther declared that if any Person happened to
have any of his Books, and did not immediately produce and burn it, he should,
upon his being found guilty, presently suffer death: and it is to be observed
how herein the Emperor acted in his civil Capacity, and in the last Letter,
with no relation to the Council, which he does not so much as name. And to
carry on his Zeal farther, Arius and Arians to make them more odious and
detestable, he branded them, ordering they should be called Porphyrians, from
Porphyrius an impious and utter enemy to the Christian Religion; herein we see
a happy union between Church and State, to punish and suppress Blasphemy and
Heresy, and when that wicked Man by means of intrigues had been readmitted into
the Emperor's Presence, upon condition to subscribe and swear to the
determinations of the Council, which both he did, and thereupon thought all
safe for himself, from Man's side whom he had deluded, and to have again been
admitted into the Church. God who cannot be deceived and will not be mocked,
executed Judgment upon him, for the day before he should have been restored, in
Constantinople in a House of Office, where he was gone to ease himself, his
Bowels fell out of his Body, which before had been Judas's Punishment, as being
crushed to death by the fall of an House, had been that of Corinthus. So let
all the Son of God's enemies be confounded if they will not be converted.

After their malicious aspersions cast upon Councils, one must not wonder if
they do what they can to abuse private Men, it is their ill nature which they
neither can nor will part with; they are in their element when they revile and
speak ill of others, and when Poison lies in the Heart, Men must expect to see
it break out; what I now say of them I speak it out of my own experience,
witness their Apology, and in one The Grounds and Reasons of the Controversy
concerning the Unity of God.
of their late Pamphlets, the Author is pleased to mention me in three places,
in the first, page 15 he says, I reburnt Barth. legate, and goes on thus, it
is a better Argument for that poor Man's seriousness in his religious
persuasion, then it is for the sincerity of Mr. Gailhard and the honor of
Calvinism, that he thirsts after the blood of Thousands. He much pittieth that
poor Martyr for the Socinian cause, so no question but that tender heart of his
does poor Vanninus who was burnt for denying there is a God: it is pity Legate
should suffer for his Religious Persuasion a very Religious Opinion to deny the
most Holy Trinity, with the Divinity of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: why
upon every account do they over-hand and shoulders bring in Calvin who is not
concerned in our Dispute; I did not so much as name him, only to vindicate him
from their false and slanderous aspersions, how does also my sincerity come in?
The matter of fact I related, is plain enough and sincere too, let them gainsay
it if they can: and because I said he was burnt for Socinianism, is it a
sufficient ground to entitle me to the name of Blood Thirsty? Had I any hand in
his Condemnation and Execution? No doubt there is a great deal of Sincerity and
Truth in such a charge against me: Fie, for shame, leave off such lying tricks,
which can do your cause not a straw worth of good, and answer my Arguments;
it is a general accusation they have against every one that is no Socinian: when
I say I could wish to see by lawful authority and means, that Blasphemous
Heresy of theirs suppressed, they presently say, you would bring an Inquisition
upon us Socinians; they blunder out that scarecrow word, Psalm. 9.12.
but extremely misapply it: Inquisition is a good word if Men do but make a
right use of the thing it signifies. David calls God an Inquisitor, for he
makes Iuquisition for Blood. So he does for Blasphemy as in the cases of
Irenaeus lib. 3. c. 3. Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. l. 4. c. 14.
Corinthus and of Arius, forequoted. So for Idolatry, and after this pattern,
why should not Magistrates who make Inquisition for Blood, make it also for
Blasphemy and Idolatry? God stands in the Congregation of the Mighty: he
judges among the Gods. Psalm. 82.1.
That is, if Princes and Judges do not their duty, God whose Authority is above
theirs, will take Vengeance of them.

In the second place I am mentioned with a witness: Page 30.
The Religious Frenzies of Mr. Gailhard, which have been so well chastised by
two honest Gentlemen. By this style one may easily know that meek, modest,
moderate and Christian (as they would be called) sort of Men: but a Zeal for
the Honor of God and Interest of Christ is no Frenzy. I am very jealous for
the Lord God of Hosts, says Elijah: 1 Kings 19.10, 14.
if this Man had lived in his time, he would not have spared him, but taxed him
with Frenzy; though I make no comparison between the Persons, yet the cause is
the same, but such Men should know how a weak, fainting, and languishing Spirit
is no fit nor proper frame in God's Service. I find with him the word Religious
is a Saddle for any Horse; Legat's persuasion was Religious, so are my
Frenzies: when will that evil Spirit depart from them? when will they cease to
give People ill language? however those Frenzies of mine have been well
chastised, how well let the vindication of my Epistle demonstrate: but these
two chastisers or slanderers are two honest Gentlemen, how can it be otherwise
if they be Socinians? For Honesty is their Essential Quality, but they are a
greedy sort of People who would suck in to themselves all Religion, Piety,
Virtue, and Honesty. In the third place he says, Page 52.
Mr. Gailhard and the growth of Error, have already declared open war against
all Churchmen of the Arminian persuasion. The more Enemies we have among
ourselves, the better for them who are the common Enemy; but I find they always
are ready to embroil things if they can, thereby to fish in troubled Water, and
may be hence it comes, I mean out of their Den, that of late we have seen
Pamphlets come abroad to revive old, and for the present, unnecessary Disputes.
But Sirs, what need ye talk of a dispute between Me and my Neighbor, whilst
there is one depending between you and me, let us first of all decide the
difference that is between us, and then we may talk of that between my
Neighbor and Me: In the mean while I find they throw their Foam about upon
others as well as upon me, for the Man says, P. 50.
but as for such furious Inquisitours, as Mr. Edwards, and Mr. Peter Brown, I
reckon they are so very Passionate, that they are utterly incapable of
attending to sober Reasoning from plain Christian Principles: better for them
to Answer our Books, than to give us ill Language.

Nay, like a distempered Man he strikes on all sides: for to attain to the end
of undermining the Church, which they all aim at, he spares not the most
Eminent Men, we have in it, for thus he says P. 23.
Unitarians are no Deists, much less Atheists or (as a Reverend Father, out of
the abundance of his Charity, Complements them) irreligious profligate
Villains, but it is to be hoped that he will recall those bitter words, at least
for his own sake, for I am told they are resolved plainly, to make it appear to
the World, that his Lordship's Doctrine in some of his Books, accords as much
with the Racovian Catechism, as theirs. But that Reverend Father knows well
what he says, and none of them all can Teach him how to speak; but as they
presume to Wrest the Word of God, so they think they may do with the Writings
of any Man: but that Eminent Person being well able to Vindicate himself, it
were in me a presumption to attempt it: but how can we believe Men who say, P.
31.
the sentiments of the Unitarians set down in the agreement, no one, that I
know of, has undertaken to refute or charge with Heresy. Suppose their
Opinions have not been refuted or charged with Heresy, as contained in the
particular Book he names, can he deny it to have been so by several Eminent
Authors in their Works, but these Modern Socinians would, bis coctam nobis
apponere Crambem, bring the same thing over and over again: would not they also
against the known Truth make the World believe that P. 29.
the Unitarians have no particular private Opinions about matters commonly held
necessary to Salvation, different from the Church of England, that is, if the
Bishops and chief Doctors of the Church know what the Church means. Here is
Pride, he must teach the Bishops and Doctors of the Church what it is that they
believe, as if they believed they know not what; yet that being so notorious
and palpable an untruth, he sometimes pulls in his horns; I do confess, says
he, P. 29.30.
that I much fear the Unitarians may have private Opinions about Articles
commonly held necessary to Salvation different from the Opinions of the
Compilers of the Thirty Nine Articles, and from the Grammatical literal sense
of those Articles, for thorough them, as thorough our Homilies, there runs a
vain of that Scheme which at this day is called Calvinism, there he owns they
have not Cranmer, Latimer, and Ridley, on their side: let him if he can clear
these two things from Contradiction. What he says, P. 31.
that the difference is only about words, elsewhere I sufficiently Answered,
sure I am, we much differ in what he says, P. 28.
that what Christanity teaches beyond that which natural reason dictates, has
not the efficacy to prevent Atheism which natural reason has, is not this, if
by Christianity he means Christian Religion, which is the natural signification
of word and thing, to prefer Human Reason before Revealed Religion or
Scripture? and out of this must not we own those modern Socinians to be as bad
as the old ones?

After what I hitherto observed of them, and of their Principles, these
following things I offer to the Serious consideration of the Reader, but more
especially to that of the Government and Magistracy which are more immediately
concerned. First, That our Controversies against Socinians, are not about
indifferent things or few Ceremonies, but concerning the most Fundamental
Truths of our Holy Religion, for the Doctrines of the Trinity, of two Natures
in Christ, of his Satisfaction, of the Grace and Providence of God, are not
Problematical, nor merely School disputes, but of the necessity of Christian
Faith: I also affirm that Socinians are Christians only in Name, not really and
in Truth, for they own not Christ, for what he is: and if the Athan. orat. 3.4.
cont. Arian.
Ancient Doctors of the Church, reckoned the Arians among the Gentiles, so we
now may account Socinians to be; Constantine the Great, made an Edict
forbidding the Porphyrians to be called Christians, and that all their Books
should be Burnt; so this were the proper Course to suppress those of Socinians,
but instead of that, they are suffered not only daily to Print new ones, but
also to Reprint old ones, and thus not only here at home, but also to have them
from abroad. Socinians do not truly confess Christ, seeing they deny he has
Divine Nature, and make of him but a secondary God, an Idol and a Creature God,
then which nothing more absurd.

I farther say, they ought not to be suffered to have Communion with the
Church, because they do not together with us, know, own and Worship the true
God who is Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, but they pretend to Worship one first
God the Father, and another inferior God made such that is the Son, moreover
they lay another foundation than that is laid, 1 Cor. 3.11.
for instead of Christ who is a Divine Person with two Natures, they set up
another Person, who is a mere Man; seeing than they lay another Foundation,
deny Christ Son of God, to be come in the Flesh, and do not adore him with us,
for such as he is, than we may have no Brotherly Communication with them: than
they have not with us the same washing of the Blood of Christ, and do not
believe therewith to be Purged and Sanctified, for they deny his Satisfaction,
that he has laid down a Price to Redeem us: they farther deny or depravate the
causes and means of our Salvation, and are guilty of Idolatry for paying a
Religious Worship to him who is not God by Nature, and though they would be
thought to be Disciples of Jesus Christ, yet they deny his Person and betray
his Truth.

I add, they Love not Christ, (and against such, 1 Cor. 16.22.
the Apostle pronounces Anathema) for they Blaspheme against him, they pretend
to love him, only as a Creature, when he should be loved as Creator: then they
are not Pious, for such cannot be said to live piously, who deprive the true
God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, of the Honor due to him, and they are highly
mistaken when they would make civil honesty to be Christian Piety, and the true
knowledge of God, and a constant profession thereof, not to be a necessary part
of Piety.

They ought not to be suffered in a Christian State, so as to have liberty of
Conscience, with free exercise of and teaching or publishing their Blasphemous
and Impious Opinions, because they overthrow the foundation of Christian
Religion, to the dishonor of God's Holy Name, seduction of Souls, and
disturbance of the Church: and as it is a Collection of fundamental Heresies, so
to tolerate Socinians is thereby to tolerate all those Heresies, whereby God's
Judgments are drawn upon Nations, wherefore Pious Christian Emperors and
Kings, to promote the Glory of God, ever took care to suppress Heresies and
Blasphemies, as the Ecclesiastical Histories do fully prove it, and thereupon
let Justinian's Code be consulted against the Heresies of Photinus, and of
Paulus Samosatenus, which Socinians do openly profess. Now the Churches in
Poland, according to the three several Protestant Confessions there, will have
no Communion with Socinians, who at several times were thence banished by their
Kings.

In Holland In 1598.
the States General having about Socinus asked the Opinion of Junius,
Trecaltius, and Gomarus, three Eminent Divines at Leyden, the answer was, He is
no Christian but half Turk; for Christians do believe one God, with a
distinction of Persons, but the Mehometan Religion is for one God without
distinction of Persons, so are Socinians: the Judgment of these three Divines
agrees, Voidov. Ostorod. in Apol. in 1600.
not only with the truth, but also with the general consent of Christians;
against the Order of the States General, by virtue of which their Blasphemous
Books were burnt at the Hague, and they Banished out of their Dominions, they
unjustly complained, and that act they compared with the Spanish Inquisition,
which here is their usual Discourse and Question, will ye bring an Inquisition
upon us? and as then, so now they would plead it to be the interest of the
State to tolerate them, whereof the contrary I sufficiently proved, besides
that Religion is against it, whose Voice is to be heard sooner than that of
false Reason, neither ought God's cause to be made a Sacrifice of, to any
wordly interest: among the Burnt Books in Holland, was Ostorodus's Manuscript
against Tradelius, wherein he called Christ's Satisfaction an invention of the
Trinitarians, according to the place of his, where he calls it, a false,
childish, ridiculous and blasphemous error, like an old Women's Superstitious
and Popish Fable. Certainly Men who have so obstinate an hatred of the Truth,
such mean Thoughts of and Contempt for him, who is the way, the Truth and the
Life, Joh. 14.6.
are a shame to a Nation, a Reproach to a People, and a Scandal to Religion,
also Dangerous, because they lose no Opportunity of Publishing their erroneous
Opinions, and their being supported makes them the bolder, therefore it is
wished (as indeed there is a necessity for it) to see our Springs cleared as
from Idolatry, so from Blasphemy: Papists who are great Idolaters, are, I thank
God, by Law excluded from having any hand in the Legislative, or Executive
Powers, and it is but fit that Blasphemers, Socinians, who confidently brag of
their Errors, should be so too. The Receiver is as bad as the Thief.

I remember a Blasphemer here, James Naylor, to stand at the Pilory, have his
Tongue bored thorough, in the Forehead Branded with the Letter B, and Condemned
during Life to be in Prison without Pen, Ink, or Paper; and though about those
times, unhappily sprung up several Sects, yet general care was ever taken of
the main and Fundamentals of Religion, even in the Army where was the greatest
Latitude allowed: for in their Laws and Ordinances of War, the first Article
was against Blasphemy in these very Words, First let no Man presume to
Blaspheme the Holy and Blessed Trinity, God the Father, God the Son, and God
the Holy Ghost, nor the known Articles of our Christian Faith, upon pain to
have his Tongue bored with a Red-Hot Iron, and in the Humble Petition and
Address of the Officers of the Army, to the Parliament, signed on Thursday, May
12. 1659, and presented by Eighteen of the Chief of them, though at that time
they were grown High and Saucy, yet in their Petitioning for Liberty of
Conscience, they excluded those that were against the most Holy Trinity and the
Divinity of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, as it is in the 6th Article thus.
That all Persons, who Profess Faith in God the Father, and in Jesus Christ his
Eternal Son, the true God, and in the Holy Spirit, God Coequal with the
Father, and the Son, one God Blessed for ever. And do acknowledge the Holy
Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, to be the Revealed or Written Word or
Will of God, shall not be restrained from their Profession, etc. Which plainly
imports that those who deny the Holy Trinity, etc. should be restrained: in the
same Article, they also exclude from that Liberty, Popery or any that held
forth Licentiousness, or Profaneness, under the Profession of Religion. These
things not usual to come from an Army, were very good. Also the late Act of
Toleration which in the latter part of this Discourse I shall have occasion to
make use of, excludes all Anti-Trinitarians from the benefit of it. And Hobb's
Leviathan was in October 1666. Condemned by the Parliament in their Bill
against Atheism and Profaneness. And both that and his Book, de Cive, by the
Convocation in July 21. 1683. all this shows how from time to time and upon
occasion here care has been taken justly to punish Blasphemers, that they
might learn not to Blaspheme, and be made an example to others, for they are a
public raging Plague, destructive wheresoever they be, not to be suffered to
profess and publish their Blasphemies in any Christian State or Society. When
God's time is come, and he will be pleased to incline the Hearts, and overruled
the Councils of Men to stand against Blasphemy, Profaneness, and Immorality
(which all except Blasphemers, Profane and Immoral Livers will do) then the
nature of them that are guilty thereof, and whom we do and shall complain
against till there be a relief, must well be considered to make the remedy
effectual: experience shows them to be proud, willful, obstinate, and insolent,
strong mouthed, therefore require strong curbs and to be hard bound; in order
to it, it is humbly conceived, and with possible respect submitted to the
judgment of Superiors, how the words of a new Law, when enacted, ought to be
full and plain, that when it comes to be executed, there be no ground left for
difficulties and exceptions, so that therein the end of the Law be sufficiently
expressed, and the things it is intend against, clearly set down; it is but to
dally with and flatter the distemper, not to lay strict and sensible penalties
upon all that speak, writ, or otherwise directly or indirectly do oppose the
Truth, and appear for the Sin: First the Authors, Abettors, Fomenters,
Printers, or other Publishers ought to feel the severity of the Law, not only
in a privative way as to be made incapable of any public charge or office
whatsoever in Church or State, but also to strike a terror and come nearer
home, to inflict Money penalties, and the like, for the fear of a pecuniary
mulct, will work upon some Men, whether Author's, Printers, or Publishers, but
as it is not enough to punish the Persons, but also the things must be
suppressed, thereupon a Prohibition to Print any more New Pamphlets and Books
tending to Propagate Heresy and Blasphemy, is as necessary as the Burning or
otherwise Destroying those which already are abroad: no Bookseller under such a
Penalty should be allowed to have any in his Shop, not to distribute any either
publicly or in private: those that are abroad should be called in, and
Publicly Burnt, and none, few excepted, be allowed to keep any, no more than
they are to have Treasonable Books and against the State. This would make
People have a care how they meddle with such things. Lastly, to make a Law more
Effectual, it requires great and severe penalties against those who are to
execute the Law as Justices of the Peace, Constables and others concerned, if
they neglect it: the executive part is the Life and Soul of the Law, without
which it is insignificant; we already have several Laws in force against
Blasphemy, Profaneness and immorality whereof an abstract was published not
long ago! it is both pity and a shame they are not put in execution, and no body
punished for want of it: a good new Act to revive them all would much tend to
the Glory of God, the Church's Good, the Honor and Happiness of the Nation, to
encourage Piety and Virtue, and to suppress all manner of Sin, whether in
Doctrine or Practice.

We read of the ten Plagues of Egypt, and we complain of the like number of the
Adversaries evil Practices, which in matters controverted between them and us,
they plague the World with, as since their beginning they ever did, and now
continue to do, there is hardly any prospect to hope that in time to come they
will alter, for thorough a long custom, they in their Hearts, where the plague
lies, have turned it into an habit, they want Sincerity and deal not fairly:
thus to make them appear in their own colors and show how much they
prevaricate, we charge them with the ten following things: First, they wrest
God's Word to confirm their Doctrines, instead of examining their Doctrines by
that word according to the Analogy of Faith, and the general consent of the
Christian Church. Secondly, they introduce strange, perverse, unheard of and
condemned Senses and Interpretations contrary to the usual signification of the
words and phrases of Scripture, and to the Scope of the Texts. Thirdly, they
take the liberty at their pleasure to alter and change the full stops, Commas,
Colons, Letters, Syllables, and whole words, and this to set up their Doctrines
and false Interpretations; as also at sometimes they add, at others they take
away to serve their ends, which in matters of Religion is what in civil ones we
call to forge and falsify deeds, a very infamous thing, but worse in matters of
Religion, because to the falsehood are joined Impiety and Sacrilege. Fourthly,
to the light of Revelation they oppose that of Human Reason, which is dark,
weak, deceitful, and fallible, as by experience we find in Humane and Natural
Things; but the other is clear, certain, infallible, and leading us to the
knowledge of the Truth. Points of Faith must not be examined by Humane Reason,
which is often contrary to it. Fifthly, they digg up out of their Graves
ancient and condemned Heresies to revive them, like a new Plague to be spread
again over the Christian World.

Sixthly, Not only they will not confine themselves within the bounds of the
received Faith by the Primitive Church, but do forge new Articles of Faith, and
cannot forbear giving ill language, revilings, and lies. Seventhly, they
despise and contemptuously reject the Testimonies and Witnesses of the Doctors
of the Primitive Church against all rules of decency and modesty. Eighthly,
they take upon themselves peremptorily and magisterially to blame and condemn
all Christian Protestant Churches, as if they knew nothing and were nothing,
which in them is an effect of rashness and pride. Ninethly, not only they
cannot forbear opposing the fundamental Principles of Christian Religion, but
also will not abstain from Impieties, Blasphemies, and abominable Expressions
against the most Holy Trinity, the Divinity of the Son of God, who is the God
of the Christians, against his Incarnation, etc. as it has already been
plainly demonstrated: such detestable things, the Apostles never did against
the Idols of the Gentiles, for we read how the Town Clerk of Ephesus said to
the People, Acts 19.37.
ye have brought hither these Men which are neither Robbers of Churches, nor
yet Blasphemers of your Goddess: the Apostles were for destroying Idolatry, but
therein they behaved themselves with a Christian Prudence and Modesty, though
in a good cause; thus Paul calmly upon the account of the Altar to the unknown
God, Chap. 17.23.
said to the Athenians, whom ye ignorantly Worship, him declare I unto you:
disputed with good arguments not with injuries; according to the rule he gives
his Disciple, 2 Timothy 2.24.25.
the Servant of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle unto all Men, apt to
teach, patient, in meekness instructing those that oppose themselves. But
Lastly they are Wise in their own conceit, setting up for the sole competent
judges of all Controversies, when alas that Reason of theirs which they so
much trust to, does often fail and deceive them, is very uncertain and proves a
blind guide, whereof I shall now give a considerable instance, and therein show
their unreasonableness for calling themselves Unitarians, for the oneness of
God lies in the Unity of Nature, not of Persons. Now I come to them and say,

Our Doctrine consists with it self, for one of the Reasons why we confess
Christ to be God, is, because we know there is but one true God; but yours
contradicts it self, because ye make two Gods of different Natures, when there
is no true God, but he that is such by Nature: so if there is but one God,
there must be only one Divine Nature, and none is God, but he who has that
Divine Nature; and if we worship those who by Nature are not Gods, we worship
false Gods, and are Idolaters: To make Gods of several Natures, is mere
Polytheism, and Plurality of Gods, which Scripture is so much against; but to
have several Persons, yet of one and the same Nature, does not make many Gods;
so that when we affirm there is but one Divine Nature, we assert the Oneness of
God, whilst they with affirming there are two Gods of different Natures,
destroy that Unity which consists in the Essence or Nature, and therefore the
Name Unitarians, which they call themselves by, is (...), abusively taken; they
make one God by Divine Nature, and another with a human Nature; a great
Absurdity, which to any rational man, must appear to bring in many Gods, so
multiplicity of Gods, which without cause they would father upon us, is justly
fastened upon them. Besides, let it be taken notice of, what kind of God they
would make our Savior to be, a God not born but made, a God by office and
favor, not by nature, a God who had a beginning and shall have an end, and at
last be stripped of his Divinity: a God who is not the first and shall not be
the last, who has not made Heaven and Earth, which the Apostle after a Prophet
gives as a Character of the true God; a God not such by Nature, Acts 17.24.
Jerem. 10.11, 13.
which Paul opposes to the true God, an improper, a metaphorical, a dependent,
and, without Blasphemy let it be said, a Mock-god, made by degrees like the
Popish Wafer-god; a God of about 1700 Years standing; such a God they make our
Savior to be, who is over all, Romans 9.5.
God blessed for ever, which is to make a God no God, and as much as in them
lies, to ridicule the Godhead; a God who has not his Being of himself, and is
not the Author of being to the Creature, which all are absurd Contradictions:
But I elsewhere abundantly proved our Savior and Lord to be of the same Nature
with the Father by an eternal generation. Is it not very absurd and
contradictious to give one the Essential Attributes of Divine Nature, yet deny
him Divine Nature, which is inseparable from those Attributes, so that where
the Nature is, there the Attributes must also be, and where the Attributes, so
must also the Nature? It Is very strange that this people look upon it as a thing
impossible, for God to communicate his Nature to one whom they own to have
received Divine Knowledge, Wisdom, Power, and that Divine Worship is his due,
which are proper Attributes of Divine Nature, not really distinct, but
inseparable from it. When men pay honor to a Person, they first of all in
their mind must be satisfied, how in that Person is some Excellency and Dignity
which deserves it, and this leads them upon this account, to make their Heart
and Affections willing to entertain a singular Veneration for that person.
Hence in the third place, arises a desire and resolution by some outward acts
to express the inward disposition to the Glory and Honor of that Person, and
to let other men see and know it: Now to have first such a Notion of a mere
Creature, such they affirm our Lord to be, then in the heart to receive such
impressions of rendering honor to such a person, and lastly by some outward act
to declare it; this I say, is perfect Idolatry, for it is to do for the Creature
all that can be done for the Creator, who unto himself alone has reserved that
Religious Worship, for it is written, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and
him only shall thou serve. Out of this it appears, how their Opinion sets up
Polytheism and Idolatry; for to affirm two Persons of different Nature, is
certainly to make two different Gods, and wholly to destroy the Unity of the
Godhead; for as they own a Plurality of Persons, so they do a Plurality of
Natures: how then can they find the Oneness of God, and wherein will they make
it consist?

Neither can they wash off the charge of Idolatry for rendering to Christ, whom
they say to be a mere Man, and a Creature, the Worship due to the most high
God, which to maintain, they sink deeper into the mire; for by one Idolatry
they would defend another, and by one false thing another as falfe: They say,
that before the coming of Christ, such Wolzog. in Matt. 4.10. p. 189.
Worship was lawfully and justly rendered to Angels, who represented God's
Person; but that Worship was rendered only to one Angel, no created one, whom in
my former Book I sufficiently proved to be the Son of God. The same Author
affirms, In Joh. 5.23.
That every Man that is sent, representing the Person of him who sent him,
ought to receive that honor due to him that sent: After this, the Prophets and
Apostles sent by God and by Christ, ought to have been Worshipped with the same
Worship due to the most high God, which cannot be denied to be Idolatry; yet
these People would pretend to abhor Papists for their Idolatry, which is
properly, when the Worship due to God alone is paid to the Creature, whereby
one God is divided into many; and as Papists to excuse their Idolatry toward
Saints and Images, idly distinguish the manner of it under different Names,
according to the different Objects; so do Socinians with their Relative Notions
of dependent and independent, of high, and most high God; what by them is
mentioned of John's falling before the Angel; to Worship him, we may look
upon it as a Flaw in him, as the denial of Christ was in Peter, therein to
forbid us the Worship of Angels, for we read how the Angel surprised at it,
with a sudden as it were Exclamation, as happens at a great trouble of Mind,
rejected it, (...), See thou do it not. Now as this Opinion of the Socinians
does agree with that of Papists, who say, they worship not the Saint or Image,
but Relatively to God, or God in it, so Socinians say, the Adoration is due to
Christ, not of it self, but by accident, not terminatively, but transittively;
the Worship passes from him to the Father, whom they Worship in Christ, just as
Papists do God and the Saint in the Image. This Opinion of Socinians does also
agree with that of the Heathens about their half or Semi-Gods, Gods of an
inferior Orb; for besides those made Gods, they owned a supreme one, and above
all the rest: Thus the Socinian Divinity agrees with that of Pagans and
Gentiles, as if I had time, I might easily demonstrate, not only out of Cicero,
Seneca, Lucian, Celsus, etc. but also out of Lactantius, Augustine, and other
Christian Writers. This Opinion of theirs, does also overthrow the Christian
Faith, for what is to embrace the Christian Faith, 1 Thessalonians. 1.9.
but to be turned to God from Idols to serve the living and true God, The
Gospel which Paul and Barnabas preached to the People of Lystra, is this, We
preach unto you that ye should turn from these vanities unto the living God,
Acts. 14.15.
which made heaven and earth, and the sea, and all things that are therein;
which they say, Christ made not. Mark, here the Question was about the worship
which those Heathens would have rendered to the Apostles: Farther, Socinian
Idolatry is directly opposed to the first Precept, Matthew. 6.24. chap. 2.16.17.
Thou shall have no other Gods before me. And induces Men to serve two Lords,
and two Masters, which Scripture says, no Man can do. In Hosea we read that
God said, Thou shall call me Ishi, my Husband, and no more Baali my Lord though
a fit and proper name to call God by, who is Lord and Master over all, for his
absolute Dominion is extended over all his Works: The Reason why he would no
more be called by that name, is because it had been abused and profaned, being
given to Creatures, and attributed to Idols, for our Lord is a jealous God, and
will not have his Name and Glory communicated to Creatures, which he abhorred;
therefore he declared in that same place, And I will take the names of Baalim
out of her mouth.

Before I leave off this point, I shall in a few Words take notice, how nice in
the Primitive Church Men were about the Unity of Essence and Trinity of
Persons: When the Heresies there against appeared abroad, this very thing about
Arrius's time, was like to have made a great breach between the Greek and Latin
Churches, which through Athanasius's Piety, Care and Prudence, was prevented:
The Controversy was about the Greek word Hypostasis, and the Latin one
Persona. The Latins suspected the Greek word might signify Essence and
Substance, which had brought in the Heresy of the Tritheists, of three Gods,
for thus three Essences had made three Gods; on the other side, the Greeks
thought by the Latin word to be meant only a Relation and Office, and not truly
a Person, which had been a mere Relative distinction, but nothing real in it;
thus the Doctrine of the Trinity had been overthrown, and so Sabellianism,
which says, that the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, are but one Person,
had been brought in; but in the Synod of Alexandria, Athanasius having to
remove all suspicion from both sides, proposed, that the words Hypostasis and
Persona, might indifferently be used in both Churches; it was agreed unto, and
Peace settled thereby. God grant we may here see the like, upon the Foundation
of Truth, to the Confusion of Heresy, that with a bare face now walks up and
down, which in the Prophets words, we may say to, Thou have a whore's Forehead,
thou refusedst to be ashamed; Jer. 3.3.
but God in his due time will make it so, and explode it; hence out of what
Solomon says, Pride goes before destruction, Prove. 16.18.
and a haughty Spirit before a fall, we may modestly infer, that if not a whole
downfall, at least a fall of that Sect is near at hand, toward which, we hope
there is some steps, for never more proud, injurious, and vile Language, than
what we read in their former and latter Books, the same Spirit from first to
last reigning therein: Nay, when the Parliament was about setting a Curb upon,
and restraining them, still they went on, and Published their Pamphlets, and
had the confidence to have their Socinian Notions in Print, distributed among
the Honorable Members, at the Door of the House of Commons, to whom therein
they would have prescribed how to draw up their Bills, and that most
impertinently, in Scriptural Phrases: Did any one ever see Bills and Acts of
Parliament drawn up so? This is a perfect mixture of Socinianism and Quakerism,
which tended, as I think, to get opportunities thereby to wrest our Laws, as
they do God's Word.

Here again, I must take notice of the Charitable Samaritan.
late Pamphlet, wherein one may see confirmed what I said before about their
endeavoring to wrest Scriptures, for from p. 16 to 22, the Author's aim is to
make them uncertain and dubious in all the Texts therein mentioned; so when it
shall serve their turn, they will of any one else: He there brings it in, p. 20.
as being his Friend Mr. Firmin's Opinion, who understood neither Greek nor
Hebrew, so could make no such Quotations and Observations as we read therein.
There he questions the Text of 1 John. 4.3. Every spirit that confesses not
that Jesus Christ is come in the Flesh, is not of God, where he adds a
Parenthesis, when there is none, thereby to exclude the words Jesus Christ is
come in the flesh, from being in the Original; farther, he says in Jude 4.
where are these words, denying the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ.
The word God is not in the Alexandrine Manuscript; this tends as they think
fit, to make Scripture subservient to their ends, and to make things therein
doubtful, by adding, taking away, Rev. 22.18.19. 1 John. 5.7.
or altering; whereupon I give him warning to mind what is said in the word.

But because the Text of John about the three in Heaven, is what he most
insists upon, though I elsewhere have spoken of it, here I shall again say
something about it, although many Learned Men before have so examined the
place, See my Book again Socin. p. 273. and my answer to the I. letter, p. 36.
that hardly any thing can be added to what has been said: They argue the
Verse is not in some Ancient Greek Manuscripts, nor in the Syriac; but this is
not Argumentative, for though it be not in some, it is in others, and if we
should go only upon that bottom, the reason is equally as good for us as for
them. De Vnitate Eccles.
Cyprian who lived about the middle of the third Century, made use of the Text,
and Jerome or the Vulgata has it; Erasmus upon better Thoughts, and after a
more mature Deliberation, had it in his new Edition of the New Testament, and
at this day the Greeks have it in their book called (...), which must needs be
in Conformity to some Ancient Greek Copies: If it be not in some of the Ancient
Copies, we may well suspect some Anti-Trinitarians of those times, according to
the usual way of Heretics, who went about corrupting by Additions,
Diminutions, or Alterations, those Texts which hit them to the quick, to have
expunged and taken it out; it might also happen through the mistake of the
Copist, for whom (as at this time it is found by experience,) 'twas not
impossible through carelessness, or unfaithfulness, to leave out a whole Verse,
and there is a particular Reason why it may be so in this; for there are two
Verses one after another, 7, and 8. which begin with the same words, There are
three which bear record in, etc. which might easily cause a mistake in the
Copist, and take the last Verse for the first, and so omitting one to go on in
the other: besides that, the Sense leads us to see there must be such a Verse
to make three in Heaven answer three upon Earth, without which, there would be
a breach left in the place, and something defective to answer the Apostles
design, who already in Verse 5 and 6. has mentioned the three, for he says,
Who is he that overcomes the world, but he that believes that Jesus is the son
of God. That is, of God the Father, so here are two of the three Persons, and
in the next Verse, the third Person, namely the Holy Ghost is named, It is the
Spirit that bears witness, because the Spirit is truth. So that this Verse 7.
is a deduction of what has been said in the foregoing, and the expression
bears witness, used in the Verse in question confirms it, as the Spirit is
one of the Witnesses, so are the Father and the Son; besides that as the
beginning of Verse 7. contains a Reason of what is said in Verse 6. how the
Spirit bears witness, which is expressed thus, For there are three, etc. so
the Copulative Particle, and, which is the first word in Verse 8. joins and
makes it answer the foregoing.

But because I find the Man makes use of Simon, Crit. v. t. c. 2.
the Oratorian's Critic, a Man, who of his own Head in several things speaks
over-boldly, and who seems to be of his Opinion, he should know that his
Writings are by Protestants to be read with Caution, for in all those kinds of
things, especially in this case, he goes upon his Popish bottom, how the
Authority of Scripture depends upon the Testimony of the Church, so that
nothing is Canonical, and to be believed as such, but what the Church says to
be so, therefore, upon that account they believe the Apocrypha, and their
Traditions to be of an equal Authority with the Canonical Books; thus all such
Papists according to their Principles, will say, ye must believe that Verse to
be in, because the Church says it: But to come to Simon's Critic upon 1.
John. 5.7, p. 8.
Simon, he mentions some Manuscripts he has seen in the French King's, and
Colbert's Librarys, which, says he, have not the Verse in question; not in the
body of the Book, but in the Margin they have: Yet mark what he writes, The
writing of the Addition appears to be no less Ancient than that of the Text;
the like he says there of some Manuscripts in the Benedictines Library of St.
Germain's Abbey, and the Addition therein is as old therein as the Text it self;
since the Additions in the Margin are as old as the Text it self, there is
ground left to believe that they were at, or about the same time, when the body
of the Copy was, and that the Copist saw he had forgotten it, and having no
room left to insert it in, he did it in the Margin; but Father Simon has
omitted a very material thing, for he ought to have said whether the Copy and
the Addition in the Margin appeared to be written by the same Hand, for if so,
then the Copist intended thereby to mend his Omission.

In matter of Manuscripts, some things must be observed, like as we do in the
case of Medals, for both relate to Antiquity: we go by some certain Rules to
find whether or not the Medal be true or false, stamped, or cast, and the time
when it was so: we have Coins of Roman Emperors, of Kings of Macedonia, Syria,
etc. which, though of a good Workmanship, yet we value them not, because
posteriour to the time when such an Emperor and such a King lived; and this we
know by the nature of the Metal, the edges of the Piece, the form and
disposition of the Letter, how round, how long, and how close, one with
another, for all those differences we find in Medals, which to learn, requires
indeed, much Experience, for want whereof, some Men, who have a great Erudition
about those things, and are excellent in the Theorical part of that noble
curiosity; yet when it comes to the Practical, they easily are imposed upon,
and cannot discern the Genuine from the Counterfeit: Nay, about these things
there is sometimes such a Dexterity used by those who make a Trade of it, as at
one time to take off every Letter of the Inscription, at another only some, and
make new ones in the place, and many more such things, which those who are
skilled in the Art, know, that thereby Men who somewhat understand those
things, are often cheated; the like may be said concerning Manuscripts,
several, either wholly, or in part, are Spurious; therefore several things
ought to be observed, and a great care used when we examine them, wherein also
are some certain Rules, but not known to every one that goes about it; and even
some who know these Rules may happen to be grossly mistaken when they come to
the Application; these Truths known to those, whose Genius and Practice has
qualified them to enter upon such Matters, if at leisure, I could enlarge upon;
but as there are so many particular cases which would require several
instances, for brevity sake, I now shall forbear saying any more to it, and
return to the point.

But suppose the Text was not in the Original, as it is, Socinians would not
thereby get so great an advantage as they imagine; if we had only that Text to
prove the Holy Trinity they might boast indeed, but we have others besides
which were never questioned in the least, as are that of our Savior's Baptism,
where from Heaven, the Father calls Jesus Christ, his beloved Son, and at the
same time, the Holy Ghost appeared in the shape of a Dove, and can any thing in
the World be more formal, plain and positive, than these words of our Savior
to his Apostles? Matthew. 28.19.
To Baptize in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.
Certainly, he who therein cannot read the Trinity, must be desperately blind,
but I The Blasphemous Socin. Heresy Confuted.
elsewhere have given Reasons enough, out of the Old and New Testaments to
prove that Fundamental Article of our Religion about the most Holy Trinity,
which all the wicked endeavors of Hell, and its Instruments, cannot prejudice;
but the more to confirm what I already said upon the point, I shall add what
follows, a place is remarkable, Hear O Israel, Deuteronomy. 6.4.
the Lord our God is one Lord. Or as in the Original, Jehovah our God, Jehovah
is one. Twice the Lord, and once our God, the word our is joined neither to the
first, the Father, nor to the third, the Holy Ghost, but to the second Person,
our God, who is become ours, by taking our Humane Nature upon him, and thus God
is become Man; may be in that prospect God said, Genesis 3.22.
Man is become as one of us. That is, as he of us, who is to be Man, or the
Son, as indeed, the second Person is the Angel who went with, and led them
through the Wilderness, that was made man; this is not as some would have it, to
be understood as a distinction of the God of the Jews, from the false Gods of
the Gentiles, for if this had been all therein intended, the name of Jehovah
needed not to have been repeated a second time, and the words, Jehovah our God
is one, had fully expressed the impiety of the Heathen for making themselves
many Gods; but this was to show three Persons in that one Godhead, for he that
was the God of the Jews, is as truly the God of the Gentiles, so of both Jews
and Gentiles, therefore says the Apostle, Is he the God of the Jews only? Romans
3.29. Mark. 12.26. out of Exodus 3.6.
Is he not also of the Gentiles? yea of the Gentiles also. This manner of
speech is by our Savior used. I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac,
and the God of Jacob. The name God is thrice in, one God who Created, Redeemed,
and Sanctified, which Works of Creation, Redemption, and Sanctification, are in
Scripture in a special manner attributed the first to the Father, the second to
the Son, and the third to the Holy Ghost: Withal, seeing the God of Abraham,
the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, are not three, but one and the same
God, something, seeing Scripture says nothing in vain, must thereby be
intended, if it had been in relation to the Father, Son, and Grandson, it
would sufficiently have been expressed with once naming God as the God of
Abraham, of Isaac, and Jacob, but God being named thrice, yet there being but
one God, it must needs relate to some Trinity therein, which being not in the
Nature, can be Relative only to the three Persons of the Godhead.

For a greater confirmation of this, let us read that Blessing which by God's
immediate command, Moses in God's own words, appointed Aaron and his Sons to
pronounce to the People, Numb. 6.24, 25, 26.
we have it thus, The Lord bless thee, and keep thee, the Lord make his face to
shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee, the Lord lift up his countenance
upon thee, and give thee peace. The Lord or Jehovah, is thrice named, yet
Jehovah being an Essential name of God; in that sense, there can be but one
Jehovah, seeing there is but one God, yet since God says, and does nothing in
vain, some reason there must be, why in this place it is thrice mentioned, which
we may find, if with attention we read the Text; the first Verse does contain
Attributes properly belonging to the Father, as to bless and keep, it is proper
for the Father to bless his Children; and God the Father is specially called
the Maker and Preserver of the Creatures, as being chiefly styled the Creator;
therefore we read God created man, Genesis 1.27, 28.
male and female, and blessed them, and said unto them, be fruitful and
multiply; here the Blessing answers Aaron's Prayer, that God would bless, so to
be fruitful and multiply them, what Aaron pronounced that God would keep and
preserve them both generally and individually. Besides that, the Greek
Etymology of the name (...) or Father, from the words (...), all, and (...) I
keep or preserve, shows plainly how a Father is he, who preserves those whose
Father he is, so a Father of a Family keeps his whole Family, and he who takes
care of all, is a common Father to all: therefore the blessing, The Lord bless
and keep thee, does specially and properly belong to God the Father, though it
excludes none of the other two Persons of the most Holy Trinity. The second
Verse contains that which is particularly attributed to the Son, as to make his
face shine upon, and be gracious unto them. Exodus 33.14.
The Face is a part of Humane Body, but none of the Persons of the most Holy
Trinity, only the Son has a Humane Body, so it is proper to the Son. Now the
Son is the Face and Image of the Father, in whom only God is seen and visible;
we must remember how God said to Moses, my face, for so it is i^ the Original,
shall go with thee; and who is he that went with Moses and led the People
through the Wilderness but the Angel of his face, or presence, Isai. 63.9. 2
Cor. 4.6.
whom I elsewhere fully proved to be the Son of God, Jesus Christ, in whose
face, as the Apostle says, We behold the glory of God. The word to shine,
which is in the Verse, does signify a property of the Son, Mal. 4.2. 1 John.
1.16. ver. 17. 1 Cor. 16.33. Gal. 6.18. Phil. 4.23. 1 Thessalonians. 5.28. 2 Thessalonians.
3.18. Philemon. 25.
for the Son is called the Son of righteousness; the latter part, the Lord be
gracious unto thee, does plainly relate to the Son Jesus Christ, who is the
Fountain of Grace, for of his fullness have we all received, and grace for
grace; no true Grace to be had but only in him; for says the Evangelist, Grace
and truth came by Jesus Christ; after this Form of Blessing it is that Paul
does conclude several of his Epistles as a Prayer to God for those whom he did
write to, or as a Blessing of God upon them, The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ
be with you all. The 3 Verse has things specially attributed unto the Holy
Ghost, as To lift up his countenance upon, and give them peace. It seems as if
David pointed at this, when he says, Lift up the light of thy countenance upon
us. Now to enlighten, encourage, countenance, quicken and strengthen Men,
Psalm. 4.6.
is the proper work of the Holy Ghost, so is to give peace, therefore he is
called the Comforter, who gives us inward joy, assurance, and peace of
Conscience, and unto our Souls he applys the benefits of all that Christ has
done and suffered for us; the better to understand this, let us comp^re these 3
verses of Numbers 6. with Paul's words, which are an Explanation thereof, The
grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 13.14.
and the love of God, the Father, and the Communion of the Holy Ghost be with
you all. This shows a Conformity in the Form of Blessing under the Old and New
Testaments, the like we find in Jude, ver. 20, 21.
where the three Persons are distinctly set down. This I shall conclude with
the following Observation, how St. John explains Moses's words in the
beginning, John. 1.1.
and that the word Bara, Created, in Hebrew consists of three Letters, for
though there be four, yet one being twice in, there are but three different,
and these three begin each the Hebrew words, signifying, Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, as (...) Aleph begins the name Abba, Father. (...) Beth, the second
Letter, of the Hebrew Alphabet, as Aleph is the first, begins the word Ben, or
Son, and (...) Resh, begins Ruach, Spirit, Hachodesh, which signify the Holy
Ghost; now must we proceed to other things.

We know it to have been the practice of all Heretics who would not downright
deny Scriptures, but keep an outward show as if they owned them, to come in,
and by a side Wind to corrupt the Truths therein contained, and no Sect went on
in that way more cunningly, presumptuously and obstinately than Socinians, who
would make of it a tool, with wresting and falsifying them to serve their ends:
and though they so highly pretend to an unreconcilableness with the Romish
Church, yet therein they follow their Methods, and have taken great and unhappy
pains in corrupting both the word of God, and the Writings of Men; but God, who
is, and loves truth, in his infinite Wisdom, to the confusion of the Authors of
such Works of Darkness, brings them to light; the World has been acquainted
with the notorious Cheat of the Jesuits of Mentz, who, with the leave of the
then Prince Elector Palatine, borrowed of the Library Keeper of Heidelberg, the
Manuscript of Anastasius about the Lives of the Popes, which they offered to
get Printed at their own Charges, and after they had given good Security that
the Manuscript should be returned; they had it upon this Condition, that every
thing therein should be printed, and nothing left out, which Condition was put
in, in relation to the History of Pope Joan that was in it: But mark the Trick,
the Jesuits got it Printed, and in one Book only, which they were engaged to
put in the Palsgrave's Library, all was according to the Manuscript, but that
which related to Pope Joan was left out in every other Book: Which Cheat of
theirs, the Library Keeper having afterward found out, he about it, published
his Complaint to the World: That Manuscript is now in the Vatican, among the
rest of the Heidelberg Library; but though, when I was in Rome, I several times
used means to see it, I could never obtain it, nor in Milan neither, where
another Manuscript of the same is said to be in the Ambrosian Library; 'twas
owned to me, that there is one, but when I desired to see it, which I did more
than once, with one pretense or other 'twas ever put off: Such are the shifts
by Papists used to conceal the proofs of a Woman having been a Pope, and an
infallible Head of their Church. Thus Socinians are glad of any pretense (which
to the utmost of their power they would improve,) to have the 7th Ver. of the
5th. Chap. of 1 John, expunged* because it lies so heavy upon them; but the
consideration of such Practices, affords an occasion to admire and adore God's
wise and infinite Providence with great Mercy to his Church, that
notwithstanding the malice and craftiness of Hell and its Instruments, wholly
or in part to suppress Holy Scripture, yet such has been his Divine Care of
it, having given his People that Holy Word of his, never to fail to the Worlds
end, that he has blasted the wicked Endeavors of all who would have deprived
the Church of that Heavenly Bread; but through so many Ages, and amidst so many
various Dispensations of his Providence, has to this day continued whole, and
in its Purity for the Good and Benefit of his People. Thus in the days of
Josiah was by Hilkiah the High Priest, 1 Kings 22.8.
found the book of the law in the House of the Lord; which was the Copy that
Moses left with them, as it appears out of 2 Chronicles. 34.14. which either by the
Negligence of the Priests had been lost, or by the wickedness of Idolatrous
Kings had been rejected, and in some kind abolished. The like care God was
pleased to use at the Taking and Burning of Jerusalem and of the Temple by
Nebuchadnezzar, though it is not expressed how; for we must not mind the Jewish
Fabulous Stories about it; yet so it was, as we gather out of Artaxerxes's
words to Ezra, Ezra. 7.14.
Thou art sent of the King, and of his seven Counselors, to enquire concerning
Judah and Jerusalem according to the law of thy God, which is in thine hand.
Thus God has rescued his Holy Word of the New Testament from the Rage and
Malice of the Jews, of the Heathen, and Persecuting Emperors, from the Idolatry
and Superstition of the Romish Church; so from the attemps of Socinians, and
other Heretics whatsoever, either in time past, or present, and will for that
which is to come, to the great Comfort and Assurance of his People.

Now having vindicated that 1 John. 5.7. and given Reasons for its being part
of, and belonging to the Chapter, Genuine as are the rest; I think my self
engaged to do one thing more, which is to clear another Text of the false and
improper Interpretation they would put upon it, John. 10.30.
it is this, I and my Father are one; Answer to the I. Letter. P. 35, 36.
elsewhere I have said enough toward it, but to make the matter more plain and
clear, it being so excellent a Text, I shall add something more to it: There our
Savior speaking of his Father comparatively with himself, says they both are
one, with the Pronoun Possessive my, as he twice calls him in the foregoing
Verse; ver. 27, 28.
he therein speaks of his Sheep, and says, I give unto them eternal life, and
they shall never perish, neither shall any Man pluck them out of my hand.
Observe, first, how he calls them his Sheep, for he by his Death purchased
them, then as he speaks Truth, unto them, he will give Eternal Life, and is
eternal Life the gift of any but of God alone? Can any one but God give Eternal
Life? Yet Christ gives it, so certainly, that they shall never perish, (here by
the by, is an unanswerable Proof against the pretended Apostasy of Saints,) and
the infallibility of this gift of Eternal Life, he confirms by an Argument
drawn out of his own power, for neither shall any Man pluck them out of his
Hand: But because to a People who looked upon him as a mere Man, ver. 29.
this might seem too high and unlikely, he gives a convincing Reason, my Father
which gave them me, is greater and stronger than all, and none is able to pluck
them out of my Father's hand. Pray observe the equality of Power between him
and the Father expressed in the very same words, none shall ^uck them out of my
Hand, and none is able to pluck ^em out of my Father's Hand: Now that he spoke
of God his Father, and that they understood it so, it appears out of verse 33.
and because that unbelieving People might happen to have asked him, how it is
that thou ^akest thy Hand as strong as God's Hand? Or as in that verse it is
expressed, That thou being a Man make by self God. For they well understood
his meaning, ^e gives them for a Reason, the equaliy in power of ^is with the
Father's, in these words, I and my Father ^re one; One God of one and the same
Nature and Power, which must needs be Divine, seeing no Man is ^ble to resist,
and overcome it; between Man and Man, ^one so strong but he may happen to meet
with a stronger than himself, but no such thing in relation to God. In the
Godhead is Oneness of Nature, and distinction of Persons, the Persons of the
most holy Trinity are really distinct one from another, not by any Essential,
but by some Personal Attribute.

I know the Idle and not in the least pertinent Solution they would give of the
Text, namely, they are ^ne in Consent, but this is neither the Scope of our
Savior's words, nor is it the true and proper sense of the place: That there
is a full and perfect Agreement between God the Father, and his Son the Lord
Jesus, ^one does question; what the Father wills, the Son wills also, and
what the Son wills, the Father wills likewise; so in every thing they are
of one Will and Mind, which by the the by, as I said elsewhere, argues Oneness
of Nature: But that this is not the meaning of our Savior's words, it is plain
enough out of the place; if it had been only so, the Jews never would have
called it Blasphemy, nor taken up Stones to Stone him; they well knew how the
Law of God required a Conformity of Man's Will with God's, and that the
Creatures Duty and Happiness consists in yielding Obedience to God's Commands:
A Harmony between God's Will and Man's, is a kind of Perfection in the
Creature, and not Blasphemy, no more than 'twas Blasphemy in Paul to say, Romans
7.16
I consent unto the law that it is good. Therefore our Savior highly meant
more than a consent, when he said, I and my Father are one; for the question
was not about a Consent, but about a Divine Power and Nature, which the Jews
interpreted, that he being a Man, made himself God, which the Lord Jesus did
not gainsay, but explains it thus, ver. 36.
I said I am the Son of God. So if the Question had been only about Oneness of
Consent, the Jews would never have about it made so much noise as they did.

But I find my self by degrees engaged in these Fundamental Matters farther
than I intended at first; yet for all this, I must not draw off, rather go on,
and here add some things to strengthen what I said in other places, and more
and more to make matters clear, I shall by the Grace of God fill up some more
Leaves to prove and explain a Subject so excellent in its self, and so
necessary to be known, that the Apostle makes it his Prayer not only for the
Philippians, Phil. 1.9.
but also for all Believers, That our love may abound yet more and more in
knowledge, and in all judgment; for our Love and Obedience to God, with our
Zeal for his Glory and Service must be according to true and sound Knowledge;
hence it is, that of Faith, the Mother of all Christian Graces, Knowledge is
the first part, and God sets a Brand with a dreadful threatening upon those who
want it, Isai. 27.11.
It is a people of no understanding, therefore he that made them, will not have
mercy on them; and he that formed them will show them no favor.

God in Scripture having said nothing in vain, but all things therein being
written for our Instruction, and strengthening of our Faith, we must not about
our Disputes against Socinians, omit a kind of proof therein contained, which,
though it be not the clearest, yet much to our purpose may be learned out of
it: In the Old Testament in three ways, besides that of Vrim and Thummim God
communicated with, and spoke to his People, by the Prophets, in Dreams and
Visions; which last, though, elsewhere we said something about it, when we
mentioned several Apparitions, yet we now shall add that to Gideon: Judge. 6.11
12, 14.
One in two several verses, called the Angel of the Lord; but in another, the
Lord himself; for it is said, The Lord looked upon him, appeared and spoke
indeed, like the Lord God, and said, go in this thy might, and thou shall save
Israel from the hand of the Midianites, have I not sent thee? No created Angel
might speak so, but only the Son of God appearing in a visible Form, who in
several other places is called Angel, who being the great Deliverer of his
People, chose what Instruments he pleased to do the work, and sent them; have I
not sent thee? This same appeared unto Manoah, who asking for his Name,
received this answer, chap. 13.18. ver. 22.
Why ask thou thus after my name, seeing it is secret, or wonderful? And
soon after, that Angel is called God, We shall surely die, says Manoah,
because we have seen God. Which was a common Proverb among the Jews, spoken of
the only true God: Now we find no where in Scripture, that God the Father
appeared to Man in Humane shape: Well, though we formerly mentioned some things
in relation to this, yet now by the Grace of God, we shall take notice of some
considerable Visions relating to our point, which we read in the Books of the
Prophecies of Isaiah, Ezekiel and Daniel, which afford new matter; and to show
a sweet Harmony between the Old and New Testaments, we shall compare them with
St. John's Vision and Revelation, but briefly, to speak of every one in order,
and by it self, we shall by the Grace of God begin with that of Isaiah.

This Prophet who the oftener, and plainest of any others, Prophesied about the
Messiah's, or God's Son's coming into the World, as in Chapters. 7, 9, 11, 40.
and in many other places, chiefly in the whole Chap. 53. which compared with
the History of his Passion, and all therein expressed in the Preter-Tense,
almost leaves a ground to ask which is the Prophecy, and which is the History?
Wherefore, he is by some justly called the Evangelical Prophet: The same
relates a Vision he had of the glory of God, the meaning whereof, the Holy
Ghost has in other places, taken care to explain to us: The Prophet saw the
Lord sitting upon a throne, and John saw one sitting upon a throne; which was
the Lord God Almighty: Isa. 6.1, 2.3, 4. Rev. 4.2.8.
In the Prophet about the throne stood the Seraphims, which had each six wings.
So in John, round about the throne were four beasts, which had each of them six
wings: The Seraphims cried one to another, and said, holy, holy, holy is the
Lord of Hosts, the whole earth is full of his glory: And the four beasts rest
not day and night, saying, holy, holy, holy Lord God Almighty, which was, and
is, and is to come, and in Chap. 5.11. many Angels in this holy Consort join
their voice with the Beasts, and the Elders. The Prophet heard the Voice of the
Lord, Isa. 6.8.
saying, Whom shall I send, and who will go for us? And the Apostle received
his Commission. Thou must prophecy before many peoples, Rev. 10.11.
and nations, and tongues, and kings. All these Circumstances are remarkable,
and show how the Glory which the Prophet saw, though within so great a distance
of time, was the same, and of the same Lord God: The Lord sitting upon the
Trone sent the Prophet, 1 Pet. 1.10.11. 1 John 3.24.
and the Lord Jesus sent the Apostles, and Prophets too; for the spirit of
Christ was in the Prophets; and hereby we know, says John, that he abides in
us, by the spirit he has given us: So that he who sent the Prophets, is the
same who sent the Apostles; and if we may believe John, who two Years after he
had his Revelation, John. 12, 38, 39, 40, 41.
did write his Gospel, assures us that the Lord Jesus the Son of God, is the
same, whom before his Incarnation, the Prophet saw sitting upon the Throne, and
whom in his Vision he had seen in the Isle of Patmos; for there he quoted that
place of the Prophet, Isas. 53.1.
Lord, who has believed our report, and to whom has the arm of the Lord been
revealed? And immediately out of the same Chap. of the Prophet, when he saw the
Vision, ver. 9, 10. he quotes these words, though not exactly in the same
order, but in the same sense, He has blinded their Eyes, and hardened their
hearts, that they should not see with their Eyes, nor understand with their
hearts, and be converted, and I should heal them: And to make the thing the
plainer, the Evangelist named the time when the Prophet said so; Joh. 12.41
These things said Esaias when he saw his glory, and spoke of him, that is in
that Chap. 6. when he saw the Vision, and when he spoke of him, whom the
Evangelist is then speaking of; and if we go back few Verses before, we shall
find he speaks of our blessed Savior, ver. 37.
but though he had done so many miracles before them, yet they believed not on
him: So then it is plain, how he whose Life John in his Gospel writes the
History of, namely the Lord Jesus, is the same Lord whose Glory Esaias saw so
long before his appearing in the Flesh; John. 17.5.
and this our Savior might allude to, when he said, And now, O Father,
glorify thou me with thine own self, with the glory I had with thee before the
World was: For if he had it in Isaiah's time, we may well conclude he had it
also before the World was; so that glory being not Humane nor Angelical, must
needs be Divine, and when he had a Being. This farther out of the Prophet, I
take notice of, The Lord said whom shall I send? By the Singular Number, to
show the ^^eness of Essence, and by who will go for us? The plurality of
Persons, according to that in Genesis, Let us make man in our image, after our
likeness. chap. 1.26. chap. 1.


Ezechiel's Vision is this, the appearance of the glory of God; but before, is
given an account of the Antecedents, by a whirlwind out of the north with a
fire, ver. 4, 5. ver. 10. ver. 18. ver. 22. ver. 24. ver. 26.
and a brightness, then the likeness of four living Creatures, the likeness of
whose face was of a man, of a li^n, of an ox, and of an Eagle, and they were
full of Eyes round about them. And the likeness of the firmament over the heads
of the living creatures, was as the color of the terrible crystal; also there
was a noise like the noise of great waters, as the voice of the Almighty: After
this the Prophet saw above the firmament the likeness of a throne, as the
appearance of a saphire-stone, and upon the likeness of the throne, v. 27, 28.
was the likeness as the appearance of a man above upon it, whose description
is made in the following Verses, as the appearance of fire round about, from
the appearance of his loins, even upwards, and from the appearance of his loins
even downwards, I saw as it were the appearance of fire, and it had brightness
round about, as the appearance of the bow that is in the cloud in the day of
rain: After which the Prophet concludes thus, this was the appearance of the
likeness of the glory of the Lord.

Now to find out the Conformity of this Vision with that of John, we must join
the first and fourth Chapters of the Revelation, and observe the Concomitants,
Fire and Brightness, his eyes were as a flame of fire, Rev. 1.1^. v. 16. chap.
4.2, 3, 6, 7.
and his countenance was as the Sun shines in his strength; also there was a
throne in heaven, and one sat on the throne. And he that sat was to look upon
like a jasper and a sardine stone: and there was a rainbow round about the
throne in sight like unto an Emerald. And before the throne was a sea of glass
like unto crystal. And round about the throne were four beasts full of eyes
before and behind. (...) ^us^ beast was like a lion. the second like a calf,
the third had the face as a man, and the fourth was like a flying eagle. These
circumstances do pretty well agree in both Visions, and 'twill appear the
better, if we speak of him who sat upon the Throne: the Prophet says, he had
the likeness as the appearance of a man; and the Apostle writes, chap. 1.13.
in the midst of the seven candleshicks, was one like unto the son of man, who
there appears among the Churches, represented by Candlesticks, as their Head;
but in chap. 4. we see him upon the Throne: the word like and likeness, is used
not only by the Prophet, but also by the Apostle John, as also by Paul, who,
speaking of the Lord Jesus, says, He was made in the likeness of men. Phil.
2.7.
This after the Incarnation, but Ezekiel speaks before that time, and of a
Vision, so expresses it by the word likeness and appearance, because he who
then sat upon the Throne was, not actually, but afterward was to be made Man,
not by any Change of Substance, but by Assumption of humane Nature; however he
describes a humane Body when he says, Rev. 1.13, 14, 15.
of his loins upward, and even of his loins downward, which John does in a more
emphatical way, when from head to foot he describes one like unto the son of
man; he does not in general say, like unto Man, but like unto the Son of Man,
which name our Lord, when upon Earth, used to call himself by: Now I say, that
he who sat upon the Throne was God Almighty, for it is called the likeness of
the Glory of the Lord: Ezekiel 1.28.
And if a Person of the Godhead, it relates unto the Son, who afterward was
manifested in the Flesh, and before under the Old Testament, had appeared in
the Shape and Likeness of a Man, which the Father never did, and of him we read
no such thing: Before I make an end with this Head, I must take notice how
because precious Stones are, even beyond Gold, the more valuable things in this
World, so when God was pleased to grant a special Manifestation of his
Presence, to set a value upon it, always something of Jewels was offered to the
eye, whereby it is delighted, and this not only in Ecstasies and Visions, but
upon other occasions; thus Moses, Exodus 24.9, 10.
Aaron, Nadab, Abihu, and seventy of the elders saw the God of Israel, and
there were under his feet, as it were a paved work of saphire-stone, and as it
were the body of heaven in its clearness.

The third Vision is Daniel's, Dan. 7.13. Acts 1.9.
one we read of Chap. 7.13. directly relating to our Savior's Ascension into
Heaven, how one like the Son of Man came with the Clouds of Heaven to the
Ancient of Days, which we find fullfilled, when his Disciples beheld, he was
taken up, and a Cloud received him out of their Sight: this I shall not speak
of, for I mentioned it in another place, only I take notice how the expression
like the Son of Man does point at that Individual Person who being the Son of
God, was made like unto the Son of Man, for it denotes that he was something
else besides the Son of Man, and before he was the Son of Man, or else the
words, behold a Man came with the Clouds, had sufficiently described the
Person, if he had been a mere Man, without saying the Son of Man; but by that
expression which, as already observed, is the very name which he, who often
called himself Son of God, used also to call himself by, the Prophet mean'd
something more than a bare Man; Dan. 9.23. Chap. 2.44. and 7.14.
for he, being a Man greatly beloved of God, by means of the great and many
Revelations he had, relating both to the Kingdom and Person of Christ: he,
though at so great a distance, might see the Son of God as become the Son of
Man, chiefly in the Vision of the 70 Weeks, and in that same Chap. in his
Prayer to God for his Nation, he mentions Christ the Messiah, V. 17.
for he does beseech to be heard for the Lord's sake, which plainly implies a
distinction of the Person he Prays to, by him called Our God, and of that for
whose sake he prays to be heard, for the Lord's sake, that is for Christ's, in
whom God alone accepts all our Prayers, John 14.6.
for none can come to the Father but by him; and now this is our form of Prayer
to God that he be pleased to hear us for the sake of his Son, who is he that
appeared to the Prophet in another place in the Vision of the battle between
the Ram and the Ge^^, Dan. 8. V. 15.16.
for he says, behold there stood before me as the appearance of a Man, who
gave the Angel Gabriel the word of Command, make this Man to understand the
Vision: but if we proceed to that Vision of his contained in Chap. 10.5, 6. we
shall find the description of a Person which does exactly suit with that in
Revel. 1.13, 14, 15. for, says the Prophet, I lift up mine Eyes and looked,
and behold a certain Man clothed in Linen, whose Loins were girded with fine
Gold of Vphaz, his Body also was like the B^ryl, and his Face as the appearance
of lightning, and his Eyes as Lamps of fire, and his arms and his feet like in
color to polished brass; and the Voice of his Words like the Voice of a
multitude.

We may take notice how in these Visions of the Glory of God, commonly appeared
a Man, or one like a Man, sitting upon a Throne: why like a Man? not as if
Divine Nature in the abstract was like the human, for such a wrong notion
Scripture declares against, but to teach how in the Godhead in the Concrete
there is something, or rather Person, Man, like Man, then more than Man, and
something besides Man, which became Christ, made like a Man, not in every thing
a Man, because no Sinner. Now as the Father was never made Man, so it would
have been improper for him to appear in the shape of a Man, but for the Son who
in time was made Man; 'twas very proper for him to appear in that Figure, even
before he was manifest in the flesh, for though at that time he was not
actually so, yet was accounted to be such, because in time to come he was so to
be made Man, according to the first promise after the fall, Genesis 3.15.
the Seed of the Woman shall bruise the Serpents head; not the Seed of Man
immediately, though called Abraham's and David's Seed, but mediately, in the
Woman's Seed immediately, for he was made a Man by the Woman's, not by the Man's
Seed; his Body was formed our of her Substance without the help of any Man, so
that she might properly, according to the Flesh, be called his Mother, but no
Man might properly be named his Father, for in that respect he had none, Luke
3.23.
for Joseph was but a supposed Father to him, and David was his Father only in
her who had been derived from him: he has a Father namely God, but upon the
account of another Generation; and God the Father in a most authentic way,
from Heaven more than once, has declared and owned him to be his Son, that is
as he came from Heaven, there lies the ground of that Sonship; God the Father
never called him Son of Man, but his own beloved, only begotten Son, in whom he
is well pleased. Now in the manifestation of his Glory, because Divine Nature
has in the Person of the Son mediately been united with humane Nature, and so
God in the Person of the Son appearing like Man, he appears in a Nature which
is his own, because the Son assumed it: and God whether essentially taken or
for the Person of the Father, never did or does in the way of Mercy and Favor
manifest himself but in the face of Jesus Christ Mediator, God and Man, as
there is no access unto God but in and thorough him, and as it is now, so it was
ever from the very beginning, wherefore he is called the Lamb slain from the
Foundation of the World: Rev. 13.8.
and this is the reason why God manifested himself under the shape of a Man, to
show how in the Person of the Son, who took upon him that Nature, he is
reconciled to Mankind; and of old the Son appeared in that likeness to signify
how in that Nature he would make our peace with, and reconcile us (...) God;
the Apostle speaking of Christ's Incarnation ^alls it, he was made like unto
Men, the word like there denotes truly and really a Man; Philip. 2.7.
this is to prove his Humanity, but how much stronger terms does he use to
prove his Divinity when he says, who heing in the form of God, the form is the
Nature whether of a Person or of a Thing, for it is that which gives it a Being,
so that expression signifies that Christ is and was such as God himself, and
therefore God, for there is none in all parts like to God, but God himself, but
what he adds in the same verse does highly confirm the truth, he thought it not
robbery to be equal with God, his being equal with God not by robbery,
demonstrates it was his due and own right.

Now this point we intend to conclude with John's Vision, for if the former
Visions agree with this, and if this relates to the Son of God who was God, and
before his Incarnation appeared in his Divine Glory in the likeness of a Man,
then with him we may well affirm he had a Being, and a Glory with the Father
before the World was. That Christ the eternal Son of God and Redeemer of the
World, is that Glorious God and Person who showed his beloved Disciple this
Vision in the Isle of Patmos, where he had by the Emperor Domitian been
confined, as he says, for the Word of God and for the Testimony of Jesus
Christ, Rev. 1.9.
is so clear, that I think, the adversaries themselves being the judges, there
is no ground left to doubt of it: to what I already said about it, I shall add
what follows. This revelation is of Jesus Christ, as we learn it out of the
first line of the first Chapter, it being as the Title of the Book, that is the
Lord Jesus revealed it unto John, V. 13.14.
who gives a glorious description of him, I saw one like unto the Son of Man
clothed with a Garment down to the Foot, and girt about the Paps with a Golden
Girdle: his Head and his Hairs were white like Wool, as white as Snow, and his
Eyes were as a Flame of Fire: These last words of the description are almost
the same, but altogether to the same purpose with what we read of the Ancient
of days who did sit, Dan. 7.9.
whose Garment was white as Snow, and the Hair of his Head like the pure Wool,
his Throne was like the fiery Flame: now the adversaries cannot deny but that
by the ancient of days is mean'd the true eternal God, so he whose description
St. John makes with the same attributes as Daniel gives of him, must needs be
the same; but the Apostle continues the description thus, V. 13.15.
and his Feet like unto fine Brass, as if they had burned in a Furnace, and his
Voice as the sound of many Waters: again let this latter and first part of the
description, about the clothing and girdle of Gold, be compared with Daniel's
Vision already quoted, and by this comparing Scripture with Scripture, we shall
find out the truth, how in both places the same is described, and so if Daniel
saw the God of Israel, the true God by nature, he whom John saw is such, which
we shall know better and better if we read in the last Verse of Chap. 4. what
the four Beasts and twenty four Elders said to him that sat upon the Throne,
thou art worthy to receive Glory and Honor and Power. And if that Verse we
compare with the 12. of 5. Chap. which is the following, we shall find these
words, worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive Power and Riches and Wisdom
and Strength and Honor and Glory and Blessing. So that we must conclude the
Lamb to be the same Lord spoken of before, I mean the same in nature, and to
the Lamb is rendered the same Honor and Worship as is to the Lord with the
same Attributes, which is expressed with some enlargement, and in more words
than in the foregoing Chapter: but by whom is this Divine Honor rendered unto
the Lamb? it is expressed in the foregoing Verse, Rev. 5.11.
and I beheld, and I heard the Voice of many Angels round about the Throne, and
the Beasts and the Elders, and the number of them was ten thousand times ten
thousand, and thousands of thousands; which last words seem to be taken out of
Daniel's Vision, Dan. 7.10.
to show how all this was rendered to one and the same, and I say that the
sameness of Worship does argue for the sameness of Nature: we find the Lord
Jesus by reason of his priestly Office, which is one of the three belonging to
his Mediatorship, to be called the Lamb, Rev. 7.17. Chap. 22.1, 3.
now this Lamb is in ^he midst of the Throne, which is the proper Seat for
Almighty God, then God and the Lamb sit together upon ^he same Throne, so there
is but one Throne for God and the Lamb; but God is jealous of his Glory, which
^e has solemnly declared, he never will communicate ^o another who is not God,
or to a mere Creature; Isai. 42.8.
between them that are inequal the Throne is excepted: though Pharaoh was
willing to raise Joseph to the greatest Honor above any one in his Kingdom,
over the which ^e made him absolute Ruler, yet he made this exception between
him and Joseph, only in the Throne will I be greater ^han thou; if Christ be
not God, Genesis 41.40.
there would be an infinitely greater difference between the Father and him,
^han there was between Pharaoh and Joseph, and God is ^o less jealous of his
Honor than Pharaoh was of his.

But to return to John, Rev. 1.17.
he in his Vision knew ^he Son of God, therefore when he saw him in that
Glorious and dreadful sight amidst Fire and ^lame, he fell at his Feet as dead,
and the Lord himself to confirm him in his Opinion and that he was not mistaken
when he thought he knew him, said I am he that lives and was dead; so all the
Glorious things spoken of and performed in the Book, are rendered to him who
lives and was dead, the true Son of God, who sent Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel,
Daniel, and all the Prophets, who being subordinate to him as the Head and
great one, received ^ll their Commissions from him, and were all Acted and
moved by that Holy Spirit of his, for as after his Ascension he sent the
Comforter the Holy Spirit to his Apostles, so before his Incarnation as well as
now, he Administered his Office of Mediator, Ruled and Governed his Church,
which he could not have done except he had had a Being, and Existed before he
was Born of the Blessed Virgin Mary.

Hereupon our Litigious Adversaries may happen to Cavil and say, such great and
Fundamental Truths as these, ought not to be grounded upon Visions and
Prophecies, I consess if we had no other proofs, I in some degree would allow
of the Objection; but they know we have so many plain and clear of another
kind, that these we make use of not for want of others, but bring them in as
over and above the full measure; my inclination leads me far enough from being
one of those who would dive into the Secret things of God, which I know belong
n^^ to us, but those that are Revealed do: I own that o^^ must be endued with
the Spirit of a Prophet before he ca^ understand a Prophecy till it be
accomplished; but when it is fulfilled though but in part, then it becomes a
History, if not wholly yet in part, and that part helps toward knowing what
remains: it is an intolerable presumption in some which we hear of too often, to
dispo^^ of those times and seasons which God reserves in his ow^ Hand, whereby
they would Limitate the Holy one (...) Israel, when to a certain Year and time
they preten^^ rashly to fix very great and considerable Events, which God twice
complains of by his Prophet, Jer. 49.19, and 50, 44.
who will appoint (...) the time? I think, they have enough to study in the
Revealed Will of God, without diving into his Secret one; b^^ what I have done
is of a quite different Nature, and it is most certain how all Types and
Prophecies relating (...) the first coming and Sufferings of Christ the
Messiah, (...) we consult Scriptures, we shall find to be fulfilled: he sai^
unto his Disciples, Luke 22.37. Jo. 19.30.
the things concerning me have an end, and upon the Cross he declared it is
finished. Now the Prophets out of what they heard and saw, having foreto^^ who
the Messiah that should come, was, what he wou^^ do and Suffer, and for what
end, we ought to neglect nothing that may clear up to us that whole important
ma^ter. As under the Law there were Prophecies and Vision about these high and
adorable Mysteries, so there we^^ Types and Figures of the same, of which I
formerly mentioned some and shall now add one thing more of God^^ Son's
Incarnation: God was in the Cloud, in the Tabernacle and in the Temple, thus
God's Dwelling in the^^ sented his Dwelling with us in our Human Nature, upon
which account the Prophet calls him Immanuel, or Go^ with us; no doubt but that
the Infinitely Wise God, wh^ does nothing in vain, had some special meaning
when h^^ chose to Dwell in the Cloud which as we read, 1 Kings 8.10, 11, 12.
filled the House of the Lord, so that the Priests could not stand to Minster,
because of the Cloud, for the Glory of the Lord filled the House of the Lord,
and in that place Solomon took Noti^^ how the Lord said that he would dwell in
the thick darkness a God full of Infinite Light, Brightness, Majesty, and Glory
to dwell in thick darkness, I see no Reason wh^ the same may not Dwell in a
Humane Body, especially ^eing it is written, a body has thou prepared me, and
also (...) Tabernacle of God is with men, Rev. 21.3.
alluding to the Taberna^^ wherein he dwelt: and farther, the Lord Jesus's
Flesh (...) Humane Body is by the Apostle called the Vail, Heb. 10.20. Exodus
34.30, 33.
which ^^aceal'd, and if I may so say, contained his Divine Per^^ and Nature,
wherein the Apostle alludeth to the Vail (...) Moses when he came down from the
Mountain he put a ^^il on his Face for the People could not look upon the
^^ightness of it, but were afraid to come nigh him. If ^^en could not behold
the Glory of God only in some ^eams of reflection upon Moses's Face, for having
been ^while with him upon the Mount, and having seen only God's Back parts not
his Face, his Goodness not his Glory, ^uch less could the World have looked
upon that Divine ^ssential Glory of his Son come out of his own Bosom: ^od
having a mind to Communicate and Converse with ^ankind, it had been impossible
for Men to behold that Glory in open Face and not Die, therefore God out of ^is
Infinite Mercy to condescend to our Weakness, did as it ^ere conceal it in a
Body and put on the Vail, that is his ^Resh; to this purpose the Apostle says,
Colos. 2.9.
in him dwells ^^l the fullness of the Godhead bodily, or in his Body: but
^aving spoken of the Cloud and of the Tabernacle, we ^ust say these few words
about the Temple, when our ^aviour said to the Jews, John 2.19, 21.
destroy this Temple and in three ^ays I will raise it up again, the Evangelist
observes that ^e spoke of the Temple of his Body: so his Body he called by ^he
name of the Temple, whereby he seemed to point at the Temple wherein God was
said to dwell, as if he had said, this Body wherein I now dwell, as formerly I
did in the Temple, you may and shall take and destroy, as it happened when they
Crucified him; but this I give you for a proof of my Divinity so as to make you
know who I am; ^his same Body or Temple in three days, I of my self and by my
own Power will raise it up again. that Body is ^ow Glorious in Heaven whilst
there is on Earth neither Ark, Tabernacle nor Temple.

At this time I have insisted upon the head of Visions which is one of the
Classes out of which we draw Arguments for the Holy Trinity, and Incarnation of
the Son of God: though they were more frequent under the Old Testament, when
those Holy Mysteries were not so plain as since they were made by the coming of
our Lord and Savior; yet God in his Infinite Wisdom to confirm all that in
that kind had been under the Law showed Abraham and his Posterity, has under
the Gospel Transmitted to his Church, thereby to show an harmony between his
Promises and the Execution thereof, that Revelation to St. John, Iown there are
some proofs, may be not so strong, because not so plain as others, for some do
prove a Truth more directly and positively than others; yet in the Word of God
every kind of proof has its use, for God in his Infinite Wisdom has thought
fit therein to instruct us in several ways and methods: if we had only
Collateral and somewhat dark proofs, we would not lay so great a stress
thereupon, but to the most positive and clear we join others to show the
excellent harmony that is in God's Word, in asserting things in some places
more, in others less plainly, for sometimes in one we find that which seemed
wanting in another, but altogether they make the thing to be undisputably true.

This consideration moves me, in the disputes we have against Socinans, to draw
up some Arguments which as yet I made no use of, to prove and more and more
demonstrate those great Truths: of that kind the following is one, it is said of
Moses that he esteemed the reproach of or for Christ greater Riches than the
Treasures in Egypt. Heb. 11.26.
How is the reproach of Christ mentioned in relation to a time that was so long
before his Birth? in the place the Apostle says, it was by Faith, now one that
is not, or that is a mere Man cannot be the Object of saving Faith, for we
believe in God not in Man, therefore we must say Christ was in Moses's time and
as then he was not a Man nor an Angel, he must needs be God: Moses whom a while
after God so clearly communicated himself to, and so familiarly conversed with,
knew well that Angel who afterward was with him all along in the Wilderness,
who to him had appeared in the Bush, to be God himself Existing at that time,
since he was with him, and who in time to come under the name of a Prophet like
himself was to be manifested in the Hesh, the Messiah and Christ as to his
Office, and at that time God by Nature: we must believe that Paul on that
occasion mentioning Christ, had cause for so doing, which can be assigned to be
no other than upon the account of his Deity, before he had upon him taken our
Humanity: This Reproach of Christ, another Apostle under the name of his
Sufferings, mentions as having of old been under the Eye and Prospect of the
Prophets, who, says he, 1 Pet. 1.10, 11.
Inquired diligently searching what, or what manner of time, the spirit of
Christ which was in them, did signify, when it testified before hand the
sufferings of Christ, and the glory that should follow; all which, related to a
coming of his in the Flesh; but looked upon him as having then another Being and
Existence; for by the Testimony of the same Spirit, they knew the Messiah to
come, in their time to be God.

As to the word Reproach of Christ, used by the Apostle, we elsewhere have it
in Scripture, Psalm. 69.9.
The reproaches of them that reproached thee are fallen upon me. The
Reproaches, Revilings and Blasphemies against God by wicked Men, are fallen
upon Christ, for not only he has born upon him David's Adultery and Murders,
the Thefts and Robberies of the repenting Malefactor, the Unbelief, Persecution
and Blasphemy of Paul, as Peter's Denying, Swearing and Cursing; but also the
Reproaches, Mockeries, Revilings and Injuries which Malice and Wickedness could
invent, fell upon him from his Baptism to his Death, especially in the
High-Priest's House, in the Judgment Hall, and upon the Cross, when Hell was
quite broke loose upon him: They that passed by reviled him, Matthew. 27.39, 40,
41, 42, 43.
wagging their heads, saying, if thou be the Son of God, come down from the
cross; likewise the chief Priests mocking him, with the Scribes and Elders
said, he saved others, himself he cannot save; if he be the King of Israel, let
him now come down from the cross and we will believe him; he trusted in God,
let him deliver him now, if he will have him, for he said, I am the Son of God.
These last words contain the ground of all their malicious Blasphemies, wherein
Socinians would have joined with the Jews, and if for the Cause, no doubt also
for the Effect. Were not these Reproaches against God, whose Holy Name was
Impiously made use of? They Reproaching for trusting in God, and for saying, I
am the Son of God, which, certainly, is to reproach God? but all these
Blasphemies, and wicked Reproaches fell upon Christ, who was made the Object
thereof; thus was fullfill'd the Prophecy, for David pointed at him when he
said, The Reproaches of them that reproached thee are fallen upon me: There are
two undisputable proofs to show, how in that place the Psalmist speaks not of
himself, but of our Savior; one is in the beginning of the same Verse, The
zeal of thy house has eaten me up, to him applied; the other is ver. 21. Joh.
2.17.
In my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink; and if for this Truth we want
another Evidence, we have it at hand, for even Christ pleased not himself, but
as it is written, Romans 15.3.
The Reproaches of them that reproached thee, fell upon me. So then if Paul
speaks truth, in Moses's time there was that which may be called the Reproach
of Christ; then in some sense Christ was at that time, and that might well be,
seeing he declared he was before Abraham.

Something more we must say about this, the better to explain it: we know
Divine Nature to be impassible, and out of the reach of any wrong on injury:
however those that impiously attempt to do it, are accounted to have effected
it, for what they could they have done toward it, and in God's Eye are as
guilty as if they had done it: Now in Moses's time the Son of God in his human
Nature, either in Soul or Body, could not be sensible of any Reproaches, for he
then had it not actually; but according to Scripture there are two Bodies of
Christ, his Natural, which he took long after, and the Mystical, which at that
time was in being; the Church is this Mystical Body: From Eternity the Son of
God had his Commission to be Head of the Church, thereby to bring many Sons
into Glory; this Commission after the beginning of the World he began to
execute in the Exercise of his Royal and Prophetical Offices, with ruling and
disposing things for the good of his Church, the Father having put into his
hands, and made over to him the whole Administration of that Occumenical
Kingdom; he is the King spoken of, Psalm. 2.6.
set upon the holy hill of Sion, who rules over, and preserves his People from
the Attempts of their Enemies, and taught them by the Prophets in whom his
Spirit was; and this mediately and actually till the time came when himself was
to perform the Work of Mediation and Redemption in the passive part thereof,
which was his Priestly Office, in offering himself a Sacrifice, and shedding
his precious Blood for a proper satisfaction to Divine Justice, and Remission
of Sins: This was the part of human Nature to suffer, but all the while before,
the Work was going on, not by means of human Soul and Body, which at that time
he had not; how then could the Mystical Body, the Church, live and be acted if
there had been no Head? and how there be a Head, if there had been no Being?
Seeing then there could be no such Body without a Head, and that no Man nor
Angel could be that Head, who then but a God could be it? Therefore all the
while before the Incarnation, Divine Nature in the Second Person of the most
Holy Trinity, was acting in the ordering and delivering his People out of the
Flood, out of Sodom, out of Egypt, and punishing their Enemies, as we see them
opposed in the Persons of Abel and Cain, of Noah and his Family to the rest of
the World, of Shem and Ham, of Lot and those of Sodom, and in this Text of his
Church, under the Name of People of God, in opposition to the Egyptians, as the
Apostle opposes the afflictions of the people of God, unto the pleasures of sin
in Egypt, (which Moses might have enjoyed when called Son of Pharaoh's
Daughter,) and the Reproach of Christ to the Treasures in Egypt. Scripture does
in several places certify, That Christ is the Head of the Church, Ephesians. 5.23.
but he who now is the Head of the Church was ever so before, or else there
would have been two Heads of the Church, which is as absurd as it is monstrous,
to talk of a Body with two Heads: Therefore as there was a Body of the Church
from the beginning of the World, so from that time has Christ been the Head of
that Body, and at that time he was as sensible of Injuries done to his Members,
as we read he was after his Ascension, when he from Heaven said to Saul, Acts
9.4, 5.
why persecutest thou me? that is, the Members of his Mystical Body, for his
Natural one was far enough out of his reach.

Here with a sad heart I must say, how since the Lord Jesus's Ascension, he
never was more reproached, or suffered more than now; we have a Generation of
Men, who with the Rebels spoken of in the Gospel, say, Luke 19.14. Ps. 22.6.
We will not have this man to reign over us; as much as in them lies, they
would make him a reproach of men, and despised of the people, and would as the
Prophet speaks, make him again a man of sorrow, acquainted with grief, Isa.
53.3.
despised and rejected of men. The Jews when upon Earth deprived him of his
Life, and Socinians now when he is in Heaven, would strip him of the Dignity of
his Person, that chiefly consists in his Divinity, which they would rob him of;
and because they cannot understand that high Mystery, they will not believe it,
so against what the Apostle says, they walk by sense not by faith; 2 Cor. 5.7.
Is it a reasonable Consequence to say a thing is not, because they cannot
comprehend it? as if because I am not able to know well how Bread, which has
neither Life, Heat, or Motion, can preserve my Life and Vital Faculties,
procure heat, and enable me to move, I should cast it off. They also attempt to
reproach Christ in his Person, so in his Offices of Mediator, he came to
destroy sin, and save Sinners, to seek and save that which was lost, he came to
destroy the Devil's Work, Heb. 7.27. and 9.14. 2 Cor. 5.21. Romans 4.25. Gal.
2.20.
and that is Sin; this has been the Way and Means to save Sinners, which was
effected, as Scripture says, by making himself an offering for sin, by being
made sin for us, though he knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness
of God in him, with being deliverd for our offenses, with loving us, and giving
himself for us. Yet all this they daily speak and blaspheme against, as already
we have abundantly demonstrated.

Before I proceed farther, to what I formerly said against their denying that
there are any Mysteries in Religion, or above the reach of human Reason, this I
shall add, That there are Mysteries in the Work of Creation, as we read in the
37, 38, 39, 40, and 41 Chapters of Job: how many intricate and mysterious
things therein, which Job, a knowing Man, and who had his Reason about him,
could not answer, and calls them things too wonderful for him, Job 42.3.
which he knew not. And chap. 5.9. it is said of God, which does great things
and unsearchable. And chap. 9.10. which does great things past finding out; yet
presumptuously these Men will be searching into those unsearchable things, and
pretend they can find those things that are past finding out. But if there be
unknown Mysteries in the Creation of the World, why then should there be none
of the Wisdom of God in the Redemption of it? There are in Nature such
mysterious Puzlings, as can sometimes as much stagger some Men's Faith of God's
creating the World, as that of the most Holy Trinity and Incarnation can shake
the Faith of others about the Redeeming it; yet it is as certain, that God
redeemed the World, as that he created it: And as God has let us see so much
of the Creation, as to convince us he made us of nothing, and when we were
nothing; so in the Work of Redemption he has showed us he redeemed us when we
were lost, with clear and sufficient Evidences of his Power, Wisdom, and Mercy:
and what therein he has revealed, we ought to believe, as our Savior said to
Thomas about his Resurrection, Be not faithless, Joh. 20.27. Luke 8.50.
but believing. To believe, is what the Gospel requires of us, thus Christ said
to Jairus, believe only: In Matters of Salvation, is on our part required an
Obedience of Faith, for, as the Apostle says, We walk not by sight, 2 Cor.
5.7. Col. 2.2. and 4.3.
or by senses, but by faith. So when Scripture says, We must acknowledge the
mystery of God, and of the Father, and of Christ, we ought to believe there is
such a Mystery, for so Paul calls it, after the Revelation of Christ, and of
the Gospel: and it is a damnable Presumption to bring these Truths of God under
the Scrutiny of human Reason, and submit them to it, and reject them when that
poor, blind, corrupt, and unsound Reason cannot understand them; it is a most
false Inference to say, I understand neither the Trinity, nor the Incarnation,
therefore there is no such thing; as if I should say, I cannot understand what
God is, therefore there is no God; my Reason cannot understand the Infiniteness
and Eternity of God, therefore God is neither Infinite nor Eternal: I do not
apprehend the design of God's Wisdom, therefore no such thing in him. He
permits Evil, and because I cannot comprehend his Reason for it, must I
blasphemously say he is wicked? These are such impertinent Conclusions, that
any Novice in the Philosophy or Divinity Schools would hiss out. I would hear
by what Authority I may set up my Reason as Judge over that which is so much
above it, and which I do not well know. All these Wanderings of Men, I say, can
conclude nothing, except they prove their Understanding to be infallible and
infinite. What? to fathom these great Depths of God with the very short Line of
humane Reason? this is an intolerable Self-conceitedness! If at first when
Watches were made, one, who never saw one, neither understood the Watch-Maker's
design, seeing the several Pieces asunder upon a Table, would have said, This
is of no use, and good for nothing; had not such a one deserved to be laughed
at as a shallow Pate, void of good Sense and Reason? Yet it is transcendently
more foolish for any one to say, his Reason must judge whether what God has
revealed be true or not? O the nonsensical, silly, shallow Brains of some Men!
As in another place of this Discourse it is observed how God said that he would
dwell in the thick darkness, Ps. 97.2.
and that clouds and darkness are round about him, so it is to show how Men must
not attempt to pry into it, for they cannot see the great, dark, mysterious and
incomprehensible things of God. 1 Samuel 6.19.
Let the dreadful Punishment inflicted upon the Bethshemites for looking into
the Ark of the Lord, serve for a Warning to all who make themselves guilty of
the like Attempts. It Is also faid, That God dwells in the light which no man
can approach unto: 1 Timothy 6.16.
which tends to keep men from meddling too far, and presumptuously attempting
to look into the secret and glorious things of God, beyond what he has
revealed. But Socinians pretend to be clear-sighted enough to see through that
thick darkness, and to be strongsighted enough, with the Eye of their humane
Reason, steadfastly to look on the Infinite, Glorious and Unaccessible Majesty
of God, and as it were to stare him in the face; but they should know, how in
this sense no man shall see his face, and live. After this rate, these
all-knowing Men may happen to attempt giving a Description of Heaven, which
according to their Principles, is a thing not above their Reason to do, or
beyond the reach of their Capacity; so no Mystery to them. Thus they shall go
beyond Paul, and know more than he, who though he was caught up to the third
heaven into Paradise, yet says, 2 Cor. 12.2, 3, 4.
whether in the body or out of the body, I cannot tell, and there he heard
unspeakable words, which it is not lawful for a man to utter: We would desire
Socinians, whom, as they say, nothing in Religion is a Mystery unto, and who
think their Reason can and may know that which others say they neither can nor
may know, because they are Mysteries: I say we would desire them to give the
World an account of what that Paradise is, and what are the unspeakable words
which Paul hear^ there, and which it was not lawful for such a Man as St. Paul,
to utter.

But once for all, to come to the Jugulum Causae, to the very heart of the
point: in all Matters' of Religion, we must have a fixed Law and Rule to be
guided and judged by, which Rule must be backed by an infallible or Divine
Authority to stand to, which is our Case against Papists, who would have the
Authority or the Reason of the Church to be that same Rule, as Socinians more
unreasonably, would have every private Man's Reason to be it, which as occasion
shall serve, can by Fancy or Interest, under the name of Reason, be wrested and
by assed, so, that Reason so apt to be blinded and imposed upon, cannot be the
Law; for there is no reason why one Man should be guided and directed by the
Opinion of another, if he has no Commission from God proved by Miracles: for
the wisest of Men may happen to be blinded by Ignorance, as the best corrupted
by Interest and Lust. After this, Men will never stand to any thing, but will
quickly run into thousands of Confusion, Superstition, and Idolatry, both in
respect of God, and of his Worship. Without a true Divine Rule, and that is only
God's Word, no certainty of the true Knowledge of God, and of his Worship, for
all the Precepts of Nature are doubtful and uncertain; for they must be drawn
from long Observations of Nature it self, great strength of Reasoning, deep
skill in Philosophy, and so many other dependencies and circumstances, that
it is almost impossible to find a Man endowed with all such necessary
Qualifications. So then to depend upon one's natural Reason as a Guide to
Salvation, is to trust upon a bruised Reed, on which if a Man lean, it will go
into his hand, and pierce it; but if we trust in God's Word, which is the Word
of Truth, the Holy Ghost will thereby, in order to Salvation, make all safe and
sure to us, whilst he leaves those who abound in their own sense, to do so
still, and those who will not understand what they will not believe, to
continue in their Ignorance, Unbelief, and Wilfulness; as for us, Scripture is
our Rule.

Now Scripture speaks of the Son of God long before his Incarnation, as of a
Person Acting, Punishing, Delivering, etc. an unanswerable proof that he then
Existed, or else he would not have acted, for Modum essendi sequitur modus
operandi; none can Act except he be, which, as observed, could not be in his
Humane Nature: Now in the Word of God we read no such thing of the greatest and
best Men, as Moses, Elias, John Baptist, no mention at all of them, till after
their Birth, only John Baptist's was foretold, not long before, but not a word
of any thing he did before he was Born, 1 Cor. 10.4.9.
as we read of Christ, that, He was the Rock that followed the People in the
Wilderness; that he was tempted by them, etc. And in what the Angel said to
Zacharias of the Birth of a Son, mention is made of our Savior, Luke 1.16.
by the name of the Lord God of the Children of Israel, many of the Children of
Israel shall he turn to the Lord their God; and who this Lord God is, it is
implied in these words, He shall go before him, that is, the Lord their God, in
the spirit and power of Elias. Now that John Baptist went before the Lord
Jesus, To prepare the way of the Lord, and make straight the way for our God,
that is, the God of Israel; it appears out of Isaiah, Isai. 40.3.
compared with Malachy 4.6. fulfilled Matthew. 3.3. Mark 1.3. Luke 3.4. John
1.23. Wherein, we see how the four Evangelists take notice of the Prophecy and
fullfilling thereof, in relation to our blessed Savior, all which, proves him
to be true God by Nature, and consequently, that he had a Being before he was
Born of the Virgin. Upon this point, the Harmony of two Prophets with the
Evangelist, is so considerable, that some things more I must observe about it.
The true God of Israel speaks by Malachy, chap. 3.1.7, 10, 11, 12, 14. etc.
and in a Chapter which is much to our purpose, at several times calls himself,
The Lord of Hosts, who is the same that ver. 1. says, Behold I will send my
messenger, and he shall prepare the way before me. This is a Prophecy about
John Baptist, Messenger to the Lord of Hosts, before whom he was to prepare the
way; observe first, he that speaks, and will send, is the Lord of Hosts, he
that is to be sent, is his Messenger, and he that is to come, is the Lord of
Hosts, who speaks, and will send his Messenger, before me, in Person not by
Proxy. We know John Baptist prepared the way, not before God the Father, of
whom in Scripture we never read that he was to come into the World, but before
the Lord Jesus Christ, his Son, whose forerunner he was; therefore Jesus
Christ is plainly the Lord of Hosts, who is the true Eternal God, who under the
name of Shiloh and Messiah, was to come, and actually did, few Months after
John Baptist's Birth. chap. 4.2.
In the last Chap. is renewed the promise of Christ's coming under the name of
the Sun of Righteousness that should arise with healing in his wings; and of
John Baptist, under the name of Elijah, ver. 5. Matthew. 17.12, 13. Luke 1.16.
before the coming of the great and dreadful Day of the Lord, that is, of
Christ, who, called John by the name of Elias, because, said the Angel, he
shall go before him, that is in the foregoing Verse, The Lord God of Israel,
spoken of Christ, whom John, went before, in the spirit and power of Elias;
that is, with the same fervent Zeal which Elias was acted by, and in that
Spirit, says the Prophet, He shall turn the hearts of the fathers to the
children. Mal. 4.6.
Which are the very words by the Angel spoken to Zacharias. Malachy calls
Christ, who was to come, Luke 1.17.
The Lord, the Lord of Hosts; a peculiar and proper Attribute of the Almighty
and Eternal God, and the Angel names him, the Lord God of Israel. Let to this
the other Prophet's Testimony be joined, Isai. 40.3.4, 5.
The voice of him that cries in the Wilderness, prepare ye the way of the
Lord, etc. which is Parallel to the other, and by which, John Baptist is
designed, for unto himself he applied it, he, whose way he was to prepare, Joh.
1.23.
is called the Lord, and our God, that is, of Israel, at whose coming, the
glory of the Lord shall be revealed. The Lord God of Israel was to come
himself, and when he was come, his Glory was revealed; the Son of God under the
name of Jesus Christ, came himself, and when he came, the Glory was revealed,
therefore Jesus Christ was the true God of Israel, this Truth depends upon the
Evidence of two Prophets, and of an Angel, as related by an Evangelist;
whereunto is joined the Testimony of Zacharias, who at that time, as expressed,
was filled with the Holy Ghost, out of all this it will appear, that no Person
was ever better designed, nor his Titles more plainly described, than is in
those places, the coming in the Flesh of Christ, the true Son of God, and who
he was.

Another place, which I think, does Evidence Christ's Divinity, Jo. 10.15.
is this, As the Father knows me, even so know I the Father. There is a great
Emphasis in the words, as, and even, which implies in the same manner, nature
and degree, the comparison shows a parity in Persons, or else it had been
enough to have said, the Father knows me, and I know the Father. If the Son
knows the Father only in part, then the Father knows the Son but in part, which
to assert, is Impiety; but if the Father knows the Son perfectly, so the Son
also knows the Father perfectly; and as no finite Creature can perfectly know
the infinite God, so he that perfectly knows the infinite God, must himself be
infinite God, such is the Lord Jesus his own Son: When Thomas answered, Jo.
20.28.
My Lord, and my God, he answered him who spoke to him, that is Christ, so then
Thomas owned him for his Lord, and his God; he knew out of the Law, and by what
Christ had taught him, that there is but one God, Matthew. 8.2. and 9.18. and
14.33. and 15.25. and 20.20. and 28.17.
therefore he would not have called him his God, and worshipped him as such, if
he had not believed him to be the true God of Israel: To this, I shall add,
that our Savior, who was no Friend to Idolatry, suffered himself at several
times, as may be seen in the Margin, to be Religiously worshipped, that is, as
God, and never hindered any from it; but if he had not been God, he would never
have permitted any one to worship him as such.

So under the shape of a Man he had been by Abraham very long before; Genesis 18.1.
for we read how the Lord or Jehovah appeared to him in the plains of Mamre, in
ver. 1. it is positively said, Jehovah, but in 2, we read three men stood by
him, whereof one was the Lord, attended by two Angels, at which sight, that
Father of Believers bowed himself toward the ground, and addressed his Speech
only to one, My Lord, says he, if I have found favor in thy sight, etc. and
by the Discourse that afterward happened, it plainly appears the same was the
true Eternal God, who promised Sarah should have a Son, this is the same, who
in the Chap. before had appeared unto him, made a Covenant with him, appointed
Circumcision for the Seal of it, and also had at that time promised Sarah
should have a Son, and there he called himself the Almighty God; without
question, chap. 17.1.
this was the true God by Nature, for none is Almighty, but he, who if such,
for the words are convertible Almighty and True, naturally eternal God, he who
is the one is the other too: Now it is very observable, how he who in the first
Book of the Old Testament proclaimed himself the Almighty, does in the last of
the New, declare himself to be the Almighty, and as there is but one Almighty;
Rev. 1.8.
so in these two several places it is but one and the same that speaks. Now John
says it plainly enough, that the Lord Jesus is the Almighty, as in another
place I heretofore sufficiently evidenced, which to strengthen, this I shall
add that as Christ our Lord in the 1 Chap. of that Book, calls himself Simply
and absolutely, the Almighty; so toward the latter end of the same, chap.
16.14.
he is called God Almighty, and that this is spoken of him, the beginning of
the verse clears it, when it says, They are the spirits of devils, which go
forth unto the kings of the earth to gather them to the battle of that great
day of God Almighty. For a greater Confirmation, let this be compared with
another Chapter, chap. 19. from ver. 11, to the end.
wherein mention is made of that Battle and its Success, there is as true a
Description of Christ in the Person of the General of the Army, as can be; he
is called, faithful and true, and in righteousness he does judge and make war,
his eyes were as a flame of fire, etc. and his name is called the word of God;
and lower, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, and the great God. If after these
positive, plain and full Evidences, the Lord Jesus be not the true, essential
Almighty God, then there is no truth in Scripture, whose main design is to
declare him to be the Son of the living God, who from Heaven, and out of the
Father's Bosom came into the World to save us from Sin, Death, and Hell.

Of this, the Deliverance out of Egypt was a Type, and both Deliverances have
one and the same Author. I find much to our purpose contained in that place,
where the Prophet speaking of the People of Israel, says of God, He was their
Savior, in all their affliction he was afflicted, Isai. 63.8, 9.
and the Angel of his presence saved them, in his love and in his pity he
redeemed them. Which place seems to relate to what the Lord said to Moses out
of the midst of the Bush, Exodus 3.7.
I have surely seen the affliction of my people which are in Egypt; which is as
if in the manner of speaking of men, he had said, I have seen and considered of
my Peoples Affliction, and for it have pity and compassion on them: It is
observable, how he who in that place appeared unto Moses, is there called by
several Names; first, The angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a flame of
fire, ver. 2. and in the fourth he is called both Lord and God, When the Lord
saw that he turned aside to see, God called unto him. And ver. 6. he is again
called God, and ver. 7. the Lord. Under these several Names of Angel of the
Lord, God and the Lord, in the different things by him spoken, is designed the
true God of Israel; which I here take notice of, because it being compared with
this Text of Isaiah we now are upon, it helps toward a better undestanding
thereof: Here it is said of the true God, he was their Savior, then it is added,
the Angel of his presence saved them; both these are absolutely expressed, and
absolutely there can be but one Savior, who is God, so the Angel who saved
them must needs be God, and it is to be taken notice of, how he who here is
called the Angel of his presence, Exodus 33.14.
is elsewhere called God's presence, my presence shall go with thee; to show
how God's Presence, and the Angel of his Presence, is one and the same God: and
he who led the People through the Wilderness, is in another place also called
Angel, chapter 23.20, 21.
I send an Angel before thee, but such a one as his name was in him; that is,
All I have revealed of my self is in him: and this very same who saved them, is
in the same Verse said to have redeemed them.. Can any one deny the Names
Savior and Redeemer properly and personally to belong to Jesus Christ the Son
of God, who from the very first verse of the Chapter is pointed at, and in ver.
7. the Prophet says of him, I will mention the loving kindnesses of the Lord,
and the praises of the Lord, who bare them and carried them, his people, all
the days of old, in the Wilderness; surely he who had done all these great
things for them, was their God, so did thou lead thy people, to make thy self
a glorious and everlasting name, v. 12, 14. God's people is Christ's people,
All the Father has is mine, says he, so he must needs be God; such to the
Jews he at several times asserted himself to be, which truth is not at all
prejudiced by his not suffering the Devils to publish who he was, namely the
holy one of God, the Son of God, the Son of the most high God; which they never
said to Paul, or any other Apostle, when they cast them out in the name of
Jesus Christ. Now our Savior's reason to forbid them, is this, the Devil is
known to be a Liar, and a truth out of a Lyar's mouth is suspected; therefore
to hinder its being questioned, he suffered them not to speak it, for he knew
how ready his Enemies would be to take all advantage against him, for they
said, He casts out Devils by Beelzebub the prince of the Devils, which he did
as God, and by his own Divine Power; but the LXX. said, the Devils are subject
to us through thy name. Luke 10.17.

This truth can be found out no better than with comparing Scripture with
Scripture, in order to it, without repeating what I said before of the Angel
promised to go before the People in the Wilderness, whom God called his
presence; I shall proceed to new matter, Exodus 23.
and take notice how that very same, who went before the People, and was called
Angel, if we may believe David, was God, the God of Israel, chap. 33.14.
at whose presence^ the earth shook, the heavens also dropped, even Sinai it
self was moved, and this is remarkable, that the same word which God used, my
presence shall go, is also twice made use of by David, Psalm. 68.7.8. Psalm.
136.2, 3, 26.
the Heavens dropped at the presonce of God, Sinai was moved at the presence of
God, the God of Israel; and the very same God called Angel, we have farther
described by the Psalmist, whom he names God of Gods, and in the next verse,
Lord of Lords, and in the last, the God of Heaven. This, certainly is the true
God by Nature, which as expressed ver. 16. Led his people thorough the
wilderness, and did all the great things mentioned in the other verses of that
Psalm, all by Stephen comprehended in one verse, Acts 7.36.
He brought them out after that he had showed wonders and signs in the land of
Egypt, and in the red sea, and in the wilderness forty years. This is the
same Angel which appeared to Moses in the bush, ver. 35, 38.
and which spoke to him in mount Sinai. Now, it is unquestionably true how that
first Martyr's drift was to preach Christ, and not Moses to the Jews, and
upbraid them for murdering, at his appearing in the Flesh, him who had done so
great and many things, and wrought all those great Deliverances for their
Fathers before his Incarnation, who appearing unto Moses in the Bush, ver. 32.
called himself the God of his Fathers, of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; this is
certainly the true God of Israel, whom Paul calls, the Lord of glory crucified,
1 Cor. 2.8.
and of whom, Stephen called the Jews Murderers; this was their God, and
according to Pilate's Inscription, their King, which to confirm more and more,
because Socinians obstinately deny him to be such, though elsewhere I have
taken notice of, I shall here make use of a Prophet's Evidence, by whom, Christ
the Messiah is called the King of Sion; Zech. 9.9.
which, when the thing mentioned was actually done to the Lord Jesus, the
Evangelist applies it as spoken of him by the Prophet. Now he who is the King
of Sion, is the King of Israel; and he who absolutely is the King of Israel, is
the God of Israel; so the Lord Jesus, whom this is spoken of, is the true God
of Israel: The Psalmist says, Arise, O God, judge the earth, for thou shall
inherit all Nations. This is the true God, whose two Attributes, to Judge the
Earth and to Inherit all Nations herein expressed, do belong, and are proper to
the Son of God, the Lord Jesus.

So do many things more, variously and abundantly, written by the Prophets,
Isai. 8.13.14.
as among others is this, Sanctify the Lord of Hosts himself; let him be your
fear, and let him be your dread: And to move them to it, he gives this reason,
etc. He shall be for a sanctuary to those that sanctify him, and whose fear he
is, but to Transgressors and Disobedient; to both houses of Israel he shall be
for a stone of stumbling, and rock of offense, for a gin and for a snare to the
inhabitants of Jerusalem. This Prophecy is of Christ in both parts, first a
Sanctuary to those who fear him, and present help and Relief suitable to their
wants, Joh. 7.37. chap. 6.35.
therefore he cries and says, If any man thirst, let him come unto me and
drink, for he that comes to me shall never hunger, and he that believes on me
shall never thirst: Matthew. 11.28.
therefore he made gracious Invitations, Come unto me all ye that labor and
are heavy laden, and I will give you rest; but if Men will not answer this
Call, he tells them, but ye will not come to me that ye might have life; so to
those who sanctify, love, and fear him, he is a Rock of Defense, a Sanctuary
and a present help in time of trouble; as for the other part, he is a
stumblingstone, Luke 2.34. Romans 9.32, 33. 1 Pet. 2.5, 6, 7.
and a Rock of Offense to those who do not fear nor believe in him: Now this
Prochecy is explained to be of him by Simeon, to him applied by Paul, and more
at large by Peter; this by the Apostles, is spoken of him whom the Prophet
calls the Lord of Hosts himself; mark the Word himself, in Person, not by a
Deputy, or any one else, that the same is the Stone of stumbling to the Jews,
hitherto experience has and does still show it to be so. The Lord of Hosts
himself is certainly the true eternal God; but Christ, if we may believe an
Evangelist, and two Apostles, is that Lord of Hosts himself, Isa. 43.10.
of whom those things were foretold: This one thing more I shall add, how
Socinians with making Christ a Metaphorical God, give God himself the Lie, who
by the same Prophet says, Before me there was no God formed, neither shall
there be after me, for according to them, Christ was a formed and made God
several Hundreds of Years after God had said so.

But to convince them of their abominable Error, I shall bring in the Evidence
of some of their good Friends, the Jews I mean: The Jews, specially the Masters
of the first and true Cabbala, do very often mention Schechina, whereby they
mean the Messiah, Shiloh, the Son of God, who from the beginning of the
Creation, to the destruction of the first Temple, in a clear and illustrious
manner dwelt with those that were pious: Hence it is that they made Light
created on the first day, Romans 5.14 Heb. 9.9.23. 1 Cor. 10.6.11. Col. 2.17.
Heb. 10.1.
to be the first Type of the Messiah; (now Types are Figures, according to
Scripture, or Examples, or Shadows; now a Shadow is a dark Figure which goes
before the Body when the Light is behind.) Bechai. p. 4. col. 3.
And God said, Let there be Light, to point at the Days of the Messiah; of whom
Scripture says, Arise, shine, for thy Light is come, and the Glory of Jehovah
is risen upon thee. And p. 9. col. 2 Isa. 10.17. John 1.9. Colos. 1.12, 13.
Mal. 4.2.
the Day wherein Light was made, is called one, or the first Day, because Light
represents one only, and thou know that he is the King of Glory: And our
Savior the Messiah, is in Scripture called Light, and lights every Man that
comes into the World. And as out of the first Light, the Sun that great
Luminary was made and placed in the Firmament, by his continual course, to give
the World light: So is the Messiah called the Sun of Righteousness, Rev. 1.13.
gloriously shining in the midst of his Church: And as it is by Aben Ezra in
Psalm. 19.
one well observed, that the Light of the Sun is very wholesome, so does the Sun
of Righteousness, with healing in his Wings, cure the Distempers of the Soul.

To proceed further into this Matter, which I hope to make a good use of in
this Cause; I say, how the Son of God, immediately after Adam's Fall, as being
the Judge of the whole Earth, to exert his judicial Power, called him to an
account for his Sin, when to him he said, Where art thou? As if he had said,
What have thou done? Answer for thy self? Now I say, that though Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost be Jehovah, yet the Jehovah, or Lord who spoke to him, was the Son,
who is the Word of the Father, by whom the Father speaks: As we read the People
of Lystra, Act. 14.12
could in their Heathenish way make a difference between Paul and Barnabas,
calling this last Jupiter, and the first Mercury, which with them were Father
and Son, because Paul was the chief Speaker. I shall here omit what elsewhere I
asserted, how the Name the Word, is the Son of God's proper Name, to say that
the Lord God the Son does testify of himself, that it is he who spoke in the
first beginning of all: Isa. 52.6.
Therefore my People shall know my Name, therefore they shall know in that Day,
that I am he that does speak; behold it is I. And he further having said, This
is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, Mat. 17.5. Heb. 1.6.
adds, Hear ye him: And Paul, When he brings in the first begotten into the
World, which can be no better understood, than of the sending of the Son upon
Earth, to preach Grace to our first Parents, Genesis 3.8. John 14.9. Isa. 63.9.
and the Presence or Face of the Lord, from which Adam and his Wife hid
themselves, is none but God's Son, in whom the Father is seen: So that it is
more than probable, that here, according to the Jerusalem Interpreter, the Son
of God the Lord commanded Adam to appear to be tried, as indeed presently
after, passed a Sentence upon him, his Wife, and the Serpent; and hereunto
agree some of the Rabbis, for by the words the Lord walking in the Garden,
Nachmanides.
one understands the appearing of Schechina in that place, and R. Abba explains
it of the withdrawing of the Schechina out of the Garden, because of Adam's
Sin; the Son of God, who at the beginning of the World, in the Garden
pronounced Judgment, and therein acted the part of a Judge, did so afterward
upon Cain for his Brother's Death, of whom it is said, Genesis 4.16.
that he went out from the Presence of the Lord; and Bechai says, it must be
from no other than from Schechina: Also Enoch the seventh Man from Adam
Prophesied, saying, Jude 14.15
Behold the Lord comes with ten Thousands of his Saints to execute Judgment
upon all, which was effected when by the Flood the whole Posterity of Cain, and
that of Seth (only eight Persons excepted, Noah with his Family in the Ark)
were destroyed. So afterward against the Egyptians, Cananeans, and other
wicked People, and so it shall continue to the latter end of the World, till
the last and Universal Judgment be over.

After the Flood there was wickedness and cause of Judgment found in Noah's
Family, as appears by the Curse thundered against Canaan, Ham's Son: As to this
Curse, before I proceed farther, I must take notice, how it seems strange that
Ham should commit the Sin, yet the Curse be pronounced not against him, but
against his Son; which to clear, some think, and it is very probable, that the
young Man first saw his Grandfather's Nakedness, and went and told his Father
of it: for we must believe upon that occasion, Noah to have been moved by the
Spirit of God, for being Drunken and Asleep when he was uncovered, he could not
of himself know what had happened before he awoke: A Curse was pronounced
against Canaan, and a Blessing upon Japhet and Ham, where Noah said, The Lord
God shall dwell in the Tents of Shem. Genesis 9.26, 27.
This Lord God is the same who in the Garden judged our first Parents. Now
these words of Noah, Onkelos, Jarchius, Nachman. and Bechai.
several Rabbis do unanimously interpret of Schechina's dwelling in the Family
and Posterity of Shem: And Bechai says something more, for he adds, That the
Schechina dwelt not in the second Temple built by Cyrus of the Posterity of
Japhet, but only in the first built by Solomon, who descended from Shem. Upon
God's Words to Abraham, Thou shall be a Blessing, Genesis 12.2. chap. 15.1 v. 5.
Rakenatensis says, they relate to Schechina; and after the Victory over the
four Kings, this same Son of God promised him his Protection, and to be his
exceeding great Reward, a numerous Posterity, the Possession of the Land of
Canaan, with Old Age to end in a quiet Death: v. 7.
And the Covenant then made with him, v. 15.
was a Declaration of his eternal good Pleasure that contained Promises of his
future coming into the World to be a Blessing to all Nations, namely Christ the
Messiah, which in due time were performed; Luke 1.72, 73. Gal. 3.16, 17. v. 29.
as by Zacharias 'twas taken notice of, so by Paul, to the Heirs according to
the Promise, which shows that God's Covenant with Abraham, contained Spiritual
as well as Earthly, Eternal as well as Temporal Promises, and that the Law
neither derogated from the Eternal Will and Testament, nor disannulled of the
Promise; the other Apparitions of the Schechina, unto Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacoh, which make a part of what I now am upon, I elsewhere sufficiently
enlarged: Israel upon his Deathbed mentions him under the Name of Shiloh, in
that Solemn Prophecy, Genesis 49.10 chap. 28.12, 13.
that he should be of the Tribe of Judah.

The Vision of Jacob's Ladder reaching both Heaven and Earth, and the Angels of
God ascending and descending on it, is by Rakenat. in h. l.
one of the famous Jewish Doctors explained of God Holy and Blessed, and of his
Schechina, whereby indeed Heaven and Earth, God and Man were joined together;
and as I love not to follow nice, only solid Notions, I shall not take notice
of the Opinion of those who say there were six Steps in the Ladder, whereof the
three lowest signified the three degrees of his Humiliation, and the three
uppermost those of his Exaltation. In the other Vision of Jacob, Genesis 31.11,
12, 13.
when he saw the speckled Rams, it is not said he saw, rather heard, for the
Angel spoke unto him, I am the God of Bethel, which Commen. in Thorah, p. 41.
col. 1, 2.
Bechai does truly interpret, El the Mighty God, and also Bethel, the House of
God; that is, the Son in whom the Father dwells; or Schechina, as Rakenat. f.
63. col. 3.
another has it. Scripture speaks of three Houses of God, first of Solomon's
Temple; secondly, Christ's Humane Nature; thirdly, the Church. The same Rabbi
says, That the Word Righteousness, which is in the Name of Melchisedec, does
relate to the Schechina, whose Type we know him to have been; 1 Kings 8.10.13.
Zachar. 6.14. Isa. 8.14. 1 Timothy 3.15. p. 45. col. 2
for I cannot be of the Opinion of two Eminent Modern Divines, Cunaeus and
Altingius, who affirm Melchisedec to be the Son of God himself, who at that
time after the Victory appeared to Abraham in Man's Shape and blessed him: For
seeing by David and Paul the Office and Person of the Messiah are compared with
the Office and Person of Melchisedec, it denotes a difference between them, for
that which is like is not the same with that which it is like unto. The ancient
Jews believed, R. Menahem.
that by reason of the Wickedness of the first World, Schechina, with Enoch,
was returned up to Heaven, whereby they own he was come down from thence, as
afterward our Savior himself declared it: John 6. Genesis 12.7.
As to Jehovah who in Canaan appeared unto Abraham, according to the constant
Tradition of the Jews, it was Schechina, for Rakenat. p. 43. col. 4 Acts 7.2. 1
Cor. 2.8.
one says it, him Stephen called, the God of Glory, and Paul, the Lord of
Glory. Nachm. in Genesis 15. Menahem in Thor. p. 16.
Some of the Rabbis say, this Apparition in Canaan to have been in the Night,
but the other after the Victory over the Kings, happened certainly in the Day:
They Menah. and Nachmanid. in Genesis 17.22.
also say, that the Lord, who in Genesis 17. appeared to Abraham, and instituted
Circumcision, did in his sight return up into Heaven, this they Bechai, p. 89.
call the Glory of God, by the Name whereby they usually denote the Son of God.

Elsewhere I observed how the Son of God constituted the Judge of the World,
executed upon Sodom that terrible Judgment which Rakenat. f. 51. c. 4.
one attributes to Schechina: Hereupon the 14th Canon of the Council of
Syrmium, called by Constantine, is very considerable, the Words are these; Si
quis illud quod, etc. If any one says that what is written, The Lord rained
upon Sodom and Gomorrah, Brimstone and Fire from the Lord out of Heaven, is not
to be understood of the Father, and of the Son, but affirms, that he rained
himself from himself, let him be Anathema; for the Lord the Son rained from the
Lord the Father. This Lord Jehovah the Son, is the same who dwelt in the Ark
between the Cherubims, above the Mercy-seat, Exodus 25.22.
whence God communed with Moses; but in the way of Mercy God never communes
with Men but in and through his Beloved Son the Lord Jesus, who as in the Old
Testament was called Jehovah, so in the New is simply and absolutely called
Lord, which is equivalent to the other, for the Septuagint rendered the Hebrew
Word Jehovah, by the Greek, (...) Lord; so that under the New Testament he had
the same Name as under the Old; 1 Chronicles. 13.6.
hence it is that the Ark was called the Ark of the Lord, or Jehovah: This,
namely, that Schechina dwelt in the Ark, Bechai in Thor. p. 9. c. 3, 4. Numb.
24.17.
the Jews owned. Balaam's Prophecy of the Messiah, There shall come a Star out
of Jacob, etc. Onkelos, Jonathan, Ben Vziel, and Nachmanides, explain it of the
Schechina, and Aben Ezra owns it to be the Opinion of many, and though this be a
Prophecy of what was to come, yet still it is of the same which was before in
the Garden of Eden, as already observed.

The clear Prophecy by Haggai of the Messiah's coming into the second Temple,
chapter 2.7, 8.
or whilst the second Temple was yet standing, I elsewhere enlarged upon, which
as we read in Drusius, R. Akiba has explained it of Christ, and Jarchius has
said, chapter 12.1.
that all should see Schechina conversing in the second Temple: In Daniel
mention is made of Michael the Great Prince, understood of Christ, and to be
compared with Rev. 12.7. in whom is God's Name indeed, for it signifies, who is
like unto thee thou mighty God; which the wisest Menah. in Thor. p. 34. c. 2.
Nachman. in Exodus 3.2. and l. c. Rakenat. p. 80. c. 2. Genesis 14.19, 20.
among the Jews do rightly interpret to be the Angel, Revenger and Deliverer,
the Angel of God's Presence; and in some place Nachmanides calls Nachm. in
Exodus 14.19. Genesis 19.20.
it the Glory of Schechina, and speaking of the Angel of the Lord, who went
before the Camp of Israel, and removed behind to be between them and the
Egyptians, whom he drowned; he says, is the great Prince: This is the same who
having before appeared to Moses in the Bush, was afterward pleased to speak to
him upon the Mount, and the Words are remarkable, The Lord came down upon Mount
Sinai; that is, from Heaven; whence afterward, to be made Flesh, he came upon
Earth in Judea, which coming our Savior does mention at several times; though
one of these Jewish Doctors thought that the Angel of whom God said, I send an
Angel before thee, etc. was a created one, and not the same Angel of the
Covenant, of whom when he was well pleased, he said, My Presence shall go with
thee, yet he owns that the Angel of God's Face had been with him, but says,
Rakenat. p. 120. c. 1.
The glorious Presence of God, Schechina was withdrawn, for he thought God was
still angry, but Moses had already appeased him.

The Jews hold, that the Law was given by the Mouth of Schechina, upon Mount
Sinai; for as he brought the People out of Egypt, (which yet excludes not the
Father, who brought them out by his Son) so in the Wilderness he often spoke to
them, chiefly upon this solemn Occasion: The Truth is confirmed by Scripture,
Deuteronomy. 33.2, 3. compared with Habak. 3.3. Levit. 26.11, 12.
The Lord came from Sinai, says Moses, and rose up from Seir unto them; he
shined from Mount Paran, and he came with ten Thousands of Saints: From his
right Hand went a fiery Law for them. And to show him to be their Lawgiver,
Prophet, and Teacher: he adds, Yea, he loved ihe People, all the Saints are in
thy Hand, and they sat down at thy Feet; every one shall receive of thy words;
compared with another place, Levit. 26.11, 12.
And I will set my Tabernacle among you, and I will walk among you, and will be
your God, and ye shall be my People. To show his gracious condescension, and
how familiarly he would converse with them; now this was a Prophecy, for he
spoke in the future of things to come, and this seems to relate only to the
Jews, but thanks be to God that now we may speak of it in the Preter-tense, of
a thing fulfilled on the behalf of Gentiles as well as of Jews, which I affirm
not out of my own Head, but out of the Word of God; And I heard a great Voice
out of Heaven; Rev. 21.3.
behold the Tabernacle of God is with Men, and he will dwell with them, and
they shall be his People, and God himself shall be with them, and be their God:
Here is the Prophecy fulfilled in the very Words, he who promised it in the Old
Testament, has made it good in the New; he is the same in both, not in person
in the Old, and only by proxy in the New, for here it is said, God himself.
Psalm. 68.8.
David witnesses that Mount Sinai was moved or trembled at the presence of the
God of Israel; now certainly the Son is the Presence, or Face of the God of
Israel, Heb. 12.26. v. 18.
and he whose Voice then shook the Earth: This is the same to whom in the same
Psalm he says, Thou have ascended on high, thou have led captivity captive,
thou have received gifts for Men, yea for the rebellious also, that the Lord
God might dwell among them; which being compared with Ephesians. 4.8. shows it to
have been spoken of Christ. Now in the Tabernacle which was set up for the
glory of God, Schechina, or the Son of God, not only appeared sometimes, but
continually dwelt therein, Levit. 9.23, 24. chap. 1.1. Number. 1.1. Ex. 25.22.
upon all occasions manifesting his Glory; thence he rendered his Oracles, and
called unto Moses to speak unto him; so that whenever God spoke unto Moses,
Aaron, and their Successors, ever it was from that place, according to his own
appointment. R. Kimhi says, that according to the Psalm 82.1. God stands in
the Congregation of the Mighty; Schechina is always in the midst of the
Congregation of Israel.

The Inscription over the Ark was this, The Name of the Lord of Hosts sits
among the Cherubims, they called it the Glory of Israel; Psalm. 4.22.
therefore after it had been taken by the Philistines, 'twas said, The Glory is
departed from Israel. Now by the Glory and Name of the Lord, the Bechai in Leg.
p. 88, 89.
Masters of the Cabbala always understand the Messiah, who is God, the Face of
God, King David, and the Mouth of Jehovah; which to apply we must take notice
of what John says, And we beheld his glory, Joh. 1.14.
the glory as of the only begotten of the Father, chiefly in his
Transfiguration: He, as said before, Acts 7.2. 1 Cor. 2.8. Hebr. 1.3. Matthew.
19.28. and 25.31.
is the God of Glory, and the Lord of Glory; also the brightness of the glory
of the Father; he has in Heaven the Throne of his Glory. By virtue of the
Covenant made in Sinai, between God and the People, God in a most eminent way,
between the Cherubims, dwelt among them, as he continued to do after the Ark
was lodged in the Temple; he taught them either immediately by himself, or by
his Prophets, provided for an delivered them from their Enemies; and it has
been the constant Tradition of the understanding Jews, Bechai in Thor. p. 88 c.
4.
that the Name of the God who dwelt in the Temple, was the Schechina; and as he
ever was with Moses upon all occasions to help and strengthen him: So after his
Death, he said to Joshua, Josh. 1.5.
As I was with Moses, so I will be with thee: I will not fail thee, nor forsake
thee; as both a Prophet to guide and direct, and as a King by his power to
defend him.

If we may look back to the ground of this series of Divine Dispensations, we
must know that from Eternity, God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, decreed to
bring many Sons unto glory, Heb. 2.10.
as the Apostle calls it, which the Son undertook to execute; and so under the
Old Testament, he at several times, and to several Persons declared and
revealed this Will and Pleasure of God, made and renewed the Promises; but as
the chief part of that great and glorious Design, which all other means were to
depend upon, was the satisfaction to be given Divine Justice, by the Death of
the Mediator; so other things before, were only preparations and dispositions
in order to it, to which purpose the Mosaical Law was instituted; therefore as
the execution was only at and after the Death of the Testator, till which the
Testament is of no force; chapter 9.9, 10.
so before that time under the Law, was shed the Blood of Calves, Goats, Lambs,
etc. instead of the Testator's, till the fullness of the appointed time, when
that precious Blood was shed upon the Cross: This I shall add, how God's
Covenant was for Glory and Eternity, but the Law was a Medium or means, as the
Deliverance out of Egypt, to bring them into a Land where God in a most
eminent and excellent way, might dwell among, teach and make himself well known
to them, in and by the Son, who is the Wisdom and the Power of God; about this
the Psalmist well observes, Ps. 147.20
He has not dealt so with any Nation. As indeed he through the Spirit of God
was so exact an observer of things relating to the Messiah, whom, according to
God's promise, he knew should come out of his Family, that our blessed Savior
after his Resurrection referred his Disciples not only to the Law of Moses^ and
to the Prophets, but also to the Psalms, Luke 24.44.
to know the things concerning him; for therein are spoken of his Godhead,
Eternal Generation, Covenant with the Father, his Humanity, Sufferings, Death,
Resurrection, Ascension into Heaven, distribution of gifts among Men, his
Kingly, Prophetical and Priestly Offices, and his Victory over his Enemies.

All this I brought in, to show how, according to the Doctrine of the Ancient
Jews, the Schechina, or Meniah was the Son of God, had a Being, and acted from
the beginning, not of the Gospel, but of the World, and thus in the Godhead
they made a distinction of Persons: And if Socinians will own the Lord Jesus to
be the Christ, then either with the ancient Jews they must own him to have been
and acted from the beginning of the Creation, and so to have had a Being long
before his Birth of the Virgin, or else they must join with the Modern Jews,
deny him to be the Messiah, and thus proclaim themselves to be no Christians,
nay Idolaters, and such as neither know, nor worship the true God, for he that
owns not and worshippeth not Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, does not own nor
worship the true God, but they plainly deny the Holy Ghost, and in effect, deny
the Son, which is very hard, and unworthy. Because the Son of God for our sake
was pleased to take upon him our Humane Nature, some Men unthankfully and
impiously go about to strip him of his Divine: On our behalf he humbled
himself, and for that, some Men undervalue him, as if their Eye was Evil
because he is good.

We reckon several Ages of the Church, whereof every one affords Demonstrations
of the Son of God, her Head's Presence and Actings for her: The first is of her
Birth and Childhood from the Creation to the Flood; the second, her first
Infancy from the Flood to Moses, when she began to gather a Youthful Strength,
by means of God's special Favor to, and Presence among them in that signal and
eminent way of the Son of God's dwelling in the Sanctuary, which David calls
Goings and Actings; when he says, Ps. 68.24. v. 7, 8.
They have seen thy goings, O God, even the goings of my God, in the Sanctuary:
Where the Prophet speaks of the Son of God, Who went up before his People in
the Wilderness, and at whose presence the Earth shook, the Heavens dropped, and
Sinai it self was moved. The third Age of the Church is from Moses to Christ's
coming, which was filled up with variety of considerable Dispensations: And
this fourth, which is her present Age, has been, is, and shall be attended
with very notable Periods, began at the coming in the Flesh of the Son of God;
and it we may call her Manhood, when the Food of Milk and Ceremonial Ordinances
ceased, and she began to be fed with strong and substantial Meat, when the
Manna discontinued, and the true Bread came from Heaven to nourish us, the
Shadows yielded the place to the true Body, and all legal Stars disappeared at
the rising of the Sun of Righteousness: And this Age of the Christian Church
shall continue till the last Day, when the fifth Age shall begin, never to have
an end, this shall be the Age of Perfection, and of Eternal Glory. He who now
is the Head and King of the Church, was so from the beginning, and shall be
such for ever. Now the Apostle says, that Christ is the head of the Church,
Ephesians. 5.23.
and the Savior of the body, and none else; and that Body which was from the
beginning of the World, never was without a Head, for without it, it could not
be a Body, both to animate and rule it; for that is the Head's Office,
according to that famous Prophecy of the Meisiah's Birth, Mic. 5.2.
in Bethlehem, Out of thee shall he come forth unto me, that is to be Ruler of
Israel. To come forth, Genesis 17.6. Genesis 25.25 and 38.28.
signifies to be begotten and born either by the Father, or by the Mother, and
unto me, that is for me, to reveal my Glory, says the Father, who there
speaks: Now absolutely, the King and Ruler of Israel, is the God of Israel,
such is the Son.

I heretofore mentioned the Text in Zechariah 2.8. For, thus says the Lord of
Hosts, after the glory has he sent me unto the Nations, etc. which affords
matter of observation more than I took notice of at that time: Here speaks the
Lord of Hosts, which is a Title never attributed to any but to the Essential,
Infinite, and Eternal God: The Lord of Hosts in the place declares he is sent,
a thing in Scripture never said of God the Father, but in many places it is
asserted of God the Son, and by the Son himself; for how often does our Savior
say, that the Father sent him, so that to be sent is a Property of the Son,
therefore the Son must be the Lord of Hosts here said to be sent: And as to
come, answers to being sent, so in consequence of that Mission, the Lord says,
I come; Sing and rejoice, v. 10.
O Daughter of Zion, for lo I come, and I will dwell in the midst of thee,
says the Lord; which was literally fulfilled after the Birth of the Son of
God. These words, Lo I come, are a confirmation and farther declaration of what
David had said long before, when God desired no more Sacrifice and Offering,
nor required Burnt-Offering, Ps. 40.6, 7.
nor Sin-Offering; that is, when the Ceremonial Law was drawing to an end; Then
said I, the Son, Lo I come; and Christ declared, He came from the Father, and
in the Father's Name: As to the other part, I will dwell in the midst of thee,
it was fulfilled at that time when John said of the Son, The Word was made
Flesh, and dwelt among us. Joh. 1.14.
Let us admire at that Holy Scripture Harmony, earthly Jerusalem was the Figure
of the Church, whose Head, King, Savior and Preserver the Lord Jesus is, and
ever was, For I, says the Lord, will be unto her a Wall of Fire round about,
and will be the glory in the midst of her, v. 5. This coming of the Lord of
Hosts, shall not only be cause of Song and Joy to the Daughter of Zion, but
also many Nations shall be joined unto the Lord in that Day, and shall be my
People, and I will dwell in the midst of thee, v. 11.
and thou shall know that the Lord of Hosts has sent me unto thee. This is a
Prophecy of the calling of the Gentiles, at, or a little after the time when
the Lord of Hosts should come to dwell in Sion; which was fulfilled, when after
the Son of God's coming into the Flesh, and his dwelling among the Jews, after
his Death and Resurrection, the Gospel was preached to the Gentiles, and the
Christian Church formed. Here we must take notice of how this Prophet Zechariah
was one of the two whom God made use of to exhort and encourage the Children of
Israel, Ezr. 5.1, 2.
returned from the Babylonian Captivity, to build the second Temple, which was
to stand till the coming of the Lord of Hosts, and King of Zion, as this
Prophet calls him, chap. 9.9. As also did Haggai the other Prophet, who
besides, named him the desire of all Nations; Hag. 2.7.
And I will shake all Nations, and the desire of all Nations shall come; And I
will fill this House with glory, says the Lord of Hosts; that is, the Presence
of the Messiah, Son of God, was to fill with Glory the second Temple, which at
that time they were about building; upon which account the glory of that latter
House was to be greater than that of the former; the Lord Jesus, who called it
his House, having with his Presence often sanctified it, and been the chief
glory thereof, which soon after it lost by his Death, when the Vail of the
Temple was rent, and about forty Years after the whole was quite destroyed by
the Romans, when according to our Blessed Savior's Prophecy, there was not one
Stone left upon another that was not thrown down; and what he said was attended
with a Character and Evidence of his Divine Authority, and infallible Truth, in
these Words, Matthew. 24.35.
Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but my Words shall not pass away, but most
certainly shall be fulfilled.

This same Prophet in the next Chapter, (as indeed in many other places of his
Vision) does yield Matter enough upon this point; As in Job we read of Satan
coming before God with malicious Insinuations against that Holy Man, and to
obtain leave to do him mischief; so here we find the Angel of the Lord to judge
between Joshua the High Priest, and his Adversary Satan, who appeared there to
oppose and resist him: This Angel of the Lord, whom elsewhere I at several
times have had occasion to speak of, is the Lord himself; for in the 2d verse
it is said, And the Lord said unto Satan, Zech. 3.1, 2
the Lord rebuke thee, O Satan: Twice the Lord answers this other Expression,
And the Lord rained upon Sodom and Gomorrah, Genesis 9.24.
Brimstone and Fire from the Lord; and certainly it is spoken of the same two
Persons whom the Name Lord belongs to: The Father's Person is but one, but the
Father's and Son's Persons are two Persons, yet but one Jehovah, or Lord, with
this difference; That as the Father has committed all Judgment to the Son, so
the Son does Administer and Execute all Judgment in the World, commanding and
making use of this Authority, sometimes under the Name of the Angel, before
whom stood Joshua clothed with filthy Garments: Now, that this Angel was
really and truly God, it appears by his commanding of his own Authority,
Joshua's filthy Garments to be taken away from him, and by his saying to him,
Behold I have caused thine Iniquity to pass from thee, which none but the true
God can say or do; for none can forgive sins but God alone, which is a Phrase
equivalent to this, I have caused thine Iniquity to pass from thee; this more
and more appears out of what is contained in verses 6, and 7. And the Angel of
the Lord protested unto Joshua, thus says the Lord of Hosts, If thou will walk
in my ways, and if thou will keep my charge, then thou shall also judge my
House, and shall also keep my Courts. Who but the true God can speak after this
manner? And that no ground should be left to doubt of this Truth, that same
Angel calls himself the Lord of Hosts; for the Angel of the Lord protested,
saying, Thus says the Lord of Hosts; as if he had said, I who am the Lord of
Hosts, protest unto thee, If thou will, etc. then I promise thee so and so,
etc. this is the proper style of him who absolutely is Lord and Master of all.
Hence we may learn another thing, which is, that Joshua being the High Priest,
was a Type of Jesus Christ our High Priest, in things pertaining to Salvation;
who, as Peter says, His own self bare our sins, which are the filthy garments
spoken of by the Prophet, in his Body, 1 Pet. 2, 24. and which by his Death
having made a full Atonement for, he was clothed with change of Raiment, or
with his own Righteousness; Heb. 1.3.
And when he had by himself purged our sins, sat down on the right hand of the
Majesty on high.

But farther, to prove his Divinity, here I shall bring in two Arguments, which
no where else I made use of before: The first is this, All men (that is, merely
men and no more than men) are Sinners, but Christ is no Sinner, therefore
Christ is no mere man, but more than a man. According to Rules this Argument is
in Mode and Figure, and both of these Propositions can fully and unanswerably
be proved out of God's Word: As to the Major, it is made good in two ways;
first, by positive Assertions; secondly, by Examples. The first has two
Branches, whereof one is, That every man is originally a sinner by nature; for
human Nature is sinful and corrupt: the other is, That every man is an actual
sinner; for as said before, as at first the Person infected the Nature, so
since, the Nature has infected the Persons for by one man sin entered into the
world, Romans 5.12.24.
and death by sin and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned
though not every one after the similitude of Adam's transgression: and when
David says, Psalm. 5.3.
Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me, he
means it of all men, as well as of himself, for without any difference or
exception, Ephesians. 2.3
we are all children of wrath, even as others. As for the other part, That
every man is an actual sinner, 1 Kings 8.46. Jam. 3.2.
it is plain, for there is no man that sins not; and Paul says, All have
sinned, and come short of the glory of God; and another Apostle says, In many
things we offend all; wherefore in Scripture sometimes men are called by the
Epithet of sinners and sinful.

But in Scripture the Holy Ghost is not satisfied to affirm every man to be a
sinner, but he therein gives Instances of, and mentions the sins of the best
and greatest Servants of God. Adam's sin I shall not name, which whole Mankind
has cause to remember with a witness; but I shall take notice of Noah's
Drunkenness, Genesis 9.21. chap. 19. chap. 12. and 20. chap. 26. chap. 43.15. Genesis
45.13 Exodus 4. Ps. 106.33 James 5. Act. 15.39
of Lot's Drunkenness and Incest, of the Mistrust and Dissembling of Abraham,
twice the like of Isaac; of Joseph's learning to swear by the Life of Pharaoh,
with something of vanity in him when he said to his Brethren, You shall tell my
father of all my glory in Egypt; of Moses's Refractoriness to obey God, when he
commanded him to go to the Children of Israel in Egypt, and to Pharaoh, and his
Unadvisedness: so Job's Impatience, David's Adultery and Murder, Solomon's
Idolatry; and that zealous Servant of God, Elias, was subject to like Passions
as we are; so Peter's Denial, Paul and Barnabas Falling out about no great
Matter: In few words, every Servant of God had their Flaws, and therefore in a
way of defiance Solomon asks, Prove. 20.9
Who can say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin? Now, I
unquestionably proved every man to be a sinner.

Now must I prove the Minor Proposition of my Argument, That the Lord Jesus is
no sinner; which to do is an easy task. He never was nor is a sinner, for
though he assumed our human sinful Nature, yet by the immediate working of the
Holy Ghost, which sanctified that part of the Substance of the Virgin, out of
which was formed our Savior's Body, it was preserved from natural corruption,
wherefore the Apostle calls him, Heb. 7.26.
holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners: And as he ever was free from
Original, so he never committed any Actual sin, which made him defy the Jews
thus, Joh. 8.46. Heb. 4.15.
Which of you convinces me of sin? None could; for though he was in all points
tempted like as we are, yet without sin; 1 Pet. 1.19
therefore the Apostle calls him a Lamb without blemish and without spot: and
in the next Chapter he adds, who did no sin, chap. 2.22. 1 John 3.5.
neither was guile found in his mouth; and in him was no sin, says another
Apostle, which Truth I look upon as undeniably proved: And so from the Premises
I may well conclude, That seeing the Lord Jesus is a Man, yet not a sinner, he
must needs be no mere Man, but more than a Man, and so God and Man; if he had
been a mere Man. ut sic, reduplicative, he also had been a sinner, but seeing
he is not a sinner, then he is not a mere Man: In this case, any consideration
drawn from Angels is not pertinent, for the question is only of Divine and
Humane Nature, not of the Angelical, for He took not on him the nature of
Angels, Heb. 2.16.
but he took on him the seed of Abraham.

The following Argument is also in mode and figure, it is thus; all Goodness is
Essentially in God alone, but Jesus Christ is Essentially good, therefore he is
Essentially God: The Major Proposition I thus explain, by Essentially, is meant
Primarily, Originally, and in its Nature, God is Independently sole good, in
and of himself, and is the Author of all Goodness. Metaphysicians among the
Proprieties entis, of a Being, which by a Virtual Reciprocration do result
from, and are converted with the ens, or being, reckon three, by them called
Incomplexe, or spoken without disjunction to distiguish them from the Complexe
which are attended with a disjunction: The three are Vnum, one, which implies a
Negation of a Division, for ens, when multiplied ceases to be one: Verum, true,
is the second, which imports a relation to the Mind, as Bonum, good, which is
the third, does to the Will: Now if according to this, every created Being is
one, true, and good in its self, how much more transcendently must it be so
with the ens entium, Being of Beings, as the Philosopher calls the first Cause
of all, that is, God infinite, who is Essentially One, True, and Good. But
because the question is now about the last, and that Goodness of his is so
fully and universally known, in this place I shall say no more to demonstrate
it.

Therefore I come to the proof of my Major, namely, That all Goodness is
Essentially in God alone; and to be short, out of so many Texts of Scripture I
shall bring but one, which is home, and to the purpose; the words are our
Savior's, Matthew. 19.17.
There is none good but one, that is God, Essentially and absolutely meant,
what goodness there is in the Creature being all derived from him: This I take
for granted, and so come to prove my assumption, how Christ is Essentially Good.

If all things that the Father has be his, as he says, they are, then
certainly, that Divine Attribute, Essential Goodness, is included, and as he
has the Nature, so the inseparable Attribute of that Nature, and e converso,
if the Attribute, then the Nature: Of Divine Goodness there are two
Proprieties, one, that it is diffusive and communicative of it self; the other,
that it is most desirable. In two ways God does communicate his Goodness, first
inwardly, which Communication is natural and necessary, whereby God the Father
has from all Eternity by Generation communicated his Nature and manner of
Subsisting unto his Son, and both to the Holy Ghost, by spiration: The Second
way is Free and Voluntary, whereby God has communicated his Goodness unto his
Creatures, which makes David to say, Psalm. 119.68. Acts 10.38.
Thou art good and do good. Thus Peter observes about our Savior that he
went about doing good. Now this Goodness of God, has in several ways been
communicated to his Creatures, as in the Creation and Preservation of the
World, in the work of Incarnation, Adoption, and Eternal Happiness, in every
one of which relating to Salvation, our Savior has been an Efficient and
Meritorious Cause, and has together with the Father, communicated his Natural
Divine Goodness in these several branches, or kinds thereof; first in Grace,
whereby God in himself is altogether lovely, and therein does favor and
benefit his Creatures. The second is Love, whereby God takes pleasure in what
he likes, does it good, and unites it unto himself; this love the word speaks
of, Joh. 3.16.
when it says, God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son. And
does not Scripture say also, that his Son, Ephesians. 5.25. Ephesians. 3.19. Jo. 15.13.
1 John 4.8.
gave himself for us? and this love of his for us, is so great that the Apostle
says, It passes all knowledge, and greater love has no man than this, that a
man lay down his life for his friends. In few words, God is love.

Furthermore, Mercifulness is another branch of God's Goodness exalted in so
many places of Scripture, that I take it to be unnecessary to insist upon it.
And was not Christ all along full of tender Mercies and Compassions toward
poor sinners, which among his own unbelieving Nation got him the Name of a
Compassionate and merciful Nature, and all the rich Graces of the Father as
Paul calls them, are conveyed to us in, by, and with Christ. Lastly, God's
Patience, is another part of his Goodness, which is highly commended in
Scripture; and, O the wonderful Meekness, Forbearance and Patience of Christ,
who by the Preaching of his Gospel, does invite sinners to Repentance, and as
it were, does beseech them to be reconciled unto God, and though by too many he
be slighted and rejected, yet he still waits: That same in several places of
Scripture, is the Character given of him, and in part, for that Meekness,
Gentleness and Patience, he is called a Lamb.

But to come to the second Attribute of Goodness, it is what in its Nature is
appetibile, desirable, or what all desire: We know the Summum bonum, the
supreme good is Summopere appetibile, Supremely desirable; but can any in
Heaven or Earth, be more desirable than the Lord Jesus, who, is the chiefest
among ten thousand, Songs 5.10 ver. 16. Hagg. 2.7.
and altogether lovely, called the desire of all Nations. This demonstrates him
Essentially to have in him that Divine Goodness, which is inherent to, and
inseparable from Divine Nature, and consequently to be Essentially God.

Before I leave off this, I must answer an Objection, which might happen to be
made against this great Truth of Christ's being essentially good; it is drawn
out of the same Chapter which already I have made use of, wherein the Lord
speaks to one who came to him for Counsel about his Salvation, and by him, as a
Prophet, to be taught the way to Heaven: Good Master, said he, What good thing
shall I do, that I may have Eternal Life? The first part of our Savior's
Answer was, Why call thou me good? As if he disproved his calling him so;
but that was not the Lord's Meaning, who denies not himself to be good; for he
says not, I am not good, or thou art mistaken to call me so; but he lays hold
upon that occasion, to teach the Man that he is God: As if he had said, Thou
ownest me to be good, and so I am; but that is not enough, thou must also
believe me to be God, because there is none good but one, that is God; the
meaning is essentially good, and of himself; and seeing in that sense Christ is
good, he must needs be God, and that is the same Argument which here I
prosecute; thus it runs, Thou should not call me good, except also thou
be persuaded that I am God: These two Propositions are convertible, God is
essentially good, and he who is essentially good, is God: So if in that sense
Christ be good, then he is God.

The Hammer of the Word, Jer. 23.29.
(for so it is called) will help to strike the Nail farther into the Head of
those proud and unchristian Sisera's, Unbelievers I may also call them, seeing
they refuse to believe the true God of Israel when he speaks of his Son, who
under the Name of this Angel, he promised should go before them; Ex. 32.34.
Mine Angel shall go before thee: And in the next Chapter God calls him his
Presence, chapter 33.14.
or his Face; God has many Angels, but in a most special manner, that he calls
his, but God has not many Faces, 2 Cor. 4.6.
only one, and that is the Face of Jesus Christ, in whom only is the knowledge
of the glory of God; for God gives the knowledge of his glory only in him,
Because he is the express Image of his, Heb. 1.3.
the Father's Person: Those two Texts in the Old Testament compared with, and
explained by these two in the New, show that the Lord Jesus, the proper Son of
God, went before, and guided his People in the Wilderness, so pre-existed the
time of his Birth of the Virgin, and that it may not be said of any Creature,
that the glory of God is in his Face, or that he is the express Image of the
Person of the Father, and the brightness of his glory, as the Beam is the
brightness of the glory of the Sun.

In my way toward a Conclusion, I shall by the grace of God briefly bring in
some few Texts, which do explain and confirm the great Truths now in question;
some I elsewhere have taken notice of, however I now shall add something to
what I then said, but others I shall mention which I did not before, but this I
shall premise.

In the Apostle John's Days, who lived to a very Old Age, sprang up some
Heresiarks, as Simon the first of all, Cerinthus, Ebion, and Menander, who
denied the Divinity of Christ, as now Socinians do. This moved the Apostle to
assert and vindicate it, as in his Gospel, Epistles, and Revelation he has
done so fully, that if there were no other Books left of the New Testament,
there is in them abundantly enough to certify and confirm that Heavenly Truth,
as out of several places in his Writings, I sufficiently demonstrated in my
Book against the Blasphemies of Socinianism, which he does so plainly, and so
often, that we must take notice how the Holy Ghost, by his Pen, intended
chiefly and strongly to suggest to and convince Men of the Fundamental Truth of
Christian Religion; namely, that the Lord Jesus is the proper Son of God; 1 John 5.5.9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 20.
and to the end that great Truth may make a deep impression upon the Souls of
Men; in one Chapter, in no less than seven Verses, he emphatically calls him
the Son of God; and v. 10, he is twice so called, so twice in the 13th. and
that in such a manner, so sensibly and with such Circumstances, as denote a
true, proper, and natural kind of Sonship; and he is so earnest upon it, (may
be all that time having in his Eye the Blasphemy of those Heretics) as to
charge those who deny Christ to be the Son of God, and believe not in him, to
make God a Liar, who is the God of Truth, the highest Blasphemy that the Devil
can infuse into Men: For, (says he) he that believes on the Son of God, has
the Witness in himself, he that believes not God, has made him a Liar: He
says, wherein? Because he believes not the Record that God gave of his Son:
And what is that Record? Besides his Commission in sending him into the World,
and the Works attended with so many Miracles and Wonders, which the Father gave
him to finish; and to the evidence of which our Savior did appeal, we have it
in his Baptism in a most eminent and special manner; for the Father bare record
of him, when he said from Heaven, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased. Certainly God spoke absolutely, truly, and properly, and not
Metaphorically, improperly, and by a Figure; not my Son according to the Flesh,
spiritually or only in some respect, but simply, my Son; that is, begotten of
my substance, and of the same Nature with me, as a Son ought to be, and is of
the same Nature with the Father, Volkel l. 5. c. 12.
whose only begotten he is, which is the proper signification of the Word
(...), which a Socinian would corrupt and render by that of Most beloved, to
enervate the strength of it: The Priests, Philosophers, and Poets, among the
Heathen, either out of Noah's, or Abraham's Schools, or by some other way, had
a kind of dark knowledge of this Truth, which for want of Revelation, they
understood not, therefore did hide it under Fables and Lies, as may be that of
Mercury, Jupiter's Son and Messenger, of Pallas born out of his Head; but for
Socinians, who have God's Word so positively affirming this Truth, it is for
them the unpardonable sin of Unbelief, which sinks them into Atheism; for
whosoever knows not, and worshipeth not the true God, he is without God, and
all who deny Father, Son, and Holy Ghost to be the true God, know not the true
God; poor Wretches who presume with the Line of their shallow Brain, and weak
Reason, to fathom the deep things of God, which prompts them to put several
impertinent, rash, and blasphemous Questions: how short do they fall of the
Modesty, Sobriety and Wisdom of an Heathen, Sextus the Pythagorean, who said,
Concerning God, inquire of nothing but what thou may lawfully; say nothing of
God, but what thou have learned of God; it is better for one to lose his Life,
than to speak an idle word of God; it is better to say nothing of God, than
rashly to speak of him; Such Men shall at the last Day rise in Judgment against
Socinians. Among the Greeks, Pythagoras himself made all perfection to consist
in the number of three, or in Trinity; and Plato constituted three Principles
of all things, Good, Understanding, and the Soul or Life, whereby we Christians
may understand Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, who created the World. But I must
go on.

The Centurion's Words are remarkable, when he said to our Savior, Matthew. 8.8
Lord, speak the Word only, and my Servant shall be healed; just as Scripture
speaks in the matter of Creation, Psalm. 33.9.
He spoke and it was done, he commanded and it stood: Such a Word of Command we
read of in Jonah, And the Lord spoke unto the Fish, Jonah 2.10
and it vomited out Jonah upon the dry Land; which last words imply a special
Providence, and ordering of things; for the Fish might have vomited him in the
middle, or the bottom of the Sea; but because God would save him, 'twas upon
dry Land. But to return to the Centurion, whose great Faith the Lord commended,
he believed and was not mistaken, that our Savior might as absolutely command
Distempers and Health, Death and Life, as he commanded his own Soldiers and
Servants; for we read in several places, how the Lord Jesus with speaking the
Word to Diseases, Winds, and to Devils, he rebuked them so, that they could do
no otherwise but to obey, which proves his Divine Power, and so his Divine
Nature, for none but God has a Divine Power: Upon this ground, after the
miraculous Work of curing the Impotent Man, who had been sick 38 Years, there
our Lord compares his miraculous Works to his Father's, when he said, John 5.
My Father works hitherto, and I work: The word my in the place is very
emphatical to show that his Works and the Father's were wrought by the same
Divine and Infinite power, which meaning they understood well enough; whence
upon good grounds they concluded, he had said God was his Father, in a strict
and proper sense, and made himself equal with God.

In another place we read of some of the ten Men that were Lepers, whom the
Lord Jesus had cured, Luke 17.15
who when he saw that he was healed, returned back, and with a loud voice
glorified God; he turned back to Christ the great Physician, to give him Thanks
and Praises, v. 16.
and worship him upon his Knees; for we must look upon him in that posture,
since our Savior told him, Arise, go thy way: v. 19.
And by that Act he paid him a Divine Honor, and by comparing v. 18. with v.
15. we shall find Christ to be the God whom the Man glorified; for the
Evangelist's, and the Lord's Words are the same, tend to the same purpose, and
the Object of the Glory given, is the same. There are not found, said the Lord,
that returned to give glory to God, that is, to me who healed them, save this
stranger.

Farther to go on upon the matter, let us observe how the Apostle speaking of
Christ by his Name Jesus, says, We have a great High Priest that is past into
the Heavens, Heb. 4.14.
Jesus the Son of God: The last words are put in to give us a proper and
distinguishing Character of the Person whom he speaks of, as indeed in the
place this is added to make a difference between Jesus Christ our Blessed
Savior, and the Jesus he had named before, v. 8.
whereby he meaned Joshua for in Greek it is the same as Joshua in Hebrew; and
here we see plainly how the Name Son of God, proper to Christ, does distinguish
him not only from Joshua Son o^ Nun, but from every other Man in the World, (as
being his proper Name) though never so good or great in God's Favor. We must
know that Joshua in bringing into Canaan the Children of Israel, was the Type
of Christ's bringing God's People into the Heavenly Land of Promise; therefore
in relation to that Office, his Name was changed by Moses, Numb. 13.16.
for his Name before was Oshea: We must also take notice how those two great
Servants of God had two several shares, and acted two different parts, which
both parts thereby Typified, were performed by the Lord Jesus their Antitype;
for Moses brought the People out of Egypt, but introduced them not into the
Land of Promise, which Joshua did, yet brought them not out of Egypt; but our
Blessed Savior is the Author, and will be the finisher of both our
Deliverances from the bondage of Sin, the Curse of the Law, and from the power
of Hell; and also he will lead us into Heaven and Glory, for he who has began
in and for us that good Work, will perfect it; to him, upon a surer ground, we
may apply what Naomi said of Boaz, Ruth 3.18
He will not be in rest until he have finished the thing.

Now when we are upon the Name Joshua, Jesus, or Savior, I am put in mind of
that excellent place generally granted to be spoken of the Messiah, whom none
but Jews will deny to be Jesus Christ; Isa. 63.1.
I am mighty to save; it is absolutely said mighty, of himself, not through the
help of any one else: v. 3.
For in the place he says, I alone have trodden the Wine Press, and of the
people there was none with me. No mere Man ever spoke after this rate, for
there as God, he by the Mouth of the Prophet speaks of himself; with this
compare Zephaniah 3.7. The Lord thy God in the midst of thee is mighty, he will
save: One Savior, and that in both, a mighty one. Now mark how in a very
different style, the great Apostle Paul speaks of himself, I can do all things
through Christ, which strengthens me; such a manner of speaking, the Lord
Jesus never used; but it seems Paul does point at the quoted place of the
Prophet, when he says, that Christ is able to save to the uttermost them who
come unto God by him: Heb. 7.25.
Here is a might to save not only in part, or only some, but fully, and to the
uttermost, therefore the Name Jesus was given him by the Angel; Thou shall call
his Name Jesus, Mat. 1.21.
for he shall save his people from their Sins: His People, that is, the Israel
of God; for they are not all Israel, Gal. 6.16. Romans 9.6.
which are of Israel. Now the Lord Jesus is not only said to be a Savior,
which in his capacity of Mediator, may be called his proper Name, so that every
one may know whom we mean thereby: This is the Character of God, Isa. 43.11.
I even I am the Lord, and besides me there is no Savior: For in that absolute
way, in Scripture, none but God is so called; but also in the Abstract Christ
is said to be Salvation, for he is the spring of it; Neither is there Salvation
in any other, Acts 4.12.
which yet Socinians would lodge in every Man who can be saved if he will, but
in the Word, God and Savior go often together, and as to the thing are never
asunder, and as Christ is Savior, so he is God. St. John, who better than all
Socinians, knew who God is, and who Christ is, in his Writings does often join
God and Christ, when he commended God's Love to us, he meaned certainly the
true God by Nature; of him he says, 1 John 3.16.
Thereby we perceive the Love of God, because he laid down his Life for us:
None but the Patripassian Heretics will say, That God the Father laid down his
Life for us, but God the Son has, as in the next Chapter he thus explains it;
In this was manifested the Love of God toward us, chap. 4.9.
because God sent his only begotten Son into the World that we might live
through him; so the God who laid down his Life for us, is the only begotten Son
of God; Who, as is said in the next Verse, Was sent to be the propitiation for
our sins; v. 10.
this was the end of his coming, and thus the laying down of his Life was a
propitiatory Sacrifice of himself for our sins.

St. Paul says, Now God himself, and our Father, 1 Thessalonians. 3.11.
and our Lord Jesus Christ direct our way unto you; here is a Prayer which is a
Religious Worship directed to God himself: Who this God is, it is equally said,
our Father and our Lord Jesus Christ, equally prayed to, because both equally
able to perform and answer the Prayer's end, so that whether the Name God
himself be taken essentially, then our Lord Christ is as well as the Father
comprehended under it, or if personally, then to leave no doubt of it, by way
of explanation, his Name is expressed as well as that of the Father, and may no
more than the Father be excluded from being God himself; but it would be almost
an endless Work, if one would make use of all Texts in Scripture, which either
directly or indirectly, by plain Assertions or good Consequences prove Christ's
Divinity, for one of the ends of the Gospel is to declare Christ to be properly
God, Joh. 20.31.
Son of God: These things are written that ye may believe that Jesus Christ is
the Son of God; yet Socinians would make him to be like those false Gods whom
Moses speaks of in opposition to the true God, of them he gives this
description, Deuteronomy. 32.17.
They sacrificed unto Devils, not to God, to Gods whom they knew not, to new
Gods that came newly up. These upstart Gods were Devils which they worshipped,
no true God but what from all eternity is such by Nature; now if the Lord Jesus
be, as they would have him, a God come up within these 1700 Years, whom they
worship, I leave them to wash off the obvious blasphemous consequence. As to
what they say, that he is God only by Office, and by virtue of his being
anointed: I answer, Anointing was a Ceremony to make and declare a King, but
the Anointing made him not a Man, for that he was before: Thus the Lord Jesus
the Son of God being Anointed, and made Christ, that Anointing indeed made and
declared him a King, a Prophet and a Priest, and thereby those Offices were
conferred on him, but that could not make him God, for he was such before;
Christ is a Name of Office, as God is of Nature.

Upon every other account they are full of their Cavils, thus they would have
the Name Jehovah not to be an essential incommunicable Name, Psalm. 68.4.
which with that of Jah signifies his Nature and incomprehensible Majesty,
whereby he is declared to be the only true God of Israel, in opposition to all
false Gods, and they would have their false Notion to stand, because they
pretend that most Holy Name to be attributed to Creatures, as to the Ark,
Jerusalem, etc. which sufficiently The Blasphemous Socinian Heresy, Confut. p.
60. Zec. 14.20
I refuted elsewhere: This only I now shall add, that the Name Jehovah is no
more attributed to the Ark, or any Creature, than that most holy Name, and
Holiness it self is to the Bells of Horses; when it is said, In that Day shall
there be upon the Bells of the Horses, Holiness unto the Lord: But as they
strike at his Divine Nature, so they do against its essential Attributes, as
Omniscience, which I also have spoken of: This I shall add, That when the
Prophets knew of things to come, 'twas by virtue of Revelation; for it is often
said, The Word of the Lord came to me; thus things they knew from God, but the
Lord Jesus knew things from himself, whether past, or to come; as among other
Instances, that of the Samaritan Woman can show about her five Husbands, John
4. chap. 5, 6. Matt. 25. chapter 17.27. chapter 16.21. chapter 21.38. chapter 26.23. v. 34.
and that of the Man who had long been sick: He also knew future things, thus
he foretold the Destruction of Jerusalem about forty Years before it happened;
thus of the Fish which Peter should catch, and of the piece of Money in his
Mouth; so he foretold his Death, and the manner of that of Peter's, that Judas
should betray, and Peter deny him, and several other things. Now this, in God's
Language, proves Christ's Divinity, because foretelling of things to come, is
given as a Character of the true God, as we have it, Isa. 41.22, 23.
Show the things that are to come hereafter, that we may know that ye are Gods,
after he in the foregoing Verse had said, Let them show us what shall happen,
or declare things for to come.

There is a considerable place to prove our Lord's Divinity, which must be to
the purpose, seeing Paul as good an Interpreter of Scripture as any of them
all, makes use of it in the same sense as we do: The words of the Psalm are
these, Thy Throne, O God, is for ever and ever, Psalm. 45.6. Heb. 8.
which the Apostle applied to the Son Jesus Christ; but as they are apt to take
unjust Exceptions at any thing that hits them; so they do at this, and would
give the words only a literal sense relating to Solomon's Marriage with
Pharaoh's Daughter: We may own something therein to relate to Solomon, but
withal it is chiefly in a spiritual way intended to represent Christ's Union
with his Church, and that it is not Solomon's Epithalamy, or a Psalm upon his
Marriage, it appears from the very first Verse; My heart is inditing a good
matter, for certainly Marrying Pharaoh's Daughter, was no good matter, for
absolutely God had forbidden his People to make any Marriage with other
Nations, Deuteronomy. 7.3. 1 Kings 11.3, 4.
and that Wife of his was one of those who turned his Heart after other Gods to
serve them: Besides what is said therein, Thy Throne, O God, is for ever and
ever, does not belong to Solomon; nor what is said, The King's Daughter is all
glorious within, to his Wife.

Their distinction of most high, which they would attribute only to the Father,
and of high God, to the Son, to make him a subordinate God, is frivolous, for
in the Divinity that makes no difference: The true God of Israel, is sometimes
called so in the superlative degree, and at other times in the positive, yet
that distinction does not make two Gods of Israel; in one and the same Psalm he
is called by both Titles in one Verse the most High, Psalm. 78.56.35.
And they tempted and provoked the most high God; and in another before it is
said, They remembered that God was their Rock, and the high God their Redeemer;
so that God, the high God, and the most high God, is but one and the same God.

The Record which John Baptist bare of our Savior ought to be weighty, (for
God sent him to the end he should bear it,) and also unquestionable, for then
he spoke against himself, when he gave Christ the whole preference, which must
be attributed only to his saying the truth: John 1.15.27, 30.
The record is this, He that comes after me is preferred before me, for he was
before me: Which Truth is of so high a concernment to be known, that in one and
the same chapter it is thrice mentioned, and in every one of those Verses it is
applied to Christ, who is directly pointed at, in these words, This was he of
whom I spoke, and he it is who coming after me, and this is he of whom I said.
this is the son of God, by Nature, not by Grace; for if only in this last
relation, it had been unneccessary, for therein had been no preference, for
John was such, and this is the plain Result of the Circumlocution by him used
before, he comes after me, and he is preferred before me, of which he gives
the reason, for he was before me. Here is a Comparison between John and Christ,
wherein Christ has the preference, not because he came after, but because he
was before John; let the Dignity be contained in the words, he is preferred,
still the reason of it is, that though he came after, yet he was before him; do
not to come after, and to be before, relate to time? For here the words relate
to their Birth; now, we must believe, that in these two Phrases, he comes after
me, and he was before me, there is Truth, Reason, good Sense, and no
Contradiction; in the same respect he cannot be said to come after and be
before, but it must be in a different one, which is this, (and if they can, let
them assign another,) he comes after me into the World, as ver. 10. that is, he
was born after me, which is the plain Truth, for the Angel Gabriel, Luke 1.36.
six Months after Elizabeth had Conceived, foretold the Virgin Mary our
Savior's Birth; so that according to the usual Course of Nature, the Lord
Jesus was born six Months after John, and in that sense, he came after him. But
how was he Born before him, seeing in relation to his Temporal Generation he
was after? It must be in regard of a Generation of another kind, for no Man
has, or can have but one Natural Generation, and can be born but once; what
else then may it be, but an Eternal one, by virtue of which, Christ in his
time, was before John? For says John, he was, not is before me, to show how
the question is about time: And if in one sense, Christ had been but six Months
before John, as he was born six Months after, then in that sense, we may well
conclude for hundreds and thousands of Years, and so to Eternity.

Our blessed Lord and Savior to give an Example, and to condescend to the
frailty of our Nature, thereby to draw Men to himself by degrees, was lowly and
humble, yet without any prejudice to his Right, which, when questioned, he
maintained, and upon several occasions asserted, though sometimes to the danger
of his Life. He could tell the Jews, Joh. 6.38. chapter 8.14.23.
I came down from heaven, and though I bear record of my self, yet my record is
true, for I know whence I came and whither I go. It Is a special Prerogative of
God to bear Record of himself, again, Ye are from beneath, I am from above, ye
are of this world, I am not of this world. And as he told them, chapter 10.38.
that if they believed not his word, yet they should believe his works, which
were so Glorious and Miraculous, and clear Demonstrations of his Divine Nature
and Power; he said that Lazarus's Sickness was for the glory of God, that the
Son of God might be glorified thereby: Son of God simply and absolutely is God;
in that case he spoke of himself, for by raising Lazarus, as he did, from the
Dead, he thereby was Glorified, and he that was Glorified was God, Son of God;
for as there was but one Glory, so there was but one God Glorified This verse
ought to be compared with the 40. where Christ said to Martha, Said I not unto
thee, that if thou would believe thou should see the glory of God: That is
his own Glory, by her Brother's Resurrection, which he was just upon going to
essect; so in the other case of the Man that was Blind from his Birth, he said
to his Disciples that He was born blind, chap. 9.3.
that the work of God should be made manifest in him. Which happened, when he
by his own Divine Power gave him his Sight, and was thereby Glorified as God.
We must observe how the Son of God absolutely taken as it is here, is God, as
well as the Son of Man is Man: And the Lord Jesus does explain the first part,
for the glory of God, by the last, that the Son of God be glorified, which
shows it to be the same, or equivalent: Thus in another place, our Savior
interprets the Phrase, making himself God, chap. 10.33.36.
by saying, I am the Son of God, with calling himself Son of God, in his and
their Sense, he certainly thereby made himself God, which they called
Blasphemy, but he denied it to be so, though he owned, he had called himself
God, and in the very sense that they had taken it.

Because our Lord sometimes called himself Son of Man, they would take
advantage of it, but when he did, it was to point at the Promise made to our
first Parents, that the Woman's Seed should bruise the Serpent's Head, and to
teach Men how they ought to look upon him as being that same Seed, who was come
not to conquer Kingdoms, as at that time the Jews fancied, but to execute the
Promise of bruising the Serpent's Head; Joh. 10.36.
when he called himself Son of Man, he spoke the truth, but he thereby denied
not that he was the Son of God; for sometimes he called himself by that Name,
and to confirm this great and fundamental Truth, there stands upon record, and
shall to the Worlds end, the famous Confession of Peter in his and of all the
Apostles Name upon a solemn occasion, Thou art the Son of the Living God; a
truth which came not out of his own Head, or out of any humane Principle, but
was from Heaven immediately revealed unto him; namely, that Jesus Christ was by
Office the Messiah, and by Nature the true Son of the living God: Now if he had
been Son of God only by deputation, there had been no need of Revelation, but
at that time 'twas necessary to let Men know how he is such by Nature, and to
refute the wrong Notions which the Jews had of our Savior, God thought fit to
inform them better with declaring his Divinity, and this is one of those
Mysteries of the Kingdom of God, Luke 8.10.
which the Lord Jesus said to his Disciples, It was given unto them to know;
wherein he plainly declared how in and after his teaching, in Religion were
Mysteries not to be known but by the Gift of God and Revelation: And I think he
was a competent Judge of such things; and when he called himself Son of God, he
could also tell whether or not he was so, which to prove further, I shall go on.

And with the Apostle say, Heb. 3.4.
He that made all things is God; that is truly and properly God of himself, now
in several places Scripture says, All things were made by the Word, which Name
John usually calls Christ by, John 1.3.10. Colos. 1.16 Heb. 1.2.
The World was made by him, which him or that Person, Paul in two places
speaking of this same point of Creation, calls the Son of God, by whom all
things were made, and by whom he made the Worlds, and so all things therein,
for by the Expression, All things in Heaven, etc. are understood all the Works
of Nature, the whole Work of the Creation: But to elude the weight of the
Argument which lies heavy upon them, sometimes (for they are apt to change and
diversifie their Notions, and are constant only in unhappy Contrivances how to
wrest Scripture) they say that the name Word, signifies Reason, and not the
Person of Christ, which Notion I Answer to Let. I. p. 29, 30.
elsewhere have spoken against; but at other times, when they are pressed, and
cannot deny it to belong to Christ, then to shift it off, they say the name
Word is taken for his Prophetical Office; but the Evangelist gives it for
Christ's proper and personal Name, for that very name is given him upon another
account, and in a different occasion, when he was seen in his Glory and
Majesty, as a King at the Head of Heavenly Armies, going to fight; there it is
said, his name is called the Word of God; Rev. 19.13. ver. 16.
and in that place he is styled, King of kings, and Lord of Lords. So it is not
in relation to his Prophetical Office, for the state wherein he then appeared,
had been very improper; he was a horseback, not to speak and teach, but to
fight; so then the name is not given him upon the account of his Prophetical
Office: If this be a name of Office, what is the reason why none of the Prophets
or Apostles, who taught and preached God's Word, were never called by the name,
the Word; it is often said, that the Word of the Lord came to Jeremiah and other
Prophets, but never that Isaiah or any of them, was the Word of the Lord; and
this Word now in question was the Son of God, 2 Pet. 1.21. 1 Pet. 1.11. Romans
1.25.
who came to, and spoke by the Prophets, for they, says an Apostle, spoke as
they were moved by the Holy Ghost, who by the same is called, The spirit of
Christ which was in them. I love to make use of Scripture when I answer the
Devil, and refute his Lies, and of those, who, as Paul says, change the truth
of God into a lie: After our blessed Savior's Example, I say it is written: We
must not wonder if some Men go about to impose upon others their Lies for
Truths, seeing Satan, whose Children Liars are, had the face to lie to him whom
he knew to be God, Son of God, when he said, Luke 4.6.
The power of all the kingdoms of the World is delivered unto me, and to
whomsoever I will I give it. So we may say of his Children, They bend their
tongues like their bow for lies: Jer. 9.3.
but they are not valiant for the truth upon the earth.

But to go on, I must observe how the Lord absolutely and subjectively taken,
does in Paul's style ever imply the Person of the Lord Jesus: So in John's
style, the Name Word used in the same manner does always signify the same
Person: And our Savior, the Eternal Son of God, called by the Names of
Jehovah, Lord, God, Son of God, who at several times was in Human Shape seen by
the Patriarchs, and spoken of by the Prophets, is the same who in the fullness
of the Times was made Man in the Virgins Womb, his Body by the Operation of the
Holy Ghost having out of her Substance been therein formed and preserved from
natural human Corruption, not that he was transubstantiated into Flesh, for
what is changed into another, ceases to be what he was, and begins to be what
he was not, but God can never cease to be what he is, nor become what he was
not: But to return to the Name the Word, when the words are the same, and about
the same Subject, we may believe the Thoughts and the sense to be the same, for
the meaning is expressed by words. In the first Chapter of John, the Name God
is eleven times in a true and proper sense made use of, and in that whole
Gospel, nor in the whole New Testament, can any instance be given that the
absolute word (...), God, in the Singular, be improperly taken, but always
properly, so we must take the word in the usual and natural sense of the
Scripture, rather than in the improper and metaphorical of Socinians: So when
John says, (...), the Word was God, we must properly understand the Names Word
and God, the first of the Person, the second of the Nature: Here they would
cavil with saying, God is the Subject, the Word the Predicate, but certainly
there being the Article (...) joined to (...), and none to (...), shows the
contrary; but indeed the Exception is frivolous, because essentialia praedicata
sunt reciproca, the essential Predicates are convertible; if God be the Word,
the Word must be God: Take notice how as by the Word God the true God is to be
understood, so when it is said the Word was God, it is meant the Word was the
true God. They object, he that is with one, is not the same whom he is with, so
the Word must needs be one, and God another; but they will not take notice how
the Evangelist says not only that the Word was with God, but also in the same
Verse, that the Word was God, which is so plain as to need no Interpretation:
But to answer in the School way, I say, he is not the same formaliter and sub
eodem conceptu, formally and under the same Notion, but in a different; here
are two Persons, he who is, and he whom he is with, we confound not but
distinguish the Persons, the Word is essentially God, though not relatively the
Person of the Father.

They move every Stone, if possible, to serve their turn, therefore as they
would rob the Lord Jesus of having created the World, so they go about to
deprive him of preserving and upholding it; for what is said of God's upholding
all things by the Word of his Power, Heb. 1.3. Colos. 1.17
which in another place is thus, By him all things consist, which means the
same as the other; yet the word (...), in the Original, rendered by to uphold,
they would Translate to govern, which is an idle nicety, he that governs well
does uphold what he governs, so that provided the thing remains, we will not
stand upon the word; only they ought to take notice of a thing material to our
purpose, how their Notion does not consist with the scope of the place, for
there the Apostle speaks not of Christ's Kingdom, but of his Person, called the
brightness of the Glory, and the express Image of the Father's Person; Colos.
1.19.
so in that other, A pleased the Father that in him should all fullness dwell;
it is not spoken of the Doctrine, but of the Person of Christ: That sort of Men
first do what they can to wrest God's Word, which abominably they generally do
in the Texts about Christ's Satisfaction, and almost in every other Point, but
when they see that cannot do, they fly in the Face of Holy Writers: Thus
Schlichtingius.
one of them upon the words, But a Body have thou prepared me, says how these
words the Apostle quoted not to his purpose, Non necesse, etc. It Is not
necessary to believe that the Author in his quotation of the words, had any
regard unto their proper sense, but had quoted them only because they were
joined with others that were to his purpose: Which in him is not only an
ignorance of the Scope of the place, but also a Reflection upon the Apostle, as
if he had not well known what he said, and wherefore, as if he at that time had
not been Inspired of God, which is both Profaneness and Impiety: However, they
cannot deny him to have been a very Rational Man, but they will be for Deism,
or Natural Religion in opposition to Revelation. If seriously and impartially
we look upon Socinians, we may about the things in question, well compare them
with the Scribes, Pharisees, and Sadducees, that were in our Savior's and his
Apostles days, as being acted by the same Evil Spirit as they were, and equally
full of Gall and Bitterness against the Person, Honor, and Doctrine of our
Lord, whom upon all occasions these do, as the others did undervalue, taking
him for a mere Man, and consequently, for a Liar and Impostour, when he called
himself true God, Son of God, in Power equal with the Father, and one with him:
Thus Impiously the Jews called him a Samaritan, who had a Devil, a Seducer, a
Deceiver, a Malefactor, and a Blasphemer. The Pharisees were full of Pride and
Self-Conceit, would pass for the only Good, Knowing, Wise Men in the World, sat
in Moses's Chair, named themselves his Disciples, said of those who were not of
their Opinion about Jesus Christ, This People who knows not the law are cursed.
How did they use the blind-born Man, when to them he spoke good Sense and
Reason, Thou wast altogether born in sin, Joh. 9.34.
and do thou teach us? Implying, as if they were not born in sin, but were
Pure and Holy. Likewise, Socinians pretend to a Pharisaical Righteousness, they
were not born in sin, for they say, there is in them no Original Sin, and they
pretend they can in this World attain to such a Perfection, as not to Sin; also
with the Sadducees they deny the Resurrection of the Dead, at least of the
Wicked, so of the Good too as to the Body. The Scribes and Pharisees could not
deny the mighty and miraculous Works of our blessed Lord, for they were Matters
of Fact, done not in a Corner, but in many several places, and in the presence
of Thousands of People, nay, in their Council they confessed it, and said, What
do we? For this man does many miracles. John. 11.47.
They could not deny their Senses, but were in their Judgments convinced of it,
yet their Hearts would not be wrought upon, by reason of a desperate Obstinacy;
but it was prepossessed with Rage and Malice, and would not yield to the Truth,
nor give Glory to God. This is the very Case of Socinians, they cannot deny the
Supreme Divine Power which the Lord Jesus exerted in so many of his Actions,
nor absolutely deny him to be God, they cannot convince him of Lie, nor of any
Sin: They cannot be ignorant of the Testimony which more than once from Heaven,
the Father gave of him, neither the Record which John bare of him, nor that,
which upon several occasions he gave of himself; as to his Divine Nature and
Power, this they cannot deny, but will not confess it, and hold the Truth of
God in Unrighteousness: whereupon, we must say they are worse than the Rulers,
Elders, Scribes, Pharisees, and Sadducees, who upon the account of a Miracle
done by Peter and John, by the Power of our Savior, and in his Name, said, we
cannot deny it, Joh. 4.16.14.
and they could say nothing against it; but Socinians speak against it and the
Truth; Satan has so filled the Heart of some of them, that though they cannot
deny God's Essential Names and Attributes, Divine Works and Worship to belong
to him, yet will not own him to be true God, and by Nature, which is the only
true God in opposition to Idols, and Creatures, which by Nature are not God's.
Gal. 4.8. But their Hearts are so perverse and set against him, that
notwithstanding those lights of the Truth, they will not be convinced: They
cannot deny that Christ did cast out Devils, but rather that to give him Glory
for it, with the Jews they wi^^ forge in their Heads, and Impiously say, he
cast them out by Beelzebub; for such Cavils and Wrestings they never want,
which helps them to speak and write against the known Truths. Julian being over
taken with a signal Judgment, could in it perceive Christ'^ Hand, which made him
cry out, Thou have overcome, (...) Galilean. Though his rage could not suffer
him to own he had been in the wrong, and will Socinians wai^ till they feel
such a stroke of Christ's avenging Hand, a^ did the Apostate, and some of their
Ringleaders?

Out of these and many things more it appears how to Socinians chiefly belongs
the Apostle's Saying of those who wrest some things in Paul's Epistles, 2 Pet.
3.16
as they do also the other Scriptures unto their own destruction: The serious
consideration of this engages the same Apostle to give those whom he writes to,
this necessary warning: Ye therefore beloved, v. 17.
seeing ye know these things before, beware lest ye also being led away with
the Errors of the wicked, fall from your own stedfastness: A most seasonable
Caution in these as well as in those Times. The Society of such which too often
proves an occasion of falling into their abominable Heresies, we also ought to
avoid, and this I speak not of my self, but have an Apostle's Warrant for it,
and such a one as made it his chief business plainly and fully to assert the
Divinity of the Son of God Jesus Christ our Lord: 2 John 10.11.
If there come any unto you; and bring not this Doctrine, receive him not into
your House, neither bid him God speed, for he that bids him God speed, is
partaker of his evil deeds: 2 Cor. 5.11.
And Paul forbids us, If any Man that is called a Brother be a Fornicator, or
an Idolater, or a Railer, or a Drunkard, or an Extortioner, to keep Company
with such an one, no not to eat; much more if a Blasphemer, ever a capital
Criminal among all Nations, which have but a tolerable knowledge of God: And
elsewhere he requires the same in relation to Men of an ill Life: Now we
command you, 2 Thessalonians. 3.6.
Brethren, in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, a strong Adjuration, That ye
withdraw your selves from every Brother that walks disorderly, and not after
the Tradition; this also relates to the Doctrine, which he received of us: v.
14.
And somewhat lower, If any Man obey not our word by this Epistle, note that
Man, and have no company with him, that he may be ashamed. That good Man was
ever desirous to reclaim Sinners from their evil Courses, but still his great
care was to preserve Men in their soundness of mind and of affections, and to
keep them from danger, he would have them to avoid occasions leading to it,
namely, the Company of those who are infected, Judge 23.
for fear of being so too; for which reason we ought to hate even the Garment
spotted by the Flesh, and with the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, (which is
his great commendation) to hate the Deeds of the Nicolaitans, which I also
hate, Rev. 2.6.
says the Son of God, and so he does the Blasphemy of Socinians, as his
beloved Apostle hated and avoided the Company of Cerinthus, one of, if not the
first Ringleader, when at Ephesus he would not stay in, but went out of the
Bathing-house as soon as he heard Cerinthus was come in; there should in the
Sheep be an Antipathy against the Wolves company, and in the Shepherd a care to
prevent their coming in among the Flock.

Our Lord Jesus Christ is considered in three Capacities, as God, as Man, and
as both, or as he is Mediator; when Scripture speaks of him in any of these, it
does relate to the Capacity he is spoken of, and every one who reads the Word
of God, when he does, must have a great care not to confound, but to
distinguish them well, for else great Inconveniences will follow; Qui been
distinguit been docet, says the Philosopher, and herein lies in part the want
of sincerity in Socinians, that by any means they go about to accommodate the
sense of Scripture to their own ends, as sometimes when it is literal to wrest
it into a Metaphorical, and when it is improper, to make it literal, without any
regard at all to the Analogy of Faith: After this way, when a Text is to be
understood (...), secundum quid, and only in some sense they would (...),
simply and absolutely interpret it as they do this, John 14.28.
My Father is greater than I; for want of making a necessary distinction
between his Divinity and his Humanity, between his State of Glory, and that of
his Humiliation, Philip. 2.8
He humbled himself, also the Son of God is after the Father only in Order but
not in Nature and Dignity: But to show their unreasonable partiality, I ask,
Why do they not also literally interpret these places wherein his Divinity is
asserted? As when he says, Before Abraham was, I am, which is a very plain
Assertion of his priority of Existence before Abraham with twice Verily I say,
John 8.58.
which is a very strong Asseveration by him used upon the weightest Matters; so
when he says, chap. 17.5.
And now, O Father, glorify thou me with thine own self, with the Glory which
I had with thee before the World was: Does not this plainly show, that Christ
the Son of God was glorified with the Father before the Creation of the World?
Colos. 2.9.
Also when the Apostle says, In him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead
bodily: Can any thing more plainly and fully assert the Divinity of Christ? So
when it is expressly said, The Word was God in the beginning. Again, John 10.
when he says himself, I and the Father are one, God Almighty out of whose
Hands no Man can pluck the Sheep, which is the plain scope of that place, and
which that enlargement and explanation does naturally, and so easily flow from,
seeing there the Subject of his Discourse is to show, how no Man can pluck his
Sheep out of his, or his Father's Hands, for they are one God Almighty: The
like we may say of the Text, where St. Paul says, Romans 9.5.
Christ is over all, God blessed for ever: Is not this plain enough? So is what
another Apostle speaks of him thus; 1 John 5.20
And we know that the Son of God is come, and has given us understanding, that
we may know him that is true: And we are in him that is true, even in his Son
Jesus Christ, this is the true God and eternal Life: Can any thing be said more
plainly than this, that Jesus Christ is the true God and Eternal Life? Why then
do not they literally interpret these and other Texts, which so clearly do
assert Christ's Divinity?

When he speaks as God the Maker of the World, he uses one kind of Style, and
when as Man, who had in our stead subjected himself to the Curse and Penalty of
the Law, another. Yet though he suffered not as God, he ceased not to be God; as
the Sun behind a Cloud cease not in it self to be bright and glorious, so the
Lord Jesus's Divine Nature under the Vail of the Flesh, had not lost her Divine
Glory, which during the time of his Humiliation, was hidden from Man's Eyes;
yet still some Beams thereof appeared in his Baptism, in his Transfiguration
and Miracles, but after his Resurrection and Ascension was manifested, as is
the brightness of the Sun when the Cloud is dispersed; then indeed he was again
glorified with the Father, with the Glory which he had with him before the
World was. This leads me to the following Consideration, which if well minded,
can by God's Blessing contribute to the better understanding of this whole
matter: After the manner of Man, that is, weakly and imperfectly, we may
conceive God infinitely, Glorious in himself, yet as his great and ultimate
end, is and ever was to promote that Glory of his, he from all Eternity decreed
to glorify himself for ever and ever, by the Manifestation of his Power,
Wisdom, Goodness, Justice, and every other Attribute; and as the first in
Intention is the last in Execution, so in order thereunto, to communicate
himself he resolved to create the World, and in the visible part of it to lodge
Man as the Chief of his Creatures, and to permit him to sin, and thereby become
guilty of Eternal Damnation: And as God is glorified in the ways of Mercy and
of Justice, so he also resolved, of whole Mankind to make Objects of these two
Attributes, to save some through free Grace, and to leave others in the natural
State of sin: And as in the Work of Creation, so in that of Redemption, the
Three Persons of the most Holy Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, agreed
about the Means conducing to that End: The Father was to send his Son Jesus
Christ, Epes. 3.4.
in whom he has chosen us before the foundation of the World. The Son to come,
purchase and work Salvation for us, and the Holy Ghost to apply that Purchase,
and make it effectual: In order to this, the whole Administration of this great
and Glorious Work was committed to the Son, Acts 10.36. Heb. 1.2. Matt. 28.18.
Joh. 5.19.
who thereby was made King and Lord of all, and Heir of all things, so all
power was given him in Heaven and in Earth. Hence it is, that what things
soever the Father does, those also does the Son likewise. Nay in this he is so
fully and absolutely Plenipotentiary, that the Father judges no man, but has
committed all judgment unto the Son. This Office of Mediator and Savior, he,
from the Creation of the World, began to administer it in the Royal part, as
executing Judgment upon the Wicked, and saving his People: sometimes by Angels,
at other times by himself in the shape of a Man. Also his Prophetical Office,
even before the Flood, 2 Pet. 2.5. 1 Pet. 1.11.
by Noah called a Preacher of Righteousness, and afterward by all the Prophets
in whom his spirit was. Thus from the beginning of the World he has every
where, from Abel to Abraham, and in Egypt, the Wilderness, etc. been Ordering,
Ruling, and Governing his Church, and the whole World, which he continues to
do, and will till after the last Judgment Day, when having gotten all his Elect
together, he will introduce them into everlasting Glory, all this by his own
Power, And this is such a work as infinitely exceeds all Humane and Angelical
Strength and Wisdom; so that none, but a Divine Power can perform it,
therefore, he that does it till all his Enemies be brought under his Feet and
fully overcome, must need be true, Essential and Eternal God.

Who but he who is the true God by Nature can Baptize with the Holy Ghost. John
6.33.
But John Baptist, according to the Testimony he had from Heaven, bare witness
that Christ does: as he actually did his Apostles, according to the promise he
made to them. And in the same place John Baptist bare record that this is the
Son of God. Acts 2. chap. 1.5. John 1.33.34. Luke 7.28. John 1.27. and 3.30.31.
Why to call him thus if he was not really such? Hereby he shows that vast
difference between the Lord and himself, of whom our Savior said, Among those
that are born of Women, there is not a greater Prophet than John the Baptist:
who in several places made himself a mere nothing in comparison of the Lord
Jesus, and here by the name Son of God, he is distinguished from all Men; John
never called himself nor no Man else, Son of God, only this Jesus Christ, and
none else is the Son of God, with the Article (...), not a but the Son, (...)
ipsemet, this very same, which that he is, is so certain a truth that our Lord
owned it before the Council of the Chief Priests, and Scribes, who were not so
blind as Socinians are, or would seem to be, for though our Savior had spoken
to them not so plainly, Luke 22.69.
yet this meaning they understood well; Hereafter shall the Son of Man sit on
the right hand of the power of God. Though he called himself Son of Man; yet
the last words made them to conclude, that he made himself the Son of God, and
consequently God, for none but the proper Son of God can sit on the right hand
of the Power of God, therefore they all presently asked him, Art thou then the
Son of God? which was a Natural Consequence of what he had said, and the
Particle then is a Note of inference, which our Savior owned in these words,
ye say that I am: That is plainly, I am and ye are not mistaken, which they
called Blasphemy; so would Socinians have said if they had been there, for now
they do, so set their Hand and Seal, Mark 14.64.
to his Condemnation for Blasphemy, and consequently, that he was justly put to
Death for it, when truly, properly, and in the sense which the Jews took it,
he made himself Son of God, which as much as in them lies, is To crucify the
son of God a-fresh, Heb. 6.6.
and put him to an open shame.

Hitherto, though I had occasion to do it, I have taken no notice of the Opinion
of those, who say, St. John's Gospel to have been written by Cerinthus, for
it is such a nonsensical untruth, and so absurd a Forgery, that I ever thought
it not worth minding. In John's time, the Heresiark Cerinthus denied our
Savior's Divinity, which that Gospel proves as often, fully and plainly, as
any Book whatsoever in the the New Testament, as indeed that Apostle did write
it a purpose to prove it, and thereby to confute the Impious Heresy of that
Instrument of Satan, as he declares it, when he says, These things are written
that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the son of God, Joh. 20.3.
and that ye might have life through his name: To say a proof is against a
thing when it is visibly for it, gives a just cause to put the question, whether
he or they who said so, knew what they said. But Drowning Men will lay hold on
any thing that comes into their Hand. Besides, it is a great Impiety to make a
Blasphemous Heretic Author of an Holy Gospel, generally owned to be Canonical,
and Inspired by the Holy Ghost.

This Holy Gospel does confound the Enemies of our blessed Lord and Savior's
Divinity, therefore, they so often would have been nibbling at it; not one
chapter but affords strong proofs of it: For not to mention here those several
places out of which we have drawn strong Arguments for it; How many things to
confirm it, did the Lord Jesus speak therein from the time of his eating the
Passover till he was taken, that was but short, which he took to prepare his
Disciples, for that separation which by his Death was to follow, comforting
them with telling what he would, and could do for them: I shall take notice of
that only wherein he speaks of that high point of his Divine Glory, by a mutual
Glorification between the Father and him, Joh. 13.31, 32.
Now is the Son of man glorified, and God is glorified in him: but this is not
all, for if God be glorified in him, God shall also glorify him in himself.
This indeed were a Blasphemy for a mere Creature to speak after this manner;
here is a perfect Equality of Glory, they glorify one another, and are
glorified one in another, God shall glorify him not without but in himself,
yea, and shall straightway glorify him. That state of Humiliation was near
come to an end, and the time was at hand, when he was again to be glorified
with the Father with the Glory which he had with him before the World was:
God's Glory is a Divine Glory, and who can be a Copartner to that Divine Glory,
but he who is God himself; certainly not a mere Son of Man, but he that is God
as well as Man. If we compare this Text with another, he still goes on upon the
Reciprocal Glorifying of one another; Joh. 17.1.
Father, glorify thy self, that thy Son also may glorify thee. I now say
nothing of Verse 5. of the same Chapter, because I elsewhere sufficiently
enlarged upon it: This is very clear, yet some will not believe what (they say)
they cannot comprehend, and thereby deny what God has revealed. Ps.
107.8.15.21.31.
Oh that, instead of it, men would often praise the Lord for his Goodness, and
for his wonderful Works to the Children of men.

I heretofore, as I hope, have sufficiently beaten down the vain Idol of their
own Reason, and demonstrated how idle and frivolous a thing it is in Religious
Matters, except it be enlightened and sanctified by Revelation: All the Skill
and Learning of the Chaldeans, which in the sight of Men was very considerable,
would have done Abraham no good toward the true Knowledge of God, without
Revelation, but God appearing and speaking to him, made him know him well and
in the true manner, which his own Reason could never have led him into, as
Revelation did: His Faith was grounded upon the Declaration and the Promise,
so, as the Apostle says, Heb. 11.8.
He went out not knowing whither he went, guided not by his Reason but by
Faith, as indeed Matters of Religion do far exceed the Eye of human Reason;
this makes the great Apostle, who had so many Revelations, to call the Gospel
not Mystery but Mysteries in the plural, when he says, Let a man so account of
us, 1 Cor. 4.1.
as of the ministers of Christ, and stewards of the Mysteries, of God; so Faith
he calls a Mystery, and so the Incarnation of the Son of God he calls the
Mystery of Godliness, 1 Timothy 3.9
and a great one too, for great is the Mystery of Godliness, and this should
admit of no Dispute, for there he says without controversy, but against Paul
and the whole Christian World, Socinians are pleased to make a great one: What
he calls a Mystery is this, v. 16. Romans 11.25.
God was manifest in the flesh: Also he calls a Mystery, The blindness that in
part is happened to Israel, until the fullness of the Gentiles be come; more
Mysteries there are in our Religion, whereof God himself is the greatest. Now
as men about these matters must not presume beyond what is written, so they
ought not to neglect or slight what God has revealed in his Holy Word about
it, for the Knowledge and Practice thereof is necessary to Salvation: The Lord
Jesus, says the Apostle, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8.
shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty Angels in flaming fire, taking
vengeance of them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord
Jesus Christ: that ignorance of God, after what he has been pleased to reveal
of himself, is unexcusable and wilful, whosoever knows not God in Christ,
Theanthrope, God and Man, knows him not at all as he ought, therefore shall be
liable to his Judgment; My people, says the Lord, Hos. 4.6.
are destroyed for Lack of knowledge, because thou have rejected knowledge, I
will also reject thee; and therefore the People that does not understand shall
fall. v. 14.
Indeed after the great Light which God has given us concerning the
fundamental Points of Christian Religion, about the Most Holy Trinity, the
Person and Offices of our Lord and Savior, there is no ground of pretense to
an Excuse, left for any that has the Word of God in his House, and can read it
when he pleases.

Therefore God has graciously done his part, sufficiently and clearly declared
his Will and Mind, which it is Man's Duty to follow and conform to, but as to
some he gives Grace to do good, others he leaves in their Natural
Refractoriness and Aversion from it, for it is Grace to seek for Grace, it is
Grace to receive it, and Grace to use it well; so he has not been wanting in
giving Rules and Directions to encourage those who do well, and punish them
that do evil, which agrees with his Justice and his Truth; and as he has
ordered the things, so he has appointed those who must execute it; among
which, as it is in every Station of Men, some do their Duty, and some not, which
is a preparatory matter for a Judgment to come: But to bring home the thing
upon us, can any one who has lived any competent time, be so blind as not to
have seen and taken notice of God's great Mercies to this Nation, which with an
humble and thankful Heart I admire at, how gloriously and universally has the
Light of the Gospel shined among us? How many effects of God's gracious and
wise Providence, has the Nation had experience of? How plentiful and powerful
has the preaching of the Word of God been in this great City, which may well
be called the Jerusalem of the Gentiles, and so proportionably in most, if not
in every part of the Kingdom? So that God might justly expostulate with us, as
formerly he did with his People, Isa. 5.4.
What more could have been done to my Vineyard, that I have not done in it? Even
of late when our Holy Religion and Liberties were in so great a danger of being
swallowed up by Popery; But what Returns to God have we made for all this? Have
we with the Psalmist so much as said or thought, Ps. 116.12. Deuteronomy. 32.15.
What shall we render unto God for all his Benefits toward us? Rather like
Jeshurun we kicked, but with this difference, that he kicked when he was waxed
fat, but we do when we are grown lean; Prosperity is apt to make one wanton,
but Adversity should make us humble. Though we thank God, Idolatry does not now
sit upon the Throne, yet it walks barefaced up and down in the Streets, which
one would have thought, that like the Man whom God by a Prophet speaks of, 1
Kings 20.42.
he had appointed to Destruction, should have been forced to abscond and hide
her Face, after she had visibly aimed at no less than the ruin of the
Protestant Religion, in the whole Kingdom, but instead of that, whilst violent
and cruel Persecutions are raging abroad against Protestants, Popery keeps its
ground, and daily her Priests by Herds are seen to slock to some places, where
against the Law, they are received, to the great Scandal of Religion, and shame
of those who suffer it, whereby they contribute toward maintaining and
promoting of Idolatry; and as Wickednesses go by couples, within these few
Years is sprung up another detestable Abomination, I mean Blasphemy, a fit
match for Idolatry, which is now as bold and insolent as ever the other was;
and as Weeds usually grow faster and thicker than the good Seed, so upon a
sudden the Nation seems overgrown with it, and no prospect of an effectual
Remedy, except with a sudden removing of the Props which support it, and let
Men in high Places look to it, as God in his due time will require it at their
Hands; for he has said, he will call to account those who consent with, and
are partakers with Sinners; Psalm. 50.18, 19, 20, 21.
which they be, if they prevent and punish them not, when it is their Duty and
in their Power to do it: Woe be to those who prefer their Worldly Interest
before that of Christ, and who for their Houses, Relations, and Lands, Mark 5.
forsake our Savior's Cause, this is like the Gadarenes, who loved their Herds
of Swine more than his Presence; thus once, when upon Earth, out of
Covetousness, and for a little Money, he was betrayed by one, who made a
profession of being his Disciple, out of weakness he was denied by another, and
out of fear forsaken by them all; but out of what he says, we reasonably
infer, that whosoever loves Houses, Lands, Money, Places, Matt. 19.29.
or any thing else whatsoever, more than him, shall suffer Loss and Punishment,
as he will reward those that are not ashamed of him, nor of his Concerns; and
this last I may apply to those worthy Persons, who hitherto used, and still do,
their utmost endeavors in their several Capacities to promote the Lord's
Honor, enlarge his Kingdom, punish, and suppress Blasphemy, Profaneness,
Immorality, and all that is contrary to Piety, Virtue, and Honor, and to carry
on a thorough Reformation in Doctrines and Manners, such need not to care a
Straw for the Frowns, Revilings, Slanders, and Hatred of evil and profane Men,
as long as they are sure of the Love and Favor of the Son of God, which the
World can neither give nor take away from them: This is a sufficient
Compensation and Comfort in this Life, which shall be followed with plentiful
and unspeakable, yea, incomparable Rewards in that which is to come.

Clogs in a Wheel stop its motion, so now when God has put us in the way, and
laid a foundation to go upon, the necessary Work is to remove Lets and
Hindrances: Wolves, though never so much in Sheep's Clothing, must never be
made Shepherds; when there is any poison in the Spring, the safest and readiest
way to prevent ill consequences and dangers, is to purge and cleanse it as soon
as possibly may be: Places of Trust, and of Influence, ought to be in the Hands
only of those who are able, faithful, fearing God, and sound in the Faith. It Is
a necessary part of Prudence, when Officers are chosen to be in a place of
Trust in any Capacity, high or low, to be cautious, and examine whether or not
such who stand, be duly qualified; it is a great folly for a Man to trust a
Covetous, Greedy, Corrupt one with his Purse, a Bloody Man with his Life, and a
Tyrannical one with his Liberty: Have we not before our Eyes, the Imprudence of
a Man who once thought with a Protestant Army to have set up Popery? Can I
think that an Ungodly, Blasphemer, Swearer, Profane, Immoral Man, is a fit
Person to secure and propagate our true Christian Religion and Piety, and to
punish and effectually suppress all that is contrary to it? Or will any Man in
the World, if he has any grain of Wisdom, entrust with his main Concerns, an
idle vicious Person, who neglects his Business, and does not attend his
Service? Employ as much as you can, Pious and good Men, for such are valuable
in every relation; good Fathers, good Children, good Masters, good Servants,
good Princes, good Subjects; and take this for a certain Rule, he who is not
true to God, will prove false to Man; he who for Worldly Considerations betrays
his Conscience, will also betray his Trust; have a Man of good Principles, and
you will know where to find him, let him be one who has a Religion, the true
one, who owns the fundamentals of true Christian Religion, namely, a God, the
Holy Trinity, our Savior's, and the Holy Ghost's Divinity; who is no Deist,
nor a profane Scoffer who ridicules not only Pious Men, but Piety it self, and
is a favourer of those who do: I say, such a one is thereby unqualified, in any
public capacity to serve in a Christian well regulated State. It Is certainly a
great Crime to help to throw Poison into any public Spring, which all do, who
favor bad Men in their unjust designs, and soon or late, the Country where
such things happen, shall smart for it; and though God, in case such Men in
Places do ride cross in his way, or lay as Blocks before him, knows well how
infallibly to remove them, yet still those that for Self Ends helped them to
get up, have thereby contracted a Guilt, and made themselves accessory to the
evil by them committed. David who was a good and a wise Man says, The wicked
walk on every side, Psalm. 12.8.
when the vilest Men are exalted: No viler Men than Blasphemers and Idolaters,
for such, when once they are in power, would frame Mischief by a Law, if they
could. Ps. 94.20.
We thank God that Idolaters are by Law excluded from bearing Rule, or having
any Hand in the Administration of the Government; would to God we might in
every part say so of Blasphemers, for they are the Rust and Moth that can make
uneffectual all our Blessings; good Men make good Times; we have too many of
those who pretend to be and would seem to be Christians, but in truth and
reality are far from it; may God be pleased to open the Eyes of those that are
concerned to know and reject them.

Some would countenance Impiety, and support Wickedness in Doctrine and
Practice under the specious pretense that they are not for Persecution, and so
by a side-Wind, as much as in them lies, cross any thing tending to punish and
effectually suppress it, but that Vizard can easily be pulled off, for to
punish and suppress Impiety and Blasphemy is Persecution no more than it is
Injustice to punish Murders, Robberies, and the like Crimes, which if Men do
not, in his due time, God will arise, Psalm. 68.1.
and his Enemies shall be scattered. Now that those who profane Religion, and
would overthrow our Christian Church, do deserve Punishment, we have the best
Instance we could wish for, no less than that of our Blessed Lord, who himself
punished the Impious Men who had profaned Religion and the Temple with their
Worldly Concerns, for he cast them all out and overthrew their Tables for
Merchandise; Mat. 21.12
and herein he not only spoke, but also employed his Hands, for, When he had
made a Scourge of small Cords, he drove them all out of the Temple: And it is
observable, John 2.15.
that what he said in John, Make not my Father's House, a House of Merchandise:
In two other Evangelists, it is said, My House is the House of Prayer; Mat.
21.13 Luke 19.45.
so his Father's House and his is the same: And John mentions that his
Disciples remembered that it was written, The Zeal of thine House has eaten me
up. Here is a Precedent for all in Authority that love Religion and the Honor
of God, to be zealous to suppress and punish those who Profane and Blaspheme
it; and I must own it to be sad Times when no restraint, or curb is set upon
them: It has formerly been made a Question, which of these two is the worse,
either when every thing is lawful, or when nothing is lawful? Though both be
extremes, which commonly are vicious, yet the first I reckon to be the worse of
the two; for I had rather to be deprived of some kind of Liberty, than to see
others with trespassing upon that Liberty, to do and say what they list; I can
in Temporals be content to part with some Liberty, rather than to see others in
Spirituals to take a Liberty of Blaspheming and Profaning God's Holy Name and
Religion: Yet I would not have a sort of People in the World to take an
Advantage of this, so as to deprive me of a just and honest Liberty, under the
Notion of restraining others from an unlawful Freedom, in indifferent and
circumstantial Matters Liberty may be allowed, when it must not be in necessary
and Fundamentals.

That busy and restless Spirit of Socinianism, does upon all occasions
discover it self, whereof we have a late instance in what happened at
Canterbury, which is to huff and defy our Church in the very Face of the
Primate: It Is a shame that some few Foreigners, Tradesmen, and others,
corrupted by their own Natural Confidence, and though encouragement they here
meet with, should be suffered to mock our Holy Religion; and in spite of our
Laws, after Tricks, Shufflings, and such Circumstances as make the thing the
more odious, to set up Antichristian Meetings, as those who are informed of the
Matter, well know. They have the Face to pretend to the benefit of the
Toleration Act passed in the first Year of William and Mary; but by a Clause in
the same they are not qualified for it, except they declare their Approbation
of, and subscribe the 39 Articles, very few excepted, which relate to the
Church Government and Ceremonies; for the Act is intended for the Ease and
Liberty only of those who differ in Circumstantials, or at most those who
overthrow not the Fundamentals, which they who do, are unworthy of, or else it
were by Law to allow of Impiety, Blasphemy, Idolatry, or any Heresy; and in
that part of the Act relating to Quakers, a Sect very unsound in the Faith,
there is a great tie upon them, for it is said, they shall subscribe a
Profession of their Faith in these Words. I A. B. profess Faith in God the
Father, and in Jesus Christ his Eternal Son, the true God, and in the Holy
Spirit, one God blessed for evermore; and do acknowledge the Holy Scriptures of
the Old and New Testament to be given by Divine Inspiration. Here is a Test for
Socinians, wherein is asserted the first of the 39 Articles of one God in three
Persons, so they declare they believe the Holy Trinity, and the Divinity of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost; as also the Divine Authority of Scripture: Now, I
say, that though this be expressed only in that part of the Act which relates to
Quakers; yet we must take it to be the Intention of the Law to reach every one
that comes under the benefit of the Act, and this is so plain, that about the
latter end of the same, all Anti-Trinitarians, such are the Unitarians, are
excluded from the benefit of it; the words are plain, Provided always, and be
it farther Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that neither this Act, nor any
Clause, Article, or any thing herein contained, shall extend, or be construed
to extend to give any ease, benefit, or advantage to any Papist or Popish
Recusant whatsoever, or any Person that shall deny in his Preaching or Writing,
the Doctrine of the Blessed Trinity, as are declared in the aforesaid Articles
of Religion. After this, we may well wonder at any one, who will say there is
any benefit by this Act intended for Socinians, it appearing so much to the
contrary, that there is no Toleration allowed them.

By what I said out of the Act, it sufficiently appears how binding it is
against those who deny the Holy Trinity, as Socinians: For they who pretend to
the benefit of it, to qualify themselves, must not only take the Oath to the
Government, but also subscribe to every Doctrinal Article of the 39, in the
first and second whereof chiefly, the Anti-Trinitarian detestable Heresy is
fully Condemned: This as to the Letter of the Law, but herein, according to the
Gospel, there is a Christian Prudence to be used, Socinians, as well as
Jesuits, have Equivocations, and mental Reservations: They sometimes to serve
their turn, subscribe things, which, as some of them have been heard to say,
either they do not understand, or else have within themselves a particular
meaning thereof. Now upon such occasions, the Officers concerned to tender the
Oaths and receive Subscriptions, ought to be Cautious how they admit some Men
to it. In a Tract I have written concerning Oaths, I mentioned several necessary
things upon this matter, only this I shall say for the present, that when there
is no ground of Suspicion, nor any thing to create doubts of the Sincerity of
him or them that are to Swear and Subscribe, then the Oath and Subscription to
end the business, may be admitted, leaving it for God to judge of the Truth and
Reality of the Party concerned: But it should be otherwise, when there is cause
to doubt of a Man's sincerity, for fear of being Instrumental in his Ruin and
Damnation; I would not easily believe a Man whom I have ground to suspect he is
a Liar, nor tender an Oath to one whom I hear to be apt to forswear; I do not
say, a Man may absolutely refuse to put him to his Oath, but not to be
accessory to his Perjury, I would be very wary and cautious, and endeavor to
find out whether he be real; or comes with an ill design: Why should I put a
Dagger, or a Cup of Poison into the hand of one who may happen not to be sound
in his Mind, and not Compos Mentis, therewith to Stab and Poison himself or
others; in this case of Heresy, we have a considerable instance in the Person
of Arrius, whom we heard of, when I spoke of the Council of Nice, it is thus,
The Emperor Constantine, upon the suggestions of an Arrian Priest, (whom his
Sister Constantia upon her Deathbed had commended to his favor,) how Arrius
had to his Imperial Majesty, been misrepresented, for his Opinion about those
Matters, was the same with the Judgment of the Council of Nice, and that if he
were pleased to admit him into his presence, he with his own Mouth would assure
him of it, the Emperor, who would not in the least recede from the Resolutions
of the Council, was upon those terms content to see him, so he comes, and in
sound words, gave him a short Confession of what he said he believed concerning
those Matters, afterward Constine asked him, whether he would subscribe to the
Council's Determinations, which he readily did, yet the Emperor to make sure
of him, required him to swear to the truth of what he had subscribed, which he
also did; thus he imposed upon the Emperor, but could not upon God who, as I
said before, found out, and Punished him. I am persuaded that many Socinians
after the Example of this their great Ringleader, to get leave to set up
Antichristian Conventicles, will, if they can, impose upon the Law, subscribe
and swear unto any thing, for they have the face to declare, if we will believe
them, that the Unitarians, the Catholic Church, the Translatour, as they call
one, and I, are at perfect Agreement? but the contrary I sufficiently showed in
my Answer to their two Letters. Still I am of Opinion, that for their ends,
they will do, say, sign, and transform themselves into any thing; therefore let
those who are concerned, look to them when they offer to swear and subscribe.

Thus having taken notice of the Law, I must not omit to do so of the Gospel,
and Address my self to the Ministers of Christ, and Shepherds of his Flock,
whose Duty it is not only to feed, but also defend it from the Wolves; else in
Scripture Phrase they are Idol Shepherds, Zec. 11.17
and dumb Dogs. Not Shepherds, but Hirelings, for says the great Shepherd of
all, He that is an hireling, Isai. 56.10, 11. Joh. 10.11.12, 13, 14. Ezeck. 33.
and not the Shepherd, sees the wolf coming, and leaves the sheep, and
flees, and the wolf catches them, and scatters the sheep. Therein is Rule
and Example for good Shepherds; a terrible doom will attend those who herein
neglect their Duty, as we read in the Case of the Watchman: it is not enough for
one to know, but he also must do his Duty, or else he shall fall into a greater
Condemnation; but 'twill be a great Aggravation when he knows the Wolf to be
within the Sheepfold, and drives it not out when he can, and if he wants
strength, let him sue for help where it may be had: Certainly these are Evil
Days, when more than ever, as it is now, out of the Heart proceed all the wicked
things, by our Savior mentioned, among which Blasphemy, Mark. 7.22.
none of the least, is named: We hope our worthy Prelates with their Pious
Care, and Christian Prudence, will drive out of the Precinct of their
respective Jurisdictions, and as far as they are able, every thing else
contrary to Piety and sound Doctrine: this with humble Respect and Submission I
bring to their Door and there leave it, not doubting but that some who are
sincere and zealous for the cause of God, will approve themselves to be among
those whom God speaks of, Jer. 3.15.
I will give you Pastors according to mine Heart, which shall feed you with
knowledge and understanding: May God in this great Concern of his, make every
one in his station, careful, diligent and faithful to Discourse, Preach, Write,
and every other way according to their Abilities promote the Interest of
Christ, that we may see whatsoever is contrary to it, thereby exploded out of
the Land, if not out of the World, or at least compelled to lurk and hide in
dark places, proper Holes for Works of Darkness, that we may no longer hear,
see, or be troubled therewith; we may hope, God will bless Joint-endeavours, if
every one in his way, and as far as he is enabled, fets his Hand to the Work;
among us let there be none like the Trumpets who encourage Men to Battle, yet
fight not themselves; or as the Bells which call People to Church, but they go
not: In my Judgment, I am not against, but for using first such charitable
means, 2 Timothy 2.25.
as thereby to try if God, peradventure, will give them Repentance, to the
acknowledging the Truth, specially to those who have been seduced, and are
misled, who indeed are pity worthy, but in relation to hardened Heretics, our
Charity must be kept within bounds, and attended with Considerations becoming
Christian Zeal and Prudence, 1 Cor. 13.
it is true, Charity thinks no evil, without cause, but she is not blind, and
can see when there is: She bears all things, but does not approve of, or
tolerate Heresy, it ought not to be void of Prudence, or of sincere love to
Truth, or of zeal for God's House, so as under the Notion of Charity, to bring,
or suffer in God's House, Men infected with damnable Heresy, Snakes into the
Mother's Bosom, or ravenous Wolves into the Sheepfold. In such things we must
not mind so much what Men will say as what God will? To loyal Subjects their
Princes Enemies are theirs, so true Christians ought to account Christ's
Enemies to be theirs; God forbid, we should under the wrong Notion of Charity,
betray our Allegiance to him, our Conscience, or the Truth. As to Socinians, I
wish the gentleness of the Parliament toward them, may lead them to the
knowledge of their detestable Errors, and prove an Inducement to repent and
leave them off, lest their Charity being exhausted, and Patience tired out, in
their Christian Prudence and Zeal for God, seeing mild Courses cannot prevail,
they make use of harder ones. May be some Wretches, whom for being in no wise
qualified for any public Places, the Penalties cannot reach, shall take the
liberty as Emissaries to disperse their venom, and to blaspheme, which Time
will show.

In the mean while it is a just cause of much Grief and Sorrow for all that are
for God's Glory, and who love their Religion to see so many Lots and Hindrances
to the sound Doctrines of the Gospel, and to the Work of Piety and Reformation.
None here can be so blind, but may perceive it, if some do not; I am sure
others afar off, to the Shame and Scandal of Religion, and of the Nation, do
with a Witness: What a stain is it to England's Honor, and to the purity of
our Holy Profession, to find that our Enemies to both Religion and Nation,
throw Dirt upon it, not in private, but as publicly as can be, It has been
told in Gath, and published in the Streets of Askelon. 2 Samuel 1.20.
The French Gazette, (and by Flying Post of Saturday 9th of April, School.
our printed Papers here it is mentioned in the Article from Paris) says, The
Bill in England against Blasphemy. and Profaneness, or as he calls it, Impiety
and Debauchery, has met with great opposition: And here it is known how that
Intelligence was too true, though it is very sad that two such abominable things
as are Blasphemy and Profaneness, should find Friends to favor and support
them, which none but those who are guilty thereof, either directly, or by a
side-wind, will offer to do; and it is too true that whilst some good and
worthy Persons used their Endeavors to promote the Cause of God, others as bad
as these are good, with their utmost power opposed it: And as in the Body, when
there is a weak and infected part, all bad Humors fall in with it, so in this
case, we find a Combination against the Truth, not only of the Jews, our
Savior's sworn Enemies, and of their Friends, but also of the worst Sects or
Excrements of Christianity; so that with the Psalmist we may say, Edom,
Ishmael, Psalm 83.5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
Moab, Gebal, Ammon, Amalek, the Philistines, etc. have consulted together with
one consent, and are confederate against it. Among others, for Socinians
appeared the Quakers, who with them agree in many things, as against
Revelation, and the Word of God, which they subject one to their Spirit and
Light within, the other to their Reason: Upon reasonable Grounds it may be
questioned, Whether Men, who own no other Christ but that which they say to be
within them, who never were Baptized in his Name, own in the Church no
Ministry by way of Office, and receive no Sacraments of Christ's Institution,
may be called Christians; as for Socinians, though they call themselves so, yet
are only in Name, nor really such, but rather Enemies to his Person, and his
Cross, whose Dignity and Merits for all their fair pretenses, they strive, and
intend if they can, to pull down; to that effect they use all they think may
conduce to it; but let them design it never so much, I can upon certain Grounds
assure them, they shall never execute it, because God's Word we have for it.

Something else there is which I must take notice of, the more because in
relation to Laws and Penalties, they keep a pother about; that Party does sound
a general Alarm, and would make many more afraid besides themselves, as if they
were all concerned for a common Cause, but I think none but the guilty ought to
fear: God forbid the Innocent should suffer with the Guilty, but withal the
Guilty must not escape with the Innocent; for both he that justifies the
Guilty, Prove. 17.15.
and he that condemns the Innocent, are abomination to the Lord: I cannot
blame Men for being cautious how to prevent Inconveniences, as much as it is
possible, lest the harmless should be involved in the same Condemnation with
the mischievous Man, which has sometimes happened, and so may again, but for
Men without a just and visible cause to be over fearful, it argues either a
faintedness in the Heart, or a guilt in the Conscience; however let a due
Prudence be made use of, both in fixing the Guilt, and inflicting the
Punishment upon the Guilty: As it is necessary and just that Men should plainly
know what they are forbidden, and must avoid; so out of Christian Prudence
there ought a difference to be made between the seducer and seduced, the
obstinate and ignorant, the leader and the misled. Deuteronomy. 22.19, 29.
It Is to be taken notice of, how under the Law there were Fines and
Money-penalties laid upon Offenders, which may be a warning for these times.
Now as to the distinction to be made of Persons, about the Jews, for whom a
great regard has been had of late, a necessary care ought to be taken to
prevent their spreading abroad their Blasphemies against our Lord, and to
confine them within their Synagogue for matters of Religion, nor suffer them to
go about seducing of Souls; they should consider here they stand upon no Act of
Parliament, only upon Connivence: Thus we shall pity their Hardness and
Unbelief, Romans 11.33.
thorough the unsearchable judgments of God, which is a continuation of that
which their Forefathers had from the beginning. But Socinians we may look upon
with a different eye, for they are Apostatized from the Truth, which the Jews
never professed: and continuing obstinate in their Blasphemies, they deserve to
be delivered unto Satan, 1 Timothy 1.20.
that they may learn not to blaspheme. This is St. Paul's Direction and
Practice.

When a Law is to be made, to prevent its becoming a snare, it ought to be
worded in as plain, full, and clear Terms as possibly may be; though for all
that, at one time or other, some, out of perverseness of Nature, will study how
to wrest it: And no wonder seeing they attempt to put false Glosses upon God's
Word, even in those places which are as plain as can be. But from a general
Rule to come to a particular one, which is what I now purpose, I shall now
reduce it to the case of Blasphemy, about which the Controversy is between the
Orthodox and Socinians: The occasion of my coming to this, when I was just upon
concluding this Discourse, is given me a sheet of Paper, under the Name of a
Caution about passing the Bill against Blasphemy, whereof the Author goes upon
two Heads, the first, What Blasphemy is in it self? the second, How far the
Civil Authority may go to suppress it? This Paper tends to what most of their
others do, to make all Dissenters, even the best sort, to think that there is a
design to disquiet them; but the cloven Foot cannot be hidden, for all that own
the Doctrinal part of the Thirty nine Articles, are not affected, only those
that be Blasphemers, and profane Men, and it is what they are afraid of: It Is
very reasonable and just to make a difference between Ceremonial and Doctrinal,
Circumstantial and Essential; to cut a little Bough is one thing, but to lay
the Axe at the Root of the Tree, is much another.

The Definition or Description therein given of Blasphemy, namely, A speaking
evil of God, is not full and comprehensive enough, but in the next Page he adds
something as an irreligious and scornful treating of the Divine Majesty in his
Nature and Attributes; but still this is defective, for Blasphemy is not only
against the Nature and Attributes, but also against the Persons of the Godhead,
and against the Word and Works of God. For Scripture does plainly speak of
Blasphemy against the Son of God, Jesus Christ, and against the Holy Ghost by
Name, as elsewhere I gave some Instances of: so it is Blasphemy to speak against
what is clearly said in God's Word, for herein men give God the lie, and make a
Liar of the God of Truth: It Is also Blasphemy to say, that all that God made
was not good, and that in all his Workings he is not just and wise: Again, we
Christians own the Knowledge and Belief of the Trinity to be as Essential in
Religion, as that of the Deity, for not to know and believe the true God is
Atheism, as well as not to know and believe a God. We own we may by Nature know
there is a God, but to know who is that true God, we must depend upon
Revelation, which names Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, whereunto our Faith must
acquiesce: so it is not every Knowledge of God that can serve, only the true
Knowledge of him in Three Persons, which to deny is Blasphemy.

By means of a distinction he makes of Blasphemy, he would lessen and so secure
it from being punished by the Magistrate, which is the thing they chiefly aim
at: we know in this as in every other Sin, by means of some Circumstances there
is a gradual difference, which makes it greater or lesser, aggravates or
extenuates it; thus one has in his mind evil Thoughts, and blasphemous
Opinions; whence they pass into the heart, thence come into the mouth, or drop
from the Pen, and are set forth in Lives and Conversation; these from the very
Spring deserve God's Judgments, for though in relation to the other degrees,
something of Excuse might be pleaded for, as arising out of Ignorance, or of a
mistaken Education, and that in relation to men, there might be some charitable
Allowance; yet in regard to God, they are a damnable Guilt which stands in need
of Pardon, that makes Paul say, 1 Timothy 1.13.
He obtained mercy because he did it ignorantly: but as to some men, as long as
they confine their blasphemous Opinions in their mind, and within themselves,
no Law nor Magistrate does or can take notice of it; but they do and ought,
when contrary to Gospel and Law, to the Disturbance of Church or State, they
promote and publish, and that presumptuously too, those blasphemous Opinions of
theirs: It Is true, that herein out of mistake or partiality, some things may be
amiss on the executive Part, however for all that, it does not follow but that
a due Care must be taken to punish and suppress the Evils of Blasphemy or
Heresy; and they who see not a necessity of it, must needs through their
prejudices, have a thick mist raised before their eyes, and if they be not
under some such Conviction, it ought to be attributed to the swimming Conceit
of their own Head, and to a deluded or wounded Imagination, or to a high
Ferment of Passions.

But to secure themselves from Punishment for Blasphemy, they pitch upon three
ways; the first, That in express Terms of Scripture the thing ought to be
declared Blasphemy, which is very unreasonable, because there are so many
Cases, that Scripture does not express every one; but it is enough to have them
employed, for Particulars are contained under Generals, as we easily see it in
the Ten Commandments of the Moral Law, in things therein commanded or
forbidden; sometime it is enough to have things deduced by good and natural
Consequences; this was our Savior's way in his Dispute against the Sadducees
about the Resurrection, they brought their Cavils wherewith they thought to
have entangled him in difficulties with their Argument drawn from the Woman who
had had seven Husbands, but he soon resolved the Sophism, and then to prove the
Point, brought in his Argument not out of express words in Scripture, Luke.
20.27, 28, 29, etc.
but by a Deduction and good Consequence, and to the Purpose, for, I hope,
Socinians, who in their Disputes do follow the Cavilling way of the Sadducees,
though they will not own him to be true Essential God, yet they dare not deny
him to have been a very Rational Man. If God be the God of Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, who then were dead, and God be the God not of the Dead but of the
Living, it follows, that at one time or other, namely, at the last Day, they
should be made alive, which can be no otherwise, than by a Resurrection. Their
second way is, when we give them positive and express Proofs out of Scriptures,
then they go about to force improper and unusual Significations upon the words.
Their third way, is sometimes to raise such unnecessary Difficulties, as are
very hard, if not impossible to be resolved by Men, thus they talk of a
Self-condemned Heretic only to be punished: Indeed a really Converted Heretic
will declare his Sin, his Sorrow for, and Repentance of it; but in case there
be no such Self-condemning Blasphemer, for it happens but very seldom, though
he be known to be Guilty by many Overt Acts, as Discourses, Pamphlets, etc.
must he be let alone: But I say that such as are Self-condemners, and confess
their Guilt, are Objects fitter for Mercy than for Judgment; on the contrary,
those who will not own their Fault, but continue in a denial of it, deserve
Punishment more than Favor, and except they confess, how can Men know they are
Self-condemned? It Is by him added, I say again, to make a culpable and
punishable Blasphemer, there must be an Irreligious and Despiteful Intention in
the words of the Person accused. When alas, the most wicked do often pretend
most to Piety, and conceal their Evil Designs under Specious and Hypocritical
Pretenses, is it an easy thing to know Man's Intentions? How few
Self-Accusing, and Self-Condemning Men is there in the World.

But why should I any longer insist upon what is contained in less than a Sheet
of Paper, when at large, and more daringly we have these, and and many more
things in a An Essay concerning the Power of the Magistrate, etc. in Matters of
Religion.
late Book, which some of their own do set a high value upon, for the Author of
one of the two Letters against my Epistle, does highly commend it to be read,
and though such Commendations I do not much value; yet, just when I was upon
concluding this, Providence having brought it into my Hand, I read it over in
the Country; and not to be altogether silent upon it, and give every one his
due, in few things therein I shall agree with him, as in what he calls
Persecution, which he makes his strongest Argument of, against former
Proceedings of Church and State; for certainly, there has been a great
severity and bitterness used about indifferent Circumstances and Ceremonies,
against those who refused to Conform thereunto, which of late some are become
sensible of, and could wish such things had never happened; and may be this
Author having been Passively concerned, Judge. 16.28.
desires to be avenged for his two Eyes; but this they say out of a design to
disunite those, who ought all to Unite against them, who are become the common
Enemy, about much higher things than those in question at that time; we ought
to make a great difference between cutting a Button off my Clothes, and tearing
them all in pieces; certainly Persecution is an odious thing, but sometimes the
name is misapplied. We own, that in the way of Penalties to punish those, who
in trivial Matters cannot to a Hairs breadth come to what is required, is
Persecution; but not to restrain from Blasphemy and Idolatry, which are against
the Fundamentals, the Cause makes the difference between what is Persecution,
and what is not; in this, as in other things, names happen to be misapplied
which should not be; for the Hanging of a Murderer, which is a due Execution
of Justice, may not be called Cruelty or Injustice, neither Punishing and
Suppressing of Blasphemy, Persecution.

But in the Book in question, the Author runs upon many wrong Notions, vain
Reasons, and of dangerous Consequence for Church and State, that deserve to be
answered otherwise than with Pen and Ink, which I leave for those to do that
are more concerned than I, there being some words and things in it which I
think, he deserves to be made to eat up: As to the Topics of their Policy
about Magistrates, I shall not meddle with, for all the many flaws therein,
only some few things relating to Religion, I will take notice of, as first, he
denies the necessity of a Judge in Religious as it is in Civil Matters, which
he calls Ridiculous, as well as Unjust, yet in page 19. he affirms, page 20.
21, 22.
in Matters merely Religious Reason to be the Judge; for he says, there is no
other judge on earth but every one's own reason. Which sometimes may judge of
things whether true or false, good or evil, but which Reason? not Natural, but
Supernaturally endowed, and how? not of its self and own Authority, but only
according to the Rule which God has given in his Word; thus when our Reason
takes upon her self to Judge of Religious Things, it may no more depart from
the Rule and Authority of Scripture, then a Judge upon the Bench from the Law;
therefore, when any such thing is attributed to Reason, it ought to be
understood of Reason guided by Scripture: We agree, that God has reserved
Matters of Religion for his own Tribunal to a final Judgment at the last Day;
so he has Civil ones too; yet this does not hinder, but that in the mean
while, the Magistrate may decide Civil Matters, and punish Transgressors; so
he must for those about Religion, the punishment here, relates to the present
time, but that of God shall be for Eternity: Therein the Magistrate does not,
as he would have it, invade God's Jurisdiction, which his is Subordinate unto,
and from which, there is an Appeal, and then there shall be the Decisive and
Final Judgment, God being the Supreme Judge of all, by whom shall many
Sentences be Reversed; the Judgment which he speaks of, is about Indifferent
and Circumstantial things, as are Meat, and keeping of some Days, of a very
different Nature, page 75.
of those in question against Socinians, which are Essential. We confess, it is
not well to molest Men about nice Controversies, as he calls it, and merely
speculative Points, bare Ceremonies, and outward Forms of Worship; but between
them and us, this is not the case, except they will call so the Funmentals of
Religion, as are the Holy Trinity, Divinity of Christ, and of the Holy Ghost,
God's Providence over the World, etc. these being controverted between us, page
64.
we must think he means when he says, They neither tend to the Honor of God,
nor the Good of Man, and at the best, are but Appendices to Religion, and
withal, so Perplexed, Mysterious, and Uncertain, that Men of the greatest
Learning, Judgment, and Probity, are strangely divided in their Opinions about
them; and he is strangely mistaken in his Opinion of them.

He says, page 33.
God has given all Men sufficient means to make themselves happy. Which must
be false, seeing all are not so, for none but would be Happy if he could; but
there are a false and a true Happiness, which last, all Men have not means
sufficient to attain to, and their Natural Reason which they would have to be
those sufficient Means, is commonly, and of it self a blind Guide, in Matters
of Salvation, and when it is, it leads them into Fundamental Heresy and
Blasphemy; and then it is but reasonable they should be made sensible of their
Errors, which, without reaching their Lives, Magistrates have several ways to
effect, as to get them Instructed, by Arguments Convinced, so with several
others, which in their Wisdom may be Suggested, and Restrained, if nothing else
can serve; in another place, he would bring in Will Worship, which ever God
abhorred, for he says, by Nature, all Men are equal, p. 39.
and have an equal and natural Right of Serving God, as they think best. The
Consequence from Nature to Grace, is not good, and this introduces a Natural
Religion, to the prejudice of that which is Revealed, it is Grace that
distinguishes Men, and as the Apostle says, makes them to differ one from
another; thus by this Assertion, they with Pelagius, confound Nature with
Grace, give Natural Reason the preference before Revelation, and whilst God
will have no other Worship but what himself has Instituted, they leave it for
Man to bring in that which he thinks best: Thus Worshipping God under the shape
of a Golden Calf, was what that People thought best at that time of Idolatry;
so according to them, under the Figures of the Idols of the Nations, they
served God; thus they thought to do when, They sacrificed their sons and
daughters unto Devils; Psalm. 106.36, 37.
for they served God as they thought best; see what service Men render unto God
when left to their own choice; they call persecution of Men for expressing
their Love and Zeal for the Honor of God, as he terms it, by worshipping him
not according to Rules, but according to their Consciences, and as they think
best: Thus all God's Judgments, and the Punishments by Men inflicted upon the
Jewish Idolaters, were Persecutions and Murders, because they worshipped God
as they thought best: Yet I am most sure Idolatry and Blasphemy are allowed in
the New Testament no more than they were under the Old: But what need we to
quote the Writings of former Socinians, to make them appear to be Advocates,
and to plead for Idolatry as for Blasphemy, seeing this same Man here does it
with a wide Mouth, and justifies my Charge of Idolatry upon Socinianism, p. 79.
when he says, If Men out of Conscience worship false Gods, and are thereby
guilty of what is called material Blasphemy, the reason for punishing them
wholly cease; that is, they ought not to be punished for their Idolatry:
Therefore the Magistrate is so far from having a Right to hinder them from
honoring those false Gods, that he ought to punish those, who whilst they
pretend to worship them, do dishonor them by Blasphemy, Perjury, or any other
Contempt. Thus the Magistrate, who according to them, may not punish the
Blasphemers of God, is bound to do the Drudgery, and punish those who dishonor
false Gods; Nay, God himself will punish such Contempts, as if done to himself,
and consequently will punish the Magistrate, for hindering them from worshipping
those false Gods, when they believe them to be true ones. Good God! What Times
are we come to, that such things are suffered to be Printed, and go unpunished?
The Magistrate may not punish those who dishonor the true God, when they ought
to punish those who dishonor false Gods: Thus Papists do well to punish those
who despise their Wafer-God, but those who despise and blaspheme the true Son
of God, the Lord Jesus, must not be meddled with: These abominable Lines of
Idolatrous Theology, I read a second, nay, a third time, thinking I had been
mistaken at the first reading.

A Man who dares to write such things, will say any thing else: In another
place he denies, or at least doubts of God's care of his Church, or of his
power to defend it: For he says, page 61.
If the Pagan Emperors had been for promoting by force, what, according to
their Sentiments, was the true Religion, they had utterly extirpated the very
Name of a Christian: A great mistake in him, for several of them, as Maxentius,
Diocletianus, and many before, and Julian the Apostate, through cruel
Persecutions, did all they could toward it, but God suffered them not, and he
never will, for our Savior has promised, Matthew. 16.18.
The Gates of Hell shall not prevail against his Church: Thus they make little
of the Church, if at Man's pleasure it may utterly be destroyed, whereunto
answers their making Religion to be merely a Priestcraft, as they term it;
also the Author makes no difference between acting for a good, or for a bad
Cause, and so alters the Question, which is not, Whether every Magistrate may
in matter of Religion, punish every Opinion contrary to his own? But whether a
true Christian Magistrate be bound to suppress what overthrows the Fundamentals
of true Christian Religion? page 81.
Therefore his Instances of Gallio, of the Town Clerk of Ephesus, and of Felix,
are not to the purpose; I suppose he will own the Christian Religion to be now
the true one, in opposition to the Pagan, or to the Jewish, in as much as
relates to the coming of the Messiah; that one must oppose not Truth, but what
is contrary to it; therefore the Persons named, are not fit Patterns to be
imitated by Christian Magistrates: Gallio was a Deputy of Achaia, Acts 18.12,
17.
there to maintain the Roman Authority, wherefore he prudently would not
meddle, nor trouble himself with a Difference about Religion among the Jews,
which was not his business. A Town Clerk wisely took care to avoid giving the
Romans cause to say that in a tumultuous and seditious way, chap. 19.
without a just cause, they had gathered together to disturb the Government,
which thereupon might have called them in question: As for Felix, he was the
Roman Governor who minded to enrich himself, and not to decide Matters of
Controversy about Religion among the Jews, a Covetous Man, who hoped that
Money should have been given him of Paul: chapter 24.26.
So these Examples hold no proportion with the Duty of a Christian Magistrate,
to act against those who would overthrow Christianity: And why should not the
Magistrate take care of the good of the Souls, as well as of that of the Body
of the Subjects, and punish Soul-destroying Errors and Practices. Among the
Jews, a stubborn Son upon this Accusation by the Parents before the Elders, how
that he was a Glutton and a Drunkard, Deuteronomy. 21.20.
was stoned to Death, and shall they who among Christians Blaspheme God, be
unpunished?

Of two contrary Propositions, if one be true, necessarily the other must be
false, it is so of two Opinions in Religion; if the Doctrine for the Most Holy
Trinity, and Divinity of Christ be true, as it is, then its contrary must be
false: And do not God's Laws bid us to follow, adhere unto, and be for the
truth, so as to promote it? Every one in his Station ought to be against what
is contrary to it: And to say the truth, as this is the interest of Religion, so
it is become the Magistrates concern to mind it upon his own account, for that
sort of Men with open Mouth, and plainly tell him he has nothing to do to
meddle with their Religion, whether true or false, nor though Blasphemous and
Idolatrous: And on the other side, this Author would influence the Members of
Parliament, who are for Penal Laws against their Blasphemies, with suggesting
that thereby they may happen to act against themselves (which cannot be except
they were of the same Principles with them) thus he speaks, page 43.
Therefore it shows the greatest Indiscretion in those (who though they have a
share in the Legislature, yet are subject to the Laws themselves) to consent to
any persecuting ones, because they cannot be sure but that they are contriving
Rods for their own Backs: They cannot forbear ever calling Persecution any
thing tending to restrain them, the cause must be examined to find out the true
Name of the thing, it is not the manner but the cause of Death that denominates
one a Martyr; it is Justice not Persecution to punish Idolatry and Blasphemy,
and make use of a restraining Power. Herein the Protestant Maxims differ from
the Popish, that these require a blind Obedience, and will not admit others to
speak for themselves, but Protestants do: We cannot approve the Socinians
Latitude in advising and encouraging every one to read all manner of Books
stuffed with Heresies and Blasphemies, page 119.
which is as dangerous as to put a Cup full of Poison into a Child's Hand, or
of one who knows not what it is: Must every Ploughman, or other Ignorant
Person, who neither knows nor understands the things, of himself explain
matters of Salvation, or be Judge thereof? In God's Name let every one read
Scripture, for all therein is excellent and good, no Poison therein, as in some
Men's Books, and therein let them be instructed, and when Difficulties occur,
advised and directed by sound and knowing Men: But chiefly, upon the reading of
the Word, let them often be upon their Knees to beg of God to guide them by his
Holy Spirit: Some are not able to discern a Fish from a Serpent, which commonly
lies hidden in those unsound Books, and by reason of natural corruption, some
would be apt to choose the worse. I know that when the necessary means
prescribed in God's Word, to inform and make us understand, have been used,
then every one must apply it to himself, not of himself, for that application
is the Work of God's Spirit, every one is not able to understand, only those
whom from above it is given to: page 120.
It Is not out of any mistrust of the Goodness and Truth of our Cause, as he
seems to insinuate, that we would not have those that are not sufficiently
instructed in the Grounds of it, Converse either with the Heretic Persons, or
with their pernicious Books: For, I thank God, we are always ready openly to
assert and defend it, but some not so well grounded as the thing requires,
might through the Cavils and Sophistry of Seducers, happen to be entangled and
deceived; the Wolves would gladly be among the Sheep, for which purpose they
often disguise themselves in Sheeps clothing, but the Sheep must carefully
avoid coming near the Wolf. page 127, 128, 129.
But this Author pleads for a Communion; hence it is that with us they would be
accounted Members of the Church, and be thought to agree with us: But I wonder
not that the Scabby Sheep would come among the Sound, for there they can catch
no harm, but can do some; but on the contrary, the Sound ones need not to
desire the Company of those which be Rotten, for they can receive some harm,
though they can do none: This People, by means of a confused mixture, would join
God with the Idol, Christ with Belial, and Light with Darkness, so Truth with
Falsehood, Protestants with Papists, Jews, Idolaters, and Blasphemers, Is not
this a kind of Juggling? But upon what Terms can this Union be? For we must
stand upon what God says to Jeremiah, Jer. 15.19.
Let them return unto thee, but return not thou unto them: Now says there this
Author, this Communion is the way whereby all Schisms, Heresies, Hatred,
Animosities, and Incharitableness would be destroyed; yet our Savior and his
Apostles say, there must be Schisms, and Heresies, but they know a way how
infallibly to root out all such things: What Mountebanks in Religion are they
who pretend to cure of all Spiritual Diseases, and quickly restore Christendom
to Truth and Unity?

Thus far I stepped aside, to take notice of these few things among many more
which this Author has said, because in general they contribute toward my main
design, to show the Spirit of Socinianism; and now in particular, I must
vindicate those places of Scripture which demonstrate it to be part of the
Magistrates Office to punish Blasphemers; we can plainly see they would make
Religion subservient unto what they call the Public Good, and they mind the
Glory of God, if at all, at the most in subordination to the State: Two Texts
of Scripture they answer, one out of the New, the other out of the Old
Testaments: The Words of the first are these; Rulers are not a Terror to good
Works, Romans 13. Job 31. v. 3, 4. v. 2.
but to the evil; Will thou not then be afraid of the Power? Do that which is
good, and thou shall have praise of the same; for he is the Minister of God to
thee for good: But if thou do that which is evil, be afraid, for he bears not
the Sword in vain. Here the Magistrate is said to be by God's Ordinance, and a
Minister of God; and can it reasonably be thought that God has appointed
Rulers to mind only the Concerns of their People, and not at all his own Honor
and Service? Scripture says, 2 Chronicles. 19.6.
They judge not for Man, but for the Lord; often such cases happen as are not
between Man and Man, but between God and Man; Must Justice be rendered for Man,
and not for God? This is as absurd as to say, That any one, whether Judges,
Governors, or others Commissionated by the King, are to take care only of the
Subjects concerns, but not at all of the King's, whose Servants and Ministers
they are: Is there any word in the Text that can afford the least ground to
confine the Office and Power of Rulers within Civil Matters, and to exclude
those which relate to Religion? I can see no such Clause in the Commission,
neither they, nor no Body else; if they do, let them show it: Without
restriction, or limitation, it is absolutely said, He is not a Terror to good
Works, but to the evil, of what nature soever; thus the Commission is general,
and by virtue of it, he ought, without exception, to praise and reward every
good Work, to punish and revenge every evil one; but they cannot deny that in
things of Religion, as well as in Civil Matters, are good and evil Works; and
the very Name of Conscience, v. 5.
for whose sake we must be subject, which is within the Predicament of
Religion, does abundantly express, that as for Religion and Conscience sake we
ought to obey, so it must be about Religious as well as Civil Matters,
concerning which he exercises his Authority, otherwise it is plainly to
introduce Atheism into Human Society; for no Religion, no God; and there is no
God owned, where Religion is not minded; and by whom should it be, but by those
who have the Power in Hand, and the Administration of the Government; which if
neglected, as good to live in Woods and Forests among wild Beasts, so it will
be homo homini lupus: This the very Heathens were so sensible of, that the Wise
among them, to tame the Ferocity of some Men's Nature, did in order to it, lay
Religion as the Foundation; for indeed, except there be something of it, such
is the Temper of most Men, that they never will submit to order: Hence it is,
that no Nation, though never so Wild and Barbarous, but had something of
Religion; by these means, Numa Pompilius brought under some Rules and
Discipline, that parcel of Rogues, Murderers, and Villains in every kind, of
which Romulus had formed his Kingdom, and took care to instruct and give them
Laws and Principles of Religion, such as they were, and afterward the Romans
took care to send their Children into Hetruria or Toscany, to have them
instructed in the way of their false Religion; and when an Addition or
Alteration was therein to be made, 'twas ever done by the Public Authority,
which shows this Man's great Mistake in what he says, p. 81. But to come to
God's People, how careful were the good Kings of Judah to reform Abuses crept
into Religion, as appears by the Examples of Asa, Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah, and
Josiah? But let us take special notice of Moses's Behavior upon the occasion
of the Golden Calf; under God he was the chief Magistrate of that numerous
People, did he not make use of his Authority when he took the calf which they
had made, and burnt it in the fire, and ground it to powder, Exodus 32.20.
and strawed it upon the waters, and made the children of Israel drink of it.
Besides, he upbraided and chid Aaron, his elder Brother, and High Priest, when
he angrily said unto him, What did this people unto thee, that thou have
brought so great a sin upon them? Merely by his compliance, to show, how when
God's Service was concerned, he minded no relation in the World, as it is every
Magistrate's Duty to do, specially of those who know and worship the true God,
who also are in Conscience bound to restrain and punish those who are not
content to go about robbing the Son of God of his true Divine Nature, but would
also deprive Rulers of their chief Glory, which is to assert and vindicate the
Honor and Service of God, and by their Authority to suppress whatsoever is
contrary to it.

But to turn to the Text, the Author says, we ought to prove two things; page
69.
first, That mere Errors of the Understanding are evil-Works, which, by the
Grace of God, I hope to do, but knowing their Cavilling Humor, we must clear
the way before us; The Understanding being the Spring and proper Seat of
Theorical Errors, it had been fit for him to have said what he means by the
word mere, whether a transient false Speculation, or an immanent, such a one as
goes no farther, but stops there in the Mind: This last does affect only the
Party, and it making sometimes but a slight Impression, is in time forgotten;
but the first produces ill Effects, for it passes into the Heart, where it
settles, and thence breaks out. Now I say, that these mere Errors of the
Understanding are evil Works: The Understanding is the Judgment Seat of the
Soul, where whatsoever comes into it, is examined, and there Judgment passed
whether it be true or false: And as the Will follows the last Dictate of the
Intellect, so thence it passes into the Will, and is either received as good,
or rejected as evil, when the first, as commonly it is, then the Affections,
seated in the Heart or Will, are engaged: When we say the Errors of the
Understanding are evil Works, by Works we do not mean what is generally opposed
to Thoughts, for all Man's Actions are distinguished into Thoughts, Words, and
Deeds or Works; now the Understanding has its Works and Operations, as well as
the other Faculties of the Soul, or Members of the Body, but in another manner,
and of a different Nature; to represent this, we use to say, that Man has a
working Head, and his Brains are at work: In this sense we say that Errors of
the Understanding are evil Works; such is the black List by our Savior spoken
of, Mark 7.21, 22.
Out of the heart of men proceed evil Thoughts, Adulteries, Fornications,
Murders, Thefts, Covetousness, Wickedness, Blasphemy, etc. all these are evil
Works, and all come from within, and Blasphemy, which is the great thing in
question, is named, and Heresy, another great Evil, which we justly charge
Socinians with, Gal. 5.20.
is reckoned among the Works of the Flesh. Such workings are in Mind and Heart,
In heart ye work wickedness, says David. Ps. 58.2.
These are evil Works, punishable by the Magistrate, according to the Text of
the Romans, which we now are upon, and both Blasphemy and Heresy are certainly
Matters of Irreligion, which to punish, as also Idolatry, does bind the
Christian as it did the Jewish Magistrate, and he is as much obliged to execute
Justice upon, as against Adulteries, Fornications, Murders, Thefts, and other
Wickednesses already mentioned: Now to close up this Head, I say, that as mere
Errors in the Understanding are evil Works, it necessarily follows, that those
who be guilty thereof, are Evildoers; all we can do for those who will deny
this, is in the words of the Roman Poet, to wish them, mentem sanam in corpore
sano, a sound Mind in a sound Body.

The second thing he would have us to prove is this, that the Apostle means
such here, that is, as hold Fundamental Errors, and are guilty of Blasphemy,
Heresy and Idolatry, (else it were not to the purpose, for these are the
things in question,) and do own, profess, and practice it; for else no Man
being a searcher of the Heart and Mind, knows what passes therein, and so may
not Punish, but for what comes within his certain knowledge, therefore there
ought to be Informations and Proofs drawn out of Overt Acts, as Words,
Discourses, Writings, and the like; the Apostle saying here, that the Ruler is
a Minister of God, a Revenger to execute Wrath upon him that does Evil, and not
adding in Civil Matters, which had been necessary, if he intended to have
restrained it only to such, or else he had not sufficiently expressed his Mind;
but seeing he simply says, Upon him that does Evil; Can any thing forbid us to
believe, and affirm, he meant doing Evil in things pertaining to God, as well
as to Men? And is it not an abominable thing for them to exclude things of
Religion, and to make Limitations where God has made none? Therefore, if God
has appointed the Magistrate to punish all that do Evil, (for the word him
being indefinite, does generally comprehend all that do so) and has not said
against his Neighbor, or against the Public Good, why should we not
understand it in any kind that deserves Punishment, and consequently, in
Religious Matters, as well as those of the Civil Society? What he says, that
this relates only to Civil Matters, because of these words, Will thou then not
be afraid of the Power, do that which is good, and thou shall have praise of
the same; is not to the purpose, as it will appear somewhat lower? We are not
so saucy as they, to limitate it only to Matters of Religion, and not also
extend it to those of a Civil Nature, for we own it relates to both Temporal
and Spiritual things.

Here the Apostle from verse 1, to 7. inclusively, upon three Motives exhorted
to Obey the Superior Powers, First, Hope of Reward, Second, Fear of
Punishment, and Third, for Conscience sake, in case the other two could not
prevail; and though he does not so plainly mention the Duty of Rulers, yet he
insinuates how they ought to Reward Good Works, and Punish Evil ones: Now to
Command, and to Obey, are two Relatives, and if Actively or Passively, we must
Obey in all Just and Lawful things, as are not against, but for the Honor and
Glory of God, as are all of a truly Religious Nature, then the Magistrate may
command all that are such, and by Penalties compel Men to Obey in things
relating to Religion, as well as to Civil Society; and if he may make Laws to
force Men to be Just one to another, much more has God Authorized him by Law
to force them to give God his due, and not rob him of his own, as more
immediately, and in a special manner are things belonging to Religion; for in
the Text, Obedience is commanded to be yielded out of a Principle of
Conscience, verse 5. and for fear of Damnation, verse 3. both which, certainly
relate to Religion. When God gave Moses the Decalogue, he divided it into two
Tables, whereof the first immedily related to him, as being Matters of
Religion, as the second did to the Civil Society; and were not the breakers of
the first Table punished as those of the second? Or is it reasonable to think,
that God took care of Man's Concern, and wholly neglected his own; so that in
this World they might offend him and go unpunished? what kind of Encouragement
would this have been to all manner of Impiety, Profaneness, and Spiritual
Wickedness? No Humane Law does per se, and of it self bind the Conscience, only
in as much as it is grounded upon God's own, who is the only Judge of it; and
can Men imagine that any Wise Lawgiver will make Laws to maintain every Man's
Right and Property, and not in the least mind his own? Therefore we must say,
that God has given the Magistrate Power, though not to Exercise any Office in
Holy things, as without a special Call to Preach the Word, and Administer the
Sacraments, yet to defend, maintain, and be a Nursing Father to the Church,
which is God's House.

They would take advantage of this, that when the Epistle was written to the
Christian Church in Rome, they were under the Dominion of Infidels, who would
not commend or enconrage them in matters of their Religion, seeing they were
not for, but against it: Let it be so, yet though they would not own the Cause,
the Effects they sometimes would praise and commend, as Humility, Self-denial,
Patience, Sobriety, Temperance, Gentleness, and such Effects of a Christian
Frame and Spirit: The very Enemies of Christ sometimes admired to see those
Graces, which are the Fruits of Faith, and of Christian Religion; therefore,
says the Apostle, Be ye holy in all manner of conversation; 1 Pet. 1.15.
and this is not only for the discharge of their own Conscience, but also in
Relation to the Infidels, and for the Credit of Christian Profession, Chap.
2.12, 15.
for he adds, Having your conversation honest among the Gentiles, that whereas
they speak against you as Evil doers, they may by your good works which they
shall behold, glorify God in the day of Visitation. And because of a Prejudice
which Christ's Enemies had against Religion, and those who professed it, which
made them speak ill of both, he says, For so is the will of God, that with
well doing, ye may put to silence the ignorance of foolish Men. This the
Apostle learned of his and our great Lord and Master, who had said: Let your
light so shine before Men, Matthew. 5.16.
that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in
heaven. So the Good Works of Christians might have praise from Christ's Enemies
and Infidels; such were the Roman Emperors. Besides that, St. Paul did intend
those Rules, not only for the present, when he wrote to the Romans, but also
for after times, for all those things were written for our Instruction and of
others, to the Worlds end; it related also to Christian Emperors, Kings and
other Magistrates in after Ages. who according to God's Promise, were to be
Nursing Fathers to the Church, and Defenders of the Faith. Now this I say, that
as in the Text is a generality of Persons exhorted to be subject to superior
Powers; for it is said, Let every soul be subject; and the Apostle speaking in
the Singular, Will thou, Ver. 3. and if thou do, Ver 4. means every
individual Person in the World; So there is an Universality in the things
committed unto the Magistrates Care, which are reduced under these two Heads,
Religious and Secular; Species are contained under the Genus, and Particulars,
as said before, under Generals: When we pray for our Daily Bread, therein Meat,
Drink, Clothes, and other Necessaries for Life are included.

Now I am to take notice of his Answer to the other Text, Job. 31.28.
This also were an iniquity to be punished by the Judge; Speaking of Idolatry:
Here he thinks he has a great advantage, for the words, to be punished by the,
are not in the Original, and hereupon, applauds himself thus, It Is an easy
thing to have proofs, if Men when they cannot find them are resolved to make
them: To make Proofs when there are none, and to deny Proofs when there are, is
proper for Socinians, which we have too many Instances of; but to tho thing,
it is true, those words are not in the Hebrew, but any that is acquainted with
that Tongue knows how short and Concise it is, that is the Idiome of it, which
he nor I cannot change, but to make it Intelligible in other Languages,
something ought to be supplied; in the Original it is thus, This also an
iniquity the Judge: Which in English, and every other modern Language is very
lame; there is no Verb Substantive, is or were an Iniquity, which any one may
see ought to be understood: Now, I say, that what is inserted, is no Addition
to the Original, with an intent to impose upon the Reader, for it is Printed in
a different Letter, but only to make it Sense in English, without which it has
none, or at least a very imperfect one. I also add, that the Words inserted, do
express the true Sense and Meaning of the place; an Iniquity, and the Judge, or
Judged, or Judicial, are in the Original, to what purpose upon the account of
an Iniquity, or Crime, can a Judge be brought in, but to punish it? Does not
the Iniquity of Idolatry, which is the thing in question, deserve Punishment,
and who but the Judge may lawfully inflict it? But he is so afraid of a Judge,
that though it be in the Hebrew, yet he leaves it out, for thus he renders the
Text; For, page 70.
this might he accounted to me an iniquity, he is not content to leave out the
word Judge, but wedges in accounted, which is not, except he will deduce it
from Judge and Judged, for a Crime is accounted or imputed, when the guilty is
punished for it: The better to understand this Verse, we ought to compare it
with another in the same Chapter, containing the like expressions in the case
of Adultery, For this is an heinous crime, yea, it is an iniquity to be punished
by the Judges, in the plural; is, is not in, nor to be punished by, yet it is
well known, by God's Law, Adultery and Idolatry were to be punished with Death,
so that it justifies bringing in the words to be punished by; and as to the
thing, it is not material whether Job lived before or after the Law. To explain
the thing, out of several places of Scripture appears the necessity of
supplying some words in our Translations to make up the Sense; Three only I
shall mention: The first is out of Amos, it is said, chap. 1.3, 6, 9, 11, 13.
For three transgressions of Damascus, and for four, I will not turn away the
punishment thereof. The word Punishment is not in the Hebrew, which in English
makes certainly the Sense imperfect, Turn away what? the Punishment thereof, of
Damascus; so that the word Punishment must be added to make up the Sense, and
that in seven several Verses of the same Chapter. The other two are taken out
of the Psalms, whereof the first in the Original is this, Let their table
become a snare before them, Ps. 69.22.
and for welfare a trap; in English the Sense is lame in the latter part of the
Verse, therefore 'twas necessary thus to supply it, and that which should have
been for their Welfare, let it become a Trap. The other Text is this, For my
love they are my adversaries, but I give my self unto prayer: Ps. 109.4.
in the latter part of the Verse, the words, give my self unto, are not in the
Hebrew, only, but I prayer, which is no sense in English: David is not Prayer,
nor an Iniquity the Judge, therefore it should be supplied, which the
Translatours have well done. Now to be even with this Author, these two things
I leave for him to prove; first, That this is not the Idiom of the Hebrew
Language; the second, That the Words supplied to make out the Sense in these
places, are against the Analogy of Faith, or the Scope of God's Spirit therein,
and I give him a long time to consider upon it.

But enough of this: As to their politic Reasons against the Magistrate's
Authority in point of Religion, and for a general Naturalization, whereby they
at once would blow up an English Birthright, with the Seven Years
Apprentiship, and bring in all Foreigners, to engross the English Trade unto
themselves, and sow the pernicious Tares of Heresy, Blasphemy, etc. among us
with more liberty, for they are also for a general Toleration, in all these, I
say, their Policy is no better than their Divinity, as might easily be
demonstrated: Indeed to Tolerate some Opinions about indifferent Circumstantial
Things, can contribute toward Peace and Union, do much Good and no Harm; but
'twould be very pernicious concerning Fundamental Errors. God, Christ, and
Religion must not be sacrificed to Interest, and other Worldly Considerations.
Yet if Pagans and Mahommetans would not disturb the Government, they would be
content to bring them in, as already we have the unbelieving Jews, (whose
Conversion I earnestly pray for) whom upon the account of Trade, and of
something else, they are so fond of, that a great Care must be had to give them
no Distaste, for fear they would be gone, when they are as glad to stay here,
as some seem afraid lest they should go, as if here they were the Pillars of
Trade, but some think there is cause to believe the contrary: I can remember
how in Cromwell's time, they sent over Manasseh Ben-Israel, to get leave to
come and settle here, he offered 200000 l, whereupon Cromwell called some
Divines for Advice, Whether, in Conscience, he might Receive and Tolerate those
that disown, and are professed Enemies to Christ? They answered, He might;
because it might afford some occasion for their Conversion: Then he sent for
Lawyers to know (because long before they had been Banished) whether, according
to Law, he might do it? The Answer was, He might, as long as he and the
Parliament, who are the Legislative Power, were agreed: But last of all, he
summoned some of the chief Merchants, to have their Opinion about it in
relation to Trade; but these broke the Neck of the Business, for they
represented how that Nation being cunning, would to the prejudice of the
English, by crafty means engross Trade wholly unto themselves, whereupon there
was an end: And it must be owned, that Cromwell and his Counsel understood well
enough the Nations Interest in point of Trade; neither does it appear, why the
same Reasons should not be now, as good as they were at that time, since it is
the same People, which still follows the same steps, as any one may see that
will take notice of it.

But enough of these Human Considerations; I wish every Man would seriously lay
Hand upon his Conscience, and in earnest mind what account they can give God,
(who certainly soon or late will call them to it) of the Talents he has
committed, and of the Authority he has put into their Hands; what good they
have done, and what evil prevented, or punished, to answer the Giver's Ends: I
say, my Horse is to carry me, my Ox to Plough my Ground, and my Dog to watch
about my House, or to follow me; all these answer my Ends, or else I put them
off; and may not every one else, as well as I, reasonably put this Question to
himself, For what End has God brought me into the World? Certainly not to
please my own Fancy, follow my own Humor, or satisfy my own Lust and Passion,
but in my station to honor and serve him, that is the Work, and the one needful
thing. For says our Savior, Luke 10.42. Mat. 6.33.
Seek ye first the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness, and all things shall
be added unto you. God is the good Master who will take care of our Concerns,
if we neglect not his, but do follow the Apostle's Rule, to do all things for
the Glory of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord. The same Apostle says
to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 10.9.
Neither let us tempt Christ as some of them the Jews in the Wilderness also
tempted; so I say, let none of us tempt Christ, as did the Jews in his time,
who still asked for a Sign, after he had given them several. Must he every Day
give them new Signs, and work new Miracles, to prove himself to be the true and
proper Son of God? That unbelieving Nation, in the highest degree tempted him
when they said, Matthew. 27.
If he be the Son of God, let him now come down from the Cross, and we will
believe him to be the Son of God: But he to prove himself to be the Son of God,
did more and a greater thing than they desired; for after Death to raise
himself, as he did out of the Grave, was more than if he had come down from the
Cross when alive: Was not our Blessed Redeemer sufficiently tempted upon Earth
by the Jews, that he must be tempted again, now when he is in Heaven? The Jews
tempted him in his State of Humiliation, and now Socinians do when he is
Glorified: The Jews would then have had him to come down from the Cross, and
now the Socinians would have him to come down from Heaven to prove himself to
be the Son of God; yet against them he has from Heaven provided a Witness
since his Ascension, I mean Paul, as we read Acts 22.14, 15.

Before I make an end, I neither can nor must forbear to say how it affords too
much matter of sad Thoughts in those who are concerned for the Cause and
Interest of the Eternal Son of God, and of the Protestant Religion, to see here
Heresy, Blasphemy and Idolatry as good as Tolerated and Unpunished, and abroad
the Professors of the true Christian Religion unjustly and cruelly persecuted.
In France, against all Edicts, Engagements and Promises in their Lives,
Liberties, and Fortunes, most barbarously: in the Valleys of Piedmont, the
Vaudois (which we may well call that Mother Church, which stood in no need of
Reformation, for it never was stained with the Romish Corruptions) are now
against all manner of Right and Justice, after great and many Services,
ungratefully turned out of their own Country, where their Forefathers with
freedom enjoyed their Spiritual and Civil Liberties, before there were in the
World any such thing as a Duke of Savoy, or a Prince of Piedmont; in Bohemia,
Silesia, Moravia, Hungary, and Transylvania, both treacherously and violently
deprived of Rights and Liberties: In Germany, by a late Treaty, considerable
Protestant Members are out off from the Empire, brought under Popery, and the
Restored strong Places along the Rhine, instead of being made a Compensation
for what Protestants have lost in those parts, do but pass out of one Popish
Hand into another, which is not better; And the Treaty of Munster and
Osnabruck, which as a Preliminary was agreed upon, to be the Ground of that
part of the last which related to Germany, is thereby broken in that point
which concerned Religion, to the great prejudice of the Protestant Cause within
the Empire, as there is a sad Experience of it in the unjust Innovations since
made in the Palatinate and other places, which therein may happen to prove the
Ground of Trouble and Confusion about it. And yet one of the Northern Crowns,
much concerned in the full observation of the Peace of Munster, without any
regard to Matters of Religion within the Empire, as they were settled by that
Treaty, has newly made a Defensive League for keeping this posteriour Treaty,
though it much derogates from the former, and all this gives but a bad present
prospect of the Protestant Cause in Europe, which in Man's Eye does much decay,
and it Makes good the Apostle's Saying, Philip. 2.21. Amos 6.6.
All seek their own, not the things which are Jesus Christ's: But God
pronounces a Woe against those that are not grieved for the Affliction of
Joseph, and afford not their helping Hand.

But this is enough spoken to and of Men, whose help is often deceitful and
vain, so I turn to God, who never failed those that seek him in Faith, and with
an awful Reverence. O Lord, more or less, we all are wanting in our Duty
toward thee: Some want Occasions, others want a Heart to improve them when
offered; some want Power and Abilities, when others want a willing Mind; nay,
whilst a small number are real and sincere, though not strong enough to do things
as they ought to be; others are full of Gall and Bitterness against thy Honor
and Concerns, and some others very indifferent, look on, and are to choose their
Religion; yet all this while thou have been a Long-suffering and Patient God,
thereby inviting Men to Repentance, allowing time to forsake their Errors, and
to acknowledge the Truth. Even that which is offered unto, and for thee, is
Lame and Blind, narrow in it self; but when it pleases thee, thou can
enlarge it. Rewards and Punishments thou have in store for every Man, according
to their Works: What then shall we say to these things? Be thou pleased to
guide, strengthen, and prosper thy Servants, Convert or Confound thine Enemies;
and whosoever obstinately refuses to submit to Christ's Golden Scepter, which
is so graciously tendered, Let them with the Rod of Iron be broken in pieces
like a Potter's Vessel, Psalm. 2.8, 9. And notwithstanding the Rage, Malice, and
Craftiness of Devils and Men, let his Interest be the prevailing one in the
World; and as his Service is in it self Honorable and Profitable, so let it be
to all that engage in it: Ps. 57.11.
And be thou exalted, O God, above the Heavens, let thy Glory be above all the
Earth.

FINIS.

