THE Evangelicall Communicant IN THE Eucharisticall Sacrament. OR, A TREATISE,
Declaring who are to receive the Supper of the Lord.

That it is an Ordinance peculiar to some, and not appertaining to all that
live under the Word.

Contrary Objections answered. Necessary Directions tendered. Cases cleared,
Care encouraged, and the whole course of the Lords Supper guided fit for
Reforming times.

By Philip Goodwin, Master of Arts of St John's College in Cambridge, and now
Minister of the Gospel, at Watford in HARTFORDSHIRE.

Matthew. 15.^6. It is not meet to take the childrens bread, and cast it to dogs.
LONDON, Printed by A.M. for Christophe^ Meredith at the Sign of the Crane in
Paul's Church yard. 1649.

TO THE Virtuous, and truly Religious Lady, the Lady JANE FITZ-WILLIAMS.
Madam,
CVstom has set up a kind of law, that when a Book is published, some Patron
must be sought. I having lived to do that, which I never thought to do while
I lived, I resolved not to be irregular, having such copious Copies, in this
case, not only among Authors in all ages, but even in Sacred Writ it self.

And though for this I have not sought a Noble Theophilus, yet I have found an
Elect Lady, on whom I have presumed, and to whom I Dedicate this ensuing
Treatise. In which choice, if either personal worth, or particular favors,
both to me and mine, may be judged encouraged engagements, and engaged
encouragements, I shall neither suspect any open check, nor deserve any secret
censure: Those that know You, can testify the one, and I my self could
amplify the other: But I know it would not pl^ase Your Ladyship, should I fall
upon the unfolding of either; though I wish the world did more fully understand
Your pious devotion, and charitable disposition, that many more might be
provoked by Your precious and praise worthy Example. And to that end I cannot
but bear witness, as to Your pious devotion, appearing, not only by Your
Lad^ships care in a private performance of Religious duties; but by Your
spiritual hunger after the public means of grace, in the Ministry of the
Gospel, esteeming the faithful Ministers thereof very highly in love, I dare
say, for their work sake; in so much that when through bodily weaknesses, there
has been a forced absence from public Ordinances, how sadly has Your
Ladyship complained for the loss of such precious liberties, a thing rare in
this Gospel-glutted age. So to Your charitable disposition, whereof plenty of
evidencing instances might easily be given, for though the common calamity
(Divine providence so dispensing and disposing) has no doubt dis-inabled Your
Ladyship from doing that in some way which would have been aforded for the
refreshment of others, yet God has made you both able and willing to give out
Your charity other ways: Whereby many even of the poorer sort have been helped
and healed, restored and preserved to praise God for You. And this I take to be
none of the least of Your Ladyships praises, that being even come to the
eventide of Your days, and near the haven of Your rest, Your faith and love in
the fresh-fruits thereof, be yet very vigorous. Madam, Go on with the good
assistance of God to do the best good You may, and the good Lord keep his best
wine for You in this later end of Your age, that when God Your Father sends,
You may depart in peace, feeling much of the power and love of God in Christ
warming Your heart while You live, and much more when You die: Which is and
shallbe the prayer of him, who is and shallbe, Divine Grace assisting, at the
Throne of Grace,

Your Ladyships real Remembrancer. Philip Goodwin.

To the Reader.
Christian Reader,
I Have been often (the searcher of all hearts knows) in some such strait about
this present Treatise, as the holy Apostle Paul once reported himself to be in,
about his particular person, Phil. 1.23. not knowing whether to desire its life
or death, whether I should let it forth to live in others hands, or to let it
lie and die in my own: For verily when I consider the poorness of these
sheets, my heart shrinks with fear, yet when I remember the preciousnesse of
souls, my heart springs with love, and the unfeigned love in the Lord I bear to
them, makes me desire this might live with them, though I know the depth of my
affection has here drawn me into a high presumption. Truly I see cause to
tremble as often as I think what hazzards I run in putting out this little weak
Boat of mine to sea, and that in a tempestuous season, when the winds are
strong and high, the waters are rough and deep, especially where I am to pass:
For matters that concern the Sacraments are such as,

1. About them there is now great controversy.

2. In them there is ever great intricacy.

As for Sacraments, there are mighty Mysteries in them, and mighty Mistakes
about them, and that in this discerning age, wherein is knowledge that leads to
truth, and yet ignorance that runs to errors. And indeed the meditation of all
the several errors, both in speculative and practical matters, that now
abound, might make a Christians heart like Jeremiahs book, to be full of
lamentations, mournings and woes. How the peace of places is disturbed, the
passage of the Gospel impeded, the power of godliness abated, and the life of
Religion almost worn out, and wasted with frivolous and fruitless disputes, is
sad to see: but what controversies are so uncomfortable and uncomely for
Christians, as those that are now started up and struggled in touching the two
Sacraments and what referres thereunto? Who is so blind bu^ sees this as a
Master piece of the devils malice, to set such at variance, whom the precious
blood of Christ has been shed to reconcile? And above all, Satan seeks to
divide them with discords (according to the old observation) in re
Sacramentaria, in matters of the Sacraments. The ancient Sacramental battles
(if but the breaches between Zwinglius and Luther be remembered) may much affect
and affl ct pious and peaceable spirits, but the disputes and debate^ that are
now in being, about Sacraments are exceeding sad to consider. Sacraments are to
be bands of union and brotherly unity, 1 Cor. 10.17. 1 Cor. 12.13. Ephesians. 4.5.
O then that about these should be schisms, strifes, contentions, divisions,
and that among persons professing the fear of God, and faith in Christ, must
needs be dolorous and grievous to every truly tender spirit, yet so it is. Take
both Sacraments, viz. Baptism and the Supper of the Lord, and (Lord) what
differences, distances and discords about these are this day in England? For
Baptism, how do some strive to contract and draw it in so narrow, as not to
admit any infants, though of Christian parents thereunto? The Lords Supper, it
is true, some make the confines of it also too close, but the most part would
extend it so wide, and open it so far, as to let all men in, though of loose,
lives to partake thereof. The charity of the former is too low and little, the
charity of the later too loud and large, and against this I engage, so that the
great Goliath my little David in the Name of the Lord is sent forth to encounter
with, is, ALL TO THE SACRAMENT, and much pleading there is for a universal
allowance to the Table of the Lord. Books be abroad to this purpose: The
arguments that some urge, I suppose are but arrows taken out of those quivers,
Such darts I have labored at the least to blunt, and such a promiscuous
liberty I here oppose with my poor ab^lity, neither am I herein single or
singular. I read in the comfortable Notes of Babington upon Exodus 29.32, 33.
Aaron and his sons shall eat the flesh of the ram. etc. But a stranger shall
not eat thereof, for they are holy things, etc. That worthy Author applies
this to the Sacrament of the Supper, and concludes no profane person ought to
eat thereof: And yet (says he) there are some that in our days (who though
they seem religious) teach and labor to maintain, that wicked ones may as well
as others communicate herein, and not only eat and drink bread and wine, but
eat the body, and drink the blood of Christ as the godly may, neither will any
thing draw them from their violence, not the sacrifices and figures of the law,
nor the pureness and plainness of the Gospel, but headlong helward they will
run with it against Scriptures, Fathers, reasons, and what ever to the contrary
should persuade, etc.

But Secondly, As about Sacraments there is now great controversy, so in
Sacraments there is ever great intricacy. It was the expression of that learned
Whitakers, that he had rather hear others, then speak himself, concerning
either of the Sacraments, being both so full of sublime Majesty and profound
Mysteries. And indeed who had not rather land what others bring out of these
deeps, then lanch out into these deeps himself? Both Sacraments have their
dimensions; yet this of the Supper seems to have the higher frame as it suits
to those who are of the higher form. So that who ever treats aright of this,
runs diverse difficulties, and who ever goes down into this deep, sees the
wonders of the Lord. That which a Papist reports of their Sacrament of the
Mass, that there are as many mysteries in it, as there are drops in the sea,
dust on the earth, Angels in heaven, stars in the sky, atoms in the
sunbeams, or sands in the seashore, etc. A pious and experienced Protestant
may well assert all this of the Sacrament of the Supper, celebrated in a sweet
Gospel-way. O what rocks of pearl, mines of crystal, mountains of diamond may
we here dig in? A fountain of living water, we may here drink at: The water is
good, but the well is deep; the fruit is sweet, but the tree is high. The world
may well wonder at my bold attempt to bring forth this sl^ght bucket to draw
water from so deep a well, to set forth this short ladder, to pluck fruit from
so high a tree: but having (I hope) often seriously looked up to God for guidance
herein, I have at length resolved to let this Treatise come forth to public
view, upon these following grounds.

1. To answer the desires, and meet the encouragements given by several
friends who heard some part of it as it was preached, preparatory to the
Sacrament, in several Sermons, through whom I have thought God might speak.

2. To manifest that my settled thoughts have been upon, and serious studies
about this blessed Ordinance, which ought to be administered, though in the
place where God for some time has pitched my Tent, for the want of necessary
assistants, I have not known how actually to administer the same.

3. To declare plainly my poor appresions, so far as the Lord has given me
understanding, the meet subject of this sacred Ordinance, with the manner of
its meet management; if so I might in some measure vindicate my self, who have
exceedingly suffered several ways, in the uncomfortable cessation of the same.

4. To provoke the expedition of that way of government in all the
congregations of Christ (if under any such eyes this Treatise may fall as the
dispatch of that good work concerns) that so Gods servants may safely and
sweetly communicate in this Supper of the Lord. An Ordinance by all Gods people
earnestly to be panted after. Its reported to be one of the three things Austin
desired to have seen, viz. Christ in the flesh. O how ought we all to desire to
see Christ advanced on his Throne, and dispensed at his Table, etc.

5. To discharge that duty wherein I look upon my self obliged both in respect
of my Ministerial calling, and in respect of the solemn covenant made with God.

1. For my calling, it ingages me to use all good ways for the instruction of
people. Now as people have two ways of learning, viz. by hearing and seeing:
So Ministers have two ways of teaching them; by proposing truths to their ears
in their Sermons, by presenting truths to their eyes, in their writings. I have
often spoke to the ears, I now once speak to the eyes, the Lord ever speak to the
hearts of his people.

2. For my covenant, it binds me in my place by all good means to endeavor,
The reformation of Religion, in Doctrine, Worship and Discipline, according to
the Word of God, and the example of the best reformed Churches: To the
compassing of which good end, if this may be any means, I acknowledge mercy.

6. To supply the want of some far better Treatise that may refer to Church
Discipline, as it is to be conversant about the right transaction of the Supper
of the Lord: for though many excellent Tractates have been published, some
whereof have positively asserted, and others polemically discussed. Many things
requisite to this Ordinance, yet to the point of Church Government as it
concerns this Sacrament, wherein some are to act, and others to submit, I find
little extant, though I fear the casting in of my poor mite, will add no great
matter.

7. To contribute my best assistance to compose present differences and
disagreements among Christians, whereby they are rent one from another in
opinion and communion; and could we accord in this one service, to walk by one
rule, and mind the same things, other diversities would be soon reconciled.

8. To facilitate this great and difficult service, when it shall come to be
performed in Congregations where it has been long neglected (which I mention
with a mourning spirit) the work may pass on the more smoothly, the way being
cleared, scruples removed, helps prescribed, the hearts of Gods people the
better prepared to meet the Lord in this his holy Ordinance. All along which I
have had special respect to the profit of the people among whom I am for the
present placed, to whom some part hereof have been publicly preached; as the
language toward the later end speaks.

Lastly, To improve the short time of my sojourning, I have considered my weak
body, and that I shall not speak long, to children, friends, or Gods prec^ous
people, which has made me the more willing to get the wind, and take the
season, to leave some part of Gospel Truth upon record for the benefit of Gods
dear Saints. Zisca desired his skin might serve the Bohemians in their wars,
when his body could no more do it: O that I might leave something to be
serviceable to Gods Church when I am gon^ Sights as they come sooner to the eye
then sounds to the ear, so they abide longer. Audible words are more tra^sient:
visible works more permanent. Sermons are as showrs of rain that water for the
instant: Books are as snow that lie longer on the earth, these may preach when
the Author cannot, and which is more, when he is not.

Thus have I given an account of the reasons swaying me to publish these
things, wherein if the Lord shall accept of me, my soul rejoices, I shall adore
free grace to be made an instrument of the least good to any, however I have
begged pardon in the blood of his Son, for what ever errors or weaknesses are
found herein, that may hinder the good success hereof; yet if possible I might
attain thereto, I cannot but let this Treatise go forth, begging the blessing
of heaven to go therewith.

Philip Goodwin.

THE CONTENTS.
WHether Christ's taking only his Disciples in at the first institution and
administration of his Supper, be a directory for future, to receive such only
thereunto as are the Discples of Christ. page 5. 2. Who upon the account of the
Gospel are now the Disciples of Christ, and what are their several sorts and
signs. p. 10. 3. How it may appear upon proof that the Disciples of Christ are
only meet to partake at the Table of Christ. p. 17. 4. What are the duties of
the Lords Supper, and whether only Christ's Disciples can perform them. p. 18.
5. What are the mercies of the Lords Supper, and whether only the Disciples of
Christ can receive them. p. 45. 6. What persons ought hereupon to forbear the
Table of the Lord. p. 60. 7. What persons must hereupon be forbid the Table of
the Lord. p. 73. 8. Who are ignorant persons, and why they are to be
restrained. p. 76. 9. Who are scandalous persons, and why they are to be
restrained. p. 84. 10. How such are further confuted, who would have all
hereunto admitted. p. 98. 11. Whether all the Jews eating the paschal lamb,
prove that all must ^ow partake at the Table of the Lord. p. 102. 12. Whether
the Israelites all eating manna, and Drinking rock-water in the wilderness,
proves that all must eat and drink in the Supper of the Lord. p. 109. 13.
Whether Judas were present with Christ and his Disciples it the first
institution and celebration of the Supper. p. 111. 14. Whether, supposing he
did partake thereof with the rest, it follows, that then all may safely receive
the same. p. 118. 15. Whether those thousands in the 2d of the Acts, by the
Apostles ad^itted to breaking of bread, prove that common multitudes may
promiscuously partake at the Table of the Lord. p. 121 16. Where the fault is
justly to be laid, if but few are admitted to the Table of the Lord, whether in
any others, or not merely in men themselves. p. 123. 17. Whether those large
bringings in of guests to the Supper, Luke 14. argue that all must be also
received to the Supper of the Lord. p. 125. 18. Whether, because the Scripture
says, God would have all to be saved, Christ died for all, Christ would have
all to come to him, that therefore all are to come and communicate in this
Supper of Christ. p. 132. 19. Whether, because all have been baptized,
therefore none from the other Sacrament are to be refused. p. 142. 20. Whether,
because we receive infants to Baptism, therefore their parents, though
profane, must be accepted to the Supper of the Lord. p. 150. 21. Whether,
because all come to the hearing of the word, none are to be put by the Table of
the Lord. p. 167. 22. Whether the Sacrament of the Lords Supper be a converting
Ordinance, as the Word is. p. 177. 23. Whether a regenerating Ordinance, as
Baptism is. p. 188. 24. Whether unprofitable hearing the Word, is not as great
a sin as unworthy receiving the Sacrament. p. 191. 25. Whether all that have
taken the National Covenant, may not partake of this Evangelicall Sacrament.
p. 196. 26. Whether putting of men from the Sacrament, be not an usurping of
some new Lordly power, and a judging of men's consciences. p. 201. 27. Whether
there be any word to warrant from Scripture the refusing of any from the Supper
of the Lord. p. 211. 28. Whether former custom of coming all to the Sacrament,
be any good plea for present and future practice. p. 224. 29. Whether Ministers
under the Gospel have any power beyond Admonition. p. 239. 30. Whether any are
to be suspended from the Lords Table, not yet wholly excommunicate. p. 217. 31.
Whether seeing wicked men eat and drink damnation to themselves, it be any
matter to the Minister or any other. p. 244. 32. Whether, seeing it is the
Ministers office to gather, does it belong to any before Christ at the last day
to s^ver, p. 247. 33. Whether the Priests office under the law, to put a
difference between the clean and unclean, was to be restrained to things, and
did not extend to persons. p. 249. 34. Whether any that desire the Sacrament,
may be denied the same. p. 250. 35. Whether, in that all will seem devout in
Sacrament time, any should be denied the thing. p. 254. 36. Whether, seeing the
best have their infirmities, the worst for all their impieties, may not be
admitted. p. 259. 37. Who they are that ought to contribute their assistance,
to keep pure this precious Ordinance, with motives to quicken their care in
this case. p. 265. 38. What rules such are to observe to direct the right
managing of their duties herein both for matter and manner. p. 283. 39. How
far it concerns the Christian magistrate to add his assistance hereto. p.
289. 40. What private Christians are to do, to afford their furtherance
herein. p. 291. 41. What is to be done that the best may be innocent, though at
the Lords Table with them the worst should be present. p. 295. 42. How the bare
presence of profane men does not hereat defile. p. 298. 43. Whether wicked
men, if they profess repentance and promise amendment, are not upon this to be
admitted. p. 300. 44. Whether, seeing God can make a sudd^^n change of men's
hearts, they are not upon hopes hereof to be received. p. 304. 45. Whether,
because wicked men may make great disturbance, if put out from this Ordinance,
it be not more meet to allow them for peace sake to partake thereof, p. 309.
46. Whether, seeing officers in the Church are few, and perhaps inferior men,
offenders many for number, and mighty for power, it be not against such, more
wisdom to forbear this censure. p. 312. 47. Whether, if offenders be
neighbors, customers, kindered, officers are yet to refuse them. p. 316. 48.
What rules Church-Elders and others are to observe, that while herein they
discharge their duty, they may not be justly charged with malice and busy
meddling. p. 319. 49. Whether there has not been ill successes in former
undertakes of this disciplinary course, that may discourage any enterprise
thereof for future. p. 321. 50. What submission is meet for people in this
p^int of the Lords Supper, and wherein it consists. p. 328. 51. Whether they
are to be examined, and what motives may persuade willingness in them
thereunto. p. 329. 52. Whether this examining people before the Sacrament does
not accord to that auricular confession of old to the Priest. p. 337. 52.
Whether it be not sufficient for men to examine themselves. p. 341. 53. Whether
such examining of men be not to catechize them like children. p. 345. 54. Why
such examining of men before the Lords Supper, and not before Baptism. p. 347.
55. Whether herein be not niceness and preciseness more then need. p. 351.
56. Whether, seeing this putting people from the Communion, may occasion shame
before men, and trouble to them in their minds, it were not better forborne. p.
357. 57. Wherein lies the greatness of the evil, of wicked men's unworthy
receiving. p. 361. 58. What course is to be taken that yet the worst may come
worthily to the Table of the Lord: motives persuading, with rules directing
thereunto. p. 367. 59. Whether public repentance be not in some case
requisite, or whether a sad confession of sins in secret to God be not
sufficient. p. 374. 60. Whether the interruption of the course of Sacraments in
several places, be not cause of exceeding great sorrow. p. 385. 61. Whether
there be not a necessity of celebrating the Supper of the Lord, and what that
necessity is. p. 399. 62. What can be said for such places where the Lords
Supper is omitted, seeing it is needful to be administered. p. 402. 63. Whether
the true servants of Christ may not unworthily receive this Supper of Christ,
and wherein to them the evil and peril of it lies. p. 407. 64. Wherein the
utility and excellency of this Gospel-Sacrament consists. p. 413. 65. What is
that peculiar interest Gods Saints have in this Supper of the Lord that others
have not. p. 428. 66. Whether such as have already repented, are not yet
ordinarily to renew their repentance before they partake at the Table of the
Lord. 67. Wherein that renewed repentance consists, with the care that becomes
Christians therein. p. 438. 68. Whether every man must have an actual faith of
his own to meet receiving the Sacrament of the Supper, when infants are
received without any such faith to the Sacrament of Baptism. p. 449. 69.
Wherein a Christians faith ought to act when he is at the Table of the Lord. p.
451. 70. Whether Believers be not bound to enlarge their obedience to Christ
upon every receipt of this Sacrament. p. 467. 71. What that enlarged obedience
contains for parts and properties. p. 475. 72. What are the evils whereof all
are in hazard after a Sacrament received, and how they may be prevented. p.
485. 73. Whether the Lords Supper ought ever to be administered in public
Congregations, not in private houses. p. 500. 74. Whether it be not most meet
for Communicants to receive the Supper of the Lord at the Table together. p.
513. 75. Whether the Sacrament of the Lords Supper be often to be celebrated.
p. 522. 76. What time of the day is most meet to celebrate this Supper in. p.
527.
To the Reader.
Good Reader,
AS I expect a friendly and brotherly acceptance of my pains, here presented
for thy profit, so I entreat a courteous and candid interpretation of some
things fallen out amiss as this book has passed through the Press. My
necessary absence secretly speaks my apology. Some mistakes I have in transitu
discovered, others I must needs leave to thine own observation, and crave of
thee to correct such faults in the printing, as thou find'st in more diligent
reading, some of which are more obvious, and do greater prejudice, though even
those which are lesser and literal, must be warily marked, least even the
misplacing of a point, make thee miss the sense of the place: And the good
hand of God correct errors in thy life, and imprint such truths in thy heart
as may be for his everlasting honor and thy eternal happiness.

Amen.
Errata, Or Faults escaped in the main Text.
PAge 60. line 26. for denied read devoid. p. 69. l. 10. for nod buckats r.
not buckets. p. 91. l. 27. for ate r. eat. p. 96. l. 15. for Genesis 40. r. Genesis
4. p. 98. l. 20. comma removed at why. p. 106. l. 5. rem. the com. at
passover. p. 135 l. 26. for bleeding r breathing. p. 142. l. 27 for bear r.
bare. p. 154. l. 22. rem. the com. at accidentally. p. 225. l. 10. for these r.
those. p. 227. l. 7. for Ministers r peoples. p. 267. l 15. for pr^phanened r.
profaned, p. 306. l. 23. for ten r. two. p. 320. l. 15. for case r. cause. p.
339. l. 23. for sill r. until. p. 349. l. 11. for to r. the. p. 404. l. 2.
rem. the com. at meditations, place it at instant before. p 405. l. 29. for
admitting r. omitting. p 407. l. 26. rem. com. at God, place it at seeking
after. p 425. l. 17. dele you after mind. p. 440. l. 5. for falls r Fawks p.
441. l. 12. for frow r. from p 463. l 13. for in another r. one in another.
p. 473. l. 10. add not after must. p. 492. l. 23. for ways r. days.

Errata in the Margent.
Page 23. pro cord. Su. lege cord s^^o. p. 33. pro (...) lege (...). p. 3^.
pro magnifaciamus lege magnifacimus. ibid. pro. men^iria lege memoria. p. 39
pro (...) lege (...) pro (...) lege (...) pro (...) lege (...). p. 118. pro
quem ea lege quae mea. p. 162. pro exant lege erant. p. 361. pro homiciduum
lege homicidium. p. 366. pro Geo lege Grego. p. 423 pro carictus lege Christus.
p. 424. pro scit lege scili^et. p. 459. pro inrem lege intrem.

In the Appendix.
Page 518. l. 13. for handeled r. handed p. 521, l. 26. for doubting r.
doting. p. 524. l. 10. and 11. for (...) and (...), r. (...) and (...).

THE EVANGELICALL Communicant.
MATTHEW. Chap. 26. Verse. 26, 27. Jesus took bread and blessed it, and brake it,
and gave it to his Disciples, saying, Take eat, this is my body.

And he took the cup and gave thanks, and gave it to them saying, Drink ye all
of it, for this is my blood.


THese verses of the holy Evangelist, Sacramentu^ utimur and Christus est
Auctor Sacramentis a^utimur and Christ^^ est ul^er.
do lively lay forth the first institution of the Lords last Supper, and what
our Savior, the Divine Institutor of it, both did, and said, at the setting up
of the same.

Two things they hold forth in general about this instituted Supper. Caenae
domini consideratur vel respectu partium ex quibu^ est constituta, vel respectu
hominum pro quibus est iustituta.


1. The Substance of it, or what it contains.

2. The subject of it, or whom it concerns.

And in reference to both these, the language and carriage of Christ is
considerable.

First, For the substance of this Sacrament Supper, which as it consists of two
parts, so the works and words of Christ that tend thereunto are of two sorts.

Sicut homo ex du^bus naturis id est ex anima subsistat and corpore. Ambr. in
l^c lib. 25. ca. 3. It^ Eucharistia duabus rebus constat terr^na and caelesti
Iren. lib. 4. ca. 14.
The essential parts of this Supper, are the outward signs, to wit bread and
wine: and the inwards signified, the body and blood of Christ.

Now the works of Christ ^owards the external signs consider,

First, For the bread, there is a four fold action of Christ: He took it, He
blessed it, He brake it, He gave it.

And then for the wine, Christ's actions are three, He took it, He blessed it,
He gave it.

Next the words of Christ toward these, which are either spoken,

By way of Imposition, or,

By way of Exposition.

Touching the bread, that which Christ requires is, Take it, and eat it.

And for the wine, that which Christ commands is, Drink it.

And both these he seems further to unfold, For the bread, he says, Secundum
quendam modum Sacramentum corporis Christi, corpus Christi est, and Sacramentum
sanguinis Christi sanguis Christi est. Aug. ep. 23.
This is my body, And for the wine he says, This is my blood, wherein we are
to understand Christ after a Sacramental manner, meaning that these outward
elements thus set apart did spiritually signify himself and the saving good of
his sufferings, so you have the duties enjoined, and the mysteries explained,
and the matters wherein the substance of the Lords Supper is contained, and all
this I shall pass being thus briefly propounded, because there are many
excellent books extant, wherein the Lords Supper for the substance of it (or
the parts whereof it is principally compacted) is largely and learnedly
discussed.

That whereof I shall undertake to treat is the subject of this Supper, Non
solum quid recipitur sed a quibus. Aug. in Joh. Tract. 62.
or the parties to whom it is peculiarly directed: for therein we are not only
to learn what is to be received, but who are to be receivers.

Now the persons that Christ in the first model of this Supper administered it
unto, and laid his Sacramental commands upon, are expressly said to be his
disciples.

Cr^de tibus Discipulis fragmenta pauis dedit Christus. Cyrill in Johan. lib. 4.
1. That which Christ himself does, is to them. He took bread and gave it to his
Disciples, and he took the cup and gave it to them also.

2. That which Christ wo^ld have done is by them: For the bread, Take ye, Eat
ye: and for the wine, Drink ye all of it.

This for the outward matters, the inward mysteries are meant to them and to
them applied. This is my body broken for you. This is my blood shed for you.


So we see here who they were whom Christ himself received to this Supper at
the first celebration of it, to wit, his Disciples only.

Now the first and best of every kind, is to be the rule of all that shall
after follow. Primum and optimum in unoquoque genere sit regis la reliquorum
and regula vim habe^ and doctrinae, and praecepti.
Hence then we have a clear discovery, who are to be accounted meet
communicants at this ho^y communion, namely, such only as are the Disciples of
Christ, and in that this is according to the primitive pattern, I shall pitch
down this profitable point.

That the Lords Supper i^ such an ordinance, that the persons for whom it is
appointed, to whom it is committed, and by whom it is to be transacted, are
such all, and such only as are the Disciples of Jesus Christ.

Touching this point I shall declare four ways. 1. How it is deducted. 2. How
it is explained. 3. How it is confirmed. 4. How it is applied.

First, I shall make good the ground or bottom where upon this conclusion is
raised, that you may see it has firm footing, and foundation in the Text, for
happily it may seem otherwise to some, because Christ's taking in of these
Disciples only, and requiring them to partake in this Supper, is thought to be
a thing merely accidental and casual, falling out at that time upon occasion
of the Passover, etc. and that therefore from thence we can lay down no
instruction for future.

But the truth is, though we say in some sense this was casual and
accidental, yet in some other respects more considerable, I am sure it was
not, as

1. It was not so in respect of the praevision and providence of God, to whom
nothing is contingent, but it was so ordered, and guided by the good purpose
and pleasure of God, that those Disciples and those only should then
communicate.

2. It was not so in respect of the intention and purpose of Christ, those were
the only company Christ himself concluded of: had he desired others also, he
could as well have sent Peter and John about to have invited more persons to
meet, and communicate with, as well is he did send them into the city to
prepare a place to meet and communicate in. But to let it appear that this
transaction, viz. with Disciples, was purposely for our instruction, and does
serve as a directory to us in this case of the communion to warrant our
confinement of this Sacrament to Christ Disciples alone, learn two things.

1. Christ's admitting his Disciples, what that did notify.

2. Christ's admitting only his Disciples, what that did signify.

1. Christ in that he admitted those his Disciples to his Supper, did thereby
declare two things.

1. That all that were a^ that present time in relation to him as his
Disciples, had a right to that Supper.

2. That all that should be his succeeding Disciples in time to come, should be
accounted meet for this Supper, for Observe;

1. (...), Discip^li, quo nomine tum temporis intelligebantur non tantum
Apostoli sed omnes qui Christi doctrinam amplexi, ejus fidem profitebantus, etc.
That Christ had not only the twelve at that time for his Disciples, but the
seventy, and several others, such who having given up their names to Christ,
and professing the faith of Christ, etc. were called his Disciples, though
infirm in themselves, and inferior to some others in place or grace, as
Chemnitius well interprets upon Matthew. 10.42. and upon Matthew. 13.16.

2. Mat. 28.19. (...) Facite Discipu^os. Pareus.
That Christ was not only to have Disciples now, but hereafter in all ages to
come. Those Disciples that were with him on earth, were after to go and make
more Disciples, as some expound the Greek word, Matthew. 28.19. for the success
of which work Christ does promise his presence to the end of the world;
Discipuli totius Ecclesia communicantis personam repraesentabant. Pareus. in
Mat. 26. Discipulorum nomine omnes fideles Christiani intelliguntur quibus dat
Christus suum corpus in Discipulis quoties sa^ram istam caenam inter se in
communi fidelium caetu celebrant.
verse. 20.

Now when Christ did administer this Supper with those Disciples, he did it as
they were,

1. A part of the present number that were his Disciples at that time, and
therein declared what did appertain to all that were absent.

2. As they were a type of the future number, such as should be brought in and
become the disciples of Christ, and so to possess the same privilege.
Distributio primum facta est in discipulos tanquam semina quaedam populo, is a
qui postea creditura erant.
Thus the best of our late writers as Bucer, Marlorat, Piscator, Pareus,
Aretius, etc. with a concurring consent carries it.

Secondly, Christ in that he admitted those disciples only to his Supper, did
thereby declare these two things.

1. That none for present that were not in some true sense his disciples had
any right to his Supper.

2. That none for future that should not become his Disciples should ever be
accounted meet for this Supper.

First, Christ did hereby show that whoever now was no disciple had no right to
fit at that Table, wherefore though we should suppose, if some others that were
disciples, had been then and there present, Christ would not have refused them,
yet we must not suppose that if any had been present, who were in no sense his
disciples, that he would have received them.

Secondly, Christ did hereb^ show that whoever should not be his Disciple for
future, should hence have no ground to plead for any part in this Supper:
Christ by this action did entail the proper interest of this ordinance upon his
Disciples as they were his disciples, and therefore the propr^ety appertains to
all his Disciples, to his disciples only, Zanchius lib. Epist. 1. ad princ.
Freder, 3, de excom, Argum, 6. Vrsinu^ in catec, de ^oena domini, Quest, 82,
and to them always that en^ail to be continued, and never to be cut off while
Christ have any Disciples remain, but the title to extend no further: and thus
I find Zanchy, Vrsine, and diverse others Orthodox Authors, conclude from the
example of Christ in receiving his disciples alone to this Supper, at the first
Institution and administration of the same as to bar out all others, Polanus
Syntag, Theol lib, 6. cap. 56. de subiectis Coen. Dom,
for ever that should not be the disciples of Christ, from any share in this
Supper.

Therefore the conclusion is well laid down, let us see how it may be laid
forth, or how it is Secondly, to be explained. That in the proposition which
requires exposition, is, what we mean by the Disciples of Christ? To clear
that, consider two things.

1. The signification of the word (disciple) in its own nature.

2. The acceptance of the phrase (disciple of Christ, as it is found in
Scripture.

1. The word disciple in latin imports a learner, Discipulus a disco
D^scipulus^ disciplinae quasi discipulina.
a Scholar or one that lives under good Discipline. And so a disciple of Christ
is as much as one that learns well of Christ, and lives well under Christ's
School-Discipline, and wh^le he lives, he loves to lesson, Cupio discere and
discipulus m^ esse profi^e^r dummod^ doceant Deum in Christo. Iero,
if he may but learn any thing more of God in Christ.

But Secondly the Script^re will speak up more fully to this: and so concerning
the Disciples of Christ, as their footsteps are found for their discovery in
Scripture, consider 1. The sorts of them. 2. The signs of them.


Disciples of Christ for the sorts of them, were either such as were ^ore
peculiar and extraordinary, or more common and ordinary.

Those who were Christ's ^isciples more peculiar and extraordinary, were the
Apostles of Christ, who preached Christ. Luke 9.1, 10. For all Apostles were
disciples, though all Disciples were not Apostles.

2. The Disciples of Christ more ordinary and common, were all such as
professed Christ, and thereupon were called Christians, Act. 11.26.

These Disciples of Christ were either nominall or real, seeming or sincere.

Gentilem vitam ag^nt su^ nomine Christiano, Salvia.
As in the world there are some Christians in name only, and such as under a
christian name lead a Pagan life, and under a Christian title oppose Christian
truth, Sub nomine Christiano doctrinae resisterent Christianae, Ierom, Non
nascimur sed renastimur Christiani. Ierom,
and some indeed Christians being truly regenerated by the grace of Christ.

So in the word there be disciples of Christ so named because of some outward
appearances for Christ made by them: Ioh, 6, 66.
others, disciples of Christ indeed, so owned of Christ himself, because of the
saving evidences of Christ's grace in them.

And now these Disciples of Christ see the signs of them as given by Christ in
Scripture, in the Scripture Christ discovers these Disciples two ways.

1. By their affections to him. 2. By their afflictions for him.
The case of Christ's disciples in respect of their affections to Christ is very
commendable, their love to Christ is large, and so great that they can hate
fathers and mothers, wives and children, Brethren and sisters for Christ's sake,
yea and their own lives likewise: and indeed else they could not be Christ's
disciples, Luke 14.26. It was a Disciple-like resolution of Jerome, Hieron, ad
Heliodor, Epist. 1.
If my father should stand before me, my mother should hang upon me, my
brethren should press about me, I would break through my brethren, throw down
my father, tread under feet my mother, to cleave to Jesus Christ, and the like
I read of one Kilian a Dutch Schoolmaster being asked if he loved not his wife
and children, answered, were all the world a lump of gold, and in my hand to
dispose, I would leave it at my enemies feet to liv^ with them in a prison, but
my soul and my Savior are dearer to me then all, nay a disciple can slight his
life out of his love to Christ as that blessed virgin in Basil being condemned
for Christianity to the fire, and having her estate and life offered her if she
would worship Idols, c^ied, let money perish, Certe non amant illi Christu^ qui
aliquid plus quam Christum em^^t. Aug. de re.
and life vanish, Christ is better then all, and sure they do not love Christ,
who love any thing more then Christ, O the surpassing love to Christ that is in
a true Disciple of Christ. He loves Christ more then he fears Hell, if Christ
should say to him, Discipulus plus amat Christum quam timet g^hennam, Bern,
take thy fill of sinful delights, thou shall not perish, only thou ^halt
never be with me, O no, he trembles and will not si^, not so much because he
would avoid hell which he fears, as because he would not offend him whom he
loves, this is a true disciple of Christ, Quomodo ama^ Christum cum adhuc amas
quod in te odit Christus, Aug.
O how far is he from a disciple of Christ, who says he loves Christ and yet
loves sin which Christ hates, and hates them whom Christ loves! Christ's
disciples they love others in Christ, and for Christ's sake, Jerome professed how
much he loved Augustine in Christ, and Christ in Augustine, Christ's disciples
they love others, but they love one another much more, because they are all
related to Jesus Christ, and by this they are known. Ioh. 13.

Secondly, The course of Christ's disciples in respect of their afflictions for
Christ, Vae portantibu^ crucem and non sequentibus Christum Bern.
is likewise laudable in that they willingly take up any cross for Christ,
follow Christ, under, and then deny themselves in all, as our Savior reports,
Luk 9.23. and 13.26. The Disciples of Christ they will not decline any cross
for Christ's sake, Josephus lib. 18. cap. 4.
nor decline Christ for any cross sake: Josephus writing of the times of
Christ, says that in those times there was one Jesus a wise man, if it be
lawful to call him a man, for he did diverse admirable works, himself was
condemned to the cross, and his followers suffered much for his sake, yet
after all they followed him still, being dead they owned him, and for all the
Ignominy of his death, and the troubles of their own lives, yet they
acknowledged him, etc.

Those are no true disciples of Christ, who either will not take up the cross
of Christ or sit sullen under it, or seek themselves in it. Those who hope to
wear the crown but will not bear the cross, they love the credit but not the
cross, as great And yrons in Chimneys, that stand for show, Inimici sunt vel
qui crucem Christi non credunt vel qui non p^rtant.
but bear nothing, those are rather Christ's enemies, then Christ's Disciples, or
such who when others bear the cross, they have no bowels in the afflictions of
others for Christ, Duobus mod^ crux tollitur aut cum per abstinentia^
affligitur corpus, aut compassione animi affligitur animus. Greg.
they have no fellow-feeling, what is all to them? Or if they must come under
the cross yet then they will not follow Christ, but sit down under deep
discontents, sure Christ has no such disciples: but sure such are the
disciples of Christ, who when they suffer for Christ, they rejoice in Christ:
let it be for Christ, and a prison is a paradise, his cross is their crown, in
such troubles they triumph, such shame is their glory: for herein they are
conformable to Christ, of whom it is said, Heb. 12.2. for the joy that was set
before him, endured the cross, despised the shame, etc. yea upon the cross he
had a glorious triumph, Col. 2.15.

Yet further, Christ in the Gospel discovers who are his disciples by these two
notes.

1. Their fertility in his works. 2. Their stability in his words.
The former declares whereof they abound, and the later wherein they abide.

First, Christ's Disciples are full of good fruits, Joh. 15.8. Herein, says
Christ, Aliquid dicitur fieri quando patefit and manifestatur.
is my Father glorified, if ye bear much fruit, so shall ye be my Disciples,
that is, So shall you make it manifest that you are indeed my Disciples, by
your bearing much fruit unto the glory of God; when we are not only fruitful,
but very fruitful to God, then it is most clear we are the Disciples of
Christ. When our fruit is not only for quality good, but for quantity great,
then it appears whose Disciples we are, when our fruits of holiness and
righteousness are not only for kind various, Inscholis human, non pro
discipulo habetur qui unam vel alteram lectionem audit, sed qui constanter in
ea addiscenda haeret, etc. Ita in schola Christi ill^ verus discipulus eius est
qui in doctrina eius evangelij perseverat Chemnit.
but for degree glorious, then we are seen to be the Disciples of Christ.

Secondly, Christ's Disciples they seek to settle themselves firm in the words
of Christ: If ye continue in my words, then are ye my Disciples indeed, says
Christ, Joh. 8.31. As he is not a scholar in a school who learns a lesson and
away, but he that abides at his book, etc. Neither is he a Disciple of Christ,
who learns a little of Christ, and leaves it presently, but he that learns and
lives accordingly: Hence then as not those that are barrer, so not those who
are backsliding are any of Christ's Disciples indeed, Joh. 6.66. Christ had
Disciples that went with him a while, at length they went back from him: but
such were his Disciples in pretense, not indeed. Those who have seemed to come
up to Christ, but now like the sun in Hezekiahs days they are gone many
degrees back, yea and their going on still is as the reading of Hebrew
altogether backward in every line of their lives, these are not the Disciples
of Christ indeed, nor ever were. Well then I hope by this time it is understood
according to the rules of Christ, who are the true Disciples of Christ, to whom
appertains this privilege to partake in this Supper of Christ.

1. Such as love Christ above all, and love all others in Christ, they are fit
to take this token of Christ's love.

Quomodo Christi sanguinem possumus hibere, qui propter Christ^^ sanguinem
erubescimus fundere^ Cypr. de ca^ dom.
2. Such as are content to take up any cross for Christ: let them drink of
Christ's blood, who are not ashamed to shed their blood for Christ or to follow
Christ in blood.

3. Such as in their lives bring forth much fruit to God: they may receive from
God this sweet fruit of Christ's death.

4. Such as keep close to the sayings of Christ are meet to partake of the
sufferings of Christ, let them drink of his blood, who will abide in his word.
These being disciple-properties, let this be a disciple-priviledge. So I
proceed,

Thirdly, To the third thing, which is for the confirming of the point, to
prove, that this ordinance of the Lords Supper is for Christ's disciples alone.

The sincere servants of Christ who are sanctified by Christ, and subject to
Christ, are such only in the sight of God, who are meet to communicate in this
Supper of the Lord.

To make this good, observe that there are things which refer to this
Supper-Sacrament of two sorts.

1. The mercies of this Supper. 2. The duties of this Supper.
The mercies descending, which are from God to man, from the Lord to the
believer. The duties ascending, which are from man to God, from the believer to
the Lord. And these things are so conjoined and involved, to wit the duties
with the mercies, and the mercies with the duties: that as who ever performs
the duty shall receive the mercy, so none can receive the mercy but who
performs the duty.

Now come to disciples and non-disciples, believers and unbeleevers, penitent
Saints and impenitent sinners, and thus falls the present case.

The duties of the Lords Supper, are such as only Christ's disciples can perform.

The mercies of the Lords Supper are such as only Christ's disciples can receive.

To clear the case, first in respect of the Sacramental duties.

The duties required for a full performance of those that communicate aright in
this holy ordinance are of two sorts.

(...).
1. Preparatory to it, which make way to the main work.

2. Executory in it, which concern the work it self. (...).


The duties preparatory to this present Supper, as the Apostle proposes them in
the 1 Cor. 11. are principally two.

1. A man must examine himself, ver. 28.

Triplex est judicium, discussionis, condemnationis, absolutionis. Aquin.
2. A man must judge himself, verse. 31.

A man must examine himself that he may judge himself aright, and he must judge
himself when he has examined himself as is meet, neither is he to eat or drink
in this ordinance until he have done both, but now a natural man that is not
discipled to Christ can never do either.

1. Let a man examine himself and so let him eat, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11.
Truly that man who takes this trial of himself, he must have prudence and
patience, two Greek words the Apostle uses in one place which implies as much,
2 Cor. 13.5. (...)
Examine your selves, prove your selves. Prove by examining, and examine by
proving. A man must examine himself as exactly as one that would weigh gold in
curious scales, try it to a grain, gold-oar is for a goldsmiths not a
blacksmith to weigh, and try. It must be a prudent and experienced exchanger
to judge such metal by weight, sight, and sound: Hieron. in Ephesians. lib. 3.
so self examination requires skill in a Christian, as that word imports: but
then so to examine as to prove himself, or as that word signifies, to ^^^r and
pierce into himself, not only to (...) the skin, but to run himself through,
and pierce the entrails in a deep search: (...).
An unconverted Christian as he has not the prudence, so he will never have
the patience to do thus with himself, only a pious man, a disciple. Proving,
examining or searching, ordinarily arises upon some degree of suspicion: now it
is no ways ordinary for an unregenerate man to suspect himself.

There is this difference among diverse between a good man and a wicked man, a
good man fears the worst of himself, and hopes the best of others in whom he
can but see any thing of God or Christ, as Calvin and Bucer were wont to speak.
A wicked man on the contrary, fears the worst of others, but hopes the best of
himself, will rather suspect all the world then himself. The discip^es of
Christ when Christ tells them one of them should betray him, they each reflect,
Is it I? not, is it Judas? so prone are good men to misdoubt themselves. When
Jehonadab comes to Jehu, 2 King. 10.15.
O says Jehu to him, Is thy heart upright as mine is? he questioned the
uprightness of Jonadabs heart, never doubting his own: so far is a sinful
man from suspecting himself, and thereupon he never examines or searches
himself. Suspision that puts a man upon examination, arises upon a double case.

1. In case some good requisite be suspected to be absent.

2. In case some evil opposite be suspected to be present.

Now take a natural man, and he suspects not himself in respect of either of
these: For good he conceives he has abundant; for evil, he conceives himself
innocent. Abundant in respect of grace, like the Laodicean Church, who thought
herself rich and increased in all good, needing no spiritual gift, yet was
poor and knew it not, Revel. 3.17. and innocent in respect of sin, Jer. 2.35.
Because thou say I am Innocent, I have not sinned, I will plead with thee.
Now when this is a man's opinion of himself, he will not examine himself: for
grace, he has it, what need he search as if he had not? for sin, he pleads not
guilty, and makes no more question. Thus we find that Pharisee, Luke 18.11. or
else as for sin if he does not think himself free from it yet then he fears
he is so full of it, and foul in it; that he is loath to look into himself, had
rather put out the candle at the door, then go with it into his house to make
any discoveries there. It is reported of the Elephant, how unwilling he is to
go into the water, being forced, he puddles it, least by the clearness of the
stream he should discern his own deformity: so a sinful man, either he thinks
he is so good as he needs not examine, or he thinks he is so bad, as he is loath
to examine, so is this thing cleared. That

1. He will not examine himself. See then

2. He cannot examine himself.

1. Because he is restrained in himself.

2. Because he is remote from himself.

1. The power of sin and satan in him, will be sure to put him by, and pull him
off from this. The devil he loves to sift men, Luke 22.31. Simon Simon, satan
has desired to winnow thee as wheat, or to winnow you, (...) Luke 22.31.
in the plural number: Noting that the devil desires that himself may sift and
winnow all men, but he is loath any man should sift himself. Therefore those in
whom he works powerfully, he will be sure to hold them from this work of
examining themselves.

2. Such men are remote from themselves: sin as it carries a man from God, so
from himself, as appears in the work of repentance, wherein a man does not only
return to God, but to himself, Luke 15.17. The prodigal repenting, is said to
come to himself; his sin had not only carried him out from his fathers house,
but also from himself: Discesserum peccatores a cord. Su. Mufcul.
In a sinful estate men and their own hearts lie asunder, till God by grace
causes them to return to their hearts, Isa. 46.8. Now self examination requires
a man to be at home with himself, it cannot be done at a distance, therefore
this cannot be done by an impenitent man; and so seeing he does not examine
himself, he must not ear.

2. A man must judge himself, and this likewise lies out of the compass of a
carnal man: (...). Tit. 3.11.
Some wicked men we read are judged and condemned of themselves, but for any
such to judge and condemn themselves, we find it not. Nec se iudicant nec
Sacramenta dijudicant. Cypr. de can. Dom.
They are rather passive than active, forced then free, which makes them no
more meet for the Supper of the Lord. For a man to judge himself as is meet,
his c^nscience must be rightly informed out of the word, and then join with God
in passing just votes of his own estate. But now the conscience of an
unrighteous man, is as an unrighteous judge altogether unfit for the seat of
judicature: No natural man will ever be a just and righteous judge in his own
case.

Scientia ad been distinguendum, iustitia ad recte distribuendum.
To complete a righteous and sufficient judge, two things are requisite,
Knowledge and Justice.

A twofold knowledge is required.

A knowledge of the law, and

A knowledge of the fact.

A knowledge of the law, that judgment is to proceed by.

A knowledge of the fact, that judgment is to proceed against, and p^sse
impartially upon, Ignorantia juris Ignorantia facti.
now a sinfu^l man has neither of these, but the contrary, Ignorance.

He has not the knowledge of Gods law, that in judging of himself, he is to be
guided by. It is a Socinian error, that a natural man without any
supernatural light, is able to understand the whole law of God: They consider
not, that beyond a literal and Grammatical sense, there is a spiritual sense
of Gods law to be looked into, which lies out of the view of an unconverted
man: Let Paul be the i^stance, who speaks of himself in his unregenerate
estate, Romans 7.9. I was alive without the law, but when the commandment came,
sin revived and I dyed. The Apostle being an Hebrew, a Pharisee, bred up at the
feet of Gamaliel, was not without the law in its literal sense, but in respect
of the spiritual knowledge of it, as it afterward came, (...).
which was not bred in him, nor brought in by him, but it came from God, Jam.
1.17.

The like is the case of every carnal man, he cannot look into the glass of
Gods law, so as to see that whereby he may pass a right judgment upon
himself, the law in its naked and native virtue in its vital and vigorous
compass, piercing and proper power, he understands not, he is no good lawyer,
therefore an ill judge.

2. Perc^ssi sum animi cacitate ut delicta nec intelligant nec plangem. Cypr.
de la.
The knowledge of the fact is requisite to right judgment, this is the
knowledge of sin, and this the sinner has not, and so can never judge himself,
a natural man never sees or knows the sinfulness of his own sin.

1. Because of sin-deceit.

2. Because of self-love.

1. Sin-deceit is great, Heb. 3.13. Prove. 11.28. It is the most egregious
impostor and cheater in the world, Sub velamine pietatis incidi in laqutos
iniquitatis. Aug. Conf.
of dissembling its name and nature, vice often puts on the vizard of virtue, and
passes unknown. As dim-sighted Isaac mistook his own sons, and knew not Jacob
in Esaus garments, so a man unregenerate is ignorant and unable to discern his
own sins, especially putting on the cloak and color of appearing piety.

2. Self-love is great, a man is not willing to believe any ill again himself,
Vitia nostra quia amaneus defendimus and malumus excusare illa quam excutere.
Seneca.
affection bribes and blindes the judgment, love covers a multitude of sins, 1
Pet. 4.8. If love will do so to others, in respect of their sins, what will
self love do toward a man's own sins? so hide them as himself shall not see or
know them: nay selflove will cause a man to judge well of sin, and himself for
sin. As when God said to Jonah, Do thou well to be angry? yes, says he, I
do well: so let God say to a sinful man; Do thou well to be covetous,
carnal, unclean? Dos^ thou well to swear, lie, blaspheme my Name, profane my
day? Yes, I do well; their self-love and sin-love makes them think their evil
is good: As we are apt to love what we judge good, so we are apt to judge that
good, which we love. A wicked man cannot behold the evil of sin, it is so near
him, Sensibile positum supra sensorium non facit sensationem.
and lies so close to his heart: there must be a due distance between the organ
and the object, that which lies close to the eye, it sees not; so in such a one
there is the first thing wanting to complete a Judge, to wit, knowledge.

The next requisite for a meet judge is Justice, this lies in two things.

1. In pronouncing a just sentence. 2. In executing of just vengeance.
Now no unconverted man will ever thus become his own Judge, Nemo se iudice
peccat.
he will not so Judge himself as, 1. To give sentence against himself, this is
only the practice and property of a repenting sinner, who if none else appear,
yet he against himself will be Plaintiff, Witness, Jury and Judge. 2 Samuel
24.10.

2. To take revenge upon a man's self, so a wicked man will not Judge himself:
but a poor paenitentiary does practice this also, 2 Cor. 7.11. Peccator^
paenitentia est sui ipsium punientia.
He is ready to do execution upon himself: in that way wherein he has
offended, by himself he is punished; If sinned by defrauding he is the more
free in restoring, as Zacheus, Luke 19.8. if raised himself in pride, he will
the more abase himself in humility as Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 32.25, 26.

Epimonondus a Thehan Captain being asked why he was so sad the day after a
great victory, answered, Yesterday I was tickled with much vain glory,
therefore I correct my self for it to day, and thus will a good man do in this
duty of self-judging. He often sets himself as at Gods bar, and Christ's
tribunal, arraigns, indites, and condemns himself: C^rissi ad cogn^scendam
vitam altenam, desidiosi ad corrigendam sua^, Aug. conf.
but how common is it for carnal men to judge others and justify themselves,
to examine others and excuse themseves, to aggravate others faults and
extenuate their own? so we see these two duties of self-examination and
self-dijudication, which are preparatory to the Lords Supper (as those two
disciples our Savior sent to make ready a room for the celebration of the
passover Mar. 14.13.) come not within the course of unconverted Christians.
Tell any such man when he calls for this Sacrament, he must first examine
himself, acknowledge his sin, humble his soul, seek the face of God by prayer,
alas! he is not accustomed to these things at other times, and therefore cannot
go about them then.

As David 1 Samuel 17.39. when he was to go and fight with Goliath in the field,
being desired to put on Saul's armor, he casts it by, saying, I cannot go in
these, for I have never proved them. So call upon a carnal man when he means
to go to this communion, first to arm and prepare himself by a practical
putting on these disciple duties of soul-searching and self-judging, etc, alas!
may he say, I cannot go to these for I have never used them. Yet as David how
naked and weak in himself soever he was, yet he would to a combat, see how
Saul seeks to dissuade him, Thou art not able to go against this Philistine, to
fight with him, for thou art but a youth, and he is a man of war from his
youth, so counsel a carnal man that is resolved to the Lords table, you are
not able to partake in that Sacrament, it is a great and mighty Ordinance from
the first Institution: you are little and far below it, and very unfit for it,
yet all avails not but away he will, without any self-examining, or
self-condemning, or any such way of preparing himself to the Supper of the
Lord, and this his omission arises in general from a double cause.

1. Because he is negligent in himself.

2. Because he is confident of himself.

1. Out of slothful negligence, being lazy and loath to take the pains he puts
all such business by. And also,

Out of sinful confidence being lifted up with self-conceits of his own
ability and worth, he lays aside all such preparatory work, but truly such a
man in stead of meeting the Lord at his Table, nay expect the Lord should meet
him wit^ this heart-quaking question, Friend, how come thou in hither? Mat.
22.12. which should either strike with astonishing silence, or else force this
trembling answer: How came I in hither? Why Lord, Good Lord, hither I come vile
wretch this day without any preparation or praemeditation, without any
soul-searching, or self-judging, woe woe to me.

And indeed great is the foregoing care that is required of every one that
comes unto the table of the Lord, Chrysostom. ad pop. Ant. Ho^. 6, ad Ephesi Hom.
3,
as the forecited Question in the Parable, Mat. 22. does import, which is not
as one well observes: Friend, how satst thou down? but, friend, how come thou
in? as if he should have said. Friend, before thou come in to this wedding
feast, thou ought to have prepared thy self for it, but so he did not, nor
so does any such man in this matter. Mat. 25. We find they were only the wise
virgins that well prepared their lamps to the meeting of the Bridegroom, and
were admitted with him, so they are only true Christians who aright prepare
themselves to meet the Lord in his Supper, and so are accepted of him.

I proceed to the second sort of sacrament duties that concern the work it
self, and they to be sure are such as no sinful man can transact, only a
Disciple, to these I shall speak two ways.

1. More generally, and then more particularly.

In general the great work of a Christian at the Sacrament lies in the
diligent exercise of suitable graces. A meet communicant.

1. He must exercise several graces at the same time, and

2. He must exercise one and the same grace several ways.

Diverse graces are to be stirred up and brought out upon this solemn occasion
and in this sacred action: A commander upon small matters, sends forth some few
of his soldiers: but when the service is greater, he draws out the more of his
forces, here a christian must draw out most of his graces, the service being so
great, whereas fewer may suffice in inferior affairs, David when he managed
the combat against the Giant, he had especially five smooth stones ready in his
bag, which he chose out of the brook. So a Christian that well manages this
matter at the supper of the Lord, he has in ready exercise at that time,
especially these five excellent graces, Faith, Hope, Charity, Humility, and
Heavenlinesse of mind.

Nos fide sp^ and delection^ s^^^s cum Chri^to in c^lo, and ipse divinitate,
bonitate and unitate, nobiscum est in terra, Aug. Tract. in Ep. Ioh.
1. Then he puts forth faith in its workings Christward, by the power of which
the soul is born up and brought in to Jesus Christ: Faith to a Disciple at the
Sacrament, is like Philip to the Eunuch in his chariot, Act, 8. it occasions
sweet warmings and workings of spirit, while it opens unto him Christ Jesus in
his bitter and bloody sufferings, when a believing soul like a net, has on it
the lead of a holy fear, and the cork of a lively faith: then cast it out, and
it catches the good things of Christ, if the cork of faith were without any
lead of fear; the net of the soul would lie too high, if lead of fear without
cork of faith, the net of the soul would sink too low, and so nothing caught:
what then shall those do that have neither fear nor faith? Luke 18.8. when
Christ comes shall he find faith on the earth? Truly he may find faith in
heavenly hearts, but when Christ comes in the sacrament he shall find no faith
on earth, Ille apud de um plus ^abe loci qui plus attulit non argenti sed
ficei, Aug,
no faith to be found on earthly or worldly minds: therefore no duty of faith
can be performed by earthly men, then hope must also do its work, which is 1.
(...) of (...), caput and (...) videre. Eras.
to stretch out the heart in an earnest expectation. Phil. 1.20. Romans 8.19. The
word translated signifies a putting forth the head to look earnestly for some
good from God. Act. 3.5. A Christian looks and expects to receive something by
the Sacrament of Christ, Aliud est sperare in, Aliud est sperare per.
as that criple did by those servants of Christ, he does not hope in the
Sacrament, but he hopes through the Sacrament to receive from Jesus Christ, and
2. Hope stays the heart in a patient expectation, as an anchor holds the ship
of the soul still, till faith brings in Christ, Heb. 6.19. hope keeps the soul
it slips not as the word there imports, and so while it holds it helps. (...)
of a, and (...).
A natural man's hope is as a spiders web. Job. 8, 14. it may catch flies, but
will never catch Christ in a Sacrament: Faith and hope in the heart as two oars
in a boat, a Christian strikes with both, and rows out to meet Christ in the
Sacrament. A man without these graces is as a boat without oars, what can he do
in the wide Sea? Now love likewise must be at work, and indeed love is a
working grace as the greek word signifies, (...) of (...) or of (...).
and it does not only work it self. but it sets all the soul on work to attain
what is beloved: O how love to Christ is operative at this ordinance, when a
Christian takes the cup of wine, Nihilest quod Christum ita nobis amabilem
reddit, quam calix ille quem pro nobis bibis. Bern. Ser. 10, in cant. Amor
concupiscentiae non re^ui^sc^^ in quacunque extrinseca aut superficiali ad
eptione amati Sed quaerit amatum perfect haberequasi ad intimae illius
perveniens, etc. Aqu, ^, ^, qu, 28. a. 2.
he thinks of the cup of wormwood that Christ drunk for him, and that springs
love to Christ, and such a love as will not be satisfied in a little of Christ,
or to look at Christ at a distance, but sets the soul in labor with eager
desires of the most intimate enjoyments of Jesus Christ: O! cries the Spouse,
Comfort me with apples, stay me with flagons, for I am sick of love: Now a
natural man has no love to Christ thus to set a work at a Sacrament. He has
no such fire of love burning in him, as may make his cold watery affections, so
to boil over after Christ. The Apostles Judges such worthy of the greatest
execration and excommunication. If any man love not the Lord Jesus, let him be
an Anathema Maranathae, 1. Cor. 16.22. Sure then unfit for this Sacrament, and
at this time, O how the grace of humility is set a work by a sincere Christian,
Non dicit Christus beati sunt pauperes spiritus. Sed spiritu. Mat. 5.3. Cajet.
an. in loc. Hoc est humilitatis miraculum ut elatio deorsim: humilitas sursum
tendat. Aug. de civ. Dei, l. 14. c, 13,
hereupon his soul sensibly feels spiritual poverty which puts it into a
spiritual capacity: O blessed are the poor, not of spirit (as one well
observes) but in spirit, Mar. 5.3. those who are not without spiritual graces,
but are affected with their wants in spiritual graces, and so are humble in
their own eyes, these the Lord will sweetly fill when he sends the the rich
empty away. Luke 1.53. And thus the heart the more humble, the more heavenly,
the lower the higher, and so the nearer God, and the fitter to close in with
Christ at this Ordinance. The highest God and the lowest heart are nearest
together, this is the miracle of humility, it tends upwards, and though it be
not an elation, yet it is an elevation of the heart that puts it into a
Sacrament frame, and fits it to converse in this Ordinance. Come to
unregenerate men, they are high in pride, and their spirits are low in
earthly-mindednesse, the curse of the serpent is upon a worldly man, upon his
belly he goes, and not Christ, but dust he eats all the days of his life.

None of these graces can he then exercise, for he has them not, Yea how can
any such have the graces of the spirit, when they have not the spirit of grace,
Iud. 19. now spirit-lesse men are unmeet for this spiritual matter, But yet
further, he that comes hither. 2. He must exercise one and the same grace
several ways: as for instance, the grace of faith, It is said of man's soul,
Tota in tot^ and tota in qualibet part.
that the whole soul is in the whole body, and the same in every part of the
body, though to several purposes, its in the eye to see, in the ear to hear,
in the tongue to speak, etc. so may it be said of a Christians faith, it is in
this whole business, and in every part of the business adding life to all, it
is as an eye to see, as a hand to take, as a tongue to taste, as a mouth to
feed, Fides non est necessaria accessuro adeucharistiam. Caiet. Iuel, defe.
Apol. 283.
etc. Faith is all in all.

When any come to the Table of the Lord, absolutely necessary is the use of
Faith; (However Caietan at a conference with Luther concludes the contrary)
hereupon Augustine, Cyprian, and others were wont to call upon those that went
to the table of the Lord, Nolite parare fances sed fidem. Quid paras deutem and
ventrem creed and mandu^asti. Aug. in Ioa. Tract. 25
not to sharpen their teeth, but to quicken their faith, the great work at that
time, being to lie upon that grace, and hereupon we s^ill urge upon such as
mean to communicate, to examine themselves concerning their faith, 2 Cor. 13.5.
now this were needless, were there not then a necessary use of faith, were
there not much business to do, which cannot be done without faith, and only
by a believer, every faithless man being an unfit man and no way meet for this
matter: let us se^ this more distinctly in the particular duties that are to be
done at the Table of the Lord.

There are four things each communicant is then to do.

1. To remember Christ. 2. To discern Christ. 3. To receive Christ. 4. To eat
and drink Christ.
And all these belong to believers to do, being works quite out of the walk of
every wicked man in the world.

1. To remember Christ at his Supper.

This is according to the express precept of Christ, Do this in remembrance of
me. And this is according to the proper practice of pious men, Isa. 26.8. The
desire of their souls is to have the Lord ever in remembrance. But much more
then when they have the memorative help: O the fresh thoughts of Christ that by
this means are more fastened in their hearts: To remember Christ his death and
sufferings at this Supper, is more then to have some few transient thoughts at
that iustant of Christ and the things of Christ, and so vanish without any
permanent impresse made upon the minds of men. To remember Christ and his
death is so to be affected with it, as to draw virtue from it, and feel the
effectual fruit of it.

Quid tamefficax ad cu randa codscientiae vulnera q^am Christ. vulnera
sacramentalis meditatio. Bern. Ser. 62 in can.
Its more then to look at things in a distance or in a general notion, its to
make all present as if the Sacrament day were Christ suffering day to be at the
Lords Table as at mount Calvary, beholding Christ on the cross bleeding, etc.
to bring all home in a close application to ones own particular interest, and
for each ones spiritual advantage, Thus carnal men can never remember Christ,
or the sufferings of Christ they are things they do not rightly understand, nor
highly esteem, and so have no mind to remember, Quae magni faciamus memiria
infigimus.
Psa. 106.7. man's memory and Gods mercy hardly hangs together. Two things
natarall men are apt to forget: Gods goodness and their own sinfulness, the
goodness of God in Christ is easily forgotten, rarely remembered, alas! sinful
men at the Sacrament, they a little think upon Christ as corporally crucified
long since: not as spiritually crucified at present before their eyes, Gal.
3.1. they mind the outward Ordinance but forget Christ, not laying his love,
his death, his worth to heart: Ecce ego derides and tamen plaugo carnales
bomines qui nondum possunt Christum spiritualem cogitare, Aug.
as a woman whose husband being to travel left her a precious jewel as a
token of his love to remember her of him in his absence, she loved often to look
upon her jewel but forgot her husband: her jewel was often in her hand, but her
husband seldom in her heart, far from the desire of her thoughts. 2. To
discern Christ his body and blood, this is our duty when we are at his Table. 1
Cor. 11.29. (...) Qui discernis dissipat segregat, (...).
to look otherwise at bread and wine there set apart then at an ordinary table:
so as to epsy Christ in them, to see Christ's body in bread, and his blood in
wine, this a believer does, but no other man can. A natural man makes no
difference between bread and wine at the Lords Table, and common meat and
drink^ at his own Table, he can see no Christ in those creatures, Magis sunt
illa quae intelligimus quamista quae cerulmus Aug.
and so while he eats and drinks them, he eats and drinks his own damnation.
Such a one discerns not Christ spiritually present, for he cannot discern the
things of the spirit, 1 Cor. 2.14. The presence of Christ is veiled not
revealed, his eyes are held in darkness and blindness, so that his soul sees
no Christ when outward objects are apparent. Tenebrae atenend^.


Two things be requisite to discerning, light, and sight, light in the air, and
sight in the eye, let there be sight in the eye, yet if the air be dark, let
there be light in the air, yet if the eye be blind, a man sees not: Now a
natural man has neitheir light or sight, his ligh^ is darkness, and his
sight is blindness, and so sees not, Ephesians. 4.18. As Isaac said to his father,
here is the Altar, wood and fire, but where is the sacrifice? So may that man
say to the Minister, Cacus interi^^ panem Christum non videt. Et beatus est ne?
nemo sic dicit nisi pariter caecus. Aug. in Psalm. 57.
here is the Table, the bread and the wine, but where is the lamb? He sees no
Christ, neither indeed does h^ mind Christ, so he sees other things present,
O says the Eunuch to Philip, here is water what lets me to be baptized? as
long as there was water present, he looked no further: Here is bread and wine
says one, what lets me to communicate? not looking to see whether himself be
prepared, or whether Christ be present, as a child loves to look on the gilded
outside of the book, but looks not on to what is within, so men at the Lords
Table gaze on the outward elements, but seek not to see Christ within. The wise
men, Matthew. 2. were not satisfied to see the star, till they came to behold
the Babe in the manger: So here to see Christ in the Sacrament, only gives true
Christians content.

3. To receive Christ this is also a duty at the Table of the Lord to take, 1
Cor. 11.24. not bread only, but the body of Christ: this every unregenerate
man is utterly unable unto, as may appear by considering what the act is.

It is a soul extending act. Ascendamus cum Domin^ in caenaculil mag^^^, and
accipiamus ab eo sursum calicem novi Testamenti. Hiero.


It is a soul ascending act.

He that would take Christ in the ordinance must stretch out himself and stir
up himself, both which are beyond the activity of all unregenerate men in
relation to Christ. The Saints though they do not stretch themselves for
matter or measure beyond what is meet, 2 Cor. 10.4. yet in good matters they
stretch themselves to the utmost of what is meet: as in prayer to God, in faith
toward Christ, they reach out heart and hand, to the utmost, Phil. 3.13. to
take hold of Christ, Ioh. 10.29. Exit de manibus eorum non enimeum apprehendere
potuerunt, quia manus fidei non habuerunt. Aug. in loc.
an unbeliever has neither hand nor heart stirred up, or stretched out to the
receiving of Christ. Hence the Lord complains, Isa. 64.7. No man stirs up
himself to take hold on me. A true Christian though he cannot take hold on
Christ as well as he would, yet he stirs himself up to it as well as he can;
whereas the case of another man is like that of the poor woman, Luke 13.11. she
was bewed together and could in no wise lift up her self, ever since the first
fall of man from God, all ascending motions of man's heart to God are forced,
none free; only through grace a true Christian can at the Lords Table reach up
a hand into heaven, and take hold of Christ sitting there. Mary looked down to
Christ on earth, and so touches him not, Joh. 20.17. Stephen looks up to Christ
in heaven, Act. 7.55. and not by the hand of his body, but by the ascent of his
faith takes his hold on Christ there, and so does a believer in Christ, at the
Supper of Christ.

4. To eat and drink Christ, his body and blood at his Table, this is also the
duty of each communicant, 1 Cor. 11.24, 25. Here is such solid and savoury
meat, as the souls of believers love: The Lord at his Table does not only
provide somewhat for his servants to look upon, but for their souls to live
upon.

Suidas reports of one Pasetes, who used ^ to ^ all his friends to a Banquet,
where they should see a table furnished with variety and plenty of all manner of
meats and drinks, but when the guests went to take any thing to eat, it
suddenly vanished away and turned to nothing. Here is a feast to which the Lord
calls his friends, and whereat, not only their eyes may be filled, but their
souls may be fed, that whereof they may certainly and sweetly eat and drink,
and so indeed do the dear Saints of God, and that others at this table do not,
it is not because there is no meat whereof to eat, but because they have no
mouth wherewith to eat. He that is well prepared to this Supper, must not only
have two eyes, and two hands, but two mouths also, one to eat and drink bread
and wine, Proculdubi^ non manducant spiritualiter carnem nec bibunt sanguinem
Christi ^icet visibiliter pramunt dentibus Sacramentum sanguinis and corporis
ejus. Aug. in Ioa.
another to eat and drink Christ's body and blood; this later every unbeleever
wants, and so though he eats the bread of the Lord, yet her cannot eat the
bread which is the Lord, though he cracks the shell, yet he never eats the
kernel; there is milk in the breast and marrow in the bone that he comes not
at: honey in this rock that he does neither taste or touch, such men suppose
themselves to eat and drink of the best but what they eat at this ordinance is
Kid and not Venison, Genesis 27.9. Like Isaac they are mistakes in their meat:
only a sincere disciple of Christ, he feeds and feasts upon Christ indeed, at
his Table, for as he has there, meat to eat of which others see not: so he
has mouth to eat with, which others know not. Thus go through all these
duties, Christ is then not only to be remembered absent, but to be discerned
present: neither only to be perceived with the eye, but to be received with the
hand: nor only must there be a hand to take him but a mouth to eat and drink
him, and all in a spiritual manner, to all which duties all unregenerate men
are altogether unable, upon a double cause.

1 Because they are bound. 2. Because they are dead.
They are held fast in the cords of their own sins, and lie like prisoners in
the bonds of their own iniquities, Psa. 9.16. Act. 8.23. A sinful man when he
goes to the Supper of the Lord, he comes out of the world as Lazarus out of the
grave, Joh. 11.44. Bound hand and foot with grave-clothes, and his face bound
about with a napkin, alas the soul of such a man can neither see, take, eat, or
think upon Jesus Christ at his sacred Supper, in any suitable manner.

2. Because as he is bound, so he is dead, bound by sin, dead in sin, Ephesians.
2.1. Can a dead man see, eat, or drink? Can a dead man discern with his eyes,
take hold with his hands, meditate in his thoughts? It was an ancient abuse of
this Sacrament, to give it to dead bodies, Placuit ut defunctorum corporibus
Eucharistia non d^^^r, nam dictum est a Domino, Accipite and edite, hoc facite,
etc. cadavera autem nec accipere, nec edere, nec memorare possunt. Con. Car. 3.
can. 6.
which sinful custom was cashiered by a council at Carthage, for this very
cause, In that Christ says, take, eat, do this in remembrance of me, whereas
carcasses and dead bodies, cannot eat or drink, take or touch, mind or
remember, and so judged unmeet for this matter: And upon the same ground,
unregenerrte men, whose souls are dead in their sins, are therefore unable to
act about the spiritual part of this Supper. So I pass from the duties of the
Lords Supper, which you see only Christ's disciples can perform, to the mercies
of the Lords Supper, which only Christ's disciples receive: And these are either,

Primary and principal, or

Secondary and consequentiall.

For mercies of the first sort, I find two.

1. Communion with Christ the chiefest good.

2. Remission of sin the greatest evil.

At the Lords Table a true Christian has the mercy of communion with Christ 1
Cor. 10.16. The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the
blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body
of Christ? It is so to believers, but for other men who by their sinful lives
hold communion with devils, and so can have no communion with Christ, as the
Apostle clears it in a particular case, 1 Cor. 10.20. sinful men they
willingly join themselves to satan's service, Luke 15.5. and so are fitter to be
with the swine at the ^evils trough, then with Saints at the Lords Table: they
can have no communion so much as with the members of Christ, much less Christ
himself. True Christians, they have union and fellowly unity one with another
in their ordinary converses, Act. 2.46. Quam suavis est haec communio? nam etsi
non miscet persenas nec unit substantias tamen consociat affectus and
confaederat voluntates, Cypr. de can, dom.
Act. 4.32. and so a sweet union and communion one with another in this present
matter, 1 Cor. 10.17. We being many are one bread, and one body: sure then
sweeter is the union and communion they have with Christ their head, in this
holy business: carnal men can have no communion with Christ, because they
have no union with Christ. Two things concur to make a union between Christ
and our souls. The spirit of Christ and faith in Christ. The spirit on Christ's
part laying hold on us, 1 Cor. 6.17. and thus we are glued to the Lord by one
spirit, as the Greek word there signifies, and then faith on our part laying
hold upon Christ, (...).
Ephesians. 3.17. Ephesians. 4.5. Now an unregenerate man has neither of these ligaments
to knit a union betwixt Christ and him. He has not the spirit of Christ, Romans
8.9. Neither has he faith in Christ, 2 These. 3.2. No faith, no Christ. Gods
Saints have a twofold union with Christ.

The one mystical, by faith in him.

The other moral, by love to him.

Natural men, as they have no faith in Christ, so no love to Christ: they love
Christ, as a malefactor loves a judge, nothing less. Union is of things
present, that some sweet way lie near together, but Christ and all unconverted
men lie far a sunder, Ephesians. 2.13. Non intervallo locorum sed pravitate morum.
Ambr. in Psalm. 119.
not by distance of place, but by dissimilitude of properties: union is of
things homogeneall that assimulate one another, but Christ and such men are
Heterogeneall, different and discrepant, so that there is no union, and so no
communion. Where there is union there is unity and agreement: communion and
concord goes together, Christ and those men have no concord, therefore no
communion, 2 Cor. 6.14, 15. What communion has light with darkness? What
concord has Christ with Belial.

2. At the Lords Table a true Christian meets with the mercy of remission of
sin, Matthew. 26.28. Christ's blood was not only shed on the cross, but also his
blood is drunk in the Sacrament for the remission of sins, that pardon of
sins to Gods Saints, might thereby be the more sensibly conferred, and the
more certainty confirmed, and so unto them it is, O says the Lord, while such
sit at his Supper; Be of good cheer, all your sins are forgiven. There are
three things the Lord gives together: Hidden Manna, a white stone, and a new
name, Revel. 2.17. And truly at this Table his disciples receive, Hidden Manna
to refresh them, a white stone to absolve them, and a new name to describe
them, the mercies of remission of sins, and adoption of sons assured to their
souls: for other men it is no such matter, they who mind not repentance, Da
Domine panitentiam and postea indulgentiam. Fulgent.
meet not with remission of sins, these two, as Jacob and Esau, one holds the
heel of the other, Act. 5.31. Christ is exalted of God to give repentance to
Israel, and remission of sins: Repentance, as it is placed, so it must be
practiced first, and then inseperably follows remission of sins, unto our
spiritual sense. Gods servants first study the practice of repentance, and
upon their attendance at this Table, their souls receive the sense of sweet
pardoning mercies: whereas others who so harden their hearts that they will
not, and their hearts are so hardened, that they cannot repent, Romans 2.5. men
to be mourned for, because they cannot mourn for themselves, they come to the
Lords Table, but no pardon does God there apply, and when after they think to
apply pardon themselves, it proves as a plaster that will not stick.

Now these being premised, I proceed to Supper mercies of the later sort, which
as it were follow upon these. To instance in five, 1. Graces increased. 2.
Comforts enlarged. 3. Conquests obtained. 4. Covenant sealed. 5. Life eternal
assured.


Now it is none but a true Christian that can gather such a bunch of grapes on
this vine, such a posie of flowers in this garden.

1. Hereby he gains growth of grace. Growing creatures, we know, are most
hungry; and a growing Christian is hungry to eat of this Supper, and being
hungry, the oftener he eats, the more he grows. At this Table is that food, upon
the eating of which, every grace in a Ch^istian grows fat, and flourishing: but
as of all graces in this ordinance, faith is most exercised; so of all graces
by this ordinance, faith is most increased. Fides pinguescit operibus Muscu,
A Christians faith gathers strength from all good works, but most from this;
here his faith converses with Christ, and Christ increases his faith, here the
hand of faith is upon Christ, and the hand of Christ is upon faith for good.
Other men when they approach this Table, they have no grace to increase, no
faith to strengthen: That faith they have is a dead faith, and dead th ngs are
not capable of growth or receiving strength. It is not with dead stones as with
living plants, Lapides non crescunt sed augescunt. Scalig.
that sun and rain cause^ to increase, many a man's faith is as Nabals heart,
dying, nay dead in him as a stone, all the Sacraments in the world no: give it
life, much less strength, Jam. 2.17.

2. Hereby the spiritual comforts of a Christian are inlivened and enlarged.
The holy Ghost like Noah's dove, brings the olive branch of peace in his mouth,
to a disciple, as he sits at the Table, thereby signifying the waters of Gods
wrath are assuaged. Yea God and Christ comes in, and both bids them welcome: Me
thinks I see as it were the Lord standing at his Table, and speaking to all
others, like that, Isa. 65.13, 14. Behold my servants shall eat, but ye shall
be hungry, behold my servants shall drink, but ye shall be thirsty, behold my
servants shall rejoice, but ye shall be ashamed, behold my servants shall sing
for joy of heart, but ye shall cry for sorrow of heart, and howl for vexation
of spirit. A true Christian is at the Supper of Christ, as Mary at the
Sepulcher of Christ, with some fear, yet with much joy, Mat. 28.8. Non
necessarium est homini ut Christum in ipsius passione deploret. Sed magis
seipsum in Christ. Luth.
with some sorrow, yet with great comfort, he sorrows that his sins were the
cause of Christ's death, and he rejoices that Christ's death should be the means
of his life, Christ's cross the cause of his crown, and Christ's blood the way
to his bliss. But a stranger does not intermeddle with this joy, nor sinful
men partake of these comforts, this new wine would break their old bottles, and
old bottles spoil this new wine. Sicut post vehememes imbres mundus ae^ and
serenus efficitur ita post lachrimarum pluvias mentis sequitur serenitas.
Chrysostom. Sup. Mat. Tanquam leones ignam spirantes ab illa mensa recedimus
daemonibus terribiles. Chry. ad popul. Ho. 61.
The servants of Christ have had their black clouds and bi^ter storms of soul
troubles, showers of godly sorrow for sin, whereupon at such an Ordinance as
this, O what bright beams, and clea^ calms and sweet comforts come in upon them!

3. Hereby glorious victories are also obtained, sin and Satan sub^ued. A
prevailing lust then vanquished, fiery temptations, and hot burning corruptions
then quenched, by one draught of Christ's blood drunk down at his Table, Hence
some Disciples have gone from this Supper triumphing and trampling upon Satan
as lions breathing fire (says Chrysostom) terrible to the Devils themselves.

Whereas wicked men they come to this Table, and drink down the Devil, yea go
from it as incarnate devils, afterward breathing infernal fire abominable to
God, being seven times worse the children of hell then before. Indeed they
refuse to combat, how should they conquer?

Though all that fight do not overcome. yet who can ever think to overcome that
will never fight? A true Christian as he will not look for conquests without
combats, so neither will he rest in combats without conquests. It is said of
Alexander he never reckoned how many battles he had fought, but how many
victories he had gained. O the desire of a Christian is so to come from an
Ordinance, that he may cry, Victory, Victory: and when does he more obtain his
desire then when he has been in the exercise of this? Gods people when they
come out from the Lords Supper, like Israel when they came forth of the red
Sea, they look and see their enemies lie dead upon the shore, that wherein they
were preserved, thereby their foes were destroyed: and Gods children here have
their souls revived, and their sins destroyed: this Table is an altar whereupon
their lusts are sacrificed.

4. Hereby to their souls the covenant of grace is sealed, and upon their
hearts the holy characters thereof are set. Sacrament days to Saints are
sealing days, Illud dicitu^ novum quod est de novored^nte gratum. Aliquid
dicitur novum vel respectu Institutionis vel respectu restitutionis.
O the sacred stamps that God then strikes upon the souls of his servants, or
if written before, yet then he wipes off the dust, as it were, that all the
letters are more lively, and become more legible. It is as a new draught it is
so renewed. Ier. 31.31, 32, 33. God then puts on the Seal again that all the
prints and parts of the impression are left more perspicuous and apparent:
sinful men are not seal-able, nor capable of soul-impressions. Hard wax will
not receive the print of the seal, no more will hard hearts. The wax is first
warmed and melted, and then it receives the Seal: so it is the heart softened
and melted, that takes the seal of God.

Those that are humble and holy, God seals with this holy spirit of promise,
Ephesians. 1.13. Gods Saints do not only receive the broad Seal, but the privy seal,
the Seal of the Spirit in the Sacrament, making its Impresse upon the Table of
their hearts, ratifying and confirming unto them the promises of the Gospel,
Vnum apex Evangelij plus valet quam caelum and terra. Lut.
one of which is more worth then Heaven and earth, unconverted men they can
have no such sealing, they are strangers from the covenant of promise, Ephesians.
2.12. they have no Christ the center in which all the promises meet. 2 Cor.
1.20. Whereas true believers have them all under seal, 2 Cor. 7.1. As Caleb
gave to his daughter the upper and nether springs: so God gives to his children
the promises of earth and heaven, 1 Timothy 4.8. and to put all out of doubt, he
sets to his seals, 2 Cor. 3.22.

5. Hereby eternal life is assured this is the fruit which hangs upon the
top-bough which only a true Christian can reach. Joh, 6.51. I am the bread,
says our Savior, that came from Heaven, If any man eat of this bread, he
shall live for ever, and ver. 54. whosoever eats my flesh and drinks my blood
has eternal life, Here is a mercy. What thing so excellent as life? Vita est
operatto creaturae cum delectatione.
and what life so excellent as that which is eternal? life is the most
precious treasure and richest Jewel in the world.

A mariner in a storm will hurl all overboard to preserve his life, skin for
skin, and all a m^n has will he give for life, what made Queen Ester so
earnest with the King? chap. 7.3, 4. she wrought for life, what made the woman
in the Gospel spend all upon Physicians? she strove for life, But alas! this
life what is it? Vita non est vivere sed valere.
It has bitterness and brittlenesse in it: one hours life in heaven is more
worth then all Methusalems time on earth, a thousand years here are not to be
valued with one day, There is life indeed, where is health without sickness,
joy without sadness, beauty without blemish, etc.

Alas! a sinful man at the Lords Supper, receives no such mercy as assurance
thereby of life eternal, because he only pertakes there of the meat that
perishes and not of that meat which endures unto everlasting life, Joh. 6.27.
Eternal life it is the life of grace on earth, and the life of glory in
heaven, these are one and the same, and only gradually differ, the life of
grace is the life of glory begun, and the life of glory is the life of grace
perfect. and so only such as have the life of grace entered, can have the life
of glory assured, so we see what are the mercies of this Supper, and that only
Christ's Disciples can receive them.

For a general proof of this, we know the receptacle of all mercy from God is
the heart of man, as that duty is not done which the heart does not: so neither
is that mercy received, which ^he heart receives not, come now to the hearts of
carnal men, and they are not capeable for the receiving of mercy.

1. Because they are filled up. 2. Because they are shut up.
Their hearts are already f^ll, Act. 5.3. why has Satan filled thy heart,
^ntus existexs prohibet alienum.
says Peter to Ananias. Their hearts are as dens of Devils, and of them it may
be affirmed as was prophesied of Babylon, Isa. 13.20. Their houses shall be
full of doleful creatures. Owls shall dwell there and Satyrs dance there,
Dragons and wild beasts shall lie down there, etc.

The hearts of men unconverted are full of filthy lust, devils dwell there,
sins dance there, they are as pitchers of earth, filled up with the poisonous
liquor of hell, or at best their hearts, but as childrens pockets that are filled
with bables, trash, and dirt.

The Inn Luke 2.7. being full of guests, Christ and his mother could have no
room, men's hearts filled with lusts, there is no room for Christ or such
mercies. Cor clausum habent quia clavem fidei non habiut. Aug.
Their hearts also are shut up and as they have not repentance to empty, so
neither faith to open their hearts, now un-emptied and un-opened hearts can
never receive those forementioned mercies. The hearts indeed of Gods Saints
are enlarged to let in those mavelous mercies. Christians hearts are well
figured out by golden vials, Rev. 5.8. vessels narrow beneath and wide upwards,
their hearts being narrow and contracted toward things below, but open and
enlarged upward toward things above, on the contrary carnal hearts be open
downward, and shut upward, that when mercies come from God, they cannot receive
them.

Take them at the Lords Table, and they receive Judgment, not mercy, a curse,
no Christ, their bane, not their bliss.

Quicquid recipitur recipitur ad modum recipicut^.
As men are that receive, so is that which is received, He that is good receives
good, but all proves bad to a bad man, Tit. 1.15. As that covering and
conducting cloud, Exo. 13. which was bright and gave light by night to the camp
of Israel, they had a great mercy in it, and much benefit by it: But to the
Egyptians the same cloud was all black, Eucharistiae sacramentum sicut mori
rubrum alijs vehiculum alijs sepulchrum. Chrysostom, in Psa, 113.
full of darkness, and disadvantage to them, Exo. 14.20. So this Ordinance of
the Lords Supper to Gods Israelites, it is a bright and blessed means of much
mercy, but to wicked Egyptians it carries death and darkness with it, Hell and
destruction follows it. 1 Cor. 11.29.

Take two men, let them sit and eat of the same meat, and drink wine together
at the same Table, the one hail and sound, he is nourished and refreshed,
Corpora impura quanto magis nutrias deteriora reddu.
his strength augmented, his blood and spirits increased the other sickly and
unsound, he is the worse for his meat, his distempers the stronger, etc. O the
soul-refreshing mercies that a sound Christian receives at the table of the
Lord, whereas others insincere and unsound, their maladies and miseries are
much more by this means augmented.

So we see that except men be the true Disciples of Christ, the duties of this
Supper they cannot receive, and so are unmeet to communicate.

I now pass on in the fourth place to apply this.

Hence we first learn how few will be found fit to partake at the Table of the
Lord, Joh. 10.14. himself says his flock is but little, Luke 12.32. fear not
little flock, yea little little flock, (...).
two diminitives in the Greek, to signify his flock is very little, In the
world there is a world of men, but few such men as are faithful followers of
Christ, we may say of such numbered and compared with others, what our Savior
says of the five loaves and two fishes, Magna planitudo hominum, sed magna
solitudo bonorum.
in respect of the hungry multitude, Mat. 15. what are these among so many?
Surely the servants of Christ in respect of the contrary company, but as the
army of Israel sometimes in compare with that of Aram like two little flocks of
kids, whilst the Aramites filled the country, Luke 13.^3. Panci sunt qui
s^^vantur? Multi certe and pauci and pauci and multi multi societate Angelorum,
Sed pauci co^paratione (...) perditorum. Aug. Sermon. 32 de Verb. dom.
1 Kin. 20, 27. Our Savior well states this to our hand, Mat. 7.13, 14. Wide
is the gate, and broad is the way, that leads to destruction, and many there be
that go in thereat, Strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, that leads to
life, and few there be that find it: If but few shall be saved by Christ, then
but few are the disciples of Christ.

And as but few find that gate of life: so but few feed upon this bread of
life.

Yet to evidence this more clearly.

That the number is small whom the Lord will accept at this Supper, there are
two sorts to be considered.

1 Those who ought of themselves to keep out.

2. Those who ought by others to be kept out.

Those who of themselves ought not to come in, but to keep off from the Supper
of the Lord, though no external power prohibits, are of two sorts.

1. Those who are deni^d of such saving graces as are necessary for it.

2. Those who do abound with such secret vices as are contrary to it.

Those ought to forbear this banquet of the Lord who are destitute of necessary
graces.

To instance in 4. sorts of these.

1. Impenitent persons who have not the grace of repentance, they who have no
sour herbs are not to eat this Passover.

Those to whom unfeigned repentance has made sin bitter, to such Christ is
sweet in his Supper.

Those that would by faith eat the bread of life, must first by repentance
change their course of life, or else they eat eternal death because they
repent not, let the best relapse and fall back into any act of sin, they must
renew their repentance, or not approach this Ordinance, sure then such as
continue in a state of sin, and never repented, ought to abide at a distance,
and not presume the Table of the Lord. Cyprian reports that in his time a
christian relapsing, Cypria Sermon. 5. d^lapsis.
and having committed Idolatry, yet before he was restored by repentance,
coming to receive the communion among the faithful, took the bread, but
putting it up to his month to eat it, it was turned to ashes in his hand. O how
shall any dare to draw near the Table of the Lord, who without repentance
perseveres in the practice of sin, and service of Satan? Christ at his Table
will only enter that heart, out of which repentance has first cast forth the
Devil, Christ will only be food to that soul, who by repentance has forsaken
Satan and sin: as for others they shall only feed upon ashes and husks, Luke 15
16, that which is neither solid nor savoury: they shall only take in the Devil,
not Christ: and so become seven fold worse the children of Hell then before,
Mat. 12.45.

2. Unbeleeving persons that want the grace of faith, The Lords Supper received
without faith it is received without fruit.

A faithless receiver is a fruitless receiver, Nazareth was Christ's own
country, yet he could do no great works therein, because of their unbelief, so
this Supper is Christ's own Ordinance, yet to many he can do nothing thereby,
because of their Infidelity, whilst we are without faith our receiving is
neither profitable to our selves, nor from us acceptable to God; wherefore want
of faith is a sufficient bar from this business.

It is said of the Jews they could not enter into Canaan, because of their
unbelief, Heb. 3.19. so for many of us our very unbelief hinders our entrance
to this communion, when Joseph's brethren came for corn to Egypt, their father
Jacob commands them to take money in their sacks: when we are to go to the
Lords Table, for food God our father calls us to carry faith in our hearts: let
us consider what sad entertainment the man met with at the wedding dinner, who
was found there without this wedding garment: Faith is that grace which is of
absolute use, for there is not any thing else in this case that we can make to
our selves to supply the room of Faith. In ancient times there were some who
when they were to partake at this Table, in stead of receiving with their hand,
they had Instruments made of gold, or some such matter, wherewith they more
immediately received the holy communion, which was after condemned by a
counsel, Concilium constantinop, 6. cap. ^0^.
and concluded that such persons with such Instruments should be in no wise
admitted. Indeed when we come to the Table of the Lord, if there were any thing
that might serve instead of Faith, any Instrument aequivalent to Faith,
wherewith we might receive this holy Supper, then the wan: of faith would not
unfit for this service, as no doubt it does.

3. Uncharitable persons that want the grace of love, The Lords Supper received
without love, it is received without life. Love puts life unto the Ordinance,
and makes the meat therein eat sweeter and better, Pro. 15.17. Better is a
dinner of green herbs where love is, then a stalled ox and hatred therewith. If
so in a common meal, much more in this; It is a good temper to come to the
Lords Table in bitterness of sorrow for sin, but ill to come in bitterness of
spirit, in regard of hatred and malice against any man, though our very enemy.
Christ when he was suffering on the cross, stretched out his hands to both
malefactors, to him that died his adversary, as well as to him that craved his
favor in death: Beatus qui amat te, and amicos in te, and inimicos propter te.
Aug.
so such as come to partake of Christ crucified in his Supper, ought to put
forth a hand of charitable affection to foes as well as friends, Luke 6.35.
such as would have the Lord so feed them with his flesh being hungry, and to
give them his blood to drink being soul-athirst, must be willing if their enemy
hunger to seed him, and if he thirst to give him drink, Romans 12.20. this is a
lesson that only a true Christian can learn, all can love friends, but these
alone love enemies.

If such a general love be requisite, in those that come to the Supper of
Christ toward enemies, O then what love is required to the servants of Christ?
the poor as well as the rich. Shall the Lords love be so great as to feast us
at his Table with his own body and blood, and shall our love be so little as
from our Table to deny bread to our hungry brethren?

Remember Dives who having no love to poor Lazarus when he desired but crumbs
from his board to refresh him, Desideravit guttam qui non dedit mica^. Aug.
Hom. 7.
was after in torment, and could not attain a drop of water to cool his tongue,
Luke 16.21.24. Those that want love to refresh the bowels of Gods poor Saints,
shall not have leave to refresh themselves with the blood of Gods dear son.

4. Impatient persons or such as are without the grace of patience. Each man
which herein communicates must not only have love that is opposed to hatred,
but patience that is opposed to wrath.

In anger a man goes out of himself, By patience a man possesses himself. Ira
est extra se ire.


Now he that does not by love possess his neighbor and by patience possess
himself, he cannot by faith possess Christ in his Supper.

Patience against provocations and patience under tribulations both are
required in this case. An impatient man that is presently provoked, and not
easily appeased, or soon reconciled, is no way fit for this service, Mat. 5.22,
23, 24. He that brings his gift to the Altar, must not come in anger against
his brother, but first be reconciled and then come, which he will not without
patience.

Patience also we urge in point of affliction, whether from God or men, in the
cause of Christ: such are not in this Supper to partake of Chr sts suffering,
who have no patience at all to suffer for Christ.

Two things argue a man's ill estate in respect of the cross, either To be
exempt from it, or To be impatient under it.


I have not a stronger Argument against the Kingdom of the Pope (says Luther)
then in that it raigns without the cross: Ego non haebeo aliud contra pape
regnum robustius argumentum quam quod sine truce regnat. Iu.
and as to reign without the cross, so to rage under the cross, argues ill
also, its wicked men who in trouble are like the Sea in a tempest, casting out
mire and dirt, as crabs in the press, sending out nothing but sour verges, and
shall drink in therefore none of this sweet wine. Let not him go to supper with
Christ who will not go to suffer for Christ, being called thereunto: He that
will not by patience bear a burden for Christ, cannot by faith drink the blood
of Christ.

Thus through the want of these graces many men remain incapable of this
Communion; what shall we say then to those persons, in the Second place, who in
respect of prevailing vices are made much more unmeet? Sure such of themselves
ought to abstain from the Table of the Lord In general, here we mean such
whose sins lie more secret and unseen in their souls even to themselves: The
very remains of which in a true christian, cause him to complain and cry, O
Lord my heart is a hell: wicked men's hearts like Pharaohs Court, are filled
with such frogs, Exo. 8. The schools well observe that outward sins are of
greater crime and blame among men, but inward heart-sins are of greater guilt
and blot before the Lord as in the Devils: no wonder they way-lay this work,
and unfit souls for this service, princely and predominant sits who are in the
heart as Kings in their throne though not open to ordinary view. Its reported
to be a part of the pride of the Persian Kings, Apud Persas persona regis sub
specie majestatis occulitur, Just. lib. 1.
seldom to be seen in public: and secret sins they reign in the souls of men
most powerfully, when least apparently, and altogether block up the way of such
souls from their access to this Supper.

To instance particularly in 4. sorts of such sinners who are thus made unmeet.

1. Unclean in heart, those who though they abstain from outward actual
uncleanness, yet their hearts are as defiled beds in which abominable brats
night and day are begotten by the Devil the Father of filthy lusts, Joh. 8.44.
Their hearts are as a Bakers oven, Hos. 7.6. which when it is stopped up, that
the heat breaks not out, it burns hottest, and bakes hardest within, so the
hearts of such men when they are restrained from outward acts, have the most
violent heats within. Their hearts are as the chimny-bricks whereupon lie
burning ^oals, and a constant fire is kept. The case of such men calls rather
for water then wine, and bids them rather to a fast then a feast, and rather to
sorrowing, then supping with Christ, which indeed a good man does, the least
sparklings and kindlings costs groans and griefs of heart. Hierom pitiously
complains that in his withered carcass such fleshly and filthy desires did boil
and burn.

But O those who when their lusts inwardly begin to flame, they use Bellows no^
buckats: Unclean lusts and lusts of uncleanness they both breed them and feed
them, Rmm. 13.14.

If men's bodies were so putrified that they bred vermin continually (as is
reported of Maximinus) which should run about, Eusebius. de vita Constam. lib. 1,
cap. 50.
and creep upon them would they come and sit at a great man's Table? many men's
souls are so vile that they breed noisome lusts which sometimes creep out at
their mouths, in sordid and unseemly words, O let not such come and sit at the
Lords Table.

2. Covetous in heart. Avarus a non videndo.
These the world so blindes their eyes that they cannot discern the Lords body.
The world so takes up their desires that they cannot hunger and thirst after
Christ, coveteousnesse causes such a distemper in their spirits, as that
disease that makes some forsake good and wholesome food to eat Oatmeal, Robertus
Gallus vir pius and insignis vixit. Centur, 13.
ashes, dust and trash of the earth, one compares the School-Doctors to a man
that refuses good bread and wine, and gnaws hungrily on a fliat-stone,
Intimating their folly in declining wholesome food in the Scripture, the edge
of their desires being sharpened, all about subtle questions, that no way
nourished their souls.

Truly such is the case of covetous men, they gnaw hungrily upon the dead
stones of the earth, having no appetite to the living bread of Heaven, They
pant after the dust of the earth, Am. 2.^. but see no beauty in Christ why they
should desire him, Isa. 53.2. The richest diet the Lord dishes out in word or
Sacrament, they loath and leave, whereas the rankest poison which the Devil can
prepare, let it be brought to them in the sweet broth of some worldly profit,
and they greedily devour it, and will the Lord welcome those to his Table?

3. Proud in heart, these though they come near the Table of the Lord, yet the
Land will not come near to them at his Table, Psa. 138.6. Though the Lord be
high, yet has he respect to the lowly, but the proud he beholds afar off,
nay, such shall not have a look of love from his eye, much less a gift of love
from his hand. Isa. 66.2.

The Lord cannot look above himself, because he has no superior, nor about
himself because he has no equal, but he looks at such as are below him, Luke
1.48. proud men whose hearts are lifted up high the Lord beholds not them,
neither can they behold the Lord. The distance is great, his eye perceives not
them, and their hand receives not him.

Their pride swells them they feel no spiritual wants, Superbia non magnitudo,
sed tumor est, Aug.
a poor humble Christian comes needy and empty indeed to the Lord, who is full
and free, and finds refreshment, The more haughtty the less hungry, An humble
soul when it judges it self most unmeet for this matter, is then most meet,
whereas proud spirits (as Luther observes) are ever unfit for this Sacrament,
Optima dispositio ad Sacramentum Eucharistiae non nisi ea qua pessime es
dispositus and tunc pessime es dispositus quando aptissime. Lu.
and never more unfit then when they think themselves most fit and best
prepared.

4. Hypocritical in heart, these are as shadows flying having no solid
substance, an hypocrite is a sign without the thing signified, a Sacrament he
is unfit for, because unlike to: for there we have not only the visible sign,
but the spiritual grace which the sign represents, God does not bring his
people to a painted banquet, as Zeuxis who fed his birds with painted Berries.

Caligula the Emperor set golden loaves, and all other services of whole gold
upon a Table before his guests, and bad them eat, these were fine to look upon,
but not food to live upon. The Lord at his Table provides not only for our
sight, but for our souls, not only a show of gold, but gold to eat and drink
indeed. An hypocrite as the greek word imports, makes an outward golden
appearance, but inwardly is base refuse, and ^otten stuff, and God will one
day fill them with the fruit of their own false ways, (...) deriv, ab (...),
super and (...) aurum.
Pro. 14.14. Job. 36.13.

Thus we have some of those sorts who by reason of secret sins are not meet for
the Table of the Lord, I do not mean where such sins are only remaining, and
abiding as a burden, for so in the best: but where they are reigning, Note.
and abounding without control or contrition.

This is sure, all sin pollutes and prejudices those in whom-soever it is, but
yet where there is the greatest measure of it, there is the greatest mischief
by it, and in those sin has the most defiling stain, in whom it has the most
prevailing reign, and the more any are defiled with sin, the more they are
unfitted by sin, for this holy service, The fouler the chest is, the more unfit
it is to have a fair and precious garment put therein, Et si in arca sordibus
plena non mittitur vestis pretiosa, quae front in anima quae peccatorum
sordibus inquinetur Christi Eucharistia suscipitur? Chrysostom.
and the filthier any soul is, the unfitter it is to receive in this holy
Sacrament.

I now pass from those who ought of themselves to forbear the Lords Supper, to
those who ought by others to be forbidden the Supper of the Lord, and they are
of two sorts.

1. Ignorant persons. 2. Scandalous persons.
God and man declares against both these, as those who ought to be kept off
from the Table of the Lord, their sinful case being more discoverable and
visible.

There are two ways whereby men may be seen and known, in respect of their
dispositions, constitutions and estates.

1. By their faces or countenance. 2. By their speeches or language.
Some are able to know much of the natures and manners of men by Physiognomy or
by their external visage, so likewise by the language much may be learned.

The language whereby men discover themselves to others view, it is twofold.

1. The language of their lips. 2. The language of their lives.
Loquere in te videam.
Let the lips of men speak, and thereby much may be seen, to what country they
pertain, Heaven, Earth or Hell, Mar. 14.70. Thou art a Galilean, thy speech
bewrays thee.

Luke 6.45.
Speech it is the Speculum or glass wherein man's mind is seen, and heart made
known.

Let the lives of men speak, and thereby more may be seen, Ille semper erat qui
semper bona facit.
In Gods account men speak, not only by their vocal expressions but by their
vital actions. Hence a continued good life is a continted prayer to God, and a
continued evil l^fe is a continued blasphemy against God: so to us the voice
and speech of men's deeds, as well as their words give out a visible discovery
of their inward estates: so that by this twofold language those two sorts of
persons to be prohibited the Table of the Lord are discerned.

Ignorant persons by the language of their lips, though some of their lives be
fair.

Scandalous persons by the language of their lips and lives. Accordingly there
are safe grounds to proceed in the restraint of both sorts from the Supper of
the Lord.

First, To begin with ignorant persons, touching whom two things shall be
enquired.

1. Who be so ignorant as they ought to be restrained?

2. Why they ought to be restrained who be so ignorant?

Who Ignorant persons be that are thus to be debarred from the Table of the
Lord.

The Schools well distinguish between persons nescient, and persons ignorant:
Nescientiaest simplex carentia scientie, ignorantia est nescientia little
quaequo scire debet. Aquin,
Persons nescient are such as know not many things which either they are not
bound to know, or else have not the means of knowledge. Ignorant persons are
such as know not what they ought to know, and which they have the means for to
know.

Persons may be two ways ignorant, according to a twofold ignorance.

An Ignorance of pure negation.

An Ignorance of prave disposition.

Ignorant in respect of a privative absence of knowledge.

Ignorant in respect of a positive awknes to knowledge, Such are Ignorant
persons with us, they have means to know but they have no mind to know, Job.
21.14. not only willingly without knowledge, 2 Pet. 3.5. but wilfully they
rejec^ knowledge, Hos. 4.6. Aliud est non scire aliud nolle scire.
They shut up themseves in ignorance, and care not to have the key of knowledge
put in their doors. Scripture-knowledge they are not only destitute of, but
opposite to, and yet think themselves knowing enough: They are ignorant of
their ignorance, Gratias ago Deo qu^d ignorantiam in meam non ignora. Ou.
they know ^ot that they do not know, whereas Gods Saints the more they know,
the more they complain they know not, 1 Cor. 8.2.

But further to declare what Ignorance it is whereupon we exclude from this
Supper.

Let us consider what knowledge it is that renders meet for this Supper, Among
the graces that must concur to make a meet communicant, ^nowledge is not the
least nor last.

As there be diverse graces that must meet to make a spiritual ^uilding for
Christ, so to make a spiritual partaker of Christ, for Christ will not be
taken in from this Supper, but where there is a house well built, and ready
raised for him, To which end Faith lays the foundation, Hope helps up the
walls, knowledge sets open the windows, and love covers the roof, and this
makes, a room ready for Christ, Christ will not from his Table be taken into
that house, where Ignorance shuts up the windows, that the light of knowledge
cannot enter.

There is a twofold knowledge for which we call in this case to make
communicants me^t for this Supper.

1. A reflect knowledge which looks inward upon our selves, and

2. A direct knowledge which looks outward upon the Sacrament.

Knowledge of our selves, our spiritual sores, maladies, and miseries through
sin, so that we see a need of some healing salves and medicines for our souls.

Knowledge of the sacrament as an excellent salve and medicine for our cure in
this case, knowing the author of it, the ends of it.

The person by whom it was instituted.

The parts of which it is constituted.

Ignorant then are they who have not this twofold knowledge, but hate it
rather, Pro. 1.22. They am Ignorant of themselves, their sores, their sins,
There are men who know many things, Notus nimis omnibus ign^tus moritur sibi.
yet know nothing of themselves, many are gone upon whose grave-stones it might
have been written. They lived too well known to others, and die^ unknown to
themselves, and yet too many such remain whose own hearts and souls are to
themselves, a Terra Incognita, or as the unknown part of the earth.

Ignorant also they are of the Sacrament, they know not whose it is, what it
is, why it is, how can it do them any good?

A pill or physical potion may do a patient good, though he knows not the
Apothecarie that made it, or the ingredients whereof it is compounded, but not
so in this case of the Sacrament. Ignorance of it, and no advantage by it. What
then when persons are ignorant of main principles? Heb. 5.12. Blind sin lets
that can no more take hold of the chief pillars of religion: then blind
Sampson of the pillars of the House without his lad leads him, Judge. 6.26. and
shall these take a Sacrament?

Nay when persons by examining of them, and speaking with them, shall be found
thus foolish then.

2. They are to be restrained the Table of the Lord, being through their
ignorance so mightily unmeet to meddle in those holy mysteries, as will appear
by six demonstrations following.

1. Those that cannot perceive, ought not to receive, they that have not an eye
to discern the Lords body, have sure no hand to take, or mouth to eat the body
of the Lord, but do undoubtedly eat on this very ground their own damnation, 1
Cor. 11.29. men it may be wise worldward, Luke 16.8. but Godward they are very
fools, Psa. 14.1 Nahash the Ammonite would covenant with those of Iabesh
Gilead, so he might thrust out their right eyes, 1 Samuel 11.2. Sin and Satan
leaves the left eye in men of humane and worldly knowledge, open and
quick-sighted, but the right eye in men, of spiritual and divine knowledge, is
put quite out, and so are unmeet to sit at the Table of the Lord, being
abominable for their blindness sake, Mat. 1.8.

2. Those in whom the Devil dwells are not fit to take in Christ, Satan's
Synagogue, and the Lords Table never well stand together, Satan sometimes
transformes himself into an Angel of light, but he ever loves to dwell in a
^ark house, and to lie in the thick mud of ignorance.

There is a word in Greek by the which the Devil is often called, (...).
that signifies himself has much knowledge, but yet he hates and hinders
knowledge in men, he knows he has none more fast then those that lie in the
dark dungeon of ignorance, bound in the chains of this darkness, There is not
on earth a greater vexation to Satan, then to see men seeking for saving
knowledge, for let this once be, and he knows he shall not have after an hours
quiet abode, Origin in Numer. Hom. 27.
but soon be to seek for his lodging.

In the mean while there he couches, and therefore thither Christ will not come.

3. Those whose unders^andings are dark, their affections are dead: the Lord
Christ they have no love to, nor desire of, etc.

Isa. 52.2. There is no communion for them, but a condemnation to them, because
they affect darkness rather then light, Joh. 3.19. An ignorant man is worse
then Nebuchadnezars Image, Dan. 2. for he has not so much a^ a head of gold,
though he have feet of clay, he has not the bright gold of Gospel-knowledge,
but he has cold claiey affections, Claritas in intellectu parit ardorem in
affectu.
neither can he have any true heat in his affections, being without true light
in his understanding, no spiritual heat, no spiritual hunger. It is by the
use and force of natural heat, that the nutritive faculty of the soul, turns
the food that is taken unto the nourishment of the body. Ignorant persons are
not fit to take food at the Table of the Lord, because they have no holy heat,
to turn such food to soul-refreshment.

4. Those whose souls are blind, themselves are bad, as the mind is, so is
the man. It is the efficacy of divine knowledge, when it comes into the mind,
to make the man good: If the mind be without saving knowledge, the man is
without saving goodness. Hence Prove. 19.2. The soul that is without knowledge,
it is not good. For any to say, though I am ignorant, yet my heart is good; It
is as one should say though I am blind, yet my eyes are good: No, heart and
all is naught where the mind is ignorant. In the law, when the plague of
leprosy was in a man's head, the Priest was to pronounce him unclean, and to be
turned out of the camp. This is the case of the ignorant man, the leprosy is
in his head, the man is unclean, and is not for this society of Saints. If the
head of the fish stinks, the whole body we say is unsavory, it shall never
come for a dish to the table. It is only the soul that is seasoned with
knowledge, which the Lord accepts at his Supper.

5. Those who know not, they are not known. I see the Lord as it were standing
at his Table, Qui ea qua sunt domini nesciunt a domino nesciuntur. Greg. in
pastoroli lib. 1. cap. 1.
with his hand stretched out, and voice lifted up, crying upon the approaches of
ignorant persons, Depart from me I know you not: So says Nabal when David sent
for prov^sion, 1 Samuel 25.11. Shall I take my bread, my water, and my flesh that
I have prepared for my servants, and give them to men whom I know not whence
they are? so says the Lord, Shall I take my bread and my wine, my body, and my
blood, prepared for my Saints, and give them to know not whom?

6. Those that Christ will come against in judgment, are not to come to Christ
in this Sacrament. How dare any ignorant man look that terrible text in the
face, 2 These. 1.8 The Lord Jesus shall come from heaven in flaming fire to
render vengeance against them that know not God, etc. In fire, in flaming fire,
by the light of which they shall be forced to see that whereof they ever before
were ignorant; and as it declares how, so why, Christ shall come, to render
vengeance against men not knowing God.

And can we think those to take virtue from Christ in the day of a Sacrament,
on whom Christ will take vengeance in the day of judgment? To conclude,
Ignorant persons, such is the sadness of their sin, that they are more fit
to have a sacrifice offered for them of Saints prayers and tears, then to have
a Sacrament offered to them of Christ's body and blood. Aqui. 21. 2^. qu. 76.
Miserable men, they will know little, that they may sin much. Sure their
ignorance may well cause grief and shame to others, Ignorantia pecoris,
ignominia pastoris.
their parents, their pastors, but much more then so to themselves. Thus much
for the first sort, to wit, ignorant persons. To proceed now to the second
sort, to wit, scandalous persons, both being to be put by the Table of the
Lord. Touching these two things.

1. How they may here be described. 2. Why they must hence be restrained.
For the describing and discovering scandalous persons, I shall declare two
things.

1. Their property. 2. Their diversity.
Scandalum est impedimentum in via, ut quis vel collabatur, vel ab instituto
cursu impediatur. (...). Id quod cogit cadere vel claudicare.
The property of scandalous persons is to lay stumbling stones, and blocks in
the way to hinder others as they go, to set snares and traps to entangle men,
and so to interrupt their course, as the usual Greek word for scandal
imports, Romans 14.13. Let no man put a stumbling block, or an occasion to fall
in his brothers way, that is, let no man scandalize or offend his brother: two
Greek words the Apostle uses, that signify offense and scandal, they may
there serve one to explain another. The offense is a scandal, and the scandal
an offense. Inter offendiculum and scand^lum non opus est distinguere quod a
quibusda^ factu^ video sed vary and parum solid. Ellius. in To.
(...) shall here a little more largely inquire what a scandal in Scripture
is, that so from the abstract to the concrete, a scandalous person may ly the
more clear.

A scandal is an offense given in some evil thing, either said or done,
through which another receives some real wrong.

1. It is an offense given, not taken only, 1 Cor. 13. Scandalum passivum non
est sine peccato scandalizati, Aq.
If any take offense when none is given, it is their sin. The disciples took
offense at Christ's words, Joh. 6.61. He gave none.

2. The offense must be in some evil thing, ^ffendiculu^ est non bonae, sed
malae rei exemplum, aedificans ad delictum. Bonae res neminem scandalizant nisi
malam mentem. Tertul. Scandalum est dictum aut factum minus rectu^ occasionem
praebens ruina. Aquin.
an offense cannot properly be given in a good thing. Men indeed of bad minds
will take offense at good things, as how often were the Pharisees offended at
the sayings of Christ, Mat. 15.12. There was no matter for offense.

3. It must be evil in word or deed, for thoughts, they only offend God. Let
men's imaginations be never so mischievous, yet they are not scandalous till
they be in some measure manifest, not men's secret sins, but when evil comes out
to the light, and walks abroad barefaced.

4. There is a real wrong to some. B^^ peceat qui cor^m ^li^ peccat and quia
agit and quia docet.
He sins twice that sins before another, for some harm reaches to him that
stands by, some offense fastens, when others before whom the evil is, are
either infected by it, Peccare non tantum in se perdi^ionis habet quantum quod
reliqui ad peccandum inducuntur. Chrysostom.
or afflicted for it. When God is dishonored, his name blasphemed, his Gospel
blemished, his people troubled, the good hindered, the bad hardened, this is
scandal, and they that do so are scandalous.

Pracepta ducunt, exempla trahunt,
2. Scandalous persons being diverse, are divided into several sorts.

1. Such as are scandalous ^n doctrine. 2. Such as are scandalous ^n practice.
Errare possu^, Hereticus non ero. Aug.
1. Such as are scandalous in respect of heretical opinions, which they broach
and teach, 1 Timothy 4.1, 2, 3. 2 Pet. 2.1. when

Haeresis Graecis dicitur ab eligendo,
1. Their errors are foul. 2. Their choice is free. 3. Their hold is fast.
Those that embrace, an^ with pertinacy maintain their damnable doctrines,
Schismaticus disrumpit charitatis vincula, haereticus corrumpit veritatu
dogmata.
are scandalous, 2 Timothy 2.17, 18. These because they corrupt the truth of
Christ, are not to approach the table of Christ.

2. Such as are scandalous persons in respect of practice, and these are of two
sorts.

1. Those that are scandalous in respect of some more particular case or fact.

2. Those that are scandalous in respect of a more general course or state.

Of the first sort, suppose some forward in paths of piety, yet relapsing and
falling into some heinous sin, whereby they give great, and sad offense, and
wherein also perhaps for a while they lie without giving any visible testimony
of true repentance, as David.

Of the second sort, where indeed the denomination of scandalous, falls most
fitly, and fully, it being not from some particular ill action, but from a
sinful conversation, they are so called, and of these there are two sorts.

1. Such as pretend to Religion, Novi multos professore: nominis Christiani noc
professionis suae vim aut scientes aut exhibentes vos tamen admoneo ut
Ecclesiae maledicere desinatis vituperando mores hominu^ quos and ipsa
condemnat, and quos quotidie ut malos filios corrigere studet. Aug. de moribus
Eccles. cap. 34.
yet give great and just offense in their lives by their lame and loose, their
uneven and unanswerable walking. Augustine confesses many such in his time, who
professing Christian Religion, yet by their licentious and luxurious lives,
gave great scandal, and with them the Manichees were wont to reproach the
whole Church of Christ, though the Church her self (as he says) did condemn
such, and those that were not reclaimed, were disclaimed: Such sure in that
they disgrace the people of God, and blemish the Gospel of Christ, they ought
to be debarred the Table of Christ.

2. Such as profess nothing so much as prophanensse, their whole course is a
continued race of wretched and riotous living, and now against such scandalous
ones I chiefly engage.

1. Because they are the worser sort.

2. Because they are the greater part.

These are to be kept off from the Supper of the Lord, and that upon a two fold
cause.

1. Because of what they already be. 2. Because of what they will otherwise
do.
Let us consider what in Scripture such are reputed to be. Ungodly men they be
as chafe which the fan flings out of the floor, Matthew. 3.12. They be as dirt
and dust, which the besom sweeps out of the house, Luke 15.8. They be as
leaven, which if let alone sowrs the whole lump, and therefore must be purged
out, 1 Cor. 5.6, 7. They be as thorns and b^iers, which though a man suffer to
be about his field, yet not to stand in the midst of his corn, but stubs them,
and burns them up, Heb. 6.8. They be as heathens and publicans, Matthew. 18.17.
they will not hear such as admonish them, yea Ahab-like they commonly hate such
Mica^ahs as tell them the truth. They be as open sepulchers, Romans 3.13. out of
which proceeds nothing but noisome savours. They be as venomous vipers, Matthew.
3.7. ready to ruin those that bear them. They be as ravenous wolves which
every careful shepherd keeps out of his fold, Joh. 10.12. They be as dogs and
swine, Matthew. 7.6. not only legal curses and corasives, but Evangelicall
cordialls and counsels they tread under feet, Amara est veritas and quisquis
came praedicat amaritudine satiabitur. Hier.
and tear those that teach them. They shoot out their arrows even bitter words,
Psalm. 64.3. against those that apply Gods Word for their profit.

What is it to preach, says Luther, but for a faithful Minister to draw the
fury of such people upon himself? Quid est praedicare nisi furorem populi in se
derivare?
See an instance in Steven, Act. 7.54. Another in Paul, Act. 21.30. Several
such yet remain, who hate those who carry the tidings of Christ, and shall they
come to the Table of Christ? shall such take in their hands the holy signs of
Christ, Quid dementius est Sacramentis Domini communica^e and Domini verba
conculcare? Aug.
who tread under their feet the holy sayings of Christ? nay, not only the
Ministers of Christ, but the members of Christ, they are apt to oppose; they be
worse then the dogs of Egypt, who when the Israelites went in great multitudes
by night along the country toward Canaan, not one of them stirred his tongue,
Exodus 11.7. whereas these, they both bark and bite at such as hasten in heavens
way: And shall they appear at this service of Christ, who so abhor the
servants of Christ? 2 Pet. 2.20, 21, 22. They are as swine, that love to tumble
in the mire, yea which is worse, as dogs that love to lick up their vomit. That
very vomit which they were sick and pained with, and was their ease to be
delivered of, yet they return ^o: such who sometimes have been conscience-sick,
with some horrid sin, have received some ease by confession of it, yet fall
afresh to it, sure the rails of good discipline are meet to keep off all such
Scripture-dogs from the Table of the Lord. It is not fit to take the childrens
bread, and cast it to dogs, Mat. 15.26. They may have of common bread, but not
of childrens bread, God may give them many crumbs of the bread of the earth,
Totum Turcicum imperiu^ quantum est mica est qua^ pater-familias canibus
proijcit.
while yet he will not give them one crum of this bread of Heaven.

The whole Turkish empire, says Luther is but an earthly crum which God the
master of the house casts to dogs.

Wicked men, let them possess their own treasures and freely feast at their
own Tables, yet they must be forbidden the Table of the Lord.

But why is it yet further that such must not partake at the Lo^ds Table?
Because if they should, these 5. things they would do.

1. They would provoke God. 2. They would crucify Christ. 3. They would grieve
the Saints. 4. They would divide the Sacrament. 5. They would destroy
themselves.
If men shall with their sins as with so many plague-sores running upon them be
allowed the Table of the Lord, then,

1. They will certainly provoke God to wrath, this the Apostle Paul plainly
proves and presses, 1 Cor. 10.21, 22. There being some who being not broken off
from their idolatrous doings, kept to their old idol feasts, yet would also
come to the Lords Table, O says he, Do you provoke the Lord to wrath? are you
stronger then he? Zanchius Ep. lib. 1. ad pr. Fre. de Exco.
from whence Zanchy upon the very business in hand, urges an argument home,
and observes these two things in that text.

1. That it is ill provoking God to wrath because he is stronger then we.

2, That though God be stronger then we, yet there are those who provoke him to
wrath by pressing to his Table while yet they impenitently persist in the open
practice of sin, 1 Cor. 10.3, 4, 5. we read of the ancient Jews w^o at^ of the
manna from Heaven, and drunk of water from the rock, both representing Christ.
But with many of them God was not well-pleased, That is God was dreadfully
displeased, who were they? They were Idolaters, fornicatours, murmurers against
God, tempters of Christ, ver. 7, 8 9, 10. and how did Gods displeasure appear?
they were destroyed of serpents, overthrown in the wilderness, in one day
there fell of them three and twenty thousand.

And what is that to us? these things were our examples, ver. 6. we should
avoid such God-displeasing-sins, not come to eat and drink at his Table,
continuing such offenders, least the Lord in wrath consume us. Neh, 13.18, 19.
He forbad the buyers and sellers en^ring into the City upon the Sabbath day,
because by so profaning the Sabbath, Gods wrath was brought in upon them, so
should profane persons be restrained from the Sacrament, because by polluting
the same, Gods wrath is kindled against them.

2. They will crucify Christ, and become guilty of his body and blood, 1 Cor.
11.27. The Apostle, Heb, 6, 6. speaks of some that crucify to themselves the
son of God afresh, and put him to an open shame. So do scandalous livers when
they approach his Table.

The Devil hereby gets more full possession of them, and so turns more
derision upon Christ, Satan casts scorn upon Christ's death, when the memorial
of it is made as but a mockery by them. Christ was crucified that sin might be
crucified with him, Romans 6, 6. They let their sins live to crucify Christ
again, Philip. Melanct. in collectane is Manli^.
as if all that past, were but a sport. In a certain place there was acted a
Tragedy of the death and passion of Christ, in show, but indeed of themselves:
for he that played Christ's part, hanging upon the cross, was wounded to death
by him, that should have thrust his sword into a bladder of blood, tied at his
side, who with his fall slew another, that played one of the women's part that
lamented under the cross, his brother that was first slain, seeing this, slew
the murderer, and was himself by order of justice therefore hanged: here were
four real deaths to them that made a play of the death of Christ.

Wicked men when they come to this representation of Christ's death, they do but
dally with the death of Christ, despise it, disgrace it, and as much as in them
lie put Christ to death again, sure such must be hindered.

3. If not, they will grieve the souls of Gods Saints in this service, wherein
God would have them rejoice. David when his men went forth to battle, 2 Samuel,
18. charged all the officers in the Army, concerning his son Absalom, that he
might take no harm, yet when Joab saw him hanging in an Oak, he struck him
through with three darts that he died.

When there is going forth to the Sacrament, God charge the Church Officers
to see his sons be not sadded, yet when they admit known wicked men among them,
their very presence is apt to pierce through Gods children as with darts of
grief, so that their hearts are ready to die in the duty.

How ill was it in them who when Christ was dying upon the cross, and drinking
his fathers cup, they to increase his sorrow gave him gall and vinegar to take,
Mat. 27.34.

So also ill is it in such who when Gods servants are drinking this cup, and
taking Christ as crucified upon the cross, wicked men being mingled amongst
them, mar much of their joy, and give them as it were gall and vinegar to
drink.

4. If they come they will divide the Sacrament, and sever what God has joined
together. An excellent union there is betwixt the signs and things signified,
In the Sacrament scandalous men will we may be sure sunder those which God
would have go together: As Potiphars wife, she gets hold of Joseph's garment,
and keeps that, but Joseph himself escapes from her, so such men at this Table
they get the outward signs which are as the garments wherein Christ is wrapped
and represented, Miserabilis est animae servitus signa pro rebus accipere, etc.
Aug. de doct. Chr, lib. 3. c. 5
but Christ himself goes away having no hold of him. When Samuel turned to be
gone, Saul gat hold of the skirt of his mantle, but it rent. Saul had Samuels
mantle-skirt, yet the body of Samuel went from him, so those men catch at the
elements of Christ, but Christ himself rends away.

They take bread and wine, but Christ's body and blood they get none of, So to
them it is but a piece of a Sacrament, a lap as it were rent off from the main
substance. And thus to divide is to deface, yea destroy the Sacrament, as man's
body and soul once severed, he cease to be a man, it is indeed no Sacrament
if Christ the soul be separate, There is only a dead carcass.

It is not the Lords Supper, such eat only bread and wine. 1 Cor. 11.20. They
must be kept out.

5. If they come in, they will destroy themselves, damn themselves at the
Sacrament, 1 Cor. 11.29. O miserable, for a man to murder himself, let us
consider these things following.

1. Of all sins what worse then murder?

The Manichees though: that to cut down a tree that life was in, to be a sin,
much more to kill a beast, because the life was better, this was fond: O but to
slay a man where the life is best, is sure a cursed and a crying sin, Genesis
40.10, 11. The very boiling of the blood in anger is a sin, what then this?

2. Of all murders what worse then self-murder?

A man's love to himself is to be the rule of his love to his neighbor, Regula
est prior regulato.
therefore if it be bad for a man to murder his neighbor, because he is to
love him, then it is worse for a man to murder himself, because he is to love
himself better.

Inter p^utem and fontem misericordia Domini.
3. Of all self-murders what worse then soul-murder? some have thought that its
possible a man murdering his own body may find mercy, but let a man murder his
own soul, and he certainly sinks himself, so dying, for ever. The soul being
the most precious piece, the murdering of that is sure the most notorious sin.

4. Of all soul-murders what worse then for a man to murder his soul in a
Sacrament? that a man should turn that to the destruction of his soul, which
tends to the salvation of souls: As the Egyptians who made the red sea their
sepulcher, when Israelites went through it to Canaan. For a man to murder
himself with that knife wherewith he might cut bread and live, O stop such
stabs, let not men poison themselves in physic. To conclude, all these sorts
once out from the Sacrament, few will be found fit to receive.

Secondly,

1. From the plain precept of the holy Apostle, 1 Cor. 11.28. Let a man examine
himself, and so let him eat: not eat, but first he must examine himself, wh ch
may contain two things.

1. He must difference himself from himself, in respect of his former condition.

2. He must difference himself from many other men, in respect of their present
condition.

Now what need this, if all without difference are to partake in this ordinance?

Is not this duty needless if that liberty be general? let a man examine
himself if he find sins weakening, and graces working, sure then he may eat:
Why if he finds sins many, and graces none, by that rule yet he may eat. Why,
then examine himself? Let a man examine himself and so let him eat: Hence it
may be inferred; as that if one knows he has not examined himself, he ought
not to eat, though others should let him: so if it be well known, such a one
has not examined himself, Zanch. Epist. li 1. ad princ. Freder. 3. de Excem.
though he would eat, yet others ought not to let him. Thus ^anchy argues on
this.

2. From the ill effects upon many people, whom the Lord punishes for their
approach to his Table, it may appear all are not to come, 1 Cor. 11.30. The
punishment here lies in three degrees. 1. Weakness, viz. the first languishing
of the body, and inclination to diseases. 2. Sicknesses, which is the more full
seazing of diseases upon the outward man. 3. Death the complement of both the
former. Now of the two first degrees being the lesser evils, the Apostle says,
many were weak and sick: of the third, being the greater evil, to wit death, he
alters the word in the Greek, and says, not a few were dead, though not so
many as were weak and sick: it is likely all were not equal in this sin, so
not all equal in the punishment, though for that very sin all in some degree
punished. For this cause many are weak and sick among you, and not a few are
asleep. They some sinned in coming unprepared, and others in that they allowed
some that they knew were unprepared, to come to the Table of the Lord.

3. From the nature and matter of the Sacrament, it may appear it ought not to
be common to all, consider it in respect of both parts.

1. For the visible part, bread and wine, these are administered not as common
bread and wine, but as bread and wine blessed, sanctified, and set apart for
that holy use, and are they all in common that these are to be administered
unto? or not rather such as are sanctified and set apart for such holy
services? may we not take bread and wine as they lie in common without
consecration? and may we take in all commonly without any consideration?

2. Christ who is here the invisible and spiritual part, he is set apart of
God, holy, undefiled, separate from s^nners, Heb. 7.26. Him has God the father
sealed, Joh. 6.27. And surely such as receive in this Supper ought to be
sanctified and sealed ones, 2 Cor. 1.22. There ought to be a similitude between
Sacrament and communicant.

4. From the peculiar interest of Believers. If all men may come and eat at
this Table, what propriety then or privilege has the Believer more then the
unbeleever? unbelieving and ungodly men what right have they, either to the
outward or inward part of this ordinance?

1. For the outward, to wit bread and wine, as in this Supper, no right in the
Court of God. Common bread and wine, by a common providence, grant they have
some divine right to, but Sacramental bread and wine, which is more special
in respect of this holy use, and comes by a more peculiar way of promise, is
proper only to pious and godly men, 1 Timothy 4.8. A Church-right, or a right
before men, some of them may have, their knowledge being competent, and their
outward practice consonant. Secret things we leave to God, in whose sight no
unholy man has right to these holy things: and such men the ignorance of whose
lips, and wickedness of whose lives, testify to us they have no right, there
we may safely suspend the act.

2. For the part inward, to wit Christ, such have no right, Heb. 13.10. We have
an Altar, that is Christ crucified upon the Altar of the cross, they that
serve at the Tabernacle, that is, which will continue the old Tabernacle
ceremonies, have no right to eat, sure then such as hold fast their old
abominable sins, have no right to Christ crucified, a^ eaten at his Table;
yea diverse ancient writers have by the Altar in that place of the Hebrews
understood the Lords Table, Estius in loc.
whereat only the faithful have right to eat, not all to be admitted. But I
will not here further speak to this, because I hasten to examine what others
speak, who press for a general admittance of all that w^ll, to the Table of
the Lord. The seeming grounds that are alleged to make this out, are raised
partly from Scripture, and partly from other reasons.

Scrip.
The Scriptures from which some so conclude, are, first, Exodus 1^. All the
assembly of Israel were to eat the paschall Lamb, verse. 3. All the congregation
of Israel were appointed to keep the feast of the Passover, verse. 47. So to
remain an ordinance for ever in their generations, verse. 14. Therefore seeing
the Lords Supper comes in the room of that Passover, all thereunto are to have
the like liberty.

death. Immediate, to wit, the present preserving of them and their houses from
that dreadful destruction in Egypt, their door posts being sprinkled with the
blood of the paschall Lamb, the destroying Angel passed over. And that this
mercy might not be forgotten, this ordinance was to remain as a memorial
thereof for ever, Exodus 12.24, 25, 26, 27. wonderfully did God work for all
Israel, both by saving all their firstborn in Egypt, and bringing them all
safe out of Egypt; and they all partaking of that external deliverance were
therefore all to partake of that external ordinance.

2. The Sacraments to Christians under the Gospel as they succeed, so they
exceed the Sacraments of the Jews under the law, so is all our care in the
course and carriage to accord. (...).
The Pharisees were the most exquisite sect of the Jews, Act. 26.5. yet our
righteousness ought to exceed theirs, Matthew. 5.20.

Take the whole people of the Jews, our plenitude of advantages exceed theirs,
our liberty in privileges transcend theirs, and therefore our purity in
ordinances ought to surpass theirs. We have greater clearness in knowledge,
and therefore should have greater pureness in practice. The new covenant made
with Christians by Christ, goes beyond the old covenant given by Moses to the
Jews, 1. In quality. 2. In quantity: For quality far more excellent. 1. In
respect of perspicuity, 1 Cor. 3.18. 2. In respect of liberty, 1 Cor. 3.17. For
quantity, Extensively, reaching out to all nations that believe in Christ, Act.
10.35. Intensively, grace now not dropped out, but poured out by floods, Act.
2.17. Its meet we be more exact in the seals of the covenant. Grant some
particular persons of old in grace beyond many of us. Yet sure greater plenty
of grace is bestowed upon the Church in the time of the Gospel, if we respect
the body of the Church and faithful in general. God would not give out and
lay forth the riches of his grace all at once, but by degrees for the greater
glory of his name, and good of his people. Christians must exceed Jews; as the
Gospel exceeds the law; Qui scit inter legem and Evangelium distinguere,
gratias agat Deo and sciat se esse Theologum.
I would be loath to diminish the due honor of either. He is a good Divine
says Luther, who has learned of God how to difference law and Gospel aright:
They are both excellent, but the Gospel surpasses in spirituality and
perspicuity. That difference which Zeno put between logic and rhetoric, is
ordinarily put between law and Gospel: The law is as the hand shut, the Gospel
as the hand open. The law is the Gospel veiled, the Gospel is the law revealed;
the ministration of the law carries death and darkness, but the ministry of
the Gospel, life and luster, 2 Cor. 3.9. See there how it exceeds in glory, and
therefore all Gospel Ordinances are to exceed legal administrations. The
penalties God inflicts upon Gospel-abusers, are far sorer then those formerly
inflicted upon violators of his law, Heb. 10.29. Therefore the more care
becomes Christians, and the more exact they ought to be in the discharge of all
duties under, and toward the Gospel, then those who worshipped God under the
law. Further the Gospel gives more strength to duty, and therefore we ought to
be more strict in duty. Moses impera^, Christus impetrat, lex jubet and
Evangelium juvat.
The law like those Egyptian taskmasters, requires a full tale of brick, but
denies straw. The Gospel guides to Christ for all abilities, Phil. 4.13. The
Jews were as servants under bondage and burdens, Gal. 4.1, 2. Christians are
the Lords freemen, and have many advantages for more exquisite services:
therefore as in other things so in this of the Sacrament, our transactions are
to be more accurate, pure and perfect, and to go beyond any passover, pattern,
and we ought in this, and in all our worshippings of God, Hag. 2, 9.
to outgo those who lived in the time of the law. Compare the ancient
passover, and the Lords Supper together, and this latter is a transcending
Ordinance: that set up more in the beginning of the world, this brought out
more in the latter end of the world, and are not the Lords last works most
excellent? We read Job. 2.10 what the Governor of the marriage feast said to
the Bridegroom, In illi^ sacrificijs figurate significabatur quod nob^s
donandum, in hoc sacr. quod nobis jam sit datu^ evidenter ostenditur. In illis
praenu^tiabatur filius Dei pro nobis occid^ndus, in hoc autem pro nob^^
annuntiatur occisus. Aug. ad Pet. diaconum. cap. ^9.
when he tasted the wine made of water, and ^ot knowing whence it was. Every
man at first sets forth good wine, and after that which is worse, but thou have
kept the good wine until now: so may a believer say to Jesus Christ, O Lord
thou have set me at thy Table, and I have eat and drunk, and blessed be thy
name, my heart is warmed, my sin is wounded, my corruptions weakened, my
affections quickened, thou have surely kept the best wine till now, the sweetest
Ordinance for last, come to particulars and you shall find this Sacrament of
the Supper surpassing the Jews Passover.

1. In the figurative part that shadowed out Christ to be crucified, and
hereafter to die, whereas this is to represent Christ that is crucified, who
has already suffered the death of the cross, and is now advanced to the crown.

2. In the memorative part, that was to remember them of a temporal
desiverance from bodily death, and the like: this is to put us in mind of our
eternal salvation, and everlasting deliverance from the death both of body and
soul in hell, by the redeeming death of Christ once on earth.

3. In the material part, At the passover, we read of bread eaten, but not of
any wine drank. In that, the Jews they eat flesh, but there was no blood drunk,
though bloodshed, Lex esum sanguinis prohibet Evangelium praecipit ut bibatur.
Cyp, de caena Domini.
but in the Lords Supper is two helps meet, both bread and wine, and here is
not only the body of Christ to be eaten, but his blood also to be drunk by a
lively faith, In a word, every time a passover was celebrated, there must bn a
lamb slain by their hands, here is a lamb slain to our hands. Well this being
more excellent, let us be the more diligent to preserve this in its practice
purely.

Thirdly, Yet from that Passover there were some forbidden, sure for
ceremonial uncleanness some were kept back, Number. 9.7. and a rule was made in
such cases for the time to come; that those so unclean should be kept back
until the next monthly passover, ver. 10, 11. that they might have time to
cleanse themselves.

Now as ceremonial uncleanness on the body, did figure out spiritual
filthiness in the soul, by thought, word and deed;

So that legal prohibition of persons ceremonially unclean, from the
Passover, did represent that such ought rather to be debarred who were known
to be polluted with moral uncleanness, and sure left for our instruction upon
record, to signify such filthy offenders ought to be suspended from the Lords
Supper, wherein we are not to fall short, but rise higher then they in that old
Passover.

Script.
The second Scripture is 1 Cor. 10.354. It is said there of the Jews, They did
all eat the same spiritual meat, and did all drink the same spiritual drink.
That Manna from Heaven, and water from the rock, did resemble our bread and
wine in the Sacrament, all representing Christ, and therefore as all the Jews
did take of them in the wilderness: So all with us may take of these at the
Table of the Lord.

Answ. Chrysostom) as thou eatest the bread of the Lord, so did they Manna,
and as thou drinkest the cup of the Lord, so did they water, to them God gave
Manna and water, to thee he gives bread and wine, yea his body and blood, etc.

2. By way of resolution. So First, we say that Sacrament was temporary, and
their participating extraordinary. It was temporary, not as the Passover
permanent, and to abide, but merely transient at that season, and so cease: Now
from a passing, flitting Sacrament, we cannot well take a standing, binding
Argument: And their partaking was extraordinary, occasioned by their present
extremity, by reason of bodily necessity, being in the desert, where they were
in miserable hunger and thirst, and so were allowed to eat the Manna, and drink
the water to preserve their natural life, having nothing else whereof at that
time to eat or drink.

This is a wrong key then and will never open the door to let in all to eat and
drink at the Table of the Lord, But,

2. Mark what immediately follows, 1 Cor. 10.5. They did all eat and drink, But
with many of them God was not well pleased, for their carkases fell in the
wilderness: God was much displeased with them, not only in their persons, but
in that very action, they being sinful and carnal did only eat and drink in a
natural way, and to a sensual end to feed their bodies, Qui in man na
Christum intellexerunt spiritualem cibum manducarunt. Aug. de utilita panit.
(...)
though the Manna and the water had a spiritual signification, yet they all
did not so eat and drink them, and therefore God was d^spleased, and they
destroyed.

3. The Apostle instantly adds, v. 6. now these things were our examples, so
ver. 11. The Greek word for example, signifies an impression or stamp, such as
is made upon coin, where print answers to print, intimating what deep dints
those things that fell upon them ought to make upon us, that we deal not in a
carnal manner, about things that have a spiritual meaning, least with us also
God be displeased, and we destroyed.

People that persist in their sins, and yet shall sit at the Table of the Lord,
they may possibly please themselves, Sordes in conspectu iudicis quod fulget in
conspectu operantu.
but the thing will certainly displease God, and though it does not procure
their present destruction, it will prepare them for eternal damnation.

The third Scripture is, Mat. 26.20, 21. Script.
Jesus sat down with the twelve, etc. and then did he institute his last
Supper, whereat Judas was one then present, wherefore should any now be
excluded? Is any worse then Judas?

Answ. Judas was with Jesus at his first setting down, and eating the
Passover, I think none deny. But whether he stayed to partake in the last
Supper, has been and is a very great question, I will not undertake to
determine it, but lay down what may be probably said on both sides, That Judas
was present at the Supper it may be supposed on these grounds.

1. The Passover and the Lords Supper being one and the same in spiritual
substance, why should it be yielded he was at the one and yet not at the other?

2. The Passover and the Supper were then so coetemporary in their
administration so instantly one upon another.

For as they were eating, Jesus took bread, Mat. 26.26. it may seem unlikely
that Judas should go forth in the very exercise of things, though quickly after.

Aqui^as 3^. Quest. 81. Art. 2.
3. Judas being a close sinner, and nothing appearing against him, for Christ
yet to refuse him, might thereby give an ill president for future, to eject
upon Jealousies, where there is nothing detected.

4. For Christ to forbid or forbear Judas in this when no charge lay against
him, would have been but the way to exasperate him, and thereupon to take the
motion to betray Christ: whereas Christ from first to last, having been
friendly to him, it aggravated his sin against Christ.

4. Luke the Evangelist chap. 22.21. says after mention of the Supper, our
Savior points out Judas, with a Behold, the hand of him that be^rayer^ me, is
with me on the Table.

But on the other side li^ these grounds, that our Savior would not allow
Judas the liberty of this Supper.

1. Because he knew him to be an hypocrite, a reprobate, a devil, as himself
calls him, Ioh. 6.70.71. were hypocrites and reprobates known to us, we ought to
shun them at this Ordinance, as other sinners: But,

First Hypocrisy is a fine thread not easily discerned: till discovered by
Apostasy it passes unknown. An hypocrite is an Apostate veiled, and an
Apostate is an hypocrite revealed, then we see him as out of his clothes, but
before we say of an hypocrite in compare of other sinners, as its said of the
Serpent, Genesis 3.1. It was more subtle then any of the beasts of the field.

2. Reprobation is a secret counsel locked up, close in that cabinet whereof
God alone has the key, we may tremblingly think on it, not presumptuously pry
into it.

Therefore for us at the Lords Table we must admit, where there is no known
cause to exclude.

But seeing Christ well knew the internal and eternal estate of Judas, Joh.
17.12. it may cast a scruple whether Christ did accept him to this Supper with
the other Disciples. Zanch. l. 1. de culi, Dei externo and page 447.


2. Those Disciples Christ gave the bread to, he said, this is my body broken
for you, and when he gave them the cup, he said, This is my blood shed for you,
now sure Christ's body was not given, nor his blood shed for Judas, as Christ
well knew, and therefore doubtful whether Christ would accept Judas to the
outward signs, when he knew the things signified, were none of his, and
declare h^s body and blood to be for him, when he knew it was nothing so.

3. Judas was not a subject capable of any of those ends and uses of this
Sacrament for which Christ himself appointed it, as nourishing of his soul,
pardoning of his sin, etc. no promise to apply, no faith to confirm, etc. A man
will forbear his work, Finis est quod maxim volumus.
suspend his act, where he sees his end will fail, in this we may conceive the
same of Christ.

4. Those that Christ gave those precepts to, for the bread, Take and eat, for
the wine, Drink ye all of it, to them he made this promise, that hereafter he
would drink wine new with them in his Fathers Kingdom, Mat. 26.29. which
expositors interpret two ways, both make against Judas, that to him this
promise could not appertain, and therefore not those precepts.

1. Chrysostom and some others by the Kingdom of the Father, understand
Christ's resurrection, and by the new wine which Christ therein would drink with
his Disciples, understand that corporal eating and drinking of Christ with his
Apostles after his resurrection, Luke 24.43. Act. 10.40, 41. Judas was now dead
and gone to his own place, Mat. 27.5. He lived not to see Christ's death, much
less his resurrection.

2. More ordinary and likely, by the Kingdom of his Father, is meant that
Kingdom of glory after this life, and by the wine he would drink with them,
that celestial liquor of sweet joy, and eternal comfort which the Saints
partake therein with Christ, Christ could easily tell that this Judas should
never attain to, himself having declared that Judas was The son of PERDITION.

5. Christ having given Judas the sop, he said, what thou do, do quickly, and
Judas went out immediately, Ioh. 13.30. That this sop was no part of the
Sacramental Supper, we may safely say, as soon as Judas had received this,
Hilar. de Trin. lib. 8. Durand. ratio lib. 4 ca. 4.
away he packs: upon this very ground there are both Fathers and Schoolmen, who
affirm that Judas was absent from this Supper, Satan entering with the sop did
not suffer him to sit still, Ioh. 13.27. The Devil no doubt, says Augustine,
was in him before, but upon the eating of the sop, Satan entered more forceably
that made him more hasten about his horrid sin, August. ad Frat. in Erem.
as when the Devil was entered into the swine, they ran straitway headlong into
the Sea, Mat. 8.32.

The principal thing that seems to prove Iudasses presence with the rest of
the Disciples at this Supper, is that of Saint Luke 22.21. De cultu Dei exter.
Zanch. lib. 1. Pa. 447. (...)
mention being made of Judas at the Table after speech of the Supper, which yet
Zanchy and others answer to make nothing for that purpose. It being in that
method according to a figure well known to Rhetoricians, That Evangelist going
on with narration of the Passover and the Lords Supper together, adds, that
ver. 21. Behold his hand that betraies me is with me on the Table, which is by
way of recapitulation or rehearsal, and then returns to the words, which the
other Evangelists, Calvin, Chemnitius, and others, can easily make a sweet
harmony, let us make no discord in this. It was in the eating of the Passover
Judas dipped his hand with Christ in the dish, and in eating of the Passover did
Christ give him the sop, which as Deodat upon the 13. chap. of Ioh. ver. 2.
says, was a bit of unleavened bread dipped in a sauce made of bittter herbs,
Vid. Diodat. Ioh. 13.30.
which according to the custom of the Passover, the Father of the Family used
to distribute to each therein. Illa nocte cana. 2. ex vulgaris paschalu
Eucharistica.
Judas having received this sop, goes instantly out. The Sacrament of the Lords
Supper being administered afterward, he is thought thereupon, not to partake
therein, as the other eleven did. But

2. Grant that Judas did remain, and receive this Supper with the rest, yet
then do but imagine how this must needs soon after occasion both a torment to
him, and triumph to Satan, Mat. 27.3. He no sooner saw Christ condemned, but he
was amazed with the guilt of innocent blood, and well he might, for were he at
the Sacrament he was guilty of the blood of Christ two ways.

1. By abusing that Ordinance of Christ.

2. By betraying the person of Christ.

Non est tum Jesus sed meus est, quae mea sum cogitat, quam ea sunt in pectore
volutat: tecum epulatur, and mecu^ pascitur, a te panem a m^ pecuniam accepit,
tecum bibis and mihi sanguinem t^um vendit,
Satan hereupon insults, Ambrose brings in the devil boasting against Christ,
and chalenging Judas as his own. He is not thine, Lord Jesus, he is mine, his
his thoughts beat for me, he eats with thee, but is fed by me, he takes bread
from thee, but money from me, he drinks with thee, and sels thy blood to me, O
dreadful! was Judas at the Sacrament? the worse was his woe.

Truly men had better be shut out from this Ordinance, then to think to get in
at this door by making Judas the porter.

3. Suppose Judas was also received to this Sacrament, yet many may well be
kept off.

1. Because in respect of good they fall short of Judas, and

2. Because in respect of evil they go beyond Judas. For good Judas served
Christ, and suffered for Christ, Judas professed Christ, preached Christ. When
Christ was in his low condition, Judas forsook others to follow him, Mat. 10.27
For evil Judas his life toward men unblameable, no drunkard, scoffer,
swearer, or open offender, were he with Christ and his other Disciples at this
Table, yet then we may say.

1. He had not showed any ill affection to Christ.

2. He had not given any offense to them that were Christ's: no open
disaffection had he particularly discovered against Christ.

The grudging at the ointment Mary poured upon Christ.

1. This seemed to be the fault of all the Disciples, Mat. 26.8.

2. If Judas first and chief in this, (...).
yet it was not from a mind malicious, but covetous: suppose the other
Disciples toward the poor had indeed charitable thoughts, Judas made the poor
but a pretense, he aimed at the benefit of his own bag, Ioh. 12.5, 6. when he
saw the ointment poured upon Christ's head, he grumbled, not because he was a
cruel wretch, and hated his Master: but because he was a covetous wretch, and
loved money.

No scandal or offense had Judas given to his fellow-Disciples, but had
carried all so fairly, that for any wrong done by him, they have no charge
against him.

If any object, o but Judas betrayed Christ.

Answer. 1. Did he communicate with Christ in the Sacrament, then he had not
actually betrayed Christ.

2. There are with us that have betrayed Christ in ways worse then Judas.

1. Judas betrayed Christ for thirty pieces of silver, many sell their souls,
and their Savior for naught, Isa. 50.1.

2. Judas betrayed Christ so but once, many betray Christ often, so many
transgressions, Illi enim persecutisum carnem ambulantis in terra, vos
Evangelium sedentis in calo, Aug. cont. lit. pet. lib. 2. cap. 87.
so many treasons against our sovereign Lord the King.

3. Judas betrayed Christ corporal in his low estate, wicked ones now betray
Christ spiritual, though above in glory. Augustine says to the Donatists, how
their sin against Christ was worse then the Jews.

They persecuted the flesh of Christ walking on earth: you persecute the Gospel
and spirit of Christ sitting in Heaven. So men's sins are worse treasons against
Christ then that of Judas was.

4. Judas its a question whether he intended to betray Christ to death, or only
thought to get the Priests money, knowing Christ at a pinch could easily escape
from them.

1. Because when Judas salutes Christ he seems to will him to shift for
himself, saying, master save thy self, or Hail Master.

2. Because as soon as Judas saw Christ condemned, he was struck with horror,
as if that were beyond what he meant: Worse are they who sin out of malicious
wickedness.

5. Judas betrayed Christ and repented, Mat. 27.3. confessed his sin, restored
the money, justified Christ's innocence to the face of Christ's enemies, men
betray Christ his cause, truth, Church, and are hardened, persist, and yet
presume.

From this instance of Judas is no proof we see for all to come to the Table of
the Lord.

Fourth Scripture is, Act. 2, 41, 42. Scrip. 4.
where we read that three thousand were added to the Church, and unto them all
instantly the Apostles broke bread. Therefore in great Congregations where are
thousands all may come to the Supper of the Lord.

In this are two parts,

1. To the Scripture it self here premised.

2. To the conclusion from it inferred.

For the Scripture, Grant there were thousands whom the Apostles did there
admit to this bread-breaking Ordinance, but then we find who they were, and
how they were qualified.

(...), pungendo penetr^, punctim caedo. Sca.
1. They were a people pricked to the heart, pierced through as with the stab of
a dagger, so the Greek word imports, in the sense of a particular sin, which
the Apostle Peter had reproved in his preaching Act. 2.36.37.

2. They were a people craving good counsel, willing the holy Apostles, should
put them upon any pious course, O what shall we do?

3. They gladly received such counsel as the Apostles gave them, though part
of it was yet more to repent, though for sin heart-prickt already. ver. 38.41.

4. They kept close to the Apostles company and counsel, continued steadfast in
their doctrine, fellowship, and prayers, v. 42. O were people thus prepared and
disposed what ever their numbers were, none need fear to admit them, but bless
God for them.

2. For the inference, Then thousands may, yes? if they be meet: and that but a
few do, the fault will be found in themselves, For if to this Supper not great
multitudes, but little companies are admitted among us, why is it?

1. It is not from the matter of it.

2. It is not from the master of it.

3. It is not from the Ministers of it.

First, for the material part of this Supper, whether we respect that which is
outward, or that which is inward, sufficient supplies might be had for
thousands. As for bread and wine, God be praised, provisions might be made for
milions of men in this case. So for Christ's body and blood, the virtue and
value thereof being infinite, is able to succor and save milions of worlds.

2. For Christ as he is not only the matter but the master of this Supper, he
is not only able, but willing to communicate himself; and as ready to give his
flesh to eat, and his blood to drink, as a mother her milk to suck, as Christ
freely yielded up himself to suffer death upon the cross: so he is free at his
Table to yield out the benefits of his death.

3. For the Ministers, Christ's servants, sure they take no pleasure causlesly
to straiten this Supper.

A faithful Minister may say to his people be they never so great, somewhat
like as Paul to Agrippa, Act. 26.29. I would to God that not only some few, but
all that hear the word preached, were not only almost, but altogether such as
might eat of this Supper, O blessed is that man whom God makes as a fruitful
vine, that his spiritual children like ol^ve plants are round about this
Table, As many arrows in the hands of a mighty man, O happy is he that has his
quiver full of them, his crown, glory, and joy. Yet alas! little is the number
we dare accep^ at this Supper, the reason arises from the unmeetnesse of the
most to communicate therein. That Kingdom that few enter into, it is not
because of the incapacity of the place, as if there were not room to receive,
or as if God and his holy Angels, were resolved to withstand multitudes
prepared, but the cause is the unfitness of the greater part of people for so
holy a p^ace: so this Sacrament few are taken thereunto, not as if the
Ordinance were incapable of more, or as if Christ and ^is Ministers were
unwilling to admit a multitude how meet so ever, but the cause is the
uncapeablenesse of the most to have admittance to this holy Ordinance.

A fifth Scripture is Luke 14.16, etc. Script. 5.
The master of the feast sent out three several times to bring in guests to
eat and drink of his Supper. A certain man made a great Supper: He bad many at
first, after sent into the streets of the city for more, then to the high ways
and hedges, among the worst of men, requiring his servants to compel to come
in, verse. 23. Therefore the Lord would have all good and bad to come to this
Supper, and thereof to partake.

First, More generally, and after, Theologia parabolica non est argumentativa.
we draw positive conclusions. Parables are precious parts of Scripture, which
many do miserably misunderstand. Parables are like spectacles, that help some
to see better, but cause others to see the worse. A parable is as a dark
lanthorn that gives light to one, but leaves another in the dark. And truly
such as make use of this parable of the Supper, Luke 14. to prove that all are
to come to the Sacrament of the Supper, the spectacles blindes their eyes, and
the darkness of the lanthorn hinders their sight. As if the Invitation of such
several sorts to that, were a clear argument for a universal admit^ance to
this, that these two are taken like one and the same; this mistake is not new:
I find Salmeron and some other popish writers interpret that Supper in Luke,
Salm. ser. in parab. Evan.
as this Supper of the Lord, and conclude that all are called thereunto. To
speak particularly to the Supper in that parable by more orthodox authors, it
is taken two ways: Eitheir for the Supper of grace in the Gospel, or for the
Supper of glory in the heavens. Besides that which is commonly called the
Supper of the Lord. Christ has a twofold Supper. 1. That whereby Christ sups
with us, bringing his provision down to us. 2. That after whereby we sup with
Christ, taking us up to his provision, both mentioned, Revel. 3.20. Canam
maguam in effabilem Regni Dei f^uationem vocavit, quod finem nesciat. Euthym.
in luc. cap. 54.
Some by the Supper in that parable, understand the Supper of caelestiall
glory, and others the Supper of Evangelicall grace. To this later I rather
lean. When Christ utters his voice in the Gospel, and works open men's doors,
comes in and makes, first a Supper in their hearts, before the Supper in the
heavens, Revel. 3.20. This Supper meant in the parable is the grace and mercy
of God in the Ministry of the Gospel, proposing Christ as a Savior to lost
sinners, and persuading poor sinners to come in by faith and repentance, and to
partake of Jesus Christ in the tenders of the Gospel. It is memorable, God for
the sustaining and saving poor perishing souls has provided three several
meals; A breakfast, a dinner, a supper. All may be but the doctrine of the
Gospel setting forth Christ. The breakfast that is in the morning or beginning
of the day, it is the lesser, quicker, and shorter meal. This was that brief
Evangelicall promise of Christ to lapsed Adam in the morning of the world, Genesis
3.15. Christ the Lamb slain from the beginning of the world, Revel. 13.8. The
dinner at noon or midday, here the provision is usually larger and dishes
fuller. In Moses and the Prophets more about the noon-time of the world,
Evangelical discoveries and discourses of Christ, are more perspicuous and
copious, Isa. 9.6, 7. Malach. 3.1. Act. 10.43. The Supper that is at the
evening or end of the day, when the cheer in a feast is very full. 1. The
Supper meal is the sweet meal, in regard of the work of the day past, we then
cease from, and in regard of the rest of the night to come, that we then soon
lie down to. The Supper God has now provided in the evening, or later end of
the world, 1 Cor. 10.11. This is sweet and large in the plain and plentiful
preaching of the Gospel, and abundant powrings out of the spirit, Act. 2.17.
Hard servitudes of former bondage and burdens, blessed be God, we are free
from, there is a rest we enjoy, and a better we are hastening to, Mat. 11.28.
Heb. 4.9. 2. The Supper-meal is the last meal, no more after, then eat or
never. Now is God sending in his last messes of mercy, not another Christ to
come, or Gospel to preach, Gal. 1.8. now feed or famish, this is the last meal.
Its Supper, upon this God is earnest, Christ is instant. The Lord calls first
Jews, then Gentiles; first those more near in the streets of the city, then
sends to them more remote, that lay as it were abroad in the high ways, Jews
and Gentiles, rich and poor. God would have them compelled in, viz to the
hearing of the Gospel, Chemnit. Harm. Euang. in loc.
that by the workings of the spirit, and the wooings of the word, they may be
turned to God, and saved by Christ. While the Gospel is preaching, and Christ
proffering, it is Supper time, the last meal is serving in, yet how many plead
excuse from this Supper. O their oxen and farms, pleasures and profits, they
have no leisure to look after what God in the Gospel tenders. I remember it is
storied of. Henry 4th of France, asking the Duke of Alva if he had observed the
Eclipses, answered he had so much business on earth, that he had no leisure to
look up to heaven. O sad for men to be so bent on the businesses of the world,
as not to cast up looks to the things of heaven, nay not to regard though the
Lord brings heaven down to them, yet thus it is, Romans 10.8. men that mind not
Christ's Supper brought down in his Gospel, shall they partake of the Lords
Supper brought forth at his Table?

A sixth Scripture is, 1 Timothy 2.4. Script.
God would have all men to be saved: therefore God would have all men to come
to the Sacrament, as a means of salvation.

I will not now stay to distinguish of the particle All,

1. God would have all men to be saved, and God would have men use all means
that tend to salvatior. Admit yet then he would have men in all the means they
use to be methodicall and orderly, taking each up in its due time and place,
that first, which is first, and then that which follows, for those means that
help a man must one help another. Finis ultimus omnibus mediu dat amabilitatem
ordinem and mensuram.
The first prepare for the second, the ^ltimate end ever gives, as a
desirablenesse to, so an orderlinesse in the use of the means. In a course of
physic for health, the patient, as he uses all for the matter, so all in that
order as the Physician prescr^bes, the first having done its due working, he
takes the second. Now for men, the first public means for their salvation, is
the word preached, Romans 1.16. When this upon them has had its due work, ^hen
take the Sacrament, as the next means to be used in its order.

2. God would have all men saved, but so as first to come to the knowledge of
the truth, 1 Timothy 2.4. so as to come first to repentance, 2 Pet. 3.9. God will
have none come to heaven in their sins, 1 Cor. 6.9. Thus God is willing all
should come to this Table, viz. that will first forsake their sinful ways,
and return to the Lord, by newness of life. God will no more allow wicked
wretches to receive at this Supper of Christ, then hereafter to receive
salvation by Christ.

3. God would have all saved. Grant, Multi nobiscum edunt and bibun^
temporaliter Sacramenta and tamen habebunt aeterna termenia. August.
but for many to come to the Sacrament, its the way to their damnation, 1 Cor.
11.29. And no marveil, to many it proves the damning of their souls, when God
accounts them guilty of the blood of his son, 1 Cor. 11.27. and though not
instantly damned, yet some ways they bear Gods angry blows, before their
final damnation comes. Master Knocks in his history of Scotland tells of one
Sir James Hamilton murdered by the Kings means there, he appeared to him in a
vision with a sword drawn, and strikes off both his arms saying, take this
before thou receive thy final doom for thy blood guiltiness, and within 24.
hours, two of the Kings sons died. Men herein guilty of Christ's blood, God
strikes their bodies with weakness, their children with diseases, their cattle
with death, their hearts with hardness, before the last doom come.

Another Scripture produced for a promiscuous admittance of all to the Supper
of the Lord, is that 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. Scrip. 7.
wherein the Apostle says, that Christ died for all; thereupon say some the
Sacrament of Christ's death belongs to all.

Answ. This argument star ds upon two lame legs, and will easily down, let but
truth be held forth, Christus non omnin^ mortuus est pro omnibus and singulis
mors om^^ esus and si sufficiebat in pretium pro omnibus and singulis non tamen
factum est; pretium pro-omnibus and singulis, quia non pro omnibus and singulis
est solutum, sed duntaxat pro electu^ D. Twiss. vind. Great.
and Dagon-like, it will soon fall before that Ark, and nothing left to be
seen, except stumps. That which the Apostle affirms, I shall explain, and that
which some infer, I shall deny. True, Christ died for all, But what all? To
wit all the elect of God. Take all restrictively with reference to all whom God
has chosen, Romans 8.32. God spared not his Son, but delivered him to death for
us all: What all? look before and after, verse. 30. Whom he has predestined,
them he called, whom he called, them he justified, etc. For all these God
delivered up Christ to death, verse. 33. After, Who shall lay any thing to the
charge of Gods elect? It is God that justifies, Pro omnibus Quid est? non
omnibus hominibus sed omnibus nobis scilicet quos praedestinavit vocavit,
rustifi cavit, etc. Aug. de civ. lih. 21 c. 24.
It is Christ that died: And therefore the Apostles expression is observable in
the 32. verse, God delivered his Son to death, not for all, but for us all: All
us whom before he has chosen. Again, Christ died for all, What all? Take all
distributively, of all ages, languages, places, cases, of all some, Revel. 7.9.
Lo a great multitude of all nations, kindreds, tongues stood before the throne
of God, made white by the blood of the Lamb, verse. 14. Revel. 5.9. The Elders
fell down before the Lamb, and sung: Thou have redeemed us all to God, by thy
blood, out of every kindred, and tongue, and people and nation.

Christ died for all, not for all collectively and in a universal sense. For
first,

Christ in his birth was set for the fall of many, Luke 2.34. therefore sure in
his death not for the rise of all.

There are some of whom Christ professes he did never know them, Mat. 7.23. for
them sure he did not dye, Verba notitia connotant affectus. Est mundus
damnandorum de quo scriptum ne cum mundo pereat, pro isto non orat, est mundus
salvandorum (de quo Apostolus) Deus erat in Christo mundum sibi reconcilians,
pro isto orat. Aug. in Ioh.
see how Christ protests and professes, I never knew you, it is more then if he
had said, I do not know you, I do not now approve you, but I never at no time
had the least knowledge, with likeance of you. There are some on whom Christ
would not bestow, in petition, a word of his mouth, and would Christ in his
passion, bestow on them the blood of his heart? Ioh. 17.6. I pray not for the
world: There is a double world in this world, as Ezekiels vision had wheel in
wheel: There is a world that shall be damned, 1 Cor. 11.32. Ye are chastened of
the Lord, that you might not be damned with the world; this world Christ prayed
not for: there is a world that shall be saved, 2 Cor. 5.19. God was in Christ
reconciling the world, for this world Christ prayed and died.

Some say that this was one of those bitter ingredients mixed into Christ's dying
cup, which he drunk, that made him so sad in death, the foresight how few would
be saved by his death, but to pass that undiscussed, comparatively those are
few for whom Christ died, though in themselves considered, they are many, hence
is it sometimes said that he died for all, Isa. 53.11, 12.
and for every man, Heb. 2.9. he tasted death for every man, in the next verse
Christ is said by his sufferings to bring many to glory: Lege D. Field de
Ecclesia, lib. 5. cap. 17. and Parker de descen. lib. 1. sect. 91.
not all. There are two reasons rendered why Christ, though by his suffering he
infinitely satisfied, yet did not suffer infinitely in time.

1. Because the excellency of his person was able to raise a finite suffering
into the value of an infinite satisfaction.

2. Because he suffered only for such as were to break off their sins by
repentance.

For all it is clear Christ died not, Joh. 10. 11.15. Joh. 15.13. Ephesians. 5.26.
Heb. 9.28. S^nguis Christi o^nibus dandus est, nam pro omnibus fusus est etiam
Turcis, Iudae^ Ethnicis. Bellarm. de Euchar. li. 4. cap. 25.
as the Papists teach.

To leave then this of Christ's death for all, as an Antichristian tenent, and
no fit bottom for a Christian argument: Now see how the foundation of the
objection fails, the building then must needs down, But

2. I answer, Lapso fundamento labitur aedificium. Quisque nascitur ex Adams
nascitur damnatus de damnato. Aug. in Psa. 131. Sunt filij Dei qui nondum sunt
nobis, and sunt nobis qui non sunt Deo Aug. de cor. and g^ac 9. Secundum
occultam Dei praedestinationem plurimae sunt foris ove^, plurimi lupi intus.
Novi^ enim ac signa^o habet, qui adhuc nec cum nec se nos cunt. Aug. in Io.
Tract. 45.
there be some for whom the sacrifice of Christ's death was purposely intended,
yet to whom the Sacrament of Chists death is not for present to be applied, I
mean, the elect of God in the world, unconverted, who still stick in natures
estate, and abide in the damned condition wherein they were born, foolish,
disobedient, serving diverse lusts, living in malice, envy, hateful, and hating
one another, Tit. 3.3. look into the Apostles black bill of abominable sinners,
1 Cor. 6.9, 10. such (says he) were some of you, and some are such: Touching
Gods election they be the sons of God, though in condition enemies against God,
Romans 11.18. Bloody souls bleeding blasphemies: sheep by election, but wolves
by condition, such as God knows, but they neither know God or themselves: what
Gods purposes are to them we understand not, but what their practices are
against God, we discern, and to such we cannot allow the Sacrament of Christ's
death, though Christ died for them as may after appear. In the work of our
redemption that is dispatched by Christ's death, there is considerable a double
act.

1. An act of oblation wherein Christ offered himself once for all as an
adaequate sacrifice and full compensation for the sins of all Gods elect.

2. An act of application which is twofold.

An act whereby Christ's death is applied to us.

An act whereby Christ's death is applied of us.

The application of Christ's death on Christ's part to us is by his Spirit.

The application of Christ's death on our part to our selves, is by faith, and
both these are required when the Sacrament is received: now this being the case
of believers alone, they only are meet to communicate.

Gods elect while unregenerate are not any way able to make out any interest in
themselves to Christ's death, therefore how shall they presume to partake in the
Sacrament of Christ's death? There is a vertuall interest they may have before
conversion, in respect of payment made, but no actual interest in respect of
purchase applied till really regenerate: Take Christ's death, those have actual
interest in it, who have actual benefit by it. such sure have part in it, who
have power from it to put sin to death, and to cleanse the soul from sin, Heb.
9.14. This is the privilege of Saints.

The last Scriptures objected. Scrip.
Christ calls all to come to him, Mat. 11.28. and declares, that whoever comes,
he will in no wise cast out. Joh. 6 37. Therefore all may come to the Supper of
the Lord, and not any that come, ought to be put by.

Answ. Mat. 11. it is true Christ therein calls all to come to hlm, but then, 1.
All, who? viz. All that be weary and heavy laden, that is, all that be weary of
the work of sin, and laden with the weight of sin, let them come to Christ even
in this Supper-feast, and Christ will in and by that afford them such a
refreshment as those find who fainting under some heavy weight, or at some
hard work are revived by taking some pleasant food, so some translate the word
of promise added in the ver. I will give you rest: (...) Reficiam.
But what is this to those, who 1. are not weary of the work of sin, such who
if they should live ever, they would sin ever? sin is such a work, Omnis
peccator peccat in suo aeterno. Greg.
wicked men may be weary in it, but never weary of it, neither is any thing
ever tired of its natural motion, its as natural for such men to sin, as the
fire to burn, Isa. 57.10. nor 2. are they laden with the weight of sin. The
Angels sinning fell down from Heaven, Korah and his company sinning sunk down
into the earth, sin the burden of which neither Heaven or earth is able to
bear, many carry as lightly away, as Sampson the gates of the City, Jud. 16.
Sin lies in them like an element in its proper place, and so burdens not: now
what shall such do at the Supper of the Lord? those there will Christ refresh
with the pardon of sin, who feel the burden of sin.

Quomodo reficit peccatis onerato^ nisi indulgentia peccatorum. Aug, de ver.
Apo. sex. ^4.
2. Christ calls all to come to him, but all, how and why?

1. So as to learn of him meekness and humility, meekness in well moderating
all their furious passions, humility in well managing all their various
actions, to rise high in meekness, and yet lie low in humility, to learn of
Christ, whose meekness was admirable, among his provoking adversaries, and his
humility imitable among his following servants, as his very washing their feet
lays forth.

2. Come so as to take up Christ's yoke and burden, ver. 29. yoke of active
obedience, and burden of passive obedience, both to do and suffer what Christ
pleases, what is this to them who as they will not learn of, so also they will
not live to Christ?

In stead of humility and meeknes, O the sad transports of pride and anger,
wherein they live with free allowance, in stead of taking Christ's yoke and
burden, they choose to draw the Devils cart, to be under the yoke and burden of
that infernal Pharaoh, that will sink their souls to hell, rather then yield
to Christ's yoke and burden that would lift them up to Heaven, for Christ's
burden its not only light but lightning, the more of it we take, the more meet
we are to mount, as the wings of a bird, the bigger they grow the better she
flies. Onu^ 2.ex o^eram allevians.
Yet such as will not come to take Christ's yoke and burden in service; cannot
come to take Christ's body and blood in a Sacrament.

And for that text, Ioh. 6.37. It is true, who ever comes to Christ he will not
cast out, yet what is this for those who continue in that case, as that

1. They cannot come to Christ, Joh, 6.44. Au con. duas Ep. Pel. l. 1. cap. 3.
and 19.
None can come to me except the Father draw, he says not except the Father
leads, as Austin observes, but except the Father draws: There is in natural
men no power bending forward, but there is hanging backward. God must draw, or
man not stir, man in natures estate has not the feet of Faith and Love, and so
cannot come to Christ, though a man comes not to the Lords Table, yet by those
he may come to Christ in Heaven, whereas without those feet a man may come often
to the Table of the Lord, yet never come to Christ, but fall from thence to
hell.

2. They will not come to Christ, when God called Christ to come to man in the
work of redemption, he had a will, only he wanted a body, God fitting him with
that, he cries, lo, I come, Heb. 10.7. but when God calls man to come to Christ,
in the work of conversion, though he have a body, yet he wants a will.

They will not come to me, Ioh. 5.40. Christ prepares for their coming, sends
and beseeches them to come, looks and waits long for their coming, and yet sits
down with this sad complaint, They will not come to me, that they might have
life.

3. Confit^^r me esse Apostatam nam fidem diabolo da^am non servavi. Lut.
They come further from Christ by daily departures, and dreadful apostacies,
Luther was a good Apostate, he came from the service of the Devil to Christ in
the Gospel, many are bad Apostates, they came from the profession of Christ in
the Gospel, to the service of the Devil, and while they so come from Christ in
his Gospel, shall they come to Christ at his Table?

4. They come forth against Christ as those, Mat. 26.47. A multitude with
swords and staves to take Christ, men come with swords in their mouths, and
staves in their hands, by wicked words and works they oppose Christ.

Thus much for the Scriptures,

1. All have been received to baptism, therefore all may be admitted to this
Supper, all being accepted to one Sacrament, why should any be denied the other?

Answ. Chron. 23.19. and shall not the Churches of Christ under the new
Testament, be enabled to bolt out black and abominable sinners, though baptized
in their Infancy from pertaking at the Table of the Lord? Is not filthy
wickedness now worse among Christians, then ever ceremonial uncleanness
among Jews?

2. Consult the age and acts of the Apostles, we shall find they administered
to some the sacrament of baptism, to whom yet we read not that they
administered the Sacrament of the Supper, though they were grown men and women.

As Simon Magus, the Eunuch, the Jailor, Lydia, The household of Stephana^, it
seems hereby they judged somewhat more requisite to this second Sacrament, then
unto the first for participation: and that the bear being baptized does not
render men meet, immediately to communicate at the Table of the Lord, but
somewhat more is required to interest men therein, and make them capable
thereof.

3. Those who when they were children did, not by any actual evil put up any
bar against the effectual benefit of baptism: yet being men by their manifest
and manifold high-daring iniquities, do daily and wickedly, and wilfully
way-lay, and put up continual crosse-bars to prejudice the power, and prevent
the profit to their souls of this precious Ordinance, therefore though they
then allowed their admission to Baptism: yet they may now be justly denied
liberty at the Table of the Lord.

4. For men that remain in their sins, their being baptized cannot entitle them
to, or prepare them for the Supper of the Lord, because they are in truth, as
not baptized, That which they call their baptism, is indeed as no baptism, in
that the main is not, which should essentiate, and integrate the same. As the
Apostle says concerning circumcision, Romans 2.28, 29. That is not circumcision
which is outward in the flesh, but that is circumcision which is of the heart,
in the Spirit, So that is not baptism which is the bare washing the body with
water, Tres sunt in baptismate aqua, sanguis spiritus. Si anum horum detrahas
non stat baptismatis sacramentum. Amb. de ijs quimyst. init. Tom. 4. cap. 8
but that which is the purging of the soul, not the putting away the filth of
the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience toward God. 1 Pet. 3.21. Three
things as Ambrose observes, I add a fourth, must meet to make up baptism,
water, word, blood and spirit, and draw away says he any one of these and
there is no Sacrament of Baptism left. What is water witho^t the word? and
what is water and word without blood and spirit? Nihil profuit Simoni Mago
visibilis baptismu^, cui sanctificatio invisibilis defuit, etc. Aug.
It is not baptism, So then those that cannot plead baptism aright, cannot
plead a right by baptism.

5. Wicked men what title and claim they had by baptism to Church Membership,
and so to this Church-priviledge to partake at the Table of the Lord, they have
meritoriously lost by the looseness of their lives.

As a man that is admitted Burgess in a City, has his ticket or instrument
whereby he has right to al^ the privileges of the City, yet for some heinous
crime committed against the City, all actual interest in city-priviledges is
deservedly lost, his Burgesse-ticket seals nothing in this case, And shall we
think that Baptism conveys such a right to privileges in the Church, as sin
cannot after interrupt? may not men be debarred from the Lords Supper, because
they have been baptized? by what right then can the Church cast any for any
wickedness out by excommunication, from that whereto they have right? this
were not right, yet deny the Church such a power, and while we may think to do
a particular right, we shall be sure to do a general wrong.

6. Wicked men having so woefully abused one Sacrament, they may well be denied
the other, That servant Mat. 25. being betrusted with one talent whereof he
made no good use, what says the Lord when he comes? give him another talent
trying if he will better use that? No, Take that Talent from him, and give to
him that has ten talents, and cast out the unprofitable servant, Those there
be who have not only not used, but miserably abused their baptism, being
thereupon bold to break out in the more abominable rebellions against the Lord
and his law. Luther tells of a virgin that would thus withstand sin and Satan, I
may not, I am baptized: but how contrary are many, Baptiza^a s^^
they yield to sin and Satan upon this, we may do so, we are baptized, out
baptism shall bear us out, Baptism it is compared to Noah's Ark, 1 Pet. 3.21.
men there are, who being in this Ark dare venture out into the deepest waters of
damnable wickedness, what floods of filthiness soever they swim in, they do
not fear drowning. And shall they have another Sacrament whereupon yet more to
presume? O how contrary do many walk to the holy nature of baptism, and that
holy ^ame put on them by baptism! O how often therewith have they lien down in
the dirt, blacking that beautiful robe cast about to cover their nakedness,
and cleanse their filthiness! Amb tom. 4. lib. de ijs qui initiantur m^ste i^^
c. 7. Zanch. in explic. Ep ad Ephesians, cap 5.
It was a custom of old when any was baptized, the Minister delivered a white
garment to be put on, saying, Take thou this white, holy and immaculate
vestment, and see thou bring it forth without spot at the judgment seat of
Jesus Christ, whereupon one Muritta baptizing one Elpidophorus who afterward
proved a profane wretch, he brings forth the white garment, and holding it up,
shakes it against him, saying, this linen garment Elpidophorus shall accuse
thee at the coming of Christ, which I have kept by me as a witness of thy
Apostasy, O where will they appear who have taken their Baptismall coat and
colors, tumbling therewith in mud and mire of monstrous sins! The Font whereat
they were baptized, the book wherein their Baptism is recorded, shall rise
against them, and the other Sacrament will but damn them yet deeper. O sad to
be sunk to hell in the abuse of both these blessed Sacraments!

2.

Answ.

1. That the next parents though naught, and not themselves for the Sacrament
of the Supper, yet their children may be admitted to Baptism.

2. That though their children be received to Baptism, yet they themselves for
their own sins may be excluded from the Supper of the Lord. To make out the
first, let us observe, how children are among us admitted to Baptism upon a
double ground.

1. By virtue of somewhat to their remote parents.

2. By virtue of somewhat to their immediate parents, though in their practice
perverse and naught.

2. That from parents remote whereupon we admit children to Baptism, is the
covenant of grace, the promise of God made to their religious ancestors and
their seed, from generation to generation, Act, 2.38. The promise is to you,
and to your children, and to them that be afar off, Two things,

1. To your children indefinitely, not to your next children only, and there
cease, but unto your children still, and childrens children.

2. To those who are afar off, that is, as Mr Beza interprets, Annota. major.
to your children afar off, in remote ages to come: yet the promise runs and
privilege reaches from pious predecessors to far distant posterities,
whereupon we administer to Infants the Initiating-seal of the promise though
their next parents are impious, and for their impieties debarreable from the
Supper of the Lord.

When God made a covenant with the the creatures not to drown all flesh more by
a flood, and set his bow in the cloud as a token he would not have it terminat
in the next generation, but extend to perpetual generations to come, Genesis
9.12.15, 16. and shall we think that God will cut short the Covenant of grace
to his servants and their seed because of the sins of some interposing?

That forecited place Genesis 9. Rupertus allegorizeth, interpreting the rainbow
to signify Christ and Gods spiritual covenant in Christ, which
notwithstanding the dark and black clouds of daily sins shall abide perpetual,
and baptism as the visible sign the Lord has set in the heavens of his
Church, to assure the same. This only I urge that if God would have a covenant
so inviolable that concerned a temporal benefit to creatures in common, O how
Interminable then is that covenant which is made peculiarly to his children
concerning eternal blessings?

And as God takes care the covenant should continue, so some sign of the
covenant.

By virtue of this covenant so made to men long since, remote children yet are
accounted holy.

We consider such two ways.

1. In respect of the common condition of nature in Adam, so unclean, children
of flesh, of wrath, of death, of the Devil.

2. In respect of the peculiar covenant of grace with Abraham, So children are
holy, the children of God, to whom baptism may well appertain, Genesis 17.7. I
will, says God to Abraham, establish my covenant with thee and with thy seed
after thee, in their generations. The plural number without period. Every good
man that ever was, is, or shall be, being the son of Abraham the Father of all
the faithful, has as large and lasting a part and privilege in the covenant
(the same for substance) as Abraham himself had. It is to him and his seed, and
seeds seed, in their generations. Whereby they are born, though in respect of
corruption, filthy: yet in respect of the covenant, holy: Romans 11.16. If the
first fruits be holy, the lump is also holy: and if the root be holy, so are
the branches. In the chapter the Apostle proves the conversion of the Jews,
against which it might be objected, O they be a vile and wicked people. Grant,
In regard of their own sinful condition, they be miserable: yet in regard of
Gods covenant made with their progenitors, their estate is recoverable. For if
the first fruits be holy, the lump is also holy, and if the root be holy, so
are the branches. The Apostle compares the ancient Patriarks to the first
fruits and root, not in respect of their persons, but in respect of the promise
made to them and their seed, as Chrysostom before, and Calvin after well
expounds it. The lump and branches are their succeeding posterities even to the
present people of the Jews, to whom the covenant continues, with an entail not
cut off, by reason of which they be called holy, and their case hopeful.

Object. Ai, the next generation to Abraham.

Answ. Yea, the same to generations remote, as not only the lowest boughs which
are next the root partake of the nature of the root, but the highest twig that
is farthest off from the same: so not only the next generation to Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, partakt of the privilege of the covenant, but also all the
Jews that followed, though at the greatest distance, had a right to the same
covenant with its sign and seal thereupon.

Object. Thus it was to Jews who were branches of that root, but what is it to
us Gentiles?

Answ. Gentiles conver^ed, though they be not as the Jews, natural branches:
yet they are ingrafted branches, receiving the sap, moisture and fatness of
the root as well as the rest, Romans 11, Some of the native branches were broken
off, and thou being a wild Olive were grasted in, and made partaker of the
root, and fatness of of the Olive tree. The Apostle opens a twofold estate of
the Gentiles what they once were, what they now are They were a wild Olive,
wholly barren. There be two kinds of Olive trees barren, one accidentally, so
upon a goats licking it (as Pliny reports) the other naturally, Plin. not.
hist. lib 17. cap. 24.
so having the shape and leaf of the true olive, but want^ng the juice and
fruits.

Such were Gentiles with their leaves of moral virtues, somewhat like, but no
right bred grace, yet then after to the Gentiles is brought in a twofold
benefit. 1. An ingrafting into the right root, called to become one Church with
Abraham and the Fathers. 2. A partaking of the root and fatnes of the
Olive Tree, that is, of all the privileges of the covenant made to Abraham,
and enjoied by the Church of the Jews. That as they and their seed in their
generations had a right to the covenant, and to circumcision the seal thereof,
So believing Gentiles and their children on in their generations have right to
the Covenant, and to Baptism whereby the Covenant is sealed. And as the Jews
though their children were abhorred of God for their sins sake, yet they were
beloved of God for the Fathers sake, Romans 11.28. That is for the promises made
to their Fathers as the ordinary gloss renders it: so the children of
converted Gentiles born in sin, and abominable to God, Propter promissiones
patribus factas.
yet for their fathers sake though remote, and their interest in the covenant,
God he accepts them, and we may boldly in baptism tender them to God, having
also a title to the covenant, fit to be confirmed by Baptism, notwithstanding
their next parents for their notorious naughtines be denied the table of the
Lord.

2. We accept children to the Sacrament of Baptism, Apolloni. middlebu. min.
ca. 5. Quest. 4.
from somewhat considerable, about their immediate parents, though such whose
wickedness worthily deserves the suspension of themselves from the Supper of
the Lord, as

1. Wicked parents with us, though they transgress the covenant, yet they do
not renounce the Covenant, as now Turks do, whose children therefore, should
any of them be occasionally cast among us, though we should suppose some of
their Ancestors to have been pious, yet seeing their parents nearer have so
renounced and abjured the faith of Christ, and professedly disavowed and
disclaimed the covenant of God, and so broken the course, the cause lies clear
why for such children we should forbear their baptizing, till themselves shall
seriously seek it.

Aliud est fidem violare, aliud est abjurare.
But now scandalous Christians, though they do violate the faith, yet they do
not so abrenuntiate the faith, so to abrogate and make all void that no
privilege should pass down to their posterity thereby.

2. Such wicked parents though they be not of the Church, yet they be in the
Church.

The visible Church is compared to a floor, wherein is both corn and chafe,
Mat. 3.12. to a field wherein is both tares and wheat. Mat. 13.25. to a great
house wherein are vessels both of gold and silver, and of wood and earth, 2 Timothy 2.20. It is like Noah's ark, Nec prop^er ma lo^ bonos de seramm, sed
propter bonos malos eijciamm.
wherein are creatures both unclean and clean, like Jeremiahs basket, wherein
are figs some good, some very bad, we must help remove the bad from the good,
not remove from the good, because of the bad, as Austin counsels in this case,
and such bad meritoriously deserve immediately to be cast out, yet till by
excommunication regularly carried they be cut off, they have some privilege
for them and theirs, which turks and pagans possess not, sure as they within
the Church are subject to some censures which those without are not, 1 Cor.
5.12. so they enjoy some advantages which those without do not. Their children
may have the benefit of Baptism.

3. Those parents though they live in a sinful course, yet they live under a
Gospel call, and so the promise is to them and to their children, Act. 2.38,
39. The promise is to you and to your children, even as many as the Lord our
God shall call, Consider we a twofold call.

1. A direct call on Gods part to man.

2. A reflect call on man's part returning to God.

The Apostle says not. The promise is to them and their children, who answer
Gods call, but to as many as the Lord our God shall call: Wicked men Echolike
that live under the word, do not speak back again to God, yet God speaks to
them, and gives them a Gospel-call.

A through effectual call it seems those had not Act. 2. for the Apostle bids
them Repent, ver. 38. Yea, and that other expression, ver. 39. seems also to
lay forth as much, To as many as are afar off, whom the Lord our God shall
call: which Calvin, Piscator, with other Expositors interpret to be a brief
description of the heathen Gentiles who are afar off in respect of the
Covenant, as many of them as shall be called by the Gospel from Gentilisme to
Christianisme, the promise also thereupon shall be to them, and to their
children, and to them thereupon may well appertain then the baptismall seal of
the promise. A eall aequivalent to this have men among us, though many do not
walk according to that call, yet by virtue of that they have, they may lay some
claim to the promises, both for themselves, and their seed.

Object. How can promises pertain to men only so called, seeing godliness has
the promises, 1 Timothy 4.8.

Answ. Promises are of two sorts, promises of grace, promises to grace:
promises of grace to be received, promises to grace that is received.

The latter looks in a peculiar manner to pious men, who as grace is received
of them, so it is improved by them, whereupon to that grace they have much more
is promised, Mat. 25, 29.

The former refers to Gods elect, that live under the Gospel, though possibly
for present their lives be loose and vain, yet as they have their part in the
means of grace, So they have their right to those promises of grace that attend
thereupon: and not themselves only, but their children also. To them and to
their children there are Ordinances of grace with their promises: hereupon the
parents abiding under the ministry of the word, their children be brought under
the administration of baptism.

4. Those parents though they be wretched in the practices of life, Aliud est
(...). Aliud (...).
ye they be right in the principles of faith: they believe well, though they
live ill, Jam. 2.19 Thou beleevest there is but one God, thou do well, men
believe the Scriptures are the word of God, they do well, they believe Christ
is the son of God, They believe the duplicity of natures, and triplicity of
Offices, and yet all one Christ: They believe well, at least in respect of the
matters believed, though not in respect of the manner of believing, yet they so
believe as brings in this benefit to their children to be accounted holy, 1
Cor. 7.14. The unbeleeving husband, is sanctified by the believing wife, and
the unbeleeving wife is sanctified by the believing husband, else were your
children unclean, now are they holy:

I shall open two things in the text.

1. What that believing is in the parent whereupon the children are reputed
holy.

2. What that holiness is in the children, that comes upon the parents
believing.

To learn what this believing is, let us look a little into the state of Faith.

Faith (as Augustine well observes) is taken in a twofold sense. Fides est
interdum id quod credimus, interdu^ id quo credimu^, Aug. li. 13. de Trin. cap.
2. comb. lib. 3. did. 23.


Either for that which by us is believed, the object, or word of Faith, Romans
10.8.

Or for that by which we believe, the grace, or the act of Faith, 2 These. 1.11.

The word of Faith is twofold.

General, that is the whole revealed will of God.

Special, that part of Gods revealed will, that relates to Christ, Ephesians. 5.26.

The work of Faith is twofold.

Internal, Actus fidei ^licitus.
which is the renewing and purifying of the heart, Act. 15.9.

External, Actus fidei imperatus,
which is the reforming and well ordering of the life.

Now persons may be said to believe according to faith in the first sense,
though they do not reach the latter, though their hearts be not renewed, their
lives reformed, they have not the work of Faith, yet they hold the word of
Faith, assent to, and are persuaded of the truths God reveals in his word
concerning himself, his son, and man's salvation by him, and such are said to
believe. Luke 8.13. Act. 8.13.37. And thus the Apostle intends that text when
he speaks of a believing parent, Aug. Epi. 89. ad Hilar. quest 40. Tertul. lib.
2. ad ^xorem. cap. 2. and 7. Loquitur de talibus infidelibus Pauius apud quos
nec legis cultusque Dei nec Evangelij ut fundamenta ex^m rudera. Synops. pur.
Theolog.
either husband or wife, 1 Cor. 7. For the sense, that not only the ancient
Fathers, as Chrysostom, Tertullian, Augustine, etc. but also the current of
late writers, as Calvin, Beza, Pareus, etc. gives of the text, lies thus. In
Corinth though there were some professing the christian faith, yet others were
still professed Infidels, abiding in their old heathenish idolatries, and this
being sometimes the case of married couples, the scruple was not whether a
truly regenerate husband, might live with an unregenerate wife but whether a
husband believing Christian religion, might dwell with an Infidel-wife or a
Christian wife, with a heathen husband, or not rather to separate, as in Ezra.

This doubt the Apostle resolves thus, that for married couples, if one
professed the faith of Christ, though the other remained an Infidel, ye need
not separate, ver. 12, 13. and then he gives the reason ver. 14. For the
unbeleeving husband is sanctified by the believing wife, etc. not in respect of
his personal condition, for then he should not abide an unbelieving husband,
but in respect of his conjugall relation: though he contin^e unclean toward
God, yet toward his believing wife in the way of marriage he is sanctified,
Tit. 1.15. this he further makes good, by that good influence that is upon the
children, Else were your children unclean, now are they holy.

For the childrens holiness what that is.

Holiness here some distinguish it into actual and potentiall, denying the
first, Aquin.
and granting the second.

But potentially the children of any parents, though never so unbeleeving, are
holy: God can make them so, Sure such children as are of believing parents, are
said to be holy in regard of some present real holiness. Holiness therefore
is again twofold, fiduciall, and foederall, Sanctit^i 1. ex foederis and fidei.
Holiness of Faith, and holiness of the Covenant, let parents believe in the
best sense, and have faith of the best sort, that is most holy, Jude. 20. yet
they cannot transmit this holiness to posterity, to make their children holy,
Therefore it must be covenant-holinesse here meant, children are holy, that is,
are separated from Turks and Pagans, Ezra. 9.2. being members of the Church
comprehended in the covenant, Interessed in the promise, and for this very
cause, as Beza upon the place affirms are to be admitted to Baptism, though
their parents whose faith is good, B^za in 1 Cor. 7.14.
yet lives being bad are to be debarred the Table of the Lord.

2. Grant such children be received to the Sacrament of Baptism, yet their
parents may be refused from the Sacrament of the Supper, which may be easily
evidenced as follows.

1. From the difference of these Sacraments in themselves, Baptism is a more
passive Ordinance, it requires indeed a receptive capacity, and capable
receptibility in the subject, which the child has. The Lords Supper is a more
active Ordinance, and requires such personal activity, and actual ability to
such things as sure such parents have not.

2. From the difference that is between such parents and their children, thus

1. The parents in their sinful condition are easily manifest. The sign at the
door tells the state of the house, he that runs may read how wretched they are,
whereas their children do not manifest such marks of misery: though not in
judgment of infallibility, yet in judgment of charity whereeve^ we see less
evil, we may hope more good, and we may believe that even of profane parents,
there be children God has chosen.

2. The parents in their several corruptions are actually opposite, and by
their filthy lives, do wilfully unfit themselves for the Supper of the Lord,
and openly oppose the Lord of the Supper, and all its saving good to their
souls: whereas the children do not lay themselves cross to the benefit of
Baptism, actually to interrupt the blessing thereof, or the Lord therein.

3. From the rules of justice and equity, suiting with the grounds of reason
and scripture, we may conclude this, that it is equal and just, the punishment
of the parents should fall upon themselves to debar them the Supper of the
Lord, but unjust and unequal the children should be punished for their parents
sins, as to be deprived the privilege of baptism. God himself though
sometimes he punishes posterities for their parents sins in things that
concerns their bodies and temporal being, yet not their souls in things that
concern their saving good, Read Ezekiel. 18.2. and so on. Let not us for parents
sins punish poor innocent infants, as to withhold that which tends to their
eternal good, though it is just themselves suffer in the other Sacrament.

4. From other supplies that may be made to children, for their bringing to
baptism, in case the parents be cut off by just censures, suppose parents cast
out the congregation by excommunication, Amesi. li. 4. de conscie. c. 27. de
bapt.
yet Divines hold that in such case some other Christian friends may stipulate
or undertake by promise for their children, and so to be baptized, the like for
children illigetimate, but no such supply can bring in profane parents to the
Lords Table, to partake upon others undertake, they yet palpably impenitent: or
one parent may supply the place of the other, to tender the children to
baptism.

The believing mother makes up the room of the profane father, if the child
may have right to baptism by the mothers title, then it is to be received to
baptism, upon the mothers tender, whereas a wicked husband is not to be
accepted unto this Supper, upon his wives interest. So we see that childrens
admittance to Baptism may and ought to be, yet their parents prohibited the
Table of the Lord.

Object. to the Table of the Lord?

Answ.

1. There are several persons to whom the word is to be preached, and so they
to hear, to whom yet the Lords Supper is not to be administered, they being not
to receive.

2. There be several reasons for which many must hear the word preached, while
yet they may not receive the Lords Supper administered.

For the persons to whom we hold out the word, and yet do not bring out the
Sacrament, as

1. Despairers of the mercy of God, let a man be Magor-Missabib a terror to
himself, his heart a hell of horror, his conscience an Acheldama a field of
black blood, Augi^ Psa. 4^ tom. 8. fol. 280.
so that as Augustine describes such a one flying from the field to the city,
from the city to his house, from his house to his chamber, etc. no rest but as
if infernal fiends in fearful shapes followed him, haling and pulling his
perplexed soul as it is written, Polidor. Virg Ang. hist. lib. 25. Id credo non
suesse somnium sed cons^ientia scelerum.
how Richard the third so dreamt the night before his death, yet to such
miserable men, Gods mercy in the word may be opened. This course took those
Divines that visited despairing Spira.

2. Opposers of the spirit of God, how did Stephen preach the word to the
stiff-necked Jews, though they always resisted the Holy Ghost, Act. 7.51. then
that oppose Gods Spirit speaking in the word, because it crosses their fil^hy
lusts and fleshly liberties. The case is common, with many as it is recorded of
the Kingdom of Congo, they much embraced the Gospel at first, but when they
found it restrained their carnal liberties, and would not allow plurality of
wives, they opposed it as fast: when it is thus, yet we must out of the word
instruct those still who oppose themselves, 2 Timothy 2.25. Isa. 46.12. Hearken ye
stout-hearted that are far from from righteousness stout-hearted yet hearken; we
must preach the word to them that reproach the word, Jer. 20.8, 9. look upon
Christ himself, Luke 7.30.

3. Relapsers from the grace of God, we see how Paul presses the Apostate
Galathians, throughout his Epistle, and how the Lord speaks to fa^len Ephesus,
Rev. 2.5. though men gone back far, yet the word may reduce them. Latimer in a
sermon to Edward the sixth, tells of one so far fallen from the know^ truth, as
to mock and scorn it, yet recovered by the word, and brought in by repentance.

4. Seducers of the Saints of God, their words be perilous to others, Romans 16
18. eating as a gangreen, 2 Timothy 2.17. Zozom. lib. 7. cap, 7.
yet Gods word may be powerful upon them, words with them of mere reason may
avail nothing, except to prejudice, Lapidand^ sunt haeretici sacrarum liierarum
argumentis At.
yet words of Scripture upon them pressed may prove profitable. Theodosius the
Emperor desirous to reason with Eunomius an Arian Bishop, his wife Placilla
the Empress hindered it, least her husband should be seduced by his words to
like of his heresy. Constantine in all the disputes before him with the
Arians, would still call for the Word of God, as the only way, if not to
convert, yet to silence and stop their mouths, Tit. 1.10, 11.

5. Perverters of the truths of God, men that mingle and mangle the Scripture:
Yet the way of Scripture rightly stated and understood, is that way wherein
with them it is our duty to deal. How did the Scribes and Pharisees wrong the
sacred truths of God; yet see our Savior rightly turns Scripture truths upon
them: yea the very devil abusing Scripture, yet Christ uses Scripture against
him, Man. 4. Indeed to pervert and wrest Gods written word, is a fearful sin,
2 Pet. 3.16. It is as Oecumenius makes it, as if the bodies of the holy pen men
should be taken and tortured, their limbs racked, till murdered, yet toward
men thus sinning by the word endeavor their good.

So we have some of those several sorts toward whom there is good use, and
for whom there is great cause ^hey should come to the hearing of the word,
which yet are no way meet to communicate in the Sacrament.

The use of the word for ^he good of such sinners, God in his word warrants, as
we have seen in passing through the particular instances, but yet warrants not
their entertainment at the Table of the Lord. Sicut fontes scaturiunt etsi nemo
inde hau^ia^t, ita postores non d^sinunt concionari etiamsi nemo proficiat.
Chr^s, in Mat. Ho. 15.


God requires of his ministers to preach the word, whether people will receive
it or no, whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear, yet speak thou:
Ezekiel. 2.5. In this respect Chrysostom compares good pastors, to fountains that
ever send forth water or conduits that are always running though no pail be
put under. But must we make tenders of the Sacrament whether any will receive
it or no? Though men be obstinate, obdurate, desperate, Apostate, must we give
the Sacrament to gain them?

2. Come we to the reasons for which many must hear the word preached, that yet
may not receive the Lords Supper administered, those we draw to two heads.

1. Because of those things which the Sacrament does more properly and
necessarily require then the word does.

2. Because of those things which the word does more properly and ordinarily
effect then the Sacrament does.

Those things that of necessity are more required to the receiving the
Sacrament, then the hearing of the word, To mention but these two.

1. A right knowledge of the word. 2. A true faith in the Lord.
To each man's meet receiving the Supper of the Lord, is necessarily required, A
right knowledge of the word, because before any man herein eats or drinks, he
must examine himself, viz. by the word. A man can take no true trial of
himself, but by the unerring rule of Gods holy word, yet neither can he make
any such use of the word, if he be ignorant in the word: men must hear the
word, that they may understand it, and be ^ble to examine themselves by it: yea
it must not only be the touchstone, but the loadstone to draw men to
self-examining, to which they are not only unable, but unwilling, they had need
hear the word, they may be persuaded thereunto.

Also true faith in the Lord Christ is necessary, or no meet receiving of the
Supper of Christ. An historic^ll faith to believe the reports of the word, and
that what a man hears from the word, is the undoubted will and infallible truth
of God, may work much to cause some profit by the word, when a m^n shall
believe that those thundering-thre^ts, those heart-awakening woes are indeed
the mind of God against sin and sinners, etc. it moves and amazes, but now to
partaking in the Supper, nothing to be done without a further and more
effectual faith: many have faith to believe God and Christ, that are re^ealed
in the word, and so may hear with some benefit, but they have not faith in God,
in Christ, as he is to be eaten in his Supper, and so cannot partake with any
profit, but prejudice, and so had better forbear the Table of the Lord, though
they may hear the word of the Lord. The present exercise of those saving graces
of knowledge and faith, are not so absolutely necessary to the first hearing of
the word, they being ordinarily brought in by the hearing of the word. The word
gives knowledge to the simple, Psalm. 19.7. and faith comes by hearing, Romans
10.17, 14. The word must be attended that these may be attained. For the help
of the Ignorant to knowledge, admirable are the condescentions of God in his
word, making what is fundamentally necessary open and easy. The spirit in the
word, as the Angels in Jacobs ladder, in some things ascending the capacity of
the most learned, in other things descending to the capacity of the meanest,
and most simple, whereas the Sacrament is exceeding sublime and mysterious:
Adoro plenitudinem Scriptura. Tert.
He that said I adore the amplitude of the Scripture, might have added, and I
adore the altitude of the Supper. Here we stand and say, O the height and
depth, etc. O great is the mystery. Every mystery is not a Sacrament, but every
Sacrament is a mystery. The word Sacrament imports a thing both sacred and
secret. In mini^^ visibili maximum lat^^.
O the treasures that are here hid and shut-up from common eyes. Chrysostom. Hom.
in Matthew. Hom. 3. de Laza.
The word as Chrysostom speaks, is open and easy to understand, exposed to the
capacity of the most unwise. God has so bowed down (says he) the holy
Scriptures, that when proud man will not speak low to little babes, August.
Tra, 35. in Joan. Enarrat. in Psalm, 8.
God does. The word, says Austin, is the candle and lanthorn God has light
up, and hung out, that none walk in darkness, but come to knowledge thereby.

And for faith, God has fitted the word as an instrument to help to that. The
word does us good, if God therein lays hold upon us. The Sacrament does not
good unless we therein lay hold upon the Lord, which is only by faith.

The word serves for the publishing and profering a part in Christ, peace, and
pardon of sins. The Sacrament serves for the applying of these to our
particular souls, which yet cannot be without faith, therefore this ordinance
does more absolutely require the present use of faith, and so fewer are found
fit for receivers at the Table of Christ, then to be hearers of the Gospel of
Christ.

2. Let us see some of those things the word of God does more properly and
ordinarily effect then this Supper of Christ, whereupon men are to hear, though
not to receive. Aquinas upon the 2. Epist. to Timothy, 2 Timothy 3.16.
affirms a fourfold effect of the word, as its proper fruits. 1. It evidences
truth. 2. It evinces falsehood. 3. It pulls off from evil. 4. It draws in to
good. The two former, says he, are more speculative, and tends to the
information of the judgment; the two later are more practical, and make for
the reformation of man's life, they be all excellent works proper for Gods word
to produce, not so the Sacrament. Three things I shall propose, something
suting to these as proper effects of Gods word. 1. Conviction. 2. Contrition.
3. Conversion.

Conviction, Tit. 1.9. 2 Timothy 3.16. Of all errors it is hardest to convince a
man of errors in opinion, yet this is done by the word. At the Council of Nice,
there was a subtle Philosopher, that in dispute puzzled all the Bishops
present, who were about 318. At length up steps a plain Christian man, and in
the name of Christ, with the naked word of God, so convinces the man of his
error, that before all he freely confesses it, as long, says he, as men's words
were only pressed, Ruffin. lib. 2. cap. 3.
I could repel words with words, but what is weak man by his words, to
withstand the word of God? I yield.

Secondly, Contrition: It is Gods word that pricks and breaks the hearts of
hardened men, Act. 2.37. Jer. 23.29. Is not my word as a hammer that breaks the
rocks in pieces? Here is law and Gospel as hammer and pillow to break the most
flinty stone. It is a speech of Luther, as I remember, as often, says he, as I
read or hear Paul speaking in his Epistles, it is as if I heard the noise of
thunder, shaking, and breaking my heart: and indeed the Gospel is the proper
instrument to cause kind heart-breakings. Sacramentum hoc Lucharistia tunc
opportune^ celebratur quando corda m^^talium pradicatione panitentiae compuncta
desiderio gratia Christi tene^^tur.
Conviction of sin, and contrition of soul are works preparing to the
Sacrament, not produced by the Sacrament, when a man is pricked in his soul for
his sin, and his soul set with unsatisfied desires after Christ, then is he
(says Musculus) meet to celebrate the Supper of Christ. It is a broken vessel
wherein God puts the oil and wine of sweet Sacramental comforts.

Thirdly, Conversion, This the word does, Psalm. 19.7. The word of the Lord i^
perfect, converting the soul. Augustine hearing a voice from heaven that bad
him, take, L^^. (...) conf. cap. 12.
and read, whereupon turning open the new Testament, he fell upon that place,
Romans 13.13, 14. Which so s^nk into his heart as proved the means of his
conversion, as he himself reports it. This Augustine as he was once preaching,
by reason his memory failed him, beside his purpose, fell to reprove the
Manichaeans, Possidon. de vita Augustini.
and by a Scripture or two, not before thought of, to confute their heresies,
by which means, Firmus a Manichaean was converted, as he after acknowledged to
Augustine, blessing God for that Sermon. O the wonderful ways of God by his
word, for the conversion of sinners: so that the most sinful men, may, and
must hear God in his word, though yet unmeet to approach the Table of the Lord.

Object.

Answ.

1. By some distinguishing demonstrations.

2. By some establishing confirmations.

To distinguish, and so demonstrate that the Lords Supper is not for conversion
as Gods word is, Note.

1. It is one thing to convert a wicked man from the state of sin, wherein he
has continued, and another to convert a godly man, from an act of sir, whereto
he has relapsed. The recovery of a good man after some sinful fall, is called
conversion, Luke 22.32. When thou art converted, etc. This reviving and
restoring of grace first received in a Servant of God, suppose the Sacrament of
good use, and great force, yet for conveying the first grace, whereby a wicked
man is converted and brought in to God, this concerns not the Sacrament, but
the word by the hearing of which the worst may be converted, Act. 28.27.

2. It is one thing to cause conversion, and another to clear conversion. A man
converted and having in the word received that incorruptible seed whereby he is
born again, 1 Pet. 1.23. which yet may lie more hid in the heart after coming
to a Sacrament, its made to spring more forth, whereupon he appears a convert
more professingly then before.

3. It is one thing to be converted at a Sacrament, another to be converted by
the Sacrament. Sacramentum habet vim impetratoriam gratiae, ration^ orationum
ministri and Ecclesia, etc. Guliel. Paris. Tract. de Sacr.
We know when the Sacrament is administered there is some expounding, exhorting,
preaching, praying, Minister and Congregation calling upon God, in the Name of
Christ, suppose a sinful man's heart be wrought upon, yet then it is rather by
somewhat at the Sacrament, then by the Sacrament it self.

4. It is one thing to be an ordinance that possibly may convert, another thing
to be an ordinance properly to convert; if we grant a man may possibly be
converted by the Sacrament, yet we deny the Sacrament to be properly for
conversion, as the word is, or thus, It is one thing intentionally to convert
as an institution, and another accidentally to convert as an occasion. That the
Sacrament in its ordinary use is purposely appointed of God for sinners
conversion, as the word is, I utterly deny: though of some particular
conversion, the Sacrament should prove an occasion, as other things may do.
The visible works of the Lord, the holy lives, and courageous deaths of the
Saints, Act. 7.60. Si Stephanus non sic orasses Ecclesia Paulu^ (...) haber^t.
the fervent prayers of Gods suffering servants, etc. have been occasions of
some conversions, Augustine ascribes the conversion of Paul, to the prayer of
Steven, Act. 7.60. Act. 22.20. Gods sore and sudden judgments upon notorious
sinners have occasioned the same upon some^ Waldus, whence were the Waldenses,
seeing among many met to be merry, one suddenly fall down dead, it struck to
his heart, he went ^ome a penitent, and proved a precious man. Augustine
reports how his father Patricius was wrought upon, August. conf. lib. 9. c. 9.
and brought from being an impure Manichee, by the prudent carriage, and pious
conference of his mother Monica. I meet with a story of one that gave a young
prodigal a ring with a deaths-head, with this condition, that he should one
hour dai^y, for seven days together look and think upon it, which bred a great
change in his life. It were easy to instance in many things that have
occasioned good in this kind, so may the Sacrament do, yet not be an
ordinance proper to convert, as the word is.

2. To establish and confirm the truth in this case, that the Lords Supper is
not that whereby is to be wrought the conversion of sinners, which I shall make
good from three grounds.

1. From the ways of conversion. 2. From the kinds of conversion. 3. From the
terms of conversion.
1. If the Sacrament converts sinners it must be by one of these two ways.

Either as a natural Agent, by an inherent power; or, as a moral Instrument,
by a derived power.

The Sacrament sure does not cause conversion in a physical way, Causa in
actis posita impossible est non sequi effectum.
from its own vigorous nature and inherent power, for then when that cause is
actually proposed, such an effect would be ordinarily produced, as appears is
not. No natural immediate cause, has the effect going before, or long after.
Conversion is before any Sacrament received in several, and in other they
receive Sacraments, and yet the Lord knows, remain unconverted. Natural causes
and their effects do so reciprocate, as bring but forth the cause, and soon
follows the effect. But so the Sacrament works not upon Saints, where there is
no such putting of bars, as may be conceived by sinners, yet how often is the
effectual benefit thereof from them suspended? they find not the good a great
while, yea it may be much of that they so much desired, they meet not with,
which argues it has no inherent power, as a natural cause to act from it self
upon good, much less can be looked for upon bad. There is difference between a
natural and a moral Agent, God conveys power to a natural Agent to do its
own action, so to work from an inward principle of it self, as to bring forth
such effects as pertain thereunto. This is not the case of the Sacrament: And
as it has not a power to work by way of inhesion, for the conversion of
sinners, so neither by way of dispensation or elevat on of God, to that use in
its ordinary course, as it has not a power to convert from an absolute
inherence, so neither as an instituted ordinance, set apart for that purpose.
Second causes can effect nothing without the continued concourse of God, the
first cause, carrying them to tha^ end he intends. Instrumentum totum subservit
actioni principalis agentis a quo dirigitur.
Instruments only work, as they are appointed, assisted, and directed by the
chief Agent; now for the Sacrament to convert, is not the work for which God
has ordained it, for which God attends or intends it. It has no derived power
for that purpose, should the Lord have meant it for this matter, he would have
left some precept to injoin the Minister to give, men to receive it for that
end, some promise to accompany and encourage the use hereof for this cause: as
he has done for the word to dispense and hear that, that thereby sinful men
may be converted and live, Isa. 55.3. Incline your ears, hear, and your soul
shall live: Yea men for present dead in sin, yet the Lord has promised they
shall hear his word and live, Joh. 5.25. The hour is, the dead shall hear the
voice of Christ, and they that hear shall live, hence we have warrant to sound
the word of life in dead men's ears, but where is the warrant to put the bread
of life into dead men's mouths that thereby they may convert and live?

2. Conversion for the kinds is twofold, as we find by its footsteps in the
new Testament.

A conversion from Gentilisme to Christianisme.

A conversion from the state of nature to grace.

The later is more then the former: The former conversion may be, and yet men
never come to the later, as it were easy to instance from diverse in the
Apostles days, who though they were converted from Paganism to Christianisme,
yet were not converted from the corruption of nature, to a state of sanctifiing
grace, now this conversion being the more excellent, it is the more difficult,
yet if the Lords Supper be proper and prevalent to cause this conversion, which
is the greater and rarer, why not apt and easy for to effect that conversion
rather, which is lower and lesser. Yet

1. If so, then how was it that our Savior sending forth his disciples to
convert men to the Christian faith, out of the Pagan world, did not appoint
them to administer his last Supper, as well as to preach the Gospel, and
baptize, Matthew. 28.19, 20. Act. 26.17, 18. God speaking to Paul, I send thee to
the Gentiles, to open their eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light,
etc. How? by giving to them the Sacrament of the Supper? No, by opening to them
the doctrine of the Gospel.

2. If so, then were we to go to the Jews, Turks, Indians, to convert them to
the faith of Christ, at our first entrance we were to administer the Supper of
Christ, as well as to preach the Gospel of Christ, that being a converti^g
ordinance, and a way for the first gathering a Church, as well as this.

3. The terms of conversion, are from sin and satan, to God and Christ, Act.
26.18. Now if the Lords Supper be set up in the Church to convert and turn men
from sin, to God, then when we find men most desperate in sin, and distant
from God, obstinate in sin, and most opposite to God; we ought to press them,
not only to take good counsel from the word, but to take bread and wine at the
Table of the Lord, to deal with them in this as in that, 2 Timothy 4 2. I charge
thee to Preach the word in season, and out of season, that is, says one, both
to the willing and the unwilling. Yea, and so must we deliver the Lords Supper,
urge it upon men, though no mind to it at all, if that it be as the word
appointed for their conversion, yea and may not the Christian Magistrate go
further? who in the Church, though he cannot force inward conversion to the
faith, yet may compel to the outward means appointed for men's conversion, and
so constrain people to partake at this Table.

This then might color that custom and constitution to injoin all at 16. years
of age, to receive the Sacrament: the thoughts of it makes my heart even quake,
no doubt this has been the damnation of diverse. As the cruel Spani^rds
forcing the Indians into the rivers, pretending baptism, and so caused the
destruction of numbers. But to conclude, if the Sacrament be a converting
Ordinance, give the word whereby it is ordained to convert, for as it must have
a word of Institution, or it could never be a Sacrament, so it must have a word
of Institution for what it works as a Sacrament.

Object. As is the word so is this, a teaching, therefore a converting
Ordinance.

Answ. A teaching therefore converting, it follows not, if we respect even the
word, its end in teaching is not only the converting of sinners, but the
perfecting of the Saints, Ephesians. 4, 11, 11. Christ gave some Apostles, some
prophets some Evangelists, some Pastors and Teachers, not some Pastors, and
some Teachers, as in the rest, but joining them together, Pastors and Teachers,
intimating (as Augustine and so Anselme expounds) two names but one office,
importing how the Pastors place is to reach.

But as we observe who, so why. For the perfecting of the Saints, (...).
for the jointing of the Saints. The Greek word is from Chirurgians who set
limbs in joint being out of place, and bind up splittered bones that be broke,
so as they may become strong and sound. When Gods Saints by their lesser slips
are like limbs out of joint, or by greater falls are brought to broken bones,
Psa. 51.8. Ossa anima spiritualia. Basil.
then its the Pastors place by teaching to set, and bind so up, as after to be
more strong and stable: Thus in the ministry of the word, the great end why we
teach is, the good of Gods Saints, to recover their relapses, to increase their
graces, and so present them perfect in Christ, Col. 1.28. So the Lords Supper
which we administer, its true it teaches, to wit, the Saints of God, to see
the love of God, in the death of Christ, to know and to apply the mercies of
God, in the merits of Christ, it teaches them the virtue of a crucified
Christ, in conquered lusts, and quickened graces, etc.

Ob. Baptism is a regenerating Sacrament,

Answ. a man be born of water and the spirit, etc. Christ says not, born again
of the spirit and water, but of water and the spirit. He puts not water after
the spirit, as fire is put after the Holy Ghost, Mat. 3.11. as if the word
water, were only added to explain the spirit, the workings whereof are as
water, so fire there is after the Holy Ghost, to show tha^ its workings are
like fire, intending by both but one thing, but water is set before the Spirit,
thereby to import that another matter besides is meant, to wit the Sacrament of
Baptism, the outward sig^ whereof is water, and indeed baptism in ordinary
course where it may be had, ^s of necessary use for regeneration and salvation.
There- our Savior speaking to Nicodemus, who was a man that might have
Baptism, if he would, assures him, that except he was born again of the water
of Baptism, Hooker. Ecclesia polit. lib. 5. 59. and 60.
and the work therein of the spirit, he could not enter into the Kingdom of
God. Hooker affirms that thus all the ^ncients were wont to expound the place.
And that Baptism is through the spirit a sanctifying and regenerating
O^dinance, the language of other Scriptures speaks the like, Ephesians. 5.26. Tit.
3.5. 1 Pet. 3.21. But that therefore the Lords Supper is so, it follows not,
nay rather therefore the Lords Supper is no regenerating Ordinance, because
Baptism is, for as the Lord will have Officers so Ordinances for several uses
in his Church, and not all about the same business, as we say of the four
Elements, that one is earth, another air, etc. it is for the good of the
universe, and that this is earth, and that air, is the pleasure of God the
creator, so for the two Sacraments, that one is for regeneration, another for
confirmation, is for the good of Gods Church and chosen, and that this is for
spiritual birth, and that for spiritual growth is from the pleasure of the
Lord, the institutor. The Lord appoints two several Sacraments, to suit to two
several subjects, and to serve for two several intents, Baptism being a
regenerating Sacrament fits to Infants, who are subjects capable of the inward
grace, therefore of the outward means. The Lords Supper being a corroborating
Sacrament, fits for men converted to, though weak in the Faith: God loves to
work by means, now for the regeneration of Infants, there is no other fit
Ordinance, whereof they are capeable but baptism, Men grown, for their
conversion and regeneration, there is the word preached, a proper Ordinance
whereon ^hey ought all to attend for that end, Jam. 1.18.19. Of his own will
begat he us, by the word of truth, wherefore let every man be swift to hear.

The Sacraments as they are meet for several persons, so for several purposes.

Baptism is the breeding Sacrament.

The Lords Supper is the feeding Sacrament.

We must be bred before fed, and yet fed, being once bred:

Baptism is once administered, it being sufficient we ere once new born. The
Sacrament of the Supper is often celebrate, because we need frequent food.
Baptism is a Sacrament more contract, the subject being capable of lesser
receipts. The Lords Supper is of a more enlarged compass, the subject thereof
having larger capacities, grace once received though at first but little
widens, as it were the soul, and so is meet for more.

Baptism has but one ma in business, the regenerating, washing, purging the
soul from the stain of sin, hereupon one sign in this Sacrament suffices, to
wit water meet to intimate its main work.

The Lords Supper has more business then one, hereupon two signs are taken
for this, to wit, bread and wine which do lively signify what this Sacrament
concerns, Two things especially.

The increasing of our grace.

The enlarging of our peace.

Bread represents that in Christ, which is to confirm and settle our souls in
grace.

Wine represents that of Christ, which is to comfort and settle our souls in
joy and peace.

In this Sacrament Christ comes forth more fully with his body and blood, that
he may the more sweetly solace the souls of his servants, so we see the work of
regeneration pertains to Baptism; the Lords Supper has other glorious
designs, that peculiarly concern the Saints of God.

Object.

Answ. Mat. 11.29. Heb. 2.3. woe then to that soul that adds to that this great
sin of unworthy receiving the Sacrament, that man who falls between these two
milstones, no marvel he be ground to powder. The ship wherein Paul was Act.
27. cast in a tempest, where two seas met, was without help broken all to
pieces. ver. 4. O let men beware they do not plunge their souls where two such
great sins meet, for how shall they then escape?

Men guilty of the one have the more cause to keep off from the other,

2. Unprofitable hearing the word is not so great^ sin, as unworthy receiving
the Sacrament, which I shall clear from a fourfold cause.

1. Because unprofitable hearing is a sinful act, only in the manner, whereas
unworthy receiving is sinful, both for matter and manner, men remaining in a
bad estate, are bid to hear the word, it being a duty that concerns all. Three
or four times in one chapt. we have this charge given, That whoever has an ear
to hear, must hear. Rev. 2.7. an^ God threatens those who refuse to hear, Act.
3.23. so that men hearing, the act is materially good, being that which God
commands, and the action is not to be omitted, but the Actor, and the manner of
the action is to be reformed. They do not sin because they hear, but it is
their sin not to be bettered by hearing, but now for wicked men to receive the
Sacrament, there being no word to warrant it, the very thing in the substance
of it is sinful, besides those evil occurrences in the transaction that makes
it more out of measure sinful.

2. Because natural men coming to the word, may possibly not be always and
altogether unprofitable hearers: whereas so often as they come to the Lords Table
they are certainly always and altogether unworthy receivers: they hearing the
word, though they do not gain so much good as we wish, yet they have some
benefit, they are not converted, yet they are restrained, and in many things
reformed, as Herod was by hearing of John, Mark. 6.20. they are not altogether
won, yet they are often almost persuaded; as Agrippa was in hearing Paul, Act.
26.28, 29. so its meet they hear still. Whereas wicked and worldly men, let us
take them when we will at the Table of the Lord, they are all every one,
altogether, every way unworthy receivers, sitting under a sad sin.

3. Because this unworthy receiving does ever suppose unprofitable hearing of
Gods holy word. Both

1. Before the Sacrament, and

2. In and at the Sacrament.

Whereas unprofitable hearing does not so suppose unworthy receiving.

Wicked men in that they receive the Sacrament unworthily, we may conclude they
have often heard the word unprofitably. The word of God it does always accompany
the Sacrament, though the Sacrament goes not ever with the word, where the
Sacrament is there is the word. A word of institution, and some words of
instruction, of ordination and exhortation. At the Sacrament there is not only
to be seen terrene signs signifying, but also to be heard, the divine word
sanctifying, so that a man cannot sin against the Sacrament in unworthy
receiving, but he also sins against the word by unprofitable hearing, whereas a
man may sin against the word by fruitless hear^ng, and yet not sin against the
Sacrament by wretched receiving, and so the sin less, being single, then when
they both meet in action and season together.

4. Because in unworthy receiving the Sacrament greater mercy is abused then in
unprofitable hearing of the word, and that in two respects.

1. If we respect the matter of mercy represented.

2. If we respect the manner of representing mercy.

The mercy represented in the Sacrament for the matter of it, is surpassing.
The word proceeds out of the mouth of the Lord, the Sacrament issues out of the
side of the Lord, nearest his heart. In the word we have the sayings of God. In
the Sacrament the sealings of God. In the word is the breath of Christ. In the
Sacrament the blood of Christ. In the word we have the love of God, in the
voice of Christ. In the Sacrament the love of God in the cross of Christ.

The representing of mercy in the Lords Supper, for the manner is very
admirable beyond the way of the word. The most taking way upon the heart, is
proposing, of objects to the eye, Lam. 3.51. Great sorrows on earth are caused
by doleful spectacles, and the best comforts of heaven, lie in beatificall
visions. At the Lords Table there is not only sounds for the ear, but signs
for the eye, not only audible documents, but visible elements, that we may not
only hear of Christ, but see him, yea take and taste him, all the senses are
met with, the more to move the heart, God helps the weak^esses of his servants,
as Christ condescended to Thomas, Joh. 20.25. Come see the prints of the nails,
put thy finger into the hole of my side, etc. thereby to strengthen his faith;
and thus in this, and therefore where such mercy is abused, sin must needs be
increased. So seeing the surpassing greatness of this sin of unworthy
receiving, compared with the sin of unprofitable hearing, it may justly deter
many from the Table of the Lord.

Obj. All with us have taken the covenant, therefore all may take the Sacrament.

Answ. France, who solemnly took an oath, the tenor whereo^ runs thus, If I
incline to contrary parties, If I make any marriage, enter any friendship, If I
afford any help, or say to any of them; God speed you, that day let a
thunderbolt strike me dead. And O the care in their after course, thoughts of
their covenant, fears of the thunderbolt, held them in continual awe: were
things thus with us it were something. But

2. For many among us, their taking the Covenant, is as no taking, for though
they have taken it into their mouths, to vote for it, and into their hands, by
subscribing their names to it, yet they never took the Covenant into their
hearts, to love it, or into their lives to folllow it. They once took it, but
they have untaken it again; what they once said with their mouths, they have
often since unsaid with their lives, they have made a covenant with God and
heaven, but live as if they had made a covenant with the devil and hell, Isa.
28.15. They have by abominable rebellions broken their covenant with God, and
covenant breakers are no fit Sacrament takers. Those that go out from the
covenant are not meet to come into the Sacrament. To come to the use of a
Sacrament in the abuse of a covenant, to think of a Sacrament course under a
covenant curse, such may rather look for judgments from God, then Sacraments
from Christ. I have read of Vladisl^us King of Hungar^, having by covenant and
oath, concluded with Amurathes of an inviolable peace between the Turks and
Hungarians, Amurath the sixth Emperor of the Turks.
yet after contrary, this Hungarian King proclaiming war with the Turks, and
being in a hot battle where Amurathes was wors^ed, he pulls out of his bosom
the articles of the covenant, spreads them and looking up to heaven, cries, O
Jesus Christ, to these leagues thy Christians have sworn by thy name, and
broken them again, If thou be God revenge this wrong, Insta^tly the battle
turned, Vladislaus was slain, his Army put to the sword, Annals Silesiorum.
Chron. Car^on. lib. 15.
and O the butcheries and bloudsheds that followed upon the Hungarian
Christians. Those men then who have broken a solemn Covenant made more
immediately with God himself, shall they think to come ^o this Table, and drink
the blood of Christ? nay but rather that God to their ^dversaries should give
out their life blood to drink, and in stead of their eating the body of Christ,
God should cast out their carcasses for the fouls of the air to eat.

3. The very covenant eng^ges many to keep, and to be kept off from the
Sacrament.

Does not our Covenant bind us to reform Religion according to the word of
God, in doctrine, discipline, and the practice of the best Reformed Churches.
Now to admit men in their known wickedness, to the Table of the Lord, crosses
^he word of God, and way of the Churches, this is not to reform, but deform
Religion, this is not to conform it to the word of God, but to transform it
according to the will of man, does not the covenant require to extirpate
profaneness and what ever is contrary to sound doctrine and the power of
godliness, and will this allow profane men to press to the Table of the Lord?

Does not the Covenant injoin, to go before others in an exemplary Reformation,
to be humbled for our own, and other men's sins, etc. And yet may we embrace men
in their sins, to sit down at the Supper of the Lord? Or does not the covenant,
as in other things, so in this, call for a stricter course then ever?

Object.

Answ. must be fit and suitable mea^s appointed for that end. Qui scelerate
vivunt in Ecclesia and communicare non desinum putantes se ^ali communione
mundari, discant ad emend tionem nil proficere sibi. Orthod. Cons Art. 7. c. 2.
de Sac.
The Sacrament is not the proper means to make bad men good, but good men
better. God has set apart means, some for the reformation of the bad, some for
the confirmation of the good; now the proper means must be applied to each, or
all in vain. Suppose a man in a dangerous disease, physic is Gods Ordinance,
and a good means for cure, but then it must be proper physic, suitable for that
disease, or else it may kill, instead of cure, So in this.

2. The Lords Supper in stead of making bad men good, bad men may thereupon
become much worse, so it often falls out when such receive, from a double reason.

1. By reason of their own presumption, having been at the Sacram^nt they the
more boldly cast themselves o^ the occasions of sin, and if they be o^ertaken
in some foul fault, it is but going to the Sacrament again, and all will be
well, us a diseased man ventures into the cold, and wrongs his body with all
diet, making account to recover it by a few pills, or a purge, at present or at
spring.

2. By reason of Gods just judgment, they profane the Sacrament, and God
leaves them to their profaneness, they come in sin, and God lets them go out
in sin, and go on in it, worse after then ever, God in stead of giving them
Christ, he gives them up to their lusts, which they prefer before Christ.

3. To put men openly bad by the Sacrament, may be the best means to make them
good, 1 Cor. 5.5. Deliver such a one to satan for the destruction of the flesh,
that his spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord. A sad punishment so to be
given up to the devil, yet thereby is meant a double good, the destruction of
sin, and the salvation of the man, that thereby flesh may dye, and the spirit
may live. A smart salve, but a sweet cure. A proper plaster for filthy sores.

Object.

Answ.

1. It is no novel thing.

2. It is no imperious thing. To clear both,

1. Let us see how this is no new censure, if we look either to later times, or
to remoter times. Convocations and Canons have concluded this as a charge upon
the Minister, Canon. 26.
that he should not in any wise admit any of his f^ock openly known to live in
sin notorious without testifying repentance.

In the Rubric of the common prayer Book before the Communion, it is thus
injoined.

That, If any be an open and notorious evil liver, so that the congregation is
by him offended, the Minister shall call him, and advertise him in any wise not
to presume to the Lords Table, till he has openly declared his repentance, and
given satisfaction to the congregation offended. So if persons persist in
variance, he must not suffer them to partake of the Sacrament till ^hey be
reconciled: If one seek peace and the other refuse, the Minister shall admit
the penitent person, but not him that is obstinate. Yea memorable is that which
the commination against sinners in the Ser^ice-Book, mentions. How in the
Primitive Church there was a godly discipline, that such persons as were
notorious sinners, were put to open penance, that their souls might be saved in
the day of the Lord, and others made more afraid to offend. In stead whereof,
till the said discipline may be restored again (which thing, says the Book, is
much to be wished) it is thought good, etc. Yea if we go to further times the
Ancient Fathers speak up full to this. Ambrose, Volo veniam reu^ speret petat
cum lachrymis, petat populi totius fletibus, ut ignoscatur obsecret and cum 2o
ut 3o fuerit dilata ejus communis credat remissiu^ se supplicasse. De poenit.
l. 1 c. 1^.
who lived in the times of Gratian and Theodosius Emperors about the year of
our Lord, 374. says thus, I will that he that is guilty and hopes for mercy,
to seek it with tears of the whole people, and if twice or thrice he be yet
refused at the Communion, let him think he has repented too slightly, and go
to his work again more thoroughly. When Theodosius the Emperor had commanded a
slaughter at Thessalonica, and soon after offered to come to the Sacrament,
Ambrose forbids him, Will thou, says he, reach out thine hands yet dropping
with Innocent blood, and with them lay hold of the blessed body of the Lord, or
life them up to put that precious blood of Christ to thy mouth? Chrysostom is
both vehement and abundant in this, Chrysostom. T, 2. in Mat. Hom. 83. Col. 670.
who lived about the year of the Lord, 398. To the Lords Table, says he, it is
worse to admit a man openly polluted with sins, then a man bodily possessed
with devils, referring to the custom that then was to keep off 3. sorts from
the Supper of the Lord, Catechumeni, Energi^meni, Profani, and accounting this
last the worst, Let him be, says that Father, who he will, a Magistrate a
Captain, a crowned King, if he come in his sins, he must be put by: No small
vengeance hangs over their heads, that will admit such men to the Supper of the
Lord. I had rather give my self a sacrifice, then give to such men the
Sacrament, thus he. So Cyprian, Cypr. Sermo. de lapsi. 50 page ^21 lib. 1. Ep.
3. lib. 4. Ep. 2.
who was about the year after Christ, 240. exceedingly condemns the rash giving
the Supper of the Lord to some relapsed from the fait^, and wretched in their
life, and commends other congregations for care in this case, concluding that
this holy ordinance does not appertain to all Justin Martyr, who was about the
year after Christ, 150. in his Apology for Christians to Antoninus the
Emperor, writes thus, In our Assemblies we admit none to the Lords Supper, but
such us being baptized, continue in professing the true faith, and leading such
a life as Christ has taught. His testimony is the more to be marked, living so
near the Apostles times, not above thirty years after St. John, yet then th^s
course was practiced in the Churches of Christ, and so running along through
centuries of years, I might multiply in late writers, Bilson in his Christian
subject, and perpetual Church Government: Not only the lack of the word and
Sacraments (says he) but the abuse of either, greatly hazards the weal of the
whole Church, yea casting holy thngs to dogs, etc. procures a dreadful doom as
well to consenters as presumers, Divina maiestas and Evangelica disciplina
exigit de publicis peccatoribus etiam petentibus sacra denegetur communio. 3^.
pa. quast. 30. Art. 6.
it being the way to turn the house of God into a den of thieves, if profane
ones be allowed to defile the mysteries and assemblies of the faithful. Yea I
find Aquinas, The majesty of Church Discipline (says he) should never suffer
this, to let open, and known offenders presume to the Table of the Lord, so
that to debar such is no new thing, and

2. No imperious thing. A ministerial power to censure scandalous sinners,
sure belongs to the Officers of the Church, though a lording power over due
privileges, pertains not to any in the Church, such exercise of dominion our
Savior forbids, Mat. 20.25, 26. as may prove to any unjust or injurious, but
shall there therefore no rule or authority take place in the Church? Bucer well
notes out of those words of Christ in Matthew against Anabaptists, ^e that
according to the will of God bears rule godly, Multi sum qui disciplinam
imperiu^ esse iudicans ac rationale^ castigatione^ superbia as^ signaniquum non
sit imperium nisi ubi aliquid iubetur igiustum noc superbiae nisi ubi
negligitur disciplina.
does nothing less then domineer or lord it, for he does most of all serve. In
this we are the servants of the Church, not lording, but laboring for its
good, i^ purity (and peace, Austin speaks excellently to this, for it seems in
his time there were those who opposed this power in the Church, and charged it
to be an imperious pride, whereupon he says thus, there are many who account
good discipline an imperious rule, and ascribe just censures to be the fruits
of pride, whereas it is not imperious, but where somewhat is commanded
injurious, nor is it pride but where due discipline is neglected and contemned.
Its horrible pride in those that will not submit to Christ's government. When
reformation begun in Luthers time, some profanely professed they had rather
live under the dominion of the Turk, then where all should be ordered according
to the will of God: such I fear, remain still that will not come under rule,
though that which Gods word requires. Duty in this kind, the Apostle three
times in one chapter commands, Heb. 13. Remember them that have the rule over
you, ver. 7. Obey them that have the rule over you, ver. 17. Salute them that
have the rule over you, ver. 24. Sure in the Churches of Christ, though none to
lord over, yet some to rule over, Christ has appointed: so some to be ruled.

Obj. To put people by the Sacrament,

Answ.

1. Intuitive, which is by an immediate looking in.

2. Arguitive, which is by a further going about.

In the first sense, so God only knows the hearts of men, his eyes by an
instant and direct inspection, takes at once an exact view of all the windings
and corners of the crookedest and closest hearts, Pro. 15.11.

In the second sense, so we know the hearts of men by fetching a compass, and
comparing one thing with another, and by reasoning from one thing to another,
we argue out the estate of men's hearts, Pro. 20.5. Counsel in the heart of man
is as deep waters, but a man of understanding draws it out, let man's heart be
never so great a deep, and the counsels of it lie never so low, yet the fiery
and flaming eye of God, suddenly sees to the bottom. An understanding man can
by reasoning and observing draw out the the heart in its counsels and colors
by degrees. The inwards of every man's heart lies open and naked to the eyes of
God, (...)
as the intrals of a beast, when the skin is pulled off, the belly ripped up, and
parts cut asunder, lie open to our eyes. Thus the Apostle expresses it in the
greek Heb. 4 13. yet we may by o^tward discoveries learn to know much of men's
hearts.

A twofold knowledge is here further considerable.

A knowledge by the roots.

A knowledge by the fruits.

1. By the roots, that is, by what runs within, the workings in and of the
heart more abstractly, thus we know our own hearts by the thoughts.

2. By the fruits, that is, by what comes ordinarily out from men in their
words and deeds, and thus we know other men's hearts, Mat. 7.16. By their fruits
ye shall know them. And now acordingly we judge. If I would judge my own heart
and estate, I will look first to what lies inward; and observe the workings and
movings of my own thoughts.

If I would judge another man's heart and estate, I will look to that which lies
outward, and observe the way of his words and works.

There is a great difference between Gods judging of men and our judging of
them. God judges of men's ways and works, according to the heart, and inward
thoughts. If a man's heart be good or bad, so God reckons the man good or bad.
We judge of men's hearts according to their ways and works, when the stream of
a man's life runs puddle water, we judge the spring head in the heart, is
unclean and naught.

1. We judge by their words of their hearts, for out of the abundance of the
heart, the mouth speaks, Mat. 12.34. The Physician looking upon the sick man's
tongue, when he sees that foul, he concludes it is worse within, when men's
tongues are black and speckt with oaths and lies, it argues a rotten heart
within. It Is a smoakie house where ordinarily the smoke breaks out at doors and
windows.

By the words of men's mouths they bewray the thoughts and estate of their
hearts, Act 8. When Simon Magus offered to buy the gifts of the Holy Ghost with
money, then Peter knew his thoughts were bad, and his estate was naught, Pray
that the thoughts of thy heart may be forgiven thee, for I perceive thou art in
the gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity, ver. 22, 23.

2. We judge of men's hearts by their works. The hand of the watch or clock
without, show how the wheels within go. The heart is the fountain of all
actions, Out of the heart proceeds, murders, adulteries, thefts, etc. Mat.
15.19. An evil man out of the evil treasure of his heart, brings forth
evil things, Mat. 12.35. We read of Tiberius, when one pretended to the crown,
(...). Joseph. de bello Iud. lib. 2. cap. 5.
and could not by many questions be tripped in his tale, he desired to feel his
hand, and finding not there the delicacy and softness of a prince, but the
hardness and brawninesse of a mechanic, he soon discovered the truth, Let men
pretend to Christ, yet if their hands be hard, if they be exercised in the
works of wickedness, the workers we know be naught, and we judge them men
unmeet for the Table of the Lord.

Object. Mat. 7.1. Judge not.

Answ. Rash and unjust judging of men our Savior forbids, which as Augustine
has well observed, consists especially in two things.

1. When we see a man do good, Non reprehendamus ea quae nescimu^ quo
animofiant, nec ita reprehendamus qua manifesta sunt ut desperemus sanitatem.
Aug. de ser. dom. in moni^. lib. 1.
yet judge his internal meaning therein to be naught.

2. When we see a man do ill, and so judge his eternal being, that therefore
he will never be good. When we judge a wicked man unmeet for the Table of the
Lord, we do neither of these, we judge him from his ill actions, to be for
present in an ill condition, what his case shall be for future, we enter not
upon.

Object.

Answ.

Quadam in Scripturis and sunt and dicuntur, quadam in scripturis sunt etsi non
dicuntur.
2. Warrants for things are found in the word two ways.

Formally in syllables.

Virtually in principles, by explicit sentence, or implicit consequence: many
things may have a sufficient Scripture-warrant, though not a direct express
Scripture-word, To the case in hand, That professed Pagans, Idiots, mad men,
persons actually drunk are to be denied the Supper of the Lord, the Sc^ipture
surely warrants it, yet where does the Scripture expressly word it?

The Gospel condemns all unworthy receiving, and declares that whoever eats and
drinks unworthily, eat and drink their own damnation, 1 Cor. 11.29. and the
Gospel commands all pastoral care to prevent sin, and by all good ways to
preserve, and save the souls of such as are under charge, Act. 20.28. Now come
to such as we may be sure will fall under this soul damning sin of unworthy
receiving the Sacrament, if we admit them, to prevent so sure a sin, and so for
a judgment, the Gospel well warrants our refusal of them: where there is in
men an unworthiness in their conditions, there will be a certain unworthiness
in their transactions, if sinful in their estates, then sinful in their acts,
so that as a real unworthiness, secret and hidden, yet known to a man's self,
should make him of himself forbear the Table of the Lord, so real
unworthiness when it is visible and open gives from Gods word a sufficient
ground to them in place that know it, to forbid those the Table of the Lord.

And if Gods word warrants that to be adjudged visible unworthiness, and
debarrable from the Table of the Lord, which arises only from a privative
cause, as want of wisdom in a fool, or use of reason in a frantic man, then
without doubt the word warrants our judging that to be visible unworthiness,
and sufficient to debar from the Lords Table, which also proceeds from a
positive cause, to wit, open evils in wicked men.

3. Gods word yet gives forth its warrant more fully not to suffer such sinful
men to conscience with us at the Supper of the Lord.

How the word forbids our communion with them, and commands our carriage
toward them: Two things there are to be taken notice of.

First, There is a private familiarity in ordinary converses.

2. There is a public fellowship for religious uses.

Now our care and carriage toward wicked men, in respect of both these, lies
thus.

For the former the word of God requires, that we draw forth from among them.

For the latter, the word of God enjoins, that we put them fo^th from among us.

If we respect intimate familiarity in private converses, the Scripture calls us
to withdraw from them, 2 These. 3.6. We command you brethren, in the name of
Jesus Christ, to withdraw your selves from every brother, that wa^ks
disorderly. He does not say, withdraw from the Congregation in which, or from
the public Ordinances at which, (...) disordered brother is, but from the
disordered brother himself in respect of private society, and keeping him
company so explained, I^. 14. Do not company with him, that he may be ashamed,
to withdraw from the Congregation where he is, it does cast shame upon them
all, as well as him, which injustice the word no where warrants. If we respect
public fellowship in religious exercises, and for the congregationall use of
holy Ordinances, then the way the word prescribes is, not to come out from
among them, but to cast them out from among us, we must keep our stations
still, and remove them, not our selves. This course the Apostle appoints the
Church of Corinth, concerning the incestuous person, 1 Cor. 5. In which chapter
he speaks to the point in hand, two considerable ways.

1. By a figurative allusion in the 7. verse.

2. By an illative conclusion in the last verse.

1. The Apostle alludeth unto the figures and fashions, as the feast of the
Jewish Passover was wont to be celebrated, to wit, with unleavened bread, Exo.
12. Now the similitude being thence fetched, we may think the Apostle therein
had a principal aim to direct these Corinthian Christians the rather, touching
the course that ought to be taken among them, for the more pure administration
of the Supper of the Lord, it succeeding in the place, of the Passover, and
persuades to purge out the old leaven, that is, put out scandalous and vicious
livers, that as formerly the Paschall, now the Eucharisticall feast may be well
kept, ver. 8. the reason is given in that leaven let alone it may sour the
whole lump. Cum fratre in que vitia hac reperiuntur, non solum sacramenta sum
edenda sedus communam escam decet, ut crubescat cum vitatur, and se corrigat.
Amb. com. in 1 Cor. 5.
One scandalous sinner let alone, may prove prejudicial to the Assembly, purge
out therefore. etc. Let not profane persons be suffered to eat with you at the
Lords Table, so Ambrose long since, and Diodat of late, understands that eating
mentioned in the 11. verse, to comprehend. Because their leaven of wickedness,
may leaven others, therefore they are to be purged out, and not to be eaten
with, now an immutable reason makes an immutable command, so that this
Apostolical injunction to the Church of Corinth, is obligatory upon all the
succeeding Churches of Christ, where the reason falls.

But 2. we see how the Apostle plainly concludes in the last verse, Therefore
put away from among you that wicked person, The inference arises from somewhat
immediately premised, to wit, their own constant way of judgment, which is
exercised toward those who are under their discipline, reaching to them within
their own jurisdiction. Do not ye judge them that are within? ye so do, and
ought to do, therefore put away from among you that wicked man, some have
translated it in the neuter gender, to be some wicked thing the Apostle
requires the Corinthians to put away, Aug. lib. 3. cont. Par^^. cap. 2.
so Augustine once expounded the text, but did after freely confess his
error, Lib. 2. Retra. cap. 17.
in his retractations putting it in the masculine gender, and referring it to a
man, not a thing, put away that wicked man. (...).
The Greek word for wicked properly signifies any evil one, and the Greek
Article being added, it notes, (...)
one more notoriously evil, as the Devil, or some vile wicked man, hereby the
Apostle teaches, that every evil man is not so to be put out, but such as be
more egregiously evil, as this incestuous Corinthian. We find how the Apostle
phrases it in the 5. verse. To deliver such a one to Satan, etc. He that is
such a one ought to be cast out from Church society, put away from among you
that wicked man, and where the like cause is, this course must be used.

Object.

Answ. A quatenus ad omne valet consequ^mia.
then in all the lesser pa^ts of it, The whole implies the parts, The greater
contains the lesser, and generals include their particulars. Omne majus
continet in se minus.
Excommunica^ion and Sacrament suspension, are so related, that what word does
bring in the former, will bear up the latter. and if in the Church of Christ
there be from the word a power to put wholly out, then there is a power in this
or that to put by.

I shall clear this more fully by considering the acts of disciplinary power in
the Church, two ways.

1. In the kinds and g^adations of them.

2. In the ends and intentions of them.

As in the Church there are ^everall sorts and degrees of sinners, so in the
Church there ought to be several sorts and degrees of censures, Nemo repent
fit pessimus
all among us are not alike evil, neither for matter, manner or measure, no
man at first is a sinner in the highest degree, so no man at first is to have a
censure of the higest degree, as excommunication major which cuts off, and
casts out from all at one clap.

And as for the intent, end, Gladius non inimici necantis sedmedici sanantir.
and aim of executing Church Censures, it is for the amendment of sinners, all
this power being for edification, and not for destruction, 2 Cor: 10.8. now
means must be suited, both in quality, and quantity, as the end may be attained.

So much blood is taken away in a disease as may recover the patient, Tantum
destinati sumen dum est quantum ad finem prodest.
so much of an ingredient is put into a potion or medicine, as is proper for
that man, and cure of that malady. So in exercise of Church Discipline, that
and so much of that, as may restore the offender suffices, Supplicia non sunt
multiplicanda sine necessitate.
if a less penalty do it, no need of a greater, and for this course we have
the warrant of the word, Mat. 18.15, 16, 17. If thy brother trespass against
thee, etc. If upon private admonition he acknowledged his fault, go no further,
or if being admonished before one or two more, in case the first have no force,
if the second succeeds, there stop, if not rise on. Tell it the Church, and
when it comes there, shall not the Church have power to proportion its censures
as the plantiffe had before it came there, Jude. 22, 23. Of some have
compassion putting a difference, and others, save, Perkins in loc.
pulling them out of the fire. The Apostle herein prescribes the course the
Church is to take in censuring offenders. Of some have compassion, how? by
letting them quite alone, there is no compassion in that, but by suiting
judgments to the state of delinquents, where the sinner is more curable, let
the censure be more favorable, and where the sinner is more incorrigible and
obstinate, let the censure be more terrible and violent. Others save pulling
them out of the fire, which is applied to excommunication, of use in desperate
cases, and so more seldom. In the Church of Geneva but two in 10. years struck
with this doom, as Mr Beza reports.

The ancient counsels of Rome had rods and axes carried before them. Rods as
ensigns of their lenity if offenses less, and offenders penitent. Axes as
tokens of severity, if offenses were greater, and offenders incorrigible.

In the Church it is meet to have respect to offenses and offenders, in
inflicting censures, those whom a less reformes, spare the greater, we grant

1. Some to deserve the utmost to be cast out from all, to wit, word,
Sacraments, and prayer.

As God sometimes sees cause to cut off some men by taking away both word and
Sacraments from them: Quomodo execidit eos Dominus? tum Dominus excidit, quando
propterincredulitatem Evangelium aufert and Sacramenta. Oleuian.
and thus God is said to cut off those incredulous Jews, Romans 11.20. so his
Officers sometimes may see cause to cut off some men by taking them away from
both sermons and Sacraments.

It was a worthy expression of an approved Author, suppose any man, Bilson,
Christian. subject. part. 3. pa. 63 64, 74. and 52.
says he, be he a prince, if he will not submit himself to the precepts of
Christ, but wilfully maintain either heresy or open impurity, the Ministers
are to admonish him what danger from God is at the door, and if he impenitently
persist, they must not suffer him to communicate either in divine prayer, or
any holy mysteries, among the holy people of God, but wholly to be excluded the
Congregation, Thus was Theodosius the Emperor excommunicated, whereupon
Ambrose would not suffer him to enter into the Church of Millan, and it has
been the practice of the ancient Church to shut out of the Congregation of Gods
people, incorrigible persons, and not to allow them liberty to come within the
doors. Yet

2. There may be some to be debarred from the Sacrament only, and to be
admitted to the word and prayer, who are more corrigible and curable, Deus
iustitiae gladlum oleo misericordiae exacuit.
toward whom its good to whet the sword of justice with the oil of mercy,
according to the commendable custom of the Church, in the most pure and
primitive times, Just. Mart. Apolog. 2.
two sorts we read of, to wit, such who were called Catechumeni, Isiodorus in
lexico.
who were newly entered into the faith of Christ, not yet baptized, and others
who were called poenitentes who for some offense were enjoined to do penance,
both these though they might lawfully hear the sermons, and pray together with
the rest, Chatechumeni exeunt^.
yet they might not partake of the Sacrament, but after the Gospel read, and
the Sermon ended, the Deacon was wont to say, Go ye hence, ye may depart, Ite
missa est. Qui non communicate, dei locum. Greg. dial^. lib. 1 cap. 23. Concils.
Cart. 6. can. 6 con. Agathen. can. 60. Lapsi in haeresim agentes paenitentiam
cum catechumeni egredi commonentur discodant
so in Gregory's time, the Deacon used to cry, you that are not to communicate,
give place: to this accords the canons of several Councels, which required
gross offenders, either in judgment or practice, to depart out of the Church,
when the Sacrament went to be administered, though they stayed till other
exercises were ended, one in this case runs thus, Those who like dogs have gone
back to their vomit, we decree they shall join in prayer only with the
faithful in the Church, Vide Ep. de cretal. Siricij.
but be kept off from the banquet of the Lords Table, that by this correction
they may both amend themselves, and be an example to others. Chrysostom in
diverse places seems to divide the whole multitude into three sorts, whereof
some were commanded away, Chr^. ad pop. Antioch. Hom. 61.
and might not communicate, some departed away, and would not communicate, some
remained still, who might and did communicate, the former he condoles, the
second he condemns, and the last he commends. Whose pious practice it was, with
great devotion to partake not only in the word and prayer, but in the Sacrament
also. Jewel. lib. 2. Artic. 1. de missa priv.


Other writers report how in the primitive Church, as all the godly were
received to the holy mysteries, Greg. Neocasarriensis, can,
so by watchful discipline the apparent wicked and ungodly were removed, and
that with great discretion, according to the enormity and quality of the
faults. The greatest offenders were utterly excluded from the Congregation, as
men not meet to be in the company of the godly, Others were suffered to enter
into the Temple, and to hear the sermon, but to go out at prayer, Audientes.
Others were permitted to be present at prayer, Cassiodorus out of Socrates
Histo. tripar. lib. 9. cap. 35. stant rei, and velu t in lamentationibus
constituti, and cu^ socra celebratio fuerit at impleta co^munio^em non
percipiunt. Dionys. Ha. Hierar, cap. 3.
but from the communion they were required to depart, of such its said that
during preaching and prayer, they stand mournfully lamenting. but when that
evercise is over, they are willed away, without the communion, until they
bring forth some more approved fruits of repentance.

Object.

Answ.

Collectively as the whole lies together.

Disjunctively in the parts asunder.

If that which is objected be taken up all together, the main strength lies in
pleading custom, thereby to warrant a universal admittance to this holy
Ordinance, the weakness of which shall be discovered from two causes.

1. Because such custom has been cross to purity.

2. Because such custom has been cross to verity.

We find how from a plea of custom the pureness of this precious Ordinance
has been wronged and corrupted in two respects.

1. In respect of the Elements. 2. In respect of the communicants.
Upon this pretense such things in this Supper for Elements have been taken up,
and continued, as Christ never ordained. To instance in these heretics of old
named Aquarij, because in the holy administration they used water only, and no
wine, which doing they upheld from a long custom, Cyprian then alive wrote
much against them, to refute the poorness of this plea, declaring how absurd
it was, when in reason they were overcome, to defend themselves by urging the
long custom. Upon this pretense also such persons at this Supper for
communicants have been taken in and continued, as Christ never intended.

How common has it been when such days and seasons of the year have come.
People merely out of custom have thought they must come to the Table of the
Lord. Chrysostom cries down such senseless conceits of several in his time.
I see many, says he, Chrysostom. ad. Ep. Hom. 3.
rudely and rashly press to partake of the body of Christ, more out of custom
then conscience.

If the time of lent, or day of Epiphany be come, they call to partake how
unprepared soever they be. Thus has it been with multitudes among us, if some
great time, as Easter or the like come about, then of course and custom, they
must not miss a Sacrament, making custom their Christ, and Easter their
Savior.

Again where custom is without truth, it is only an ancient error, now this
custom not alone destitute of, but opposite to truth, we may clearly conclude
it. Tertullians saying is sound and good. Tertul. com. Mar. l. 4. c. 5.


That is truest which is f^rst, and that which is first is truest. Now if we
look to the first administrations of the Supper by Christ, then by his
Apost^es, and so on in the primitive times, all were not allowed the Table of
the Lord, as is already declared, since sinful men have ^een suffered at the
Supper of the Lord, but from the beginning it was not so. Chrysostom has a
considerable expression, Aquilarum non graculorum ha^ mensa est, Chrysostom. Hom. 24
in^. ad Cor.
says he, The Table of the Lord is that whereon the carcass is laid, we must
not suffer chattering jaies to come thereunto, for only high-flying Eagles are
to feed thereupon, whom he excellently opens, we proceed to the parts of the
present objection, which are principally two.

1. That which pertains to the Ministers giving to all.

2. That which concerns the Ministers receiving all.

Ministers herein under charge are of two sorts. Some corrupt and vicious,
others godly and gracious. If we consider, it is no marvel for Ministers,
scandalous and wicked themselves, to admit wicked and scandalous men to the
Sacrament. Had we had that clericalis disciplina, which learned Bucer did so
often call for in King Edward the 6. days, it had prevented much evil in this
kind: for want thereof, O the monstrous miscarriages that have been among many
of this order, both in their personal and Ministerial places. To instance in
this so black and blameworthy the prostituting holy mysteries to profane men,
but such Ministers practice is a poor president to abide by in this business.
Come to Ministers holy and good, unto whom this common coming of all to the
Sacrament has been the heaviest burden on their backs, and these I reduce to
two ranks.

1. Such as after a while, have eased themselves of it.

2. Such as have stood still, and groaned sore under it.

Hereupon many Ministers of precious parts and spirits, that they might be
delivered of this load, have been brought to forsake, some the calling, others
the Kingdom, and to bid a final farewell to dear England; ventring Sea-voiages,
to live in poor wildernesses, to pass through boisterous winds and waves, to
dwell among wild beasts, with many wants: Others that have stayed by it, how
have they mourned under it, both to God and men! Hereupon at many a Sacrament,
they have much straightened their own comfortable communion with Christ, through
the uncomfortable communion of others, this very ingredient has imbittered the
whole cordial: how with troubled hearts and trembling hands have they dealt
out the outward signs, with lamenting looks lifted up to God, besides many
secret cries to heaven for help in this very thing! Yea and beyond what
sorrowful mournings they have made to God, they have given faithful warnings
to men in this matter, that they might take heed of sinful receiving. O what
beseeching with arguments, and denouncing of judgments, and standing in the
way of wicked men, with Gods word, as well as they might, to hinder their
coming in to the crucifying of Christ, as the Angel of the Lord stood with a
drawn sword, in Balaams way, to affright his going on, to the cursing of
Israel. Yea some have proceeded further in the present case, but how far
soever any with us have formerly acted, it is now meet we all do more, and be
more exact in this matter.

1. Because these be times of sorer tribulation, when a Church or Kingdom is in
trouble, the Lord looks some good should be set up, that was not in it before
seen, as when a woman is in travel, all about her look for somewhat to be
brought forth, that was not before born, Ezekiel. 24.6.12. we read what a woe God
pronounces against the city, that is as a boiling pot by reason of a great fire
under, but yet the scum remains in. O the hot fires of affliction over which we
have boiled, and shall we not yet cast out our scumme? have the winds been
high, the tempest great, the ship of our state often ready to be broke, yet not
all join to throw out Jonah? to purge Sacrament and assemblies of profane men,
for whose sake these storms have lien sore upon us? yea and why should not such
^onahs themselves submit to be cast out, that so our sea might cease raging?
Have we been beat with Gods rod, and yet not bow to Christ's Scepter? It is
reported of Grosthead once a Bishop of Lincoln, speaking of the Discipline in
the Primitive Churches, against known offenders, calling them out to public
repentance, and casting them out for incorrigible wickedness: which
discipline, said he, is not like to be let into this Land, unless way for it
be first cut by the blows of a bloody sword. A sword of blood has cut and killed
heaps upon heaps in this Kingdom, and yet are we awk to good ways: are not our
necks still stiff? who yields to the yoke of Jesus Christ?

2. Because these be times of sadder desolations, and thereupon sinful men are
herein the less sufferable. We read, Levit. 14. A house where the plague of
leprosy was, if cureable, the course was for the Priest to command the plague
stones to be taken away, and cast out into an unclean place, without the city,
and cause the house to be scraped round about, and the dust scraped off to be
poured out without the city, in an unclean place, verse. 40, 41. But if the
plague in a house were prevalent, and all the stones, mortar, and timber were
taken with it, it was to be all broken down, verse. 45. This has been the case
of Churches and Kingdoms, in whom wickedness has been so prevalent, and
wicked ones so abundant, as no way with them, but pulling down. O that we could
see if any course for our cure by scraping off, and casting out leprous and
infected ones might yet be, least we likewise be utterly broken down. Christian
Churches who have held wicked men in their lap, God at length has spewed them
out of his mouth, Revel. 3.16. and because they would not cast out others, God
has cast up them, and laid them like a filthy vomit on the ground never to be
taken up, and it has been indeed observed that those Christian Churches, the
Lord has laid wast for indulging wickedness have never been restored or made
up again. The seven Asian Churches that once were, are to this day a dreadful
instance.

3. Because these be times of brighter illuminations, and therefore it is meet
to stand at a greater distance, with the works and workers of darkness. More
clarity requires more purity. Things good, the goodness of them is more seen.
Things evil, the evil of them is now more known. Whereupon it is meet we be
more exact to embrace the one, and to refuse the other. Luk 15.8. What woman
having lost one piece of silver, does not light a candle and sweep the house,
etc. The house is the Church, the piece of silver lost in the house, is
impenitent sinners living in the Church, the woman of the house, is the Pastors
of the Church, her lighting of the candle, is their preaching of the Gospel to
convert wicked men, the besome with which she sweeps the house is that
discipline which they exercise in the Church toward open offenders: Now its
meet when the candle is burning, the besome should be sweeping. O that now both
might be brought and set up in Gods house, the candle of clear doctrine, to
dispel the darkness of ignorance, and the besome of strict discipline to sweep
out the dust of profaneness, and so all clear and clean.

4. Because these be times of greater Reformation, not of looser toleration; we
are not to copy according to what has been formerly loose, but to labor the
amendment of all heretofore amiss. Consider we but the very censures of the
Church, how they have been corrupted, abused and perverted, in two respects.

1. In respect of the men they have been inflicted on.

2. In respect of the matters they have been inflicted for.

Those that this bow has been bent upon, and these arrows let fly at, were
still men most pious and zealous: carry on crows have been let come to the
carcass, when all the powder has been spent upon Doves and Pigeons, Quid est
quod Ecclesiae gladius, viz. Excommunicatio, extrabitur pro re nihili, ut pro
re nummaria? Gers. lib. de Eccles. defec.
for some circumstantiall, poor, pecuniary trifles forbid the Table of the
Lord: as Gerson complains, how in popish times the Ecclesiastical sword was
wont to be drawn for mere matters of nothing, etc. So since has it been
against Gods dearest servants, when the vilest of the people have been fed with
the bread of the Lord, and ought not this sad abuse to be reformed, and so
censures reduced and restored to their Primitive purity? We may well consider
for things of this sort, Their first formation, their deformation, and their
reformation. The forming of all at first was fair, Church-orders and Ordinances
right and regular, but O the foul deformities that have fallen in since, which
to us call aloud to labor a reformation, now the Apostle, Heb. 9.10. titles the
time of the Gospel, the time of reformation, or the time of correction, as the
Greek word signifies, (...).
and indeed if there be no disciplinary correction, there will be no
Gospel-reformation.

To close this part we plainly see, that however it has been, yet now from the
present seasons there are pressing reasons why Ministers should manage this
Sacrament-matter much more exactly then ever, to set up and keep up such a
quickhedge of holy discipline, as may keep off profane men from defiling the
holy things of God.



the earthly signs and visible shadows, not the heavenly and invisible
substance. Gregory of Valentia knowing that for some of his seven Sacraments
there were no visible signs to be named, held there was no need of such signs
to the nature of any Sacrament: Disp. 3. de sacr. qu. 1 and punct. 2,
but truly if there were no such signs to be received in the Sacrament, the
most of men never yet received any thing of a Sacrament.

No man can actually receive the Sacrament, but he must receive those signs,
but a man may actually receive those signs and yet not receive the Sacrament.
Godly men they virtually and effectually often receive the Sacrament, when they
do not actually receive the signs, and wicked men they often actually receive
the signs, and yet never virtually and effectually receive the Sacrament.

2. Have people often partaked of this Supper? how is it then that they are yet
so unfit for it?

A business that a man has often done, he is dexterous and ready to, knows how
to go judiciously and exactly about it: but O how awk and to seek are the most
of men to manage this matter, any that proves them shall find them as unfit
and unapt to this holy service, us if they had never come near the Supper of
the Lord, their ignorance as dark, their faith as dead, their desires as dull,
men wholly unmeet to meddle with these Sacramental mysteries.

3. Have they to this Ordinance been often admitted? truly they have for which
the more to be humbled, for sure thereby the more guilt is upon them, and the
more wrath is against them, the guilt of blood, and the wrath of God so much
the more abides them, so often as they have been at the Supper of Christ, so often
they have been gu^lty of the blood of Christ, 1 Cor. 11.27 I remember M.
Greenham speaking of non residents wishes that this Inscription or motto,
might be wri^ten on their study-doors without, and walls within, on all their
books they look on, beds they lie on, tables they sit at, etc. The price of
blood, The price of blood. The like were to be wished for to all that have often
been bad communicants, that in great letters it were written on their shop
doors without, walls within, on all their wares, and whatever objects are before
their eyes, The guilt of blood, The guilt of blood. O how ought this to
affright and afflict their hearts, to be often guilty of the blood of Gods
dearest son, and Saints sweetest Savior, once damning is too little for them
that have done this deed so often. This at the last day will bring an increase of
Judgment, not be a ground for argument, to say, Lord we have received many
Sacraments, heard many sermons, Lord, we have often eat and drunk in thy
presence, and thou did often teach in our streets, to this is that astonishing
answer, Depart from me ye workers of iniquity, Luke 13.

4. Have people all in general formerly come to the Sacrament? So there is no
particular person but upon condition may come again. It is not for men's persons
sakes, but for their conditions sakes, whereupon we dare not admit them: let
but their conditions be altered, and their persons shall not be hindered. As
innocent Adam having changed his condition, and of good become bad, was turned
out, not to eat of the tree of life, so the most sinful son of Adam, if he
changes his condition, and of bad becomes good, he may be taken in to eat of
the bread of life, as while men's estates are not good, but visibly bad, we must
bar them out, so when those very men's estates are not bad, but visibly good, we
may bring them in.

That profligate prodigal, Luke 15. when he repented, and returned to his
father, O what music and dancing in his Fathers house? how was he feasted with
the fatted calf at his Fathers Table? and O the welcome that the wickedest man
in the world may have to the Table of the Lord, if he humbles his soul, abhors
his sin, forsakes his lusts, reformes his life, but if men remain in their
manifest wickedness, we can by no means admit them, whatever they have
formerly been, as in our persons we ought to grow up, and go on to greater
degrees of purity and holiness, so in our Congregations,

In Jacobs ladder the Angels of God were ascending and descending, none
standing still: to stick in our old wonts, and make no progress in the
practice of piety, becomes not Christian^ty.

Mat. 5.47. (...)
We must not only in good works do more, but do better, as our graces must be
more refined from their contrary corruptions, so holy Ordinances from opposite
pollutions.

Object. to the Sacrament, of them in this case, is no more required.

Answ.

Now what that power is, and where that power lies the opening of two or three
Gospel-texts will tell us.

I will give unto thee (says Christ to Peter) the keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven, etc. by the Kingdom of heaven whereof the keys are, is not meant any
earthly or civil state, but the Church of Christ under the Gospel, for of that
Christ expressly speaks in the verse before. By the keys of this Kingdom are
meant several powers of the Church. He says not key, as if but one, but keys
in the plural number, for of these there be two at least.

A key of Instruction. A key of jurisdiction.

A key of doctrine, A key of discipline.

To thee will I give the keys, in that note two things.

1. There must be some persons of such a function and calling as may exercise
the power of both keys, power are in vain, except they be drawn into act, Hoc
est quod dicimus P etrum gessisse persona^ omnium Apostuloru^ quare hanc
Promissionem non uni P etro sed omnibus Apostolis factam esse and in illo omnes
Ecclesia claves accepisse. Whit. de Pont Romans
and keys be to no purpose, without hands to use them.

2. To all such persons as Peter did represent and include, are these keys to
be committed, which as Augustine and others expound, did signify not only all
the Apostles present, but the Church in and with her due Officers and
Ministers, to the end of the world, Mat. 28.19, 20. as may appear by the power
here promised, and after actually given, John. 20.22, 23.

To these Christ gives both the key of doctrine, for the unfolding of
Scriptures, and the key of Discipline, for the inflicting of censures.

Now in this key of Church Discipline there is sure some power of censure
beyond admonition,

1. Because else it need not have the distinct place of a key, admonition might
be reduced to the doctrinall power, and so be but one key, as those Scriptures
declare where teaching and admonishing are conjoined in one sentence and
service, Col. 1.28. Col. 3.16.

2. Because else it would not have the proper use of a key, if in it there were
not a power, as to open the door and let some in; so to lock up the door, and
shut others out, if only to be admonished, and so all taken in.

Matthew. 18.15, 16, 17, 18. If thy brother trespass against thee, admonish him
between thee and him alone, if he hear not thee, admonish him before two or
three more, if yet he hear not, tell it the Church, etc. The Church is by a
Synechdoche, the lawful Governors of the Church, the Pastors and Presidents
thereof, to whom the censures of the Church do of right belong. Thus
Chrysostom and Theophylact among the Ancients, (...).
Pareus and Piscator among our late writers, expound the place. Christ says
not, Tell it to some power in the Church, but tell it to the Church, that has
power it self in an Ecclesiastical way to correct contumacies, and to inflict
Church censures, some beyond admonition.

1. Because else the Church representative is able to do no more then the
particular complainant has done, for he has admonished already, both single
and with others, and so much may Christians do, as to admonish an offender,
both diverse together, as well as asunder, 1 These. 5.14. 2 These. 3.14.

2. Because else the Church has not such sufficient ways to help it self, as
the particular complainant has. A private Christian offended, may admonish him
that gives the offense, first alone, then before two or three: if yet no
redress, he can seek help of the Church, make his appeal thither, now when the
fault comes to the Church, if it can only admonish, having no power it self to
go further, whether is it to appeal? if we think of the civil Magistrate, there
was none professing Christianity for ^00. years after Christ, fit to friend the
Church, and how unmeet some yet are, in some places to assist the Churches of
Christ, is sad to consider: Christ, who proposed standing rules for future to
his Church, left it very bare, if he allowed it only to admonish offenders, and
then admit them in their offenses. We know an offense when it comes to the
Church, the measure of the sin is increased and extended higher, therefore the
measure of the censure must be proportioned and enlarged further: and sure by
the text, the Church offended does more then admonish.

1. It is to do that which suited to the censures of the Jewish Sanedrin, for
though our Savior in the place does not refer complaining Christians
thither, for he lays down rules to remain, when none of this should be, yet he
alludes to that for present, and would have that in his Churches, that might
answer thereunto, their censure was more then to admonish, to excommunicate, to
put out of the Synagogue.

2. It is to do that whereupon every particular member is to repute the party
as a heathen and publican thereupon, not for Church society, but to be as an
alien without, this argues more then admonition.

3. The Church does that whereupon the offender stands bound in heaven, sure
more then admonished.

4. The Church is to do its utmost that may gain the soul of the offender, for
which there is a censure of the Church, beyond admonition, 1 Cor. 5.5. 1 Timothy
1.20.

Text is Titus 3.10. A man that is an heretic, after the first and second
admonition reject. Reject, The Latin word signifies to cast out again, suppose
once out before while not professing Christianity, then so abusing, and
declining Christianity, cast him out again, not only admonish him but reject
him. The Creek word is said to signify the drawing one out of a city, (...)
as an outcast, and translated to the Church, to note the casting out a man by
excommunication, or cutting him off from the society of the Church, this must
be done to a man obstinate in a false opinion, sure also to one obstinate in a
soul conversation, and this Titus must do, not as a Prince or Magistrate, but
as a Pastor or Minister.

Object. he eats and drinks damnation to himself, 1 Cor. 11.^9. It is nothing
to the Minister or to any other.

Answ.

1. It is sin to us, if we do not what we can to prevent it.

2. It is sorrow to us, when to prevent it, we have done what we can. If men
come to the Lords Table unworthily, and so receive their own damnation, if we
may by good means preve^t it and do not, Zanch lib. 1. Ep. page 66.
it is sin to us. We violate charity, and be guilty of iniquity, says Zanchy,
to suffer a man to damn himself with a Sacrament, whom we might restrain, as to
let a man with a sword, stab himself, out of whose hands we might keep such
weapons of death. The Apostle Paul tells Timothy, that if he admits unworthy men
to the Ministry, who are known, or upon trial might be known, he should
thereby partake of other men's sins, 1 Timothy 5.22.24. The same shall we, if we
admit men to the Sacrament, whose sinfulness is or may be known.

2. This same will be sorrow to us, either from what our selves may thereby
suffer, or from what such sinners do thereby suffer. By such an allowance we
may bring on our selves a sore vengeance. Eli because he suffered his wicked
sons to offer sacrifice, to meddle in the Priests office: O the dreadful
judgment that fell both upon him, and his house: he admonished them, but
because he restrained them not, 1 Samuel 3.13. by severely chiding them as he was
a father, by punishing them corporally as he was a judge, by deposing them from
their office as he was a high Priest, says Diodat. God knows how our selves
may suffer if we restrain not such sons of Belial from the Banquet of the Lord.
Eusebius. lib. 3. cap 25.
Eusebius reports of John the Evangelist, that he would not suffer Corinthus
the heretik in the same Bath with him, least some judgment should abide them
both. Into the Bath of this blessed ordinance, we can with no safety to our
selves admit men known in their sins: suppose while we do our duty we quit our
selves of danger, yet sure the voice of each good Minister is as that of Queen
Ester; How shall I endure to see the destruction of my people? they eat and
drink damnation in this Supper to themselves. True, yet that which is damnation
to them, is tribulation to him, their destruction is his affliction, their sin
his sorrow, Chrysostom in Matthew. Hom. 6^. At inquit Calvinus Chrysostomum
siquntus occidi me potius patiar quam haec manus Dei contem^poribus judicatis
sancta Domini porrigat. Melch. Adam. de v^a Calvini.
shall we think to administer to unholy men these holy mysteries, and no matter
to us? There have been those who have thought this something. Chrysostom
protested he had rather give his life to a murderer, then Christ's body to an
unworthy receiver, and rather suffer his own blood to be poured out like water,
then to tender Christ's blessed blood to a base liver: And Mr Calvin in this,
resolving as he professed to follow Chrysostom what ever he suffered, denied
Bartlerius and some other Servetians for their open unworthiness, Cogita
quantis augustijs constringer is ^nam me absente posses celebrari hac
condition ut ad vos usque vel manibus reptarem. Ep. ad Farel.
this Supper of the Lord, whereupon arose such violent opposition against him,
that for ought I read he was forced to forsake Geneva for a time, at another
time Calvin sadly complaining to his friend, upon the approach of a Sacrament,
breaks out: O think, says he, what straits of mind I am in, O that it might
be administered me absent, or pass into peoples hands some other way.

Object.

Answ. Psalm. 50.5. Gather my Saints to me, those who have made a covenant with
me by sacrifice, or above sacrifices, as Mollerus upon the place renders it,
Saints, who beyond and above outward ordinances, have come up to inward
obedience: O it is sweet gathering such Saints in to God and Christ, who being
in covenant are fit for the seals thereof.

2. We are to gather sinners, but how? to wit by the preaching of the Gospel,
not by administering the Sacrament, Ephesians. 1.10. God having made known, What?
not the mystery of this blood in the Sacrament, but the mystery of his will in
the Gospel. Why? that thereby he might gather all into Christ. (...). Grotius.
in ^p. 1.10.
The word, to gather, does imply how mankind by sin is as a decayed house, by
the fall whereof all the pieces are scattered, till workmen come, and out of
the rubbish repair, etc. God by the Gospel gathers men up, and restores them in
Christ, this is the gathering way, Mat. 23.37.

3. If we may gather, then we must sever, as choosing of some does imply a
refusing of others. When David, 1 Samuel 17.40. chose five smooth stones to go
against Goliath, it argues there were other stones he refused, as unfit for that
business, so when some be gathered, there must needs be others severed.

4. Under the law, the Priests were commanded to separate and put a difference
between the clean and unclean, Levit. 10.10. Levit. 11.47. Levit. 20.25. Ezekiel.
42.20.

Object. That was for beasts, places, and things, the Priests were required to
divide between the clean and unclean.

Answ. Yea and a separation sure they were to make between persons clean and
unclean, precious and vile, holy and profane, so as to remove the one from the
other, Ezekiel. 20.37, 38. I will cause you to pass under the rod, and bring you
into the bond of my covenant, and purge out from among you the rebels. Junius
upon the place says, God compares the people of the Jews to a flock, and
himself to a shepherd, who as his sheep pass one by one out of the sheep-coat,
by his rod he severs one from the other: so God received some, and rejected
others, meaning to make his people more pure, he purged out persons most
impure: this difference he puts by using instruments therein, or proposing his
practice as a pattern for others to act the like thereby. The rod of good
Discipline is excellent to make this difference, when people pass under it,
and rebels put out by it, of which the Apostles speaks, 1 Cor. 4.21. Under the
law, that the rules of difference between clean and unclean, did reach to
persons, as well as places and things, is clear, Acts 10.14, 15, 28. Ezekiel.
34.17. and shall not the like liberty be allowed under the Gospel, to judge
between people and people?

5. In the preaching of the Gospel we must sever and put a difference, so cut
out the word, as that each man have his meet portion, (...) recte and (...)
divide. Illyr. in locum.
2 Timothy 2.15. Rightly dividing the word of truth. The Apostle alludes to the
practice of Leviticall Priests, concerning their sacrifices, thereby directing
Evangelicall Ministers how to manage their Sermons, applying such Scriptures to
the holy and humble, as are not fit for persons proud and impenitent, and may
we make no difference in administration of the Sacrament, Cuicunque rei ponis
signum ne confusa cum alijs a te non possis agnosci. Aug. in Joan. Tr. 25.
which being the sealing ought to be the most severing ordinance?

6. Our severing now is far different from Christ's separating at the last
day, in two things.

Ours particular, His general.

Ours temporal, His eternal.

We in severing, judge only some persons, for some practices, known offenders,
for foul offenses. Christ in separating will judge all, close hypocrites, and
close secrets. We sever and put out, so as upon repentance to receive in again,
Christ so separates, as to set in eternal gulf between: so casting out as
never to come in.

Object.

Answ. men desire to have: God to his servants gives what is good for them,
Deus saepe dat iratus quod negat placatu^.
not ever what is asked by them, to sinful men God often grants that in fury,
which he would deny in favor. Thus had Israel a King, Hos. 13.11. Thus God
gave Israel flesh, Psalm. 78.29, 31. While the meat they desired was in their
mouths, the heavy wrath of God came upon them. What parent will give the child
the utmost it desires? to give a knife into a childs hand, is not so hazardous
as to give the Sacrament into the hands of sinful men.

2. It is not the Sacrament many desire, but only somewhat of the Sacrament,
viz. the outward elements of bread and wine, the bread of the Lord, not the
bread which is the Lord, Joh. 6. When Christ spoke of living bread, some cried,
Lord ever give us of that bread, verse. 34. but when Christ told them he was
that bread, they murmured and went away. Luther tells of a great man that
desired to accumulate Church-preferments, Luther in Hosea.
pure bread and wine being at his table, he points with his finger to them
saying, O those be things for which I love this kind of life: so its bread and
wine, why many desire the Sacrament, as Tanners, they desire but the bark of
the tree, so men desire the bark of a Sacrament, this appears to be all they
desire. For, 1. Give them the outward signs and they are satisfied, having the
bread and wine in their bellies, they bless themselves like Micah having got a
Levite into his house, Judge. 17.13. never thinking whether they have Christ in
their hearts or no. 2. Deny them those things, and their anger is up. In nature
the concupiscible faculty of the soul is backed by the irascible, anger is
moved, when desire is denied. Let the Minister deny bread and wine, O how they
are disquieted: Let God withhold Christ, that troubles them not. When outward
signs are not, a gratiou^ soul desires Christ, Psalm 63.1. I thirst after the,
O Lord, in a dry and barren land where no water is: so such a one thirst after
the Lord where no wine is, no Sacrament is; or when outward signs are, yet a
sanctified soul is not therewith content, but longs after the Lord, he cannot
be quie^ with bread and wine in his hand, except he have Christ in his heart.
Habeo Christum in charta non in cords.
But as once Bernard complained, Ah me poor wretch, I read Christ, but I
cannot reach Christ, I have Christ in my books, but cannot hold Christ in my
thoughts.

Its not alone Christ in the signs, but Christ in his soul, that a sincere
saint seeks, Others they desire the loaves, not Christ, or let us judge the
best we may, yet

3. What desires they have Christ-ward are but languid and lukewarm, flat and
faint, whereas right Sacrament desires are strong, vehement desires, Psa. 42.1.
As the Heart pants after the water brooks, so does my soul after thee, O Lord.
His desire to enjoy God in Temple-ordinances, was as the Hearts desire to water,
which as Augustine opens the place, expresses strong desires. Serpents tui
vitia sunt, accide serpents iniquitatis and desiderabis fontem veritatis.
The Heart (says he) in grasing kills, and eats a Serpent, that so infl^mes the
mouth, as no rest till it drinks at some water brook, whereby it is cooled and
comforted. Thy Serpents, O man, are thy sins, kill them, and then thy desires
will kindle, to drink of the springs of truth and life.

Thus he applies it, and indeed while men's lusts are lively, their best
longings are lazy. The case of carnal men.

4. If their desires seem strong, yet then they are no ways well bottomed, nor
well backed.

Their desires have no good bottomings, they are not grounded upon a real
sense of soul-wants, as to arise from self emptiness, or from a taste of
spiritual sweetness, formerly felt in the use of the Ordinance, It Is neither
fruitful experience, nor cheerful expectance of spiritual good that springs
these desires. Their desires have no good backings, the^ are not seconded with
suitable endeavors, their desires of a Sacrament do not set them on work to
prepare for a Sacrament by soul-examining, heart-humbling, and the like.

Obj. All will be piously disposed when they come to the Sacrament, therefore
it is pity to put any by.

Answ.

One reports that knew a student in Cambridge, so popishly affected, at the
time of the communion, he took the bread but eats it not, yet closely conveys
it away, for which being soon after in horror of conscience, he threw himself
headlong over the battlements of the College chapel and died. A credible
Author witnesses of a woman who was at the Sacrament in such malice, that she
took the bread not eating a crum, and touched the cup not drinking a drop, as
she after boasted with a vow, the Sacrament should never come within her till
one that had wronged her had made satisfaction to her: so some have come not
being charitably disposed toward men, much less religiously disposed toward
God: how ill the Corinthians were hereat disposed we read, 1 Cor. 11.18, 20, 21.

2. No wicked man can be well disposed at the Sacrament, To be well disposed
lies in two things.

1. To cast off sinful dispositions, and dispositions to sin, now can a
sinful person put off sin upon any occasion? he can as easily shake off the
skin from his back, or fling off his flesh from his bones, or pour his bowels
out of his body, as put off sin from his soul for the least season, a
blackamore may as well change his skin, or a leopard his spots, as the prophet
speaks, Ier. 13.23. Actus interminitur gradu^ remittitur habitu^ non amittitur.
As a godly man may interrupt actions of grace, but habits and inward
dispositions thereunto remain immovable, so a wicked man may stop the actions
of sin for a season, but inwardly the habits and dispositions thereunto abide
strong unstirred.

2. To be at any time well-disposed, is to put on gracious dispositions, and
dispositions of grace, no sinful man can ever do so: outside forms of
godl^nesse may be put on and off, when inward powers and principles are most
remote. Our shadows are longest when the sun is lowest, who of himself can call
a good thought into his mind when he will? 2 Cor. 3.5. and can a wicked man be
well-disposed at his pleasure?

3. Suppose some languid velleities, some leaning inclinations, some bublings
up, and a few faint affections be found, these are poor things to posture the
soul in a safe way for a Sacrament-work, Logicians put a difference between
dispositions and habits. Habits are hardly attained and hardly removed,
Dispositions easily come and easily go, and truly according to rules of
divinity, some slight and sliding dispositions some little heat of affections,
are but poor preparations to a Sacrament, how often are men afterward worse? as
water once warmed becomes more cold, and ice broken something thawed in the
day, free^es the more hard at night. Those mentioned, Heb. 6.4, 5. had some
dispositions for a time to good, but yet after proved irrecoverable Apostates,
etc.

4. Have men such good dispositions when they come to the Sacrament? Truly such
Saintlike dispositions are their silent damnations, they hereby condemn
themselves. Is it good to be religiously disposed for and on a Sacrament day,
and why is it not good every day? Is it fit then to be devout, and why not meet
always? At that time to lift up hands to God, and at other times to lift up
heels against God, how absurd is this?

5. We are not to forethink what their case may be at that present, on such an
extraordinary occasion, but what is their common course in their ordinary
conversation, Mat. 7.16. By their fruits ye shall know them, and must judge
them, not by their leaves of outward expressions, nor by their buds of some
good dispositions, which take them at some solemn times as fits of devotion:
but by the usual fruits which the tree of their lives do ordinarily bear. At a
Sacrament they will seem very devout, how vile soever at other times. The
Habassines are very religious on a Sacrament day, Brerew. ^nq. cap. 23.^66.
Melch. Ad. in vita Mel.
having taken it they will not spit till the Sun set, It is said of the
Italians, they so devoutly receive, as believing God to be in the bread, but
otherwise live as if they believed no God to be in Heaven. And the like do the
lives of profane men speak, how fair soever they carry it in this Sacrament
service, A conduit on some great day runs wine, but water is that it ordinarily
runs with. Thus here.

To conclude, beyond what is pleaded by others, there is one thing wicked men
ordinarily urge for themselves, and their coming to the Supper of the Lord.

Object.

Answ. Perfidus mendax impostor Apostata tuba rebellionis. Lutherus apud illo^
Diabolus ^st, sed Christus regna^ and vivat.
as they be not, whom yet you except and object against. We read of Luther that
the common charge against him was, to be a man false, perfidious, treacherous,
seditious, the trumpet of rebellion, a seducer, an Apostate, etc. thus have
others of the servants of God, yea the very son of God, been accused of crimes
whereof they were clear and innocent: wicked men being foully infected with
these plague-sores themselves, they would have none thought sound. Its storied
of Nero, himself being unclean, he did think there was no man chaste, it is
ordinary for wicked men being loath to father their own bastards, to lay them at
other men's doors, that while they can cause others to be suspected, themselves
may pass without suspicion, I mean, those sins which they are themselves
deeply guilty of, they would fain fasten upon the most faithful Saints of God:
no wonder they think the godly for they think God himself to be like them Psa.
50.21, These men as they will not think those things in themselves to be sins,
which are, so in others they think those things to be sins which are not: in
themselves pride is but decency, coveteousnesse good husbandry, etc. in Gods
Saints their zeal is anger, their appearing for God, hypocrisy, and the like.

2. Say such have some evils in them, yet then they have excellent graces,
which you have not. It Is true the best Saints like the best men's books have
their errat^es, but yet then there is a great deal of good solid matter
besides, The most godly though there is an old man which they have not quite
put off, yet then there is a new man which they have put on, Qui Christu^
induit omne^ simul in universum virtutem induit, omnemque gratiam habet, Chrysostom.
to wit Christ with his graces: grant there are some as painted sepulchers,
Apothecaries boxes, and like the Aegiptian temples gay and gorgeous without,
and within nothing but ugly objects: yet God ha^h his sincere Saints, who
though mean it may be to outward view, yet by reason of rich graces are all
glorious within, Psa. 45.13. As the Tabernacle that was covered with rams-skins
and badgers-skins, but within curious work, costly silk, and ^eaten gold. Gods
people are compared to a cloud, Heb. 12.1. and truly they much resemble that
cloud which guided the Israelites in their way to Canaan, which had a dark side
and a bright side, the Egyptians could only see the dark side of the cloud,
and so mistook: thus wicked and worldly men can only see the dark side of the
Saints infirmities, not the bright side of their graces, and hence they err in
judgment, but now I pray learn this truth, those men you malign though they
have some evils, yet then they have such precious good things in them as you
have not, and therefore may well be accepted where you are not.

3. Say they have such sins in them, yet then they bewail them daily, Perpetuis
lachrimi^ obruit ora dolor
which you do not, and so may be meet for that mercy which you be not, you sin
and sorrow not, when you should tremble and not sin, you sin and not tremble:
let the misery of your sin increase, yet you account not your selves miserable,
Nihil miserius miser^ non miserante scipsum.
whereas Gods Saints cry out of this misery most, Romans 7.24.

You at the best do but seem to repent whatever your sin is: Poenitentiam non
agunt sed fingunt. Salv. Tundens pectus and non corrigens vitia illa
consolidat, Aug.
you swear and cry God forgive, with a blow upon the breast, and no bruise upon
the heart, so that sin by this is but more settled in you, and you in sin,
whereas the servants of Christ look upon Gods broken laws, with broken hearts,
Psa. 51.8. They sin, but yet with a great difference from other men.

There are three things distinguish them.

Resolution before, Psa. 39.1. 1 Ioh. 3.9. Natus ex Deo non faecis peccatum sed
patitur potius,
Reluctance in, Romans 7.19. Repentance after, Mat. 26.75.
Whereas alas! other men before sin, they resolve but little, in sin they
reluct less, and after sin they repent least of all, Romans 2, 5. Rev. 2.21. Let
a godly man fall into sin, Peccavi Domine and paenitet me peccasse.
and he rises by repentance, and runs in to God, and cries, Lord, I have
sinned, and it repents my soul I have sinned.

As wicked men if they have or do any good, they are after it the worser, the
more proud, insolent, impenitent, negligent, so the godly if they do any evil,
they are after it the better, Videle fratres magis placuit humilitas in malis
factis quam superbia in bonis factis. Aug.
the more humble, penitent, vigilant, diligent: and we read how the poor
Publican humbled for his sin was accepted, when the Pharisee proud of his good
deeds was detested, Luke 18.14. Let none wrangle then because Gods Saints find
acceptance to the Sacrament, Terret me to ta ^ita mea nam mihi apparet aut
peccatum aut tota sleri^itas. Anselm.
when themselves are refused, for though they sin, yet for it they are humbled,
when in it others are hardened, they tremble at it, when others triumph in it,

4. Its not such sins you condemn them of, for which you are kept off from the
Sacrament, to wit, secret sins in the heart, as pride, coveteousnesse, and the
like, but other outward evils in your lives, as excessive drinking, swearing,
whoring. In the best governed town or city, its not every desease, sore, or
sickness, that men are shut up for, and excluded society, but the plague:
neither is it every sin men are shut out for, from the Sacrament: but for sins
of a larger size, A quibusda^ in coena domini perceptio Eucharistiae negligitur
quae quia eadem die ab omnibu^ fidelib^^ (exceptis ijs qui pro gravibus
criminibus inhibitum est) percipienda est. Ecclesiasticus usus demonstrat: quum
etiam poenitentes eadem die ad percipienda corporis and sanguin^ dominici
sacramenta reconcilientur, Orthod cons. Art. 7. cap, 3. Lorinus in Psalm.
Gladius paenae acerbitate^ erga vicinos, arcus paenae celeritatem erga remo^^^
mo^strat. Chrysostom.
which are not suddenly slipped into, but ordinarily lived in, and such as argue
an ill estate. Wicked men may do some particular good, yet their common course
and general condition naught, a sweet apple may grow out of a crab-tree stock,
and a fair flower out of a stinking root, so a good act for the matter, from a
man whose estate is naught, and his beaten way bad: likewise a godly man may do
some particular evil, yet his ordinary way good, and life straight, to which
it is meet to have respect, and such as are of a sinful conversation, have in
this no cause to object, yet

5. Let such as profess religion fall foully in point of scandal, and cause
the name of God to be blasphemed, truly they must be debarred as well as you,
until they testify repentance.

We find how in former times there were two chief instruments of use in war,
The sword and the bow.

The edge of the sword to cut off those who were nearest, and the arrow of the
bow, to strike those which were most remote. Thus in discipline we shall not
only have a swift arrow to le^ fly at profane men that are most d^stant, but a
sharp edge to strike such who by profession approach nearest when ^hey offend.
A scandal in a Saint is l^ke the Eclipse of the Sun, it must not be let pass.

6. As God said to Cain when he was wroth, because his brother Abel was
accepted in sacrifice, so say I to you in this matter of the Sacrament, If you
live well and do well, shall you not also be accepted? yes yes, why stomach you
the admittance of such to the Sacraments, do you walk with them in the ways of
the Lord, and you shall partake with them at the Table of the Lord.



I proceed to discover what may make for the regulating of things in point of
practice, for the keeping pure this precious Ordinance, by keeping off ^mpure,
ignorant and impenitent persons, for which purpose I shall call upon several
sorts to contribute their most vigorous assistance, and for this end I declare
two things.

1, Who are they that are herein to be active.

2. What is that that is herein to be acted.

The persons among us that in this case ought to act, are of two sorts.

1. Those who are more public, Officers in the Church.

2. Those who are more private, members of the Church.

Church Governors are to execute Church Censures, as the Ministers of the
Gospel, and others chosen and appointed for that purpose.

Public Ministers as they must be the light of the world, so the salt of the
earth, Mat. 5.13, 14.

The light of the world for clearness of doctrine. Curabit pastor ut pleb^
ipsa viros graves timentes Dei ac boni testimonij deligat, quorum cura and
vigilantia disciplina Ecclesiastica ad ministratur.


The salt of the earth for exactness of discipline.

For this well managing they are to look out others to join in labor with
them. The Pastor says Musculus well, must take care to find out among the
people grave and godly persons by whose vigilance and concurring diligence the
censures of the Church are to be administered. Assemblies and Sacraments in
purity preserved. As God set Cherubins at the door of Paradise, to keep off
apostate Adam, he might not enter to eat of the Tree of Life, so Christ sets
officers in his Church to keep off unmeet persons from coming in to eat of this
bread of life. Jehu in policy commanded a great sacrifice to be offered in the
house of Baal, and appointed fourscore men with this charge, to see that none
of the servants of the Lord were there, but the worshippers of Baal only, 2
King. 10.23. On the contrary at the Sacrament in Gods house, officers must see
there be none of the known servants of sin and satan, but the wor^hippers of
God only. As valiant soldiers keep a castle against any intruders that would
take it, so must Church Officers keep the Sacrament, when unmeet men press to
receive it, Tom 2. Chry. in Matthew. Hom. 83.
or to use Chrysostoms similitude, they are to keep this pure, as a man would
keep a pleasant spring clean, whereat he uses to drink, not letting the feet
of filthy beasts and swine no puddle it. These all must help to bring in to
Christ, such only as Ashpenaz to Nebuchadnezar, Dan. 1.3, 4, 5. Those of the
children of Israel that were without blemish, wise and well nurtured to eat in
the Kings Palace, provision there made.

We distinguish of a twofold power of the keys, the one concionall, Trelcat,
Just. Theol. lib. 2. page 287. Pareus in 1 Cor. 5. de Excom. Eorum qua
convenient Presbyteris, vi ordinis Pre^byteralis alia convenient singulis
personaliter alia conjunctis collegialiter. Forb. Irenik. lib. 2. cap. 10. sec.
13. page 191.
the other judicial. The former is proper for Pastors alone, whose calling it
is, by the Preaching of the Gospel, to shut and open the Kingdom of heaven. The
later belongs to them, with others joined with them, to wit the keys of
jurisdiction, or external discipline, this pertains to the whole Consistory or
College Ecclesiastical, who are in government, to administer Church
Discipline, least the holy things of God be prophanened and defiled. This
disciplinary power is needful to the well-being of a Church, that the purity
of it be not corrupted, nor the peace of it disturbed, by the permitted
mixtures of unmeet men to the mysteries of Christ. For the civil sword, often the
edge is too blunt, Vid. Ames. de conscien. lib. 4. cap. 29. page 235.
and the point is too short: Church rules are fit to go beyond humane laws; as
Christian piety, beyond civil honesty. Now this power of jurisdiction in the
Churches or Congregations of Christ,

1. It is not in any single Minister alone.

2. It is not in the whole body of any people.

1. Christ has not committed this power to one, Cuncti claves regni caelorum
accipiunt, and ex aequo super eos Ecclesiae fortitudo solidatur. Hier. lib. 1.
advers. Iovin.
but to many. As we say against the Papists, that none of the keys were
committed to Peter alone, but to him with the rest of the Apostles. So these
keys of disciplinary regiment in the Churches of Christ, are not to any Pastor
alone, but to him with other Elders, as Feoffees in trust for the good of the
whole, is this power committed. And a mavelous mercy meets that Minister,
where are meet coadjutors in this, to be joined unto him. Onus Angelicis
humeris formidandum.
There is no work like that of the Ministry, a burden that might make the
shoulders of Angels to quake. When God has put a pious Pastor into a
Congregation, and shall say of him, as of Adam when he had placed ^im in
Paradise: Clavis doctrinae data est uni subiective, non unitati^ nisi
obiecti^e, clavis discipline data est Ecclesiae and subiective and obiective
and data est non uni sed un^tati, etc.
Its not meet for the man to be alone, I will make him a help meet for him, I
will provide such a company of choice men, who shall be assistant to him for
correcting the bad, and guiding of all for good: Alas, to leave this on any
one, however furnished. It may be said to that Minister, as Jethro to Moses,
Exodus 18.18. Thou will surely wear away, both thou and the people with thee, for
this thing is too heavy for thee, and thou can not perform it thy self alone.
Yea himself will be forced to say to the people, as Moses to Israel, Vid.
Cartwr. in Annot. super Act. 156.
Deuteronomy. 1.12, 13. I my self alone cannot bear your cumbrance, your burden, and
your strifes: Take ye wise men, and understanding, and known among your Tribes,
and let them rule over you: Nor does God in all his word lay such a weight on
the back of any one man: but other provision is made.

2. The Juridicall power of the keys, Act. 25.6. Non dicit totam Eccles. sed
Apostoli and seniores. Calvin.
is not committed to the whole body of any people promiscuously. If all were
rulers, then where be the ruled? this would both deface the beauty, and disturb
the order of the Church in every place. There must be beauty, what a deformed
thing were the body if all were eye, or all tongue, or the feet to stand in the
room of the arms? so here. There must be order. Two things prejudice the
Church, when no order at all, (...).
or order according to the will of man; but order according to the will and
appointment of Jesus Christ is safe and sweet. If the whole multitude should
exercise such judiciary acts of casting out, and the like, then the woman must
usurp authority over the man, contrary to the express command of the Apostle,
1 Timothy 2.12. Therefore where ever the simple right of this power is primarily
placed, 1 Timothy 5 17. Duos ordines Presbyterorum fuisse inde apparet, alij
Presbyteri erant doctores, alij tantum seniores quidam and prudentiores populi
qui una cum doctoribus gubernabant Ecclesiam, etc. Illyric. cla. script. page
970. Nonnulli praepositi sunt, qui in vitam and more^ eorum qui admittuntur
inquirant, ut qui tu pia committunt eis communi caetis interdicant: qui vero ab
istis abhorrent, ex animo complexi, meliores quotidie reddant. Origin. tom. 3.
cont. Celsu^, in Philoc. ca, 18. Interp. Tari^.
the execution of this Church-regulating-power concerns some, not all, Matthew.
18.17. Tell the Church: There is the Church plaintiff, to wit the members, and
the Church defendant, to wit the officers, that is, Ministers and others, as
assistants. 1. For Ministers, Act. 20.28. Take heed to the flock over which the
holy Ghost has made you overseers, 1 Timothy 3.4, 5. If a Minister knows not how
to rule h^s own house, how shall he govern the Church of God? 1 These. 5.12.
Know them that are over you in the Lord, Heb. 13.17. And for others with the
Minister to rule in the Church as Governors, read, Romans 12.8. 1 Cor. 12.28. 1 Timothy 5.17. The Elders that rule well, are worthy of double honor. According to
which place, what was the practice of the Primitive times, we find affirmed by
credible witnesses: We shall but read what is attested by, and translated out
of Origin, who lived about 200. years after Christ, it was a known order in the
Church to have another kind of Presbyters beside who applied themselves to
Preaching, that did attend discipline, whose place was to censure manners, to
cast out offenders, and so preserve Sacraments pure, that with us the same care
may be kept, let me beseech by these motives.

1. For the Lords sake. 2. For the Churches sake. 3. For the Kingdoms sake. 4.
For Congregations sakes. 5. For the Sacrament sake. 6. For the Saints sake. 7.
For sinners sake. 8. For our own souls sake.

For Christ's sake. If we admit whom we know unmeet to these holy mysteries, let
us but think both what a great displeasure, and great dishonor it will be to
Christ: displeasing because it will pervert his gracious purpose to his people
to have this peculiar to them. A special token of his love and care toward
them above others he intended herein, and indeed the way of Christ's love to
them in this is admirable, to feed them with his own blood, and let others
famish. We read of a man condemned to starve to death in a prison, Valor
Maximus. lib. 5.
his daughter getting leave to visit him once a day, so she brought nothing to
eat or drink, she preserved him a long time unknown, by milk he sucked from her
breast. Christ, that none of his members might starve, lets them have this
breast to suck, but when it shall be drawn out to all it lessens Christ's
affection, and alters his intention, who meant this milk only for his own
children: Because he would not like some mother, says Chrysostom, Chry. ad
pop. Antioch. Hom. 60.
put out his babes to nurse, but suckle them, and bring them up by his own
breast, yet neither so as to nurse others children. To suffer the known sons of
satan to suck at this breast, to sit at this board, is also a great dishonor
to Christ. I have read of Ingo an ancient King of the Draves and Veneds, who
making a stately feast, appointed his Nobles, at that time Pagans, to sit in
the Hall below, and commanded certain poor Christians to be brought up into his
presence Chamber, to sit with him at his table, to eat and drink of his Kingly
cheer, at which many wondering, he said, he accounted Christians, though never
so poor, a greater ornament at his table, and more worthy his company, then the
greatest Peers unconverted to the Christian faith, for when these might be
thrust down to hell, those should be his consorts and fellow Princes in heaven.
Aeneas Sylvius cap. 20. Europ Aven lib. 3. Annalium.
And truly a few poor Saints, they honor Christ at his Table, whereas
multitudes of men great in wealth, and wickedness, are but blemishes at this
board, and spots at this feast, Jude 12. O for Christ's sake suffer no such at
this Supper of the Lord. It is reported of that renowned Mr Fox, such was his
zeal and love to Christ, that he would never deny any beggar that asked him an
alms for Christ's sake. This is the prevailing argument with God, be it with us.

2. For the Nations sake. There is nothing more provokes God against a people
then prophaneing his pure and precious ordinances, when they shall not only
abound in what is filthy, but abuse what is holy, and be corrupt in the best
things, then comes the fierceness of Gods fury.

There were two things in the old world that brought the destroying flood. All
flesh had corrupted his way. The earth was filled with violence, Genesis 6.
Corrupt in respect of Gods worship and service depraved. Violent in respect of
injurious dealing between man and man practiced: to grow corrupt in Gods ways
of worship, brings a flood. Venerable Bede in his Ecclesiastical History of
England, reports that about the year of our Lord 420. The Brittons having been
long afflicted by Irish, Picts, and Scots, God gave them great rest, peace and
plenty, as had not been heard, but they more then ever contemned his word,
profaned his Sacraments, not only the people vile, but the Ministers very
loose in their conversations and ministrations, whereupon came a plague that
the living were scarce able to bury the dead: The Saxons of Germany who came
first in for their help, broke out upon them in bloodshed, drove them into a
corner, and all this came, says that reverend Author, for their hateful sins
against Gods holy Ordinances? may we not read upon the forehead of the late
bloudsheds, that have been in this Kingdom, the guilt of Christ's blood that
lies upon this Land through sinful receiving the Sacrament? The judgments of
God often suit to the sins of men, that by the punishment we may know the
offense. Josephus reports that not long after the Jews had crucified Christ on
the cross, so many of them were condemned to be crucified, that there was not
place enough for crosses, nor crosses enough for the bodies that were to be
hung thereon. O let us herein prevent Christ's second crucifying, not dealing
out the Sacrament to such as to do it, will do what in them lies. We read
the Roman Emperors strictly forbad the transportation of oil, wine, and
pleasant commodities to barbarous nations, least they being drawn in, mischiefs
to the state might follow. Let us not administer bread and wine, such precious
things to profane men, least to the land worse yet follows.

3. For the Churches sake. To put out unmeet men at least from the Table of the
Lord, is the way to make the Church beautiful, healthful and fruitful. This
defaced the glory of Nebuchadnezzars Image, Dan. 2. that having a head of gold,
it had feet of clay and iron: Shall the Church have a bright head and black
feet, will not this be a blemish? Let us make much of the gold, and not mix
therewith iron and clay, this will be the Churches glory, honor, and health.
Evil men, says one, are in the Church, as ill humors are in the body, when
they are purged out, the body recovers health and strngth, is eased and
refreshed: So when such men are put forth, and cast out, the Church is much
relieved and revived, becomes more able to bear and bring forth fruit unto God.
The course God took with his Vineyard to make it fruitful, Isa, 5. He fenced
it, gathered out the stones, and planted it with the choicest plants. Gods
Church must have a fence, else every swine comes in: the scand^lous, those
stones of offense must be gathered out, and Gods Saints, as choice plants, set
in place, and then we shall see good fruit.

4. For each Congregation sake, suffer not such men to sit at the Table of the
Lord. Achan took the wedge of gold, and the Babylonish garment, whereupon it
went ill with the whole camp of Israel, think we what may befall the whole
assembly of people, especially if we knowingly allow filthy sin^ers, to take
the holy Sacrament, such as in the ways of their wickedness hold fellowship
with devils, to have herein any fellowship with Christ and his people, O how
abominable. Cambden reports of Redwald King of the East Saxons, that in the
same Church he had two Altars, one for Christian Religion, and another for
sacrifices to devils, if we promiscuously receive good and bad to the Lord;
Supper, we make as it were two tables in one Church, so far as concerns Gods
Saints, there is the table of the Lord: so far as concerns sinners, there is
the Table of devils: Zanc. Epist. lib. 1. ad pr. Fr 3. de Exc.
That the Apostle 1 Cor. 10.21. pleads against Idolaters, learned Zanchy
extends to all impenitent sinners, who are not, says he, to be brought in to
the Table of the Lord, because they be not broken off from the Table of Devils,
least God thereby be provoked, ver. 22. O how will it then provoke to to turn
the Table of the Lord into a Table of Devils? as all wicked ones may well be
called, Joh. 6.70.

5. For the Sacrament sake suffer not this, it is an honor to the Ordinance,
to have here a Table of Angels, not of Devils, for virtuous men to be about the
board of the Lord is a grace, as it was to Solomon's bed to have a guard about
it of valiant men, Cant. 3.7. will not the presence of profane men prove a
prejudice to each part of this precious Ordinance? Vtinam substantia nostra
incorporetur sanctu, ut in ijs ad gloria^ resurgat, non peccatoribus in illis
enim resurget ad gehennam. Cor. a lapide
so defile purity and deface beauty, as to occasion complaints both from
creature and Christ. One brings in the creature groaning out their desires
thus, O that we might ever serve such as are godly, O that our substance might
be incorporated into Saints, that so we might rise with them to glory, for if
we be incorporated into sinners, we shall go in them to hell: if we suppose the
creatures of bread and wine, so to moan and groan to be eaten and drunk by
wicked men in their ordinary way, much rather may we think it then when they
are herein elevated and raised to a high and holy use: yea and this a way to
put Christ himself to an open shame, Heb. 6.6. and cause him to complain to
have his Table crowded about, his holy Ordinance defased by profane men, so
that as it was said, Mat. 22.10. whose image and superscription is this? it may
be applied here whose Ordinance is this? The glory, honor, and beauty of it is
hereby lost. One reading Mat. 5.44 l^ve your enemies, bless them that curse
you, do good to them that hate you, etc. broke out, either its not the Gospel
of Christ, Aut hoc non est Evangelium aut nos non sumus Evangelici. Whita.
conc. ad Cler. cant.
or we are but ill gospellers, when this holy Ordinance is abused and misused,
we may say, sure it is not the Sacrament of Christ, or we no
Sacrament-Christians, either it is not the Ordinance of Christ, or we no
friends to Christ's Ordinance, to let the luster of it be darkened, and its
beauty blemished by base and vile men.

6. For the Saints sake suffer not such men herein to be joined unto them, to
tie a living man to a dead man has been the judgment that some malefactors
have been condemned unto, and it is a sad one. O let us not here in this case
couple together Gods living Saints, and men dead in their sins, to bring in
beasts to feed with men at the same board, does not reason and humanity abhor
it. When we read of Nebuchadnezzar and bruit beasts feeding together, he was
not as a man, but as a beast, so let religion and christianity teach us this,
that to the Lords Table where the Saints eat and drink, we do not admit such
men, as the Scripture compares to beasts, Psa. 49.12. Psa. 80.13. It were
better says Chrysostom to be a beast, Melius est esse iumeniu^ quam comparari
iumento.
then to be like a beast, men then that are so, are unfit to have society with
Saints, at the Supper of the Lord: Its prophesied when the Church shall be
restored to peace and purity, Isa 35.9. No Lion shall be there, nor any
ravenous beast found there, the unclean shall not pass there, but the redeemed
of the Lord shall walk there, etc. God has promised Ezekiel. 38.24. There shall
be no more a pricking briar nor a grieving thorn about his people, let not us
set briars and thorns among Gods vines, nor let them root in Christ's garden
among his flowers.

7. For sinners sakes, as we tender the eternal good of their souls, suffer
not this: to allow them liberty to the Table of the Lord, will but harden them
in sin, and hasten them to hell, they will but imbolden themselves to persist
in sin, and think if they come to a Sacrament, thereby to satisfy all. It is
reported of Lewis the second, that he used to wear a leaden crucifix in his
hat, and every time he swore an oath, or did any villainy, he would take it in
his hands and kiss it: and then swear again the more impudently, and sin over
and over the same with greater confidence. So wicked men strengthen themselves
in their wickedness, thinking how often so ever they do ill, if they come and
receive the Sacrament, all is well, though hereby also they bring upon
themselves swift destruction: so that all such may well fear the receiving the
Sacrament should prove to them as the gold of Tholosse to them that took it,
who all perished in the possession of it, the His^ory of which Possidonius
reports. Ahab would have Naboths vineyard, though he drew on himself the guilt
of Naboths blood, but it was his ruin, 1 Kin. 21. men will have the Sacrament
of Christ, though they are thereby guilty of the blood of Christ, and draw down
their own damnation: men press to the Sacrament unprepared, as a horse unarmed
rushes into the battle, but his death is so much the surer and sooner: suppose
through the patience of God utter ruin is respited for present, and unworthy
receivers reprieved for a while, yet then some other dreadful judgment
betides them, God strikes them with hardness of heart, blindness of mind,
worse then that wherewith he smote the sinful Sodomites, when from all
quarters they pressed to break into Lots house, and take the two Angels, Genesis
19. to prevent this evil do we our utmost.

8. For our own souls sakes, admit not unmeet men to communicate in these holy
mysteries: that this may be the more effectual, Let us observe two things.

1. The duty required of us. 2. The danger incurred by us.
The duty that the danger may be prevented.

The danger if that the duty be neglected.

We must herein either come under duty, or under danger, our duty is to give
this blessed bread to children, not to dogs, Mat. 7.6. Give not holy things to
dogs, nor cast ye your pearls to swine, least they trample them under feet, and
turn again, and rent you. Here are persons of two sorts described, dogs and
swine, matters of two sorts proposed, holy things and pearls, actions of two
sorts prohibited, give not neither cast, and reasons of two sorts rendered,
least they tramp^e them under their feet, and turn again and rent you. Some by
dogs understand Infidels and unbeleevers, by swine sectaries and heretics, by
holy things the two Sacraments Baptism and the Lords Supper, by pearls the
mystical sense of Scriptures, etc. Others by dogs understand men erroneous in
their judgments and opinions, by swine, men vicious in their practice and
conversations, by pearls Gospel-cordials, by holy things bread and wine ^n the
Supper sanctified for a holy use, which we ought not to give to such persons
upon those perils.

1. Of pollution to the things, least they trample them under feet.

2. Of affliction to our selves, and turn again and rent you. We read of two
Donatist who coming to Thipasa, Opiat. Meltuit lib. 2. cont. parenianum cent.
4. cap. 6.
a city of Mauritania, and entering where the Sacrament was administering, took
the bread and gave it to their dogs, but those very dogs immediately growing mad
turned upon their own Masters, rending and tearing them with their teeth. God
knows how sorely we may suffer from those sinful men, to whom we give this
holy Sacrament. We know the severe punishment cast upon Eve, who not only her
self eat the forbidden fruit, but in that she gave her husband Adam to eat
thereof, Genesis 3.12, 16, O let not us suffer sinful men to sit and eat with
Gods Saints at the table of the Lord, least thereby we draw down upon our
selves much sin and sorrow, when despairing Judas came making his miserable
moan to the Highpriests, saying, I have betrayed the innocent blood, they
slighted him answering, what is that to us? Look thou to that, no, was it
nothing to them? did not they give him money to do it? If an unworthy receiver
shall come trembling to us, and cry I have betrayed innocent blood, shall we
put it off with a what is that to us? when we put that into their hands whereby
it is done, surely just blame abides us. If any man under the Law left his pit
open, so that his neighbors beast falling into it, was harmed by it, he must
be responsible for it: if we under the Gospel shall leave this Ordinance open
to all, so that those who are more like beasts then men, come to it, and are
prejudiced by it, must not we answer for it? Let us all upon whom this charge
is laid, set our selves to the utmost to oppose the approach of such persons to
the Table of the Lord, Come, let us up, and be doing, what is to be done, and
how I reduce to two heads. 1. For matter we must mind some actions. 2. For
manner we must mind some cautions. The actions for matter we are to mind, are
two.

1. We must examine carefully. 2, We must determine faithfully.
We must examine that we may determine, and we must determ^ne when we have
examined. We must search before we censure, and look in before we lift out,
Thus did God with fallen Adam, before he turns him out of Paradise from eating
of the tree of life, he comes to him questioning of him, Genesis 3. Adam where art
thou? who told thee thou were naked? Have thou eat of the tree that I forbad?
what is it that thou have done? and after he dooms him, and drives him out:
before we cast any out of the Congregation, or put any from this bread of life,
we are to examine exactly, to try the truth of things that we may be sure to
bind those on earth that God will bind in Heaven, Mat. 16.19. It is the
observation of Cyril upon Ioh. 18.12. how the Jews first took Christ and bound
him, and after inquired the causes against him, etc, an ill pattern for us to
follow, before we bind let us beat out truth, and see if there be sufficient
cause that require such a judiciary course, let us know what is not sufficient
matter to warrant such an Ecclesiastic censure in these four things.

1. Every declamation is not enough. Against some person there may be a flying
report, a running noise we may not pass our censure upon. God heard a cry to
Heaven of Sodoms sin, yet before he proceeds to judgment, read what he
resolves, I will go down now and see, whether they have done altogether
according to that cry which is come unto me, and if not that I may know. Genesis
18.21, Every rumor will not bear out a censure, but let us examine and see,
and so proceed.

2. Every accusation is not enough, there may not only be a talk abroad, but
one may come in and personally accuse another, yet that not sufficient to put
one ^ut or presently by the Sacrament. Its not a man's justifying himself, nor
another accusing him, that can well bottom this business: Julian who after
proved the Apostate, one Delphidius accusing another before him, which he could
not prove, the party denying the fact, Delphidius answers, if it be sufficient
to deny what is laid to ones charge, who shall be found guilty? Julian answers,
And if it be sufficient to be accused, who can be innocent?

3. Every imagination is not enough: not only what is said by some others, but
we our selves may suspect a man for such a matter, yet suspicion not warrant
suspension, many things are which seem not to be, and many things may seem to
us to be, which yet indeed are not: we may think both the guilty innocent, and
the innocent guilty, therefore we must not casheer before we inquire, Culpa
lata Culpa levis,
but be able to convince before we condemn.

4. Every aberration is not enough, no man will put his servant out of his
family, or his son from his Table, for every small offense. There be lighter
and lesser evils, whereupon in this case we cannot cast out little sins, do
make men liable to great personal dangers, though not to these ministerial
censures. The smallest sins that are unrepented of, idle words, and the like,
will bring a man under the judgment of Christ, Mat. 12.36. though not this
judgment of the Church. Christ for those will shut men out of Heaven, and cast
them down to the Devil at the last day, but we must not herein shut Heaven
against men, or deliver them up to the Devil for every error in judgment or
practice, yet when evils grosser and greater be fiercely professed, foully
practiced, and fully proved, we have just matter to conclude upon, and to
exclude such sinners from society with Saints in the Supper of the Lord. The
cautions which for the manner we are to mind, shall come forth in fourthings.
Our putting herein by, and casting out, must be carried on.

1. With deliberation, beware that in such censures we be not praecipitate to
do any thing hastily, but see that our proceedings be well considered, and all
our progresses prudentially poized. This Church censure must not be like Ioabs
sword, which upon every motion was wont of it self to fall suddenly out of it is
sheath, but deliberately drawn out by degrees. Its observeable when God was to
take the Prodigal into his house, he ran, Luke 15.20. When to turn Adam out of
Paradise, he walked on in the garden, Gen 3.8. his motion herein was more slow,
we must not cast out or cut off, but gradually and with good advice.

2. With detestation abhorring not the person of the offender, but the
condition of the offense: not as it said of one, He hated the tyrant not the
tyranny, but what we do herein, be it with hatred against the sin, not the man.
Not abhorring them that are evil, but abhorring that which is evil. Romans
12.9. The Apostle in the former verses having spoken of gifts and governments
in the Church, he then ads this, to guide the managing of all ^n a meet way to
love the persons of men unfainedly, but to hate the evil practices of men
abundantly: Abhor that which is evil. The Greek word imports extreme
detestation, (...).
which is aggravated by the composition, as Chrysostom observes, w^o also
refers this 9. verse to those before, to order all therein praescribed, so
Rollock also understands the verse.

Look likewise that we detest that evil or any degrees thereunto in our
selves, for which we contest against others: that we suffer not any of that in
our selves which we censure in others.

3. With moderation, Beware while we pursue sinful actions in others, we be
not transported with sinful passions our selves, of wrath and anger, but
manifesting a spirit of meekness. Sic vigilet moderatio ut non do^mim
disciplina. Aug.
The snuffers of the Tabernacle were made of pure gold: so Church Censures must
be kept pure, burning with fervor, not blacked with anger. let not us be so
moderate as to let Discipline sleep, or therein to be slight, for so a
moderation of censures, may prove the murdering of sinners, not cutting off the
gangreen-limb is the death of the man.

4. With lamentation, Beware that we be not hardened against men in our hearts,
though we find them hardened before us in their sins. We read of a Judge that
never pronounced a judiciary sentence of death, but tears fell faster from his
eyes, then words from his mouth, when the incorrigiblenesse of men call by an
Ecclesiastical sentence to cut men off, and put them away from among us, its
not unmeet for the tears of our eyes to express the Troubles of our hearts,
and to let execution of censures be with expressions of sorrow, so shall we
manage this matter meetly.

Dilexi viru^ qui cum corpore solueretur magis de statu Ecclaesiarum quam de
propr^s vel negotijs angebatur.
The civil Magistrate who is to reform abuses in worship, to keep pure the holy
things of God, that all be carried piously and peaceably in the Church, is
herein to bring in his help. I love the man, he is more solicitous to reform
the Church then to preserve himself, etc. says Ambrose of Theodosius.
Magdeburg. c^nt. 5.
I have read of Anastatius the Emperor, how God ^hot him to death with a hot
Thunderbolt, because he was lukewarm for the Church, and not zealous to root
out the Arrian party. That unmeet persons be put away from these precious
things of God, let likewise the Magistrate be fervent. Zanchy in an Epistle to
Prince Frederick the third, does much quicken his zeal, and beseech his
assistance in this, God turning Adam out of Paradise, did not only set
Cherubims at the garden, to keep the tree of life, but also a flaming sword to
turn every way, Genesis 3.24.

The Christian Magistrate is to be a nursing Father, and a nursing Mother to
the Church and Children of God, Isa, 49.23. Now a great part of the nurses care
is to see to the food of the child, Magistratus si malus tentator tum est. Si
bonus nuritorinus est etc. Aug. sermon. 6. de verbis Domini, Sec. Mat.
that the child have its fitting food, and that which is good and wholesome,
and that dogs come not in to eat up the childrens milk. The Christian
Magistrate is to feed the Church imperatively, and causatively by requiring
others so to do: he is to command that the breasts be drawn out for the
children of the Church to suck, and to forbid that no black mouths be laid to
this blessed breast: Custos utriusque tabulae.
Three Tables he ought to be a careful keeper of, the first and second Table,
and a third to wit the Lords Table, that Gods olive plants may peaceably sit
about it, and wicked ones debarred from it: if he ought to extend his care,
that the first Table be well kept, then the last as a branch of that: must he
not suffer such as would advance a breaden God, and may he endure such as abuse
the bread of God: must he be against those who blaspheme the name of the Lord,
and not against those who profane the Table of the Lord? does he well to
remove crucifixes out of the Church, and shall he let crucifiers alone in the
Church? Sons of Belial, Deficie^^^ coniunctione magistrat^^ potest aliquod
Ecclesia extra ordinem facere quod ordinary non potest: and deficiente
ecclesia a suo efficio potest magistratus extra ordinem procurare ut Ecclesia
ad officium redeat, etc. Iun. Anima. in Bellar. de Council. lib 1. c. 12. no.
18. Nulla est res tam Ecclesiastica quin aliqua ratione pertineat ad
iurisdictionem magistratus nec ulla causa tam secularis modo ab Ecclesiae
membro praestetur quin quaetenus observantiam erga Deum respicis pertinere
possit ad Ecclesiasticam gubernationem, Ames. Med. Theol. lib. 2. cap. 17.
who as much as in them lies by a sinful receiving, crucify the Lord of life.
The care and courage both of Magistrate and Minister is no more then need in
this matter. If Church Officers be defective in their duties, the Magistrate
must put out the more vigor and valor to preserve the Ordinance pure: as if
the Magistrate be remiss, the Church Officers ought to be the more active to
beat back Sacrament abusers, and if in this either withdraw their duty, the
other must stir the more extraordinary. But a mutual conjunction is most
excellent.

The work is great, yet might there be this twofold union, no doubts, nor
difficulties should make me despair, to wit, A union of power. A union of
spirits.


As the two milk kine went together the same way to carry on the Ark of God, so
if these two, Magistracy and Ministry go together to help on the government of
Christ, and this needful discipline which concerns the Sacrament, if hands and
hearts may join in this, how well will things be? let not one put it off to the
other, but both concur as the cause requires, which will be well pleasing to
God, and profitable to the Churches of Christ.

I proceed to persons more private, Sort. 2.
of whom there is also somewhat required, that this pure and holy Ordinance may
be kept up, and carried on in its purity and holiness, that unmeet men may be
removed, and good discipline promoted, their duty I reduce to two heads.

1. They are no give their free consents.

2. They are to make their just complaints.

Their free consents they are to give when by Church Officers there is an
execution of due censures, and indeed the averseness of people hereto, may
much prejudice the practice of Discipline herein. Augustine writing against the
Donatists, says that in some Churches the body of the people was so corrupt
that they would not assent to the execution of censures, which hindered the
casting out of offenders, but herein peoples forwardness may prove a great
furtherance. Cyprian writing to Cornelius a Roman Bishop declares how ready the
people were to approve the excommunicating and casting out of the lapsi, those
in time of persecution had fallen from the faith, though very loath to yield
their consents for the receiving of them in, though they professed repentance.

Zanch. de redemp. in pr^ce. 4. lib. 1. page 756.
Zanchy speaking of that question, by whom excommunication is to be exercised
among other things, in answer compares the government of the Church to the
Roman Commonwealth, which had the dictators, the Senate, and the Quirites,
the most difficult things were determined by the former, Pa^eus de Excom.
poris. 5. and in 1 Cor. 5.
with the consent of the latter, and he shows that the Church government in
respect of Christ is a monarchy in respect of the Presbyters censuring an
Aristocraty, and in respect of the people consenting a democraty, which in the
case he concludes requisite. Musen. loc. com. de ministris verbi Dei, in tit.
de potestate ministrorum page 377.
Pareus proposing some conclusions concerning the same censure in the Church,
says that though the Pastors and Presbyters for order sake, are to have the
chief place, yet they must call on the Congregation for their concurring
consent. So Musculus in his common places speaks much to this purpose. The
people do greatly fail in their duties, when they withdraw their consents,
especially when things be put to the vote. The Saints are said to judge the
world, 1 Cor. 6, 2. In that they shall be as witnesses, assisters, observers,
approvers of the judgment, Christ shall pass at the last day, and Calvin
says well to the case, Hoc addo illam esse legitimam in excommunicando homine
progressione^ si non soli seniores scorsim id faciant sed approbante Ecclesia
in eum modum ut plebis multitudo non regat actionem sed observet us ^estis and
custos. Institu. lib. 4. Qui proximi mala conspiciunt and silentio praetereunt
quasi conspectu vulneribus usum medicaminis subtrahunt.
The people are not by the multitude to overpower any just proceeding against
offenders, but what the Elders orderly do, they are to attest, and approve, and
thereby also the judgment is theirs, and private Christians must consent
either to the casting out, or to the coming in of offenders, to consent to
their admittance is sad, The Jews stoned Stephen, but Paul stood by, and
consented to his death, Act. 22.20. Wicked men herein crucify Christ, and
others consent to his death who will not consent to restrain them from that
which is the cause of his death, yea

2. People are to make their complaints and to call for just discipline Isa.
59.4. When they see or hear of foul offenses, not to conceal them, but seek
their redress, Augustine speaks well, They that see their neighbors sins, and
are silent, and so no censure take place, is as if they should see ulcerous
sores, and withhold the use of meet medicines.

Hereby also they pull upon themselves the burden of other men's sins, Lev.
5.1. If a soul sin and hear the voice of swearing and is a witness whether he
has seen it or known it, if he do not utter it, then shall he bear his
iniquity,

If a man hears words of treason against a prince, and discovers it not to some
Magistrate in 24. hours, himself is judged guilty of treason, what then to
conceal words of blasphemy and treason, against the most high God, Pro. 29.24.
whosoever is partner with a thief, hates his own soul, he hears cursing, and
bewrays it not, Mar. 1. Its a sin to be an ea^-witnesse of blasphemy, and not
wilingly bewray it,

2. That he which is so silent, makes himself partner with that sinner whom he
so concealeth, Lev. 29.14. Before the blasphemer was stoned, all that heard his
blasphemy were to come, and lay their hands on his head, why? sure to discharge
themselves of that guilt which else they had contracted by hearing of him, if
they had not declared against him. Ever mind that Gospel command Mat. 18.17.
Tell the Church, inform Church Officers of Church-offenders.

Christians that will quit themselves as becomes them, must be careful herein,
otherwise themselves will suffer. Here may a great question fall in, viz.

Sacrament does defile and infect others? To which I answer.

Not physically, but morally,

Efficiently. Deficiently.
1. Efficiently, when they say or do what they ought not in reference
thereunto, as if in their minds they approve their presence, much more if with
their mouths they plead for their admittance, speak, yea urge arguments that
may make for such promiscuous mixtures, and lay down what may encourage the
coming hereto of carnal men without any disciplinary difference, this
contracts guilt, and then

2. Deficiently, when private Christians neglect to say and do what they ought.

Vt rue ad c^nam accedam non scrutandum est qua quisque conscientiae ad eam
mecu^ accedat sed de mea ipsius conscientia mihi laborandum est. Ita^ and cum
adulteris, and cum homicidis and cum sceleratissimis quibusvis, modo nulla mea
culp^ sit, Quod non placet non nocet. Si adcoenam castus and sceleris purus
accessero, nihil illorum impuritas mihi nocuerit dicam etiam amplius si vel
Turcam vel Iudaeum pastor quispiam adm^t^eret modo quantum in me est agit^ tota
illius facti culpa in illum recideret, nec ego propterea cunctanter ad mensam
Domini accessero. etc. Beza Ep. 2. page 28. 29.
In this case consider there is a fourfold duty required of particular
Christians, which if they discharge they come not under any fault or guilt, let
who will be present, but if they fail of those duties (I do not say fail in)
therein they sin, and therewith are defiled.

1. Duty is toward the sin it self, of such men's partaking, that is to dislike
it, and in their hearts to hate it, I hate the work of them that turn aside,
says David, Psa. 101.3. it shall not cleave to me, as if he should say, If my
heart rise not against such sins, if I should not dislike and hate them, some
blot would cleave to me, but now not.

2. Duty toward God, to pray and mourn in prayer for the presence of such men
at this precious Ordinance: Mary the mother of Christ, his Disciples and
friends saw Christ despitefully used, and crucified on the cross, yet it was
no sin of theirs, no evil cleaved to them, for it grieved their hearts, and so
when Gods Saints do sorrowfully lament the sin of such as crucify Christ at
his Supper, there is no defilement falls on them, they are free and shall
receive signs of savor, and Gods marks of mercy, Eze. 9.4.

3, Duty toward such miserable men as do in their prophanensse approach the
Table of the Lord, that is, to exhort, admonish, reprove them, Ephesians. 5.11. Have
no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them;
implying strongly, that if there be a reproving of them, there is no fellowship
with them: and so there is no infection by them.

4. Duty is toward governors, to wit to inform them of such offenders, thus
the Christians in Corinth, and Thessalonica did inform the Apostle of such in
those Churches, 1 Cor. 11.^8, 2 These. 3.11. let these duties be observed, and
you are free. Beza excellently in this case concludes, that let wicked men be
present at the Sacrament, yet Gods Saints become not filthy because not faulty,
having done their duty, they are not guilty: no sin, no soil.

Having complained to God and men against offenders, and in their places done
to the utmost to keep of such unmeet men, there is no sin whereof they are
guilty, nor soil wherewith they are filthy. Those in authority that will not
discharge their duty, must bear the blame, and wear the blot, profane men are
to be put by, and cast out, yet if to do it be not my office, it being not
done, it is not my offense.

The Apostle tells the Church of Corinth, that the incestuous person let alone,
would be as a little leaven to sour the whole lump, 1 Cor. 5.7. If we suppose a
present infection upon the Church, then it was thus. The public Officers were
defiled because they had not put away that wicked man from among them. The
private members were polluted, because they had not mourned, or made means that
he which had done this deed might be taken from among them, verse. 2. so that if
private Christians do not complain, and seek the removal of unmeet men, then
thereby they are defiled, but if they mourn to God and men, that such may be
taken away, however they are free, both from fault and filth: if wicked ones be
with them at the Table of the Lord, they are not thereby defiled. I^ is not the
naked presence of profane men can herein pollute the people of God, for if
that alone were infectious, these things would follow.

1. It would be so in one ordinance as well as in another, it would be as
hazardous to have them present at the hearing of the word, as at the partaking
of the Sacrament.

2. It would be so by one sinner as well as by another, it would be as
prejudicial for a close hypocrite to be present, as another wicked man. Then
the presence of Judas at the first administration cast defilement on all the
disciples, whereas supposing him present, we will not think all them defiled
thereby. When Judas with the rest were all together at Supper, Joh. 13. Christ
says unto the disciples, yea are clean, but not all, verse. 10.11. The unclean
one, made not the rest unclean.

3. It would be so at one season, as well as at another, how should Gods Saints
ever meet with any safety or security, if the sole presence of any one
unsanctified man should always prove such a prejudice.

4. It would be so to one Christian as well as to another, harm hereby to him
that has been most diligent in his duty, as well as to him that has been most
remiss, but let private persons be persuaded to pursue their duty, and they
shall escape all danger. Execution of Church censures is not to be by any
private member, or single Officer. I would they were cut off that trouble you,
says Paul, Gal. 5.12. He did not undertake to do it alone, 1 Cor. 5.4. When
ye are gathered together, and my Spirit, in the name, and wi^h the power of
Christ, to deliver such a one to satan. Let us each go as far as we can, if
others will not concur, we leave the sin at their door.

Against this course several objections lie cross which I shall in the next
place seek to remove.

Object.

Answ. Hoc plaugo quod te non plangis. Hieron. Tom 1. fol. 231.
As once Jerome condoled the obdurate condition of Sabinian. Sure such must not
be received to the Supper of the Lord, much less men resolved in their sins.

2. Suppose such professions and promises as now they may make, have from them
by former experiences ever proved false and fruitless, must we still trust
bare words? God has cast them down by sickness, they have said as much to get
off of that bed, as now to get in to this board, to come out of that trouble,
as now to come in to this Table; How sorry they had sinned? how resolved to
reform? As when Nebuchadnezzar besieged Jerusalem, the Jews promised to set
their servants free, but no sooner had the King removed his siege, but they
bring back their servants to bondage, Jer. 34.10, 11. So when God has laid
siege to them by some close affliction, they have professed fair, and promised
much, but the siege once raised, they have returned to their wonted
wickedness, who would believe such lying words?

3. Suppose they profess and promise, yet in their professions and promises,
they manifest monstrous Ignorance, and thereby are found unfit? They profess
repentance, but cannot tell what repentance is, they say they are sorry for
sin, and yet can give no account what sin is, or what God is they have sinned
against, they promise amendment for future, ignorantly taking it for grant,
they can either by their own power amend, or procure power from God at their
pleasure. Luther reports of one Sta^pitius a Germane Divine, that he often
promised God, and vowed against a particular lust, but was as frequently
foiled: he after discovered, how being ignorant of his weakness to perform all
his promises had been passed in self-confidence, etc. whereupon he miscarried.
Carnal men in their making promises to reform their whole lives, we may easily
find how grossly ignorant, and so self-confident they be, how little they
know of their own infirmity, and inability to any good, etc. how they know
nothing of fetching grace by the way of the covenant of Gods grace in Christ:
So while we should let them in for their promises, we must keep them out for
their ignorance, this being more foul, then the other fair.

4. Suppose sinful men profess and promise, yet in their open protestations
they have their secret reservations, they sometimes say well, but O that there
were in them such a heart, Deuteronomy. 5.29.

Such men in their professions and promises, Aug. conf. lib. 8. cap. 7.
are like Austin once in his supplications and prayers, he acknowledges he
prayed against concupiscence, Malebam expleri, quam extingui.
but with a fear, God should hear him in his prayers, and that secretly he
desired rather to fulfill his corruptions, then God fulfill his petitions: so
they promse but with fear God should hold them to their promises, profess
their repentance, but are afraid God should force them indeed to repent, their
hearts still go after their wickedness: so that what ever is uttered, until
their condition be altered, there is but little weight in such words, whereupon
to accept them to the Supper of the Lord.

5. Suppose they so profess repentance, and promise amendment, as according to
the rules of the word they may be judged indeed to repent, to be ingenious, and
real, then they ought not to be kept back, yea if for any scandal they stand
excommunicate, they ought to be absolved and received into this communion of
Saints, as soon as such repentance appears.

I have met with a story, and it is a sad one: Dionysius B. of Alexandria,
writing to Fabius B. of Antioch, reports of one Serapion, a man who a long time
lived ( viz. in the Church of Alexandria) without blame, but after in
persecution denied the faith, yet at length was sorely afflicted for his sin,
made mournful complaints, entreated to be received to the Supper of the Lord,
with sore and bitter cries, but none gave ear, and being still kept off, the
old man fall; into a dangerous disease, and for some days lay senseless, but
then coming to himself again, Vid. Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 43.
O how he weeps because he had been denied the Sacrament of Christ, yet with
sad blames of himself for his sin, he gives up the ghost, and dies. God forbid
if men be sincerely sorrowful, and seriously mind amendment, that they should
be refused from the Table of the Lord, nay we shall rather encourage their
coming, and glorify God in them.

Object.

Answ. make a mighty change upon the hearts of the most miserable men, yet that
God then will do so, what warrant to expect it?

There is a twofold power of God. Scaligor. Exerci^a. 365 Sect. 8.


Absolute and Actual.

By the former God is able to do all things.

By the later he does no more then agrees with his will, Voluntas ^ius potesta^
eius.
for his will and power hold equal pace, neither are these two properties in
God, as those two disciples of Christ, going to the sepulcher, one out-running
the other, Joh. 20. Now that wicked men may come to the Lords Table, and that
God will there, by his power, make such a present change: Zanch, lib. 3. ca. 3.
d^ Not. Dei.
What ground to expect it?

Neither do I speak here but of Gods operative will, which ever concurres with
his actual power, and that these should then meet to effect this matter in a
moment, why should we think? Considering these things.

1. God reveals no hints of such a thing in his word, which is the transcribed
copy of his will, and the ordinary rule of his works.

2. The common course of Gods workings toward the creature have not been
ordinarily instantaneous, God could have made the world in a moment, but he
took six days to do it in. God could expedite all his pleasure in an instant,
both in us and for us, but he takes time to accomplish his purpose.

3. State right the case of carnal men in this mighty and mavelous change,
how wide the terms are asunder, to bring from nature to grace, from death to
life, wherein God usually goes by degrees, as the subject whereon he works is
made capable to receive his impressions, Joh. 16.12. Men, the worse they are,
the longer settled in sin, the more they oppose grace, and are crossely
indisposed thereunto, the more slowly comes in and goes on the great work of
God in the change of their estates.

In natural generations, the more vast the creature, the more slow the
production, an Elephant ten years in the womb, for a man grown up great and
gross in sin and wickedness, yet to have such a good change all of a sudden
is a rare wonder. Christ when he raised Lazarus from death to life, that had
lien but four days in the grave, he groans, and over the grave he groans
again, Lazarus comes not presently forth, Joh. 11. and shall men who have lien
many years rotting in their sins, have such a sudden resurrection? I remember a
question Austin propounds, whether they whom Christ shall find alive at the
last day, shall not die at all, or in their passage to Christ in the air, die
and instantly live again? In answer he inclines to the latter, saying, such
have their death, and be again with a mavelous celerity revived, but this
seems otherwise, 1 Cor. 15.51. and so truly to think of men dead in their sins,
yet in the day of a Sacrament, with a sudden celerity, to be made so alive by
grace, as to meet Christ aright at his Table, is a mistake.

4. A wicked man at the Table of the Lord is out of his way, and out of Gods
way too, viz.

Wherein God ordinarily works that mighty and mavelous change, for that is
the way of his word, wherein by the effectual energie of the spirit of grace,
Christ is formed in the soul, and the soul transformed by beholding the glory
of the Lord in that glass: 2 Cor. 3.18. and therefore to admit a wicked man to
the Table of the Lord, looking there for such an instant change to be wrought
by God as to make him immediately meet for the Lords Supper is senseless, but

Lastly, To make men meet for the Table of the Lord, there must not only be
something done in them, but by them, as there is work for God to do in men, so
there is work for men to do toward God, now though God can do his work in an
instant, yet men to do their work must have a time, as to examine themselves
with reflects upon their sins to stir up soul-humblings and hungrings, etc.
which they must do who would receive this Supper aright, there must not only be
some workings of Gods grace in the man, but some co-workings of the man by the
grace of God, which will require time; some seeds, habits and principles of
grace, God may instantly cast in, but for a man to act from those principles,
and to draw out the due exercise of grace for a meet communicating, is not so
easily or instantly done.



Ans. Potius quam aliquod regno and gloriae Christi decedat ruat non solum pax
sed calum and terra. Melius est dissidium pietatis ortu^ causa, quam vitiosa
concordia.
Rather then any thing should fail or fall of the kingdom, glory, and
government of Christ, let not only peace go, but heaven and earth go too,
says Luther, and better is dissension for piety and purity sake, then corrupt
communion and concord says Hierom, when Christ was born Herod and all
Jerusalem was troubled, Mat. 2.3. should not Christ therefore have come?

2, Why should any be provoked when this course is not till men's own wickedness
procures it unto them? Christ whips the buyers and sellers out of the Temple,
but the whip was made of their own cords, brought in to tie their breasts with,
Ioh. 2.15.

Men put forth for their sins, must blame themselves. Its storied of
Apollidorus the tyrant how he dreamt that the Scythians came and plucked him out
of his bed, pulled off his skin, and cast him into a seething caldron, where
his own heart cried to him, Thy self is the cause of these thy sufferings. If
men be put out, what they suffer is of themselves, Being their own sin is the
cause, they should take it penitently, and it being the just punishment of
their sin, they should take it patiently. Lam, 3.39.

3. If wicked men will be hereupon enraged, they shall thereby add sin to sin.
Its their sin to need this censure, Veniat veniat verbum Domini and submittemus
illi sexcenta si nobis essent colla. Baldas^ minist. Ger. in Ep. ad Oecolamp.
and its their sin next not to submit to this censure, when they need it: as
one to Oecolampadius said of the Gospel of Christ, so should each one say of
the Discipline of Christ, let it come, let it come, and we will submit, if we
had hundreds of necks to put under, on the contrary sure such as in wrath rise
up against it, whatever troubles to others they cause, it will be to themselves
in the close, as Samsons foxes who set the Philistian fields on fire,
themselves perished probably in the flame, Iud. 15.4.

4. It is far better to occa^ion wrath in the bad, then grief to the good. Let
men in their wickedness be received to the Supper of the Lord, and we thereby
cause a double sorrow to Gods dear Saints, its their sorrow to think of the
sins such men have committed, and it is again their sorrow to see such men
admitted in their sins. We may suppose one for: will be displeased, better
offend many bad then one good, Mat. 18 6. He that offends one of the least that
believes in me, better a millstone were hanged about his neck, and he drowned in
the depth of the Sea, from the greek its aggravable more fully, (...).
importing, such a millstone, not light and little, that a man's hand can turn,
but one so great and heavy, as requires the strength of a horse to stir it, yet
better to have this hung about a man's neck and drowned therewith, etc. then to
offend the meanest member of Christ.

5. While we avoid provoking of men, and occasioning troubles from them, we
shall be sure to provoke God, and cause worse troubles from him, yea hereby we
may come to suffer sore both from God and men. We read of the Jews in
Constantines time, Chrysostom. in orat. contra Iudaeos.
when they sought to bring in their ceremonies Christ had cast out, and to
build up their old Temple, the Lord had thrown down, Amb. lib. 5. Ep, 2^.
the Emperor with his army, slew many, and made slaves of the rest: yet after
in Iulians time attempting the same worse befell them, God fought against them
from Heaven, flung bals of fire that broke their work, burnt their tools in
their hands, and coats on their backs.

If we yet will bring in such persons or things to corrupt the worship of God,
as are begun to be cast out, and build up old customs in corrupt communions,
that are in part thrown down, Gehennan de c^elo misit^ Sal. in Gen, 19.24.
though a sword be already upon us, yet more miseries may remain even from men,
if not far worse for God to fight against us, to fling hellfire from Heaven
into our hearts, to have controversies with our consciences, if not with our
kingdom, to set them in a burning flame will be fearful, better the fury of
men fall upon us in the discharge of our duties, then the anger of the Lord, in
the neglect of the same.

Object.

Answ. Achan troubles all Israel, what then to have a box full of flies? a camp
full of Achans? multitude of sinners is the magnitude of sin.

2. Are they already many i^ if they be indulged and let alone they will be
more: when we see heaps of weeds and nettles in a garden, we pluck them up,
least seeding and rooting they more increase: let these alone and our
Congregations will become like the sluggards field, Pro. 24.31. nettles
covering the face thereof, and thorns thick in every corner.

3. Are they many? there may be the more hope by our fervent and faithful
endeavor in this Discipline to do good to some: though among many its likely
there will be those who thereupon will be hardened in their sin, and more
desperately enraged: yet some other thereby may be humbled for their sin, and
effectually converted, that as he said, If I had not perished I had perished,
so some man may say, If I had not been cast out, I had been cast out, If I had
not been delivered to Satan, I had not been delivered from Satan, thus where
there be many sinful, we may the more hope hereby, to be a means of much good
to some, which is the end of such censures, 1 Cor. 5.5.

4. Are they many? yet there be more with us, then against us, as Hezekiah
quickened the courage of his servants, when a numerous host of Assyrians came
against them, 2 Chro. 32.7, 8. With us is the Lord our God to help us, and one
God is more then many thousand men, Josephus reports of Herod the King, that in
a speech he once made to his army, Josephus l, 15. cap. 8.
he had among others this quickening Passage, perhaps some of you will say, that
right is on our side, but the greater number on the other side, ah! how
unworthy is such an expression of my followers, for those with whom justice is,
with those also God is, there neither wants multitude nor fortitude, Think we
in this case how Christ for our encouragement says the same to us, and bids us
set one God against many thousand sinners.



Answ.

In a word if the least letter be blotted, its the less legible, but if the
vowels therein be defaced its all marred. Great men says Augustine in the
world, Aug. de civ. Dei, l. 4. c. 3.
are as vowels in a word, if they be blurred with sin, the more mischief is
done, the more meet to be restrained, the more cause to keep them from the
Table of the Lord.

2. Are they great? this may be a means to make them good, and O how great will
that good be, when greatness and goodness meets. The good examples of great
men are to others as the party-colored sticks to Jacobs sheep, Gen 30.39.
causing them to bring forth the like, Let us herein what ever men be, take the
course Christ has appointed, powerful it may prove for the good of the
greatest men, who being themselves good, may occasion much good in many others.

3. Are they great? there has been as great as they kept off in the present
case. Ambrose in this stoutly withstood the Emperor Theodosius, Qui secutu^ es
errantem sequere poenitentem Theodorit Hist. l. 4. c. 17.
he pressing that he might partake, excusing his own foul fact, by David's doing
the like, to which Ambrose replies Thou have followed David transgressing,
follow David repenting, and then think thou of the Table of the Lord.

4. Are they great that will be offended, if they be refused? there is greater
then they that will be incensed, if they be received: Better displease mighty
men then an Almighty God, Luther has some such like expression as this, Nihil
est tentatio vel universi mundi and totius inferni in unum conflata ad eam qua^
Deus contrarius homini ponitur.
If all the troubles of the whole world, and all the powers of Hell were
mustered together against us, it were nothing to this, to have the great God
become contrary to us.

5. The greater the men be, the greater will all our zeal appear to be for God,
while we withstand them, and herein protest against them; a little fire will
fasten upon straw, and small sticks, but a great fire seizes on the greatest
blocks.

Lastly, Wicked men being many and mighty, the more need of united strength
against them, all in office to agree in a close accord: Magistrate and Minister
conclude as Joab and Abishai, 1 Chronicles. 19.12.

Object.

Answ.

2. Better hazard a good customer then hazard a good conscience, peace in thy
heart will be beteer then pounds in thy chest.

3. They are not kind and good to thee if they would have thee neglect duty,
Qui phr^neticum ligat and qui lethargicum excitat ambobus molestus sed ambos
amat and vere amicus est. Aug. de ver. D^m. Sermon. 59.
and so sin for their sake.

4. If they be kind and good to thee, be thou so to them, are they kind and
good to thy body and outward estate? be thou kind and good to their souls and
spiritual estates.

If to a Sacrament thou suffer them to come in their sins, and thereby damn
their souls, art thou kind and good to them? nay is not this great
unkindnesse? will thou so serve a friend? Meli^r est misericordia punicus quam
crudelitas parcens. Correptiones amici grata sunt acul^o^ habens dolorem non
habent comp^ngimur censorijs sed delectamur benevolentijs. Ambros.
Better is correcting mercy then sparing cruelty, says Ambrose.

5. Thou may not, as thou fear, hereby loose them, but gain them rather,
that by this they may become better neighbors and friends then before, and a
day may come, such a one as thou now hold'st back, may say to thee, as once
David to Abigail, 1 Samuel 25.32. Blessed be God, and blessed be thou, and
blessed be thy advice which kept me from being guilty of Christ's innocent
blood. Let the righteous so smite me: The wounds of a friend are better then
the kisses of a foe, Psalm. 141.5. Prove. 27.6.

Object.

Answ. Eccles. 11.4. He that observes the wind shall not sow, and he that
regards the clouds shall not reap. He that meditates discouragements, neglects
duties. But

2. If thou say and do nothing in this case the wicked will make an ill
construction, they will conclude you are like to them, and like well of them,
as Psalm. 50.21. These things, says God to the wicked, thou have done, and I
kept silence, and thou thoughtest I was altogether such a one as thy self, but
I will reprove thee etc. so do you appear against them least they so conclude.

3. Better they charge you with malice and hatred of them, then God with love
to them, and helping of them in their wicked ways, Noli frater, noli obsecro
non te decet etsi aliquem forte deceat: si tamen quicquam deceat malos Emeritum
certe non decet defendere Optatum in malu. Aug. ep. 168. ad Emeris.
2 Chronicles. 19.2. O says the Seer to Jehoshaphat when he had complied with Ahab,
Should thou help the ungodly, and love them that hate the Lord? therefore is
wrath upon thee from the Lord. A wicked man, as a man, is to be loved, but as
wicked it is meet to hate him: It ill becomes any to be wicked, and it will
worse become you any way to defend their wickedness, which you do when you
omit your duty, and will not declare or proceed against them.

But to prevent such a charge of malice,

1. Neither say or do more against one than another, but be impartial against
all, spare neither friend nor foe.

2. Do not make too much haste, before there is just cause, nor delay too long
when the cause is just: When a matter has lien long unquestioned, or
uncomplained of, and after brought out, it is more suspicious of spite,
therefore act timely herein.

3. Do all you can, Sive clames, dilectione clames, sive corrigas, dilectione
corrigas ad disciplinam: fiant omnia dictante charitate. Aug. in Ioh. Tract. 7.
in all other offices of love to them, and friendly courtesies for them, though
in this you are against them, and for your own satisfaction do this all in
love, complain in love, and do not seek private revenge, in public censures:
Jehu's fault in this was foul, Hos. 1.4. and when your own hearts can witness
what bowels of compassion you bear to them, mind not what contrary clamours
are made by them.

Object.

Answ.

The just reproach of a busie-body you shall not need fear, only observe these
rules.

1. Do not stir thus for every small matter, but what is gross and
scandalous, Eccles. 7.21. Take no heed to all words spoken, etc.

2. Do not strive for a public penalty till thou see private means prevails
not Matthew. 18.15, 16. Then tell the Church.

3. Do not move furthe^ then the compass of thy own place, let thy oars row
within thy own boat, (...), Comp^sita vox ab alieno and Episcopo, i e.
Inspector^. Eras
not busy in other men's matters, 1 Pet 4.15. 1 Pet. 4.15.
Keep within thy own orb, and therein with all agility act to the utmost. No
element we say is heavy in its proper place, let no Christian, public or
private, move heavily in his own place or station, but bestirre your selves for
God in this case of Christ.

Object.

Answ.

You cannot dispense wit a duties upon any entreaties. Let me give you a famous
instance, that something suits this case. I have read of Charles the Emperor,
and two great persons once in this Kingdom, Cranmer and Ridley, soliciting King
Edward the sixth, Act. and Mon. 2. page 553.
that his sister, the Lady Mary might have the Sacrament in the popish way, he
stood out denying and pleading the cause with them, they still pressing their
carnal arguments, he burst out into bitter tears, sobbing and beseeching them
to say no more, whereupon they went their way, professing the young King had
more Divinity in his little finger, then they in their whole bodies.

The more purely the Sacrament is celebrated, the more unmeet are all impure
persons to approach thereunto, no persuasions therefore should procure our
allowance thereof, hereby our Christianity, fidelity, fervency, and sincerity,
will be the more eminently set forth, when against all entreaties, we
resolutely resist their admittance unto the holy Table of the Lord, and when
against all discouragements we zealously persist in purging Sacraments and
Assemblies from what is impure and impertinent.

Lastly, some, and left off with shame and sorrow in others.

Theolog proplem loc. 112. de excom. page 340.
have been often attempted, but poorly prospered.

In some Churches of Germany, it was, as Aretius observe, by some studiously
endeavored, but the work was hindered, the promoters discouraged, and all
vanished without any good success. In this Land, what endeavors have been to
reduce this discipline, they that are acquainted with the history of times can
tell. But what of this?

1. There have been times when this has been enterprized and prospered, and
those the first and best times: How prosperous and vigorous this course was in
the times both of Origin and Cyprian, Origin contra cells lib. 3. Cyprian ep.
12. and 55. and 59. 64. and ep. 68.
instances are plain and plentiful ^n their learned writings: How severe and
strict Discipline was then against scandal, and to debar the scandalous from
the communion and Church Fellowship, is clear, with the good successes therein,
and issues thereof, though in these last and worst times, oppositions have been
high, and interruptions great.

2. Good things through opposition have for a time ceased, yet after, most
happily succeeded, established and flourished. The building in Ezras and
Nehemiahs time, by power and policy, by reproaches, lies and disgraces, was
wholly for a while interrupted, yet afterward effectually finished.

3. The more frustrate former attempts have been, the more glorious may be the
effects for future, the more glory may rise to God, and rest on us, it will the
rather be our crown and comfort to possess that which others reached after,
but could not attain to, Genesis 38. We read when Tamar was in travel with her
Twins, that one put forth his hand, and hopes was he would be by and by born,
but he drew back, and in stead another came forth, who for his violent breaking
out, was called Pharez, A Breach: yet after his brother that appeared first,
was born, his name was called Zarah, his birth being as the rising of the sun,
with facility and beauty, so the Hebrew word is interpreted by some. When good
Discipline has been at the birth, what opposite breakings out has there been?
how has it been forced back? yet when it shall come forth, it may be called
Zarah, it will be to the congregations of Christ, as the rising of a glorious
sur. When the sun sets, night follows, and then all the wild beasts with
boldness creep forth, but when the sun rises, they are forced out of the open
field, and made ^o ly down in their dens.

4. This course has been undertaken, but broken off, the causes whereupon may
well be enquired.

Psalm. 104.22.
1. A cause in offenders may be proposed.

2. A cause in Reformers may be supposed.

In offenders the cause has been more positive.

In Reformers the cause has been more privative.

Offenders so various, violent, desperate and disobedient, not bowing their
necks to the yoke of Jesus Christ, but as an excess of evil in them, so a
defect of good in others. Reformers who have begun this business have ceased
the service.

1. For want of diligence, loath to take pains to pursue it, and unweariedly to
abide by it.

2. For want of patience ^o endure the difficulties wherewith they have been
beset in the onset of service.

3. For want of prudence, wisely with discretion, caution and moderation to
manage this matter.

4. For want of concord not cordially agreeing to carry on this course,
officers and offices, differing, the swords civil and Ecclesiastical clashing.

5. For want of courage, sin in others has been above zeal in them. Suppose
upon some of these causes the work has ceased, its no warrant for us: let us
be diligent, patient, prudent, let us have concord, courage to carry on this
work of God. Luther speaks excellently to Melancton, who was apt to be
disheartened with doubts from difficulties and fears, from foes, and so to cease
the service they had undertaken. If the work be not good, why did we ever own
it, if it be good, why should we ever decline it? Why, says he, should we fear
the conquered world, that have Christ the conqueror on our side?

Are we in respect of our places to appear for God against sinners? let not our
fear be above our faith and fervor: what if the work be hard and hazardous? The
King of Navarre once told Beza, Pelago se non ita commissurus, quin quando
liberet pedem refer posset
that in the matters of Religion and Reformation, he would launch no further to
sea then he might be sure to return safe to haven, if the winds and waters
were rough, Beware we of this and let us resolve to sail on what ever we suffer.

I conclude with these two proposalls.

1. The greatest opposition against any good course is ordinarily at the
entrance. It is, and ever has been the main and most elaborate design of the
world, as St Cyprian observes, Cyprian Sermon. de stella and magis.
to strangle Christ in his cradle, and kill him ^n his infancy, when he begins
to be shaped and formed as in the first conversion of a sinner, and reformation
of a Church, let us therefore now look for no less.

2. The more opposition there is against any good course, the likelier at
length to succeed.

In Dioclesians time under whom was the last and worst of the 10. Persecutions,
though then Christian Religion was more desperately opposed then ever, Russin
yet it prospered and prevailed more then ever, so that Dioclesian himself
observing the more he sought to blot cut the Name of Christ, it became more
legible, and to block up the way of Christ, it became more passible, and what
ever of Christ he thought to root out, it rooted the deeper, and rose the
higher: thereupon he resolved to engage no further, but retired to a private
life.

This discipline of Christ that concerns the Sacrament, let us pursue it,
prosper it shall, though it goes on hardly and heavily a while, let us maintain
our places, and keep our ground against sinners, as the stars in their
courses fought against Sisera. The cause is the Lords: The comfort will be
ours: The good to Gods Church will be great. Take away the dross from the
silver and there shall come forth a fair vessel for the finer, Prove. 25.4.

The exhortation next is to you (my dear neighbors and friends) freely to
submit your selves to good government, herein, Heb. 13.17. Obey them that have
the rule over you, and submit your selves. The Apostle uses two words to set
forth the duty of people to their Pastors, Obey and Submit: there being two
sort of things which they ought to come under, their Sermons, their censures,
obey them Preaching, submit to them punishing: obey them in the course of sound
doctrine, submit to them in the course of just discipline. I have read of
Ambrose, that once being about to leave the Church of Millain, the people of
the place flocked about him, laid hold of him, protesting they had rather lose
their lives, then lose their Pastor, beseeching him to remain and promote among
them, the Gospel and government of Jesus Christ, professing and promising their
ready submission thereunto.

The like let me beseech you to, whom I dearly love in the Lord, that
Sacramental discipline to which you are to submit, I refer to 3. heads.

1. To be examined whether fit. 2. To be refused if found unfit. 3. To be
directed you may be fit.
1. You are to submit to meet examination, this is agreed, all are not meet to
be admitted to the holy Table of the Lord, many for ignorance, as also for
other wickedness, ought to be debarred, but after things well weighed and
proved: Now must we try and so take heed whom we refuse? and must we not try to
take heed whom we embrace? must we examine least we err in rejecting, and had
not we need examine, least we err in admitting? An unmeet man has more wrong
to the Sacrament to be accepted, then a meet man from it to be debarred: let a
good man be refused, he suffers that which God will sanctify, and it may be
sufficient for him to have that mentally, which he cannot have Sacramentally,
God accepts his desire, and will supply his Sacrament-absence with the more of
his own presence: let a wicked man be received, he commits that sin, and
contracts that guilt, which had he been suspended, had been prevented. Submit
then to this necessary course of due examination and trial before the
Sacrament, for the discovery of your necessary knowledge or debarrable
ignorance, in that point. I principally press it.

1. In household government, it is the duty of domestic rulers, to examine such
as are under their chaage. Pareus in loc.
It was Abraham's praise to have so many catechized servants in his family, Genesis
14.14. servants well instructed in matters of Religion, so the word is rendered.

The words that I command thee, thou shall talk of them when thou sit in
thy house, and thou shall teacht them diligently to thy children. Deuteronomy. 6.7,

The Hebrew word is, thou shall whet or sharpen them to thy child^en, by
repeating them, and causing them to repeat, as in a catecheticall way: and are
not those who are Governors in the Church, and have others under charge, to
extend care in this kind?

2. In civil courts trial must first be made, and then sentence passed,
witnesses examined, than the innocent cleared, and offenders punished, Titles
tried, evidences produced, and proved, and after vardict given, etc. much more
meet is this in all Church-proceedings, else a greater wrong may be done, in
matters that concern the soul and spiritual estate, then in things that only
refer to ehe world,

3. In other callings those that are to deal with you in inferior matters, you
allow to examine and question you, the Physician before he gives you physic
asks many things, you willingly answer, and open your griefs, and as well as
you can tell the whole state of your bodies, and may not he that watches for
your souls, and seeks your spiritual cure, enquire and examine?

4. In other cases you are content to come under the questions of others,
though those upon whom you may be accidentally cast: If you loose your ways in
a journey, if any that may direct you enquire, whence you come? whether you go?
etc. If you lose your estates by casualtie, if any that may supply you, enquire
your case, examine your wants, your answers are ready, and will you be a verse
herein that tends to your internal and eternal good?

5. Unwillingnesse hereunto its an argument of an ill estate, he that is loath
to have his house searched, its a sign he has therein some ill gotten goods.
Its a suspicion a man's gold is not weight, being loath to have it brought to the
scales, On the contrary, it is a comfortable evidence of a hopeful condition,
to submit to trial and examination. A good scholar that has it in him is
willing to be examined, though a dunce or non-proficient have no mind to that
matter.

6. The undergoing of this, may be your peace and comfort, your praise and
profit, hereby we may be able to give testimony of you, and of that meetnesse
we find in you, to communicate in the Supper of the Lord, whereby both your
selves and others may be the more satisfied, your confidence and comforts
increased, your knowledge and experience enlarged, and others by your means
encouraged.

The posing and examining a good Scholar is his advantage, discovers his
reading, adds to his learning, he comes off with applause and honor.

7. Better be examined by men before, then to be questioned by the Lord, and
your own awakened consciences at the Sacrament, or after: for God to find you
out and fall upon you there, as on him without the wedding garments Mat. 22.
with a Friend how come thou in hither? how durst thou presume to this
precious Ordinance? or as God came upon Adam, when he had eaten forbidden
fruit, with where art thou? what have thou done? Here are questions will more
amaze, then any your Minister can put. Saul boasted he had done the
Commandment of God, O but the sheep bleated, and the oxen lowed, a man thinks
all is well, he has been at the Sacrament of Christ, but by and by his
conscience bleats and lows against him, a worse business then an examination
or suspension.

8. Why should not you give an account to them, that must give an account for
you? Heb. 13.17. Its the Apostles argument to urge peoples submission to their
Pastors, they watch for your souls as they that must give an account: God will
one day enquire, and Christ will question with us, what our care has been of
you, our pains with you, our prayers for you; We must be more exactly
answerable to God for souls, then ever Jacob was counteable to Laban for sheep:
and may not we take an acount, who must give an account?

9. We require no more then what has been the practice of the best Reformed
Churches, Consueta^ est ut qui per atatem inque doctrina catechetica profectum
ad saecram coenam, primum admittuntur, etc. Zepperas polit. Eccles. l. 3. c. 8.
p. 721.
If any were to be admitted to the Supper of the Lord, they were such as had
been well instructed and examined in the doctrine of Catechism, and their
proficiency being found by some in office more privately, they were then
presented to the whole Church, being required publicly to give testimony of
their knowledge, and make confession of their faith, and so come in to be
accepted at the Table of the Lord.

10. Gods servants examined by adversaries, have spoken freely with peril of
life, to points of Faith, when they knew their answerings made way for their
sufferings. Gordius a martyr being about to be examined before his adversaries,
his friends advised him to conceal himself, and not let his tongue declare what
he did in his heart believe, yes, says he, its fit my tongue that was made for
God, should speak for God, though it be with the loss of my life, I will give
an account of my faith, if called thereunto. O what sad examinings Gods Saints
have patiently suffered, Read that little book of Martyrs the 11. of the
Hebrews, some were tortured, examined upon the rack, ver. 35. Others were tried
with c^uell mockings and scourgings, ver, 36. Thus was Paul examined, when
every question was with a blow that drew blood, Act. 22.24. 2 Cor. 11, 24, 25.
yet admirable were the answers he gave, and confessions he made, of which we
read both, Act. 24. and Act. 25. at large, yea Christ himself gave excellent
answers, even to betraying questions, Mat. 22.35, 36. and before Pontius
Pilate, witnessed a good confession, 2 Timothy, 6.13. and will not you do this in a
friendly way?

11, and lastly, see if the word of God do not warrant some to examine, and
others to answer in discovering cases, Rev. 2.2. I know thy works, says the
Lord, unto the Church of Ephesus, how thou can not bear them that are evil,
what then? why cast them out? before trial be made, no, thou have tried them,
which say they are Apostles, and are not: tried them examined them, as some
reads it, pierced into them as the Greek word imports, (...) a (...).
by close-searching questions: and this the Angel of the Church practiced, and
was praised for, what the Lord commends he commands, 1 Pet, 3.15. Be always
ready to give an answer to him that asks a reason of your hope, with meeknes
and fear. To confess Christ the Gospel clearly requires, Luke 12.8. Cyprian puts
a difference between confession and profession. To profess is for a Christian
of his own accord, to utter his own belief: To confess, its to make answer to
demands, made by those in authority, who question our Creed.

We find a threefold confession in Scripture.

A confession of praise, Heb. 13.15.

A confession of sin, 1 Ioh. 1.9.

A confession of Faith, Romans 10.10. With the heart man believes, and with the
mouth confession is made, to wit, the tongue confesses what the heart
believes. If we do not confess the faith, we deny the faith: being examined
of our faith in Christ, if we do not confess him, we deny him: Mat. 10.33. He
that confesses me before men, him will I confess before my father in Heaven:
but he that denies me before men, him will I deny before my Father in Heaven.
There are but these two, him that confesses, and him that denies. Cyprian tells
of some who loath to deny, yet lother to die, accepted from the Magistrates,
scrolls testimonial of their abnegation, though they did not expressly deny
him, yet they not expressly confessed him, they were enjoined public repentance,
as those that denied him, Phil. 2.11. Every tongue shall confess that Jesus is
the Lord, all shall speak it out together as the greek word notes, and so when
examined by such as be over you, you must freely confess, yea you ought before
your acceptance to this holy Supper, willingly to undergo, and cheerfully to
answer, as examination is made.

Object, But this examining and questioning of men and women, and requiring
their answers, will bring back auricular confession of use in popish times.

Answ Why so? sure were it not through ignorance (to charge no deeper) this
argument would never have been urged, Its their ignorance not knowing what that
auricular confession of old was: and its their ignorance or not knowing what
that confession is, which we in this case call for.

Confession indeed we desire, Non dico ut confitearis conservo tuo peccata tua
dicito Deo, qui curet ea, Chrysostom. in Psa. 50.
but no way such as in popish times was practiced, and long since exploded, and
expelled.

That Sacramental or auricular confession.

1. It was of sins only.

2. Of all secret sins, even inward thoughts.

3. It was done privately in the ears of the Priest only.

But now the examining of people, and the confession we expect thereupon,

1. It is not so much of sins and iniquities, as of needful qualities and
abilities, to render you meet for this Supper of the Lord. We enquire of your
knowledge, faith, repentance. etc.

Its not bad fruit but good fruit that we look for and ask after. Quid mihi est
cum hominibus ut audiantsecretas confessiones meas quosi sanituri sint animae
languores m^os? Aug. Agnoscitreus Ignoscis Deus


2. Suppose search be made for sin, and we call to confession, its not of
secret sins known only to God. The inward evils of the heart they are only
offensive to God, and its enough to confess them to God, Psa. 32.5. What have
any to do to hear your private confessions, who cannot cure your inward
distempers? God gives remission, to him make confession, 1 Io. 1.9. yet

La quae conserentiam gravant exponere Ecclesia nostra consulit consolationis
gratia, Che. part. 25.
3. The confession we mean in this matter, is not to be made in the ears of the
Minister alone. It Is true there may be some case wherein confession to one
single in secret, may be meet, as when some close sin lies heavy upon
conscience, and dreadfully distresses the mind, but then

1. We do not bring in such a confession by any coaction, but the party is
herein free not forced, nor

2. Do we limit it to a particular man, but one skillful, faithful, and
pitiful, to open the troubled heart unto, and when ease can no way else be
had, Solatium vita habere cui pectus a perias.
happy is he that has a friend he can unbosome himself unto: such a confession
may sometimes be meet before the communion, which as it is not to be too far
extended, Haec confessio nec nimi^ laxanda, nec nimis astringenda est. Carol.
Imp.
so neither wholly neglected, excepting this case, the confession we intend is
not required to be made to the Pastor privately, or any other particular
person, but a confession either less or more public: less public as to the
Pastors and their assistants convened for the managing of Ecclesiastical
discipline, who ought to enquire of scandals, and to be informed of the state
of their flocks, Pro. 27.23. Moulin does excellently commend this as a usual
practice among all the reformed Churches in France. Its trus there is a
confession that sometimes ought to be made more public, to wit, of men's
public sins, before they come to the Lords Supper, as in the Council of Nice,
Conc. Nic. can. 11.
was prescribed to them, that in the persecution of Licinius had sacrificed to
Idols, Eusebius. Eccl. hist. l. 9. c. 38.
The Emperor Philip that slew Gordianus earnestly desiring to partake of the
Sacrament of the Supper, but was denied sill he stood in the place of the
penitentiaries, and made public recognition of his sin: and truly a confession
either more or less public of many, its meet to require, Confessio fa ad
ostensione^ panitentia non ad impetrationem venia.
not for the obtaining of pardon, but to testify the truth of repentance, men
that are not ashamed before others to profess their wickedness and
blasphemously to bark against Heaven, Non erubni profiteri blasphemias meas and
latrate adversus te, Aug. conf.
whoever hears: and shall such be ashamed to confess their wickednesses in the
hearing of others? to such I say, give glory to God, and make confession of
your sins unto men, Josh. 7.19. Those whom John did admit to baptism, being
men they made confession of their sins, Mat. 3.6. Quisquis verbum confessionis
in ore habet and in cord non habet, aut dolosus est aut vanus, qui vero in
cord and non in ^reant superbus aut timidus. Bern.
and why may we not expect the same from such who upon conviction are to make
confession, or to receive no allowance, to this Ordinance, because of their
palpable pride and impenitency. O they that have lived without God in the
world, ignorant of, and oppos^te to Christ, would they rush in, and not so much
as meet with a question at door, not be examined either concerning sin, or a
Savior, how they repent of the one, and what they believe of the other? It
must not be.

Object.

Answ. they are unwilling yea, and unable to answer.

2. Men must examine themselves that they may the more promptly and prudently
answer, when they are examined by others: you will be the more apt and able to
give an account to others, having first taken an account of your selves,

3. All are apt through self-love to deal slightly with themselves, in
examination of themselves, and so the more need to be examined by others. A man
is loath to dig into himself, but willing enough to indulge himself.

4. Men through self-deceit are prone to presume and conceive all is well, no
need to examine: He that is first in his own cause seems just, but his
neighbor comes and searches him, Pro. 18.17. seems just and innocent, not only
to others, but to himself, and in his own esteem, till another comes, and
discovers that whereof he was not aware. In civil law it is said to be a rule,
who might be presumed parties (as household witnesses) their testimony is
invalid and ineffectuall. Truly a poor testimony has that man in matters of
his soul, that has only the witness of his own deceived heart, seduced by the
subtleties of Satan, assuring all is well let others examine, and they may
witness, but they cannot give testimony, except they first take trial.

5. However others examine you, yet you must examine your selves, however you
examine your selves, yet its meet others examine you also, some must examine
you to give themselves and others satisfaction with whom you are to join, you
must examine your selves that in your selves you may be the more fully
satisfied, that into the fellowship of Saints you are fit to be joined, We must
examine whether you are meet in the court, and account of the Church: you must
examine whether you are meet in the sight, court, and account of God, we must
examine your knowledge in points of religion, you must examine whether that
knowledge we praise and approve, be sanctifying and soul-seasoning and saving
or no, we must examine so much and so far as matters may be knowable to us, you
must examine what further may be known by you, to wit, the estate of your
hearts toward God, which we cannot search, nor shall we judge, God indeed
searches and judges your hearts and thoughts, we do not.

There are three things God reserves to himself.

The revenging of wrongs, Deute. 32.35.

The glory of events, Pro. 16.33.

The searching of hearts, Ier. 17.10, yet though no man can search another
heart, each man may, and must search his own heart, Psa. 77.6. I commune with
my own heart, and my spirit made diligent search, I swept my own spirit with a
besome of trial, as its rendered by some, and this as at other times you ought
to do, so especially upon a Sacrament approach. Io. Buxdorf. Sinag. Judah. cap.
11.
As the Jews before the Passover use to make an exact search into every corner
of the house for leaven, so must you before this Supper search into every
corner of your hearts for sin, and yet still submit to the trial of others,
that we may examine and see whether you are furnished with those qualities
which are of ntcessary use in this Ordinance. The Roman fencers before they
were to enter the theater, in a gladiatory combat, were wont to carry their
weapons they were to use first to the governor, for him to prove them, and
allow them, as fit for that exercise.

Its meet your knowledge, your faith, and such like graces, which you are to
use at the Table of the Lord, be proved and tried by such as are appointed
thereunto, to see it they are such as are fit for this Ordinance. When Joseph's
Officers came to search Jacobs sons for their Masters cup, Genesis 44. they all
took down their sacks and willingly submitted themselves thereunto, ver. 11.12.
so do you when the Officers of Jesus Christ be to search and examine you in
this case, yield your selves thereunto with willingness of mind.

Object.

Answ.

1. As children for wilfulness and stubbornness they need rods of correction,
1 Cor. 4.21. What will you, shall I come to you with a rod? A rod of Church
discipline, they were worthy therewith to be chastened.

2, As children for weakness and ignorance they need words of instruction, in
the very rudiments of religion: need of milk and not of strong meat. Rudimenta
quibus pueri erudiuntur,
Heb. 5.13. need to be taught in catecheticall principles, so as to answer back
again with a lively voice, whereby such principles may be the more piercing,
and take the deeper impression, as the word to catechize, imports, taken from
the ecchoing of a voice, or whetting of a knife forward and back again, gives
it a sharper edge, and makes it more easy to cut, and such a course of
catechizing is of good use in the Church, 1 Cor. 14.19. (...).
In the Church I had rather speak five words wherewith I may catechize others,
so the Greek reads it, Gal. 6.6. Let him that is catechized communicate to him
that catechizeth, it is the same word in the Original.

2. You must be all like little children in a laudable sense, or no entrance
into life everlasting, Matthew. 18.3. Except ye be converted and become as little
children, you cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven, that is, you must be
humble, lowly, tractable, submissive to rules of good discipl ne, which when
once you be, you will not refuse to be instructed or catechized in the
knowledge of God, or any thing that concerns your good. (...)
We read how Theophilus was catechized, Luke 14. and so Apollos, Act. 18.25.
and it was their honor, not their shame so to be.

3. We shall not deal with you herein as children, but with respect to your age
and place, and you may ca^l it not examining or catechizing of you, but a
friendly conferring and discoursing with you about God, his being and working,
and will, made known in holy Scriptures, about man, his innocence, apostasy,
and recovery; his generation, of God, his degeneration in Adam, and his
regeneration in Christ, concerning the Sacrament, etc. Let us speak together in
a sweet and loving way of these things.

Object.

Answ.

Do thou renounce the devil? I do renounce. Do thou believe in Christ? I
do believe. Do thou promise obedience to the Gospel? I promise. So Philip
examined the Eunuch, then baptized him, Act 8.

2. The same vertually is yet done to infants, being we inquire of their
parents or others in their behalf.

3. We actually examine persons grown up, before a Sacrament, because through
years they are able to answer, which infants are not, and reason for them why
they should, which for infants is not, they having given outward offense,
manifested visible and audible ignorance and vanity, therefore meet they give
open testimony of their knowledge, faith, obedience, etc.

4. Some difference is between the two Sacraments, that may satisfy in this as
is already shown.

Secondly, Trial being thus taken, and you found unfit for the Table of the
Lord, you are to be refused, and so remain, submitting your selves thereunto,
until you are duly prepared for a meet partaking thereat: and surely such men
will fall under a great evil hereupon, who shall not patiently submit hereunto,
if any shall oppose herein, the evil will be found to be great.

1. In respect of the causes whence it will proceed.

2. In respect of the effects which it will produce.

An opposition, or non-submission to a just censure in this, It must proceed
from some evil of sin, as suppose pride and ignorance, or the like. A double
error is ordinary in the judgments of men, either they think all generally are
de jure to receive the Sacrament, and so dislike if any be put by, or if not
all, yet they think so well of themselves, that each one of them for their
parts ought of right to receive, and so storm at a restraint, as a wrong. If
notice be given of a Sacrament, each one is apt to conceive himself fit to be a
guest: As when Haman heard of one to be raised to honor, he presently thought
himself was the man, Ester 6 6. When men hear, that from the Sacrament some are
to be debarred, they say not as the disciples, Is it I? Is it I? or as those,
Act. 2.37, What shall we do? But as Peter to Christ concerning John, What
shall this man do? Men have ordinarily, either a low esteem of the Sacrament,
or a high esteem of themselves, they think the ordinance may well descend to
them, or they well ascend to the ordinance: being ignorant of the worthiness
of the Sacrament, and the unworthiness of themselves, and so are highly
displeased when they are justly debarred. This also will produce sad evils,
both of sin and punishment, men that will not patiently subject themselves to
just censures, they thereby aggravate their sins, and bring themselves more
under some sad stroke from God. Socrat. Schol lib. 1. cap. 25.
Church history reports of Arius that wretched heretic, Alexander B.
Constantinople.
how much he was incensed against Alexder, for casting him out, and denying to
admit him to communion, Eusebius B. Nicomedia,
Arius stirred up Eusebius who threatened Alexander, that if he did not take him
in by such a day, himself should be cast out from his place and banished, and
such a one should succeed him, who should admit Arius to Church Fellowship.
Holy Alexander goes into the Church, cries to God in prayer to prevent such a
ones admission, and behold in the evening of that day Arius was taken away by
an execrable judgment in his sudden death. The good man pressed God with tears
before the Communion Table that he might not come there, God struck him with a
dreadful blow, his blood and bowels gushing out, he instantly died. Men that
will not submit themselves to meet chastisements, pull down upon themselves
more dreadful punishments, submit your selves therefore, that you may be sure
to escape all such destroying evils.

Object.

Answ.

Naturalists write, that the Unicorn comes to the water, puts in his horn, and
then all the beasts follow, and drink together without danger, its not
applicable here, the same Sacrament, physic to the good, poison to the bad for
all that therein, the one to God acceptable, yet the other abominable. Though
Moses and Samuel stood before me, my heart cannot be toward this people, cast
them out of my sight let them go forth, Jer. 15.1.

2. It may prove the worse for you, sin thereby the more increased, God thereby
the more incensed, not only because of what you partake of, but also because of
whom you partake with, for God requires all corrupt mixtures to be removed, as
from his service, so from his servants. The man that crope in among the wedding
guests, without the wedding garment, Matthew. 22. O the fury that fell upon him
there, Bind him hand and foot, take him away, cast him into outer darkness,
where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, verse. 13. Better bear a
Sacrament-suspension, then to hazard such a sad rejection.

Object.

Answ.

1. Think we how exact the very heathens have been even in their sacrifices to
keep off persons profane with a procul hinc. Tu geniter cape sacra man^^
patriosque pen^^es: M^ bell^ extento digressu^ and caede recenti, Aterectare
nefas donec me flumin^ vivo, A^^^ero -- Virg. 2. Aemad,
That saying of Aeneas, in the Poet, to his father when he came from the war,
is a clear proof, Father do you meddle with the sacrifices, but as for me its
a sinful thing to touch them till I have wasted my self in the fountain: Hence
the heathens had one, ever appointed to cry out to the people, when they came
to sacrifice, All you that are unclean, be gone, etc.

2. Consider not only what has been the light of nature in the hearts of men,
but what is the strength of nature in the bodies of healthy men: such vapors
and humors as are obnoxious and peccant, nature ejects and works out of the
body, and the more forcible nature is, the fewer of such distempers it leaves:
see how each part herein helps it self: the head by sneezing, the lungs by
coffing, the veins by swearing, the stomach by vomiting, etc. and shall not a
strict course be allowed in the Church to remove what offends with submission
thereunto?

3. The exactness of former ages in this service of the Sacrament has
exceeded. Origin in. Levit. Hom. 13.
Origin calls the bread and the cup in the Lords Supper, The holy of holies,
unto which only holy ones are admitted, the unholy excluded. Chrysostom. in
epist. ad Heb. Hom. 17.
And Chrysostom reports, that in the Primitive times, when ever this Sacrament
was administered, a Deacon stood up and cried in the open Assembly, Holy things
to Holy men, Holy things to Holy men: thereby debarring all others unholy, and
raising the hearts of the holy.

4. This is the highest service under the Gospel, and so requires the more
axactnes, the next thing to be done is drinking wine with Christ in his Fathers
kingdom, Mat. 26.29.

Object.

Answ. I speak this to your shame, 1 Cor. 15.24. You have heard many Sermons of
faith in Christ, and yet you believe not, this is your shame. Positively to
practice contrary courses, to pursue sin and wickedness, whereby you are made
unmeet for this holy Ordinance, this is your shame.

2 For such as are under ignorance or scandal to be accepted to the Sacrament,
would be a far greater shame, then their putting by can be, because that only
would be a shame to themselves, but this a shame to many more. A shame to the
governors and government, to admit such unmeet men. A shame to the whole
Congregation among whom they are admitted. Now is it not far fitter for shame
to fall upon a pr^vate person, then upon a public Congregation? and is it not
more meet that an offender should bear his own shame, then others innocent to
be cast under it? It Is said, 1 Cor. 11.14. that its a shame for a man to wear
long hair; or to nourish his hair long, so in the Greek: Now when a man will
not suffer his long uncomly locks to be cut off, (...).
he nourishes them, and that is his shame: When a man shall nourish his filthy
lusts, and by mortification not endure them to be cut off, it ^s his shame,
when Church Officers with the rasor of discipline shall not cut off offenders,
but indulge and nourish them it is their shame. Better for transgressors to
abide blushing under their own shame by suffering a just censure, then for
others to undergo the shame of sinful slacknesse to censure when the cause is
just.

3. It will not only be a shame to you to be put by the Lords Table for your
sins, but it will be a soul shame for you to appear at the Table of the Lord in
your sins. Brethren, I ask you, says Augustine, Is it a shame to go and sit at
the table of an earthly Lord, August. de Temp.
with filthy clothes and dirty hands, and is it not a shame to be at the Table
of this heavenly Lord, with unhallowed hearts, unsubdued lusts, and unreformed
lives? the other is a shame before men, this a shame before God, Angels and
Saints. Would not you think it a shame to sit naked of bodily garments at an
ordinary feast among neighbors? and is it not a shame to appear naked of all
soul attire at this extraordinary banquet in the presence of the Lord and his
holy Angels? O what silencing shame and confusion of face was that man struck
with, who was found at the wedding, without a wedding garment, Matthew. 22.12.
but for a man to be found there, all filthy and defiled with sinful
pollutions, who can utter that shame? If the linen upon the Communion Table
were black and foul, the bread moldy, the wine-cup all dusty, etc. would not
you cry shame upon some? and will it not be a shame for your selves to be there
all soiled with sin? You would have the vessels there made clean, says
Chrysostom, for your use, and should not you there be more clean for the Lords
use?

4. If you think of shame to be put forth from the Sacrament, and from a few of
Gods servants in communion on earth, among whom you may be after received,
think then what a shame it will be at the last day, to be shut out of heaven,
and from the society there of Saints and Angels for ever. For Christ at that
day to say, Chrysostom. Hom. ad pop. Antioch.
Depart from me, a thing more terrible, says Chrysostom, then a thousand hels.
O then to be cast off by Christ with an I know you not, to have the door of
heaven shut upon you, so as no arguments will ever open it, will not this be a
shame? Yet this prove your portion among other sins, for this sin of unworthy
receiving the Sacramnnt.

5. To be put here to shame may be your advantage for future: If men sin and
suffer for the same, it is good to be ashamed, it is a shameful sin to be a
shameless man, for to be as Caligula was, who said of himself, he loved
nothing better in himself, then that he could not be ashamed: O how much does
it move God to wrath, to find sinful men without shame, Jer. 3.3. but on the
contrary how well was God pleased when he saw Ephraim ashamed? Jer. 31.19.
Quantum displices Deo immunditia peccati, in tantum placet Deo crubiscentia
panitentis. Bern.
So much the more as God has been displeased with the blackness of sin, the
more will he be well pleased at the blushing of the sinner, and bringing of him
to a penitential shame. He that has not been ashamed to commit sin, had need
take the more shame in his repentance for sin, and indeed one end of Church
censures is to make men ashamed. If any obey not our word by this Epistle, note
that man, and have no company with him, that he may be ashamed, 2 These. 3.14.

Object.

Answ. ignorant and scandalous: Be not opposite and obstinate, Search for
wisdom as for silver, and knowledge as for hid treasures, Prove. 2.4. and then
add to your knowledge temperance, and to temperance, patience, and to
patience, brotherly kindness, 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, so shall you find friendly
acceptance at this Supper, both from God and men, and so escape all such shame
and trouble.

2. You say the putting you from the Sacrament will be a trouble to you, and
truly good reason it should, for we hope such a censure you shall never lie
under, unless drawn down by your own sinful deserts, and being justly
punished it is meet you be troubled: To lie under censures and sufferings for
sin insensible, is an addition to sin, and an ill condition in the sinner.

3. Your trouble of mind hereupon may prove very profitable, such troubles may
bring forth sweet cures and comforts to your souls.

The Angel troubled the waters, and then it cured those that stepped in, Joh.
5.4. Its the Lords method and manner to trouble men's minds first, and then
come with healing in his wings, Malach. 4.2. Your trouble for being put by one
Sacrament, may be a means to prepare you for many, and that there may be so
good effects of such troubles, take ye heed of these things in trouble.

1 Beware your wrath do not overcome your grief, that that fire in you do not
dry up this water, that anger in you against such as have censured you, do not
prevail above sorrow in you, who by them be so censured.

2. Beware you be not more affected with the censure for your sin, then with
the sin for which you come under censure. Let not the penalty so much afflict
as your iniquity: be more disquieted at your transgression, then at your
suspension.

3. Beware your dolor do not prevent your labor, that sorrow do not so
swallow you, as to hinder your seeking of God, and setting about all good means
for your amendment, 2 Cor. 2.7.

4. Whereas you speak of trouble, to be kept off from the Sacrament, know this,
that for you in your sins to receive the Sacrament, will bring about in time a
far worse trouble to your souls: woeful trouble may well arise upon your
receiving, as your selves will say, if you consider two things that you may
expect when ever you so receive.

1. You will fall short of the greatest good.

2. You will fall under the greatest evil.

Is not this ground of trouble to come to the Supper of the Lord, and to go
without the Lord of the Supper to eat the bread of the Lord, not the bread
which is the Lord? God not give you any of his son to eat, you miss the main
meat at the Table,

Its said of the Ravens, they feed not their own young, till they be feathered
black, as themselves be black: but by a strange providence they a^e preserved,
Psa. 147.9. Men not black but bright, holy as God is holy, in a Sacrament such
God will feed, now for you to have only a little bread and wine, no^ a crum of
Christ, nor the least drop of his blood, this will one day undoubtedly trouble,
for no Christ no crown, none of his blood on earth, none of his bliss in
heaven.

2. The evil you will come under of sin and punishment will increase your
trouble. An unworthy eating and drinking at the Lords Table, to use the
Apostles phrase consider

1. What is criminal in it. 1 Cor. 11.27. Superblaillic quia homo potius in
sua quam in Dei potestate esse dilexit, Furtum, q^ia quod non suu^ raptavit,
sacrilegium quia quod sanctum alienavit, homiciduum, quia seipsum
praecipitavit, fornicatio quia integritas humana serpentina persuasione
corrupta est, etc. Aug. Enchir. ad Laurent, c, 45 Placitum sugiendum ubi ab
osculo incipitur bellu^ and p^^pacis indicium pacis rumpitur sacramentu^. Aug.
Sacrilegium quasi sacriladium. Tribus modu committi potest velin personamvel in
locum. vel in rem, Aqul. 2. 2ae. Qu. ^9.


2. What is penal upon it. The fault and the guilt.

For the fault or offense its foul, though few think so, As that sinful eating
of Adam in Paradise may seem but a small matter in the judgment of man, but in
the eye of God a whole volume of iniquity was in it, pride, disobedience,
rebellion, treason, theft, sacrilege, murder, and many other sins, lay in the
belly of this mother sin, as Austin well observes: so this sinful eating in
the Sacrament, may seem to some a small offense, but in that so many sins meet,
as make it exceeding sinful. Here is pride, else no man in his wickedness
would so presume, and here is rebellion and treason against Christ his crown
and dignity, a fair pretense there is indeed of love and loyalty to Jesus
Christ but it is but like the treason of Judas which was brought on by a kiss,
and so the fact more soul, their hands and lips adore him, but their hearts and
lives abhor him. Here is theft and sacrilege. To take away the communion cup,
or the linen from the communion Table: O that we will say were horrible and a
high offense, what then to take bread and wine set apart and sanctified by the
Lord, Quicu^que cum peccat^ mortali hoc sacrament^^ sumiti^currit sacrilegium
tanquam sacramenti violator. Aquin. 3a. pa.
for this holy use with wicked and unwashen hands? Read that close c^tting
quaery, Romans 2.22. Thou that abhor rest Idols, do thou commit sacrilege?
Remember Achan with his wedge of gold, and Babilonish garment, but to rob God
and sacrilegiously to venture on these holy things of God is worse, and here are
murders more cruel, then any Chronicle can compare: for Samson to destroy
himself, though therewith he destroyed the enemies of God some dispute the
fact, but here for a man to kill himself, Adorantes Dominum neque ita ut est
dignum ea viventes non senti^us so reos fieri Dominicae mortis, etc. Ans
and therewith likewise as much as in him lies, the dea^ son of God: O
matchless murder, O tremble over that in the 1 Cor. 11, 27.29. but ^aving
spoken somewhat before of Adams eating the forbidden fruit, what a dreadful
sin was that; let me a little further compare that and this, The fruit of that
tree some conceive was sacramental, which made the fact more fearful, to
profane Gods Ordinance by a sinful sacrilege, but however lay these two
sinful eatings together, and this may seem in some things to exceed that.

That was against God a creator, this against Christ a redeemer, now its more
to redeem a soul then to create a world. Bonum gratia unius est maeius quam
bonum natura totius universi Aquin. 12ae. Qu. 113. Art. 9.
That was against the word of the Lord: this against the blood of the Lord,
there was guilt of the blood of man, but no guilt of the blood of Christ. That
struck at the covenant of works: this with wrong reflects on the covenant of
free grace, that sinful eating was but once done, this often, even as often as
wicked men receive.

The ingemination of sin, is the aggravation of sin. That being the first sin
of man, there was no sin the punishment of which might affright from it: this
is a following sin, and sad judgments have been already inflicted even for the
same sin, to warn others from it, 1 Cor. 11.30. For this cause many sick and
weak, and many sleep in death: However by a virtuall influence and reference,
that sin had a large extent, yet in person it was actually done but by few: but
this sinful eating is actually done by many in their own persons, and
multitude of sinners, it increases the magnitude of sin; That was the occasion
of Christ's coming into the world, which though it was for his abasement, yet
for his advancement also, together with much glory to God, and good to his
Church, by the birth and death of Christ: hence some have said, O happy sin,
etc. but O the dishonours done to God and Christ, by this eating, O who would
not fear to fall under this sin, If I should further compare this sin with all
the pardonable sins of the sons of Adam, Cruciate, damnate, torquete, atterite,
nos quoties a vobis metimur toties plures efficimur; nam sanguis Christianorum
semen Ecclesia est, Tert. Apologet.
would not this transcend?

Amongst them can there be a greater then oppression and persecution of Gods
people to death, yet by means of such bloudsheds the Church has more
flourished? that blood has been seed, but here the guilt of Christ's blood who
does not quake to carry? The beating and killing and stoning the servants is
some what, but this is the heir let us kill him, that is worse. For Julian to
take his own blood falling from him, and cast i^ up as into the face of Christ,
was woeful: but for a wicked communicant to take Christ's own blood as it were
from his heart, and fling it into the face of Christ, O fearful.

I proceed in short to that which is penal.

Dreadful dooms do a^tend this sin, besides what after follows. When the
Ordinances were more carnal, the punishments upon disobeyers and abusers were
more corporal: now those are more spiritual, these are so also. Peccatum quod
i^^stu^ videtur habet paenam pedissequam, (...) nemo de admisso nisi
aemaritudiu^ doleat, aut cacitate non doleat, Aug.
Blindness of mind, hardness of heart, and a reprobate sense for present,
and damnation hereafter for ever, 1 Cor. 11.29. He eats and drinks damnation.
Damnation? what hels of horror are in that one word, no tongue cantell. A
curious painter desired to draw out the tortures of the Spanish Inquisition,
took a board and all besmeared it with blood, intimating, they were
unexpressible.

So to declare what are the torments of eternal damnation is impossible. Qui
discordat a Christo nunquam manducat carnem eius nec bibit sanguinem: etsi
tantae rei Sacramentum ad iudicium suae perditionis quotid e accipit.
O fear, and fly, think if God should set upon you at the Sacrament, and there
seal this damnation to your souls: and assure your selves your sin herein it
will be so great, God will remember it in judgment both here and hereafter:
For a small sip of wine in a Sacrament-cup, O the dreadful cups of Gods wrath
whereof you must ever afterward drink, in all which this sin of unworthy
receiving the Sacrament, Non est pana supra Israelem in qua non sit uncia
vituli.
will bring in the most bitter ingredient. The Jews have a proverb That there
is no punishment comes upon Israel in which there is not one ounce of the
golden calf, meaning, that that was so great a sin, that in every plague God
remembered, that that had an influence into every trouble that befell them, so
may you expect that in every punishment you shall after fall under, there will
still be an ounce in it of a polluted Sacrament, this will add to all your
troubles on earth, and torments in hell.

When you shall come to this holy Ordinance, Hildebrand. dictus Geo. 7.
and not consider what it requires, when you neither can or will answer
according to what it commands, what can you expect but a dreadful damnation to
follow? I have read of a Pope who demanding of the Eucharist resolution of
diverse questions, as the Gentiles were wont to do of their Idols, and receiving
n^ answer, cast the Eucharist into the fire. O fearful profaneness! If you
receive the Sacrament again and again, yet having no regard to answer that holy
administration with a holy conversation, and God thereupon fling your immortal
souls into infernal flames. O righteous vengeance, or if God do not presently
cast down your souls to hell, suppose he brings up hell into your souls by
terror of conscience, cast into that case of Judas when he had betrayed the
innocent blood, you must not think to fall under so great a sin, but you must
also fall under some grievous judgment. It has been a custom when any was
charged with a crime, Corpus Domini nostri Jesus Christi sittibi ad probationem.
The Sacrament was given him with these words, Let the body of our Lord Jesus
be to thee a trial of thy innocence or guiltiness. Upon this ground supposing
that some eminent judgment would soon seize upon the guilty: You come to the
Sacrament, God secretly says, The bread thou eatest, and wine thou drinkest
this day, let it be to thee in the effect, as thou art in thy estate. Be it
unto thee in its working, as thou art in thy walking, what would this produce?
You may be amazed to meditate. O then rather then run this hazard, submit to
this censure of refusal from the Table of the Lord, Better endure such a just
chastisement, then fall under such sin and punishment.

3. Submit your selves to be directed in such ways, whereby the worst of you
may yet become meet, and worthy to communicate at this holy Table of the Lord.

And what I call you herein to consider, I reduce to two heads.

1. To encourage your submission. 2, To enlarge the direction.
Your submission may be encouraged to the use of good means by such motives as
these.

First, Though you have ^een most unmeet and unworthy, and therefore justly
refused, yet using such means, you not only possibly may, but certainly shall
become so meet and worthy, as to be readily received. The Apostle first wrote to
the Corinthians, to put away from communion among them the incestuous person,
and after wrote to them to receive him into their society again, 2 Cor. 2.7.
being prepared by penitential workings, for that whereof he was before
unworthy. It was the error of the Novatians and Donatists of old, That such as
were cast out of the Church for adultery or apostasy in times of persecution
were never to be restored: Aug. lib 5. cont. Dona. Cypr. lib. 4. Epist. 22.
which opinion both Augustine and Cyprian reproves. One simus who run out of
the family of Philemon, yet after being reformed, we read how affectionately
Paul writes to receive him in again. As there may be just cause for men's
casting out, so there may be cause as just for their taking in again.

Secondly, Though in the case of the Sacrament, you can by no means be meet or
worthy in respect of a worthiness of adequation, yet there be ways whereby ye
may be worthy, in respect of worthiness of approbation, such is the
transcendent excellency of the Ordinance, you can never be absolutely meet or
worthy, yet you may be accepted so; meet and worthy in the account both of God
and good men, and for this do you strive to be accounted worthy of the
Sacrament of Christ as to be accounted worthy of the kingdom of God, 2 These.
1.5.

Thirdly, Though you may not by the means you use become immediately so meet
and worthy, as some others are of this Ordinance, yet you may be so meet and
worthy as to deal safely in this service, as David had diverse Worthies, and all
did well in the wars, though some did excel the rest, 2 Samuel 23.19.

Fourthly, Though some will not submit to the means, but remain unmeet and
unworthy, yet if others of you will go the right way to work, you shall be
embraced, notwithstanding as men meet and worthy; those that will not, either
they must be forbid, or approach at their own peril, while they are eating and
drinking at the Table, they may expect an handwriting upon the wall, as
appeared to Belshazar, when abusing the vessels of the Lord, with a Mean Mean
Tekel, etc. and better a power to forbid them, then this peril to abide them,
plunging them into a perplexed posture, how ever you shall be found to have so
much weight and worth as to meet with a sweet welcome at the Table of the Lord.

Fifthly, Though you have had some trouble and sorrow being cast out for your
unworthiness, the greater will be the joy and comfort, when you shall come so
in, as to be accounted worthy. The prodigal out from his fathers house, was
sore afflicted, but O the meat, mirth and music that was made at his return,
father and friends, they all rejoice: O the joy to Pastor and people, upon your
admittance, what think yo^ will then be the comfort to you your selves? When
the Sacrament to them that be in the gall of bitterness, shall be as the
bitterness of gall, it shall be to you far sweeter then the honey and the honey
comb.

Sixthly, Though the very means you are to use to be esteemed meet and worthy at
this Table, be very tedious, troublesome, painful and unpleasing to the flesh
for present, yet the spiritual good you shall after gain, will abundantly
recompense. I read of one about to suffer martyrdom, putting one leg into the
fire, cries, the flesh shrinks and says, Thou fool will thou burn and need
not? the spirit answers, Hell fire is hotter, will thou venture that? The flesh
says, Will thou leave thy friends? The spirit answers, Christ and his Saints
society is better, etc. When you are about such means as may make you meet for
a Sacrament. The flesh perhaps will say, Will thou put self to shame, and sin
to death? The spirit may well answer, To eat and drink damnation is worser, The
flesh say, Will thou forsake thy old lusts and lovers? The spirit may answer,
Communion with Christ and his members is better.

It was an excellent courage in Ignatius, I am the wheat that the teeth of
beasts must grind, it matters not, Iren lib. 5. Contr. Val.
so I may be pure bread for my masters tooth; let fire, racks and pullies, yea
and all the torments of hell come upon me, so I may win Christ: Thus do you
resolve though it cost you bl^^hings of face, breakings and bleedings of heart,
cuttings of soul, and killings of sin, yet you will willingly under go all to
gain Christ, that he may be the pure bread whereof you may eat at his Table,
and that will excellently answer for all, thus though some of the means it may
be you must use to be made me: and worthy to partake at the Table of the Lord,
be tedious to the flesh, and contrary to nature corrupt, yet there is that in
Christ will well answer the cost, O then submit to such means, whereby you may
be accounted meet and worthy, ^oth of God and men that are good.

That God may account you so, in the way of his mercy.

That men may account you so, in the way of their charity.

And seeing I have begu^ to discourse to you, who may be refused even by men as
unworthy and unmeet, I shall declare to you how you may be received, even of
men as meet and worthy.

To direct you herein, two things I propose for your practice.

1. Sorrowfully to confess evil past. 2. Seriously to promise good for futu^^.
Nemo eru bescat paenitentiam agere qui non erubuit panitenda commi^ere.

Scandalls and open evils whereby you have given public offense, thereof you
must make penitent and public confession, such as have not been ashamed to
practice and commit sin openly, should never be ashamed to repent and confess
sin openly, says Augustine. Its no shame publicly to pass from evil to good,
as Ambrose once spoke to Valentinian. We read of one Eccebolius in the
primitive times, after a sad revolt, comes to the congregation, where once he
was a member, cast himself upon the threshold, with tears crying to the people
as they passed in, Tread, Calcate me salem insipidum. Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 1.
tread upon me unsavory salt, etc. It might rend the most rocky heart to read
the penitential expressions and confessions of Origin, as translated by Jerome,
and related by Eusebius, who being excommunicate for his denial of Christ,
miserably bewails it, Nihil est quod pudori esse debeat nisi non fateri. Ambr.
de paenit. lib, 1. cap. 16. lib. 2. cap. 10. Aug. in lib. 50. Homil. Hom. 49.
Cyprian. lib. 3. Epist. 17. Origin. Hom. 2. in Psalm. 37.
passionatly pressing the people to pray for him. Ambrose in his 1. book of
Repentance, and chap. 16. excellently opens this, perswadeing offenders to
public bewailing their offenses, and not to be ashamed, except not to confess
their sins, and to beseech the whole Church to pray for them, and so to admit
to communion. Augustine and Cyprian before him, and Origin before them both,
clearly declare, that in their times, such was the course of the Church in this
case, and Zozomen fully affirms the same order in use. Rei terram sese pro nos
abijciunt cu^ planctu and lamentatione, Episcopus occurret cum lachrymis and ad
parimentum lamentando prevolvitur and universa Ecclesia multitudo lachrym is
suffunditur. Zozom lib. 7. cap. 16.
They, says he, that have offended come forth into the midst of the people,
and fall down flat, with weeping and lamentation to the ground. The Minister
comes to him with tears, and falls down also, and the whole multitude of the
Church is poured over and over with tears, etc. Thus the Emperor Theodosius,
who having commanded a massacre in the city of Thessalonica (upon the murder of
one of his servants) when seven thousand in the space of three hours were
butchered, was after required, Ruffin. lib. 2. cap. 18.
and did manifest his public repentance in the presence of all the people, and
this before he could be admitted to the Lords Table. The public penitential
confessions of King David, in the business of Bathsheba and matter of Vriah,
remains upon record, from whence Mr Hildersham on Psalm. 51. does abundantly
press this practice in the Church, both from Scripture and reason, to whom I
refere those, who in this would be more fully informed, and that others to this
may be more effectually-inforced. There is only one thing I conceive may most
probably be questioned by some, viz.

Whether it be not sufficient for men to confess their sins in secret to God
only?

Answ. To clear truth in this, there is something to be granted, and something
to be denied.

We grant that men's confessing their sins to God in secret, it is to be
preferred for a threefold cause.

1. Because thereof is ever an absolute necessity.

2. Because therein is the more certain sincerity.

3. Because thereby is more spiritual commodity.

The necessity is hereof absolute, its not possible for any man to do well in
the things of God, that will not confess his sins in secret unto God.
Sincerity is more certain. In confessing our sins to God publicly before men,
we are more prone to play the hypocrites, secretly argues more uprightness,
commodity more spiritual; that wherein man is most plain, therewith God is
most pleased, and that wherewith God is most pleased, thereby man is most
profited. O the peace and pardon God speaks to the soul that in secret
sincerely sighs out confession of sin, notwithstanding we deny that confession
of sins in secret to God alone is all that is required, there are cases wherein
more is called for, to wit, to confess sins to God before men, yea to confess
sins against God unto men; and sure then to confess unto men such s^ns and
trespasses as are against men, may well be practiced amongst men.

To acquaint you with some cases, consider sins whether against God or men, are
of two sorts, either private or public. Private sins known to God, but unknown
to men, yet must be confessed to men in a two fold case; as first, in case they
so burden the conscience as no ease is had; its some medicinable cure of heart
grief, (...). Nazian. eig. ^arm. ad Episc.
to pour out words to the air, faith Nazianzen, much more to pitiful and
faithful friends, Jam. 5.16. 2. In case the evil of a private sin so redounds
to the hurt of many, that God pursues it to bring it to light; It ought
publicly to be confessed, Josh. 7.19. But then public sins, or sins known to
men more or less, must be confessed publicly as they be known and do offend.
If an offense be given to a particular Christian, the offender must confess
it, Luke 17.4. If thy brother trespass against thee, and turn again, saying, I
repent, that is, confess his sin and express his sorrow for the same, thou
shall forgive him; sure then if an offense be given to a Congregation, the
offender must accordingly frame his confession, and so seek his reconciliation,
and after received to communion. Council. Nic. can. 1^.
They were injoined by the Council of Nice, who had sacrificed to idols in the
persecution of Licinius, to make their public confession, or no admition.

2. It is meet you publicly promise good for future. In the book of Nehemiah
we read of the people of Israel, having by sinful mixtures soiled themselves,
they first publicly confessed their sins, chap. 9.2. and next they entered into
an oath with a curse, to walk in Gods law, to observe and do his commandments,
chap. 10.29. Publicly swearing themselves to God, and then after they went and
offered great sacrifices, with great rejoicings, chap. 12.43. An oath excellent
to keep you off from sin, and keep you in to God. (...). Septum.
The word in Greek for an oath, is derived of a Greek word that signifies a
hedge, which if once a man have set about himself, he must not break through. An
oath is either assertory, whereby men witness truth to what is in doubt, or
promissory, whereby men oblige themselves to what is their duty. Such an oath
David publicly p^omises himself to God by Psa. 119.106. and this is seasonable
to do upon a Sacrament occasion thereby to attain the more free admission.

Si nihil contra adferatur admittitur quidem fed non nisi solenni pactione cum
Deo and cum Ecclesia, Spondet vero Ecclesia se ambulaturu^ prout sancta^ illam
communionem decet, disciplinae illius Ecclesiae subiacere velle, etc. Qui ad
sacram coenam primum admittu^tur fidei confessionem coram tota^ Ecclesia
public edant, Zep^pol. Ec. l. 1. c. 14 p, 158
Thus M. Parker a man of eminency for learning and holiness, who though born in
England lived and died beyond sea who reports the practice of reformed
Churches, not to take any to the Lords Table, but with a public promise.

Yea with him Zepperus and other approved writers witness the same, from whom
I shall further acquaint you, with what is required in the best reformed
Churches of all that come to communicate at the Table of the Lord, in two
things.

A public acknowledgement of true faith.

A public engagement unto good life.

Confession of faults of some.

Confession of faith of all.

But of this Confession I have spoken before.

I shall only counsel you thus to engage to good life, and so be received to
Sacramental society.

In Athens every one that was admitted to the freedom of the city, Pugnabo pro
sacr^^ and folus and simul cum alijs, Melanc.
came to a public place, and engaged by oath to maintain holy things alone,
and with others, and shall any shun this pious practice, to possess this
privilege in the Church. The German Princes by solemn promises, protested they
would cleave to the Gospel preached by Luther (and hence they were first called
Protestants) taking the Sacrament thereupon. Justin Martyr who lived about 150.
(...) Apol. 2
reports of three things required of such as were to the Sacrament received,
newness of birth, soundnes in faith, and promise of good life.

Isa. 56.6, 7. The sons of the stranger that shall join themselves to the Lord,
to love him and serve hom: and shall take hold of me by covenant, them will I
bring to my holy mountain, and make them joyful in my house of prayer, their
sacrifices will I accept.

But as for you that are yet in your sins, whether more open or secret: O how
fain would I prescribe you all some course whereby you may not only pass with
men, but with God, as a people proved and approved of the Lord for this
precious Ordinance. For truly if you are such as are only received of men, but
rejected of God, your case is sad; suppose a man should be debarred from thi^
Table, Quid obest homuni, si est de illa tabula delere veli^ humana ignorantia
quem de libro viventium non delet in iqua conscientia? Aug.
yea thrown out of the Church unjustly, when yet his heart is right and
straight, his conscience clear and clean toward God, what real hurt has he?
God makes it up, but suppose a man shall be embraced and brought in, yet God
abhors: for his heart is wreched, and his conscience is foul toward God, and
what good has he? The man in the Gospel without the wedding garment, the
servants admitted him, and they laid no restraints upon him, they saw nothing
that c^ld for censure, but takes him in without scruple: O but the Master of
the Feast comes and finds him naked, he commands him to be bound hand and foot
and cast into utter darkness, ah poor man I whatever liberty he had to come
in, yet for want of a wedding garment on his back, he cannot get out, but with
chains and fe^ters on his feet, Mat. 22.11, 12, 13. Est, 6 the last, its said
The Kings chamberlains hasted to bring Haman in to the banquet, which Ester had
prepared: but in the 7. chapter we find, that he being there, when the King
came to know the wickedness of his heart, and bloudinesse of his mind, in
conspiring the death of his Queen and all her kindreds, its said, The Kings
wrath was up at the banquet of wine, and he rose in a rage, and would not rest
satisfied, till Haman was had out and hanged up,

You may be such as Gods Ministers may think so well of as to have you in to
this banquet, which the Lord has prepared, but yet God that knows the
wickedness of your hearts, and sees here as it were a conspiracy against the
life of his son, and that while you are eating and drinking, you are guilty of
Christ's body and blood, Gods wrath is up at this banquet of wine, while Haman
was at the banquet, Ester stands up and petitions the King, that if she found
any favor in his eyes, O let my life be given me, etc. for I and my people are
to be slain by means of this wicked Haman, etc. O for Christ Jesus to stand up
before his Father the King, and accuse you, while you are at the Sacrament, If
ever I have found favor in thy sight now preserve me from wicked hands, think
how hereupon the wrath of this great King will be up, and what ruin to your
souls is like to ensue: well learn how to prevent his in time, you know that
for want of (...) settled government we have been long kept without this blessed
Sacrament: I hope there are among you, who lament after the Lord: and the Lord
hasten the desires of your hearts, and the Lord help us to prepare for what we
desire, I have already showed you what more toward men (when called thereunto)
you ought outwardly and openly to do. I shall now tell you what also toward
God, both outwardly and inwardly you ought to be, that herein God may account
you meet to communicate.

The directions I shall give you, I shall take from that course which good King
Hezekiah prescribed to the Priests and the people in his time to prepare them
for the Passover, which they had been then long without, Read 2 Chronicles. 29. and
the 30. chapt. Accordingly there are two things required.

1. To be humbled. 2. To be hallowed.
Your hearts must be humbled, as those of Asher, Manasseh, and Zebulun, 2 Chr.
30.11, who at home humbled themselves and then came up to Jerusalem to
celebrate the Passover. In private I pray you, practice soul-humbling duties,
that so you may be prepared for the Supper of the Lord.

I speak to you who are for present impenitent, stiffenecked, and stonehearted,
the Lord give you to be humbled for two things, that by your sinfulness this
sweet Sacrament of the Supper of the Lord, 1. It has been corrupted, and 2. It
has been interrupted,


You have corrupted the holy Sacrament of the Lord, Tit. 1.15. to the pure all
things are pure, but to the impure and them that are defiled all is made
unclean. Though holy things have not sanctified you, yet you have polluted holy
things, their sin was foul, Mal. 1.12. That said the Table of the Lord was
polluted, O what is their sin then that do not say the Table of the Lord is
polluted but yet they have often polluted, and by sin defiled the same? O what a
dreadful thing it was Numb. 19, 13. To defile the Tabernacle of the Lord, and
is it now nothing to have defiled the Table of the Lord? look how the Prophet
complains, Isa, 28.8. All places are full of filthy vomits, yea the Tables are
unclean: for men to defile their own Tables is ill, O what then to defile the
Table of the Lord? 1 Samuel 2.17. by reason of the sins of Elies sons, men
abhorred the offerings of the Lord: Sacrifice which the Lord commanded was
abhorred of men, like a loathsome thing, because of their sin by whom the
Sacrifice was offered: Incensi odor de immundorum manibus rep^datus est pro
faetore, and iram non fratiam pra sumptio meruit, Cypr. de can. Dom.
this is bad, but what is it when the Lord shall abhor his own offering?
consider the first of Isay, Incense from men of foul hands and hearts, is an
abominatio^ to the Lord. In stead of a sweet smell, it has a stinking savor,
and provokes God to wrath, to cause the Lord to loath his own Ordinance, O sad!
O be humbled deeply before God for this.

Again as through your sins you have corrupted, so you have interrupted this
holy service, for this also be humbled.

The former has been the cause of the latter: water that runs into narrow
pipes, while all is kept clean, it passes freely: but when the water is thick
and muddy, and pipes and passages foul, then the course of the water is stopped,
pure and good blood, goes easily into all parts of the body, and into every
vein: but when the blood is corrupted, its free course is hindered: O its our
corruption of, that has caused an interruption in the course of the Sacrament,
O the fearful defilements of this pure Ordinance, in all the parts of the
Kingdom.

The Lord remove all our mud that these waters of the Sanctuary may run clearly
and freely. The Lord cure our corruptions that so there be no obstructions, but
as a Sacrament, so Christ's blood in the Sacrament may pass abundantly. O let
us look back and weep bitterly in that we have thus broken off the way of this
Ordinance: O how God was displeased with those that trod down the pastures, and
fouled the waters with their filthy feet, that so his flock could not eat or
drink, Ezekiel. 34.18, 19. O must not God needs be angry with you, who by your
sins have pudled this water, have stained and so stopped these streams of God?
Genesis 26. we read that Isack had no wels open to water his flocks, for the
Philistims had stopped up all the wels of water, which were dug in the days
of Abraham his Father: your sins and the sins of the land have stopped up these
wels of water, that the flocks of Christ in diverse Congregations of the
Kingdom have at this day no where to drink, Ier. 5.24, 25. yet say they not in
their hearts, let us fear the Lord that gives rain, and reservs to us the
appointed weeks of the harvest. Though your iniquities have turned away those
things, and your sins have withholden good things from you: O that you would
yet fear the Lord, who gives you the rain of his word, and can reserve again
for you the appointed months for the Sacrament, though for a while your
iniquities have turned away those things, and your sins have hindered such good
things from you.

Nay by this means Gods dear children have been deprived of their bread, this
refreshing food of their souls, A sad case in the book of the Lamentations,
when children have cried to their Mothers for bread, and they had none to give
them: little infants have laid their hands in their mothers bosoms, but could
find no milk in their breasts: what soundings, faintings, and fallings down in
the streets of the City, etc. Read the 2. of the Lamen. 6.12. and is not this
heart-lamenting matter when the poer hungring Saints and servants of God have
cried for this bread, and their Ministers not know how to give it them? Diverse
poor Congregations have neither Ministry of the word, nor administration of
Sacraments, Cant. 8.8. We have a little sister, and she has no breasts, what
shall we do for our sister? The God of Heaven help in this case, and there be
others who have only one breast, the word preached, but not the Sacrament
administered. Amazones veint qui mazam non habent. Amazones a (...) i.e. mamma
ducitur nomen. Hinc Servi^^ notat Amazones A taliano uni mammas vocari.
history reports to the praise of those warlike women of Scythia, that they cut
off one breast, that they might the more dexteriously draw their bows in
battle, and only one breast left to bring up their children. I cannot but
record this on the contrary with grief (and with tears more ready to fall from
my eyes, then words from my mouth) to think of Congregations like women with
one breast: Its a joy to a good Minister as to a loving Mother, when there is
two full breasts to draw out for the child to suck, and its a trouble when one
is dry. The Lord fill both our breasts with good milk: O let us be humbled that
our sins have done us this wrong, I fear the other breast should be taken, away
too, for our wantonness, worldliness, way wardnesse, wickedness, the good
Lord prevent. O mourn in secret for your sins, that have so corrupted and
interrupted the course of the Sacrament.

I have before told you what public sorrows, public sinners are to express,
O now learn what private remorse ought to abound between God and all your
souls. Bodily wounds are worst when bleed most inwardly: but wounds of godly
sorrow are best, that bleed more in the heart, then is wept out at the eyes: O
go aside and cry, strike Lord, Lord strike this stony heart of mine, that out
of this hard rock waters of sorrow may gush: public sorrow without private,
argues hypocrisy, and is never pleasing to God, as she that has rotten
inwards, Magis culpa digna est quae ad laudein lachrymas fundit quam quae
pulchritudinis causa coloribi^ faciem suam pingit. Chry. Home^. in Mat.
a black heart, but paints her self with colors, that she may have a
beautiful face, is hateful to God: but more abominable is he or she that has
a hard unbroken heart, yet can water the cheeks in the presence of others with
tears, Mal. 2.13. They covered the Altar of God with tears, yet in heart were
impenitent sinners, and God abhorred their sacrifice. Would you be accepted of
God at the Sacrament? O go first and deep much in secret, and mourn because you
can mourn no more, the more the hear^ is thus torn the more entire it is, Non
est cor integrum nisi sit scissum
and the more meet to receive Sacrament sweets. This is the first thing, Be
humbled.

2. Be hallowed, you must be sanctified and holy as many of you as would be
meet for this holy service, 2 Chro. 29.15, 17. 2 Chro. 30.15. see what
sanctifying there was of persons and things, to prepare for the Passover, O do
you consider what sanctity and holiness is required to prepare you for the
Supper of the Lord.

Now in this hallowing lies a twofold holiness, both which must concur, that
you may be holy, and so fit for this holy business.

1. Relative. 2, Positive.
Relative holiness takes in two things.

1. A separation from sin. 2, A dedication to God.
1. You must be separate, Est. 6. you read how the Passover being to be kept,
it is said that all such as had separated themselves from the filthiness of
the heathen of the land, did eat, and kept the feast seven days with joy, and
we see how Ezra after exhorts, chapt. 10.10, 11. He stands up and says to the
people of Israel, Ye have indeed transgressed, yet now make confession unto the
Lord your God, and do his pleasure, and separate your selves from the people of
the land, and all the Congregation answered with a loud voice, so must we do,
and so do you, O separate ye your selves from sinful courses and company.
There is a good Schism and separation that cuts asunder the cords of
corruption, that breaks the brotherhoods of wicked men, though there is a
schism and separation, that is very bad, which breaks the bonds of Christian
unity, and rends Christians from society one with another. Christ will separate
at the last day, but who? The sheep from the goats, and not the sheep one from
another, who are they which dare do that now which Christ himself will not do?
nay dare do that which Christ himself has undone, Christ came down from Heaven
to break down walls of separation, Ephesians. 2.14. and they build them up again. All
the time Christ walked upon earth, he did not leave behind him the least
footsteps of such separations, as of late has been every where peremptorily
practiced, Nor yet any of the Apostles that came after him, we read, Act. 19 9,
that when Paul had for three months, been preaching publicly at Ephesus,
Diverse were hardened and blasphemed the way of the Gospel, then he departed from
them, and separated the Disciples. He separated the Disciples from them that
blasphemed, not the Disciples one from another, and this after they were
hardened, and so became incurable, 2 Cor. 6.17. Come out from among them, and
be ye separate, from whom? There were some in Corinth continued professed
Idolaters, those who were converted to the Christian faith, must come out from
among them and be separate, for what agreement, says he, has the Temple of
God with Idols? ver. 16. so separate, I beseech you, as to cease all sinful
converse with profane men, if you love to live among dead men's tombs, you are
not fit for the Table of the Lord. In this Supper as the Elements, so the
Communicants must be separate from common and corrupt uses.

2. You must dedicate and devote your selves to God, 2 Chr. 29.31. Then
Hezekiah said, now you have consecrated your selves unto the Lord, come near,
and bring sacrifices and thanksofferings into the house of the Lord, 2. Chro.
30.8. Be not stiff-necked as your Fathers, but yield up your selves to the
Lord, and then enter into his Sanctuary to serve the Lord. Thus do you resign
up your selves unto God, and then come to this holy Table: all and each of you
I exhort, O give thy self to God, and that Truly without dissembling Timely
without delaying, and Totally without dividing.


An unsound Christian is as the false mother in the Kings, that would have the
child divided, he is loath to give himself wholly to God: whereas a sincere
Christian takes these two parts, body and soul, and does as the poor widow in
the Gospel with her two mites, Luke 21.3. throws them both together into the
Lords treasury, devotes them both to the Lords service: when you are willing to
go, and put all into the treasury of the Lord, then you are fit to come to the
Table of the Lord. I suppose when you shall be at this Supper, you will desire
to have both Elements, bread and wine, and both things signified, Christ's body
and blood, O then give both body and soul to God: If you would not have a half
Sacrament, nor a half Savior, O let not God have a half soul, and a half
service, but give your selves wholly to God, 2 Cor. 8.5. O thus separate your
selves from all sordid uses, and consecrate your selves to God, for all holy
purposes, that you may be meet for the Table of the Lord, O arise with the
prodigal, Luke 15. Luke 15.18. (Surgam) quia ^acebat (and ib^) quia long
aberat (ad patrem meum) quia sub principe percorum erat. Aug.
and leave feeding with the devils swine, and come home (how distant soever you
are) to God, and sue to be one of his servants, for ever to live in the bonds
of obedience, then you shall have bread enough, and meat enough to your bread,
a whole fatted calf, verse. 17.23. Thus much for that relative holiness
required. I proceed to positive holiness, Sanctitas duplex, seminalis and
germinalis.
in respect of which you ought to be holy also, and this is two fold, Habitual
and Actual.

1. Habitual holiness, that is, the infusion of such divine graces whereby
you may be fitted for the service of God, whereunto you are devoted: Anima and
spiritus, i. e. (...).
my prayer is with the Apostle, 1 These. 5.23. The Lord sanctify you throughout
in soul, in body, in spirit, Matthew. 13.33. The parable tells us of the woman
that took her leaven and laid it in three measures of meat, till the whole was
leavened: The Lord lay such a holy leaven of grace in these three parts, body,
soul and spirit, that the whole man in each of you may be leavened, and you may
be sanctified throughout, that God by his Spirit would come down and break a
box of holy spiknard in your hearts, that the whole house might be filled with
the sweetness of that odor, Joh. 12.3. That God would pour that holy oil upon
your heads, that may run down to your beards, and to the skirts of your
garments, that you may be all over anointed of God, Psalm. 133.2. 2 Cor. 1.21.
That your hives may be full of the honey of heaven, your hearts filled with the
graces of God, and then

2. Actual holiness: To make you meet communicants, its not enough to have
grace in you, but there must be a holy exercise of all those graces in you,
ready to put forth in all practical imploiments and improvements. Soldiers
while they lie still in their quarters are of little use, and do little good,
but when they are drawn out and march forth in their ranks and places, then
they be fit to go upon service, and ready to encounter an enemy in the field:
while graces lie idle in the heart, they are to little purpose or profit, but
graces drawn out in exercise, are prepared to any holy service.

When ever you are to come to a Sacrament, you must strike up a call, and beat
a march to your graces aforehand, and so come and close with Christ in this
ordinance. Non semper sancti sunt qui loca sanctoru^ tenent sed sancti sunt qui
sanctorum opera sancte exercent. Hier.
O know that you cannot in this, or in any other ordinance, act holily without
this actual holiness, such a holiness you ought to set awork in all your
works, even in common actions, in ordinary eatings and drinkings, you ought to
hold forth holiness, much more when you come to eat and drink in the
Sacrament. Zach. 14.20, 21. Its prophesied, how upon every pot in Judah and in
Jerusalem, should be written Holiness to the Lord, much more on the pots in
the Lords house. O I beseech you be holy, and indeed holy: a visible sanctity,
though inward hypocrisy, may give you admittance among men, but there must be
holiness with uprightness, or you can have no acceptance with God. In a man's
body, Melior est in corpore digitus vivus quam oculus vitreus. Aug. in Psalm.
130.
when each part must act in its place, the little finger that has life, is
fitter for service then the glass eye that is only for ornament: and truly
when Christians shall be to act in this Supper-service, its better to be a
sincere Rahab, then an unsound Judas, Christ-man may permit him, but Christ-God
abhorres him. An hypocrite in his most glorious work is abomitable to God,
whereas a true Christian in his poorest imploiment finds favor in his eyes. O
do not appear only, but be in heart really holy, you that intend the holy
Table of the Lord. An hypocrite in this business may pretend great tenderness
and strictness, O how afraid least any guilty of Christ's blood, should partake
with him at the Sacrament, when yet the guilt of Christ's blood may lie upon his
own soul without sense, Matthew. 27 6. Qualis haec innocentiae simulatio,
pecuniam sanguinis non mittere in arcam, and ipsu^ sanguinem mittere in
conscientia^? August. Ioh. 18.28.
for his hidden and secret sins: as those Jews, when Judas restored his thirty
pieces, Matthew. 27.6. they would by no means have the price of Christ's blood lie
in a chest, when yet the guilt of this blood lay on their hearts without any
remorse, O gross. They would not defile themselves by coming into the common
Hall on the preparation day to the Passover, but to imbrue their hands in
Christ's innocent blood they scrupled not. O they must not eat in vessels
unpurified, O what washing of pots and pans, but the meat they eat ^n these was
polluted with oppression and intemperance, Matthew. 23.25. Woe to you scribes
pharisees hypocrites, ye make clean the outside of the cup and platter, but
within all is full of bribery and excess. O for Gods sake see you be
sanctified and holy, Quid tuum altar? me^^ tua spiritualis. Quid spirituale
tuum sacrificium? omnis bona operati^. Quod t^um Templum? mundum cor in quo
Deus habitare amat. Chrysostom.
both within and without: You are not fit for the holy Table of the Lord, till
you are indeed the holy Temples of the Lord. Be humble, be holy, these must
pass inseparably upon you: first be humble, then hallowed, a building of
holiness is not set up in the heart, but the strong holds of the devil, by
true and through humblings of heart are battered and beaten down. The Jewish
Rabbis report, Vide Hier. ad Fabiolum de 42 mans^nibu^ mansione. i.
that the same night that Israel departed out of Egypt toward Canaan, all the
Idols and Idolatrous temples in Egypt, by lightening and earthquake were broken
down: and truly at that very time when men go forth from their natural estate
toward heaven, in a way of holiness, all the synagogues of satan and idols of
jealousy in them, are by soul-enlightenings, and sorrowfull-heartquakings
broken down: O I beseech you submit to this way of God with you, and work of
God in you, as ever you desire to be seen with acceptance at the Supper of the
Lord. To conclude, Its reported of Mr Bolton now with God, calling for his
children on his deathbed after some speech to them, he ends, and I hope there
is none of you will dare meet me at Christ's tribunal in an unregenerate
estate: O that I might thus close my counsel to you, I hope there is none of
you will dare meet me at the Lords Table in a sinful estate. If yet you will
unhumbled and unhallowed, come into this tent, and as Sisera, Judge. 4.19, 21.
take the milk and the butter, I have told you of the nail and the hammer. The
Lord is free and I am free, the hazard be upon your own heads.

The last branch of the exhortation referres to such of you as are the sincere
servants of God, and true disciples of Christ: seeing the transaction of this
Supper-service of right belong^ unto you, see that you transact this service of
the Lords Supper aright, to which end I shall labor with your souls in things
of two sorts, viz.

1. To propose some nforcing persuasions. 2. To prescribe some informing
directions.
The arguments whereby I shall quicken your care in this case follows.

1. Consider the necessity of a right celebrating this Supper, its needful
that in a meet manner you be made partakers thereof, and that from a twofold
cause.

1. Because Christ's words command it. Necessitus praecepti. Necessi^^ medij.
2. Because your wants require it.
Christ in express words commands that this service by his servants be done.
Do this in remembrance of me, Luke 22.19. wherein Christ does not only injoin
the action, Do this, but declares the reason, In remembrance of me, the more
to encourage Christian obedience. I have read of one who willingly fetched
water near two miles every day, Cassianus. lib. 4. c. 24.
for a whole year together, to pour upon a dry dead stick, upon the bare
command of a Superior, when no reason could be given for the thing: how ready
then should you be to obey the command of Jesus Christ in this service of the
Sacrament, when he gives for the action so sufficient a reason? Do this, that
thereby you may remember me. Yea besides this the duty is necessary, by reason
of your own necessities, There is a great difference between the Saints being
on earth and their being in heaven, hereafter in heaven you shall be so
abundantly filled with the immediate presence of God and Christ, as to want no
Sacramental supplies, or any communion-cordials, neither souls or bodies shall
ever feel the least hunger or thirst there. Christ Jesus before his death was
hungry and thirsty, needing meat to eat, or water to drink, Mat. 4.2. Joh. 4.6.
but after his resurrection, though we read he did eat, yet it was as a work of
potency, August.
not of necessity.

After the resurrection, and in the state of glorification, we shall not be
necessitated out of hunger or thirst to eat or drink, hunger and thirst suppose
a vacuity, emptiness, or absence of what the appetite desires, and so a
perplexity, trouble and pain to the party thereupon, which is not suitable to
the full satisfactions and perfections of heaven, but pertinent to our indigent
estate here on earth, while we are in this wilderness world, we shall have our
wildernesse-wants, as our bodies so our souls will need their several meals.

Every Christian here is a traveller, his way may be rough, and his journey
will be long from earth to heaven, from mortality to immortality, and so need
of frequent refreshments at the Table of the Lord.

Every Christian is a soldier, his battles may be hot, his enemies will be
great, he had need have good diet in his quarters, that may cheer his spirits,
and keep up strength and courage. Our Father Abraham having fought with those
conquering Kings, Genesis 14. rescued Lot, and recovered all the spoil, Glass,
Philol, sacra, pa. 423
Melchizedec brings him out bread and wine, considering his want after so hard
a work: Some make this a type of the Eucharist, and the truth is we may allude
thereunto, for after our conflicts and combats, we the children of Abraham
shall much need such bread and wine, and Christ our Melchisedec has herein
mercifully provided for us, we need the Sacrament though not as a Savior, yet
as a means of salvation, let not any attribute too much to the Ordinance, not
yet too little. We need Christ as an agent, and the Sacrament as an instrument,
we need no more but Christ in a way of merit to procure good for us, Via duplex
meriti and medij.
yet we need the Sacrament as a way of means to convey good to us, in the
supply of our wants. And are not our wants many that are to be supplied? our
weaknesses many that are to be supported? our enemies mighty that are to be
subdued? Are we not soon seduced, easily conquered, hardly recovered? Are we
not fainting under crosses, feeble in our graces, fickle in our purposes, and
frail in all our performances? needing Sacramentall-succours, and
corroborating-cordials: so we see what need there is aright to celebrate this
Supper, and solemnize this holy service, Two things I suppose may hereupon be
questioned.

1. About the long omission of this Ordinance in many places.

2. About the free exercise of this Ordinance by many persons.

1. Is it necessary? why then has this service in several places been so long
neglected?

Answ. viz. Circumcision and the Passover, though of necessary use, yet had
among the Jews their long intermissions, Josh. 5.2, 3, 4, 5. 2 Chr. 30.2.

2. The command of Christ to celebrate this Supper, Aquinas 12ae quae. 71.5.5.
is an affirmative command of which the rule has been.

They bind to a perpetual preparation, and continued disposition, and to
actual observation and real execution, as often as good occasions are offered,
Gods servants cannot at all times be receiving the Sacrament, yet at all times
they should be disposed toward it, breathing after it, complaining over the
wide intervalls of it: The Sacrament is Christ's chariot in and by which he
rides into the souls of his servants, at the long delays of which it becomes
every Christian to cry as the mother of Sisera, Iud. 5.28. Why is the chariot
so long in coming? and why tarry the wheels of the chariot?

3. There are that think it better to delay an Ordinance of God, then to defile
it, and that the delaying of it that we might not defile it, is better then the
defiling of it, lest we should delay it. The delaying of it opposes more
directly, only the circumstance of time interrupting the frequency of it. The
defiling of it opposes the very substance or thing, corrupting, the purity of
it. So to blemish the luster is to abolish the life, and to deface the beauty,
is to destroy the being. 4. The service of the Lords Supper, though it has
been suspended in some places, yet it has been so supplied in others, as that
such who have had right to it, and been sensible of the want of it, have
comfortably partaked in it, and heartily blessed God for it.

5. The servants of Christ when they have not found Sacraments actually instant
by soul meditations, they have made Sacraments past to be present, as those
beasts who are not ever tak ng in fresh food, yet they are ever chewing the
cud, and as it were eating what they have eaten over and over again, Lev. 11.3.
Deuteronomy. 14.8.

6. God may suffer this Ordinance to be long suspended that peoples need
thereof may be the more apprehended, that by its long vacancy they may learn
both its excellency and its necessity. Of many good things we never so know the
worth as by the want, nor feel the want as when the things are wanting. Mercies
long continued are much contemned, but having had their absence, we more pr^^e
their presence, Amen in this.



Answ 1. Perhaps some may be there which should not, only through your neglect,
in that you know some scandalous evil by them, but will not complain of them,
or orderly appear against them, yet your selves abstain for their sakes,
whereby you run under a double blame.

1. To conceal their sin, which you ought to declare, Deuteronomy. 13.8. Pro. 29.24.

2. To forbear that service which you ought to perform, 1 Cor. 11.24.

Your selves will voluntarily keep out, rather then help to have others
regularly cast out, and so fall under evils worser then whereof you are aware,
but

2. Suppose no endeavors of yours be neglected, if yet unmeet men are
admitted, you do not join with them, but they with you, for you to join with
sinful men in sinful matters would bring guilt upon you, but if some bad men
will join with you in good matters, it proves no prejudice to you. To celebrate
the Lords Supper is a work in it self exceeding good, and if others that ought
not will come and go as far with you, as the outward act, its evil to them,
but none to you, having to your power opposed their presence.

3, Take heed you do not neglect an undoubted duty, to escape an uncertain
danger.

A peril merely supposed will not warrant the admitting a practice clearly
imposed Let due discipline be vigilant and diligent to remove unmeet men, yet
some may remain to be admitted, which you may imagine are meet to be refused,
yet no sufficient objection against them can be produced, and so the harm you
fear by them, is merely supposed. It is not what our thoughts are of a thing,
that makes it lawful or sinful, but what the thing really is in it self:
Vzzah conceived he ought to stay up the ark, yet the action was evil, as he
feels by the sequel, you may think for such a cause you ought to stay from the
Sacrament, and yet offend God in forbearance, you omit a duty that is certainly
required, to avoid a danger which is not certainly incurred: Unmeet men in Gods
sight may be at this Table, and yet no real peril or prejudice to you: See
page Indignitas duplex est vel receptoris vel receptionis.
but to make up a more full answer to this, you may find something for
satisfaction before,

2. I proceed to a second Argument to awaken your care for your right receiving
the Sacrament, who are Christ's servants indeed, which is to consider that an
unworthy partaking hereof by you is both possible and perilous.

1. Possible, toward this Ordinance there is a twofold unworthiness.

One in respect of the men who are the partakers.

Another in respect of the manner of partaking.

The former is ever found among impenitent sinners.

The latter may befall the Saints of God, and that from a twofold cause.

1. Because of their own negligence. 2. Because of their enemies diligence.
You that are Gods servants and children, yet through your own neglect may here
become guilty of unworthy receiving two ways.

1. If you do not work out your duties. 2. If you do not work up your graces.
If your duties be not by you wrought out before you come at the Table of the
Lord, but like the foolish virgins you sleep, not trimming your lamps, or
preparing your oil to meet Christ the bridegroom at this wedding Feast, you
labor not in God, seeking soul-searching duties aforehand. It is no marvel
for a carnal man to say as he Luke 16.3. I cannot dig, and to beg I am ashamed.

Not dig by serious examination.

Nor beg by ardent supplication.

For wicked men to have no mind to heart-digging duties, who cannot abide a
soul-searching nor conscience-digging Ministry, this is no marvel, and for
them to be as bad at begging, having no skill or will to press God by prayer
to prepare them for the Table of the Lord; in this no wonder: but for any of
Gods people not to put forth themselves seasonably in this digging and begging
is abundantly blameworthy: for want of which they prove in receiving unworthy.

Again if your graces be not by you wrought up when you are come to the Table
of the Lord, if you do not orderly act each grace in and at this Ordinance,
rise up by faith, mount up in the spirit, seek to clasp Christ in Heaven, and
to compare his throne with enflamed affections, but set soul-sluggish in this
service, you become unworthy in receiving, through your own idleness and
negligence.

2. This same may be helped further forward through your enemies industry and
diligence. Satan to prevent your sweet, and procure your smart, has his ways
and wiles to work your woe, and to occasion miscarriage, See how the Devil dealt
with Eve, she having a mind to taste the fruit, he puts her on eagerly to eat,
allows her no time to pause, having made the motion, he plies it, gives her no
leave to go aside to consider in her felf, consult with her husband, or enquire
of God, but without any ado eat she must: so Satan may praecipitately hasten
you upon the Sacrament, hindering those antecedaneous duties, that should
prepare thereunto, causing such sleightnesse before, and flatnesse in, whereby
you become in receiving yet more unworthy. This is possible.

And as it is possible, so it is perilous for any of the people of God, to
partake unworthily at the Table of the Lord, considering therein two things.

1. The concomitant sin. 2. The consequent judgment.
The sin of unworthy receiving is great by whomsoever it is, because it ever
carries in company such a sin, as must needs add a sad aggravation to it, viz.
A guiltiness of Christ's body and blood, 1 Cor. 11.27. Whosoever shall eat this
bread, and drink this cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body
and blood of the Lord.

Now for any of you to be guilty of Christ's blood, there are two things that
heighten the sin.

1. The eminency and greatness of his person.

2. The proximity and nearness of his relation.

Look we upon Christ, and his person is eminent both for greatness and
goodness, upon his thigh is this name written, The King of Kings and Lord of
Lords, Rev. 19.16. yea Christ is now a King in his throne crowned and exalted
to the highest honor, Phil. 2.9. ^o be guily of such a Kings blood, is black
especially for you who know how excellent he is, Cant. 5.10.16. and to whom he
is so nearly related, your friend, your kinsman, your husband, your brother,
your Father: for a wife to be guilty of her husbands blood, a son of his
Fathers blood, a fearful sin. When Caesar was wounded to death in the
Senate House, Brutus coming for his blow, Caesar looks him in the face, (...).
saying, What and thou my son? how may the Lord look a Christian in the face,
thus guilty of this bloody fact, with a Wha^ thou my son? We read of the son of
Craesus, who though before dumb, yet seeing one about to stab his Father, cries
out with a clear and shrill voice, O man kill not Craesus: (...) Herodo^^ and
Aul. Gel.
thus would it become Christians to cry to others in this case, but to do the
thing themselves is dreadful. For Christ to go show his Father, lo these are
the wounds that I received in the house of my friends, Zac, 13.6. Yea from the
hands of my friends on a Sacrament-day. When the Jews shed Christ's blood,
though they thought not of it, yet there was need of it, and good by it: hereby
sins pardoned, souls purged, God pacified, but herein to be guilty of his
blood, what need? what good? Constantine going to war against Maximinus was
struck with a leprosy all over, Ni^ephoru^ Cali. l. 7. c. 33.
some to seduce him from his religion, told him the only course for his cure,
was to bath him in a pool, full of the warm blood of innocent children,
wherewith he was taken at the first, children gathered, executioners prepared,
the day appointed, but O the dreadful cries of the Mothers, the Emperors
mind changed, the thoughts of the thing amazed him, he resolves to abide the
malady, and not to try such a medecin: O what an astonishing sin to be guilty
of the innocent blood of Christ? The judgment that follows is fearful, 1 Cor.
11.29. He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks judgment to
himself, (...). Zanch. in conf. su de Relig. Chrysostom. in cap. 16. ^ph^. 10.
Judgment, some would have the greek word to signify rather temporal
castigation, then eternal damnation, and applied to Gods people: that is more
proper and so the Apostle after explains it, ver. 30. yet it may imply the
utmost evil, as deserved Judgment to himself, He that is guilty so against
Christ, the evil thereof redounds to himself, that is, not to any other man,
say some: but so it may do, If I know an unworthy receiver, have some power to
restrain him, yet do not, Evil will be to me if another knows, yet moves not
to hinder such a sin, it may bring evil also on him, but the unworthy receiver
eats the evil to himself, that is, no real hurt rests upon Christ, though the
man be guilty of Christ's body and blood, yet no proper violence or prejudice
reaches to Christ, but all the hurt is to himself.

The misery and mischief that ensues is to himself.

O do you fear unworthy eating and drinking at the Table of the Lord, It was a
sinful eating in the beginning of the world, that brought in worlds of misery
upon all mankind, it should make all men to the end of the world, awar both
what and how they eat. I say not this to fright you from, but to cause you to
be more cautelous in this holy service, wherein there is so great hazard of
miscarriage, even amongst Gods own servants.

3. The utility of the Sacrament when received aright, should also quicken your
desire thereof, and your care therein, There are some have found sweet fruit
every month on this tree like that Rev. 22.2.

And indeed hereby is gain lying in a twofold good, which the faithtull may
find.

1. There is present good they may be possessed of.

2. There is future good they may be prepared for.

1. Gods people are sometimes actually possessed of much good, by a meet
receiving this Sacrament, for hereby they possess Christ, and in him all good.
Ille habe^ omnia qui habet habentem omnia.
The Apostle 2 Cor. 11.33. reports how when some sought him and desired to
apprehend him, he was let down from a window in a basket, and so escaped their
hands. Gods Saints in another sense seek Christ, and being desirous to
apprehend him, he is let down as it were from the windows of Heaven, in the
Sacrament, and they receive him to the joy of their souls. Dr. Tailor the
Martyr, blessed God for his prison, because there he got great soul advantage
by, and sweet soul acquaintance with the Angel of God, M. Bradford, as he calls
him.

O how may a Christian bless God for this Sacrament, where he gains
soul-advantage, and most sweet acquaintance with Christ Jesus the dear son of
God, who herein becomes what ever is good to the souls of Gods Saints. So that
their hearts and lives upon receiving this holy Sacrament have been like the
Egyptian fields upon the overflowing the river Nilus, flourishing and
fruitful: their souls have been as it were fatted with marrow, fired with
zeal, fenced with courage, and filled with comforts, having feasted with Jesus
Christ their dear Savior in this Supper.

Hence at the Sacrament their souls have said as the Disciples when they were
with Christ at his transfiguration in the mount: O its good being here, and in
their desires have cried, Lord, evermore give us of this bread.

They refreshingly find that every crum of this bread, every dram of this
grace, every drop of this peace, which they receive from Christ in a Sacrament,
has a sea of sweetness in it.

As the Jewish Rabbines were wont to say that upon every letter of the Law,
there hangs mountains of profitable matter, O the Ocean of benefit and comfort
from a little of Christ in this Supper! hereby the poor have been enriched, the
weak have been revived, the sad have been refreshed, and such as have come
militant, have gone triumphant away: longing for mother Sacrament day, when
they might meet with such sweet morsels of mercy, and though (as one
professes) such had rather die then once eat at an Idols Table, yet are glad
if they may often eat at the table of the Lord, out of the sweet experience they
have had of benefit by it, and comfort in it.

Though they eat the bread of adversity, and drink the waters of affliction, a
Sacrament supper sweetens all, as one little spark of a troubled conscience can
drink and dry up a sea of worldly comfort, so one spark of spiritual comfort
from Christ in a Sacrament, is able to drink and dry up a sea of worldly
sorrows and sufferings.

Let believers come to this conduit, and by faith turn the cock, and they may
fill their pitchers up to the brim with wine: they may go away with their
hearts us full of precious comforts, as ever they can hold, and is not this a
mavelous mercy? especially when sad distresses have set upon their souls
before: to comfort up a distressed conscience, is a greater work in Luthers
account, then to raise the dead to life: yet this may, and sometimes is done to
the souls o^ Gods Saints in a Sacrament.

O what mountings of mind, in soul-solacing ascents, yea what heart-reviving
converse has an humble Christian with God and Christ in this precious
Ordinance? wherein God opens his bosom, and Christ his bowels and blood, and
much makes himself known, Luke 24:35. He was known of them in breaking bread,
As he sat at meat with them, he took bread blessed it, brake it, and gave
them, then were their eyes opened, and they knew him. O the illuminations,
manifestations, consolations, confirmations, that Gods servants receive from
Christ by and through a Sacrament.

The comfortable communion a believer has with Christ in this Ordinance, is
more worth then all the world.

That noble Marquess being offered a great sum of money to go from Geneva to
Italy answered, Galeacius Caracciolus.
Let their money perish with them who prefer the riches of the earth before one
days communion with Jesus Christ. Eucharistia immortalitatis alimonia, ad
sanand^s infirmitates medicamentum, Cypr. de caena dom. Corpus Christi est
aegrit medicina, dehiles confortans valentes delectans, languorem sanans and
sanitatem servani, Bern. O medicinam omnibus consulentem, omnia tumentia
comprimentem, omnia tabescentia reficientem, necessaria custodientem perdita
reparantem deprava^a corrigentem, Aug. de agone Christi^.


The communion a Christian has with Christ upon one Sacrament-day, the comfort
fort of it is beyond compare, besides other concurring comforts, and
soul-soveraign benefits that abound by this means, deseases cured, strength
increased, health preserved, hopes established.

The poor lame cripple, Act. 3. by means of the Apostle of Christ, was
recovered his ancle bones, received strength, and receiving strength he went
away leaping and praising God: O thus a meet communicant finds and feels by
the Sacrament of Christ for the salving and saving good of his soul: you have
read of the woman who touched Christ's garment, what good she got, O to take
aright Christ's Sacrament, what benefit it brings, yea and the good it prepares
for is admirable, all a believers pains before to prepare for the Sacrament is
nothing to the future gains the Sacrament prepares his soul for.

Blazacium Plin, l. 18. c. 10
History reports of a country in Africa where the peoples industry has an
abundant reward, for every bushel of seed they sow, they receives a 150. fold
increase after, O consider your labor shall not be in vain, do what you can,
plow and sow, be it in tears to fit your souls for the Sacrament, the
recompense first and last will be great.

Pet hoc fi^ hom^ ad actionem promptior ad laborem patientior ad amore^
ardentior ad fatiendum velocior ad resistendum fortior, Bern. Te calicem
sanguinis Christi bibere ut possis and ipse propter Christum sanguinem fundere,
Cy. lab. 4. Ep. 6.
The Sacrament be to you as Isaacks Gerar, Genesis 26.12. as Isreal's Canaan flowing
with milk and honey. The Sacrament does apt and dispose to be more diligent in
service, Patient in suffering it prepares Christians both for the cross and
the crown, for the troubles of earth, and the triumphs of heaven: by drinking
the blood of Christ, we are made more courageous to shed our blood for Christ
Cyprian shows how the Martyrs in the primitive Church, when they were to appear
before the cruel tyrants were wont to receive the Sacrament, and thereby they
were fired with zeal and fervor, filled with faith and fortitude: thus
Augustine also reports, Vid. Aug. in Ioh. Tract, 17
perhaps the Saints at the instant do not find those springings of spirits,
leapings of heart (as John Baptist in the womb) when not the mother of the
Lord, but the Lord himself comes to them in a Sacrament, yet afterward they
cannot but cry, (...) Archimedes and Andreas, Ioh. 1.41.
I have found him, I have found him, at that present possibly not feel such
sensible joies, yea suppose at the time of the Sacrament they should rather sit
trembling with fear, and apprehensions of their own unworthiness, etc. as Jobs
children when they were eating and drinking wine in their eldest brothers
house, the devil occasioned a great wind to blow upon the house: it may be
that Gods children even at a Sacrament, when they are eating and drinking wine
in their elder Brothers house, satan may raise such blustering winds of
misgiving fears, and hearttrembling doubts, as may much molest them at that
time, yet even thereby they are made more meet for future comforts, which
afterward are so much the greater, their joies the fuller, and their faith the
firmer, sooner or later you may expect to receive sweet soul commodities by a
right receiving the Sacrament.

4. The excellency of the Sacrament in it self calls for the more exactness in
the transaction of it, and to cause the more care in all your carriage about
it. Excellent is this feast in two respects.

1. In respect of the master of it. 2. In respect of the matter of it.
For the master of this feast and author of this ordinance, it was Jesus
Christ: when the soldier with his spear pierced Christ's side, there came blood
and water; water representing baptism, Vid. Aug. in Psalm. 40. Chrysostom. in Ioh.
hom. 48. and alij.
and blood the Sacrament of his Supper: Both Sacraments they issue out of
Christ and are set up by Christ. In reference to Sacraments old and new, there
were three things required.

1. To accomplish. 2. To abolish the Ancient. 3. To establish others in the
room, and all this has Christ done. Eiusdem potestatis est constituere and
destituere.

It was Christ that could take down the one and set up the other.

Its for him to institute (...) Sacrament, that can animate a Sacrament, put
life and power into it, this only Christ.

Dat esse and operari.
Its Christ that can set an ordinance a working, therefore fit to se^ it up in
its being: Well the Sacrament is of Christ, and therefore excellent. Manna was
in it self an excellent food, and so much the more excellent, in that it came
from God, and not by the ordinary course of nature: and is not this blessed
Sacrament excellent, which comes from Christ who is God blessed for ever? Romans
9.5. Caelum and Christus non patiuntur hyperbolen.
Christ and Heaven are so excellent as they can never be set forth too far, O
then this that proceeds from Christ is surely excellent: O the preciousnesse of
Christ, in compare of him, (...) quasi (...).
a Christian may well account all other things but dross, dung, and dogs meat,
Phil. 3.8.

The woman clothed with the Sun treads the moon under her feet, Rev. 12.1.
Siquis temporalia Christo praeponat, non est in eo fundamentu^ Christus, Aug de
civ.
well if Christ be so excellent, the Sacrament which is Christ's Ordinance has
in it a real excellency.

2. Come to the matter of the Sacrament and in that respect its excellent; this
is twofold.

1. The visible and external, matter. 2. The invisible and internal matter.
For that which is outward and elementary, to wit, bread and wine, O these are
excellent; take them in their ordinary use, but then set apart for this holy
purpose, they are more precious. As the consecration of wood and leather, put
greater excellency upon them, then gold and silver had that were not
consecrated. Panis est doctrinalis victualis sacramentalis.


Take but bread in its common use, and its of worth some would derive the
latin word from a greek, Panema (...) multi indinem salutum magnitudinam
solaminum plenitudine^ omnium bonorum.
which ^s very comprehensive, and carries in it ^ll for necessity and abundancy
that good is, O then for this Sacramental bread which signifies and sets forth
more and higher matters, and so the wine its an excellent creature to heal, to
cheer, refresh, and the like, take it in the Sacrament, it transcends for its
signification sake.

But I rather speak to the spiritual matter of the Sacrament, for that is
surpassing precious, Come to the body and blood of Jesus Christ: Christ (says
one) is not as a mother that puts forth her child to nurse, but in the
Sacrament he feeds us with his own precious blood: whence is this O sweet Jesu
that thou should give thy own blood to drink? Vna guttula plus valet quam
caelum and terra. Lu.
O how precious is this blood, 1 Pet. 1.19. One little drop more worth then
heaven and earth, as the guilt of Christ's blood nothing more formidable to
abide upon us, so the good of Christ's blood nothing more comfortable to apply
to us, It has a justifying, sanctifying, mortifying, mollifying power, and
therefore of great price: The soul of man is excellent, that is redeemed by
Christ's blood, Magna res anima qua Christi sanguine redempta est, etc. Bero,
and the blood of Christ is excellent, that is able to redeem man's soul.

By this red sea of Christ's blood our souls pass to our promised Canaan, and
all our spiritual enemies are drowned thereby: God has his black book of our
sins, but a red line of Christ's blood drawn through makes all unlegible: Lord
says one I am amazed, I know not what to do: but I put Christ's blood between
thy wrath and my sins, and so forth, Christ's blood is the key that opens
Heavens door, or else the very truth is, we were all shut out, thus you see the
excellency of Christ's blood and that must needs be excellent, where the virtue
and value of Christ's blood comes. O but see these excellent things as united in
a Sacrament, the outward elements, Sanguis Christi clavis paradist.
and heavenly graces bread and wine: Christ's body and blood, food both for soul
and body. Behold in this Sacrament Christ and the creature join, Heaven and
earth meets together.

The external signs have their excellency, but the things signified do far
surpass.

Bread and wine are things that admit mutation they alter and change, Christ is
immutable, the same yesterday, to day, and for ever, Heb. 13.8. and that which
is Christ's is like Christ, not subject to change.

Bread and wine are things that admit diminution, the more is taken of them the
less remains.

Alimonia haec non distribuendo minuitur sed potius ministrando augetur. B^rn.
Non esurientes animas sed esuriem ipsam pas cunt animarum. Pern. Psa. 107.9.
Christ the spiritual food how many soever partakes, there is never the less
left, whole Christ continues.

Bread and wine cannot feed the hungry and thirsty soul: Christ indeed is
precious for this spiritual purpose: Give me Christ or I die, says the poor
panting Saint: Earthly things will rather feed hunger, then feed the hungry, O
but Christ his body and blood suits and satisfies all such desires, that the
most enlarged soul says, I have enough in Jesus Christ.

Quid prodest regium alimentum si ad gehennam pascat. Tert.
Bread and wine are precious things that may beseem a Princely Table, but yet
thereof a man may eat and dr^nk and die eternally: what avails kingly fare, if
it feeds, fits and fats for hell? O but now Christ is such food, such bread, as
whoever receives him, Habit vitam aeternam scit in pretio in promisso in
prim^ijs.
lives for ever, Whosoever eats my flesh and drinks my blood has eternal life,
Joh. 6.54. he has this life already.

In the outward elements it may be possible to put poisonous ingredients,
Interijs nefarie necatus veneno per infectum panem sacrum etc. vide Platin. in
^it Clemen.
poison may be conveyed into sacramental bread or wine, to the death of the
receiver, as we read of Henry the seventh, so murdered by a monck, Agrippina
poisoned her husband Claudius, by mingling poison in the meat he most loved to
eat: but now the spiritual food in the Sacrament is not capable of any such
harm or hazard to him that takes it; Credo vitam aeternam, and edo vitam
aternam.
such a one may say not only I believe life eternal, but I receive life
eternal.

Thus we have the excellency of the whole Sacrament, and the surpassing
excellency of some part: O then let this move you to mind you how you go about
this matter.

The Sacrament is a rare and rich treasure, O seek it with all your souls: Quid
est scriptura nisi quaedam amoris epistola viventis Dei ad creaturam suam?
Greg. Quid est Eucharistia quaedam amoris tessera morientis Christi ad
Ecclesia^ sua^?
What is the Scripture says one but a love letter sent by the living God to
his creature? I may add, what is the Sacrament but a love token given by a
dying Christ unto his Church? A cabinet of jewels more worth then cubbords of
plate? And is the Ordinance so excellent? O how unseemly then to hang this
jewel of gold in a swines snout: O then how Gods wrath must needs be provoked,
to see profane men press upon this precious Ordinance: History will tell us
what sad events have followed upon the insolences of sinful men against the
things of God, Tacitus Hist. lib, 5.
as for defiling the Lords Sabbath and his Sanctuary: O what then to profane
the Lords Sacrament, so pure and precious a treasure: nay we find in antiquity
of some polluting but the sepulchers of the Saints, resolving profanely to
take them up ^o search for treasures, supposed to be hid therein, God made fire
to rise out of the earth, Josephus. Antiqu. l. 12 13. and lib. 11. cap. 11.
and devoured them on a sudden: O let herein transgressors tremble: If Gods
wrath like fire breaks out of the earth, to consume such as wrong but the
sepulchers of his Saints, what fire and flames of fury will God cause to come
from Heaven to burn up such as abuse the Sacrament of his son? in which indeed
are hid rich treasures of real excellencies out of their reach.

Now then this being so excellent an Ordinance, its meet none should meddle
with it, but excellent men, and such are only Gods Saints in the sense of the
word, Psa. 16.3. Gloriosius est nomen pietatis quam potastatis.
Pro. 12.26.

Its only grace that does truly ennoble. It was a good expression of
Theodosius, that be esteemed himself more honorable in that he was a
Christian, then that he was an Emperor, and more advanced to be a member of
the Church of Christ, then to be a head of the greatest Empire in the world.
Well then, gracious men are the most glorious men, and they that are Gods
excellent servants are fit for this excellent Sacrament let others avoid, In
this garden are diverse rich flowers, not for spiders and frogs to creep on, but
for Bees to suck honey out of.

5. And lastly, Ponder your propriety in this precious Ordinance: This
Sacrament is yours, and all the precious pearls to be found in this
Gospel-cabinet are yours: Mat. 7 6. Cast not your pearls, It may be the torment
of Devils, the wonderment of Angels, and amazement of all wicked men, to
meditate your peculiar propriety herein, and it ought to be your care and
comfort to consider hereof, poor cottagers cannot abide enclosures, but would
have all lie common, and not any man to any thing more right then another, but
rich men are careful to maintain their fences, and keep up their interests:
Wicked men would have this Ordinance to lie open to all, and no fence about
this field wherein Christ the treasure lies hid, like that in the parable, Mat.
13.44. yet it concerns Gods Saints to preserve the hedge, and to stand for
their peculiar interest, and to mind two things in respect of their undoubted
right toward this blessed Sacrament of the Lords last Supper.

1. The clearing of it, and 2. The claiming of it.
Certitudo duplex, vel objects, vel subiecti.
As you have a sure title, so make your title sure; that as the thing is certain
in it self, it may be so to you: this will inflame your desire, provoke your
care, and increase your comfort.

You are not much taken when you look over the inventory of another man's goods;
but let a rich man's last will and testament be brought, wherein you hear your
selves have large legacies given, O then your affections are up, and you long
to have that in your hands: ^adem est ratio de non apparentibus and non
existentibus.
well, know what a legacy of love Christ has given you in his last will and
Testament. This Sacrament of his death is yours, yet if you are ignorant of it,
it is as if you had no such interest in it.

O endeavor to clear this estate, that your understandings may not be clouded
with any darkning doubts, Demonstratio qua nihil relinquit, aut inevidentiae in
re, aut formidinis in intellectu.
and so take the Sacrament with trembling hands, and mis-giving hearts, as if
you had no part nor portion in this Gospel-priviledge, which is peculiarly
yours by a double right.

1. By a right of promise. 2. By a right of purchase.
You may enter upon this Ordinance as your own by promise: See how Peter would
encourage the converted Jews to the Sacrament of Baptism, because the promise
is to them, Act. 2.38, 39. and you may challenge the Sacrament of the Supper, as
your own by virtue of Gods promise, 1 Timothy 4.8.

The promises of God they are of two sorts.

Either such as concern the end of Faith.

Or such as concern the means helping to that end.

Now as by virtue of a promise, salvation as the end is yours, so by virtue of
promise the Sacrament as a means helping to that end is yours; Qui destinat ad
finem destinat ad mediatendentia ad finem.
for as means and end are both concluded in the purposes of God, so they be
both included in the promises of God.

Gods promises of good to his people are considerable two ways.

Either as they are absolute and free, in respect of their first framing.

Or as they are conditional in respect of their after fulfilling.

For the former as soon as ever we have right to the promise, which God has of
mere grace made, we have a true and real right to that good to which the
promise refers, but further when the condition of the promise required on our
^art is faithfully performed by us, and for present effectually found in us,
our right is more ratified, and becomes more perfect and complete: take but one
instance near the matter in hand.

There is a promise of filling the foul with constant supply of spiritual food
upon condition the soul be kept up in a hungring and thirsting frame, Mat. 5.6.
Blessed are they that hunger and thirst, Or, they that are hungring and
thirsting, so the Greek runs, (...)
after the participle of the present tense, intimating, that when ever this is
found, the present dispositions of your souls, you are blessed, and may expect
spiritual repletions as your own proper good by promise,

2. By right of purchase, and here let me guide your motion in three things.

1. Go out to Christ's death, and behold therein the full attainment of all good
for Gods Church.

Note here two things in the death of Christ,

Satisfaction, whereby the debt being paid, Solutio dedebiti redundantia merit^
evil is removed.

Acquisition, there being an overplus of merit remaining, good thereby is
procured.

Christ did by his death merit all such good things for his Church, as the
great love of himself and his Father thought fit to confer both in grace and
glory.

2. Come back to the Sacrament, and there see a containment of all good in some
kind, which Christ by his death has purchased whatever is savingly good for
present or future, is some way either represented or transmitted or assured,
in, by and through the Sacrament to the souls of Gods Saints.

The primary and general good is union and communion with Christ: The
secundary and particular are those rich mercies that arise from those depths
and seas of grace and glory: peace and comfort which are from Christ as streams
of honey from a rock begun on earth, and filled up in heaven. Then

3. Turn home to your selves, and there see what entertainment you may give to
all this good, truly you may apply all with joy, as your own portion, you may
take both the lamp and the oil, both the golden pot and the heavenly Manna
therein, as your own, by a purchased interest, I mean the whole Sacrament, with
the earthly and heavenly part, you may hence receive as your peculiar right:
Such is the love of the Lord Jesus, Aug. in Psa. 102. lege de amore pelicani
erga pullulos languentes.
that Pelican-like in his death he has let out his own blood, and in this
Sacrament he applies his blood with all the blessed benefits of his bloody
death, to heal and help up the drooping souls of his dear Saints, and they may
close in with all these comforts, as their own by the foresaid right of promise
and purchase.

Christ's death is yours, therefore the Sacrament that shows his death. The
Covenant is yours, therefore the seals of the covenant: You are of Gods Family,
therefore the Family food is yours: You have right to a Sacrament when none
administered, Ius ad rem, Ius in re.
and when it is you have right in it. It is your bacquet and all therein is
yours, Christ the vine is yours, Christus meus and omnia.
therefore the grapes are yours, Christ once yours all is yours, Christ the
main of the Sacrament is yours by an undoubted right two ways.

By donation, and By relation.
Your right to Christ is clear, because he is freely given you of God.

As Christ has a right to the Saints by virtue of Gods gift, Thine they were
and thou gave them me, Joh. 17.9, 11. Non ex debito sed ex dono.
so the Saints have right also to Christ by virtue of Gods gift, Isa. 9.6.
Believers have Christ given them of God four ways, whereby they receive a full
right.

1. Christus datur nobis, datur prae nobis, datur prae nobis, datur in nobis.
He is given before them as a pattern for their lives, 1 Pet. 2.21. Joh. 13.15.

2. He is given for them in the sacrifice of his death. Galat. 2.20. Ephe. 5.2.

3. He is given to them in the Ministry of the word, and of the Sacraments.

4. He is given in them by the habitation of his holy spirit. 1 John. 3.24.

Surely then Christ is of right theirs, and the Sacrament their assured right.
Whose such a lordship is, to him belongs the writings, deeds, conveyances,
privileges, rites, and all immunities. So here.

2. Christ is your right by way of relation: Relationes sunt minimae entitatis
sed magna essi cadiae.
Every relation carries some propriety in it, and privilege with it: but none
like that which is conjugall between man and wife: and this relation lies clear
betwixt Christ and his Church, Hos. 2.19, 20. The marriage knot brings a
marriage right: A mutual interest to enjoy each other, both at bed and board:
and does not the spiritual cont^act between Christ and every believing
Christian convey as much? O then know your right, and observe all good ways of
a due entrance upon, and partaking of, that which is your right.

I proceed then to those directions which are for your guidance about this
great Ordinance. For by your careful course in this way of the Sacrament, you
may enjoy your right.

Now then consider as there are three times wherein your duty is concerned, so
there are three things wherein your duty is contained.

The times toward this Sacrament that concerns the exercise of duty, are
before, at, and after.

The things that contain your duties, which about this Sacrament are to be
exercised: are repentance, faith, and obedience.

Repentance before. Faith in or at, and Obedience after.
When I place repentance before faith, I intend not thereby to state the method
of Gods first working these in the conversion of a sinner: but only the manner
of working these, in and by a converted Christian upon this solemn occasion of
receiving the Sacrament: we live in an age too apt to catch up disputes, and
study rather to be polemicall then practical Christians.

I begin with repentance, the renewed practice of which is preparatory to this
precious Ordinance.

Mark three things. D^cet ^ratio Dominica nos esse quotidia nos peccatores and
totam vitam esse paenitentiam.


1. In general the whole time of our life is to be a time of repentance. The
Lords Prayer (says Luther) that leads us daily to pray for pardon of sins,
teaches us that we are daily sinners, and that we ought all our days to
repent. Quid restat O peccator ni si ut in tota vita tua deplores totam vitam
tuam?
Anselm in his meditations confesses that all his life was either damnable for
sin committed, or unprofitable for good omitted, and at l^st concludes: O what
then remains, but in our whole life to lament the sins of our whole life. This
becomes all Christians.

Aut iterati dolores cruciabunt ^anitentem vitam meam aut cruciatus aeterni
vexabunt animam meam, Aug. (...) Ap^um est omne bonum loci^ and temporibus su^^
and laudabilia quaeque sordes cunt nisicongrua sede potiantur.
2. There are some particular seasons, when especially we should be in the
practice of repentance.

Its wisdom in a Christian to understand, and then to apprehend the most meet
times for the managing of meet matters. Its the Apostles counsel, Ephesians. 5.16.
to buy up all the fairest opportunities, so the Greek, word renders it, to
transact his necessary businesses in the best times. All the work we are to do
in this world, the Lord has fitted to prope^ places and seasons, which if we
do not observe, each good duty does loose its beauty, Ecc. 3.11. see what is
the praise of a man, Psa. 1.3. He brings forth his fruit in his season, his
fruit, proper to his place, and in his season, in the due time for that fruit,
^o then there are some more especial seasons to set about this work of
repentance. There is a time to mourn, and a time to rejoice, a time to weep,
and a time to laugh, Eccl. 3.3.

Before our receiving the Sacrament, is a fit season to set about the business
of repentance: O then to put in practice the parts of repentance, are as apples
of gold in pictures of silver, O then its good to set this work upon the
wheels, then to be serious in the work of repentance will cause us to feel the
want of the Ordinance, and by feeling the want, we after find the worth.

Sharp things are apt to move appetite, and the more hungry we are the more
meet we are for to feed ^n the Sacrament, Cibis acc^rimu accrescitur appetitus.
Then the soul is in a fit posture by faith to take in Christ, when first by
repentance it has thrown out sin.

Where the burden of sin has first caused the bitter groans of repentance,
there is a fitness to come in the Sacrament to Christ for deliverance, Illi ad
Christum vocantur qui sensu peccati premuntur and pro pacificanda conscientia
laborant, and illi soli sunt qui cum fructu ad Christum veniunt. Musc. in Mat.
ca. 11.
when repentance has made the wound, then Christ in the Sacrament is ready to
make the cure.

O then before you come to take the Sacrament of a broken Christ, go and
prepare the sacrifice of a broken heart, Christ's heart and side was pierced and
stabd, to let out his blood, Si vis Christum cognoscere si vi^ ipsum accipere
sicut se fiegit, ita te frange Ber. Hom. de duo. disc. cuntibus ad Em,
and shall not thy heart be pierced and struck to let in the blood of Christ? I
remember what is reported Ridly said to Latimer, when they were to suffer
martyrdom for Christ. Come my brother, let us be content to take a hard
breakfast, our dinner, and o^r Supper will be the sweeter: so are we to receive
the Sacrament of Christ. O then, come my Brother let us be content, to take a
bitter breakfast of heartbreaking repentance, the Lords Supper will be the
sweeter, and our Supper with the Lord the more delightful.

If we would find Christ to our comfort in the Sacrament, make a sorrowful
search for him before. Pharoahs daughter being come down to the river to wash
herself, she found Moses laid in an Ark of bulrushes. O let us go down first
into the river of repentance, and wash our selves and then come and see, come
and take up Christ in the ark of the Sacrament, in the elements of bread and
wine: Joseph and Mary then found Christ in the Temple in the midst of the
Doctors, when they had spent some time before, and sought him sorrowing, Luke
2.48. Let every man in this matter mind these five things following.

1. Separation of himself: having a desire to come to the Sacrament, and there
to enjoy Jesus Christ. Pro. 18.1. Separate thy self from thy company in the
world, from thy calling in the world, from the cumbersome cares of the world,
go aside from all, and be as if thou had no shop, no wife, no child, etc. As
Abraham going to sacrifice Isaak, leaves Sarah and servants and all.

Its said of Saul's father, 1 Samuel 10.2. he left his thoughts of his Asses, and
cried, what shall I do for my son? so do thou lay by all mindings of earthly
matters, and say, O what shall I do for my soul? and what shall I do for my
Savior?

2. Scrutation of himself: O make inquisition each into his own heart and life,
before he approaches the Table of the Lord O look look to two things.

1. What sin there is opposite to a Sacrament.

2. What grace there is requisite for a Sacrament.

1. Go down into the sides of thy ship and seek out sleeping Jonah, and by
repentance cast out sin, then thou art fit to come to this shore, Lay the Bible
before thee, take the candle light of clear Scripture with thee, and seek all
the dark corners of thy deceitful heart, that is apt to color and cover sin:
I would not have you go to search for sin in your soul (that falls in your
cellar, Psa 119.105. Ex hac lucerna accende and tu lucernam ut ucceat interior
oculus tuus qui lucerna est tui corporis.
who is ready to blow up all) without the lanthorn of Gods word, nor yet to
take a dark lanthorn of obscure and doubtful Scriptu^e to discover your sins
and examine your selves by.

2. What grace requ^site for a Sacrament: O consider and see to that also, Luke
14.28. which of you entending to build a tower, sits not down first and counts
whether he has sufficient to finish it, so if you intend to partake of Christ
in a Sacrament, O sit down first and consider how you are accommodated for so
great a business, with all useful graces.

As soldiers when to go to a combat, then they look for their weapons, ^ub up
their armor, make all bright, and fi^ for service; O so do you when to go to a
Sacrament, see you have the whole armor of God, O rub up all your spiritual
pieces, look all be clean, and well sco^red by repentance, and so fit for the
Ordinance

3, Humiliation of himself, and for what he finds amiss, in respect of sin
present, or grace absent. O this is indeed the main of repentance, when by
repentance we have cast down our selves, then come and by faith take up Christ,
Genesis 24. We read of Rebek^h when she was among the servants, she rode upon her
Camel, but when she was to come near to Isaak, she light down to the ground and
covered her face. So how ever mounted, yet when thou art to approach near
Christ in the Sacrament, go down frow thy Camels back by soul humbling
repentance, and cover thy face with shame, and so draw near, this is the way to
receive, not only Christ, but the fullness of Christ. If a man would convey
water from a fountain in his field to a cistern in his house, he lays the
leads and pipes low in the ground: Christ is the fountain thy soul is to
receive the fullness of all grace from, and the sweetness of all peace in,
through his ordinance, as the means of conveiance: O then see that thou
humblest thy self to the ground, and lie low by unfeigned repentance. O do not
you say repentance is a hard work, that is for them who still stick fast in
their sins, and that have no principles of grace in their souls. Luther
confesses that before his conversion, he met not with a more displeasing word
in all his study of divinity, Paenitens de peccato doset and de dolor gaudet.
then Repent, but afterward he took delight in the work, to sorrow for his sin,
and then rejoice in his sorrow; the like let it be with you.

Say not you have repented already; truly.

Homo ipsius paenitentiae panitere debet. Salu.
1. We have need to repent of our repentance, not to repent because we have
repented, but because our first repentance was no more, our penitential
sorrows no greater. The smaller fine the Tenant paies at his first coming into
a house, the more rent he must pay after, at usual times: Alas, our repentance
was so little at our first coming into Christ, Iuanis est paenitentia qua^
sequens culp^ coinquinas quia nihil prosunt lamenta si replicae ^ur peccata,
and nil valet a malo veniam poscere, si mala de novo velis iterare. Aug Iterum
peccavi Domine and iterum poenit^e me peccasse.
that we had need have other times, before Sacraments and the like, to enlarge
our repentance.

2. We have often sinned since our repentance: and sins after repentance are
worst, and of them most need to repent. All your sins before conversion, not
like those since: and will you come to a Sacrament in them, without repenting
of them? Having had sins after repentance, we had need have repentance after
sin: O sad where sin is the last: Its good to have repentance follow sin,
Paenitentia est mala praeterita plangere and plangenda iterum non committere.
Ambr. Deus paenitere dicitur non quia est in Deo commutatio paenitentia, sed
quia ad modum panitentis se habet. etc Aquin. in Romans Luk 15.7. Gaudium in
caelo non super uno peccatore paenitentiam cogitante aut super uno paenitentiam
dicente sed super uno paenitentiam aegente. S ella. Deus est qui consolatur
flentes curat dolentes, reficit paenitentes. Chrysostom. Nemo ad Deum precans and
flens accessit, qui no^, quod postulavit, accepit. Chrysostom.
but to have sin follow repentance, and so to remain, is miserable. O repent,
repent.

If ever you think aright to receive the Sacrament, O prepare by repentance,
do not only as if you did repent, but repent indeed. Its well for us that God
seems sometimes, as if he did repent, when yet there is no penitential change
in God, no repenting grief in God, O but it will be ill for us to act only
somewhat like repentance, and not actually and in truth repent; O do not only
think of repentance, and have some words that way, but do the work truly, and
thoroughly, this shall cause joy in the heavens, and joy in your hearts. Our
Savior at the Marriage, Joh. 2. furnished the guests with plenty of wine, but
the pots there, were first filled with water: O let us fill the pots of our
hearts, with the water of repenting sorrows, and the Lord at the Sacrament will
turn all into the wine of soul-reviving comforts.

4. Supplication unto God. Petition God with tears and prayers, O let us
aforehand send out our ships of prayer to sea, God knows with what rich lading
they may return upon a Sacrament day, then may they come like Bees laden with
honey into the hives of our hearts, and fill us with combs of comfort. O pray,
pray, and see that all your prayers carry fire and water in them, fire of zeal,
and water of sorrow.

The more the waters of the deluge increased, Quanto est qui libet sanctior and
desider^ sancti plenior tanto est in orando fletus uberior Aug.
the higher was Noah's ark carried: O these waters of repenting prayers, will
raise thy heart to heaven, and the nearer thou are so brought to Christ, the
fitter to receive him in a Sacrament: Go to God, and look backward upon that
sin thou desire God in the Sacrament to seal the pardon of, and grant thee
power against look forward to the Christ, ^^e grace. that the Sacrament thy
soul would fain partake of, and converse with, and beg with tears, Pr^ces
suadent lachryma cogunt in vicibilem vincunt, omnipotente^ ligant. Iero.
the Lord cannot deny thee, thus thou shall overcome God, and then come fetch
Christ home in a Sacrament: God while thou art sitting at the Table, shall
stand at heaven gates as it were, and say secretly to thy soul, thou have
sought Christ, behold, there he is, O then to have justice look out, and mercy
plead, O let us embrace this man, he has abhorred himself let us spare this
man, he ^ath not spared himself: let us now forgive him his sins, he has with
grief confessed his sins, Iustitia de cae^o prospicit misericordiae precat
tanquam Dei dice^tis, parcamus huic homini quiae ipse sibi non pepercit
ignoscamus quia ipse agnoscit, and quia ipse conversus est ad puntendu^
peccaetum suu^ convertam^s and nos ad liberandum eu^ Au. in Ps. 84
he has turned himself by repentance against his sins, now give him
deliverance from his sins, Christ shall plead with the Father, to be at peace,
and O let us save that man, he has condemned himself: At the bar of Gods
justice Christ shall plead his own blood, and his death, that thou may live:
At the bar of Gods mercy Christ shall present thy tears, and prayers, and God
then give his sweet smile upon thy soul.

O be encouraged therefore before you go to the Lords Supper, to cry to the
Lord by prayer, thus I pass the fourth thing requisite for every Christian
that would merely communicate, to wit, invocation or calling upon God by prayer
with the inmost affections as the word well imports. Invocaere quasi intus aut
in se vocare, Ansel.


5. Obligation of himself to God, this becomes every one, yea all that would
partake aright, Jer. 50.4, 5. Going and weeping they shall go to seek the Lord,
saying, Come, let us join our selves to the Lord in a perpetual Covenant, O
how seasonably may this practice be applied to a sacrament occasion? We read of
Jacob Genesis 28. when he was to go to Padan-Aram to take a wife, how solemnly he
vowed himself to God, Magnum quoddam est and salutare bonum, votu^, atque
anioraru^ mosita^um fir^ma custodia intissimumque praefidium, Chrysostom.
when you are to go to this holy Ordinance to take Christ, bind your selves to
God, draw up the indentures and covenants aforehand, and then seal them in the
Sacrament, when God seals his Covenant to you; O thus go to the Sacrament, your
so^s being safely guarded, strongly armed, girt and bound up firm to God in
holy vows and covenants.

Thus you have all the parts of renewed repentance, which every true Christian
ought to practice, that prepares for the Sacrament: and I beseech you set to
all this with lowly and humble hearts: hearts laid in the dust are fittest for
Christ, Isa. 6^.2. Those herbs and flowers rise highest in the Summer, and with
the greatest beauty, that in the winter have shrunk lowest into the earth: and
those Christians are like to rise up highest with most glorious joys in the
Summer-day of a Sacrament, who have before shrunk down lowest in the wet winter
work of repentance. Jacobs sons when they went to Egypt, they first met with
rough usage, they were imprisoned, perplexed, and in great straits, but after
Joseph makes them a feast, gives them all messes of meat, they eat and drink
and are merry with him, Ge. 43.31. Joseph makes them first to remember their
sin, Genesis 4^.21. With bitterness of soul they consider their not regarding
their brother in the bitter anguish of his soul; and then O what revivings of
comforts does he afterward cause.

Thus Christ our Joseph will have us pass through some rough work of renewed
repentance, Magna amaritudo peccati, quae tanta^ amaritudine^ peperit.
have our souls imbittered in the remembrance of the bitterness of his soul
once for sin, and then comes this feast of fat things where they eat and drink,
and are merry in the Lord. O the Benjamin messes of blessings and mercies,
Christ there gives out to them, and so for ever gains their heart. Well, would
you have those comforts given you in great measures at the communion? O then
give your selves to this whole work of searching, sorrowing, fasting, praying,
etc. Ester desires others, and resolves her self to fast and pray, and then
says she, I will go in to the King, If I perish, I perish; but O what favor
she found, etc. let this be the course of every Christian, O repent, Esto
parv^^ in oculis tuit ut si^ magnus in oculis Dei, Aug.
entreat, lie down, look up, and then say, now will I go in to Christ at his
Supper, If I perish, I perish: but when thou have been low in thy own eyes,
thou shall be high in his. To close I shall only desire when you have done what
you can in this case, take care of your thoughts in two things.

1. That they do not sink too low, nor 2. That they do not rise too high.
Let them not be so low as to say, Though I go to this Supper, yet shall I not
meet Christ: let them not be so high as to say, now I go and I cannot miss
Christ, let me repent, weep, pray, promise, it is all in vain, Christ and I
shall never come to close: however or whatever I have done, I shall go and come
a Christlesse creature: Beware of this diffidence, or thus, I have now examined
my self, acknowledged my sin, wept, prayed, covenanted, therefore I cannot
miscarry: my preparations have been such. I am sure to speed well, and to come
back full of Christ from his Table. Beware of this confidence: It was a good
observation of Augustine, he says. Other vices are in sins, Caetera vitiae in
peccatis superbia in recte factis maxim timenda, Aug.
but pride and high confidence is most apt to creep in upon duties well done:
when we have much humbled our selves we be prone to grow proud in our selves
thereupon to go to the communion in the strength of our own preparations, O go
renouncing all empty, lowly, hungry, humble, self-denying, to this Supper of
the Lord, and the Lord prosper you. Go as if you had not shed one tear, made
one prayer, thus shall the first work be well finished: viz. the work of
repentance that goes before.

I proceed to the second thing requisite at the Sacrament, to wit, faith: it is
true, Christus auditu est devorandus intellecturuminandus cord sitiendus: and
fide digerendus Tert. de resurrect.
there is use of other graces, and happy is the man that has his quiver full
of them; but I may say for faith, as David of Goliahs sword, There is none like
that. The main of this Sacrament work lies upon faith: As fire is to the
chimick, so is faith to the Communicant, there is nothing to be done without
it; Faith says to all that come to the Sacrament, as our Savior said to his
Disciples, Ioh. 15.5, without me you can do nothing, viz. pleasing to God, or
profitable to your selves, Non dentes ad mordendu^ acuimus sed fide sincera
panem sanctu^ frangimus and manducamus. Cypr. de caena Do.
As the angels that came to destroy Sodom, said to Lot, We can do nothing thou
thou art gone, Genesis 19, 22. so may Christians when they are met to receive the
Sacrament say to faith, we can do nothing till thou art come, The faculties of
the soul, the graces of the spirit, the promises of the Gospel, do nothing if
no faith.

And 1. As this is one thing considerable that in the Sacrament nothing can be
done without faith,

So also there is a second thing to be considered, which is, that in the
Sacrament all may be done by faith. As Luther says of prayer, Est quaedam
omnipotentia precum.
so may I say of faith, it has a kind of omnipotency in it, its able to do
all things. There is nothing meet to be done at the Table of the Lord, Tantum
possumu^ quantu^ credimus Cyp.
but faith is able, and by faith we are able to do it. Read the 11. of the
Hebrews, and see, if there be any thing in the whole course of a Christian, to
which he is not fitted by faith, and then draw it to the particular case.

Well, but when I speak this of faith, in reference to the Sacrament, its meet
to enquire two things as touching faith.

1. What Faith it must be. 2. What faith must do.
Faith which is of this concernment in the business of the Sacrament, it must
carry with it these two pertinent properties.

1. It must be a man's owr Faith. 2. It must be a man's actual Faith,
Or the faith that is a man's own in act, not another faith: As the Prophet
says, Hab. 2.4.
The just man lives, so say I, the just man receives by his faith, his soul
receives benefit in the Sacrament by his faith: Dormit fides and Christus d^rm
it. Aug.
and not by a dead faith, or a dormant faith, but by a vigorous and lively
faith, awakened to its work: It must be a Christians own faith in exercise; and
the more full of vivacity and activity a man's faith is in the Sacrament,
Efficaecia Eucharistiae non aequaliter se habet quoad omnes fidel^s sed pro
ratione fidei communicantiu^, Orig.
the more is like to be his souls advantage by the Sacrament: the more agility
in the one, the more efficacy in the other. Well then remember it must be thy
own particular faith, and thy own practical faith that is required in this of
the Sacrament, to make thee an approved Communicant.

It is not required of all that partake in the Sacrament, Ad Dei dignitalem
spectat ut quibus fidem aetas denegat proptia^ gratia concedat prodesse
alienam: nec Dei iustitia propriam ab his putat exigendam fidem. quos novi^
propriam nullam haebes re culpa^, Be.
they should have the same strength of Faith, but its needful they all have
the same truth of Faith: each one a true faith of his own to set a work, though
weak.

Suppose in receiving Infants to the Sacrament of Baptism, there is a respect
had to the faith of others, though they have not actual faith of their own,
the case differs.

For first the greatness of Gods grace may admit them to the mercy of actual
baptizing, though the littleness of their age cannot admit them to the duty of
actual believing, Christ by his spirit in Baptism may comprehend them, though
they by faith cannot at all apprehend Christ.

2. They have no actual fault of their own, God may rather dispense^ with the
want of actual faith of their own; as by faith they cannot actually embrace,
so by sin they do not actually oppose.

More might be added in the Infants behalf touching Baptism. Ad nutritionem
spiritualem requiritur non ta^tum habitus and dispositio fidei; sedactus
etiameius exercitus and exercitatiuita ut non omnes fideles semper digni sunt
convivae in hac caena nisi fidem quam habent exercent, Am. ca. (...).
though they have no actual faith of their own; but for us in the Sacrament of
the Supper, it is another matter; Every one of us must have a proper faith of
his own to employ, not only the seed, habit and disposition of faith, but faith
in its excited exercises. The prayer which prevails at the throne of grace,
Iam. 5.16. is an operative and working prayer, so the Greek reads it, and truly
the faith that avails at the Table of Christ, is an energeticall and actual
faith, stirred up to such workings as suits the Sacrament: Moses hand lying in
his bosom was leprous, but at length pulling it forth, and stretching it out,
it was made well: Again, O see at the Sacrament this hand of your faith lie not
folded up, as it were, in your bosom, but stir it up and stretch it out, and
then it shall be well with you. It is not the Hawk that sits still hood-winkt
upon the fist, but the looking, flying hawk upon the wing that does the
service. O it is a winged working eye-viewing faith that will do us service in
a Sactamant, as not a faith that lies still in our hearts as an idle habit, or
like a sluggish servant in a house.

But I pass on, particularly to propose what faith is to do in the Sacrament,
to wit Two ways, 1. Toward the Subject. 3. Toward the object.


The subject of faith is the heart or foul of a sincere Christian, toward
which Faith at the Sacrament is to do two things.

1. To empty it. 2. To open it.
To empty it of evil thoughts.

To open it in good desires.

1. Faith is to empty the Christians house of such ill guests as make their
untimely visits, his heart of those incursions of unmeet thoughts, that are apt
to come in at the Sacrament, and if they be not cast out of the heart, Nihil
est in nobis cord fugacius quod a nobis (a Deo etiam) toties recedit queties
per pravas cogitationes defluit, Greg.
will carry away the heart: The heart through these thoughts is apt to fly and
fling off from God, and the business in hand: Satan a^ such a time sets in,
and suggests what he can, to draw out the mind in idle excursions, and
impertinent cogitations, and the more the service is solemn, and the soul is
serious, the more Satan is subtle and sedulous, Job. 1.6. There was a day when
sons of God came to present themselves before the Lord, and Satan came also
amongst them: The Devil upon a Sacrament-day, will get in among the children of
God, when in this great service, they come to present themselves before the
Lord, to puzzle their hearts with improper thoughts: to some he comes in as a
roaring lion, Magis vereor serpentem gliscente^ quam leonem rugientem. Iam.
1.14. (...). Metaphora sumpta a piscatoribus qui bamis suis escam placida^
imponunt, tit pisces capian.
with heart-amazing thoughts of a man's own unworthiness by reason of sin, and
wretchedness to meddle in such sacred mysteries; to others as a cunning
serpent (which is most common) with some heart taking thoughts of profit or
pleasure; and so entice the soul aside from the service, as the fish is drawn
on and at length plucked out from its Element by an eye-alluring bait, Iam.
1.14. Mat 12.47. we find when Christ was in a place where he was earnestly set
about his Fathers business, one comes in to him, and says, Behold thy mother
and brethren stand without, desiring to speak with thee; but he would not away
from his work: so thus when a Christian is fully bent in this blessed business
of God, Satan comes to the soul with a whisper, behold such a man, or such a
matter of the world, a wife, a child, a friend, again, stands without,
desirous to speak with thee, Cor meum side fixum a Christo meo crucifixo nihil
est quod trahat, Buce.
and so get off the heart from the good in hand; but all such motions, the
power, practice and prevalence of this grace of faith ought to repel: As a
ship at sea with a leak, as the water comes in, there is one pumps it out: the
soul at a Sacrament would even soon be sunk, by sinful and unseasonable
thoughts, but faith helps cast them out: be the thoughts perplexing? etc. Faith
must hint that good from God, and love from Christ, as to expel them: Faith
takes up a promise, and force them away; as Abraham by his hand drove away the
b^rds, that would needs come to interrupt him in his service: Genesis 15.11.
so a Christian by the hand of Faith, must drive out these disturbing thoughts
from his soul at the Sacrament. Be the thoughts more pleasing, faith must catch
up that in its hand from the word, a menace, a promise, a precept, the
remembrance of which may cause him to bewail and to repel these thoughts from
the heart, eye lifted up in a sad ejaculatio^, Vellem fervire Domine sed
cogitationes non patiuntur,
Lord, now how fain would I serve thee, and vain thoughts will not suffer me,
Faith must declare that there is enough in the Ordinance, to take up all the
thoughts: other matters to meditate upon more profitable, more comfortable,
more needful, more fruitful: The death of Christ, the love of Christ, and the
like: alas! for unbeleevers at the Sacrament, Excellous sensibile destruit
sensu^.
their minds may be are amazed at the height of those mysteries that they
think of nothing; as a Clock wound up beyond its ordinary pitch, stands still:
or else their thoughts fall flat to the earth upon the bare bodily things, the
bread and wine before t^em, or else they let them fly out upon some other vain
object, or as foolish archers shoot away their arrows at random, their
thoughts running upon no particular thing. In believers ill and vain thoughts
in Sacrament time intrude, but faith turns them out, and takes in better: O let
this be your care, Numb. 9.10, 13. A man in a journey was not to eat the
Passover, his mind and thoughts would be unsettled: O see your hearts be not
in a journey but at home, minding the matter at hand, when you are at a
Sacrament, and O stir up faith for your help in this case, to cast such bold
guests out of the house of your hearts.

And as faith ought thus to empty the heart, Bonum quod vere credimur valde
volumus.
so

2. Faith must open the heart in holy desires. The affections of the soul are
of two sorts.

Those wherein the soul is contracted, as in grief and fear.

Those wherein the soul is dilated, as in joy and desire.

And as in worldly greifs and fears, the soul is contracted by unbelief, so in
spiritual joys and desires, In desiderio illo pij animi suspiria inenarribilia
and gaudtum ineffabile mirifice coadunantur, suspiria inquam gaudium quae ne
ipse quidem, qui ea sentit, potest plene enarrare, To. in Ioh.
the heart of a Christian is, and ought to be dilated by the exercise of Faith
set faith on work at the Sacrament, it will encourage a Christian in his
desires, and so increase desires in the Christian. O the promises, says faith:
that are to desires, and to such as hunger and thirst, Mat. 5.6. Ioh. 7.37.
Thou hungrest and thirstest, says faith to the soul, be of good comfort; O how
wonderfully is the heart enlarged with desires unspeakable, and joys
unutterable hereby. This one key of faith unlocks all the doors about this
house.

Faith gives the soul the sight and sense of it wants, and so springs desires
after suitable supplies from God in Christ. Let a man have good in him, Ille non
est bonus qui non vult esse melior.
yet he finds the want of good, and desires to be better. Faith at the
Sacrament does well to bring and present to the soul, as it were a new fresh
written bill of all its wants; and the soul finds want of power to support it,
want of wisdom to direct it, want of mercy to preserve it, want of comfor^ to
refresh it, and the like. Then further faith reports the fulness of God
through Christ, to make up all that is wanting to the utmost; thereupon the
heart is stirred up, and stretched out, in strong desires for such enjoyments:
O says Jacob to his sons, why sit you gazing, and perishing in want? there is
plenty of corn in Egypt, have you down. O says faith, there is abundance of
all good in God; yea says the soul by the Echo of faith, In my father house
is bread enough, and shall I perish for hunger? I now come for bread, will my
Father give me a stone? no, no: I have sinned, yet I am a child, and shall not
I eat of the childrens bread? though I have forgot my duty, Et ubi nunc est
pater ille, potentissimus, dulcissimus and liberalissimus nunquid potest
oblivisci filium uteri sui? absit absit, Ber. parab. de fill. reg.
will my father forget his bounty? no, no: O now how the soul is open in
desires, now it pants, breaths, and even breaks with longing to bath it self in
the blessed streams of Gods free grace, and Christ sovereign blood. O when a
Christians faith like Aarons rod, though before it has been too too much as a
dry stick, yet now at a Sacrament it buds and blossoms, and bears such good
fruit of gracious desires; Blessed is it.

But secondly, See how faith is to work in reference to the object.

The object of faith is Christ, and in reference to Christ, faith at the Table
of the Lord, ought to do two things.

1. To look out for Christ. 2. To lay hold of Christ.
Faith at the Lords Table must look to Christ, and set the soul into an
unsatisfied way without Christ.

The two Mary's when they came to the sepulcher of Christ, they saw the linen
lying, and there were Angels standing, but all this not content them, they
looked for the body of Jesus, and not seeing that, they were perpl^^ed: They
have taken away my Lord, says one, and I know not where they have laid him:
Amulus non valet quicquam, haereditas est qua^ quarebam, Bern. de caena dom.
I^^. etc.
I says the Angel, I know whom you seek, Jesus which was crucified. So a true
Christian is at the Sacrament of Christ: let him see there Ministers standing,
and the bread and wine presented, O that not content him. Its the body and
blood of Christ his faith looks for, Jesus of Nazareth which was crucified,

Valde protestatus sum me nolle sic satiari ab eo, Melch. Ada. in vit. Lu.
The believer says concerning the outward elements, as Luther of worldly
preferments, I earnestly protest, I will not be put off with those things,
Lord, says Abraham, what will thou give me so long as I go childelesse? Genesis
15.1. so says such a man, Lord what will thou give me if from this Sacrament I
go Christlesse? Sicut mea non tibi placent oblata nisi mecum, Sic honorum
tu^rum contempla^^io reficit no^ sed non satiat nisi tecum. Bern.
Lord says the soul, I know it is not some signs of good from me only, which
will please thee, but thou requirest my self: so it is not the naked signs in
this Sacrament can satisfy me, but I must have thee thy self or I die, if I
live, Lord, my life will be a death, thou made me for thy self, and if I may
not now enjoy thy self, Fecisti nos Domine prote and inquietu^ est cor nostru^
donec veniat ad te, Aug.
my heart will be unquiet, and my life uncomfortable, thus does the soul seek
Christ at the Sacrament, and thus it becomes a Christian by faith to look for
Christ. I have heard it reported credibly of a Christian man, Quid petis O
Iudat ut Deus tribuat tibi panem? pane^ dat omnibus, dat quotidie dat semp^r.
etc. Christum crucifixime creed Christu^ quaere, etc. Amb. Ps. 118 Sermon. 18.
who in the night dreaming the day of Judgment was come, was so possessed;
that he rose and run out into the street, and looking up to heaven cried, where
is my Christ? where is my Christ? O when indeed the Sacrament-daies come, a
good Christian by faith is so affected, that in his heart he looks up, and in
his secret thoughts cries, O where is my Christ? Quicquid mihi praeter illum
est, dulce non est, quic quid mihi vult dare Dominus meus auferat totum and se
mihi dat, Au, Enar. 2. in Psa. 26, Christum ipsum desidero accipere and non ^d
solum sed accedere ad sacro sanctum eius lateris vulnus, ostium arcae, quod
factum est in latere, ut totus inremusque ad ^^er Jesus, Bern. de amore Dei,
cap. 1.
where is my Christ? To behold the cutward elements will content others, but
Christ himself in them is he which a believer looks for. When Jacob saw the
chariots and the wagons which Joseph had sent his spirit revived, but yet with
the sight of these his mind was not satisfied; O says he, my son Joseph
lives, I will go see him before I die; he loves to look into that chariot
wherein he may go see Joseph his son.

A Christian when he sees the bread and the wine, those good creatures sent and
set before him, his spirit may revive, but his faith works on, O says he, my
Savior lives, now let me see him before I die, then he comes to clasp Christ
as old Simeon the babe in his arms, with (...) Lord now let thy servant depart
in peace: O if now he might never return to ^ee his house more, Apprehensio
Christi per fidem duplex Alia est originalis quae apprehenditur ad un^onem de
novo integrandam Alia est secundaria qua^ apprehenditur Christus ad
consolatione^ ex unione percipienda^
or to see wife or child more, he could be content to go out of the world in
that sweet enjoiment of Jesus Christ, which is the other thing faith at the
Sacrament does toward Christ, viz.

2. It is to lay hold on Christ.

As little Zacheus in the sycamore tree sees Christ, and then soon comes down
and takes Christ with joy into his house; so a believer by a little faith sees
Christ in a Sacrament, and then receives him into his heart with joy. When Gods
Saints come to solace and satiate themselves with sweet Sacrament-comforts,
they are not, they must not be satisfied by faith, only to set their eyes upon
Christ, Cum ad mensam Domini calestibus cibis satiandus accedis corpus and
sanguinem Christi, men tu oculis aspice, cordis man^ suscipe and haustu
interiori assume, etc. Euse. Emisenus,
but also to set their hearts upon Christ, not content only with the eye of the
mind to look on Christ at a distance, but with the hand of the heart they
labor to lay hold upon Christ, and to partake of his presence, and may they
but find such favor with God, herein to receive Christ as a gift from God, O
what Hallelujahs and heavenly Hosannas are their souls ready to sing! We read,
Mar. 6. how there was a day when King Herod made a Supper for his Courtiers and
Captains, and Herodias dancing so pleased Herod, whereupon says he to her, Ask
what thou will, and I will give it thee, she being instructed of her mother, O
give me, says she, the head of John Baptist by and by in a charger, she craves
John Baptists head, rather then half a kingdom, The King to grant her request
commands off the head of John the Baptist, and gives it to her in a charger,
which she takes and carries home to her mothers house with much joy. So there
is a day when the great God makes a Supper for his children and servants, then
the believing soul secretly dances and pleases God, whererpon he profers, what
will thou desire and I will give it thee? then the soul being prompted by this
mother grace of faith cries and craves, O give me but now the body and blood of
Christ in this Ordinance, O a Christ rather then a Kingdom; neither is it
grievous to God to have this the request, Et vos qui accepturi estis
sacramentum salvatoris pedes fide tenete, lachrimis lavate, crine tergite cord
tongite, Chr. in Mar, hom 14.
but straightway he gives Christ's body and blood to the soul in the Sacrament,
which by faith it receives as from the hands of God, and carries home with
sweet comforts of heart, Cant. 3.4. O how the heart by faith hugs and kisses
not only the face, but the feet of a crucified Christ, being ready to wash them
with tears of joy, yea and is willing to do further, like that woman in the 7.
of Luke, who having washed Christ's feet with the tears of her eyes, for a
wiping towell she takes the hair of her head, now a Christian by faith flies
high at Christ, comes up to Christ, and takes a conjugall hold and a Covenant
hold of Jesus Christ, with a my beloved is mine, and I am his, Can. 2.16. Faith
draws the soul in to Christ, and Christ into the soul: Faith it is a mounting
grace, to meet Christ, Faith is an eager grace to close in with Christ, Faith
is as that Disciple which outran his fellow, and came first to the sepulcher to
find Christ. Faith stirs up much love to Christ and Christ bears much love to
faith, Ad Eucharistiam accedimus ibi contemplamur Christu^ pendentem in cruce,
Ibi in sinis Christi recumbimus, ibi in in ipsum cor Christi intro spicimus
quod sit misericors quod nobis mortem peccatoris, etc, L^^.
they never meet, but O what mutual imbracements each of other, Faith
embraces Christ as Christ embraces faith: Faith is as that beloved Disciple,
when other graces stand waiting to do their service for Christ, Faith lies in
the bosom of Christ, when Joseph saw Benjamin, then O the comfortable close
between him and his brethren, O says he, I am Joseph your brother whom you
sold into Egypt. Be not grieved in your selves, etc. then they weep in one
another necks for joy, but especially he falls upon Benjamins neck and Benjamin
on his neck, and he first kisseth him, and then kisseth all his brethren. When
Christ sees faith at the Sacrament, O what sweet closes are there between
Christ and each believing Christian, he secretly speaks, Q^^^ Christo suavinis
Apprehensio cutus est cum suavi^a^^ magna and gaudi^^ ^^credibili ni res
planesuavis est ea quae apprehenditur To. in Ioh. Patent mihi viscera per
vulnera and intravi, Aug. Cruce haremus sanguinem sugin^us and inter ipsa
redemptoris nostri vulnera figimus lingu^. Cyp. de ^e^. dom.
Fear not, I am Christ your elder brother, whom your sins put to death, But be
not grieved, you are come to seek Christ, Behold I am he, I am thy everlasting
and everloving Father, draw near, touch me, take me: and O what fallings as it
were in another necks now is! O the kisses of love that pass at this present,
O what breakings of gold rings as it were for tokens of strong affections on
both sides, O now faith puts her hands into Christ's wounds, yea lays as it
were her mouth close to the wounds of Christ, and sucks in sweet blood with an
holy hunger and thirst. In English Chronicle, we read of Elenor the wife of
Edward the first, the King having gotten a wound by a poisoned dagger, she sets
her mouth to the wound to suck out the poison, ventring her own life, to
preserve her husbands; Were it to suck poison, a Christians love is such to
Christ as could be content to suck it out: ^s sometimes when Christ is wounded
with the poisonous tongues of blaspheming men, a Christian could be willing to
draw it all upon himself, Sug^ quod pro^e factum est and cresces ad id quod
est, Aug. in Psalm. Ta^^^^ quisque sibi recipit, quantum vase fidei colligit,
Aug. In primitiva Ecclesia ut unanimitatis iudicium ^num magnu^ panem and
omnibus sufficientem offerebant: quod adhuc Graeci servare dicunturr. Frangimus
and dividinius unum panem in multas parts, ad designandam unio^emcharitatis
accipi^ntium. Ans. 1 Cor. 10. Sancta illa ^nius and eiusdem pa^is and poculi
pacifica distributio com^rdiam Evangelicam and unitate ^ere dentibus divinam
tanquam una en^^itis praedicat and praescribit, etc, Dionys. Eccl. Hier. cap.
3, Hier. lib. 3. super Ep. ad Gal.
to take it off from Christ, Heb. 11.26. Psa. 69.9. sure then to such precious
and so al-preserving blood by faith from the wounds of Christ as presented in a
Sacrament, the believing Saint is bent with an holy greediness.

Thus you see how faith is to work, and a Christian by faith toward Christ
Jesus in a Sacrament: O let this be our care, and it shall be our comfort:
There is yet one way more wherein faith ought to work at the Sacrament, tha^ is
in a way of love to those which are Christ's for Christ's sake. Faith it works by
love, Gal. 5.6. and faith at a Sacrament works up love in a most lively way.
Faith in the Sacrament presents the love of God in the death of Christ, and
then makes this inference: That if God have so loved us, we ought to love one
another, 1 John 4.11.

The Lords Table must be like Gideons Altar, Judge. 6.24. Jehovah-shalom, The
God of love and peace, is there, and it becomes the people present, to be knit
together in love and peace. The Lords Supper it self is an Ensign of unity, and
a bond of charity, 1 Cor. 10.17. We being many are one bread and one body, for
we are all partakers of one bread, Many grains of corn are there knod into one
loaf, and many grapes of the vine are mixed into one cup.

Thus in the Sacrament we read a lecture of love and brotherly unity, the
Sacrament is like one of St John's sermons, which as is reported, what ever was
the doctrine, yet this was one use, My little children, love one another, and
when through age he was fain to be born up by two, and could only speak a
little, be would stand and double this, O my little children, love one another:
Thus the Lords Supper is never administered, but it calls for love. This voice is
to be heard in every Sacrament, O my friends, eat and drink, and love another:
Indigne manducant ^ui corpus and sanguinem Christi in sacramento manducam and
bibunt membra antem ejus Evangelio non agnoscunt, Aug.
we should never be at this love-feast without a love-fire. Faith at the Lords
Table as it should draw out much love to Christ, so it should draw down much
love to the members of Christ: As the ointment upon Aarons head went down to
his beard, and to the skirts of his garment, or as the box of spikenard when
Christ was at a great Supper in Bethany, Joh. 12. Mary broke out of her love to
Christ, pouring it out upon Christ, it spread down to his feet: and filled the
whole house with the odor: faith upon a Sacrament-Supper pours out that love
upon Christ, Beatus qui te amat and alios in te and propter te na^ solus is nil
charum amittis cui omnia chara sunt in eo qui non amittitur, Aug
as descends to his meanest members, and becomes a sweet savor both to God and
men: Faith assures the soul in the Sacrament, that there is nothing lost by
this love, but that blessed is he who loves Christ, and those who are Christ's,
in Christ, and for Christ's sake. O then at the Sacrament-season, and upon the
Sacrament-occasion, let our faith thus work by love to Christ, and then to the
purest and poorest members of Christ: Among our selves who communicate
together, let our love abound, forget all old grudges, and forgive what ever
injuries we have received from any of our fellow-brethren. When Luther had
woefully wronged and reviled Calvin, well says Calvin, Etiamsi Lutherus millies
me Diabolu^ vocet, ego tamenillum insignem Dom^ni servum agnosco, etc.
Let Luther hate me, and in his wrath call me Devil a thousand times, yet I
will love him, and acknowledge him a most precious servant of God: O this is an
excellent temper for a Christian, to answer others wrath with love: O this is
commendable allwaies, but especially if faith at the Sacramrnt can give this
strength of love, its laudable, labor it I beseech you.

I have done with the duty of faith at the Sacrament, and proceed to what
becomes the care of a Christian after the sacrament in point of obedience:
Concerning a Christians obedience that is fit to follow his receipt of the
Supper of the Lord, I refer things to two heads.

1. The kinds and parts of it. 2. The qualites and properties of it.
Obedience has two sorts and two parts, all coming within the compass of each
communicant, for sorts, Obedience is either Active, or Passive.


As we need the concurrence of both in Christ, to wit, active and passive
obedience, to complete a Savior for us, Christus nobis natus and d^tus non
solu^ auferre peccata patiendo sed etiam afferre iustitia^ faciendo,
so Christ requires the concurrence of both in each Christian, to complete a
servant for him: and as whoever would have Christ for his Savior, so whoever
now has Christ in the Sacrament, must consequently be careful in both, And
first for active obedience.

Now this obedience is nothing else but the echo of a man's way unto the voice
of Gods word, when our practice answers to what Gods precepts first speaks. Now
the commands of God are of two sorts.

1. His negative commandments, that forbid what is evil.

2. His affirmative commandments, that enjoin what is good.

Accordingly, there are two parts of active obedience meet for every
communicant to mind.

Cease to do evil, Isa. 1.16, 17. Learn to do well, Isa. 1.16, 17. Abhor that
which is evil, Romans 12.9. Cleave to that which is good, Romans 12.9.
1. Has God spoken peace to thy soul in a Sacrament? O then return no more to
folly, Psalm. 85.8. Indeed its ordinary for a sinful man, when he comes to a
Sacrament, to say as it were to his sins, like as Abraham, when he went to
sacrifice Isaac, said to his servants, Genesis 22.5. Abide you here, I and the lad
will go yonder and worship, and after return again to you. An hypocrite may
seem to be very severe against his sins, upon a Sacrament solemnity, but
afterward indulge them as his darlings. History reports, Brisson de Reg. Pers.
lib. 2.
that it was a custom among the Persians, to keep a great Festival one day in
a year, wherein they would all go out in companies, and slay all the serpents
and venomous creatures they could meet with on that day, but after willingly
let them alone, to swarm till the revolution of that day again.

I need not speak, men's practice will explain this to your hands.

Let a dog eat never so much good meat, yet he is apt to lie down and tumble in
the stinking carrion that he next comes near. Admit a profane man to feed in
the Sacrament, yet you shall find him upon the next occasion, lie down and
tumble in the puddle of pollution; from the Lords Table, to the devils trough,
and there fat up their filthy lusts. As the prodigal, when he had received his
portion, then he went to his harlots, and wasted all in riotous living: so a
wicked man, having received the Sacrament (not his portion) he runs out into
all excess of riot. Christians ought to be the more exact in the course of
their lives, having been at the Table of the Lord, to abandon all sin, and keep
a strict hand over all their ways, Defer^^ de ch^ractere ^^^natur, de qu^
militans honoratur. August.
lest turning as a swine to the mire, that which should be the beautiful badge
of their honor, prove the black character of their shame. O beware, now expect
corruptions and temptations will be stirring and striving. Have we been at the
Sacrament, no doubt the devil will do his utmost to draw us aside into sin.
It Is observable, when Israel had eaten Manna from heaven, and drank water out
of the rock, then came Amalek to fight against them, Exodus 17.8. When Christ
had been baptized in Jordan, then he was led into the wilderness to be
tempted: the Spirit of God had descended upon him like a dove, then came the
spirit of satan against him as a lion, God had said, This is my beloved Son,
then says the devil, if thou be the Son of God. Have we been at the Sacrament
of the Supper to the comfort of our souls? then expect the devil will mount his
ordinance, and play upon our souls from the gates of hell with strong assaults,
Pharaoh like, endeavoring to drive us into some red sea, to force us into some
sad sin, and so inbitter our sweet. O then take heed, the rather, when we have
received good we be not drawn into evil. The wise men when they had been with
Christ, and done their homage to him in the house, they returned not to Herod,
but went back another way: O when Christians have been and embraced Christ in
the Sacrament, Immutatio via est, Emendatio, vita.
they must not return to sin, but go another way then perhaps before they went:
Before in a way of formality, pride, impatiency, after must go in a way of
fervency, humility, meekness, etc.

2. The second part of active obedience is to abide and abound in well doing,
M^lites Sacramento erant iurati and obstricti ad praestandum soli imperatori
fidelitatem and obedientiam.
this care is required of every Christian after the Sacrament. In the Sacrament
they have as soldiers, bound themselves in a military oath, to obey Christ as
their captain, and to fight under his colors: O then see you serve the Lord
Christ. The Sacrament carries with it the force of a covenant. The Latin word
may well signify an oath, for indeed, such as have aright taken the Sacrament,
have taken a sacred oath and covenant, and what does this after require? but
careful and constant obedience, as that to which we have bound our selves by
solemn covenant. Christians that come in to the Sacrament, they take both a
positive and negative oath, to renounce the devil and all deeds of darkness,
and to yield dutiful obedience to God all the days of their lives; to cast
down all weapons of war, whereby they have fought against the Majesty on
high, and as sworn soldiers to Christ their captain, for ever to march under
Gospel colors, and not to love their lives unto death in Gospel causes; now
who but a peridious fugitive, will fly away after sworn engagements? O you that
have subscribed your names, and listed yourselves in the Lords Register, and
taken the Sacrament thereupon, O stand to your vows, and be valourous for God,
strenuously striving to exalt Christ, his cause and Kingdom in the world.
C^^^^t. Mag. ce^. 2. c. 6.
History reports, how this has been the ancient custom of pious Christians
under persecuting Emperors, to meet, and by the Sacrament to bind themselves
for ever, to fly what was evil, and follow, what was good; and sure this has
been ever their religious care afterward, to pursue their covenants, and to
fulfill their engagements. Herod's oath to the Damsel, which he made at his
great supper, in the presence of his nobles that sat with him at the table, he
would make good, and shall not we much rather make good our oath, wherein we
have sworn our selves to God, in the presence of Angels, and such as sat with
us at the Table, partaking of the Supper of the Lord, who else will witness
against us? Luther reports of a godly maid, who when the devil would draw her
from her pious course to sinful practice, would beat him off by her baptismall
vow, I cannot: I must: I am a Christian under covenant: however satan solicits,
let us not only fly evil, but be according to covenant, full of good works: As
those sheep after washing, every one bore twins, Cant. 4.2. O see that after a
Sacrament we sit not down in security, and slacken our duty. Luke 12.16, 19.
The rich man's ground yielded largely, then says he, Soul take thine ease, thou
have goods laid up for many years. Good Lord prevent, but we are apt, if an
ordinance brings forth plentifully, to sit down and say, Soul now take thy
ease, thou have now riches of grace, store of joies; Soul thou have now had
sweet communion with God, and filled thy self with refreshing comforts in
Christ, take thine ease: Now thou may neglect prayer a while: whereas prayer
and every good duty should be the rather doubled, according as the ordinance
has been blessed. The rich man's fields bringing forth plentifully, he resolved
to build his barns bigger; O let us, when God in a Sacrament has enlarged his
hand in mercy, enlarge our hearts in duty; let our lives be better, and our
obedience greater; let us up and be doing for God, beyond whatever we did.
Sampson having taken and eaten honey out of the dead carcass of a lion, the
Spirit of the Lord came so upon him, that after that, he went and did most
valiant deeds all the days of his life. When you have taken and eaten that
which is better then honey out of the crucified carcass of the lion of the
tribe of Judah, O that then the Spirit of the Lord might so descend and abide
upon you, that in the strength thereof, you might go and do valiant things for
Christ and his cause. Elisha when he had received the mantle and spirit of his
Master Elijah, he went and wrought wonderful works: Have you in the Sacrament
received the mantle and Spirit of your Master Christ? not only the outward
elements, as the mantle he was wrapped in, but the spiritual substance, the
same Spirit that dwells in Christ, O then you must on and divide Jordans, leap
mountains, look devils in the face; O go and do glorious things for your good
Lord and Master Jesus Christ, who has done far more for you. Quid nos pro
domino (...) bon^ facere con venit, e^^ ille pro mali^ serv^ tan^^ seceri^?
Salvi.


O what a shame for the devil to triumph, and as it were to outbrave Christ
with the fervencie of his followers, and the slacknesse of Christ's servants; as
for mine, I never died for them, I never gave body or blood to them, as Christ
has done for his: As once God said to satan, Have thou considered my servant
Job? etc. So for satan to say to Christ, Have thou considered such and such of
my servants in the world? I feed them with husks at my trough, thou feedest
thine with rich dainties at thy Table, and yet mine are more active, forward,
and more full of obedience to me, then thine are to thee: mine are more fat and
thriving in sin and wickedness, then thine in grace and holiness. O let there
be no cause of this from you, but be abundant in all weldoing, be flourishing
in grace, fervent in spirit, serving the Lord, Romans 12.11. Thus for the parts:
Now for the properties of practick obedience, take two.

1. See it be well grounded. 2. See it be well bounded.
1. Take care your obedience be well grounded, not as corn on the house, that
withers for want of good rooting, Principiam obedientia duplex est principium a
quo scilicet spiritus Dei, and principiu^ quod scili^et spiritus noster
renevatus. Ille cor nostrum vendicat qui suum pro nobis dedit. Amor meus pondus
meum eo feror quocunque feror, Aug.
O it is good when it proceeds from Gods spirit in our spirit: Every act of
obedience coming from Gods spirit working in our spirits, To. 1.9. is very
wellpleasing to Christ. In all obedientiall acts, he requires an obedientiall
heart, and that all our obedience springs from the hear^, Romans 6.17. and then
it takes upon the heart of Christ: Christ was hearty in all that he did for us,
and he expects the same it all that we do for him: O to have a heart possessed
with love to Christ, and from thence to send forth obedience to Christ, this
becomes every Christian communicant.

Regula proportionis paritatem habet cum illa re cuius est regula.
2. See your obedience be well bounded according to the rule of the word, That
it be not short not over, go to the utmost of the rule and no further, Its not
obedience that goes beyond the rule of Scripture; The rule of Gods word, and
the way of man's life, must hold their proportion, no more, but what ever Gods
word requires must be your care to acomplish, Your obedience as it must be
cordial, so it must be catholic; the Lord must be obeyed in all things,
Obedience must be universal, both in regard of the subject and object: O its
well becoming a Christian, to lay this charge upon his whole man, Quicquid
propter De^ fit aqualiter fit.
as Mary the mother of Christ did upon all the servants at the Feast, Joh. 2.5.
Whatsoever the Lord says unto you, do it. Eyes, ears, hands, heart, lips,
legs, body and soul, do you all observe, and what ever Christ says unto you,
do it, this comes well after a Sacrament.

We read of Joseph of Arimathea, when Christ was crucified, he went in and
begged of Pilate the body of Jesus, and then took it down from the cross, and
laid it in a new sepulcher. Have you before the Sacrament gone in to God, and
by the prayer of repentance begged the body of Jesus? and then at the Sacrament
have you by the power of faith taken it down as it were, from the cross, and
laid it in a new heart and spirit? O then see that you after make it appear by
walking in newness of life, and yielding up your selves in newness of
obedience to the Lord, all the days of your lives. The right ordering of this
business of obedience, keeps up the soul in a constant communion with Christ,
as if every day were a Sacrament-day; It holds the heart in a Sacrament frame
against the next sacrament time.

I pass on to passive obedience, for that also appertains to al such as
partake of this Sacrament. Had it not been ^or a suffering Christ, we had
neither had Sacrament nor Savior, let us hence learn to suffer for Christ.

The parts of passive obedience are two.

1. The privative in loss of comforts for Christ.

2. The positive, in enduring dolours for Christ.

And in both it becomes al^ that partake in the Sacrament of Christ, to be
content to suffer for Christ: The losing and leaving of creature accommodations
for Christ, to this we should be willing, if it be the will of God, and his
call that requires it.

I have read of one who being tempted with offers of money to desert his
religion, gave this excellent answer, Let not any think that he will embrace
other men's goods to forsake Christ, who has forsaken his own proper goods to
follow Christ.

Read the Apostle, Phil. 3.8. he speaks of himself (as Calvin observes) as
having been like one in a sea tempest, that had cast out all his precious wares
and goods for Christ's sake, for whom; says he, I have suffered the loss of
all: the like in stormy times must we yield unto for Christ. Christ Phil. 2.7,
8. made himself of no reputation. He emptied himself, so the Greek signifies,
(...).
he stripped himself naked of all, and was obedient to the death, even to the
death of the cross: now as at the Sacrament we have a commemoration of it, so
after the Sacrament a conformation to it, and imitation of it, as cause
requires, would well beseem every servant of Christ Nothing lost by loosing for
Christ. Be content to undergo any positive pain for Christ; Mercatura est
quadam aminere ut maioralucr^ris. Tertul.
O what did Christ suffer to make food for our souls in a Sacrament, what
breakings and bleedings? what immeasurable miseries and unparalleld passions?
whoever has or do commemorate Christ's sufferings at a Sacrament, shall find
them different from all ours, two ways.

1. In respect of their intention or meaning. 2. In respect of their extension
or measure.
The sufferings of Christ we^e intended as propitiatory of the wrath, and
satisfactory to the justice of God, which the sufferings of no finite creature
can be: The sufferings of Christ were extended and drawn out to that degree, as
no creature in suffering can sustain, he bore that cross, as had it lain upon
the back of my man or Angel, it would have crushed him down to Hell, and
swallowed him up for ever; and shall not the meditation of such unsufferable
sufferings for us, make us willing to suffer something for Christ, and with
Christ? It is true, Christ's personal sufferings in his humane body, as
Mediator, are fully finished, Heb. 10.14. but Christ's general sufferings, in
his mystical body the Church militant on earth, are yet further to be filled
up, (...).
Col. 1.24. thus Christ suffers still, and we are to suffer with Christ, and
for Christ: of this cup we must all drink, each member his measure, every
person his portion. I remember an excellent expression of Ambr. o that God
would turn all the adversaries of Christ, and his Church upon me, that they
might bend all their weapons against me, and satisfy their thirst with my
blood, so Christ and his Church might go free; to have such a spirit prepared
for the cross, it well becomes Sacrament-Christians, and Christians who at the
Sacrament have fruitfully minded the sufferings of Christ.

2, For the properties of passive obedience; when ever you suffer, it is meet
to mind three things to make up your sufferings good.

1. A good cause. 2. A good call. 3. A good course.
A good cause to suffer in; a good call to suffer in that cause: and a good
course or carriage of your selves in suffering for that cause whereunto you are
called, 1 Pet. 2.20, 21. miss one, mar all. If the cause be good, yet if the
call be not good; If your call be good, yet if your carriage be not good, it
spoils all: they all met in the sufferings of Christ, so they should in the
sufferings of every Christian: see you suffer for a good cause, Blessed are
they that suffer for righteousness sake, Mat. 5.10. For thy sake we are killed
all the day long, Psa. 44.22. Augustine speaking of the death of Christ, and
the two thieves, concludes, It is not the likeness of the cross, but the
goodness of the cause that makes a Martyr.

See your call be good to suffer, when sinning and suffering lies before you,
so as one you must yield to; if you would avoid sinning, you must embrace
suffering: either you must omit obedience active, or you must submit to
obedience passive; now God gives you a call to suffer, and you are to choose
affliction rather then sin, Job. 36.22. see your carriage be comely under the
cross, behaving your selves in suffering both valiantly and patiently.
Lactantius boasts of the brave spirits of the Martyrs in his time. Our children
and women (not to speak of men) flames of fire cannot fetch tears of water, nor
all their sufferings force a sigh. A religious commander, shot in battle, when
the wound was searched, and the Bullet cut out, some by pitying his pain, he
replied, Though I groan, yet I do not grumble, In all this Job sinned not, nor
charged God foolishly. This is to be as one prepared by the Supper of Christ to
suffer for Christ: and that you suffer with courage Christian-like, take but
two helps.

Praevision, and Provision.
Forethink of suffering, Chrysostom suffering under the Empress Eudoxia, tells
his friend Cyriacus, how he armed himself aforehand: I thought, will she banish
me? The earth is the Lords: Take away my goods? naked came I into the world:
will she stone me? I remembered Stephen: behead me? John Baptist came into my
mind: etc, Thus forethink: And store up graces, promises, experiences,
cordials, etc. against a suffering time. Thus see to your obedience first
active, then passive, and truly he that will not do well, will never die well
for Christ: If you do not serve Christ in life, you will never suffer for
Christ to death, O then devote your selves to both, resign your selves to God
in service and suffering, Romans 12.1. Has the Lord given himself down to us in
the Sacrament? Sacrificium est sacrum in fide factu^.
O then let us give up our selves to the Lord as a sacrifice. Between a
Sacrament and a sacrifice there is this difference: In a Sacrament we receive
from God, in a sacrifice we offer to God. The best thing that we can receive is
the Lord himself in a Sacrament, Psa. 51.17. Non vult Deus sacrificium
trucidati pec^ris sed vult sacrificiu^ contriti pectoris, Aug.
and the best thing that we can offer is our selves to the Lord as a sacrifice,
both by doing and suffering, and no less the Lord expects. It is not the
sacrifice of a slain beast, but the sacrifice of a living Saint the Lord is
delighted with: O be you such well-pleasing sacrifices to God in all holy and
humble obedience; O manifest the strength of a Sacrament in the life of
obedience, and in obedience to God all the days of your life. Our whole life in
this way, Melanc in Psa. 119.
says one, may, and is meet to be, a perpetual Sacrament and each obedient
Christian, a continual Communicant.

But herein who would not be amazed to meditate, the good Lord forgive us; we
are apt to think when a Sacrament-day is over, all Sacrament-duties are over,
as if when the Ordinance were at an end, there were an end of the Ordinance: I
remember a good man coming from a public lecture, and being asked by one,
whether the Sermon were done? answered with a sad sigh, Ah, It is said, but not
done, Lord help us, we are ready to be, when the discourse from the Pulpitis
finished, as if the Sermon were done, and when the bare business at the Table
is dispatched, as if the Sacrament were done, and we done with the Sacrament.
Let me close in few words.

1. Of caution. in this present case. 2. Of counsel. in this present case.
O let me in love admonish you to beware.

1. You do not trust in, and rest on the bare act of receiving the Sacrament,
either with a rest of confidence, or a rest of contentation. It is the
expression of a precious man, A good work trusted in, is as mortal, as a sin
unrepented of, We are ordinary desirous of, and perhaps diligent to prepare for
a Sacrament; our thoughts are active, our hearts hot, and our affections
fervent at the Sacrament, and then we think all is well, the work is well done,
and away we go. In the 1 Samuel 4. we read of the Israelites when the Philistims
came against them, they cried out to bring the Ark of the covenant into the
field, and that should save them, and when they had got the ark of the covenant
into the camp, then they shouted, and in that they trusted but what follows?
the Philistims fight, and the Israelites for all that fly, and fall before
them, ver. 10. and so on: the story is sad, we conceive if this Sacrament of
the covenant be brought into our Congregations, then we shall be safe, and when
we have this present amongst us, and pertaked of by us, then we sit down
satisfied, and rest contented, but the sequel is sad, Thus to rest in the
service prevents much good, and procures much evil.

A twofold good is prevented.

Hereby, neither the Sacrament after it, does us that good, nor we do not that
good after the Sacrament, as otherwise would.

The Israelites trusting in their bare view and looking upon the brazen
serpent, it became a Nehushtan, a thing of naught: so if we trust in our bare
receiving the Sacrament, it will cause the Sacrament to become a Nehushtan, a
thing not doing us any good.

Hence we come to cast by what would become us after the Sacrament: we do not
watch, and work, we do not after act upon a Sacrament, because we rest in the
act of the Sacrament: yea there is much evil hereupon: Moses while he kept his
rod in his hand, he did great things, but when he laid it by, it became a
serpent: if we lay by the Sacrament, no marvel if it proves like a serpent,
having a sting following our neglect: O let as keep up the Sacrament in our
hands and hearts, by a well improvement of it, and we shall do great things by
it; now confidence in the first act, will cause negligence in the future, and
therefore beware of that, trust not to your bare being at the Sacrament, and
then cast consequent care by.

2. As take heed of restings in the Sacrament, so of rentings after the
Sacrament. This also is very prejudicial to the practice of subsequent
obedience, the more firm and close Christian union is, the more apt and able we
are both to do and suffer, the more sweet and easy will both active and passive
obedience prove: O then when by a sacramental bond we have been brought
together, let us not after dissent and fall asunder. All acts of religion ought
to bind but no religious act like this.

There are two things, the thoughts of which they are as weights that sink, and
as darts that strike my very soul through and through.

1. That Christians who live together in the same place, Religio a religando
and significat omnia illa pietatis and unitatis officia, quibus Deo and proximo
obligamur, Lactant. l. 4. cap. 28.
should use diverse Tables, and divide and separate one from another in this
service.

1. That Christians, who so live in the same place, though they use one and the
same Table, yet they divide and separate one from another after this service.
The first is sad and sinful; This the Apostle blames among the Corinthian
Christians, who as they had their separated preachers, Vid^ Part. in Ep. 1 Cor.
11.21. Adeo divisi erant ut invicent communicare sacram coena^ non dignarentur,
singula factiones id agebant ut alia alia^ praeverteret. Paulini verbi gratia
primi vementes suam cunam celebrabant non expectatis Petrinu, Apolloneus, etc.
Vide Pareus in locum, Dominus instituit suam coen^m ut esset communio (...) and
(...) totius Ecclesia. Pareus. (...). Dionys. Caena (...), a communione
vescentia^ Plut. and Isio
fo their separated Suppers, as one party was of Paul, another of Apollo,
another of Cephas, so it seems they did communicate apart in the Supper of the
Lord, those of Paul by themselves, those of Apollo by themselves, and so those
of Peter by themselves, 1 Cor. 11.21. In eating, every one takes before other
his own supper: which may be meant, not only what they did in their love
feasts, but also in this: each company seeking to preven^ other, that they
might partake apart, none staying for those who were more truly Christ's, nor
yet one for another, but striving to be asunder, and this Paul calls their own
Supper, because herein they cros^ed the institution of Christ, who appoints it
to be a communion, wherein the Church gathered should communicate together. But
celebrating it in such a separated way, it was their own Supper, not the Lords
Supper, it being not only a corrupting, but a perverting the Ordinance in the
Apostles opinion. The Lord redress this in our days: that any dissentions
should set Christians at such a distance, that they cannot sit together at the
same Table, to partake of the Supper of the Lord; O sad, that when we eat one
food, we cannot eat it in one fold as becomes Christ's flock.

But then secondly, this is likewise to be lamented, Vnum sig^^ habemus, quare
non in uno ovi^^ su^ mus? Aug. T^. 7 Sermon. ad pleb. Caesariem.
that Christians who live in one place, sit at the same Table, and communicate
together in the Lords Supper, should yet afterward fall asunder, and by
discords rent one from another who is it that bewails not such breaches
between brethren? O the infinite scandal of such dissentions, a good man that
is deeply affected with this, would be content to heal such wounds with the
loss of his life. Quis non v^ta sua redima^ submatu^ istu^ infinitu^ dissidij
scandalum. Buc.
O I beseech you all to preserve the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace,
and seek, you that have joined in one Sacrament, to be of one soul, as the
primitive Christians, who broke bread together, were so bound up together, that
though a multitude, yet of one heart, Act. 2.42. and 4 32. The Sacrament should
be a uniting Ordinance, to knit those in love together who do not live
together. Paulinus speaks excellently to Augustine in an Epistle, It is no
marvel though we both that are absent be yet present together, and being
unacquainted, yet know one another, seeing as we have one head, so we live by
one bread, Non mirum si and absentes adsumus nobis and ignoti nosmet novimus
cum unu^ habeamus caput uno pane vivamus una perfundamur gratia, una inc^damut
^ia, Paulin. Ep. ad du. 33 Luther to the Pastors of Stratsbur. Noluis ha^^
laudem adversa parti concedere, quod pacis and concordiae studiosiores qua^
ipse essent, etc.
we are poured over by one grace, meet together in one Christ, and walk in one
way. O then much rather, you whose tents God has pitched together, you do not
only eat one bread, but you eat it at one board; O study you to stick together,
and to stand fast in brotherly unity. It was a high expression of Luther, I
desire to maintain Christian concord, as I desire Christ should be to me
propitious, and I scorn it, that any should take this praise from me, to be
more solicitous then my self of peace and unity. O such a disposition would
well beseem all Gods Saints, who have been together at the Supper of the Lord,
and learned this lesson which is there so plainly taught: O you that have
sweetly sat and eat together the Sacrament of Christ, do not you break about
intricate or inf^riour things, that may refer to Christ: would not the Jews
have been to blame, who having lovingly eaten together the flesh of the
Paschall lamb, should after fall out about the bones? I leave it to the
thoughts of Christians, thus much by way of caution to dissuade you from some
things that may hinder your obedience so God after the Sacrament.

I come briefly by way of counsel to persuade you to some things which may
^urther, and help forward your obedience which after the Sacrament you owe to
God; to instance in two.

1. Consideration. 2. Congratulation.
1. Consider after thou have been at the Lords Table, how all was there, how
God wrought in thy heart, and how thy heart wrought toward God: when God had
been making the world, he looked back upon all the work, and what he had done
each day, and saw that all was very good, Gen 1. last. so it will well become a
Christian when he has been partaking the Sacrament, to look back upon all that
business: its good to reflect, and take an exact view of every days work, but
the work of a Sacrament-day, to look over that and consider, was not all very
good then? O keep it so. Its said, Genesis 2.1.2. that God having finished the
earth and the heavens, be rested, how? surely though from the work of actual
creating, yet not from the works of effectual preserving what was created,
Joh. 5.17. My father works hitherto: so a Christian man when he has at the
Sacrament been acting about earth and heaven, discarging his duty both about
the earthly and heavenly part of this Ordinance, and finished his work in both,
though he rests a while from actual receiving, yet not from careful
preserving what there he received: and O thus do; what life, warmth, strength,
heart-inlargements, and soul-refreshments you found at the Sacrament, remember
and labor to preserve all after in vigor. When God at the creation had set
the world in a good frame, was it not his desire it should so after continue? O
when at the Sacrament your hearts have been set into a good frame, take care
they so continue: if you reflect and find there was not that good, those
comfortings and quicknings at the Sacrament you desired, you had need be the
more fervent in following duties. Physic at first taking, lies still in the
body, but warm broth after received sets the physic a work. Go aside and take
some heartwarming prayers, and the sacrament may diverse ways after work
kindly thereupon.

2. Congratulation; Thanksgivings to God may both animate the mercy, and
facilitate your duty. Glory sent up, brings grace down, and grace makes all
easy, whether doing or suffering; O what blessings and praisings of God becomes
Christians after this Ordinance for ever? when Christ rode in triumph, Mat. 21.
not only those that went before, but those that followed after, sung, Hosanna
to Christ, blessing him in the name of the Lord, Hosanna in the highest: so
when Christ rides in triumph, upon the free administration of this Ordinance,
not only those duties that go before, but much rather all those actions and
affections that follow after, should sing Hosanna to God and Christ, blessing
and praising the name of the Lord, Hosanna in the highest.

O follow Christ afterward, as David the ark, leaping and dancing, what says
sinful Israel? Hos. 2.5. says she, I will go after my lovers, that have given
me my bread and my water, my wool and my flax, my oil and my drink, so do you
say, I will go after my dear and loving Savior, who has given me not only
bread and wine, but his own flesh to eat, and his blood to drink: yea and
follow after him, not heavily and sadly, but with rejoicings in him, praisings
of him, and cheerful thanksgivings to him.

Dear Christians would you be thankful to Christ, walk humbly, live holily,
for truly the life of thankfulness lies in the lives of the thankful; have
you been at the Sacrament, and there remembered how Christ's death was a
propitiatory sacrifice for you? then do not after forget how your lives ought
to be a gratulatory sacrifice to God. Be thankful to God, vocally, vitally,
and votally: render to the Lord, what possible praise you can, both with lips
and lives, and let your hearts wish it were more then both can express. As
your desire was before the Sacrament to enjoy Jesus Christ, so let a holy fear
be after, least by any neglect you loose Christ whom you did there enjoy: as
your care should be at the Sacrament, not to leave Christ behind you, as
Joseph and Mary did, Luke 2. so let your care be after, you do not let Christ
behind you, forgetting your duties toward him, and observance of him: not
only see that you set your eye on Christ at the Sacrament, but that you keep
constant your eye upon him afterward; as there was then a taking of him, so
after a walking with him; as Elisha went along eying Elijah, looking on him,
and talking with him, when a chariot of fire, and horses of fire, came and
parted them as^nder, and took up Elijah to heaven, Elisha looks up after him,
and cries, M^ father, my father, the chariots and horsemen of Israel. If black
clouds, or fiery assaults shall seem to separate Christ from thee, yet walk
with him as far as thou can, and then look after him when thou can not
walk after him, and cry, My father, my father, the Savior and Redeemer of
Israel: O thus see your carriage be toward Christ, after you have conversed
with him in the Sacrament: O be not remiss in these subsequent duties.

I read, Guliel. Linwood. lib. 3. de Custodia Eucharistiae, etc.
how it was an ancient custom in England, when popery prevailed, what an
unwarrantable care there was after the celebration of the holy Sacrament, for
to preserve the remaining elements?

The bread and wine left, they use to hang up in a clean canopy, and to look to
with all diligence: O that piety might so prevail all over England; that there
might be among all that profess themselves Christians and come to the
Sacrament, this comely and commendable care after of remaining duties, to hold
them forth in all holiness of life, with pure consciences and clean
conversations; for which purpose my soul^ desire and prayer is, that God from
heaven would so bless you, that you may live to his praise and glory however,
for ever,

Amen. Amen.
AN APPENDIX, OR A Brief addition annexed to the foregoing TREATISE, Containing
some few things yet further requisite to be known, as relating to the Supper of
the Lord.
IN relation to the Lords Supper, there are requesites of two sorts to be
considered.

1. The communicants. 2. The concomitants.
Or else, 1. The subjects. 2. The adjuncts.


For the subjects of this Sacrament, or who they are that are meet communicants
therein, make but a reflect, and you shall find a full report.

For the adjuncts at this Sacrament, or what they are that are meet
concomitants thereof, look on a little, and I shall give you a full account: or
if you please, the things of two sorts considerable, that concern the Sacrament
of the Supper, are; 1. Some more substantial. 2. Some more circumstantiall.


Those things that are more substantial, I have largely discoursed in the
foregoing tract.

Those things that are more circumstantiall, I shall briefly dispatch in this
short postscript.

The circumstances about the Lords Supper to be received that I shall observe,
are two.

1. The place where. 2. The time when.
For the place, it is twofold 1. The place in which. 2. The place at which.


If you look at the Lords Supper and enquire.

1. What is the place ^n which it ought to be received: And

2. What is the place at which it is meet to be received.

It is answered by proposal of a double place.

1. The Temple place. 2. The Table place.
The place of the Temple, is the place in which the communion ought to be
reeeived.

The place at the Table, is the place at which this Communion is meet to be
received.

1. For the place in which it ought to be administered and received, is the
place of the Temple, or a Temple place: let none take offense at the phrase.

I pass by the ancient acceptance of the word, Temple, as we do the word
Priest. It Is reported, that when the Priests of the Jews petitioned Titus the
Emperor for their lives, Decet Sacerdotes cum templis interire.
they had no answer but this, It is meet that the Priests and the Temple should
perish together: and truly, in an ordinary sense, as they lay before Christ
among the Jews, so let the names of Temple and Priest perish and be forgotten
together.

There is another interpretation of the word Temple, that I take too, even as
it referres to place, and I conceive the sense is significative.

By a Temple place then, I mean an ample place, Templum a ^uor and amplum.
or a place that is liable to open view, not a close corner shut up from sight:
To speak plain, the place appointed for Gods public worship, where Gods people
openly congregate and communicate, in opposition to private corners. In such
places the Lords Supper ought to be received, where the word is publicly
preached.

The Scriptures of the new Testament clearly put a difference between private
houses and public places, forbidding that to be done in public, which is
required in private, 1 Cor. 11.22. Have ye not houses to eat and drink in, but
d^spise ye the Church of God? And on the contrary, commanding that in private
which is forbidden in public, 1 Cor 14.35. Let women ask their husbands at
home, for it is not permitted to them to speak in the Churches.

And for the matter in hand, that text before cited, 1 Cor. 11.22. Have you not
houses to eat and drink in, Theodorit. Theoph. l. Oecame.
^ut despise ye the Church of God: Chrysostom and some other good Interpreters
after him, from thence say, that therein the Apostle reproves the Corinthian
Christians, because they did celebrate the Lords Supper privately in separated
parties, when they should have appeared publicly together: They had indeed
their own private houses allowed for their ordinary eating and drinking in,
apart one from another, but to transact this service asunder in their several
societies and sects, it was to contemn the public, where it ought openly to be
performed together: It was to despise the Church and people of God, with whom
they ought herein professedly to partake; yea and this was in the Apostles
account, to corrupt and pervert the Ordinance of Christ, and to make it to be
but their own supper, not the Lords Supper, as verse. 21. The Lords Supper,
Simul ^i^imus quia simul vivi^^^. Aug.
that was to be received in the open Congregation, when the whole Church should
publicly convene and communicate together, but they receiving privately and
separate from others, St Paul calls it, every man's own supper, and not the
Supper of the Lord, verse. 21. Augustine, Epist. 118. ad Ianuar, cap. 5.


Augustine also and Pareus long since, carries these reprehensions of the
Apostle, as occasioned upon the miscarriages of the Corinthians, in and about
the celebrating of the Supper of the Lord, as now, Suppose they did it not in
their own private houses properly, ye^ interpretatively; for though they might
come and do it in the place for the public, yet they did it not publicly
together in the place, but one before another, and so one without another in
their private parties, all one, as if in private places, and this was their
blame.

But I come to lay down some grounds, from whence to evince and evidence this,
that the Lords Supper is by Gods servants to be celebrated together in the
public place of Gods worship. As

1. The preaching of the Word, and administrations of the Sacraments, are notes
whereby the visible Church is to be discerned, therefore they are acts which
ought to be openly and visibly performed.

The Church of Christ is that woman clothed with the sun, Revel. 1^.1. Is as a
City or Beacon upon an hill, to be seen, but how? not by its invisible graces,
but by its visible ordinances.

It Is true, the Church at some time may be no more actually seen then the sun
behind a cloud, or a village in a valley, Non semper visa etsi semper
visibilis.
but yet when ever it is seen, it is in and by the open use of these means. And
sure this lies upon all of us to maintain, as the reality, so the visibility of
the Church. We are all to do all that in us lies, to prevent the clo^ding and
hiding of the Church of Christ; we are to keep up to our utmost, the splendour
and clarity of the Church, that in its brightest colors it may be as visible
as possible, and this is done two ways.

1. By the exemplary purity of private Christians.

2. By the apparent purity of public ordinances.

The word purely there preached, and the Sacraments there so administered, do
exceedingly set forth the Church to its open view.

Augustine, Calvin, Zanchy, Aug. de civ. lib. 11. cap. 1. Calv. Instit. lib, 5.
cap. 1. Zanch. de Eccl. Trelcat, lib. 2. cap. 14. de Eccles,
and almost all our late writers, do unanimously conclude, that these are the
manifest characters of the militant Church of Christ, whereby it is made
visible, and therefore these are to come forth, and not to be cloistered up in
obscure corners.

It is a sad time, when the Prophets of the Lord must be fed with bread and
water in a cave, 1 King. 18. It is a time of great affliction, when the Church
is forced to creep into some close place; as Athanasius (that great ^ight of
the world) constrained by the Arians to hide himself for six years in a deep
pit, Eusebius. lib. 20 cap. 18. Trip. Hist. lib. 5. cap. 3.
as Eusebius reports; no coming forth to preach the truths of Christ, or to set
to the seals of Christ in open public assemblies.

Thus in Tertullians time, as he reports, such was the cruelty of tyrants, that
the poor Christians were driven to meet in holes and woods, and to communicate
in caves; Veritas non querit angulo. Veritas nihil cr^bescit nisi abscondi.
yet this we may ^ay, that it is with the true Church, as it is with the truth
it self, it may be thrust into a corner, but of it self it seeks no corners; It
is ashamed to be hid, it is ever desirous to come forth in a public profession
and participation of ordinances, not only to hold fast, but to hold forth the
truth, and openly to seal to it.

2. Consider it is that which does abate and abase the honor of the ordinance,
to carry it into private, when public administrations are allowed and
professedly practiced by the people of God. Things, the more excellent they
are, the more apparent they ought to be: what ordinance more excellent then
this?

3. It is the way to deface and defile the ordinance, to bring it into secret
places. In a dark cellar, there may soon be water mixed with this wine.
Ordinances are ordinarily never more perverted, and by seducers sinfully
corrupted, then when they are most obscured, and secretly transacted. As
cunning thieves, if they can draw a traveling man from out of the broad beaten
roads of ordinary passing, into lone houses, narrow lanes, darkwoods, and the
like, then they misuse him, rob, strip and destroy him: so when subtle
seducers can once draw the public worship of God, or any part thereof, out of
the open places of ordinary recourse, into close corners and lone houses, then
it suffers sore: and indeed this is observable, that seducing spirits seek to
win all into secret; Matthew. 24.26. Our Savior foretells of false prophets,
how they would cry up a Christ in private: Behold he is in the secret chambers,
but believe them not. Deceitful tradesmen that would put off bad wares, love
to lay them forth in dark and close shops. You have some, whose property and
practice is just like that of the harlot, Ita miseris cordibus occulta
haereticorum verba eo magis sapiuut, quo cum reliquis communiter non habentur.
Gregor. mor. lib. 23. cap. 17
Prove. 9.14, 15, 16, 17. Passengers that are going on their ways, she calls in,
saying, Stolen waters are sweet, and bread eaten in secret is pleasant; but
read the peril thereof in the close of that chapter: O then if you would not
your selves be deceived, nor suffer Gods service to be ^efiled, keep word and
Sacraments in their proper places of public dispensation. Ponder, Prove. 8.2,
3. and Prove. 9.2, 3, 4, 5. Cant. 1.7. Cant. 3.2.

4. It is the honor of the Church, and terror of the adversaries, to manage
and maintain each ordinance in public; when any of these be carried unto
corners, hurried and hidden in holes, then the enemies of the Church triumph;
when they are brought forth and ma^e useful as public instruments, then the
Church triumphs, and the enemies are struck with terror: The Church of Christ
is then terrible, when she is as an Army with banners, Cant. 6.4, 10. When the
soldiers lie still in their quarters, and the banners are set up in close
corners, the Army is not then so terrible, but when the soldiers march out,
and meet in open fields, and there display their banners together, then is the
terror. The application is easy.

5. Consider, Civil government, and acts of public judicature, were wont to be
in the gates, open and public places; and still we know there are many things
of that nature that must be done in open court or not valid. Judges and
Justices fit not in private houses to discuss and decide law cases, and the
like, but upon the open benches, at Sessions and Assizes; and shall we draw
into private the public administrations of the Gospel? No.

6. As for this ordinance of the Lords Supper, Aquinas 30 pars Art. 3. Quaest.
83.
it is a representation of the Lord Christ's suffering: now Christ did not
suffer in a corner, nor in a private house, but openly without the gate of the
city, where might come a full concourse, Heb. 13.12, 13. Therefore the
resemblance and remembrance of the same is to be open and public, and not
carried in a private way.

7. We know, that in the time of the old Testament God would have his people
publicly to serve him in the Tabernacle; their Sacrifices were not to be
offered and eaten in every p ace, but only in the place the Lord had appointed
to put his name there. Read, Levit. 17.3, 4, 5, 6. Deuteronomy. 12.4, 5, 13, 14, 17,
18. Obed Edom did well to take the Ark of God into his house, but it was when
it could not be settled in its proper place, 2 Samuel 6.12. O mark, when did King
David dance? but when the Ark was brought from Obed Edoms house, and set in his
place, even in the midst of the Tabernacle, 2 Samuel 6.17, 18. The place for the
public service of God, which afterward was done in the Temple. The Sacraments
then were not to be administered in private houses. The party to be circumcised
was to be brought forth before the Lord. The Sacraments and the who^e service
of God under the Gospel is more gloriou^, and the glory thereof more worthy to
appear in public. If it be objected.

Object. Israelites did eat the paschall Lamb in their houses, Exodus 12.

Answ. Israelites were then in Egypt, and had no liberty to make any public
meetings for that end.

2. God commanded the paschall Lamb should be eaten in all the houses of the
Israelites at one and the same time, and that in effect was as much as if it
had been public in the same place.

3. Afterward it is clear the course was at the Passover for the people to
come together, and so to celebrate the same publicly, 2 Chronicles. 29.

Object.

Answ.

1. Some essential and permanent. 2. Some occasional and transient.
The essential acts of Christ that remain to be observed may be comprised
under that express command of Christ, Do this, etc. beginning first at these
words, Christ took bread, and when he had blessed it, he brake, etc. All which
circumstances delivered by precept the Church succeeding is tied to observe.

The occasional acts I call those which accidentally fell out by occasion of
the Passover, whereupon Christ when he did institute his Supper, took only his
own family, and betook himself to a private house, or suppose occasioned by
reason of the hatred and malice of his adversaries who were many and mighty, he
goes with his disciples up into a private chamber, and there ordains this
Supper to prevent violence and disturbance.

2. Though it was a private room, yet it is said to be a large and spacious
room, which may carry somewhat in it for our purpose, Luke 22.12. The good man
of the house shall show you (such Christ to his disciples that he sent into the
city to prepare the Passover) a l^^ go upper room furnished, there make ready.
Why a large and spacious room? no need in respect of the present number there
to meet and communicate; for we know they were few, but it might be to signify
that the Lord would not have this communion confined and narrowed up for future.

The disciples were the type and representative of a greater number of persons
then themselves, of the whole people of God and Church of Christ now to be
begotten to God in Christ, and so the chamber might well be a resemblance and
model of a greater place then it self, even of the largest meeting places,
where Congregations multiplying, and the Churches of Christ increasing, should
gather to celebrate this Supper together.

And if other particulars in the place did shadow out something as is agreed,
why not this?

It is said in that it was a borrowed room, it set forth, that Christ would not
have the Sacrament to be carried in a pompous way, it did point out Christ's
poor condition and that his Kingdom was not of this world.

In that it was an upper room, it set forth the divinenesse of the Sacrament,
and the duty of lifting up the hearts of the communicants.

In that it was a prepared room clean and ready trimmed, it was to teach the
purity of the Sacrament, and what preparedness is meet for Communicants.

And in that it was a spacious room, why should not the amplitude of the
chamber hold forth something also, and though it might direct to somewhat else
yet why not to the case in hand.

3. If the practice of the Apostles, Act. 2.46.

Answ. Senechdoche, is sometimes taken for the whole service of the Lord
Supper, but the best expositors I have met with do not so interpret that place
in the Acts.

1. Some affirm that breaking bread from house to house, to be meant of the
liberality of the rich to the poor, when the Christians had spent the day in
public duties of piety, then they closed it with duties of pity, and works of
charity, the richer sort out of their bounty broke bread from house to house,
where the poor wanted it; according to that Isa. 58.6. Is it not to break thy
bread to the hungry, and to bring the poor?

2. Some explain it of their private familiarit^ and frugality at their common
Tables, in their ordinary meals, no sumptuous banquets, but sober and temperate
in their diet, sincere and upright in their love; the end of the verse ^elps
out the fence, They eat their meat with gladness and singleness of heart: as
they use to meet together in the Temple for to perform public worship, so they
met and broke bread together at home to declare their mutual friendship. To
conclude then, as for the Lords Supper you have seen the place for the
participation of it.

Administration of Sacraments is a part of the public Ministry, and therefore
as it ought not to be done by a private person so nor in a private place.

It has been no small evil of our age, to ^^eight public Ordinances. It is
recorded of the Albigenses, that they exceedingly despised the public
Sacraments, polluted the Temples defaced the Bibles with their urine, and
excrements, and other filthy actions, labored to make odious the public
places for Gods service; but Gods sore Judgments pursued them, though they for
a while prospered and prevailed, insomuch that they spread into a thousand
cities, yea almost over all Europe: yet after they diminished apace, a hundred
thousand of them were slain, partly by war from men, partly by fire from
heaven, at one time.

2. The place at which the Lords Supper i^ meet to be received, is the
Tableplace, or at the place of the Table: to make good this, take these
following demonstrations.

1. For Pastor and people to partake together at the table, is most agreeable
to the first institution.

The room that Christ directed to eat the Passover in with his Disciples, it
was to be a chamber ready furnished, Luke 22, 12. and it was so; Now among
other furniture, it appears there was in the chamber a Table, at which Christ
sat down with his Disciples, and where it they did eat, Luke 22.21. Behold the
hand of him that betraieth me is with me on the Table.

Joh. 13.28. When Christ had given Judas a sop, he commanded him to do what he
did quickly; now says the text, No man at the Table knew for what intent
Christ spoke this to him. Grant that this was at the eating of the Passover,
that Christ with his Disciples were thus together at a Table, yet then its
clear, Christ continued his place both in the chamber, and at the Table, till
the whole service was done: At the Passover and at his Supper (as for ought we
read) he continued his posture of sitting; so its likely, in both he continued
his place at the Table, for one did so immediately follow the other, that there
does not appear to be any time for removes. It was meet that at that time when
the Sacrament of the Passover was to expire and die, the Sacrament of the
Supper that was to come in the room, should instantly take life and breath; and
it is evident by two Evangelists, that there was not the least time between,
but as they were eating the Passover, Christ did instantly institute and
administer to his Disciples his last Supper, Mat. 26. Di^d. in loc.
Mar. 14.22. And (...) they were eating, Jesus took bread, etc. While he and
they were remaining at the Table together, he dispatcheth both: so that here is
no rising in the administration, neither to go from person to person, or to
speak particularly to each, but sits and says, once for all to all: Take ye,
eat ye, drink ye, etc. all, etc.

Thus the first transaction of this Supper service was at a Table, Christ and
his Disciples being thereat together: And upon this eating and drinking at the
table it was, that by way of similitude Christ tells his Disciples, Lu. 22.30.
That hereafter they should eat and drink with him at his Table in his eternal
kingdom, only alluding to that action, they had now done together at the Table.

2. For Communicants to partake at the Table, is most agreeable to the ancient
custom of the primitive times.

Nonne Christus pasci^? mensa ips^us est illam medi^ constituta^ Quid ca^sae
est O a^dientes j^^ mensam vide^ti^ and ad ep^las non accedatis? Aug. de verb.
Dom. secun. ^oh. Sermon. 42,
Augustine, who lived about the year 400. or 420. thus rebukes some of his
hearers. Does not Christ profer you food at his Table? and is not his Table set
in the midst of you? O why do you only look at it, and do not rather live at
it, come to it, and eat of the banquet there.

And again thus, The Sacrament of Christ's body is prepared in the Church, and
received at the Lords table, of some to life, and of some to condemnation.

Chrysostom, who lived about the year 398. plainly describes the order of the
Communion, as in his time, thus,

Chrysostom. in 1 C^. 10. Ho. ^7.
These reverend mysteries, being once laid forth on the Table for all the
communicants to receive, the rich has no more privilege there then the poor,
but all alike come, and there take part of that spiritual meat? The Minister
stands still, and waits for all, Considera quaeso mensa regalis est apposita
Angeli mensae ministrantes ipse rex adest and tu procul ^scitan^ adstas
approp^nqua and demensa participa.
even for the poorest of all.

Again thus. See I pray how the Table is prepared, the Angels as attendants
about the Table; yea behold the Lord and Master of the F^ast himself (...) at
the Table, and stand thou gaping at a distance from i^, draw near to it and
partake at it. Doctor Fulk affirms out of Gregory Naziazzen, who lived about
the year 380, who says, that in his time the Communion Table was so set, that
men might come to it, and place themselves round about it, and so partake at it
what was prepared on it.

Eusebius reports of Dionysius of Alexandria, who lived about the year 157.
Eusebius. l. 7. c, 8
that he has these words in an Epistle unto Xistus B. of Rome, speaking of one
that was not satisfied in his Baptism, says he, I having known him, that for
a long time he had often been present at the Lo^ds Table, and there lifted up his
voice, and sounded Amen with ths rest, after he had heard the public
thanksgiving, and there put forth his hands and received that holy food as it
was laid forth for him with the rest, I durst not again baptize him; I bad him
be of good cheer, and still bodily approach to the Table of the Lord, and
partake of the communion of Saints.

Clemens Alexandrinus, who was the Master of Origin, who lived about the year
200. after Christ, says, That in that Church where he was a Presbyter, the
manner was for the people to stand at the Table, Videl, of Alexandria. Stromat
^i. 2. Eius partem s^^^re.
and there ev^ry one himself to ^^ke his part, being prepared, and divided; and
this course was then common, as other Authors witness, But

3. The receiving at the Table, is also most agreeable to the present practice
of the best reformed Churches; as Scotland, New England, and in all the purest
Congregations of our present reforming-times this way is used. The Minister
goes not up and down with the bread and wine in his hand, to find out
communicants scattered about in their several seats, but Minister and people
together at the Table, he first receiving, then those next him, and so the
Elements handled from one to another, the Minister remaining in his place, the
Elders by and about the Table, taking care that every one receive his part in
his place. Thus in the Dutch and French Churches at this day; And what respect
we ought to have to the pious patterns of reformed Churches, let us remember
the first article of our Covenant.

4. This most agreeable to the late Directory, established by Authority. It
requires the communicants, to come and partake at, or about the Table, page 51.
They may partake about it, yet at a distance from it; but they partake best at
it, when close about it, and when they partake both about it and at it, then
both phrases are observed. In the thanksgiving directed this is to be
acknowledged as a mercy, that by Christ we have liberty to eat and drink at his
Table, page 53.

The Minister being at the Table, is there not only to communicate himself, but
there to break the bread, and give it to the Communicants; Take ye, eat ye,
page 54.

No direction to go up and down to speak, and give to each individual and
particular person, remote from the Table.

5. This participating of people at the Table, is most agreeable to grounds of
reason and religion, as

1. This whole Eucharisticall service, Mensa haec ipsa anima nostrae vis est,
nervi mentis fiducia vinculum, fundamentum, spes, salus, lux, vita nostra,
Chry, Ho. 24. 1 Cor. 10
the Scripture figuratively calls, the Table of the Lord, 1 Cor. 10.21.
Therefore the whole service is most meet to be transacted at the Table of the
Lord.

2. The gesture that is thought to be most fitting is a Table Gesture; Now if
at the Lords Supper it is most fit to use a Table Gesture, then it is most meet
the gesture should be used at the Table.

3. This is a Symbolicall feast or banquet, now how do men eat and drink at a
feast? not scattered about the house, some in one corner, some in another: but
they come close together, at and about a Table.

4. This sociall sitting at the Table of the Lord, does best and most aptly
represent our mutual fellowship and coheirship with Christ, and one with
another; hereby is more lively laid fo^th, the close union and communion that
is betwixt Christians, whereof the Lords Supper is to be a pledge and ^ymbole.

5. This makes way for the more mutual comfort of all that communicate one in
another, while they are thus it the Table together.

As our sight of the Elements at this Supper is meet, so our sight of the
communicants may be good and of good use. Indeed if bad be by, it may occasion
grief, but if we see such with us as we account gracious and good, O then to
sit near them, and behold their presence, their countenance, their carriage is
very quickening and comforting, and this is much better done by sitting together
at a Table, then scattered about in several seats.

O then from all this take encouragement to come and partake at the Table of
the Lord, O let our zeal for God, and love to Christ move us with delight to
meet the Lord at his Table; O how much the wrath and rage of malicious
adversaries have moved them against Gods people, for coming to the Lords Table,
yea against the very Table, because of Gods people coming thereunto.

Augustine reports, Aug. ad Bo^. Ep. 5.
that in a Church in Africa, the Sacrament of the Supper being administering,
some of the Donatists came in, and drove the people from the Table, wounded the
minister, and broke the boards of the Table in pieces. The like, or worse we
read of Julian, Cent. Magd. cent. 4. bap. 3. Theod. lib. 3. cap, 11, and 12.
uncle to Julian the Apostate; he coming into a Church at Antiochia, pissed
against the Lords Table in contempt, smote Euzoias the Minister, who sought to
hinder him: but memorable was Gods justice upon him, for miserable was his end,
his bowels rotting, his excrements came, not forth by the accustomed passages
of nature, but through his mouth, and so he died.

The Papists doubting upon their sacrificing Altars, how have they vomited up
their scoffs and scorns at our Communion Tables.

Let but this the more heighten our desires, the more inflame our affections to
be cheerful partakers at the table of the Lord; yet so as not to be satisfied
to be our selves alone at the Table of the Lord, unless we may have there also
the Lord of the Table.

While the King sits at the Table, the spikenard smells, Cant. 1.12.

Thus much of the first circumstance, that concern the Lords Supper to be
received, which is the place: I proceed to the second circumstance, which is
the time.

The time that refers to the receiving of the Lords Supper, whereof we are to
take notice, is twofold.

1. The time for the day, ho woft it is to be received.

2. The time of the day wherein it is to be received.

Calv. Instit. lib. 4. cap. 7.
For the first part of the time, if it be enquired, how often the Lords S^pper is
to be received? I answer. Comparatively, often is easy to imagine, positively,
how often is hard to determine. We may say the Sacrament of the Lords Supper is
often to be received.

1. In compare of the Sacrament of Baptism, which we receive once in an age,
never to be repeated more. Baptism is the breeding the Lords Supper, the
feeding Sacrament: when we are once bred, we must be often fed.

2. In compare of the Passover of old, which was received once a year, and no
more, Ex. 13.10. the Lords Supper which as it succeeds, so it exceeds in
eminency and frequency.

3. In compare of the culpable customs of some of old, who only desired the
Lords Supper, when they supposed the approaches of death, Chr. ad Ephesians, Hom, 3.
or only upon some great solemn feast-daie: This course Chrysostom closely and
cuttingly reproves some Christians for in his time: and indeed the Lords Supper
is more often to be received then so by the Disciples of Christ.

But to come up more directly to the thing it self, all comparings laid aside,
and absolutely conclude: That in the Churches of Christ the Lords Supper is often
to be celebrated and received, whereupon consider, 1. The grounds and reasons
of it, yet 2. The bounds and limits to it.


The reasons whereby your often receiving is grounded, are 1. External, 2.
Internal.


The reasons external that lie without us, why we ought often times to receive
the Supper of the Lord.

1. The precept of Christ: This do as often as you eat this bread and drink of
this cup. For as often as you shall eat this bread and drink of this cup, ye show
the Lords death till he come, 1 Cor. 11.25, 26. (...) implies a (...): as often
as ye do it, therefore do it often.

2. The practice of the Apostles and primitive Christians, who did as may seem
receive the Lords Supper once a week, every first day: The Lords day, Act.
20.7. In Ecclesia Millaine. Vt ipse Ambrosius refer^ de ordine Eucharistia,
Omni hebdo^^d^ efferendum est: etia^ si non quotidie, etc. Am. 1 Timothy cap. 1.
And upon the first day of the week, when the Disciples came together to break
bread, etc. That is, to partake of the Lords Supper, as Calvin upon the text
clears it.

And as this Ordinance is most meet for weak Christians to frequent, so in the
young and weak beginnings of the Church it was an Ordinance very frequent:
hence it is meet yet among us to be often.

2. The reasons internal that lie within us, why we ought often times to
celebrate and receive this Supper of the Lord.

1. The prevalencses of our lusts.

2. The imbecillities of our graces.

How often may we find the one too strong, and the other alas too weak? our
dross is heavy, and our gold is light: Amel^k prevails, and Israel in us is
beaten down,

Truth is, our own inward maladies and infirmities, require such means and
medicines to be often received and applied.

We give a sick servant, Sape d^^^^ agr^t^ serv^ quod non s^mel dam^^ filio
sano.
that often which we give not to a well son once; our sick and sad estate, our
drooping and dying condition often needs this quickening cordial, yet consider,

2. The limits whereby our often receiving is bounded.

Those are either 1. More general. Or 2. More particular.


Generally thus, It is sure we are ofttimes to partake at the Table of the
Lord, and the Lords Supper ought often to be administered.

1. Yet not so often as sometimes it has been.

2. Yet not so often as otherwise it might be.

De mensa dominica quae alicubi certis dierum inte r^allis praeparatur sumitur
quibusdam ad exitium, Au, in Joan, Tra. 26
1. The Lords Supper in some times formerly, have been so frequent, that it has
been done every day.

Anciently, in the Fathers we find, that it was a custom in some Churches,
for the people publicly to meet every day, and to have the word preached, and
this Sacrament administered to them. Vide Aug. Tom, 2, Ep 118 and lib, Eccle,
argmatum,
Chrysostom did oftentimes preach daily to the people; hence in his homilies
you may frequently meet with his (...), yesterday, this and this I taught you.

And it is evident by Augustine and Jerome, that in their times, in some
Congregations, the same people received the holy communion every day, so in
Cyprians time. We say, let the Lords Supper be often, yet not so often as in some
times it has been; nor 2. so often as were it not for some respects it might be.

The people of God, Quoad jus, may have allwaies a right to receive, and yet
Quoad factum, not at all times to exercise the act of receiving, but intervals
and intermissions must be. And a^ some times, there may be some things that may
occasion longer interruptions in these Supper-administrations, then at other
times. But I shall look upon things as they pass in the ordinary line of time.

The particulars then that do restrain and limit our actual partaking at the
Table of the Lord, that it is not so frequent as otherways it might, now
follow.

1. Our own personal indisposednesse to this holy communion: Our fields are
not always in case to receive seed, they must have their constant course of
preparing; and sometimes the husbandman sees it meet to let his fields lie
fallow for a while, that afterward, when they are sown, they may bring forth
the fuller crops, and so truly our hearts are not always in case for a
Sacrament, they must have time for preparing, and it may be that great
husbandman lets his servants a while lie as it were fallow from this ordinance,
that after, when they do partake, they may find the greater comfort.

2. The unpreparednesse of other persons we are to approach to this Table with;
the Sacrament is to be a communion of the Church together, therefore it
requires for those we are to communicate with, some time for their preparation;
suppose this or that particular Christian, should be kept in such a holy frame,
as to be ever fit for this precious ordinance, yet it may be otherwise with
others, who yet are fellow members, and so ordinarily it is, and thereupon a
stand.

Soldiers in an Army, when they are to manage a fight; though some particulars
are prepared to the battle, yet that is not enough, there must be a competent
number at least in readiness, it being a work that must be carried on
together, so here. 2 Chronicles. 30. You ^eade, how ready bent was good Hezekiah to
the business of the Passover, yea and some of his Princes, verse. 1, 2. yet
because there were of the Priests and peop e that were not prepared as they
ought they could not keep it when they thought, as verse. 3. 1 Cor. 11.33. as
the Apostle requires Christians, When they come together to eat the Lords
Supper, to tarry one for another, so truly before they come to celebrate this
Supper, it is requisite to tarry one for another, and this asks time.

3. Time is needful, not only for all to prepare for the receiving of the
Lords Supper, but for all to improve the Lords Supper after it is received,
time after to digest it, and draw out the strength of it. There are subsequent
duties when the Sacrament is received, that are not instantly dispatched: There
is a secret virtue in the Sacrament that is not presently perceived, There is
Worth, Warmth, and Strength, that is not suddenly discovered, and that which is
found is fit to be laid forth, to the glory of God, and praise of Jesus Christ.

Elias, when God has fed him, he must walk in the strength of that food, 1
King. 19.8. Prove. 9.5, 6. Come, says wisdom, eat of my bread, and drink of the
wine I have mingled; and what then? Why, Forsake the foolish and live, and go
in the way of understanding, hereupon this cannot be so frequent.

4. If frequency in this ordinance be extraordinary, we are apt to dash upon a
double rock. As

1. To much to advance the external work of it. And

2. Too much to abase the internal worth of it.

1. When the ordinance is very frequent, we are apt to adore the bare work
done, and how have some erred in this very thing? coming often to this holy
communion, because they thought their often receiving would satisfy for their
often sinning; this good work often performed, should make amends for evil works
often reiterated. Hieron. 1 Cor, 10.
Jerome has a good caveat upon this, Let no man presume, that God, for
receiving the spiritual meat, or drinking the spiritual cup (ex opere
operato) will pardon him if he offend: It seems some were apt to think so:
Origin. in Matthew. tract. 25.
And Or^gen before him says thus, The often using of the communion, is not
such righteousness of it self, but the setting forth of righteousness, it is
the spiritual part, which is righteousness it self, etc.

And again the same Author says, That the thing santified by the word and
prayer, Origin. in Man. cap. 15.
of his own nature sanctifies not any, how often soever he uses it; for then
might he be sanctified, who eats unworthily at the Table of the Lord. O how
prone have people been to think, if this work were but often done, it cured all
that was ill done, and so rested.

2. We are subject, when the Sacrament is often celebrated, to abate in our
accounts of it, and affections to it; upon long delays, our desires to it have
increased, whenas by frequent receipts, our esteems of it have diminished. The
sun in the firmament is a glorious creature, yet because we see it commonly, we
admire it not. Manna at first to the Israelites was a rare thing, but when it
was common every day, they soon loathed it: This ordinance is very excellent,
let us so use it as we may still prize it, and though we cannot always have it
present in fact, yet let us always make it present by faith.

2. For the time of the day wherein the Lords Supper is to be received.

The exact time of the day wherein this ordinance ought to be administered and
received, I will not undertake to determine: So far as I shall discuss of
time in this respect, shall be to consider,

1. The time of the day wherein it was first instituted.

2. The time of the day wherein it was after exercised.

3. The time of the day wherein it is now accustomed.

The time of the day wherein the Lords Supper was first of all instituted,
Lombard. lib. 4. did. 8. Aug. ep. 118. cap. 6.
was the evening, that is the later part of the day, as Matthew. 26.20. Mark.
14.17. Now when the evening was come, etc.

If any enquire, why Christ instituted this his last Supper in the evening of
the day. I answer,

1. Because it could not be done sooner.

2. Because it could not be delaid longer.

Not sooner, because the Passover must be abolished, before this Supper be
established, or else there should be two Sacraments of the same use at the same
time, now it must be the evening before a period could be put to the Passover.

1. In that the Passover was not to be abrogated but at the time when it was
to be celebrated, and that was not until the evening, Exodus 12.6. The whole
assembly of the congregation of Israel shall kill it in the evening, and eat
unleaven bread at the even, verse. 18.

2. In that the Passover was not to be abolished till Christ the true Paschal
Lamb was near to be sacrificed. When the time came that that was to be
fulfilled in the substance which was represented in the shadow, then, and not
before, was the shadow to vanish: and this evening that hour was at hand, for
tha^ night was Christ betrayed into the hands of his enemies, and so begun his
sad sufferings.

Thus you see whereupon Christ could not institute his Supper sooner then this
evening when he did it.

2. Consider he could not delay it any longer then that evening.

1. Because this evening the Passover being abrogated, the Supper must then
(as its successor) be immediately instituted, that there might be no intervall
or empty space when the Church and people of God were without such a Sacrament.

2. Because the night following Christ was taken away from his disciples, and
delivered into the hands of his adversaries, that so the evening before he must
do this with his disciples or never; and it was needful for them that Christ
should then leave them such a remembrance of his presence, token of his love,
testimony of his care, seal of his covenant, and such a cordial to preserve
their spirits in all their approaching perplexities.

To conclude this then, when Christ's passion so nearly approached, this
Sacrament being a representation of his passion, was to be appointed.

Thus you have the time of the day wherein the Lords Supper was at the first
instituted with the causes thereof.

2. Observe the time of the day wherein it was afterward practiced.

For the time of the day afterward, I find that the primitive Christians did
not keep constant punctually to the same time, but sometime they celebrated the
Lords Supper in the former part of the day, and sometimes in the later;
sometimes upon days they were sooner, and sometimes later: sometime they took
the morning, and sometimes the evening, and some days both: and there were
three things that occasioned the set time to be so uncertain.

1. The manner of Churches. 2. The malice of tyrants. 3. The multitude of
communicants.
The order and custom of Churches in several places and ages made this
circumstance so various. In many of the Affrican Churches, as Augustine
reports, in his time the Christians were wont to spend the whole day, in
fasting, praying, preaching and singing of Psalms, and then at night, supping
together, they celebrated after all the Sacrament, in imitation of Christ, and
so departed.

Ideo canati communica^ur^ Apostoli ^uia necesse ^ras pascha typicum prius
consu^mari and sic ad very ^as^hae Sacramenta transiri: nunc autem in honorem
tanti Sacramenti placuis magistris Ecclesiae prius nos spiritualibus epulis
refici ac postea terren^. Beda.
Yet this same Author tells us, that else where in honor of the Sacrament as so
high and holy a mystery, the Christians were wont to be at it more early, and
to make it a leading ordinance: and that no meat might enter their mouths
before this food in the Sacrament, they would not delay it so long in the day.
And about the year 680. after Christ, it was concluded in the fixth
oecumenicall counsel, being the third Council held at Constantinople, in the
time of Constantine the Emperor, That night-Sacraments cel^brated after other
ordinary suppers were eaten, should after that generally cease in the Churches.

2. The malice of tyrants constrained the Christians to alter, as their place,
so their time, for this service; and to do it, as where, so when they could
with most secrecy and safety.

Tertullian, who lived about the year 180. or 200. after Christ, says, That in
his time, Plinius sub Traiano scripsit solitos stat^ die Christianos aute lucem
carmenque Christo communi voce dicere: postea se Sacramento obstringere non in
scelus aliquod, etc. Cent. Magd. cen. 2. cap. 6.
by reason of the rage of persecuting tyrants, the Christians would sometimes
be together before day break in the morning, to celebrate these sacred
mysteries. So in the time of Trajan that bloody Emperor, who was about the
year 100. after Christ (under whom was the third of those 10. Persecutions)
that was also the course of the Christians, to meet in the morning before day
light, and then to sing a Psalm, and after to celebrate the Supper of the Lord.

3. The multitude of communicants have made this ordinance to be acted at
several times upon the same day. In quibusd^m locu tibi mayor and friquenitor
est p^^^ltas Dei bis affertur and mane and ad vesperam, alijs autem locu ad
finem tantum di^i mos est offerri. Aug. Ep. 1.8. ad Ia. Gregor. in Evang. ho^.
^.
Augustine says, that in some places whereas the resort of the people is
greater upon certain days, this oblation is twice made, first in the morning,
and after toward night: but in other places, whereas the people is not so
great, the same is only before night.

Upon the same ground, Gregory tells, how he ministered the holy communion at
three sundry times upon one and the same day.

Thus you see the time of the day wherein this Supper of the Lord has been
anciently solemnized, how diverse and different it has been, and the causes
thereof.

3. Observe the time of the day wherein it is now accustomed.

The custom, you know, among us in these times, for the celebration of the
Lords Supper, is to keep to the former part of the day, and to decline the
later; to make it rather a morning, then an evening service, the convenience of
which is well warranted upon these grounds.

1. To manifest our high esteem of this ordinance, that when the joifull day is
come, we cannot but make all meet have to it, such is our high account of it.

2. To show our earnest desire to it, and to Christ in it, when the day is for
it, we long to be at it; when desires are earnest, endeavors are early, Psalm.
63.1. O God my God, early will I seek thee, my soul thirsts for thee.

3 To express our ardent love to Christ: The two Mary's, such was the strength
of their affection to Christ, that early in the morning, they come to the
sepulcher where Christ was laid, Mark. 16.2. Love will bring us out as soon in
a Sacrament day as may be to meet Christ.

4. To discover our courage for Christ, when we do not as Nicodemus, delay and
come to Christ by night, but early and openly in the day; to show we are not
ashamed nor afraid in open view to own Christ.

5. To declare our care, first to serve the Lord Christ, and then our selves:
It is said of some, Romans 16.18. They serve not the Lord Jesus, but their own
bellies; they prefer the filling of their bellies before the service of
Christ. We let better appear from us in this very business, in that we see
that Christ be served before our bellies be filled, and that we mind our souls
before our bodies, and the meat that endures, before that which perishes, Joh.
6.27. Not that I think it unlawful to eat any thing before we receive the
Lords Supper, but sure when our bodies are fed with a full meal, our souls may
be found more unfit for holy services.

6. For this service in the day of its discharge, we take the former part,
because it is the fresher part, when we are more dexterous and ready, more
vigorous and lively, more active and able to high and holy imploiments:
ordinarily when night comes, and after supper, we are more meet for bodily rest
in the bed, then for any soul service at the board.

7. And lastly, Such are our innumerable iniquities, frequent failings, and
manifold miscarriages even in all holy ordinances, that our last work in the
best day had need be repentance. If our prayer in the morning be, Lord, Give us
this day our daily bread, our prayer in the evening had need be, Lord, Forgive
us this day our daily sins.

But to enlarge the thing in hand no further, you see what time it is wherein
we celebrate the Lords Supper, and how meet it is to have and hold that time,
to wit, the former part of the day. If any shall object,

Our Savior did this in the evening,

Because though he did so himself, Do it; Zanch. de Redemp. l. 1. de cult^ Dei
exte, p. 488.
but did not command the season when we should do it. Zanchy excellently well
states and determines this, to whom I refer.

Augustine has this expression to the case in hand. If Christ, says he, Nam
si hoc Christus monuisset ut ad finem dici and post cibos alios, acciperetur
credo quod eum morem nemo varrasset. Aug in E^. 118. ad Ian.
had commanded that the Sacrament should ever be received at the end of the
day, and after other meats, I believe no man would have changed that order.

Christ administered this his last Supper at night, or in the evening, but there
being no mystery in it, nor mandate for it, that individual act is not
obligatory upon us.

Besides, this was grounded upon such reasons, as to him were urgent and
necessary, but are not so to us: We have neither the occasion of Christ's
approaching departure to require it, nor his leaving it as a present pledge of
his love to challenge it, nor the concurring of his passion to call for it, nor
the necessity of the precedent Passover to urge it, that we should celebrate
this Supper in the evening as Christ himself did.

Christ did this in the evening, after the Passover, to signify the
abolishing, both of the Passover and the evening, and so to leave the time
free for h s Church and people afterward, to dispo^e as meet occasions should
require.

If any shall say; we continue the name, therefore we should continue the time:
The name of Supper, therefore the time of Supper. I answer,

1. We call it by the name of Supper, because Christ ordained it at his last
Supper.

2 We call it ordinarily by other names also, as Sacrament, Commun^on, etc.

3. This ordinance may even now be called a Supper, because though we receive
it not in the evening of the day, yet in the evening of the world.

And so you have the circumstances of place and time, as they relate to the
Lords Supper, examined.

FINIS.
AN ALPHABETICALL TABLE.
A.
ADmonition, by whom to be given. page 241. Affirmative commands, how they
bind. p. 402. Afflictions, how to make them good. p. 481. Affections of the
soul of two sorts. p 455. Ambrose withstood Theodosius. p. 221. Apostate, who.
p. 113. Apostles and disciples differenced. p. 10. Auricular confession, what.
p. 337. Augustines prayers, what in youth. p. 303. Augustine, how converted. p.
176.
B.
Baptism and the Lords Supper differenced. p. 164. Baptism what therein
comprised. p. 146. Baptism, how by many abused. p. 147. Baptism, why to
infants administered. p. 150. Bar of God twofold. p. 445. Blasphemy, what and
how committed. p. 74. Blood of Christ how excellent. p. 423. Bread, what it
imports. p. 422. Branches of two sorts. p. 154. Burden twofold. p. 139. Burden
of Christ, what it is. p. 138.
C.
Caligula, how he entertained his guests. p. 72. Catechism, what and why it
is. p. 344. Christians of two sorts. p. 10. Children how holy, how filthy. p.
152. Communion with Christ, what. p. 46. Comforts from Christ, how. p. 51.
Coming to Christ, what and how. p. 139. Confession in Scripture, threefold. p.
335. Conquests by combats obtained p. 52. Consent of private Christians, what.
p. 291. Covenant sealed, when. p. 53. Covenant old and new differenced. p. 104.
Covetous persons, who. p. 69. Crucifying Christ afresh, when. p. 93. Custom
corrupting the Sacrament 2. ways. p. 225.
D.
Death of Christ, in it two things. p 431. Death of Christ not for all. p. 133.
Death of Christ contains a double act. p. 136. Deceitfulness of sin, how
great. p. 25. Despairers of Gods grace recovered. p. 167. Desires in carnal
men discovered. p. 252. Defiling the Sacrament worse then delaying it. p. 403
Dissentions among Christians, how bad. p. 489. Discerning of Christ, what. p.
39. Disciple, what it signifies. p. 9. Discipline in the Church to be desired.
p. 310. Discipline, what it contains. p. 218. Division of the Sacrament how
made. p. 95.
E.
Eating of Christ, what it is. p. 42. Elders in the Church two sorts. p. 270.
Examining a man's self, what. p. 22. Examining by others, why. p. 329.
Excommunication, when to be used. p. 219. Excommunication, how formerly abused.
p. 233. Eying of Christ, always good. p. 494.
F.
Faith taken in the word two ways. p. 161. Faith its exercise in two things.
p. 457. Faith necessary at the Lords Table. p. 36. Few fit for the Table of the
Lord. p. 59. Federall holiness, what it is and does. p. 163. Firmus a
Manichaean, how converted. p. 177. Frequent receiving, what need. p. 400.
Fruitfulness in good works, how good. p. 15.
G.
Gentiles estate, twofold. p. 154. Giving our selves to God, why. p. 392. Gods
giving of Christ, 4. ways. p. 433. God reserves to himself 3. things. p. 343.
Gospel more excellent then the law. p. 104. Government in the Church, what. p.
292. Governors of the Church, who. p. 265. Graces at the Lords Table, what are
exercised, and how increased. p. 31, 50. Grief to Gods Saints how caused. p 94.
Grosthead, how he thought discipline would come in. p. 230.
H.
Hearts of men, how judged. p. 210. Heretics, who so called. p. 86.
Heavenlinesse of mind, how meet. p. 35. Holiness applied to infants, twofold.
p. 163. Holiness required of men, twofold. p. 393. Humbled, why requisite. p.
382. Humility, how rare. p. 35. Hunger, spiritual, how good. p. 430.
Hypocrisy, how fine a thread. p. 113. Hypocrites, how discovered. p. 71.
I.
Ignorance, twofold. p. 76. Ignorant persons, and persons nescient differenced.
p. 75. Impenitent persons how described. p. 61. Impatient persons, how
discerned. p. 65. Infirmities in Saints, and impieties in sinners
distinguished. p. 261. Interest in Christ's death, twofold. p. 137. Infants,
though no actual faith, are to be baptized. p. 450. Judas, many worse then he.
p. 118. Justice, wherein it lies. p. 27. Judging a man's self, how requisite. p.
23. Judge, what required to make one complete. p. 24.
K.
Keys of the Church, what they be. p. 239. Keys of the Church, who to use
them. p. 240. Knowledge requisite to right-receiving. p. 77. Knowledge
requisite to self-judging. p. 24. Knowledge of others, how attained. p 207.
Knowledge, the devil has much of it himself, yet hates it in others. p 80.
L.
Language of men twofold. p. 74. Lift of grace and glory, how the same. p. 56.
Light, if true, produces heat th^^ is good. p. 81. Love to Christ, and love to
sin, how opposite. p. 12. Love to Christ in a disciple greater then the fear of
hell. p. 12. Love to Christ's members, how great. p. 13. Luther encouraging
Melancthon. p. 325.
M.
Magistrate, what to do in the Church. p. 289. Man's threefold estate opened.
p. 346. Manna, spiritual, who eat thereof. p. 110. Meals three provided of
God. p. 127. Ministers of two sorts. p. 227. Moderation in Church censures, how
meet. p. 288. Murder of a man's self, how great a sin. p. 96.
N.
Nebuchadnezzar, what he was while he fed with beasts. p. 278. Nurses care,
wherein it consists. p. 289.
O.
Oath, the word warrants twofold. p 377. Obedience under the Gospel, twofold.
p. 467. Olivetrees of two sorts. p. 154. Opposers of Gods word, how bad. p.
168. Opposition against Church Censures how great a sin. p. 347. Opposition of
good is most at first. p. 326. Order according to the will of God, how good. p.
269.
P.
Parables, what they are like. p. 125. Parents of two sorts. p. 150. Passover
of the Jews for a double use p 102. Passover of the Jews, short of the Lords
Supper. p. 107. Perverters of Gods truth, how bad. p. 169. Perseverance in
Christ's words, how good. p. 15. Powers in the Church, wherefore. p. 267. Power
of God, twofold. p. 305. Prayer, how requisite before the Lor^s Supper
received. p. 445. Private persons to inform Church officers of offenses in the
Church. p. 293. Pride in duties well done, how prone. p, 446. Promises of two
sorts. p 159. Promises of God considered two ways. p. 430. Profession and
confession differenced. p 335.
R.
Reformation, in what now expected. p. 233. Reformers, wherein formerly
defective. p. 324. Religion, all its acts binds to unity. p. 487. Relapsers,
how they may be recovered. p. 168. Remission of sins, how sweet a mercy. p. 48.
Remembering of Christ, how just a duty. p. 37. Repentance public, when
required. p. 373. Reprobation, how great a secret. p. 113. Repentance, a work
all our life time. p. 435. Resting in good duties, how bad. p. 485. Right of
believers to the Lords Supper, twofold. p. 429.
S.
Sacrament and sacrifice different in what. p. 483. Sacrament, what the word
imports. p 173. Scandal, what it is. p. 84. Seducers, who they are. p. 169.
Self-love, the prejudice of it. p. 26. Self-confidence, the evil thereof. p.
29. Separation unwarrantable. p. 390. Signs outward in the Lords Supper, two,
though but one in Baptism, why. p. 190. Sins known only to God, must yet in
some cases be confessed to men. p. 376. Suffering for Christ, how to know when
called thereunto. p. 482. Sufferings of Christ, of two sorts. p. 482.
Sufferings of Christ differing from ours, wherein. p. 479. Supper-meal, the
last meal. p. 128.
T.
Taking hold on Christ in his Supper, the sole work of a Believer. p 460.
T^^^kfulnesse to Go^, threefold. p. 494. Tho^ghts evil at the Sacrament are
very great evils, how cured. p. 452. Thoughts, how to be ordered in Sacrament
time. p. 446 Treasons against Christ, many worse now then that of Judas. p.
120.
U.
Vbeleevers unmeet receivers. p. 62. Uncharitable persons, who, and how unfit
for the Table of the Lord. p. 64. Unclean in heart, how bad. p. 68. Unicorn,
the virtue of his horn. p. 350. Union with Christ twofold. p. 47. Union with
Christ, how made. p. 46. Union the ground of communion. p. 48. Unworthiness
toward the Sacrament twofold. p. 407.
W.
Way twofold. p. 401. World twofold. p. 133. Word of God, a threefold effect.
p. 175. Word and Sacrament differenced. p. 195. Word of God ought always to
accompany the Sacrament. p. 194. Worthiness, twofold. p. 369. Wrath of God
provoked by abusing the Sacrament. p. 91.
Y.
Yoke of Christ, what it is. p. 139.
Z.
Zeal for the Church of God, how good. p. 289.
Some Scriptures occasionally explained.
Genesis.
Chap. Verse. Page 2. 2. 491 6. 11. 273 14. 14. 329 14 18. 401 17. 7. 152

Exodus.
Chap. Verse. Page 12. 3. 10^

Numbers.
Chap. Verse. Page 9. 7. 108

Deuteronomy.
Chap. Verse. Page 6. 7. 330

1 Samuel.
Chap. Verse. Page 3. 13. 245

2 Chronicles.
Chap. Verse. Page 29. 30. 382 30. 15. 389

Psalm.
Chap. Verse. Page 42. 3. 253 61. 8. 187 101. 3. 296 147. 9. 360

Proverbs.
Chap. Verse. Page 19. 2. 81 29. 24. 294

Isaiah.
Chap. Verse. Page 46. 8. 23 49. 23. 289

Lamentations.
Chap. Verse. Page 3. 51. 195

Ezekiel.
Chap. Verse. Page 20. 37. 249

Hosea.
Chap. Verse. Page 7. 6. 6^

Matthew.
Chap. Verse. Page 3. 11. 188 5. 14. 265 7. 1. 21^ 7. 6. 28^ 7. 16. 20^ 11. 28.
137 16. 18. 239 18. 6. 3^^ 18. 16. 241 20. 25. 205 22. 1^. 380 26. 29. 114 28.
19. 7

Luke.
Chap. Verse. Page 12. 3^. 5^ ^4. 18. 125 ^5. 8. 232 ^5. 17. 23. 18. 8. 3^ 22.
21. 116 22. 31. 22

John.
Chap. Verse. Page ^. ^. 188 6. 44. 140 12. 5, 6. 119 13. 30. 117 15. 8. 15.

Acts.
Chap. Verse. Page 2. 42. 121 2. 38. 122 5. 31. 49 19. 9 390

Romans.
Chap. Verse. Page 7. 9. 24 11. 16. 152 12. 9. 287 14. 1^. 84

1 Corinthians.
Chap. Verse. Page 5. 6. 268 6. 2. 292 7. 14. 160 1^. 21. 276 11. 22. 488 11.
28. 98 11. 30. 99 14. 19. 345

2 Corinthians.
Chap. Verse. Page 5. 15. 132 6. 17. 391 13. 5. 19

Galathians.
Chap. Verse. Page ^. 6. 345

Ephesians.
Chap. Ve^s. Page 1. 10. 247 4. 11. 187 5. 11 297 5. 16 436

Philippians.
Chap. Verse. Page 2. 11. 336 2. 8. 479 3. 8. 4^1

Collossians.
Chap. Verse. Page 1. 2. 480

1. Thessalonians.
Chap. Verse. Page 5. 23. 393

2 Thessalonians.
Chap. Verse. Page 3. 6. 214.

1 Timothy.
Chap. Verse. Page 2. 4. 12^ 4. 8. 159 5. 17. 270

2 Timothy.
Chap. Verse. Page 2. 15. 250 3. 16. 175 4. 2. 185

Titus.
Chap. Verse. Page 3. 10. 243

Hebrews.
Chap. Verse. Page 4. 13. 208 6. ^9. 33 13. ^0. 101 13. 17. 327

James:
Chap. Verse. Page 1. 14. 452 5. 16. 450

2 Peter:
Chap. Verse. Page 2. 20. 90

Jude.
Chap. Verse. Page ^ 21. 219

FINIS.

