Serious Advice TO A PRESERVATIVE Against the Blasphemous Heresy OF
SOCINIANISM.

Do not I hate them, O Lord, that hate thee? And am not I grieved with those
that rise up against thee?

I hate them with a perfect Hatred, I count them mine Enemies,

Psalm. 139.21, 22. By J. G. G.

LONDON, Printed for Geo. Grafton, and are to be Sold by Ric. Baldwin at the
Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane, 1695.

Serious Advice to a Preservative against the Blasphemous Heresy of
Socinianism.
NOW more than ever, there is cause to say, the last Days and Times foretold by
the Apostles 2 Timothy 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
St. Paul and 1 John 2.18.
St. John, are come upon us: For not only Iniquity in Practice does abound
every where, and the Man, and Manner of Sin, is daily more and more discovered:
But also Perverseness in Judgment, in no less than Heresy and Blasphemy, walks
barefaced with those who are so far delivered up to Satan, as to deny the Lord
of Glory: For abominable Socinianism, which is a Sink of the Cerinthians,
Ebionites, Sabellians, Samosatenians, Photinians, Arrians, Semi-Arrians,
Anti-Trinitarians, Pelagians, and of several other Heretics, does now proudly
appear, and, in Effect, defy Christian Religion, and attempts to overthrow the
Foundation of the Gospel, not in one but several parts thereof: It is for me a
Matter of Wonderful Grief, to see the Boldness and Impudence of that Abominable
Heresy as it were Triumphantly to come in, of one side; and the Silence and
Sluggishness of those that should oppose it, on the other: Jer. 9.1.
O that my Head were Waters, and mine Eyes a Fountain of Tears, that I might
Weep day and night for the Guilt which is thereby contracted upon the Nation.

My Purpose is for the present, by the Grace of God, only to give in my
Evidence in the Case, and that as briefly and plainly as I can, to condescend
to the meanest Capacity: But if by Providence I be further engaged in the
Matter, I shall grudge neither Time nor Pains upon so Just, so Necessary, and
so Glorious an Account, as to bear Record for the Fundamental Truth of
Christian Religion.

Laelius Socinus the Uncle, and Faustus Socinus his Nephew, both of Siena in
Italy, soon after the Death of Detestable Servetus, did the first conceive, and
the second bring forth their Damnable Opinions, which amongst the rest are
these: They deny the most Holy and Adorable Trinity, Christ's Divinity, his
being Coeternal in Time, if we may use that word, with the Father, Coessential
in Nature, and Coequal in Power; they will not own he has given the Father
Satisfaction for our Sins, but only obtained for us, by our Faith and
Obedience, to satisfy for our selves: They say he died for our Good, but not
in our Place; he died for himself, not for his Sins, but for the Mortality and
Infirmity of our Nature which he had assumed; he became not our High Priest
till after his Ascension into Heaven: How Man, before his Fall, was Naturally
Mortal, and had no Original Righteousness; that in us there is no Original Sin,
as it imports a Deformity of Nature: The Holy Ghost they admit not to be God,
no more than Christ, whose Incarnation they affirm to be against Reason, and
without Proofs of Scripture: With Pelagians they are against Providence and
Matters of Grace. All these, and others, abominable Errors, which destroy the
whole Foundation and Work of our Salvation, are to be found in the Books of
Socinus, Crellius, Ostorodius, etc.

How far will Men go, when once they are fallen into and engaged in an evil
way? When God has left them in the Blindness and Darkness of their
Understanding, and given them up to the Imaginations and Counsels of their evil
Hearts, to the Temptations of Satan, and to their own Natural Corruption: We
see it in the case of that Wicked Arrius, who within a short time, from the
Year 323 till 336, drew a great part of the World after him; and in the other,
of that great Impostor Mahomet, who agreed with Arrius against the Deity of the
Lord Jesus, wherein he is followed by Socinians: That Man, thorough a Judgment
of God, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11.
sending a strong Delusion that Men should believe a Lie, by the means of a
Foolish Book, of a Nonsensical Alcoran, of pretended Trances and Raptures, when
he was in his Fit of the Falling Sickness, and of the Cheat of a Pidgeon
picking (as it had been taught) some Grains out of his Ear, as if the Angel
Gabriel, under that shape, had then been Suggesting his Religion and Doctrine
to him; with some Allowance to the Pleasures of the Flesh in this World, and
Promises of the like in the next; by these means, and the Trick of his Tomb at
Mecca, has drawn a great part of the World after him.

In order to settle their Impious Principles, Socinians go about two things:
First, To overthrow the Ground of our Faith and Religion, with their attempting
to undermine Holy Scriptures, which are the Foundation and Rule of it: To bring
it about, They affirm the Old Testament to be needless for Christians; as for
the Books of the New, they allow not the Authors thereof to have been Inspired
by the Spirit of God, positively against what is said 2 Timothy 3.16. and therein
they would have some places to contradict others; grant this and you take away
the Infallibility and Truth of Scripture; and if it be yielded of one Text, why
not of many more? If so, What will become of Christian Religion grounded upon
the Gospel? For if we must believe St. Paul who Gal. 1.11, 12.
Certifies, it is not after Man, for he neither received it of Man, neither was
he taught it, but by Revelation of Jesus Christ.

The second thing Socinians do to promote their Blasphemies, is, To make
Natural Reason the Principle of Religion, for they give all to Reason, as if it
was Infallible and could not be imposed upon, and nothing to the Authority and
Consent of the Church, nor of Scripture it self, according to this Rule of
theirs, That no Interpretation of Holy Scripture is to be admitted, except it
does agree with Natural Reason, and to the Evident Experience of outward
Senses: Instead of the Traditions which Papists bring in, they would have their
own Reason, without the Influences of the Spirit of God, to be the genuine and
proper Interpreter of God's Holy Word: So take away the Rule, and you bring in
Disorder and Confusion.

We know and own, how Faith does not destroy Reason, rather it does Refine and
Purify it; so God forbid we should exclude Reason from Religion, for it is
Subservient to it; Reason indeed has something of Religion; for by the Light
of Nature, in things of the World, and Course of Providence, one may be
convinced how there is a Being of Beings, a first Cause of all, and a God whose
Power and Wisdom appears in the Works and Order of Nature, which as Psalm. 19.
David says, and Romans 10.18.
Paul after him takes notice of, day unto day utters Speech, and night unto
night shows Knowledge. But our Religion and Faith in Christ is not a Doctrine
of Nature, or else Salvation thorough his Name had been known to every Man, but
Experience convinces us of the contrary: And St. Paul does positively and
plainly declare upon the Matter, in the case of those who wanted no Natural
Reason, when by the Rules thereof they would measure true Religion, Romans 1.21,
22
Became vain in their Imagination, and their foolish Heart was darkened.
Professing themselves to be Wise, they became Fools.

All and the best Natural Reason in the World, nay the greatest Gifts of
Nature, in Knowledge, Wisdom, Parts whither innate or acquired by the
Philosopher, Orator, etc. come very short of Faith, which in us is the Soul of
our Religion; for, 1 Cor. 2.14.
The Natural Man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are
Foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, for they are Spiritually
discerned. So that with St. Paul we may upon this account ask, 1 Cor. 1.20.
Where is the Wise? Where is the Scribe? Where is the Disputer of this World?
Where is the Rational Man? Has not God made Foolish the Wisdom of this World?
The Reason that is merely Natural he has infatuated; and to show that Reason
alone cannot bring us to true Religion, that is, to the Gospel, it is called a
Mystery, Ephesians. 3.4.
the Mystery of Christ, and 1 Timothy 3.9.
the Mystery of the Faith, and a great one too; 1 Timothy 3.16.
for without Controversy great is the Mystery of Godliness, God was manifested
in the Flesh, then Christ is God, for none but he was manifested in the Flesh,
justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed
on in the World, received up in Glory; all these are appliable to Christ, and
to none but him, to God made Flesh. The Knowledge of this is so far above
Reason, that to make it known, 'twas necessary it should be revealed: Ephesians. 3.3.
How that by Revelation he, God, made known to me the Mystery; yea, such a
Mystery as Natural Reason could not attain unto, for it is Col. 1.26.
the Mystery which has been hid from Ages and from Generations: Surely during
these Ages and Generations there were those Men who wanted not good Natural
Reason, but now is made manifest to his Saints, not to every Man, for, Matt.
13.11.
unto you it is given to know the Mystery of the Kingdom of Heaven, but to them
it is not given: Then it comes not by Natural Reason, but it is a Gift of God.
Now the Gospel and the Preaching of Jesus Christ, is the Doctrine of Christian
Religion; and this, Romans 16.25.
According to the Revelation of the Mystery which was kept secret since the
World began.

If we want another Apostle's Evidence, we have it in St. Peter in the case of
the Prophets under the Old Testament, who 1 Pet. 1.10, 11, 12.
enquired, and searched diligently, of the Grace that should come unto you, all
which had been in vain, but they got it by Revelation, unto whom it was
revealed, that not unto themselves, but unto us, they did Minister the things
which are now reported unto you, by them that have preached the Gospel unto
you; no need of Revelation where Natural Reason can attain unto; yet without
Revelation the Prophets, which wanted no Natural Reason, could not. I go
further and say, Angels, who are clear sighted, far above Men, 2 Pet. 2.11.
greater in Power and Might, and have a greater depth of Reason, What of them?
Which things, says the same Apostle in the same place, that is, the Mysteries
of the Gospel, the Angels desire to look into, not to dive, but to look into,
to see and adore that Incomprehensible Mystery, they cannot look into, or else
they would not desire it, for none desires to have that which he has,
Angelical Nature cannot fathom those Depths, and do we think the shallow Brain
of the most Rational Man can? Hereupon I think I may follow our Blessed
Savior's way, of arguing in the case of the Day of Judgment; only he does from
the lesser to the greater, and I from the greater to the lesser; Mark 13.32.
Of that Day, and that Hour, knows no Man, no, not the Angels which are in
Heaven. Thus the Mystery of the Salvation of Mankind knows no Angel, much
less any Man, be he never so Rational, only as much as God has been pleased to
reveal in the Gospel; that Knowledge comes not by Reason, or any thing else of
Nature, but by Grace. I think this sufficiently shows, how deficient Natural
Reason is, to lead us to True Christian Religion without Revelation, which God
effected by means of Angels, Prophets, Apostles and Evangelists, and this not
with a bare outward Declaration, but an inward effectual Working and Revelation
of his Holy Spirit.

But I must not exceed the narrow Bounds I prescribed my self: So then in
Opposition to Socinians, as we believe the Perfection and Infallibility of Holy
Scripture, we also must own, there are in our Holy Religion, several things
above Reason: Indeed Matters of Fact do fall under our Senses, but those of
Faith go far beyond them; Material things, such as our Senses, hold no
Proportion with Spiritual, such is Faith, highly elevated also beyond Reason.

Certainly this Generation of Men, come under the Curse pronounced by St. Paul,
1 Cor. 16.22.
If any Man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maran-atha:
It Is to Hate and not to Love him, as to go about to derogate from his Right,
and as much as in them lies, to deprive him of his Due, and dishonor him, as
he told the Jews, John 8.49. Verse 12, 18, 24, 28, 29, 40, 42.
I honor my Father, and ye dishonor me. Wherein? It is set down in several
places of the same Chapter, as namely, they would not believe him to be the
Light of the World, nor the Witness which he and the Father did bare of him;
and that he was he, that is, the Messiah, the Christ, the Son of God, who had
told them the Truth he had heard of God, whom he there calls often his Father,
for I proceeded forth and came from God. Yet it is as true as strange, that
notwithstanding so many clear Proofs of his Divinity in Scripture, Socinians
deny him to be God, without which he had not been qualified to be Mediator
between God and us (for a Mediator must have the Nature of both Parties) nor
gotten the Victory over all the Enemies of our Salvation. Though to avoid
Prolixity, I must not insist upon the Proofs of our Lord's Divinity, which is
the Life of our Faith, Hope and Comfort, yet something I must now say to it.

If we had no other Witness but St. John, it were more than sufficient to
condemn the Blasphemy: In the days of the Emperor Domitian, one Ebion a
Samaritan, and his Sectators, denying Christ's Divinity, the Apostle did write
his Gospel to prove it, which in so many places thereof is done as positively,
fully and clearly, as Heart can desire: Only some few I shall take notice of,
to begin with the first Verse of Chap. 1. John 1.1, 14.
In the Beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was
God; compared with V. 14. and the Word was made Flesh. Afford us this Argument,
the Word was God, the Word was made Flesh, therefore God was made Flesh: And as
the name Word is proper to Christ who was made Flesh, it follows, that Christ
is God. And in another place he is, in a most specifical manner, called Chap.
3.16.
God's only begotten Son, whereby he is affirmed to be of the same Nature and
Substance, and equal with him, Chap. 14.9.
He that has seen me, has seen the Father, says he: The Reason he gives
elsewhere, Chap. 10.30.
I and my Father are one; and to Philip he says, Chapter 14.10, 11.
Believe me that I am in the Father, and the Father in me; which for greater
Confirmation he had said just in the Verse before; this Demonstrates a stricter
Union than merely one of Favor and Grace; this shows the Unity of Nature in
the Distinction of Persons, which though distinguished amongst themselves, so
that the Father is not the Son, nor the Son the Father, yet both are Gods, and
Divine Nature is common to both; nothing can be more like the Person of the
Father, than the Person of the Son, wherefore he is called Colos. 1.15.
the Image of the invisible God: God the Father is Invisible, no Man has ever
seen him, but he has made himself visible in the Person of his Son, who is
partaker of his Nature: To this purpose the Lord Jesus is said to be Heb. 11.3.
the brightness of his Glory, and the express Image of his Person. This is no
Flattery to him nor Favor, for it is his Right; herein he is no Usurper nor
Intruder, for if he was, God would not suffer it, being, as he is, so Jealous
of his Honor and Glory; it is therefore upon a just Title, that Phil. 2.5, 6.
Christ thought it no Robbery to be equal with God: None but God can truly and
really be equal with God; I would know what mere Creature may lawfully be
compared to, and be equal with God.

The Lord Jesus himself declares at several times, how he came from the Father,
that is, from above, John 3.31.
from Heaven; how the Father had sent him, which is to be understood, when he
became Man, and was born of a Woman: Now he could not be sent and come, before
he had a Being; and as he was come from the Father, so he returned to the
Father, as he declared it to his Disciples: But I desire a special notice to be
taken of what is said: John 17.5.
And now, O Father, glorify thou me, with the Glory which I had with thee
before the World was: Whence we infer, how the Lord Jesus was before the World,
that is, from Eternity, for time began only at the Creation; how not only he
was, but also had Glory equal with the Father: This cannot be understood of his
Humanity, because he was Born in Time, and he was not Glorified till after his
Resurrection; nor he could not have a Glory, except he had a Being, which Being
had no relation to his Humanity, but to his Divinity: And because, thorough his
Humiliation, that Glory had been eclipsed, he was to return, and again to
appear in it, after the Work he came about was over.

There would be no end if I would enlarge, and bring in so many places as the
Old and New Testaments do afford, to prove this Point, the strength of which
the bitter Enemies of this Truth, being sensible of, it makes them do what they
can to elude it, and undervalue the Authority of the Scripture, which must be
the Judge in the Cause, reserving the Interpretation thereof to their own Fancy
or Reason, as they would call it. Wherefore to be short, I shall, according to
the usual way in Schools of Divinity, resolve the whole into an Argument, which
is this, He to whom in God's Word are appropriated the Names, Attributes, Works
and Divine Honor, he is true Eternal God; but to the Lord Jesus all these are
attributed in Scripture, therefore the Lord Jesus is true Eternal God: We must
descend to Particulars.

First as to the Names, we begin with the Old Testament, few out of many: He is
called Isa. 7.14.
Immanuel, which being interpreted is, Matt. 1.23.
God with us: And by the same Prophet, amongst other Glorious Names, he is
called the Isa. 9.6.
Mighty God: And in another place, Chapter 35.4, 5, 6.
Behold your God will come with Vengeance, even God with a Recompense, etc.
which our Savior Matt. 11.5.
applies unto himself. So the Name of God, and of Jehovah, which Jews own to
be an incommunicable Name of God, never to be pronounced but once a Year, by
the High Priest, in the Holiest of all, are given him; as in Chapter 16.13. and
18.1. this to be compared with Hos. 12.6
Genesis, and in Exodus 3.15.
Exodus; in Mal. 3.1.
Malachy he is called the Lord, the Messenger of the Covenant, who often
appeared to the Fathers, as a forerunning of his Incarnation; amongst others to
Josh. 5.14, 15.
Joshua, under the name of Captain of the Host of the Lord, to whom Joshua, by
his Command, rendered the same Honor as Exodus 3.5.
Moses had done before, Put off thy Shoes from off thy Feet, for the place
where thou stand is Holy Ground; in which place he is called the Angel of
the Lord, v. 2. v. 4. the Lord and God. This is the Angel of God promised to be
sent before his People, Exodus 23.20, 21, 22.
for my Name is in him, he is called by the same Name as I am, and he is the
same as I am, even God. Of the word Jehovah, which is Englished the Lord, being
attributed to our Savior, we have besides others, two considerable Instances;
one is, Isa. 40.3.
The Voice of him that cries in the Wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the
Lord, make straight in the Desert a Highway for our God: The Voice is John
1.23.
applied to John the Baptist, as our Savior, whose Forerunner he was, is the
Lord and God. The other Instance is this, Hos. 1.7.
I will have Mercy upon the House of Judah, and I will Save them by the Lord
their God: Now there is no other Savior but Jesus Christ the Messiah, which he
plainly declared to the Woman, John 4.26.
I that speak unto thee am he. If then Christ spoke the Truth, and St. John
has written the Truth, Christ is he, who is also called, Isa. 63.9, 8.
the Angel of God's presence, who saved them his People, so he was their
Savior: All this spoken of the Lord Jesus.

The Proofs of this out of the New Testament are as clear as can be, besides
the Texts already quoted, observe the following, John 17.3.
This is Eternal Life to know thee the only true God, and whom thou have sent
Jesus Christ, that is, to be the only true God, a thing usual amongst the
Hebrews, for though the Language be Greek, yet the Writers were Jews, whose
Tongue and manner of expressing themselves is Compendious and Laconick, and
commonly implies more than it does express, especially in avoiding of
Repetitions; of many Instances let one serve for all, it is this, Psalm. 37.25.
I have been Young and now am Old, yet have I not seen the Righteous forsaken,
nor his Seed begging Bread, supply the word forsaken before expressed, for
sometimes the Seed of the Righteous, God suffers by way of Trial to beg; but
though they beg, yet he never forsakes them: Thus in this place after the
words Jesus Christ, the words to be the only true God, ought to be supplied and
understood. The same Evangelist adds elsewhere, John 20.31.
These things are written, that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the
Son of God; of the Living God according to the Confession before made by Peter,
Chap. 6.69.
We believe and are sure that thou art that Christ, the Son of the Living God:
The Son and only Son of the Living God, must needs also be the Living God: It Is
said, Acts 20.28.
God has purchased the Church with his own Blood: Properly speaking God has
no Blood; How then can he purchase a Church with his own Blood, otherwise than
by the means of an Hypostatical Union of the Divine and Humane Natures in one
Person, by virtue whereof the Blood which belongs to Humane Nature is called
God's own Blood. Thomas calls him John 20.28.
my Lord and my God; and St. Paul says, Romans 9.5.
he is over all God Blessed for ever, and Colos. 2.9.
in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily. How fully does this
express it, thus 1 Timothy 3.16.
God was manifest in the Flesh; and his beloved Apostle says, 1 John 5.20.
And we know that the Son of God is come in the Flesh, and has given us an
understanding that we might know him that is true, Son of God, even in his Son
Jesus Christ: This is the True God and Eternal Life. This Jesus Christ is not
God only in comparison of other Men, or by some special Prerogative of Favor,
or in some higher degree than all the rest; but this Jesus Christ is the True
God: How can it be more plainly and fully expressed that he is the True God? So
every where else the Lord Jesus is absolutely called God, the True God, and not
relatively, as Moses is said Exodus 7.1.
to be made a God to Pharaoh.

Holy Scripture gives our Blessed Savior Attributes that are incommunicable to
the Creature, so he must needs be True God: As first Eternity, whereof he is
called the Father, or Isa. 9.6.
the Everlasting Father; also, Rev. 1.8, 17, 18.
Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and the Ending, which is, which was, and which
is to come, the Almighty; repeated Verses 11, 12. namely, when the Apostle
turned to see the Voice that spoke to him, that had called himself Alpha and
Omega (which being the first and last Letters of the Greek Alphabet, signify
first of all and last of all, that is, his Eternity) he saw one like the Son of
Man, that is, the Lord Jesus, who v. 17. calls also himself the first and the
last; and the next Verse shows it to be understood of Christ, for he says, I
am he that lives and was dead: And Chap. 21.6. he says again, I am Alpha and
Omega, the Beginning and the End, to be compared with v. 3. The Tabernacle of
God is with Men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his People, and
God himself shall be with them: To be understood of the Incarnation, as
expressed by the same Apostle John 1 14. and if any Doubt should remain, it is
fully cleared Chap. 22.13. where again, and together, are rehearsed the general
words spoken asunder in the other places, I am Alpha and Omega, the Beginning
and the End, the First and the Last: and to know who says so of himself, read
v. 16. I Jesus have sent mine Angel; and v. 6. is called the Lord God, And the
Lord God sent his Angel, etc. And that all this is the Attribute and
Prerogative of the only true Eternal God, Isa. 41.4. and 44.6.
it appears out of Isaiah which our Savior's words in the Revelations relate
to, Thus says the Lord the King of Israel, and his Redeemer the Lord of Hosts,
I am the first, and I am the Last, and besides me there is no God; which to the
same purpose are repeated in other places of the same Prophecy. To condescend
unto our Capacity, the Spirit of God does represent this Eternity in three
parts, Past, Present, and to come, by him which is, which was, Rev. 1.4.
and which is to come; and it cannot be denied, thereby the True Eternal God to
be understood; and hereunto does fitly answer that place of Scripture which
applies it to the Lord Jesus, Heb. 13.8.
Jesus Christ the same yesterday and to day, and for ever.

Socinians would have Christ's Being to have began with his Birth of the
Blessed Virgin, but he peremptorily confutes them with the Jews, when he says,
John 8.58.
before Abraham was I am. Can that Generation of Vipers deny he spoke the Truth
when he said so? If they do, then with the Jews they declare themselves to be
the Children of the Devil, who, as our Savior said to them, Verse 44.
Is a Liar and the Father of it. If now our Savior was amongst them, they
would take up Stones to Stone him as the Jews did at that time, according to
their Principles (which are the same with those of the Jews) they would call
him a Blasphemer, and make use of their words, Chap. 10.33.
For a good Work we stone thee not, but for Blasphemy, and because that thou
being a Man, make thy self God. I ask, Did the Lord Jesus upon this Charge
deny himself to be God? Which he would have done if he had not been: Or else,
Was he an Impostor or Deluder? Which he must needs have been, if he would have
passed for God when he was not: O the Horrid and Insufferable Blasphemy of
Wicked Men.

Then Scripture attributes Omniscience unto Christ when he was upon Earth as
well as now, he knew every thing, John 21.17.
Lord thou know all things, says Peter unto him, Chapter 2.24, 25.
he knew all Men, and needed not that any should testify of Man, for he knew
what was in Man. There was no Dissembling before him, Heb. 4.13, 14.
for all things are, and were, naked and open unto the Eyes of him with whom we
are to do, even Jesus the Son of God, who, when upon Earth, knew John 6.70. and
13.11.
which of the Twelve was a Devil, for he knew who should betray him. This
Record he bears of himself, and we know his Record is true, Rev. 2.23.
All the Churches shall know that I am he which searches the Reins and Hearts.
All this is very plain.

In the Word of God our Savior is declared to be Almighty, for, John 5.19.
whatsoever things the Father does, these also does the Son likewise; and Heb.
1.3.
he upholdeth all things by the word of his Power: In the fore-quoted place of
Rev. 1. he calls himself the Almighty.

Christ Jesus is also present every where, another Attribute of an Infinite
Being; Matt. 18.20. Chap. 28.20.
Where two or three are gathered together in my Name, there I am in the midst
of them; and, Lo I am with you always even unto the end of the World.

But not only all these forenamed Attributes incommunicable to the Creature,
such is every mere Man, are applied unto the Lord Jesus, also Divine Works are,
as the Creation of the World, John 1.3.
All things were made by him, and without him was not any thing made that was
made: Which St. Paul confirms, Colos. 1.16.
For by him were all things created that are in Heaven, and that are in Earth,
visible and invisible, whether they be Thrones and Dominions, or Principalities
or Powers, all things were created by him and for him. We know the Work of
Creation is peculiar to God, he never imparted it to any Creature, for none is
capable of it, only an Infinite Being and Power can fill up an infinite
distance between an ens and non ens, a real Being and nothing; between these
two is an unpassable Gulf for any Creature, an Abyss that can be filled up by
no Man nor Angel: To create is God's incommunicable Work, the Name of Creator
or Maker of something out of nothing, belongs to God alone; and seeing the
World was created by the Word, and that Christ is the Word that was made Flesh,
it follows that Christ is God: Heb. 1.2.
God by his Son made the Worlds: So he Rules and Preserves the World, as in the
fore-quoted place, Heb. 1.3. He upholdeth all things by the Word of his Power:
He says himself, John 14.11.
Believe me that I am in the Father, and the Father in me, or else believe me
for the very Works sake. He is one of the Elohim that created the World. Genesis
1.1.
It is also a Divine Work to raise Men from the Dead, this also belongs to
Christ, for as the Father raises up the Dead, and quickneth them: even so the
Son quickneth whom he will: The words as and so do show an Equality in the
Acts, our Savior raised Jairus his Daughter, Lazarus, etc. nay he raised
himself by his own Power, John 10.18.
I have Power to lay down my Life and take it up again. Can any one but God
give Eternal Life? But Chap. 10.20.
Christ gives his Sheep Eternal Life: Who can forgive Sins but God only? The
Jews were in the Right, according to their Primciples, to call it Blasphemy,
because they believed him to be a mere Man, and not God, as he was, Mark 2.7,
10.
Why does this Man thus speak Blasphemies? who can forgive Sins but God only?
Whereupon immediately our Savior, to show he was God, said, That ye may know
that the Son of Man has power to forgive Sins, etc. he proves it with a
Miracle: The raising of the Dead, and other Miracles done by the Apostles, were
not in their Names and by their Power, as all Christ's were, Acts 3.6.
but in the Name and by the Power of Jesus of Nazareth.

Lastly, Divine Worship and Honor is and ought to be rendered to our Savior by
Angels and Men, and Heb. 1.6.
let all the Angels of God worship him; and John 5.23.
that all Men should Honor the Son even as they Honor the Father, that is,
alike, that signifies in the same Nature, Manner, and Degree; but God declares
Isa 42.8.
he will not give his Glory to another: Wherefore Christ must needs be the same
as the Father, of the same Nature, and not a Titular God, as they would make of
him: So they who deny him truly to be the Son of God, in that, are worse than
the Devils which owned him to be such; Matt. 8.29.
which Truth has been sealed with the Blood of Millions of Martyrs. And to
come to Particulars, John 3.15, 16
we must believe in him, we must Matt. 28.19
be Baptized in his Name, and Phil. 2.10.
at his Name every Knee should bow. If Christ were not God, it were Idolatry to
worship him; yet our Blessed Savior, who was no Friend to Idolatry, would not
have suffered the Man in the Gospel to have worshipped him, but far from
forbidding, he encouraged him to it, and under what Notion? as Son of God, for
he asked him, John 9.35, 36, 37, 38.
Do thou believe on the Son of God? The Man answered, Who is he Lord? Christ
replied, Thou have both seen him, and it is he that talks with thee. Can we
desire a plainer Declaration that Christ is the Son of God, and ought to be
worshipped; and if he were not the true Son of God of the same Nature, it had
been Idolatry and Blasphemy in Thomas, to call him, John 20.28.
My Lord and my God.

God foreseeing the Devil would raise his strongest Batteries against his Son,
who came to destroy the Works of the Devil, which therefore would have cut him
off in his very Cradle, and stirred up the whole Malice of Earth and Hell; and
to Discredit his Doctrine, that Father of Lies found Instruments that defamed
his Person, and said, he was a Samaritan, a Friend to Publicans and Sinners,
that had a Devil, and did cast out Devils by Beelzebub; he was the Carpenter's
Son, such a Fellow as they knew not from whence he was, a Seducer, Deceiver and
Impostor: I say, God fore-knowing all this, provided sufficient Remedies, and
by his Holy Spirit in his Word, gave such clear and full Evidences, as none,
but those in whom the God of this World has blinded the Minds, could doubt of,
or call to question this Truth of the Gospel, John 3.16. and Chap. 1.18.
That God sent his own Son into the World: Moreover, His only begotten Son,
which is in the Bosom of his Father, he has declared him; which no body else
could, it must be God's only Begotten, the reason is given in the beginning of
the Verse, no Man has seen God at any time: Shall not God's only Begotten Son
receive and be Partaker of his Father's Nature? If absolutely no Man has seen
God at any time, he that has seen and declared him must needs be God.

Though this Matter be so copious, yet to keep my self within my narrow Bounds,
I shall to this Point add a few words more: St. John says, that 1 John 2.18.
in his time there were many Antichrists, and Chap. 4.1.
many False Prophets were gone out into the World. These Opposers of Christ
were of two sorts, some who denied Christ Jesus to be come into the World, or
in the Flesh, that is, That the Messiah which took up the whole Expectation of
the Jews, was not come; for we know the Messiah and John 4.25.
Christ to be but one and the same: Now those that confessed not Jesus Christ
to be the promised Messiah, were Antichrists, the Messiah was to come in the
Flesh, that is, To take upon him our Humane Nature and become Man. All
Prophesies and Types under the Law, in every Circumstance, were fulfilled in
the Person of the Lord Jesus born of the Virgin Mary, and whosoever denied it
was an Antichrist.

The second sort of Antichrists in St. John's time, were those that, as the
Ebionites did then, the Arrians since, and now Socinians do, own Christ to be a
Prophet and a Savior, but would have him to be merely a Man, and only a
Creature; a Man they would not deny him to be, but disowned him for a God. Now
against these the Apostle does speak, 1 John 4.15.
Whosoever shall confess, says he, that Jesus is the Son of God, God dwells
in him, and he in God: So by the Rule of Contraries, and the Style of
Scriptures, we do infer, that whosoever shall not confess that Jesus is in a
true and a proper Sense the Son of God, God dwells not in him, nor he in God;
both which, that is, the Validity of this Inference, and the Apostle's
Position, that Jesus is the Son of God, do appear in the following Chapter,
Chap. 5.9, 10, 11.
He that believes not that Christ is the Son of God, has made him a Liar,
because he believes not the Record that God gave of his Son: For this is the
Witness of God, (which is greater than the Witness of Men) which he has
testified of his Son. Wherein the Apostle relates not only to the Time of our
Savior's Baptism, when the Voice came from Heaven saying, Matt. 3.17.
This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased; but also to the
Transfiguration, when the Voice came out of the Cloud with the same words with
this Addition, Chap. 17.5.
Hear ye him; which St. Peter takes special notice of, when he says, For he,
Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 1.17, 18.
received from God the Father, Honor and Glory, when there came such a Voice
to him from the excellent Glory. And this Voice which came from Heaven, we
heard when we were with him in the Holy Mount. Where the Apostle plainly
declares, That as the Voice came from God the Father, so it was spoken of and
to God the Son, or else the distinction of Father and Son had been improper and
superfluous; God in the Voice calls him his Beloved Son; the Apostle says the
Voice came from God the Father: If there was not some special Energy and
Signification in the word Father, the Apostle would only have said, that Christ
received from God Honor, etc. but speaking of the Father and of the Son, who
are Relatives, that shows the distinction of two different Persons of the
Godhead.

This Voice was the Application to the Person of whom long before Psalm. 2.
wherein the Kingdom of Christ was Prophesied of, Psalm. 2.7.
The Lord has said unto me, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee.
Yea, such as David whose Son he was according to the Flesh, in Spirit calls him
Lord; which place our Savior makes use of against the Pharisees, for after
they had answered his Question, Whose Son Christ was? He much to his purpose
asks them, Matt. 22.42, 43, 44, 45.
If David then call him Lord, How is he his Son? This could not be in the
Capacity of his Son, for the Son is not Lord over the Father; wherefore it must
be upon some other account; there was between them another Relation, it could
be no Humane one within such a distance of Time.

Hence is appears, That if God does so often, and in so singular a manner, call
the Lord Jesus his Only Begotten Son, in whom he is well pleased: If God, I
say, speaks Truth, the Lord Jesus must be his Son; not in that way of Favor
and Grace only, as Socinians would have it, and as all his Elect are, but in a
stricter and essential Relation; to beget, is to communicate his Nature and
Substance; and in this Sense he is the only Begotten Son, there is but one thus
properly God's Son: We have a Text which speaks plainly to the purpose, and
gives a right Interpretation of the Phrase, the meaning whereof the Jews
understood very well; it is said, John 5.18.
The Jews sought the more to kill him, not only because he had broken the
Sabbath, but said also that God was his Father, making himself equal with God.
So then when Christ called God his Father, he meaned that he was equal with
God; the Jews say so, the Evangelist does not say they were mistaken; and our
Blesied Savior, Ver. 19, 21.
the best Interpreter of the thing, confirms they had a right Notion of the
Matter; for in the 19 and 21 Verses, he affirms his Equality in Power with
the Father, For what things soever he does, these also does the Son likewise.
For as the Father raises up the Dead, and quickneth them, so the Son quickneth
whom he will. This Equality in Power argues an Equality in Nature; for though
God can do great and miraculous things by some Creatures, yet still it is the
working of his own Power; but God cannot bestow an Infinite Power upon a Finite
and bound Creature, which it is not capable of, because it would imply a
Contradiction: An Infinite Power in Christ, such as the Father has, does in
him import an Infinite Nature. But at this time I must not suffer my self to be
drawn too far into the Matter.

Well, as we heard, St. John calls Antichrist him that denies Christ to be the
Son of God: 1 John 2.22.
He is Antichrist that denies the Father and the Son: Surely Father and Son
must have the same Nature, deny one and you deny both; Who is a Liar, but he
that denies that Jesus is the Christ? To what he calls Antichrists and Liars,
St. Paul gives the Name of Blasphemers, and begins with himself, as he was
before his Conversion, 1 Timothy 1.12, 13.
Putting me into the Ministry, who was before a Blasphemer and a Persecutor.
Wherein was he such? He speaks something of it when he says, Acts 26.9.
I verily thought with my self, that I ought to do many things contrary to the
Name of Jesus of Nazareth. What does he mean by the Name of Jesus? His Person
he could not reach, his Members he persecuted as much as he could; nay, as he
says, he compelled them to do as he did: What Is that? To Blaspheme; he
compelled them to Blaspheme, his Name, Acts 26.11.
his Religion, and say many things against his Person, and deny him to be the
Messiah, the Son of God, and the Profession of his Gospel, to defame and
dishonor him: And do not Socinians do part of this, and the worst of it, with,
as much as in them lies, depriving him of his Godhead, attacking him in the
best and most sensible Part: Methinks these Men should have observed and taken
warning by God's signal Judgments upon former Blasphemers against the Person of
Christ. Arrius their great Founder, whilst he was easing himself of the
Necessities of Nature, his Bowels came forth, and with them his Life: Artemon,
Samosatenus, and several more in former and later Ages, came to miserable
Deaths: The end of Julian the Apostate is well known: These should make them
Fear and Tremble. However in them is a Hardness, as was in the Jews, whose
Arguments they borrow, Acts 13.45.
Blaspheming and Contradicting, as they did, to what concerning this Matter was
spoken by Paul and Barnabas.

The Grounds of their Error I shall not at this time go about to refute, that I
reserve for another occasion if God permit: However two things I shall mention,
which like two Rocks they commonly split upon, and this being well understood,
affords Answers to most of their Arguments. St. Peter's words, by him spoken
in another case, I here shall make use of, 2 Pet. 3.5.
For this they are willingly Ignorant of; namely, the difference of Christ's
State of Humiliation, and that of his Exaltation: The Jews who receive not the
New Testament, may be ignorant of this, yet not willingly; but Socinians, who
say and pretend they admit it, cannot be Ignorant but willingly: After this
Rule we may resolve those places in Scripture, the Sense whereof, thorough
their Prejudice, they mistake, wherein Christ is made Inferior to the Father,
and the Father said to be greater than he: It Is most true, that as he performed
the Office of Mediator, as he was Man, as at that time when he was upon Earth,
in that low and humble Condition, he then was Inferior to the Father, but it
was not so before, for he, to obtain Salvation for us, voluntarily left that
Glory which he had with the Father before the World began, and of himself, as
the Apostle says, Phil. 2.6, 7, 8.
took upon him the form of a Servant, and was made in the likeness of Man; and
he humbled himself, and made himself of no Reputation: He had a Being before he
was made Man, and that Being, as the Apostle faith in that place, was the Form
and Nature of God, whereby, without Robbery or Usurpation, he was equal with
God. After the time of his Humiliation was over, he went up to the place whence
he was come down, again to appear in his Natural Glory, which Glory here he had
still, but it was under a Cloud, which made it invisible to Man: His Humane
Nature was that Cloud which Scripture calls Heb. 10.20.
the Vail of his Flesh, which under the Law was typified by the Vail of the
Temple; because the Light of the Sun, when it is behind the Clouds, does not
appear bright and glorious in our Eyes, Must Men say he has no Brightness nor
Glory? Still there is enough left to convince us, that in it is a Light, or
else it would be quite Dark: So though the Lord Jesus his Divine Glory and
Majesty was eclipsed for a time, yet several Beams of it appeared in his state
of Exinanition, as in his Baptism, Transfiguration, and when John 12.28, 29.
the Voice came from Heaven saying, I have both glorified it, and I will
glorify it again; which made some of the People that stood by say, it
thundered; and others, An Angel spoke to him: Besides those many miraculous
Works he did, which none but a Divine Power could effect, all these leave
unbelieving Enemies of his Divinity without Excuse; for they refuse to receive
the Testimony of God the Father, of Christ himself, and of the Apostles and
Evangelists, which is as good as to call him a Deluder and an Impostor.

Their other Stumbling Block and Rock of Offense, is the Incarnation of the Son
of God, or his taking upon him our Humane Nature out of the Virgim Mary,
thorough the Operation of the Holy Ghost, which by no means they will own,
though Scripture says, in that Famous Prophecy of the Coming of the Messiah,
Isa. 7.14.
Behold a Virgin shall Conceive, and bring forth a Son, and they shall call his
Name Immanuel: Matt. 1.23. to this answers John 1.14. and 1 Timothy 3.16.
Which being interpreted is, God with us. What does this Interpretation, God
with us, signify else, than an Union of Divine with Humane Nature, one Person
to be both God and Man, which does meet in the Person of our Blessed Savior,
who for Confirmation of this, is in Scripture so often called God, Son of God,
and Man, Son of Man: Can there be any thing more positive than this? John 1.1,
14.
The Word was God, and the Word was made Flesh; by Flesh is meant Humane
Nature; then God was made Man, as to the Manner, it could not be by
Transubstantiation (change of Substance) of Divine Nature into Humane, which
had imported an Annihilation of Divine Nature, which to think is Blasphemy,
elsewhere Scripture says positively, God was manifest in the Flesh, a Text
parallel to that of John to prove the Incarnation, which the place shows to
be said of Christ, in whom are terminated all the Prophesies and Figures under
the Law about the Messiah; and though the Modus and Manner of things, be above
the reach of Men to dive into, and so we must not be rash about it; yet God in
his Word, having revealed the thing to be, and said something about the Manner,
it must not be neglected by us: See the Angel's answer to the question of the
Virgin, Luke 1.34, 35
How shall this be, seeing I know no Man? The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee,
and the Power of the Highest shall overshadow thee. This indeed is a high
Mystery, the Coming of the Holy Ghost, the overshadowing of the Highest: Yet
however this is plain, that that Holy Thing or Person to be born of Mary,
should be the Son of God, and really called so; for to be called is really to
be so; as of John Baptist, Thou Child shall be called the Prophet of the
Highest, Luke 1.76. shall really be so; or else, if he had not really been, it
had been a Lie: Man was to have no hand in the Birth of that Child, for the
Virgin knew no Man, it was to be a Production only of the Holy Ghost coming
upon the Virgin, and of the Power of the Highest overshadowing her: Here we
must draw a Curtain and a Door before this high Mystery; yet we may say, that
to bring into the World one that should be merely a Man, there had been no need
of this transcendent, unspeakable, and incomprehensible way: If it was intended
he should have been no more than a Man, there had been no need of altering the
usual Course of Generation, as it was not in Take notice of the difference,
Moses as a Servant, Christ as a Son, over his own House. Heb. 3.5, 6.
Moses, Elijah, upon whom afterward God poured his Spirit: So if the Lord
Jesus had been but a Man, he might have been begotten of a Man, and afterward
God might have bestowed his Spirit upon him in a higher measure than ever it
had been upon any Man that went before; but the overshadowing of the Highest
was not in vain, because God does nothing in vain: The Holy Ghost alone might
have preserved him from Sin in his Conception, but there had been no need of
the overshadowing of the Highest. Take notice how Christ is also called the
Highest, and the Great God. Luke 1.76. Tit. 2.13.


Let us compare the Cases between the Birth of John the Baptist, of whom our
Savior says thus, Luke 7.28.
Amongst those that were born of Women, there was not a greater Prophet than
John the Baptist, and that of the Lord Jesus: In the first, two things are
remarkable, the first, That an Angel was sent to Announce his Birth: The
second, That he should be filled with the Holy Ghost from his Mothers Womb; all
the rest was Natural and Common, Chap. 1.
Thy Wife Elizabeth shall bear thee a Son: Here according to the usual Course
of Nature, a Child was to be born of a Husband and his Wife, though Old, yet
the thing happened before to others; but in the Person of Christ is a Child
born of a Woman without Man: The Angel said to Zachariah nothing of the Holy
Ghost coming upon Elizabeth, nothing of the highest overshadowing her, as to
the Virgin Mary: And we know how never one Man, or one Prophet spoke of another
as John Baptist did of our Lord and Savior; he knew his distance, the
difference between them, and his nothing in comparison with him; John 1.27, 30
He that comes after me, and whose Shoes latchet I am not worthy to unloose;
the same was before me, yet born six Months after him, and before Abraham too,
though there were 42 Generations between them. O that Pre-existence has no
Humane Foundation, and can be attributed to nothing, but to an Eternal Being;
he owneth he was not the Christ, but he was sent before him to cry in the
Wilderness, Make straight the way of the Lord, Jehovah, and I saw and bare
Record that this is the Son of God: Wherefore upon occasion our Savior says
of John Baptist, He bare record of me unto the Truth; Chap. 5.33, 34.
though I need no such thing, for I receive not Testimony from Man; however he
bare Witness unto the Truth, that I am the Son of God: And indeed if to prove
it there was but one or few such Texts and Particulars in Scripture about
Christ, some might happen to think there is room for Cavils and Exceptions; but
so many things, and in so many several places, being said to that purpose, and
all tending to confirm that Truth, how he is True God, and Only True Son of
God, there is no reasonable ground left to doubt of it. 1 John 5.20.
We know, says St. John, that the Son of God is come, and has given us an
understanding that we may know him that is True, even in his Son Jesus Christ:
This is the True God, and Eternal Life. Nothing plainer than that Jesus Christ
is the True God, Relatives ought to be applied to the next.

Scripture mentions four kinds of Generation, the first, by Father and
Mother, that is, the Common: The second, without Father or Mother, which is
properly Creation; so Adam was begotten, and on this account called Son of God:
The third, of a Father without Mother, thus Eve was formed out of Adam's Rib:
But the fourth, and more Miraculous is, of a Mother without a Father; thus our
Blessed Savior was born of a Woman without the help of Man: But all these do
relate only to a Temporal Generation, but that of Jesus Christ Son of God in a
strict Sense, by the Father, is Eternal.

Now the Office of Mediator, required a Person that should be both God and Man,
to perform those things that were to be done in relation to both: As for
instance, To Suffer and Die, was the part of Humane Nature, which the Divine is
not capable of; but to overcome Death and our Spiritual Enemies, could not be
effected but by a Divine Power: And it also became the Majesty of God, that the
Mediator should be God; which Majesty is so great, that none but he that is
intimate and equal with the Father, could interpose between God and Man: Angels
themselves could and dared not undertake it, for they stand in need of Christ
Mediator; and Job 15.15.
they are not Pure in God's sight, which makes them hide their Isa. 6.2.
Face in his Presence; now much less any Man only such: Besides, who but a God
could destroy Sin, appease God's Wrath, overcome the Power of Satan, and Death
Natural and Eternal? Who could make Expiation for Offenses committed against an
Infinite God, but he that is Infinite himself? By whose Intercession could
God's Anger be pacified, but thorough his that is his Beloved Son? By whose
Power could Satan, and the whole Power of Darkness be overcome, but by him that
is stronger than all the Devils and Hell? And who could conquer Death, but he
that has destroyed him that has the Power of Death; Heb. 2.14.
And as none but a God could deliver us from all these Evils, under whose Power
we were; so none but a God could restore us to the Goods we had lost: As first,
Who could have restored us to a perfect Righteousness, but he that is
Righteousness it self? Who to God's Image, Chap. 1.3.
but he that is the express Image of his Person, and the Brightness of his
Glory? Who could make us Children of God, but he that is his Natural and only
begotten and beloved Son? Who could bestow upon us the Holy Ghost, but he from
whom the Holy Ghost proceeds? And who could give us Eternal Life, but he that
is Life it self? And by whom could we come to God, but thorough him that is the
way? Hence it appears, John 14.6.
how none but a True and not a made God, could be a Mediator between God and
us: If one Man sin against another, 1 Samuel 2.25.
says Eli, the Judge shall judge him: But if a Man sin against the Lord, who
shall entreat for him? No mere Man can, only he that is Lord God himself.

Romans 8.3.
What the Law could not do, in that it was weak through the Flesh, God sending
his own Son in the likeness of sinful Flesh, and for Sin, condemned Sin in the
Flesh, is a place worthy to take up our Serious Thoughts: This shows first,
the Law could not justify us, by reason of Weakness thorough the Flesh, or
Humane Nature, which to remedy, 'twas necessary God should send his own Son to
relieve this Weakness and Impossibility; for that wherein our Nature, thorough
Frailty, was wanting, must be helped by Divine Nature. Secondly, This shows,
how this help came by means of God's own Son, whom God sent into the World, and
by a Sacrifice for Sin, effected that which was impossible for any Man
whatsoever to do. Now, if they can, let them find stronger and more proper
Expressions, to signify Christ Jesus to be the True, Proper, Natural Son of
God, than these in Scripture, God's own Son, the only begotten Son, which is in
the Bosom of the Father, in whom the Father is well pleased: Can this be said
of one that is a mere Man? No, nor of any Angel which is a nobler Creature: For
unto which of the Angels said he at any time, Thou art my Son, Heb. 1.5, 6, 8.
this day have I begotten thee. And again, when he brings the first Begotten
into the World, he says, Let all the Angels of God worship him. He cannot be
called the First Begotten, in relation to a Temporal Generation, for many other
Sons of Adoption God had begotten long before Christ's appearing in the World;
but upon account of an Eternal, take notice of what is added, But unto the Son
he says, Thy Throne, 1 Timothy 1.1. Tit. 1.3.
O God, is for ever and ever; not only here, and in other places I already
quoted, he is called God, but also St. Paul in two places gives him the name of
God our Savior; he is God as certainly as he is our Savior, for in both
places both are joined together. Now as when the Spirit of God does in
Scripture call him Man, we ought to believe him to be a Man indeed; so when he
calls him God, we must believe him to be God indeed; for with St. Paul, Romans
2.2.
We are sure that the Judgment of God is according to Truth: And immediately
after his Conversion, he began to preach the Gospel with this Fundamental Truth
thereof, namely, That he is the Son of God: Acts 9.20.
And whosoever owns him not to be truly God, gives God the Lie, disowns him to
be our Savior and our Mediator; for as the Mediator does act the part of Man
with God, so with Men he is to perform the part of God; he stands between two
Extremes, and reaches them both with filling the space, though never so distant
between them, he immediately approaches unto God, whom he pacifieth toward
Men, and from him, upon the account of his own Merit, obtains for them all
Gifts and Graces necessary to their Salvation: All this none but a God can do
for us.

But here I must stop, for insensibly I am driven farther than I intended; only
few words I shall speak, in relation to the most Holy and Blessed Trinity,
which they deny. Divine Nature is most simply and singularly one; yet in that
one Essence are Three Persons distinguished in Number, Order, Manner of Acting,
and with Personal Names and Attributes: And though the words Trinity and
Persons, be not in so many Letters set down in Scripture, no more than the word
Sacrament, Symbol or Creed, Lord's-Prayer, etc. Yet as we agree that these are
contained in and deduced out of the Word of God, so we may say of those now in
question. For Brevity sake I shall mention none of the several Proofs taken out
of the Old Testament, and pitch upon few of those out of the New.

The Baptism of the Lord Jesus does afford a clear and strong Proof; God the
Father speaks, Matt. 3.16, 17.
This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased: Christ the Son of God is
Baptized; The Spirit or Holy Ghost descended from Heaven like a Dove, and
lighted upon him. Then the Apostles are commanded to Chap. 28.19.
Baptize in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost;
furely by any one that can reckon, it will be found there are Three Hypostases
or Persons, for so the word (...) is rendered in relation to God the Father, for
the Son is said to be Heb. 1.3.
the express Image of his, the Father's, Person. In the following Text we also
find there, John 14.16, 17.
I will Pray the Father, and he will give you another Comforter; the Father, I,
and the Comforter, there called the Spirit of Truth; and in the next Chapter
it is said, Chap. 15.26.
But when the Comforter is come, whom I will send to you from the Father; again
here they be Three. St. Paul also mentions them, 2 Cor. 13.14.
The Grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, The Love of God, that is, the Father, and
the Communion of the Holy Ghost: This I shall conclude, with that of another
Apostle, 1 John 5.7.
For there are Three that bear record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the
Holy Ghost; and these Three are One. I think from the word Three, that of
Trinity may well be derived: Here is proved the Trinity of Persons, and the
Unity or Oneness of Essence or Nature: The Trinity of Persons does not multiply
the Nature, without any Contradiction a Subject may in one respect be one, and
manifold in another: This is clear out of several Instances in Nature, Man has
a Soul, this Soul has three several distinct Faculties, the Mind, Will and
Memory; the Mind is not the Will, nor the Will the Memory, these are three
different Faculties, yet but one Soul. In the Sun are three things, the Body,
the Light, and the Heat of the Sun, yet not many Suns, yet only one. A Father
has a Son, the Father and the Son are two different Persons, yet they have the
same Nature and both are Men. There are many more such Instances which I now
forbear to mention, to show how in created Substances Trinity or Multiplicity
does not destroy Unity; so we may reasonably infer, that in the Godhead the
Trinity of Persons is no Prejudice to the Unity of Essence or Nature. But for
all this they will deny the Divinity of the Son and of the Holy Ghost; the
first I proved, and I think it is fit I should say something to the last, but as
shortly as I can.

In order to it, I shall resolve all into one Argument, as before I did about
Jesus Christ: The Syllogism is this, He is True and Eternal God, whom Scripture
gives to, the Names, Attributes, Works and Worship of God; but all these,
Scripture attributes to the Holy Ghost, therefore the Holy Ghost is True
Eternal God. To begin with the first, I say the Names of the True God are
simply and absolutely given to the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 3.16.
Know ye not, says Paul, that ye are the Temple of God, and that the Spirit of
God dwells in you: The latter part explaineth the first, the dwelling of God
alone does make and constitute the Temple of God; and those very same whom he
calls the Temple of God, he calls the Temple or Dwelling of the Holy Ghost.
We have another, when Paul said to Ananias, Acts 5.3, 4.
Why has Satan filled thy Heart to lie to the Holy Ghost; and in the next
Verse, Thou have not lied to Men, but unto God: Whom he before called the Holy
Ghost, he now called God; these last words tend to exaggerate and aggravate the
greatness of his Sin: The name of Jehovah is also attributed to the Holy Ghost,
for the Lord said, Numb. 12.6.
He will make himself known to and speak by Prophets: Now if we compare this
with what Peter says, 2 Pet. 1.21.
Holy Men, or Prophets, of God, spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost; we
shall find, that Jehovah, who promised to speak by Prophets, is the Holy Ghost
which moved them to speak.

The Attributes of the True God, do also belong to the Holy Ghost; as first
Eternity, it is said, Heb. 9.14.
Christ thorough the Eternal Spirit offered him; so does Omniscience, for the
Spirit searches all things, yea, the deep things of God; also Omnipresence, he
is every where, Psalm. 139.7.
Whither shall I go from thy Spiri? etc. That is, I can go no where from it;
and the Spirit of God dwells in you; so he does in every Believer; for Romans
8.9.
he that has not the Spirit of Christ is none of his; as for Almightiness, all
his Works do demonstrate it.

Also the Works of the True God are attributed to the Holy Ghost, as the
Creation of the World, Psalm. 33.6.
By the Word of the Lord were the Heavens made, and all the Host of them by the
Breath, Spirit, of his Mouth; and Job 26.13.
By his Spirit he has garnished the Heavens; the Preservation is represented
by his Genesis 1.2.
moving upon the face of the Waters; or laying upon, as a Hen does to preserve
her Chickens: But as the proper Attribute of the Holy Ghost, is to be Holy and
Sanctifier, the great Actor in the high Mystery of Regeneration, and applying
of Salvation, the Work whereof is altogether Divine; so to clear it, we shall
come to some Particulars, as teaching of the Prophets, who by him were moved,
as already observed out of St. Peter. Now it is said, Heb. 1.1.
God spoke unto the Fathers by the Prophets; then the Spirit that spoke by them
is God, 1 Cor. 12. from Verse 4 to 12.
The diversities of Gifts are of the same Spirit, the difference of
Administration of the same Lord, and the diversities of Operators of the same
God. Now this distribution of Gifts, whither of Wisdom, of Knowledge, of Faith,
working of Miracles, of Pongues, etc. all these works that self-same Spirit,
dividing to every Man severally as he will, it is all his Free Gift; and that
there may be no mistake about the word Spirit, the Apostle in that place V. 3.
calls him the Holy Ghost.

The Government of the Church, which is the Work of God, is also attributed to
the Holy Ghost, for Acts 13.2.
the Holy Ghost said, Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the Work whereunto I
have called them; which Institution of Ministers in the Church made by the Holy
Ghost, is also mentioned in another place, Chap. 20.28.
Take heed therefore unto your selves, and to all the Flock over the which the
Holy Ghost has made you Overseers; that Commission is in the Name and by the
Power of the Holy Ghost. Thus also the Works of the True God are attributed
unto the Holy Ghost, when he is called John 15.26.
the Spirit of Truth; Rom 8.15.
Spirit of Adoption; Chap. 1.4.
Spirit of Sanctification, or of Holiness, and the Tit. 3.5.
Spirit of Regeneration; our Blessed Savior himself owneth, that Matt. 12.28.
he cast out Devils by the Spirit of God.

Thus Honor and Worship due to the only true God, is also rendered to the Holy
Ghost: Thus St. Paul calls Romans 9.1.
upon him as a Judge of his Conscience, and Searcher of his Heart: In Matt.
28.19.
Baptism he is called upon as well as the Father and the Son; and that which in
Scripture is said about Chap. 12.31.
Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, which shall never be forgiven; and 1 John
5.16.
which we are forbidden to Pray for, does sufficiently convince, how the Holy
Ghost is to be worshipped with no less Piety, Honor and Adoration, than are
the Father and the Son.

This short Scheme, which upon occasion may be enlarged, I at this time have
drawn against the Blasphemous Heresies of Socinians, that by the Paw the Reader
may know the Lion; and so to give People warning of the Danger and Nature of
the Poison, which strikes at no less, than to overthrow the Fundamentals of
True Christian Religion. Thus if Men, having been forewarned, stand upon their
Guards, they may, by the Grace of God, be able to avoid the Evil and Occasion
of it. As to the other Points wherein they Err, especially about Matters of
Grace, as that the Causes of Predestination are not in God, but in us; that he
does not predestinate to Salvation any particular or certain Persons; and that
Predestination is mutable, and may be frustrated: These and others I now omit,
only give this hint to show, how they are broke loose against the Person and
Grace of our Blessed Savior; in them we find united and concentered the
Damnable Errors of the two great Heresiarks Arrius and Pelagius, even against
Scripture, Reason and Authority, the Belief of the True Christian Primitive
Church.

That which now remains for me to do, is directly to address my self to
several sorts of Persons: First, To the Clergymen, both to the Sound and
Unsound part thereof, whom God has set to be Watchmen over Israel his People;
they cannot be Ignorant of God's Charge to them, and how strictly God will
require at their Hands the Blood of those that shall Perish thorough their
Faults: It is the Duty of them all, whither Superior or Inferior, and ought to
be their diligent Care, to feed their Flocks with Sound Doctrine, and with the
Sincere Milk of Truth, to prevent the Wolves coming into their Sheep-folds,
which now are waiting for an Opportunity to enter in and tear, Ezekiel. 13.5.
Let them go up into the Gaps, and make up the Hedges for the House of God, and
use every one all possible endeavors, with Watching and Preaching, to prevent
the Poison's creeping within their several Churches, and strive, with good
Lives and Conversations, to procure God's Blessing upon their Labors. But in a
special way to the Superior Clergy, who have a great Hand in the Government of
the Church, and are dignified with Titles, that the greater Power they have,
the more is and shall be required at their Hands, when the great Shepherd and
Bishop of our Souls shall appear: I dare not to presume so far of my self, as
to think I am able to advise, much less to prescribe any Methods, that must be
left to their Christian Prudence, and to that Measure which God has imparted
to them of his Spirit.

However with Submission it will be well to begin at Home, and every one see
whither all be safe and sound within the Pales of their Jurisdiction; and if
there appears any signs of Leprosy and Plague, without loss of time, and in
the most proper ways, let them Purge, Cleanse and Remove it, and then use means
conducing to keep it out, and hinder its coming in: Afterward let them meet
and join Heads together, and be a mutual Help, and take such wholesome and
vigorous Resolutions, as may, by the Blessing of God, root out and prevent the
growing of those dangerous Weeds: Let every one, not only within his Precincts,
labor against the Distemper, but also altogether strive to drive it out of the
Land: Let them use their Authority, as far as it reaches, in Ecclesiastical
things; and wherein it falls short, they may, for help, apply to the Civil
Power, and those amongst them whom God has endued with sufficient Parts and
Learning: Let them, in God's Name, make use of those Weapons to fight against
and batter down Error and Heresy; to discourage and discountenance it in the
Fautors and Professors thereof: And speedily they must go about it, for fear of
coming too late; for it is too true, and too public, how the Poison is gotten,
not only here and there, up and down, but also into our very Vitals, I mean
into the Universities: Let them but be Real and Upright for God and our
Savior's Interest, and trust God for a Success: But at one time or other Jer.
48.10.
the Curse of God will light upon those that do his Work deceitfully, or
negligently. Wherefore mind ye Christ, if ye will have him to mind you; be
concerned for him and his Glory, if you desire him to be concerned for you.

My next Address is, to the Magistrate and Secular Power, whither Supreme or
Subordinate, Legislative or Executive; with all humble Respect in the present
case to put them in mind of their Duty; as they Rule for God, who has placed
them in their Stations, so at the Last and Terrible Day, if not before, he will
call them to give him an account of their Administration; he not only has
called but also preserves them in the Exercise of their Charge, and keeps the
most Unruly in Awe and Obedience under them: As this he does for them, so he
expects they shall do other things for him; he has put the Romans 13.4.
Sword in their Hand, which they bear not in vain, for he is the Minister of
God, a Revenger to execute Wrath upon him that does Evil; not only to maintain
their own Authority, but also and chiefly that of God, for all Authority is
originatively in him, and but derivatively in them; for in his Name, and by
Virtue of his Commission, is all Jurisdiction, and all Judgment to be executed:
They are the Keepers of both Tables, to punish not only the Transgressors of
the second, but also those of the first; not only Adulterers, Thieves and
Murderers, but also Profane, Impious Idolaters and Blasphemers: I do not say
presently to Hang, Draw and Quarter, but let the Guilty be discountenanced, and
the Obstinate and Contumacious punished: Herein let Christian Prudence be their
Guide, and the Law of the Land, not without God's, be the Rule, whereby they
will unnest our Atheistical, Impious and Profane Persons, who do shelter
themselves under Socinianism.

I am sure the Devil and all the Powers of Hell, can raise no Opinions more
Damnable and Blasphemous, no more Destructive to the very Foundation of Faith
and Salvation, than to bring in amongst a Christian Society, that which spares
not, but strikes at Divinity it self, which offers to pull out of God's Bosom
his only begotten Son; who robs that very Son of God, of his Nature, and of
that Glory which he had with the Father from all Eternity; and undertakes to
Annihilate that Holy and Blessed Spirit of God: This, indeed, is to grieve him
that comfort us in all our Griefs, and at once to overthrow the whole
Mystery of our Redemption; for if Christ be not God, he has not satisfied the
Justice of God, nor appeased his Wrath: And thus our Faith is vain, and we are
still in our Sins; for it was impossible for any Man, merely such, to perform
that great Work, and overcome all our Enemies: I say, though God had
strengthened him never so much, for no Man could receive a greater Power than
Humane Nature is capable of; and God could not of a Man make a God, because it
implies a Contradiction: Humanity being passible, was a fit subject to suffer
Pains due for Sin and the Curse of the Law; but an Infinite Power was necessary
to get the Victory over those Torments, and over Death. I say not only that
Humane Nature alone could not perform this; but I add, That Angelical Nature,
more noble and perfect, would have sunk under the Weight and Burden of it.

These Errors we must look upon as Hellish and Prodigious Monsters, as indeed
they are, but withal the Impudence and Shamelesness of those that are
therewith infected, is a great Aggravation, they Glory in their Shame, for with
a bare and brazen Face, they own and publish their Opinions, which I could
observe to my Grief and Amazement: No Modesty in their Behavior, no sign of
Piety in their Discourse, no Check of Conscience; they speak openly, write
publicly, and boldly disperse their Erroneous Books; and no Curb, no Restraint
put upon them; they Poison the Souls, and no body says to them, What do
thou? We have the Ny -- s, the Fer -- ns, the Fr -- ks, etc. known for what
they be; we have here, as I am informed, one Crel -- us Nephew to that Infamous
Socinian beyond Sea; we have here some Fr -- ch Wretches, who, before they came
over, durst not own their Opinions, for fear of Fire and Faggot, yet here vent
them with Liberty, who if ever they went back, would no doubt draw in their
Horns; nay, some of them take upon them to Travel abroad in the Capacity of
Governors to young Noblemen and Gentlemen, though in a high degree infected
with that Plague; yet these things are not taken notice of, though of such a
Nature as deserves strictly to be looked and narrowly inquired into: And God
knows what Judgments this is like to bring upon the Nation, as if before we had
not Sins enough to answer for, but there must be this new Addition: However, we
have some Law against Blasphemy and Socinianism which makes great Noise, and
spreads too much; God knows whose Fault it is, with the Royal Prophet we must
say, Psalm. 119.126.
It is time for thee, Lord, to work, for they have made void thy Law.

We want no Presidents nor Examples out of Scripture, to show how it is the
Magistrates Duty to punish such Enormities, for as they have the Sword to
defend the Innocent, so it is to punish Malefactors, of which there can be no
greater than Blasphemers: As of the two kinds of Treasons, that which is
against the Prince's Person is in a higher degree and greater than that against
his Government; so the Blasphemy against God's Works and Providence, may be
called less than that which is immediately against his Nature and Persons: God
requires of Magistrates, and so they in Conscience are bound to provide, that
Subjects be rightly instituted in his True Religion, and consequently to have
every thing removed and punished that is contrary thereunto: This course was
taken by the good Kings of Judah, as Asa, Jehoshaphat, Hezechiah and Josiah; so
since Christ's Coming good Christian Emperors did so; hence to suppress
Heretics, the Councils of Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus, Calcedon, were
summoned by the Emperors Constantine, Theodosius, Martian, etc. as to the
Blasphemer mentioned in the Old Testament, He was stoned by God's immediate
command. Levit. 24.14.
Here Worstius's Book De Deo was in King James's Time burnt by the Hangman; as
some Years after the Racoviensis Catechism was, by order of Parliament,
condemned to be.

Lastly, I come and address to all and every particular Subject, of whatsoever
Rank and Quality, whither Noble or Ignoble, High or Low, Rich or Poor, Young or
Old, and earnestly desire them, as they are tender of the Glory of God, of
their own Salvation, and of the Welfare and Prosperity of their Religion and
Country, not to suffer themselves to be mislead and seduced by those Ravenous
Wolves, who do not come in Sheeps-cloathings, for they deal above-board, but
like Roaring Lions; with such keep no company, and as much as possibly you can,
avoid all Communication, 1 Cor. 5.11.
no not to eat, as St. Paul says, which if you do, you tempt God, as much as
one who would lie a bed with another that has the Plague, yet think himself in
no danger of it. Romans 16.17, 18.
Now, says the same Apostle in another place, I beseech you Brethren, mark
them which cause Divisions and Offenses, contrary to the Doctrine which ye have
received, and avoid them: This is both Warning and Command, and Beseeching
against the Enemies of the True Doctrine he taught, the reason he gives in the
next Verse, For they that are such, serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their
own Belly, and by good Words and fair Speeches deceive the Hearts of the
Simple: Let the Simple beware of such Deceivers. This Advice in such cases he
gives the Simple, as being most of all in danger of being seduced; but to the
Learned and Clergy in the Person of Titus, he says that which I wish them to
mind, Tit. 3.10, 11.
A Man that is an Heretic after the first and second Admonition, reject:
Knowing, that he that is such, is subverted and sins, being condemned of
himself: What the Holy Apostle says, he backs with a Reason.

Here I cannot forbear, with all due Respect, in God's Name, to declare to
Kings, Parliaments, and to any that have a Hand in the Civil or Ecclesiastical
Government, that in case they every one in their Station, and to the utmost of
their Power, do not go about to restrain and suppress that Damnable and
Antichristian Poison, they thereby become accessory to the Blasphemy; it is
their Duty, and in their Power, to oppose it; which to neglect, is to encourage
it; for Impunity is an Encouragement to Crimes; and they must know, God at one
time or other will require it at their hands, and these few Lines I have
written, shall rise up in Judgment against them: Let them remember and apply
Mordecai's words to Esther, Esther 4.14.
If thou altogether hold thy Peace at this time, then shall Deliverance
arise from another place; but thou and thy Father's House shall be destroyed.

But to return to those whom I am Addressing to, I say to them, Mistrust the
Deceitfulness of Sin, the Craftiness of the Devil, and the Weakness and
Corruption of your own Hearts: As you are to avoid their Discourses, so have
nothing to do with their Books; this I speak chiefly to the Ignorant and
Unlearned, who must never read them, but in the Works of sound Divines that
refute them; but be very frequent in reading the Word of God, which can afford
both Offensive and Defensive Weapons against such Enemies; therein you may find
strong and full Proofs, with Demonstrations of the Divinity of our Blessed
Savior, of the Holy Ghost, and of every other high and necessary Point of our
Faith, for therein God has not left himself without a Witness against all
Opposers and Blasphemers whatsoever.

This against such Deceivers and Antichrists as St. John calls them in his
second Epistle, I shall now conclude with what the same Apostle says in the
same place, If there come any unto you, and bring not this Doctrine, 2 John
10.11.
receive him not into your House, neither bid him God speed. You see he
forbids to wish them well, in the following Verse he gives the reason, For
he that bids him God speed, is partaker of his evil Deeds, makes himself
Accessory to his Error and Guilt. This Holy Apostle not only gives us this
Rule, but also his own Example in the case of Cerinthus another Heretic in his
time, who denied Christ to be God or Son of God. We have it related out of
Polycarpus by Lib. 3. cap 3.
Ireneus and Lib 4. Hist. Eccles. cap. 14.
Eusebius, How at Ephesus St. John being gone to wash himself in a Bath, as
soon as he heard Cerinthus was there, he went away abhorring the place; and
this he added, He feared, the place wherein such an Enemy of the Truth had
Bathed would fall; and he no sooner came out, but the House fell, wherewith
Cerinthus and all others within it were killed. Now to him Rev. 19.13, 16.
whose Name is called the Word of God, and who has on his Vesture, and on his
Thigh, a Name written, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. 1 Timothy 6.14, 15.
To the Lord Jesus Christ, who is the Blessed and only Potentate, King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords: To 1 Cor. 1.24.
Christ who is the Power and Wisdom of God, even that Wisdom that speaks thus,
Prove. 8.22, 23.
The Lord possessed me in the beginning of his way, before his Works of Old. I
was set up from Everlasting, from the Beginning, or ever the Earth was. To him
be Honor and Power Everlasting. Amen.

FINIS.

