OF Laying on of Hands. Heb. 6. 2. OR, A DISCOURSE Containing these 4. Chapters.

1. Of the several Ends of Laying on of Hands, in the New Testament. 2. What
Laying on of Hands, is not, and cannot be meant. Heb. 6. 2. 3. What Laying on
of Hands, is and must be meant there. 4. That the Laying on of Hands, practiced
by some in these days, on all Baptized Believers, was never Instituted,
Commanded, nor practiced at all, by Jesus Christ, or his Apostles in all the
New Testament.
Mark. 7. 7, 8, 9. In vain do they worship me, teaching for Doctrines the
Commandments of men.
For, laying aside the Commandment of God, ye hold the Tradition of men.
Ye reject the Commandment of God, that ye may keep your own Traditions.
Col. 2. 8. Beware lest any man spoil you, through vain deceit, after the
Tradition of men, and not after Christ. LONDON, Printed by John Streater, 1656.

CHAP. I. Of the several Ends of Laying on of Hands, in the New Testament.
FOr the better understanding of this great Controversy, of late raised, about
Laying on of Hands;

We shall first consider the several Ends, of Laying on of Hands, practiced in
the New Testament.

Upon search we find, this Rice or Ceremony was used, upon a threefold
Account, or to a threefold End.

1. For Healing or recovering the sick.

2. For ministering or giving the extraordinary gifts of the Holy Spirit.

3. For Ordaining and appointing of Officers.

1. For Healing or recovering the sick. Mark 16. 18. They shall Lay Hands on
the sick, and they shall recover.

Acts. 28. 8. The father of Publius lay sick, etc. and Paul laid his Hands on
him, and healed him.

2. For ministering, or giving the Holy Spirit. To this end Peter and John Laid
their Hands on them at Samaria. Acts 8. 17, 18, 19. Then laid they their Hands
on them and they received the Holy Spirit. And when Simon saw, that through
Laying on of the Apostles Hands, the Holy Spirit was given, etc.

And that hereby is meant the extraordinary Gifts of the holy ly Spirit,
nothing is more evident. For,

Verse 12. it is said, they Believed.

Verse 14. that they had received the Word of God.

Verse 16. that they were Baptized.

All which could not be, unless they had already received the ordinary measures
of the Spirit.

Further it is yet more evident from the Text it self; for after all this, it
is said, They received the Holy Spirit by Laying on of Hands, ver. 17.

And that before this, the Holy Spirit was fallen upon none of them. ver. 15,
16: A phrase, peculiar to the extraordinary Gifts of the Holy Spirit, See Acts
10. 44. and 11. 15.

It is yet further evident, for the Falling of the Holy Spirit on them, was so
visible, that Simon saw it. ver. 18. And thereupon ver. 19. he says, Give me
also this power, that on whomsoever I lay Hands, he may receive the Holy Spirit.

And that they Laid their Hands to this end, the Text is as express, ver. 17.
They laid their Hands, and they received the Holy Spirit. And ( ver. 18.)
through Laying on of Hands, the Holy Spirit was given.

So that you see clearly, they laid on their Hands, to give the extraordinary
or miraculous gifts of the Holy Spirit.

But, say some, the words of Simon ver. 18. 19. are reproved by Peter, ver. 20,
21.

To which we answer: Simon is not reproved for what he had asserted, that he
had seen; for, that was true. But, that he would have purchased this gift and
power, with money; Herein lay his wickedness. Because thou have thought, that
the gift of God may be purchased with money, ver. 20.

Upon this account also Paul laid his Hands on the twelve men at Ephesus, Act.
19. 6. And when Paul had laid his Hands upon them, the Holy Spirit came on
them, and they spoke with Tongues, and prophesied.

And, that by the Holy Spirit here, is meant the extraordinary Gifts of the
Spirit, is clear: because ver. 2. it is said, they believed. Now none can
believe without the Holy Spirit, 1 Cor. 12. 3. But most clear in the Text it
self; for the Holy Spirit, came so on them, that they immediately thereupon,
spoke with Tongues and prophesied. A phrase noting the highest measures of the
Spirit, that ever were attained; yea the Baptism of the Spirit, Act. 2. 4. and
10. 44, 45, 46.

3. For Ordaining or appointing of Officers.

To this end, Timothy had hands laid on him, by the Presbytery or Eldership. 1 Timothy 4. 14. and that this was for the Ministry, the whole context proves, from
Ver. 11. to the end. So also, 2 Epist. 1. 6. is to be understood, Paul being
one of the Presbytery: and there also, about the Text, Ministerial gifts are
spoken of.

If any object from these two places, that there is a gift spoken of, that
Timothy received by laying on of Hands.

To this we Answer: that we verily persuade our selves, that none, who rightly
come into this office in sincerity and conscience to God, and in love and duty
to his Church, but may confidently expect the blessing of God to the increase
of their gifts, and experience does abundantly restifie to the truth of this.

We further find upon enquiry, that all the standing Officers in the New
Testament, were set apart unto their Ministry, by this Rite or Ceremony.

1. Messengers. Thus Paul and Barnabas were sent out by the Church, Act. 13. 2,
3. As they ministered to the Lord, the holy Spirit said, Separate me Barnabas
and Saul, for the work whereunto I have called them, and when they had fasted
and prayed, and laid their hands on them, they sent them away.

Thus you see the Messengers of the Churches were appointed to their work, by
Laying on of Hands.

2. Elders, or overseers. 1 Timothy 5. 22. Lay Hands suddenly on no man.

And that this was spoken in reference to Elders, the whole context before
prooveth, from Ver. 17. where the Apostle treats expressly of Elders, Ver. 17.
Let the Elders, etc: Verse. 19. Against an Elder, etc: and then in Ver. 22. Lay
hands suddenly on no man, viz. Elders, before spoken of. That is, ordain no
man an Elder suddenly, or rashly, or too hastily, without some due trial, and
consideration had of his gifts, fitness, and qualifications, set down 1 Timothy
3. beginning, and Tit. 1. 5, 6. etc.

3. Deacons. Thus the 7 Deacons were appointed to their work, Act. 6. 3, 5, 6.
in express terms.

Thus you see all the New Testament-Officers were appointed by Laying on of
Hands.

And this shall suffice for the first Chapter, to show the several. Ends of
laying on of Hands in the New Testament.

CHAP. II. Which of these Layings on of Hands is not, and cannot be meant Heb.
6. 2.
BEfore we resolve this Question, we readily acknowledge, that A Laying on of
Hands is a Principle of Religion, and a part of the Foundation of the Christian
building, Heb. 5. 12. and 6. 1, 2.

Why else seemed it good to the holy Spirit, by this Penman, to put and reckon
it, amongst such Principles of the Christian Religion, as Repentance, Faith,
Baptism, the Resurrection, and eternal Judgment, and these granted by all,
under the least profession of Christianity, to be Foundation-Doctrines.

This being premised, we notwithstanding deny, that it is either laying on of
Hands, for Healing the sick; or for giving the extraordinary gifts of the Holy
Spirit; (much less the laying on of Hands practiced by some in these days, as
you may further see in Chap. 4.)

I. Here cannot be meant, laying on of Hands for healing or recovering the
sick; and that for these reasons;

1. Because the gift or power of healing by laying on of Hands is ceased. Now
that cannot be a Principle, etc: which is not in force in all ages, nor any man
capable to practice it.

At the first promise of giving this power, it was accompanied only with
miraculous gifts, Mar. 16. 17, 18. In my name shall they cast out Devils, they
shall speak with new Tongues, they shall take up Serpents, and if they drink
any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them; they shall lay Hands on the sick, and
they shall recover.

Now how dangerous and destructive a principle is this, that miracles should be
of the essence of Religion (as Principles are) and yet no power to practice them

2. As it is necessary, a foundation-Principle should continue and be in force
in all ages; so it is necessary also, it should concern the whole Church, and
every member thereof, as a Foundation does the whole, and every part of the
Building, to support and uphold it.

Admit then this power were now in force; how would the healing of any one
particular member, concern the whole body as a principle? etc.

Therefore we conclude, that Laying on of Hands, for recovering the sick,
cannot be that Principle, etc: Heb. 6.

II. The Laying on of Hands, for giving the extraordinary gifts of the holy
Spirit, cannot be meant here; and that for these reasons:

1. Because (as before) this power of giving the extraordinary gifts of the
holy Spirit, is now ceased.

As appears by the practice of it at this day, for although so many have had
hands laid upon them, to this end; yet these extraordinary gifts, have never
followed, to any one of them; but both they and the administrators are, and
remain, as other men.

Yet to call this a Principle etc: what were this but to grant, that one of the
Foundation-stones of the Christian Building were now lost? And if but a part of
the Foundation fail, how tortering must the whole building stand, and will
soon decay, and come to nothing. And it is well known, that a principle in all
Arts and sciences, is of constant and standing Use.

2. That this laying on of Hands, cannot be the principle, Heb. 6. because this
Laying on of Hands, is there called a Doctrine, Ver. 1, 2.

But, that laying on of Hands, to give the holy Spirit, was never once taught
in all the New Testament, no not by them that practiced it.

3. If this laying on of Hands were the principle, etc;

Then this very Church of the Hebrews (the first constituted Church in the New
Testament after Christ's Ascension) this Church being the same with that, Act.
1, and 2) had wanted a principle in Religion, which were very absurd to
imagine; for they themselves had not Laying on of Hands to this end. Act. 8.
being the first place that ever it was practiced: and sure in all matters about
worship, the written word must be our Rule; and to the Scriptures silence, we
must give consent, according to that Proverb: Where God has not a mouth to
speak, we must not have an Ear to hear.

Besides: that they had not Laying on of Hands, to this end, is evident,
because they received the extraordinary gifts of the holy Spirit without it,
Act. 2. Verse. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5: etc.

Therefore we conclude, that neither of these two Layings on of Hands can be
meant, in Heb. 6. 9.

CHAP. III. What Laying on of Hands, is, and must be meant, Heb. 6. 2.
FOr the better resolving this Question, we must take notice, that it is Laying
on of Hands, here in the singular number, (...). etc: therefore can be but one
Laying on of Hands, that is called here a Principle, etc: and not more, as some
would have it; for then it should be Layings on of Hands, in the plural number.

As in the same place, when the Apostle would understand more Baptisms then
one, he says, The doctrine of Baptisms, in the plural number.

This being considered, we must remember, what went before, that it is neither
Laying on of Hands for healing the sick, nor for giving the extraordinary gifts
of the Holy Spirit.

Then it must be, Laying on of Hands for ordaining of Officers.

Which will more clearly appear by this Argument.

It must be Laying on of Hands, either for healing the sick, or for giving the
extraordinary gifts of the holy Spirit, or for Ordaining of Officers.

But neither for healing the sick, nor for giving the extraordinary gifts of
the holy Spirit.

Therefore for ordaining of Officers.

For the first Proposition, That it must be for one of these three Ends,
because there is no other Laying on of Hands, upon any other account in all the
New Testament.

For the second Proposition, that it is neither for healing the sick, nor for
giving the holy Spirit, has been already proved, Chap. 2.

Therefore it follows, it must be Laying on of Hands, for appointing of
Officers. And this shall suffice, for the first Argument.

2. That Laying on of Hands for Officers, is here meant, will further appear,
because this Laying on of Hands, is called a Doctrine, ver. 1. and therefore
must be a Laying on of Hands, which is some-where else taught. But the other
Layings on of Hands, were never once taught. But this Laying on of Hands, was
taught, viz. by the Apostle Paul, 1 Timothy 5 22. Lay Hands suddenly on no man,
that is, Admit none rashly, or too hastily into office: and that this concerns
Officers, see before, Chap. 1. In this verse. there are two things taught, one
expressed, the other necessarily implied: that which is expressed, is, that
Timothy should not suddenly Lay Hands on any man; that which is employed, is,
that it was to be done, if advisedly; If not to be done at all, it were
frivolous to say, it should not be done suddenly.

Thus you see the Apostle Paul teaches this Laying on of Hands which in Heb.
6. he calls a Doctrine.

Now lest any should say, that this laying on of Hands, concerns all Baptized
believers, we therefore shall enmind them, that from their own principle and
practice, this cannot be; because they Lay Hands on all their disciples,
immediately upon their Baptism, and therefore leave no room for this word
[suddenly] in the Apostles exhortation: and it is sore against their wills, if
they may not Lay their Hands suddenly upon Baptism: and, in their own sense,
there is none fit for Baptism, that is not thereupon fitly qualified, for this
their imposition: nor do they ever stay till they are further qualified for
this ceremony; and therefore the Apostles would in vain have exhorted them, to
Lay Hands suddenly on no man. But that this was for Officers, the most amongst
themselves, that I have wet withal, do confess.

We might yet further add, if need were, that this Laying on of Hands, for
office, was enjoined and commanded by the holy Spirit, Act. 13. 2, 3. but now
they cannot show, where the other Layings on of Hands, was in the least
enjoined and commanded by the Holy Spirit. Therefore we conclude again, it
must be Laying on of Hands for Officers, which the Apostle here calls a
Doctrine.

3. Again this Laying on of Hands, this Church of the Hebrews, had practiced
amongst them, Act. 6. 6. they Laid their Hands upon the Deacons, to assign
them to their office. But none of the other Layings on of Hands, was practiced
amongst them, as we find. Now it cannot rationally be supposed, that the
Apostle, writing to the Hebrews, should call that a principle, etc. which they
were not acquainted with, but rather that Laying on of Hands, which they were
under the practice of: and therefore it must be this Laying on of Hands for
Officers, Heb. 6. 2.

4. Besides, this Laying on of Hands only remains in force, the other two not
capable to be practiced, nor have been for many hundred years. It must
therefore necessarily follow to be this Laying on of Hands, which is still in
force: because called a part of the Foundation, Heb. 6. 1. Now a Foundation
must always be the same, and of constant and standing use to the whole building.

5. This Laying on of Hands only, concerns the whole Church, which is necessary
a Principle should do. We have already showed you how the other do not concern
the whole; but this does, in regard every member is bound to live under the
Government of the Church, and to be obedient to their Officers, to whom the
Rule and care of the whole Church is committed. And therefore this must be the
Principle, etc. Heb. 6. 2.

Having thus sufficiently proved, what Laying on of Hands, is here meant. Heb.
6. 2. We shall now further show you, what is here meant by this phrase of
Laying on of Hands, that is to say; The Government of the Church, which was put
into the Hands of men appointed thereunto, by this Ceremony of Laying on of
Hands. The very Order of the Principles, as they are laid down, Heb. 6. 1, 2.
further confirm this.

Therefore leaving the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, (or the beginning
words of Christ) let us go on unto perfection: not laying again the Foundation
of Repentance from dead works, and of Faith toward God, of the Doctrine of
Baptisms, and of Laying on of Hands, and of the resurrection of the dead, and
of eternal Judgment.

For as the next thing to be done, after Faith and Repentance, is to be
Baptized: so the next thing after baptism, is to be added to the Church. Act.
2. 38. 41, 42. 47. the Officers whereof were always appointed by the Laying on
of Hands. And this was the constant practice of the Primitive times.

And as in these six Principles, the two first, viz. Repentance and Faith: and
the two last, viz. the Resurrection and eternal Judgment, are absolutely
necessary unto salvation: So the two middlemost, viz. Baptism, and Laying on of
Hands; are necessary to a right and orderly Church constitution, and
progression. Baptism, to admit into the Church; and this Ceremony of Laying on
of Hands, noting the Ministry and Government of the Church, when come in.

We take leave yet to add, that this is the Judgment of most modern and later
writers, on the Text, that we have met with. We shall instance only some few in
English. Wilsons Christian Dictionary. Dr. Gouge in his late large comment on
this Epistle. Trap upon the place, says, That by this phrase of Laying on of
Hands, is meant, the Ministry and Government of the Church. And Cartwright
upon the Rhemist-Testament on this Text, and else where in his Harmony, says,
That he which denies Church Government, denies a Principle of the Christian
Religion.

Now that there might be Government and order in the Church, Officers were
appointed thereunto by Laying on of Hands.

The very light of Nature, and common Experience teaches, that Government is a
principle in all Constitutions, whether of Nation, Family, or the like: without
which, all would suddenly be out of order, for Anarchy has always been the
forerunner of confusion, if not of utter dissolution. So of a house, without a
Foundation there can be no building. Hence the Metaphor in the Text, Not laying
again the Foundation. Implying, that as a Foundation is to the building, to
support and uphold it, so necessary is Government in the Church.

Hence it is, that the Apostles always appointed Elders, in every Church, in
every City Acts 14. 23. Tit. 1. 5. and these Elders were ordained, by Laying on
of Hands; as before.

CHAP. IIII. That the Laying on of Hands, practiced by some in these days, on
all Baptized Believers, was never Instituted, Commanded, or Practiced by Christ
or his Apostles in all the New Testament.
HEre indeed lies the stress of the Controversy, which chiefly occasioned me to
write these few Lines, that we might undeceive, and reduce such as are already
under the vanity of this practice, and to prevent others from owning of, and
submitting to such a Scripture-less thing as this is, which some (who know not
what they say, nor whereof they affirm) call an Ordinance of Christ, though
without any the least word or warrant for it, in all the New Testament of our
Lord.

Certainly this has been a received Principle, we have of late years taken up,
and must continue to go by, if Christ's Disciples; That we must introduce
nothing into the worship of Christ, but what we have an express Word for, from
that great Prophet in his New Testament. See Acts 3. 22, 23. For this very
cause we have all along separated from the Bishops, and the Church of England,
and shall we now return again? God forbid.

Now that which has not one word of Institution, or command for it in all the
New Testament, is no Ordinance of Christ, but Will Worship, and Superstition.
(Superstition signifying something more then appointed.) But this Laying on of
Hands, on all Baptized Persons, has not one word of Institution, or command
for it in all the New Testament. Therefore no Ordinance of Christ, but
Will Worship and Superstition.

That there is no Institution or Command for it in all the New Testament,
appears, because the greatest Contenders and sticklers for this practice, did
never yet allege any one place, that does in the least, prove any such thing;
if there had been any, certainly they would have produced them. They themselves
instance but two places, where the words are found, besides Heb. 6. viz. Acts
8. and Act. 19. with which they have raised such a dust, that has indeed
blinded the eyes of some honest, well-minded people; and by good words, and fair
speeches, have deceived the hearts of the simple. But to lay this dust which
they have raised, and to discover the (but) pretenses they have made. We shall
first consider their forementioned Allegations in the General, and then view
them more particularly.

First, neither any one, nor all of these places, have the least word of
Institution or Command in them: Nor one syllable of proof brought from them,
that this should be done to all Baptized persons. Besides the Ends of Laying on
of Hands in these days, is a different thing from the Ends in these Texts; all
which will more appear in the particular view of them, which is the second
thing propounded to speak to.

And first for Heb. 6. 2. Neither the Subjects nor the Ends, are particularly
mentioned and expressed in this place, and therefore we must go to other
Scriptures, to find out what Laying on of Hands is most agreeable to this Text,
as we do in the case of Baptism in the same place: The Text neither telling us,
who should have Hands laid on them, not to what End; neither is the word All in
it, as was before noted, and we have already proved (...) from other Texts, and
clear Arguments, that this Laying on of Hands is to another End. See Chap. 3.

The two other places they bring (we put them both together, because they are
of the same nature) are Acts 8. 14. 17. where Peter and John Laid their Hands
on them at Samaria: and Acts 19. 6. where Paul Laid his Hands on the twelve at
Ephesus.

That the Laying on of Hands in these Texts, was for the giving of the
extraordinary Gifts of the Holy Spirit, we have already proved, Chap. 1. There
is not one word of Command here requiring us to do as they have done. They
Laying on their Hands, as moved thereunto by the Holy Spirit, having received
power to minister the extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit, as appears, because
those Gifts did immediately follow their Laying on of Hands.

We have also before proved, that the power of giving these Gifts being ceased,
the Rite and Ceremony as to this End ought to cease also; and cannot but
presumptuously be practiced at this day, the gifts never following, much less
reckoned for a principle in Religion. But these gifts did both times immediately
follow in the Acts. The gifts now being neither found in the Minister,
norfollowing the Administration.

Have we not as good ground, to adventure the Laying on of Hands, miraculously
to heal the sick, having I am sure as good a warrant, and may hope to speed as
successfully.

Besides these two places they have not another, to pretend to, where the words
are found.

As for that place, Act. 9. 17. where Paul had Hands Laid on him; from their
own confession this will not serve their turn, for it was before his Baptism,
verse 18. and it was for the receiving of his sight, as well as for his being
filled with the holy Spirit, if not principally for the recovering of his
sight, see ver. 12. Only we will note in general that this Laying on of Hands
to extraordinary or miraculous ends, had not at all respect to Baptism, for it
was as well before Baptism, as after it; as in this case before us. Nor do we
think it needful to make answer to those Texts, brought in by some of them,
for number but not for weight, as Ephesians. 2, 20. we are built upon the Foundation
etc: and Heb. 3. 14. we are made pertakers of Christ, if we hold the beginning
etc: And 2 Epist. of John, 9, 10. whosoever transgre^^^th, and abides not in
the Doctrine of Christ, etc: and such like Texts as these are, where they can
find the word beginning, Doctrine or Foundation. We cannot but judge, the very
recital of these Texts, a sufficient confutation, to any man that has his
reason in his head. And wish with all our hearts, they might not incur that
severe censure of the Apostle, of Handling the word of God deceitfully, 2 Cor.
2. 17. and 4. 2.

And thus we doubt not, but all unprejudiced and unbiassed people, considering
what we have said, will see they have no footing in the Scripture (which must
be our Rule and Directory for our whole worship) for this their Laying on of
Hands, much less to make it a principle of Religion, and so (as they do) a
Boundary of Communion.

The truth is, they themselves are so much at a loss in this matter, that they
agree not about the end. They make more Ends of their one Laying on of Hands,
then of the several kinds of Layings on of Hands, in the New Testament. Some
for one end, and some for another, and so proceed to a third and a fourth end,
as if God indeed had sent among them, the confusion of Tongues, instead of
speaking with Tongues, and the miraculous Gifts of the Holy Spirit.

Some would have Hands Laid on, for the obtaining of the extraordinary gifts of
the holy Spirit, in imitation of Act. 8. and Act. 19. to this we have once and
again spoken.

Some would have Laying on of Hands, for Confirmation as they call it, and
though they shroud themselves under the forementioned Scriptures, yet to speak
truth, their best argument is the Common Prayer book; and some of them have
been so ingenuous to confess as much; and have very much boasted and gloried,
in this one inartificiall unconcluding Argument: for the Scripture owns them
not all in this case.

Doctor Gouge, on Heb. 6. says, that though Laying on of Hands, were anciently
practiced by the Fathers to this end, yet it is not expressly set down in
Scripture. But thanks be to God through Jesus Christ our Lord, we have been
better taught in these last days, then to own any thing in the worship of
Christ, from their Tradition or Authority, unless also grounded on the word of
God. What is this practice then, but setting our posts by Gods posts, and
bringing in a Tradition of men, instead of an Appointment of Christ?

A third sort there are, who practice this Laying on of Hands, as a means to
receive more of the Holy Spirit, and that in the ordinary measures of it.

I confess, here they say well, if they could make the least proof of such an
End from the Holy Scriptures. This fair Pretext to obtain more of the Spirit,
has beguiled many a poor, weak, unstable soul. We profess our selves so
far one with them in this thing, that we cannot Judge him a Christian, nor
worthy to be accounted Christ's Disciple, that would not use all means,
appointed by God to obtain more of the Holy Spirit: we are so sensible of the
daily need of more of the supplies of the Spirit: and could they but show one
place, where ever Laying on of Hands, was practiced upon all Baptized
Believers, upon such an Account, we would in great measure suddenly become
their Proselytes. But in this matter (by their leave) we are as confident as
the silence of Scriptures can make us, that there is not any one Text, in all
the New Testament, that does in the least, justify and warrant such a practice.

This is to appoint a means, that was never of Gods Institution, and therefore
in the Use of it, cannot expect his blessing, but rather, Who has required
this at your Hands.

Let experience testify how much more of the Holy Spirit, they have received,
then others of their Brethren, who were never under this practice. It has not
been our observation alone (and with grief of heart we speak it, and could
wish it were otherwise) that instead of the Holy Spirit, a strange Spirit,
another Spirit, has generally followed this practice, so just it is with God,
to give over persons, to their own Spirit, when they introduce a tradition of
their own, for a commandment of God, and pretend the Spirit for it.

And who is so ignorant, that knows not what a strange rigid censoriousnesse,
has possessed the hearts and tongues of most of this way, as if indeed they had
received, by Laying on of Hands, another Spirit, instead of the Holy Spirit of
God. Witness the saying of some of them that we are not yet babs in Christ:
and have forbid some their houses, who were instrumental in their conversion
because they are not under this ceremony, denying communion with their
Brethren, who in their own consciences are every way equal to them, in Gifts
and Holiness, and hold the same Faith and Doctrine of the Gospel, and are of
the same order and practice with them, excepting this matter: yea and have
proceeded so far, as to excommunicate some, for no other cause but this. And
as I was writing this, one told me, before good witness, he was dealing with,
and in danger of Excommunication for this very thing.

Read these very men, in Isa. 66. 5. Your Brethren that hated you, that cast
you out for my namessake, said, Let the Lord be glorified: but he shall appear
to your joy, and they shall be ashamed.

There is yet a fourth End proposed by some; viz. That they are now waiting for
the same Gifts of the Holy Spirit, that were then given; and therefore continue
the Ceremony, as a means to obtain them. This is but little different from the
first End. But to this we answer,

1. That there was never any Laying on of Hands, practiced in all the New
Testament, under the waiting, or in the expectation of the extraordinary Gifts
of the Holy Spirit, as a means to obtain them; but, as was said before, was
never practiced by any, till they had first received power from on high, and
these Gifts immediately followed thereupon.

2. When the Gift or power is restored, then let the practice of the Ceremony
be restored also; For as when the power ceased, the Rite by right ceased also;
so the Ceremony ought not to be practiced, till the power be again received;
for what is this else, but to set a seal to a blanck. And whether this Power
shall be restored again or no, is not our Enquiry at this time. But when the
Gift, then the Rite; otherwise we should restore an empty Form, without its
Power. Again, as they cannot agree among themselves about the End: so neither
about other Circumstances herein. Some of them would have the Administrator to
be only Messengers. Others would have, Elders also.

Though the Truth is, that Laying on of Hands, which they would have the
Standard of this their practice, was only administered by Messengers. Peter and
John Acts 8. and Paul Acts 19. the only persons Ministering in this kind, in
all the New Testament. However they can agree well enough in this (as Pilate
and Herod to crucify Christ) so they to deal hardly with, if not to
excommunicate their Brethren. We willingly pass by other incongruities, which
they commit, not worth taking notice of. As the necessity they put of two being
the Administrators of this work, when as Paul alone, Acts 19. did it. And yet
but once more practiced in all the New Testament. viz. Acts 8.

We hope by this time, we have said enough to all impartial men, who are not
carried otherways, more by Will and prejudice, then by Scripture and Reason.
For those that are already under this practice, we hope they will consider,
what has been here delivered, in all humility of mind, as those that have
spoken the words of truth and soberness, our Consciences bearing us witness in
the Holy Spirit, aiming at nothing more, than the truth of the Gospel, and the
peace of the Churches. We pray that your own names and credit, may not lie at
stake in this matter, a temptation too incident to flesh and blood, and we
trust the same God, that has carried out many of you, very far in the ways of
self-denial, will teach and help you at this turn also, to judge it no
dishonor to recede from error how long soever embraced, and to take up truth
when e're you find it. Our bowels yearn toward you, and we are sad at heart,
when we think of the sad account, some of you have to give in this particular,
either for dividing from Churches, where you have had sweet communion together
with your Brethren, or for dividing of Churches, or at least keeping them from
uniting together; and all this, upon no better an account, then (I may say) a
mere empty Form and Ceremony. We will only say this, This will be your loss in
the day of our Lord Jesus, which is shortly coming.

Our heart is enlarged toward you, but we shall leave you to judge of this, as
God shall direct you, in your most retired and serious thoughts.

Only we have this to add, that we had not set Pen to Paper, had there not
been such a violent imposition upon the Churches, of your Imposition of Hands,
as to make it essential to Communion.

The blessing of the Almighty, go along with it, that as we have sown, He
will by his good Spirit be pleased to water, and we shall expect a plentiful
Harvest, for we can assure our hearts, That we are not as many, which corrupt,
or deal deceitfully with the word of God, but as of sincerity, but as of God,
in the sight of God, speak we in Christ.

FINIS.
We hope you will fear the Woe, written against them that add to the word of
God; ^^^^cially in the worship of Christ. See Deuteronomy. 4. 2. and 12. 32. Rev. 22.
18. Prove. 3^ 6. Add not thou unto his words, lest he reprove thee, and thou be
found a (...).

