Christian Directions, SHOWING How to walk with GOD All the Day long.

Drawn up for the use and benefit of the Inhabitants of SEPULCHERS Parish,

By THO: GOUGE, Pastor thereof.

1 Samuel 12. 23, 24. I will teach you the good and the right way: only fear the
Lord, and serve him with all your heart, considering how great things he has
done for you. 2 Pet. 1. 12. I will not be negligent to put you always in
remembrance of these things, though ye know them, and be established in the
present truth. Luke 17. 10. When ye shall have done all these things which are
commanded you, say, we are unprofitable servants, we have done that which was
our duty to do. LONDON, Printed by R. Ibbitson, and M. Wright, at the
King's Head in the Old Bayley. MDCLXI.

TO My dearly beloved Friends and Neighbors, the Inhabitants of Sepulchers
Parish.
Grace, Mercy and Peace from God the Father of Mercies, and the God of all
Consolation.
My Dear Friends,
COnsidering with my self, how besides my Lords-daies Preaching, and Week-daies
Catechizing, I might be further serviceable to your souls, in promoting their
spiritual welfare; It pleased God to put it into my heart, to draw up some
practical Directions for your better guidance in the way to Heaven, and to give
to every Family in my Parish a Copy of them. Accordingly I set upon the work
with all readiness and alacrity, being much persuaded in my self that some
spiritual advantage might (through Gods blessing) accrue unto your souls
thereby. The Lord, who is the searcher of all hearts, knows, that my only end
and aim herein is the advancement of your everlasting salvation, which if it
shall be any way furthered by this small Treatise, I shall never repent of my
pains and cost: But shall very much rejoice that the Lord has enabled me (in
any measure) to be serviceable to him in the furtherance of the Gospel of his
dear Son, especially among you my dear flock.

Two considerations, among others, have had some influence upon me in this
undertaking.

The one is of that mutual love which has hitherto been between us. As I have
you in my heart, so am I persuaded that you have me in yours. During the whole
time of my abode with you (which is now above two and twenty years) I do not
remember that we have had the least difference, no not about the point of
Maintenance, the usual unhappy makebate between Minister and People. For
though the value of the Living be not so much by half as is generally reported
abroad (being no Parsonage, but a Vicaridge, endowed with a third part of that
Tithe which the Parson does collect) yet I cannot but with much thankfulness
acknowledge, that what I have had, has been with much love and friendliness.
For when you have made any composition with me for my part of the Tithe, you
have always given me more than I could demand or expect. If then the blessed
Apostle Paul were willing, and that with gladness, 2 Cor. 12. 15.
to spend and to be spent for his Corinthians, and that although the more
abundantly he loved them, the less he was loved of them; Much more ought I to
be like-minded toward you, who have not at any time so ill requited my love,
but always been ready to answer it with reciprocal affections. That therefore
I might leave to posterity some public acknowledgement, and perpetual memor^al
of your constant love and respect to me, together with my due resentment of
it, was one consideration which put me upon this design.

Another was the gladsome reflection upon your great and godly care of your
poor, which I look upon (even as it is meet for me so to do) as the fruit of
the Gospel preached among you, and an argument of your profiting therein. And
indeed it is such, as I willingly take occasion to make public mention of it
for an example to others. For though your poor be many hundreds, yet, I think,
I may say truly, without offense to other Parishes, they are in some respect
better provided for than any poor in the City; For by the voluntary
contribution of diverse of you, with the assistance of some other charitable
persons,

1 All the poor children in your Parish are taught to read and write gratis, by
such Schoolmasters and School-Mistresses, who teach them their Catechize,
whereof my self sometimes take an account.

2 All the Ancient poor who can either spin or knit, may have Flax and Yarn for
fetching, to set themselves on work, an are well paid for the same, immediately
upon the return thereof. This consideration, as it has very much affected me,
so have I always accounted my self your debtor upon this score. And surely if
our Lord and Master does take what is done unto the poor for their relief, as
done unto himself, then should we also, especially his Ministers, in some
sort, be like-minded. Your debtor therefore I have taken my self to be, nor
could I bethink my self how to discharge this debt in a way more suitable to
the nature of it, and my relation to you, than by endeavoring something
extraordinary for your good hereafter, as you have done extraordinarily for the
present good of our poor; and as you have put your selves to special pains and
charge for the succor of their bodies, so to put my self upon some special
labor, and willingly be at some cost for the advantage of your souls.

But the main Motive which has put me upon this undertaking, is, the single
sense of my Relation to you, that it has pleased God of his infinite goodness
and free grace to entrust me a weak, frail, earthen vessel, with that
inestimable Treasure, the Mysteries of the Gospel, and appointed me to preach
unto you in particular the Unsearchable Riches of Christ. I account it the
greatest honor a poor creature can be capable of, to be made directly
subservient to the glorious counsel, and gracious purpose of his Creator, for
the recovery and restoration of the world by Jesus Christ; and therefore that
we Ministers of the Gospel, whom God has vouchsafed this honor, have the
strongest engagement and obligation laid upon us to preach the Gospel, both in
season and out of season; and to lay out our selves all manner of ways, if by
any means we may gain souls unto Christ, and build them up in him. Now this way
I have here taken will have this advantage above others, above my ordinary
preaching, and performance of other Ministerial duties among you, that whereas
by them I can mind you of the things which belong unto your everlasting peace,
only while I am in this Tabernacle: By this, as it is said of Abel, Heb. 11. 4.
I may still speak to you, even when dead. Accept therefore (my dear Friends
and Neighbors) this little Treatise from the hands of your loving Pastor,
whose heart is exceedingly enlarged toward you, greatly longing after you all
in the bowels of Jesus Christ. For what is my hope, 1 These. 2. 19.
or joy, or crown of rejoicing? Are not even ye in the presence of our Lord
Jesus Christ at his coming? Accept it therefore, and testify your acceptance
by reading of it, and much more by a conscionable performance of the Directions
contained in it. I think they will carry their own evidence with them, that
they are all agreeable to the Word of God: For I have not made it my business
to mint new Notions, but to press upon you old Truths, and known duties. I have
drawm them up in a plain and familiar style and Method, studying rather to be
profitable, than accurate; They are of daily use to an holy life, and therefore
I hope you will daily peruse them. They are of general use to all sorts of
Christians, at all times, in their several places, Callings, conditions and
relations, and therefore I hope you will give the more diligent heed to them.
Such whose Callings and Businesses will scarce afford them leisure on the
week-daies to look into such Treatises as this, I do earnestly entreat them,
that at least on the Lord-daies, after the performance of the public duties of
Piety in the Congregation, and of private in their Families, they would spend
some time in reading a part of this book with their Family. And the Lord make
it abundantly useful and profitable unto you. Heb. 13. 20, 21.
Yea the God of peace that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that
great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the blood of the everlasting Covenant,
make you perfect in every good work, to do his will, working in you that which
is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever
and ever, Amen.

Sepulchers, London. December. 20. 1660. Your Affectionate, though most unworthy
Minister, THO. GOUGE.

A TABLE of the particular Points contained in this TREATISE.
CHap. 1. Shows how to begin the day with God. Chap. 2. Of Secret Prayer in
the morning. Chap. 3 Of Ejaculatory Prayers. 4 Of reading the Scriptures in
private. 5 Of Christian watchfulness over our Thoughts. 6 Of watchfulness
over our Words. 7 Of watchfulness over our Actions. 8 Of watchfulness against
Sin. 9 Of our behavior at Meals. 10 Of Sports and Recreations, and directions
concerning the same. 11 Of the duties of our Callings. 12 Of our behavior in
secret, and directions concerning Divine Meditation. 13 Of our behavior both
in good and bad company. 14 Directions to the rich, how to Improve their
wealth, to the glory of God, and the good of their own souls. 15 Directions to
the poor, showing how to carry themselves Christian like, in their low and mean
estate. 16 Of Christian-like carriage under reproaches. 17 Of our carriage
under crosses and afflictions. 18 Of Dying well. 19 Directions to such as visit
the sick. 20 Directions how to cloze the day with God. 21 Of the Morality of
the Sabbath, with directions how to sanctify the same. 23 Of the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper, with directions for the worthy receiving thereof. 23 Of the
Common mutual Duties betwixt Husband and Wife. 24 Of Husbands Duties to their
Wives. 25 Of the Duties of Wives to their Husbands. 26 Of the Duties of Parents
to their children. 27 Of the Duties of Children to their Parents. 28 Of the
Duties of Masters to their servants. 29 Of the Duties of Servants to their
Masters. 30 Of resting upon Jesus Christ alone for life and salvation.
Christian Directions, showing how to walk with God all the day long.
CHAP. I.
How to begin the day with God.
I. AT thy first awaking in the morning, consecrate unto God the freshest of
thy thoughts by lifting up thine heart to him in praises and thanksgivings for
that comfortable rest and refreshment he has vouchsafed unto thee the night
past. For had not the Lord been the more gracious unto thee, thou might have
slept the sleep of death, yea, thou might have awaked with hell flames about
thine ea^s: what cause therefore have thou to bless God, as for the mercies of
the night, so for the renewing of his mercies with the day? And then heartily
beg of God his direction, assistance, and blessing upon thy lawful pains and
endeavors that day.

II. Having thus consecrated thy first awaking unto God, by blessing him for
the mercies of the night, and for adding another day to thy life, then steep
thy thoughts in a serious meditation of God, and of some or other of his
glorious Attributes, as

1 Of the infinite Purity of God, who is of purer eyes than to behold iniquity,
i. e. Hab. 1. 13.
with the least approbation; but hates all sin with a perfect hatred, as being
contrary to his nature. A serious consideration whereof would, through Gods
blessing, prove very effectual for the suppressing of those impure thoughts
which are apt to arise from thy corrupt heart.

2 Of the almighty Power of God, whereby he is able to strengthen thee in all
thy weaknesses, to support thee under all thy trials and temptations, to supply
all thy wants, to deliver thee out of all thy dangers, to carry thee through
all thy undertakings. In which respect the Apostle calls Gods Power, a mighty
Power, and an exceeding-greatnesse of Power, Ephesians. 1. 19. A serious
consideration whereof, cannot but stir thee up, as to fly unto God by Prayer
in all thy wants, straights* and dangers, so to cast thy self upon him and his
mighty Power, to rest and rely upon him for seasonable help, succor, and
deliverance, who never fails those who put their trust in him.

3 Of the Omnipresence of God, of his continual presence about thee, and with
thee, wheresoever thou art, and whatsoever thou do. Psalm. 139. 3.
For he is about thy bed and thy path, and takes notice of all thy actions,
and when no man sees thee, yet he sees thee before whose Tribunal thou must
one day stand to give an account of all thy actions. Surely it would be a
special preservative against sin, and a singular means to make thee watchful
over all thy ways and actions, if thou did seriously consider Gods
All-seeing presence about thee.

4 Of the Omnisciency of God, his knowing of all things, even the secret
thoughts of thine heart, (...).
and the inward inten^ions of thy mind, before whom all things are naked and
unbowelled, as the Apostle speaks. Not an ambitions, worldly, lustful thought
in thine heart, but God is privy to it. Heb. 4. 13.
And as the wise man speaks, He will bring every secret thing into
judgment. Eccles. 12. 14.


This, if it were seriously considered, how would it make thee watchful over
thy very heart? and careful to suppress all wicked, lustful thoughts at their
first rising? and to keep thee upright and sincere in what thou do,
especially in the duties of Gods worship and service, as knowing there is no
dissembling before God.

III. Call to mind what sin it is whereunto thou find thy self most
propense, and with which thou art oftenest and easiliest overcome, as having
least power to resist it; And every morning furnish thy self with the strongest
Arguments thou can against it, and then bring up thine heart to a firm
resolution, as against that sin, so against the occasions and allurements
thereunto. For it is not possible for thee to forbear any sin, to which thou
have a natural propensity, unless thou shun all the occasions and alluremen^s
thereunto.

IV. Every morning exercise thy Faith in Jesus Christ, and thereby draw forth
of his fullness grace sufficient for the day, and the duties thereof. To this end

1 Meditate of that fullness which is in Jesus Christ, for the through supply of
all thy wants, needs, and necessities, as the Apostle expresses in Col. 1. 19.
It pleased the Father, that in Christ should all fullness dwell; Fullness of
power, to strengthen us in all our weaknesses; fullness of wisdom, to direct us
in all our doubts; yea, fullness of spirit, for the supply of his members with
all needful, necessary graces.

2 Believe that Christ is thus filled for the good of his Church and Members,
that he may communicate unto them of his fullness grace sufficient for the
discharge of the duties both of their general and particular callings. For in
Christ there is not only a fullness of abundance, Plenitudo abundantiae, and
plenitudo redun. dan^^ae.
in regard whereof he is sufficiently full in himself, but also a fullness of
redundance, an overflowing fullness for the supply of all his members. In which
respect we are said John 1. 16. Of his fullness to receive grace for grace, or,
grace upon grace, (...), i. e. Gratiam gratiae additam, vel gratiam gratiae
cumulatam.
one grace of the Spirit heaped upon another.

3 Cast thy self upon Christ and his fullness, resting and relying thereupon for
supply of all thy wants, for strength to carry thee through all the duties both
of thy general and particular calling; For by resting and relying upon the
fullness that is in Jesus Christ, thou will draw forth thereof for thy comfort
and support, and so make it thine own.

V. As thou art rising out of thy bed, take all occasions of holy and heavenly
meditations,

To give you some hints.

1 When thou see the nakedness of thy body, let that mind thee of thy sin,
which caused thee first to be ashamed of it; For our first Parents before they
had sinned, were not ashamed of their nakedness, Non quod iis sua auditas ^^set
incognita, sed tu^pis nuditas nondum erat. August. de Civit. Dei. l. 14. cap.
17.
as you have it, Genesis 2. 25. They were both naked, the man and his wife, and
were not ashamed, not because they did not know themselves to be naked, but
because there was in their nakedness nothing to be ashamed of, their bodies
being more comely than any apparel could make them; But after our first Parents
had sinned, then were they ashamed of their nakedness.

And how should the consideration thereof stir thee up earnestly to long after
the Robe of Christ's Righteousness, to be clothed therewith, which will make
thee lovely and amiable in the sight of God?

2 Let thy rising out of thy bed, mind thee, as of a resurrection from the
death of sin, unto the life of grace here: so likewise of the resurrection of
thy body out of the grave unto eternal life at the last day, when thou and
every one of us must appear before the great Judge, to give an account of
whatsoever we have done here.

3 Let the light of the day mind thee of Jesus Christ, who is often in
Scripture termed Light, yea the True Light.

4 When thou art putting on thine Apparel, let out thine heart in a serious
Meditation of the Robe of Christ's Righteousness, which alone can make thee
amiable in the sight of God; And by Faith apply Christ and his Righteousness
unto thy self, resting, and relying thereupon for the pardon and forgiveness of
thy sins here, and for eternal salvation hereafter.

Having thus showed thee how to begin the day with God, I shall add a few
Motives to quicken thee up to a conscionable use of these forementioned
directions.

1 This will be a special means to keep out worldly, wanton, and impure
thoughts out of thine heart, so that either they will not dare to come in, or
shall the easier be kept out.

2 Hereby thine heart will be exceedingly fenced and guarded against all the
suggestions of Satan: for the heart being first possessed with the thoughts of
God, it will keep out the suggestions of Satan, who otherwise will not be
wanting to cast his hellish firebrarnds into thy soul.

3 Good and holy thoughts first let into the heart of a Christian in the
morning, will keep it in the better tune all the day after; so that the heart
seasoned with heavenly meditations, or spiritual matter in the morning, will be
the more savoury and spiritual all the day after. Qu^ seme^est imbuta recens
servabit od^rem Testa diu.
For the heart retains all the day a tincture of its first thoughts in the
morning. As a vessel retains the favor of the liquor first put into it.

Obj. Happily some will object, that to put in practice these rules and
directions will take up too much time, even more than their Callings and
employments will afford.

Ans. 1. True it is, some men's Callings and Employments do not afford them so
much time, as others do, yet there is none but may find some time for
spiritual and heavenly meditations, if it be but in their rising out of their
beds, and putting on their clothes.

2 If thou have not time to put in practice all these directions, at least thou
may go over some or other of them; yea I shall give thee this as my special
advice, If thou art straightned in time, rather to fix upon one or two at one
time, then in an overly and perfunctory manner to ramble over them all every
morning.

Thus much of morning Meditation.

CHAP. II.
Of secret Prayer in the morning.
SO soon as thou art up, go into thy Closet, or into some private place, and
there offer up unto God a Morning Sacrifice of prayer and thanksgiving, let any
thing be omitted rather than that; if thy business be urgent and great, rise
the sooner, dare not to attempt any thing, till thou have commended thy self,
and thine affairs unto God by prayer; if thou take any little liberty to omit
this duty, the Devil will so work upon thee, that by little and little thou will wax weary of it, if Gods grace be not the more powerful in thee. And
truly the morning is the fittest time for this duty of secret prayer, men being
then freshest and freest from worldly businesses and distractions. We have a
saying amongst us, Aurora Musis amica.
that the morning is a friend to the Muses, as being the best time for study. I
am sure it is as true, that the morning is a friend to the Graces, as being the
best time for any holy service.

For reason and experience do teach us, that in the morning our memories and
senses are the quickest, and all the faculties of our souls at their best,
having recovered fresh strength through the sweet sleep, and comfortable rest
we had the night past; and in the morning the sooner the better, for if thou
shall enter upon any worldly business, or discourse, before thou have offered
up thy morning Sacrifice, thou shall find it much harder to keep the world out
of thine head, and thine heart close unto the duty. But if some extraordinary
business have occasioned thee to delay it, do not thereupon wholly omit it,
but be careful to take the first opportunity of retiring into thy Closet, there
to offer up thy morning sacrifice unto God.

Thus duty of secret Prayer is expressly commanded, and the practice of it,
especially in the morning, we find also very much commended to us in the World
of God.

First, The duty it self is expressly commanded by our Lord and Savior, Matthew.
6. 6
When thou prayest, enter into thy Closet, and when thou have shut thy door,
pray to thy Father which is in secret, and thy Father which sees in secret
shall reward thee openly. Here you see is a positive command for the practice
of secret Prayer, Enter into thy Closet, or into some private place, and having
shut the door, pray.

Secondly, The morning is commended to us for the choysest time of practicing
this duty,

1 By the example of Christ, 2 By the practice of the faithful.

1 By the example of Christ himself, of whom it is recorded by Saint Mark, Mark
1. 35.
that he rose early in the morning a great while before day, and went out into
a solitary place, and there prayed. His rising betimes showed his earnest
desire, and diligent care in the performance of this duty, for when we have a
good mind to do a thing, we use to rise betimes and go about it.

2 For the practice of the Saints of God herein, the Scripture is very
plentiful. Job 1. 5.
It is recorded of Job, That he rose early in the morning, and offered burnt
offerings before the Lord. He did not only rise in the morning, but early in
the morning, giving unto God the first fruits of the day. And David's morning
devotions are often expressed in the book of Psalms; Psalm. 5. 3.
As, My voice shall thou hear in the morning, O Lord, in the morning will I
direct my prayer unto thee, and will look up. Psalm. 63. 1.
And again, O God thou art my God, early will I seek thee. And it is recorded
of Daniel, That three times a day he kneeled upon his knees, and prayed, and
gave thanks, viz. Dan. 6. 10.
in the morning, before he entered upon any business; at noon, before he went
to his dinner; and in the evening, before he went to bed. And that this was
his usual practice appears from the following expression, viz. As he did
aforetime, i. e. he prayed three times a day, as he was formerly accustomed
to do.

For the more profitable pressing of this duty of secret prayer,

1 I shall give you some motives to quicken you up to a conscionable
performance thereof.

2 Answer some Objections.

3 Give you some Directions for the right manner of performing it.

The Motives may be drawn to Three Heads.

1 The Excellency. 2 The Necessity. 3 The Utility thereof.

I. The Excellency of secret prayer appears in two particulars.

1 In that it increases our Communion and Fellowship with God, Qui vult cum
Deo semper esse, freque^ter debet ^rare. Aug. de Temp. Sermon. 112.
bringing us into a familiar acquaintance with him. As the converses of a
Christian soul with God in secret prayer are sweet; so oh how sweet are the
discoveries that the Lord often makes of himself to the soul of a Christian in
his secret prayers? When Daniel was praying alone in secret, Dan. 9. 20, 23.
it was said unto him, Thou art greatly beloved.

2 The Excellency of secret prayer appears, in that it procures a comfort and
sweetness upon those mercies which it obtains: For this is an experimental
Truth, That those mercies which are given in as answers and returns to our
prayers, are the sweetest and most comfortable. And certainly this is one
reason, why many find so little comfort in their yoak-fellows, in their
children, in their estate, and the like, they did not seek them of God by
secret prayer, and so did not receive them as answers to their prayers, but
only from an hand of common providence, without any seeking of theirs.

II. The Necessity of secret prayer, especially in the morning, appears.

1 In that without it we cannot with any confidence expect Gods blessing upon
our pains and endeavors; For, as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 127. 1, 2.
Except the Lord build the house, they labor in vain that build it. So except
the Lord bless our pains and endeavors, it is in vain to rise^ up early, to
sit up late, and to eat the bread of sorrow; and prayer is the means God has
sanctified for the obtaining his blessing.

2 In regard of manifold casualties whereunto we are subject; for death lies
every where in wait for us, so that we go every moment in danger of our lives:
If we walk in the streets, so many tiles on the house top, so many deaths hang
over our heads: Quem dies vidit veniens superbum, hunc dies vidit fugiens,
jacentem, Senec.
if we walk in the fields, so many beasts as we meet withal, so many enemies
to endanger our lives. Yea, how many have risen well in the morning, who have
been found dead before the evening? And what has befallen one may befall
another. And how sad a thing will it be to be Arrested by Death, and called to
the Bar of Gods Judgment, to plead Guilty or not Guilty, before we have (...)
our selves at the Throne of Grace, to Sue forth our pardon.

III. A third Motive may be taken from the utility of this duty; and indeed
manifold are the benefits which usually follow and accompany the same. As,

1 It is the proper means appointed by God himself, for the obtaining of all
sorts of good things at his hands; and therefore where this duty is enjoined,
we very often find it attended with very excellent Promises annexed, to
encourage us with faith and confidence to call upon him; Matthew. 7. 7
as, Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it
shall be opened unto you. etc.

2 By accustoming our selves to pray in our Closets, or private Chambers, we
shall be the better fitted to pray in the presence of others. And such as are
Parents, and Masters of Families will be thereby enabled to pray with their
Families; for certainly one special reason why many Parents and Masters of
Families do neglect that necessary duty of praying with their Families, is,
their not accustoming themselves to pray in secret morning and evening. 1 Samuel
17. 39
What David said of Readiness armor, I cannot go therein, for I never proved it.
The like may some say of Prayer, I cannot go thereto, for I never used it. The
accustoming ourselves to pray alone in secret, will fit us to pray in the
presence of others.

Having given you some Motives to quicken you up to a conscionable performance
of Secret Prayer, and that especially in the morning.

I shall answer an objection or two.

Obj. 1. Some are apt to object their little leisure, and great employment, to
excuse themselves from offering up their morning Sacrifice unto God?

Answ. 1. The greater your employments are, the more need you have to offer up
your morning Sacrifice unto God, thereby to seek his assistance, and blessing
upon your pains and endeavors, it being the Ordinance he has sanctified for
that very end.

Time spent in prayer will be no hinderance, but rather a furtherance of our
worldly businesses and employments; this will oil the wheels for any work,
making it more easy; yea and sanctify all the things we take in hand, making
them successful unto us; for those works which are sanctified by Prayer do
usually speed best.

Obj. 2. Some object their great inability to pr^^^^hey know not how to pray,
not having the spirit of prayer?

Ans. 1. Let such bewayl this their sad condition, and mourn under the sense of
it, remembering what our Savior says, Blessed are they that mourn, for they
shall be comforted. Matthew. 5. 4


2 Go unto Christ, and say unto him as the Disciples did, Lord teach me to
pray; Luke 11. 1
with an acknowledgement of thine own inability, Romans 8. 26
beg the assistance of Gods Spirit, and say, Lord, thou have promised thy
Spirit to help the infirmities of thy Servants, O make good this thy gracious
promise to me thy poor, weak and unworthy Servant, let me feel and find the
assistance of thy Spirit strengthening my weakness, and enabling me to pour out
my soul before thee in some acceptable manner.

3 Call to mind thy sins, with the aggravations of them, and withal consider
thy Spiritual wants, and then put thy self upon the duty of Prayer; confess thy
sins unto God, with all the aggravations thereof, as well as thou can, beg
the pardon of them, and be earnest with God for such Graces as thou stand in
most need of. By using and exercising that small ability to pray that thou
have, thou shall increase it, and grow more able to do it with comfort.

4 Know this, that a man may pray most effectually, and acceptably, even when
he cannot express himself in any apt words; for the work of the Spirit in
Prayer consists not so much in the expression of the tongue, as in the
affection of the heart, wherein the very life and soul of prayer does consist.

Having answered the forementioned Objections, I shall now give you some
directions for the right manner of performing this duty of Prayer, so as it may
be acceptable and pleasing unto God.

To this end,

1 Some things are required before Prayer.

2 Some things in Prayer. 3 Some things after Prayer.

1 Before Prayer there is required preparation; which consists in two things.

1 In a serious Meditation of the infinite Majesty and glory of God on the one
part, and of thine own Vileness and unworthiness on the other.

2 In a sequestration of thy thoughts from earthly affairs, and worldly
businesses.

For thy better help thereunto observe these rules.

1 When thou art going to prayer, renew thy resolution against wandering
thoughts, saying with thy self, I have lost many a prayer through the
distractions of my thoughts, and wanderings of my mind after worldly matters
therein, and I am in danger to lose this prayer also, if I be not the more
watchful over my self: therefore I do now resolve, with the assistance of Gods
grace, to be more watchful over my thoughts, to keep my heart close unto the
duty I am going about, and not to suffer my mind to wander after other matters,
as formerly it has done; if thou would make trial hereof, thou would find
there is great power in such a resolution, when it is fresh upon thy heart, and
spirit.

2 Beg of God, that he would by the assistance of his holy Spirit restrain all
vain and wandering imaginations.

3 Use thy voice in prayer so often as conveniently thou may, provided it be
not for oftentation to be heard of others, which thou will find very
effectual, as for the intention of thine affections, by raising them to an
higher pitch; so for the attention of thy mind, in keeping it from wandering and
roving after worldly thoughts and imaginations.

4 But if notwithstanding thou find, that in praying thy mind and heart has
been sometimes taken up, and possessed with worldly thoughts and distractions,
it will be a good course, in thy private prayers, to repeat that again which so
coldly and carelessly passed from thee, laboring in thy repetition to repel all
wandering thoughts, and to pour forth those petitions again after a more hearty
manner; For, by imposing this task upon thy self, thou will become more wary
and watchful over thy thoughts, lest otherwise thou be enforced to continue
long at that exercise, unto which, through the depravation of thy nature, thou
art so backward and averse.

II. As preparation is necessary before Prayer, so in prayer diverse things are
required; as,

1 Faith; Prayer must be made in faith; which our Savior plainly expresses,
Mark 11. 24
where he says, Whatsoever things ye desire, when ye pray, believe that ye
receive them, and ye shall have them. Believe, that as God is able, so willing
to grant whatsoever thou prayest for, so far forth as in his wisdom he sees
it to be good for thee.

2 Fervency, that thou pour out thine heart and soul unto God, with great
ardency and earnestness of affection. For, the Apostle James tells us, Jam.
5. 16
that the effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man avails much; so that it
is the fervent prayer only that is effectual. And without doubt this is one
special reason why our prayers are so seldom answered, namely, because they are
performed with such deadness of heart, Oration tepida frigescit p^iusquam coelos
ascendit.
and dullness of spirit, for the lukewarm prayer is cooled and frozen before it
can ascend up to heaven. As therefore thou desire to have thy prayers
effectual, let them be fervent, and so thou shall not need to doubt of a
gracious and happy issue. I grant, thou can not always have a like fervency,
yet thou must always strive against deadness of heart, and dullness of spirit;
for God regards the manner of our actions as much as the matter, how we pray,
as well as what we pray for.

III. The Duties required after Prayer are these.

1 Diligently to look after thy prayers, observing what answer and return the
Lord gives thereunto. Psalm. 5. 3.
Thus did David and Habakkuk; For hereby thou shall be the better fitted for
thankfulness, Hab. 2. 1.
being furnished with more abundant matter of praise: And also be the more
provoked and stirred up thereunto.

2 Look back and consider the manifold weaknesses, infirmities, and
imperfections which have passed from thee in thy praying, how dead and dull
thine heart was, and how distracted thy thoughts were therein, and let the
apprehension thereof prevail with thee, as to disclaim all thine own
righteousness as filthy rags, so to drive thee unto Christ, to roll thy self
upon him, resting upon his perfect Righteousness alone for life and for
salvation. As this is one chief end why God suffers corruption to remain in his
children, even after their Regeneration, and to have an influence into all
their holy services; So it is the use which we should make thereof: And
therefore so often as thou find thine heart dead and dull, and thy mind
distracted with worldly thoughts in prayer, say with thy self, Lord, what need
have I of a Savior? I see thou may condemn me for my most holy services,
and therefore I go wholly out of my self unto Jesus Christ, resting upon his
perfect Righteousness, and all-sufficient Merits, for life and for salvation.

CHAP. III.
Of Ejaculatory Prayers.
BEsides thy solemn Morning Prayer, it will be good to send up Ejaculatory
Prayers, and Praises unto God, and that frequently upon all occasions.

By Ejaculatory Prayers and Praises, I mean, The sudden lifting up of the heart
unto God upon some present occasion, either in way of Petition, or Thanksgiving.

Which kind of Prayers we find commanded under those general Precepts of
praying always, Luke 18. 1.
and praying without ceasing; 1 These. 5. 17.
The meaning whereof is not that thou should wholly and only attend on
prayer, so as to neglect the word, and other duties of piety, or the ordinary
works of thy calling: But that besides thine ordinary and set times of prayer,
thou should always have a praying frame of spirit, be ready upon all
occasions to lift up thine heart unto God in some short Ejaculations.

For the more profitable pressing of this kind of prayer, I shall

1 Give thee some Motives to quicken thee up to a frequent performance thereof.

2 Add some Cautio^^*

The Motives may be drawn to three heads.

1 The Excellency. 2 The Necessity. 3 The Utility of this kind of Prayer.

I. The Excellency of Ejaculatory Prayer appears, In that at all times, and
in all places, even in our converses with men, we may thereby converse with
God, and enjoy an holy familiarity with him, and yet others in our company take
no notice thereof. And when we are about the works of our Calling, we may
without any hinderance thereof, lift up our hearts to God in some short
Ejaculatory Prayer, for his assistance and blessing, which, though they are but
as Parentheses in our worldly employments, yet will prove very advantageous to
us therein.

II. Another Motive may be taken from the Necessity of these Ejaculatory
Prayers, and that

1 In regard of the sudden dangers and plunges whereunto the people of God are
many times brought, which will not afford time for continued prayer.

2 In regard of the manifold slips and infirmities of the people of God, which
put them upon praying for the pardon and forgiveness of them.

3 In regard of the manifold mercies, blessings, and deliverances, which
unexpectedly thou receivest from God, there is frequent occasion of Ejaculatory
Prayers and thanksgivings unto him.

III. A third Motive may be taken from the Utility of those Ejaculatory
Prayers, which appears

1 From Gods gracious acceptance and remuneration of the same* whereof the
Scripture gives abundant instances and examples; As of David's Ejaculatory
Prayer against Achitophel, that God would turn his counsel into foolishness, 1 Samuel 17. 14.
was graciously accep^ed and granted in defeating the same. Nehem. 2. ^^6.
The like we read of Nehemiah's Ejaculatory Prayer unto God, to incline the
heart of the King to grant his request, which was graciously heard and
answered. So also the poor penitent Theef's Ejaculatory Prayer unto Christ,
Lord remember me when thou come into thy Kingdom. Holy Ejaculations are the
Spiritual breathings of a gracious heart, which as they are very pleasing unto
God, so exceedingly advantageous unto Christians; for though they are very
short and sudden, yet seldom do they return empty.

2 These Ejaculatory Prayers are a special means for the improving of every
opportunity and occurrence of Providence to thy spiritual advantage.

Herein be careful to observe these two Cautions.

1 Content not thy self with these Ejaculatory Prayers and Praises, as if they
were sufficient at thy lying down, and rising up, and that thou need not to
trouble thy self with any longer prayers. Oh let not thy Ejaculatory Prayers
justle out either thy closet or family prayers; but as God in his Word
requires the one as well as the other, do thou make conscience of every one of
them in their time and place.

2 Beware of formal and profane Ejaculations, which come from the lip, but not
from the heart; as Good Lord, and Good God, or, The Lord bless me, and Lord
have mercy upon me, with such like, which can be no better than a taking of
the name of God in vain, in that they are uttered customarily in a way of form,
merely from the teeth outward, for which, without true and unfeigned
repentance, God will not hold thee guiltless.

CHAP. IV.
Of Reading the Scriptures in private.
ANother duty to be performed alone, is Reading of the Scriptures* And indeed
the Word and Prayer should go hand in hand together, 1 Timothy 4. 5.
as the Christians daily exercise, For every thing is sanctif^ed by the Word of
God and Prayer.

Appoint therefore some set time in every day for the reading of the Word; The
morning is the freest, when our spirits and wits are freshest. Per Scriptu^as
solas potes plenam D^^ intelligere voluntatem. Hier. ad D^met.
By reading three chapters a day, the whole Bible may be read over in a year.
But I would not so strictly tie any to this, as still to go on in reading some
part of the Scriptures every day. And if extraordinary occasion hinder thine
ordinary task, double it another time; For by the holy Scriptures only we may
attain to the knowledge of the whole will of God.

For the more profitable pressing this duty, I shall

1 Give you some Rules and Directions to be observed, 1 Before the reading of
the Scriptures. 2 In reading of the Scriptures. 3 After the reading of them.


2 Give you some Motives to quicken you to a frequent reading of them.

I. The Rules and Directions to be observed before reading are these.

1 Go about it with all holy reverence, as in the sight and presence of God, 1
Pet. 1. 21.
believing it to be the Word of God written by holy men, as they were moved
and inspired by the Holy Ghost, as the Apostle Peter expresses it; when
therefore thou set thy self to read the Word, say to thy self. I will
hearken what the Lord will speak unto me therein.

2 Lift up thine heart in prayer unto God, as for the Spirit of Illumination,
to open the eyes of thine understanding, that thou may rightly conceive his
Word: so for wisdom to apply, memory to retain, faith to believe, and grace to
practice what thou shall read.

II. The Rules and Directions to be observed in reading of the Word, are these,

1 Read the holy lives and actions of Gods Children, not only as matters of
history, but as patterns of imitation: for, for this end are they recorded unto
us, Romans 15. 4.
as St. Paul testifies, Whatsoever things were written aforetime, were written
for our learning.

2 In reading the Promises and Threatenings, the Exhortations and Admonitions,
and other parts of the Scripture, so apply them to thy self, as if God by name
had delivered the same unto thee; whereby the Word will become very profitable
unto thee: For thus will promises to others encourage thee, threatenings against
others restrain thee from sin, exhortations to others stir thee up to thy duty,
and admonitions to others make thee wary; yea thus, whatsoever things were
written aforetime, Sint divinae Scr^p^urae semper ia maaibus, and jugite mente
volvan^ur. Hier. ad Celant.
will prove good instructions unto thee.

III. Rules to be observed after the reading of the Word.

1 Seriously meditate of what thou have read, that so thou may the better
remember and understand the same.

2 Labor to work something of that thou have read upon thine heart, and give
not over till thou find the affections of thy soul warmed thereby.

To quicken you up to a frequent reading of the Scriptures, consider these two
Motives.

1 The first may be taken from those treasures that are contained therein, such
treasures as men never heard of. The subject matter of the Word, are such
mysteries as were hidden in God, and by his Spirit revealed unto men. All the
abstruse learning, and mysteries of other books and writings, are but straw and
stubble, yea dross and dung in comparison of the precious pearls in this.

2 Another Motive may be taken from the many sweet and precious promises which
are scattered up and down in the Word. For as there is not a condition into
which a Child of God can fall, but there is a Direction and Rule in the Word,
in some measure suitable thereunto: so there is not an affliction into which a
child of God can fall, but there is a promise in the Word in some measure
suitable thereunto.

CHAP. V.
Of Christian Watchfulness over our Thoughts.
DO not think, that having saluted God by prayer, and reading his Word in the
morning, Prove. 4. 23. Mark 13. 33. 37, 38.
thou may take thy leave of him all the day after. But second thy praye^s
and reading with Christian Watchfulness, 2 Timothy 4. 5.
which is a duty incumbent upon all, being much pressed upon us in Scripture.

For the profitable handling whereof, I shall show you 1 The Nature of
Christian Watchfulness. 2 The Extent thereof, or the particulars wherein we are
to manifest the same.


I. For the Nature of Christian Watchfulness; It is an heedful Observation of
our selves in all things, and a diligent circumspection over all our ways,
courses, and actions, that we may not displease God in any thing, but rather
please him in all things.

II. For the Extent of this duty, The Apostle sets it down in general Terms, 2 Timothy 4. 5.
Watch thou in all things, which I shall branch into several particulars.

1 Over thy Thoughts, Words and Actions.

2 Against Sin in general, and the several kinds thereof.

1 Thou must be watchful over thy Thoughts, Jer. 4. 14.
that vain Thoughts may not lodge in thine heart.

For the profitable pressing of this, I shall 1 Give you some Motives to
quicken you up thereunto. 2 Some Directions and helps thereunto.


I. For Motives, first consider, that vain and evil thoughts, though they break
not forth into acts, yet are they actual sins; for thoughts, though they are
inward, yet are they the acts of the soul, and in that they are evil, they are
sinful.

2 Evil thoughts are not only sinful in themselves, but they are likewise the
cause of all sins, the plotters of all treasons against God, the Panders of all
other lusts; so much the Apostle James expresses, Jam. 1. 15
When lust has conceived, it brings forth sin; lustful thoughts being
conceived in the heart, they soon bring forth sin, breaking forth into acts of
filthiness and uncleanness.

3 Consider, that by our thoughts especially, will the Lord judge us at the
last day, 1 Cor. 4. 5
When he will make manifest the counsel of the heart, as the Apostle
expresses it. And Romans 2. 16. God has appointed a day wherein he will judge
the secrets of men by Jesus Christ. Then the swarms of our vain and evil
thoughts shall be discovered, and laid open, to our eternal shame, before God,
Angels, and men, without true and unfeigned repentance.

4 Evil and vain thoughts without true and unfeigned repentance, will sink our
souls to Hell; such of you therefore as make no conscience of your thoughts,
but delight your selves in vain and wicked thoughts, in lustful and unclean
thoughts, and that impenitently, how can you escape the vengeance of hell?

I deny not but the best men, through the remainder of corruption in them, are
subject to vain and wicked thoughts; but these are their grief and their burden
against which they strive, and for which they earnestly beg pardon, and
therefore shall not be said to their condemnation.

The helps and directions are these.

1 Consider, That the Lord does as strictly observe all inward sinful thoughts,
as he does the outward acts of sin; He is Omniscient, and knows all things,
yea he is the trier and searcher of our hearts, and so is privy to every vain
and wicked, Psalm. 139. 1, 2.
to every wanton and lustful thought in our hearts; So that howsoever men
discern not our thoughts, yet God does.

2 Make not too much of those vain and wicked thoughts which do either arise
from thine own corrupt heart, or are cast in by Satan; I mean, thou must not
revolve them in thy mind, by musing and meditating on them with any delight;
for if so, thou art in danger to be ensnared by them.

3 With detestation speedily reject, and cast all vain and wicked thoughts out
of thine heart; As in thy judgment thou can not but condemn them as base and
wicked, so in thy affections abhor and defest them, yea reject and cast them
away as abominable.

4 So soon as any vain or wicked thoughts begin to arise in thine heart, fix
thy meditation upon good thoughts, and upon such especially as are contrary
thereunto. Thus when vain thoughts begin to arise in thine heart, strive to put
them out, by fixing thy meditation upon some serious matter; when earthly,
worldly thoughts begin to arise in thine heart, fix thy meditation upon some
spiritual and heavenly thoughts; when any lustful and impure thoughts begin to
arise in thine heart, fix thy meditation upon some holy and good thoughts,
think of the excellency and necessity of holiness, Heb. 12. 14
without which no man shall see the Lord.

5 Humble thy self for all thy sinful and vain thoughts, of what sort or kind
soever. For know assuredly, that unless thou humble thy self for thy sinful and
vain thoughts, thou shall be called to an account for them at the Day of
Judgment, 1 Cor. 4. 5
when the Lord will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make
manifest the counsels of the heart.

6 And that which sanctifies all other means, is earnest and hearty prayer unto
God that he would be pleased, as to suppress and keep down all vain, wicked,
wanton thoughts from rising in thy heart, so that he would rebuke Satan, and
restrain his malice, that he may not cast his hellish thoughts into thine
heart; or at least, that he would enable thee to quench them at their first
entrance. This course did the Apostle Pau^ take in the like case, as we read in
2 Cor. 12. 7, 8.

CHAP. VI.
Of watchfulness over our Words.
AS thou must be watchful over thy Thoughts, so likewise over thy Words,
according to the counsel of the Prophet David Keep thy tongue from evil, Psalm.
34. 13
and thy lips from speaking gu^^e.

For the profitable handling of this part of Christian watchfulness, I shall
give you,

1 Some Helps and directions thereunto.

2 Some Motives to quicken you up to a conscionable use of those helps and
directions, The helps and directions are these.

I Avoid all corrupt and rotten communication; Ephesians. 4 29
which direction the Apostle Paul gives, Let no corrupt communication proceed
out of your mouth.

The corrupt speeches we ought carefully to avoid are of several sorts, which
may be reduced to these Heads.

1 Such as tend to the dishonor of God. 2 Such as tend to man's disgrace and
hurt.
Those which tend to Gods dishonor are especially these.

I, Unlawful Swearing, which is in three respects especially.

1 When men swear falsely, or as we speak, forswear themselves.

2 When they swear impiously. 3 When they swear rashly.

1 They who swear falsely, whom we call perjured persons, are such as confirm
any thing by Oath against their knowledge, or swear to do a thing which they
intend not; or intending at first to do it, yet afterward are careless and
negligent in the performance of it.

These false Swearers do not only sin themselves, but as much as in them is,
bring God in compass of their sin, and make him partaker thereof; he is made a
witness, and an approver of a Lie, and therein made like unto the Devil, who is
the Father of Lies, which is a most abominable dishonor done to the holy name
of God.

2 To swear impiously, is an unlawful Oath, either in regard of the matter, or
of the form.

An impious oath in respect of the matter, is by oath to bind a man's self to
do some wicked thing, as those Jews who bound themselves with an oath to kill
Paul; Acts 23. 14
and Iezabel, who took an oath to slay Elijah. 1 King. 19. 2
This kind of Oath makes God a Patron, and approver of wickedness.

An impious oath in respect of the form of it, is, when we swear by other
things besides Gods holy name, as by any Creature, as Joseph by the life of
Pharaoh.

3 To swear ra^hly is to swear lightly, and frequently, in our familiar talk
and discourse; this, though it be a common and ordinary sin, indeed too too
common and ordinary, yet it is a most grievous Sin, and a sin that cries loud
in the ears of God for vengeance. The hainousness of this sin appears,

1 In that Gods name is thereby taken in vain, which is a direct breach of the
third Commandment, for that forbids us to take the name of God in vain.
Exodus 20. 7
Now then is Gods name taken in vain, when needlessly, without any just cause,
it is used by any, against which there is a judgment threatened in the next
words, The Lord will not hold him guiltless; i. e. he shall not go unpunished.

2 Swearing in our ordinary discourse is the very Livery of the Devil, and
badge of profaneness, which the Wise man hinteth unto us, Eccles. 9. 2. where,
as he makes it a sure sign of a godly man, to fear an oath, so of a wicked and
profane person, not to fear an oath, but to make no conscience of it. And
truly, ordinary swearing may well be a badge and note of a profane person, for
such an one will make little or no conscience of any sin, who makes no
conscience of this sin of swearing, which is so vain and unprofitable a sin:
for the excuse whereof the swearer cannot plead any outward good, neither
profit, as the covetous worldling; nor honor and preferment, as the ambitious
person; nor pleasure, as the voluptuous; and therefore we may well conclude,
that he who makes no conscience of swearing, will make little conscience of any
other sin; for he that will sin for nothing, as the swearer does, certainly
will sin for something. Nay, what sin will not he commit for profit, pleasure,
or preferment, who sticks not to profane the holy name of God for nothing?
Mat. 5. 37 (...).
Our blessed Savior speaking of this sin, says expressly, it comes of evil,
meaning the Devil, Let your communication be yea, yea, nay, nay, for whatsoever
is more than these comes of evil; i. e. that evil one the Devil, who is the
author of all vain oaths. Which me thinks should be a powerful argument to
prevail with men, to avoid in their ordinary communication all vain oaths, yea
and needless protestations, considering they come from the Devil, who is the
Schoolmaster that teaches men to use them, and therefore by a frequent use of
them, they show themselves to be the Scholars, if not the children, of the
Devil.

II. Another kind of corrupt speech is, when Gods holy titles are upon every
light occasion used, and so plainly abused; as when any thing suddenly happens
out, then we presently say, O Lord, O God, O Jesus. Again, when we would have
any thing, then we are apt to say, for Gods sake do this, for Christ's sake do
that, and yet with no reverence do we think of God, or of Jesus, if we think
of them at all; for commonly it is but a phrase of course. to say the least of
this, it is a direct taking of Gods name in vain, and so makes us liable to
that curse, God will not hold him guiltless, that takes his name in vain.

These are some of those corrupt words and speeches which tend to the dishonor
of God.

Come we now to such as tend to man's disgrace, or hurt; and they are such as
are against our selves directly, or against others. The corrupt speeches that
are against our selves are Imprecations. It is usual with many, by imprecating
some mischief against themselves, to confirm their speeches; methinks such
should be afraid lest God in judgment should hear them, and justly cause the
vengeance they call for, to fall upon themselves; let such remember the Jews,
who cried out, His blood be upon us, and our children, and from that day to
this has it lain heavily upon them.

Of corrupt speeches against others, there are many kinds; as,

1 Imprecations, for it is usual, if not much more usual, to make fearful
imprecations against others, as well as against our selves, which as they are
corrupt speeches, so are they ill-beseeming Christians.

2 Unclean and unchaste^ speeches are another kind of corrupt communication.
Some men's mouths are always full of them; which plainly shows the pollution
of their hearts, and how their minds are wholly set on lust.

3 Idle and vain discourses which tend to no good, are another kind of corrupt
speeches; as old Wives fables, talking of matters not belonging to us, prattling
of any thing that comes into ones head. Mat. 12. 36
Our Savior says, That every idle word that men shall speak, ^hey shall give
acco^nt thereof ^in the day of Judgment. Here our Savior shows that at the
Day of Judgment we must give an account, not only for filthy, unclean, and
unchaste speeches, but likewise for idle words, yea for every idle word; and
therefore how does it concern us to be watchful over our selves, as against
all filthy and unclean speeches, so likewise against all idle words?

These are the kinds of corrupt Speeches, and communication, which we ought the
more carefully to avoid, in regard of the hainousness thereof.

II. Accustom your selves to holy con^^rences, and good communication; It is
not sufficient to abstain from corrupt communication, except you accustom your
selves to good communication; for it is good and gracious speech which
commends a good and a sound heart, even as its good fruit which commends a
good tree.

III. In all your conferences, (...).
forbear to speak evil of others; This direction the Apostle James gives,
Speak not, says he, ev^l one of another; the word in the original properly
signifies, a speaking one against another, and forbids all manner of words
tending to the disgrace and disparagemen: of your Neighbor, whether that you
speak be for the matter of it true or false; for a man may be said to speak
evil of his Neighbor two ways, viz.

1 By raising false reports.

2 By a divulging of their secret evils.

This God did expressly forbid his own people the Jews, Levit. 19. 16
Thou shall not go up and down as a Talebearer among the people; like unto a
Peddler, which carries his Pack from house to house, venting here a little, and
there a little, until at length he has uttered all his Wares. Thus there are
too too many who go up and down, from house to house, (...).
uttering slanders and reproaches as Wares, which indeed is the Devils proper
sin, who is styled, the accuser of his brethren. Oh consider, that God will
surely recompense this into your bosoms; Rev. 12. 10 Mat 7* 1
for as our Savior speaks, Judge not, that ye be not judged, for with what
judgment ye judge ye shall be judged; and with what measure ye mete, it
shall be measured to you again. So that thou shall be sure to find others that
will be as ready to judge thee, and to speak evil of thee, as thou have of thy
brother, who will have as little care of thy credit as thou have had of thy
brothers; so far should thou be from wronging thy neighbor, by being the
author and spreader of evil reports, that thou should not lend thine ear to
them that spread them, for thine ears may be as guilty as thy tongue; therefore
such evil speaking should not be heard without some expression of dislike:
which would be a special means for the suppressing of them.

IV. Be not lavish in your words, Quicquid in buc^am veneri^ profundunt, hinc
studium mentiendi ^um vera desun^.
but sparing in your speech; utter not all that you hear, or know. Which rule
the Apostle James gives, in Chap. 1. 19. Let every man, says he, be swift to
hear, but slow to speak.

V. Be well advised before you speak; for oftentimes many men's tongues do
overrun, Ludov. Viv. de Christia. Foem. l. 1.
and outstrip their wits. But do you forethink, whether that you are about to
speak be suitable, and seasonable, and let not thy tongue run before thy mind.
(...), ne lingua praecurrat menti.


VI. Let your ordinary speech be plain, without oaths and imprecations, yea
without all vain asseverations and protestations. This direction our Savior
gives, Let your communication be yea, yea, nay, nay; i. e. let your ordinary
speech be plain, and naked, without any oaths, imprecations, asseverations and
protestations. For, Matthew. 5. 37 (...)
whatsoever is more than these, i. e. whatsoever exceeds a simple
affirmation, or negation, comes of evil; i. e. of the evil one the Devil.

VII. In all your Conferences speak nothing but the truth; This direction the
Apostle gives, Ephesians. 4. 25
Wherefore putting away lying, speak every man truth with his neighbor. Though
lying be a sin common amongst all sorts of people, not only children, but also
grown men and women* as in their ordinary discourse, so especially in their
trading, wherein what more ordinary than lying and dissembling, yet is it a
most heinous sin, as will appear by due consideration of these particulars.

1 It is a Sin against knowledge and conscience; it cannot be ignorantly
committed, Mentiri est contra mentem ire.
for ignorance is against the nature of a lie; the word in Latin to lie, is as
much as to speak against ones mind and knowledge.

2 It is most agreeable to the Devils nature; so that a lying spirit is a
Diabolical spirit, and a Liar carries the very image and picture of the Devil,
Joh. 8. 44
who is the father of lies.

3 It pulls down Gods fearful Judgment and Vengeance, and that both temporal
in this world and eternal in the world to come; for proof whereof, observe in
general what David says, Psalm. 5. 6. God will destroy all that speak lies.
More particularly for Temporal Judgments in this world, Hos. 4. 2
the Prophet Hosea reckons up this Sin amongst those gross sins which caused
God to send Famine, Plague, Sword, Captivity, and other like Judgments on the
Israelites. For eternal Judgments, we find them lik^wise threatened against
this Sin, as in Revel. 21. 27. we find Lying reckoned amongst those sins which
bar us out of heaven; and Revel. 21. 8. we find it reckoned amongst those sins
which thrust us into Hell; But the fearful, and unbeleeving, and Murderers,
and Whoremongers, and Sorcerers, and Idolaters, and Liars, shall have their
part in the Lake which burns with fire and brimstone; here lying is reckoned
amongst those sins which thrust us into Hell. And we may further observe
amongst what heinous and capital Sins Liars are reckoned, even amongst
Murther^rs, Whoremongers, etc. which further shows the hainousness of this sin.

VIII. Pray unto God to sanctify your speech, and so to direct it by his holy
Spirit, that it may tend, as to the glory of his name, so to the good both of
the speaker and hearer. All our endeavors are nothing without God, and
therefore we had need go unto him by prayer, so to sanctify our words and
speeches, that they may tend to the good of others, and minister grace to the
hearers.

CHAP. VII.
Of Watchfulness over our Actions.
AS we must be watchful over our thoughts and words, so likewise over our
actions.

For the more profitable pressing of this part of Christian watchfulness, I
shall give you some helps to direct you therein.

I. Make Gods Word the rule of all thy actions. This direction the Apostle
hinteth, in Gal. 6. 16. As many as walk according to this rul^, peace be on
them, and mercy. Where the Apostle terms the Word of God the rule whereby we
must walk, and square all our actions.

Quest. What is to be done in such cases, wherein we are doubtful, and
uncertain of the will and mind of God, and what is most agreeable thereunto?

Ans. 1. In doub^ful cases, where the reasons on both sides seem to be equally
balanced, observe which side seems most to tend to the glory of God, the good
of thy Neighbor, and thine own Spiritual welfare, and incline rather
thereunto; and know, that when thou shall propound these things as thine end,
and aim, and make them thy Bias, God will then delight to make known his good
pleasure to thee.

2 Seek advice from others whom thou conceivest to be godly, and judicious;
and amidst their counsels observe what it is thine own spirit does best approve
of, and most cloze with.

3 Prayer being the means sanctified by God for the obtaining of every good
thing, be earnest with God in Prayer, that he would direct thee in the right
way and course; that he would cause thee to hear a voice behind thee, saying,
This is the way, walk in it.

4 Having prayed unto God, and commended thy case unto him, hearken and wait
for the return of thy prayer, diligently observing to what course thine heart
is most inclined after prayer; and conclude that to be the way he would have
thee to walk in.

II. Another help and direction is, to propound Gods glory as the chief end and
aim of all thine actions; 1 Cor. 10. 31
which direction the Apostle Paul gives us in express terms, Whatsoever ye
do, do all to the glory of God; i. e. that God may be thereby glorified. For,

1 Without this thy best actions, thy most religious exercises are neither
acceptable nor pleasing unto God; let any action be in it self never so
specious and glorious, yet if Gods glory be not the end of it, there is a woe
to such works, instead of an Euge, or Well done.

2 This puts a value and price upon all our actions, the more they a^m at this
end the better they be. As therefore thou desire to have thine actions and
services acceptable and pleasing unto God, let his glory be thy chief and
principal aim therein, doing what thou do in obedience to the Command of God,
that he thereby may be glorified.

I deny not but other ends may creep into thine heart, and steal into the
performance of thy best actions, as thine own profit, applause, and the like;
but know for thy comfort, that the Lord looks more to the general bent of
thine heart, and frame of thy spirit, in what thou do, then upon any
particular base and by end, which sometimes creeps and steals into thine
heart, and will reckon with thee according to the general purpose and aim of
thine heart, and not according to some particular end and aim, which has crept
in unawares through the corruption of thine heart.

III. Another help and direction to Christian watchfulness over thine actions
is, To commend all thine actions and businesses unto God by Prayer, not
enterprising any thing without seeking direction, assistance, and a blessing
from God; for as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 127. 2
It is vain for you to rise up early, to sit up late, to eat the bread of
sorrows, unless the Lord put to his helping hand, and come in with a blessing;
which is obtained chiefly by prayer; far be it therefore from thee to
enterprise any thing without first commending it unto God by Prayer; for
questionless one special reason* why many find not that success in their
businesses which they desire, is, because they have not first commended them
unto God by Prayer, they have not sought unto him for his direction,
assistance, and blessing.

IV. Set God always before thee, and ever walk as in his sight and presence; In
omnibus qu^ agis, Deum praesentem cogites, Ber^. Med* Genesis 17. 1
which direction the Lord himself gives to Abraham, for the better ordering of
the whole course of his life, saying, Walk before me, and be thou perfect; i.
e. walk as in my sight and presence, setting me ever before thee; which will be
a special means to keep and restrain thee from many sins; this we read kept
Joseph from yielding to the wanton solicitations of his Mistress, though he had
the opportunity of privacy, Genesis 39. 9
How can I, says he, do this great wickedness and sin against God? It was the
apprehension of Gods ^ll-seeing presence that preserved him from closing with
the inordinate affection of his Mistress.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Watchfulness against Sin.
AS thou must watch over thy Thoughts, Words, and Actions, so likewise against
Sin.

Both against Sin in general, and likewise against the several kinds of Sin.

I. First, thou must watch against Sin in general, not bearing with thy self in
the willing practice of any known Sin; for in vain do thou expect any true
peace in thy soul, so long as thou re^ainest, and favourest any one Sin in thy
self against thy Conscience.

For the more profitable pressing of this part of Christian watchfulness, I
shall give thee some helps to direct thee therein.

1 Carefully avoid all the occasions and means which may allure and draw thee
unto sin; for it is impossible to eschew the one without the other; it is not
possible that he who is inclined to drunkenness should contain himself from it,
if he avoid not the places and company of drunkards; neither is it possible for
him that is wanton and lascivious, to abstain from filthiness and uncleanness,
if he frequent unchaste company, and pamper himself in gluttony and drunkenness.
Peccata non sant ^^nenda coalescere etc. sed in exordiis stati^ enecand^ sunt
etc. Hilar. Enarrat. in Psalm. 36


2 If thou art assaulted, resist sin in the beginning; Do not dally with
temptations, as the Fly with the flame of a Candle, lest thou be burnt before
thou be aware; neither do thou suffer Sin to grow and increase, but rather
withstand the first beginnings thereof, and if possibly nip it in the bud.

3 If thou be overtaken with any sin, labor to recover thy self with all
possible speed, by true and unfeigned repentance. Be sure thou do not live,
nor lie impenitently in the practice of any Sin against thy Conscience, for so
long thou wearest the Devils Livery, and art a stranger to true peace.

4 Being recovered, take heed of relapsing; A relapse is dangerous in bodily
diseases, much more in spiritual; Christ saw this to be a needful caveat,
therefore he gave this advice to a Woman taken in Adultery, Joh, 8. 11
and forgiven, Go and sin no more; yea the same advice he gave to the poor
Cripple, whom he healed at the Pool of Bethesda, Joh. 5. 14
backed with a strong reason, saying to him, Sin no more, lest a worse thing
come unto thee. Which does not imply, that a man may keep himself pure, and
free from all sin; but that he ought with the best care, and greatest
watchfulness that he can, endeavor to keep himself pure and free from all
sin, especially from enormous sins* which in an high manner provoke the Wrath
of God. Though therefore thou have obtained the pardon and forgiveness of thy
former sins, it concerns thee to be watchful against sin for the time to come,
otherwise thou art in great danger of relapsing into the same sins, if not
worse; whereby thy last state will be worse than the first.

5 Often have recourse unto God by fervent prayer, as against sin in general,
that he would be pleased to keep thee from falling thereunto, so espe^ially
against those particular sins which thou find working and stirring in thee,
and with which thou art most molested, earnestly begging power and strength
from God, that thou may be enabled to stand in the day of temptation.

II. As thou must watch against Sin in general, so likewise against the several
sorts and kinds of sin. A,

I. Against thy beloved Sin; Peccatum in deliciis, as Aug. calls it.
for there is none of us all but we have in us our darling and beloved Sin,
our own Idol (as I may say) whereunto we many times do service, to the great
offense of Almighty God.

For the better discovery whereof take these few directions.

1 Observe which way the stream of thy thoughts run, especially thy morning
thoughts, whether after the world, or this or that lust, for Where the Carcass
is, there will the Eagles be gathered together; whatsoever thy beloved Sin is,
upon that will thy morning thoughts most hover; so that if world^ness and
covetousness be thy beloved Sin, thy morning thoughts for the most part will
be upon the world, and the things thereof, how thou may grow great and rich
in the world; if pride and ambition be thy darling and beloved Sin, then thy
morning thoughts will be upon thine advancement, how thou may ^i^e in the
world, and if ^^clearlness be thy beloved Sin, then thy thoughts, especially
thy morning thoughts, will be un^^ean, thy ^ead will be taken up with
speculative filthiness, how thou may satisfy thy just; for this is a sure
rule, Every man is what ^ee is most in the morning. As he that is spiritual
has his morning thoughts upon God, or upon some spiritual and heavenly subje^^
so he that is worldly and unclean, has his morning thoughts upon the world,
and about the satisfying of his carnal lusts.

2 Observe seriously what Sin it is thy Conscience does most and chiefly check
thee for, especially in time of affliction, for Conscience being then awakened
will most of all check thee for thy beloved Sin.

3 Observe what it is wherewith thine enemies do most upbraid thee* for others
many times can sooner discern our beloved Sin than we our selves, which like a
stinking breath is sooner sented by a stander by, than by him that has it; and
thus may thou make a good improvement of the bitterest objections of thine
adversaries against thee.

4 Observe what Sin it is thou have least power to resist and with which thou
art oftnest and easiliest overcome, notwithstanding thy Conscience checks thee
for the same; thou have hereupon good ground to conclude that to be thy beloved
Sin.

Having found out thy bosom Sin, thou must especially watch against that, lest
thou be surprised by it; and that for these reasons.

1 Because this Sin is so sweet and delightful to a Sinner, that he does very
hardly part with it; he will forsake all that he possesses, yea and adventure
life it self, rather than forsake his beloved Sin; (...). Heb. 12. 1
and therefore it may fitly be called the Sin that hangs so fast on, as being
not easily cast off.

2 One beloved Sin in the bosom so alienates the heart, that it cannot love
Christ as it should; as one stranger in the bosom of the Wife, so takes up her
affection, that she cannot love her Husband as she ought.

II. Thou must with as great care and circumspection watch against the sins of
the times, and places of thine ab^de. So long as thou live in this world thou
can not be freed from the society and neighborhood of wicked and ungodly
men, but thy care must be to keep thee as free from their wickedness as thou
can. This advice the Apostle Paul gives in these words, Ephesians. 5, 15
See that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise, because the days
are evil; intimating, the more evil the times are, the more any sin does abound
in the time and places of our abode, the more watchful should we be over our
selves against those Sins, that we may not be infected nor poisoned by them:

And truly, as it is an high pitch of impiety for a man to be bad amongst good
men; so it is an high pitch of piety, for a man to be good amongst bad men, to
retain his goodness in wicked times and places. Singularity I know is charged
upon Gods children as their disgrace, but certainly it is their glory that they
are a peculiar people, separated from the sinful vanities and courses of the
world; for we read, that the Spirit of God in setting forth the height of men's
misery in their Natural state, describes it by their living according to the
common course of the world, Ephesians. 2. 2
and the sinful practices thereof.

III. Thou must with as great care and circumspection watch against secret
sins, as against open and public sins, making conscience of sinning in secret,
even when thou have the opportunity of privacy for the acting and committing
thereof, and that for these reasons.

1 Because we are more apt to fall into secret than into open and public sins.
For if we can hide our sins from the eyes and knowledge of men, we are apt to
think all is well and safe, and thereupon encourage our selves to sin in
secret. The fear of shame and discredit with men, has great force to restrain
men from committing sin in the public view, but in secret few care what they
do; and therefore the Murderer and Adulterer are brought in by Job emboldning
themselves, Job. 24. 14
saying, No eye sees us.

2 Howsoever we may hide our secret sins from the eyes of men, yet it is
impossible to hide them from the all-seeing Eye of God, (...). Eurip.
who sees all, himself unseen of any, being present in all places, beholding
both the evil and the good, Proverbs 15. 3. If then thou will sin securely,
says Augustine, seek out a place where he sees thee not, and there do what
thou will; Quare si peccare vi^, quaere ^^bi t^ non vide ^at, and fac quod vis.
Aug.
But seeing God is present in all places, it is impossible thou should hide
thy sins from his all-seeing Eye; and therefore never be encouraged to sin in
hope of secrecy.

3 As God here sees and takes notice of our most secret sins, so he will one
time or other discover those deeds of darkness to our great confusion, without
true and unfeigned repentance; if not here in this life, yet at the Day of
Judgment, when our most secret Sins shall be discovered to the view of all;
Eccles. 12. 14
for as the Wise man speaks, God will bring every work into Judgment, with
every secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil, There is never a
wicked man almost in the world, though never so formal, but he has at some
time or other committed that wickedness in secret which he would not have known
for all the world; but know for certain, that at the Day of Judgment all the
world shall hear thereof, for then all thy secret sins shall be discovered to
Angels, Men, and Devils, thy secret uncleanness, and close adultery, thy
pilferings and stealings, thy false weights and measures shall be brought to
the view of all, to thine eternal shame and confusion. Were our hearts thoroughly
possessed herewith, oh how watchful would it make us over our selves in secret,
and fearful to adventure upon any Sin, though we have the opportunity of
privacy for the acting of it?

IV. Thou must be watchful against the least sin, not esteeming any Sin so
small and venial, as that thou may safely give it entertainment, and continue
in it without true and unfeigned repentance, and that for these reasons.

1 By the least Sin the Law of God is transgressed, his Justice violated, Ne
consideres quod parva (...) peccata, sed quod magnus sit Deus eui displicent.
and his Wr^th provoked; and therefore far be it from us to account that Sin
little, which is committed against a God of infinite Majesty; whereupon says
Saint Augustine, Do not consider the smalness of thy sins, Aug. de Poe^itent.
vera and falsa, cap. 8.
but the greatness of God, who is displeased and provoked by them.

2 Little Sins are apt to make way for greater; as a little Boy let in at the
window, will open the door, that the stoutest Thief may enter in, and rob and
spoil the house; so little Sins being once admitted, will in time set wide open
the door of our hearts, that the greatest and grossest may enter in, and so rob
and spoil us of all grace and goodness; and therefore despise not the smallest
Sin, for even that is a step to a greater: for who sees not by daily
experience, that unclean thoughts, and fil^hy words, draw many on to unclean
actions; Quaeque sequentis victoriae causa ^uit.
yea as Justin reports of Ni^us his Victories, Justin. lib. 1.
how every Victory was a means of another conquest. So every small Sin is a
means and way to a greater.

And this must needs be so. Because God in his Judgment does usually punish
Sin with Sin, I mean, God does many times punish some men's lesser Sins, by
leaving them so to themselves, and to the corruptions of their own wicked
hearts, that they break forth into the acting and committing of grosser Sins.
The best means therefore for a man to keep himself from great and heinous Sins,
is, to be watchful against smaller Sins, and to make conscience of them; for
though at the present thou abhorrest the very thought of Murder, and such like
heinous Sin, yet if thou give way to uncleaneness, or live impenitently in
any other Sin, the Lord in his Justice may leave thee so to thy self, as that
thou shall break forth into actual Murder for the covering of thine
uncleanness. Thus it fell out with David, who questionless abhorred the thought
of Murder, 2 Samuel 12. 9
yet having committed uncleanness with bathsheba, soon after murdered Uriah
(though an innocent man, and one of his Worthies) for the covering of his
Adultery. And how many Women in these our days, who abominated the very thought
of Murder, yet have most cruelly slaugh^e^ed their tender Infants, for the
concealing and covering of their unleanness? As therefore thou would avoid
Murder, or such like heinous Sins, be watchful against, and careful to avoid
lesser Sins, lest they make way for the other.

3 The least Sin cannot be expiated, nor pardoned, without the precious blood
of the Son of God. That expression of the Apostle is observable, Christ was
delivered to death for our offenses; the word in the Greek translated Offenses,
(...). Romans 4. 25
signifies properly our slips, implying, that our smallest Sins could not be
expiated without the bloody death of Jesus Christ. Oh let not us overlightly
account of that, for which Christ paid so dear a price as his own most precious
blood.

CHAP. IX.
Of our behavior at Meals.
AS thou must be watchful against all kind of Sin, so likewise over the things
which in their own nature are lawful; for it is in the use of things lawful
wherewith the Devil does most prevail, at least with those who are not grossly
wicked and profane* I shall show thee some instances of things lawful, over
which thou ought to be watchful, viz. Eating and Drinking, Recreation, thy
Calling, etc.

Considering our Adversary the Devil lays in every place baits and s^ares to
entrap us, so especially at our Tables; therefore it concerns us in a special
manner to be watchful over our selves at our Meals.

For your better help therein take these Directions.

I. Forget not to pray unto God for a blessing on the creatures whereof thou
art to partake, for as the Apostle speaks, Every Creature of God is good, 1 Timothy 4. 4, 5
being sanctified by the Word of God, and Prayer.

It was the usual practice of our Savior to lift up his eyes to Heaven, and
crave a blessing upon the Creatures before he did partake thereof; 1 Samuel 9. 13
and this has been the usual practice of the Saints, Acts 27. 35
and people of God before, and since Christ's time. Having therefore such worthy
Patterns and Presidents, follow them, not daring to partake of any of Gods good
Creatures, till thou have lifted up thine heart to God, and craved his blessing
upon them; for otherwise, how justly might thou expect from God a curse,
rather than a blessing?

II. Eat as in the presence of God; God is ever present with us wheresoever we
are, (...). Greg. Naz.
as in our Beds, so at our Boards, eying and observing all our actions, like a
well drawn Picture, that eyeth each one in the room; so God eyeth each one in
the world, as if his eye were upon him alone. It will be therefore thy wisdom
wheresoever thou art, to carry thy self as in the sight and presence of God,
more particularly at thy Meals, when thou art most apt to forget God, and to
give out thy self to the Creature, and to the satisfying of thy carnal lust and
appetite.

III. Season and sanctify thy Meals with spiritual communication, and holy, at
least useful discourses, that thy ^oul as well as thy body may be fed and
nourished. And in regard of your great backwardness unto, and barrenness in
spiritual discourses, that you cannot suddenly find out any fit matter for it,
it will be a point of spiritual wisdom in you, beforehand to think of some
seasonable, savoury Heads whereon to discourse at Meals, which may tend to the
good and edification of others; and resolve to embrace every opportunity that
is by any offered to you for good discourse. Yet I deny not* but you may
lawfully at Meals discourse as of News, so of Civil matters, or of your own
affairs, and the like, especially ^hen you perceive that your company is unfit,
or unwilling to fall upon any spiritual discourse; yet you shall do well (...)
season your Civil and Moral discourses with some spiritual and savoury
expressions.

IV. Fail not to give thanks after meals, for that comfortable refreshment you
have found from the creature. As ye ought to begin your Meals with Prayer unto
God for his blessing, so ye ought to end them with praises and thanksgivings
unto God; which the Lord gave in special command unto his people, Deuteronomy. 8. 10
saying, When thou have eaten and art full, then thou shall bless the Lord thy
God; and says the Prophet Joel to Gods People, Joel 2. 26
Ye shall eat and be satisfied, and praise the name of the Lord your God; yea
we read that the Heathenish Idolaters at their feasts were accustomed to praise
their false gods, Dan. 5. 4
for it is said, They drank Wine, and praised the gods of gold, and of silver,
and of brass, of iron, of wood, and of stones. Is it not then a wonderful shame
for Christians after their Meals not to praise the true God, from whom we
receive all the good things we do enjoy? yea what is it but brutish and
swinish ingratitude, if when God opens his hand, and fills us with plenty
of good things, we do not open our mouths in praises and thanksgivings unto
God, giving unto him the glory thereof?

CHAP. X.
Of Sports and Recreations.
AS you ought to be watchful over your felves at your Meals, so likewise at
your Recreations; for though some recreations are lawful, yet are we generally
apt to abuse them unto licentiousness, and to adventure upon all manner of
sports and recreations without any difference; therefore I shall show you,

1 What kind of Sports which are used for recreations are lawful.

2 How those which are in their kind lawful are abused, and so made unlawful.

Unlawful Sports and Recreations may be brought to these Heads.

1 All such wherein neither wit of mind, nor exercise of body is used, as
Dice-play, and some Games at Cards, for in them is nothing but an expectation
of an uncertain event, wherein neither wit of mind, nor exercise of body is
used, which are the main ends of Sports and Recreations, either for the
refreshing of our minds, or bodies, that we may thereby be the better enabled
for the honoring of God in the discharge of the duties of our place and
calling.

2 Such as bring danger to men, as of old was fighting with Beasts, and now
Matches at Foot-bal, fighting at Cudgels, especially fighting with sharp
Weapons, 2 Samuel 14. 15, 16.
much like the playing of Ioabs and Abners men, who at length killed one
another.

3 Such as declare Gods punishment on the Creatures for man's Sin, as
Bear-baiting, Cock-fighting, and the like; the enmity that is in one Creature
against another, is a punishment on the poor Creatures for man's Sin, and
therefore ought no^ to be a ground or matter of sport and rejoicing unto us,
but rather of sorrow and humiliation.

4 Such as are forbidden by the Laws of the Land, or place where we live; for
Sports and Recreations being among indifferent things, the Magistrates
authority is especially of force in them; and in this respect our ordinary
Stage Plays in this City are unlawful.

II. The next thing to be considered is, how those Sports which are in
themselves lawful, are made unlawful by men's manner of using them.

1 When too much time is spent in them. Recreations should be as sauces to
your meat, to sharpen your appetite unto the duties of your Calling, and not to
glut your selves with them, so as to make your selves the more unfit, both for
the duties of your Callings, and of Gods service; you must know, that the main
and principal end of Gods sending you into the world, was not to follow your
pleasures, but that you should spend your time and strength in the duties of
Gods service and in the means whereby you may be fitted thereunto.

2 When your Recreations are made a trade of Merchandise, as when men Play
merely to get money; that which a man gains by this tra^^ick, he cannot with a
good conscience possess and enjoy; it is not by God given him, Zeck. 5. 3, 4
because he comes not to it by lawful means, but is rather as stolen goods,
over which Gods curse hangs; and as for the party that loses, he also is
guilty of Theft, for that which he loses he purloyneth from his Wife, Children
and Family, if he have any; or if not, from Church, Commonwealth, and poor. Oh
that all our Gamesters would consider what a fearful reckoning they are to make
at the Day of Judgment, not only of their precious time lavishly misspent,
but also of their estates for the most part wickedly lost; when in their
account there shall be found so much wasted in Gaming, and so little given to
the Poor, and charitable uses.

Q. Is it altogether unlawful to play for money?

A. I will not say it is altogether unlawful to play for money, provided that
what you play for be but a small matter, of little value; which is to be
measured according to the estate and quality of those who play.

3 Lawful Recreations are made unlawful, when they are used at unseasonable
times; as on days of Humiliation, and on the Sabbath Day, in which time the
Lord forbids all men to seek their own pleasure. Isa. 58. 13.


4 When they are so used as they raise a man's Passion unto anger, fury, and the
like; or that they cause swearing, cursing, brawling, quarrelling, with the
like evil effects. He that cannot moderate his Passion, nor rule his Tongue at
Play, is not fit for it.

5 When in your Recreations you forget God, who is present with you as at all
times, so in all your actions; and therefore respect ought to be had to God, as
in all your actions, so in your recreations: Then you are to remember, that you
are in the presence of God, who sees and observes every thing. Which would
be a special means to keep and re^train you from many uncivil and uncomly
actions.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Duties of our Callings.
EVery one ought to have special regard to the duties of that particular
Calling wherein he is placed by Gods Providence; in a conscionable discharge
whereof consists the very life and power of religion.

For the more profitable handling of this Branch of Christian watchfulness,
viz. over our particular Callings, 1 I shall premise a few things. 2 Give you
some directions to help you therein. The things to be premised are these.


I. That every man ought to have a certain Calling, wherein he may exercise
himself to the glory of God, and good of others which will appear from these
reasons.

1 It is the Ordinance of God, Genesis 3. 19
that in the sweat of his face every man should eat his bread; which words are
to be understood not only as a Curse^ but also as a Co^^nd; yea Adam in the
state of Innocence had a Calling appointed him by God, namely, to dress the
Garden. Genesis 2. 15


2 Whosoever has no Calling whereby he may be profitable to Human society, 2
These. 3. 11
is said to live disorderly, and walk inordinately.

3 Manifold mischiefs and evils are avoided by following a lawful Calling. For
idleness is the cause of many evils, he that gives himself up to
sloathfulness is a fit subject for the Devil to work upon; yea an idle person
is the Devils Shop, there he works, ever busy when men are most idle.

II. That our Calling ought to be honest and lawful; that is, such an one as
our labor in it may tend to the glory of God, the good of our neighbor, and
the furthering not only of our own temporal, but also of our spiritual welfare.

These things premised, come we now to the Directions.

I. Begin with God, by seeking unto him by Prayer, as for the pardon of thy
sin^, and supply of all needful graces, so for his blessing upon thy lawful
pains and endeavors, for as the Apostle speaks, By the Word of God and
Prayer all things are sanctified, 1 Timothy 4. 5
and therefore it must needs be an unsanctified way and course to begin any
thing without first seeking unto God by Prayer for a blessing; for indeed it is
his blessing alone that makes rich, and that causes any thing we take in hand
to thrive and prosper; which Moses acknowledges, where speaking to the people
of Israel, Deuteronomy. 8. 18
he says, It is the Lord that gives thee power to get wealth.

II. Be painful and industrious in the duties of thy Calling. Which direction
the Wise man gives in these words, Eccl. 9. 10
Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with all thy might; i. e.
whatsoever works or duties belong unto thee by virtue of thy Calling, do them
with all thy might; i. e. do them vigorously, diligently, and industriously.
For your encouragement thereunto know, that diligence in your Calling is
usually crowned with riches and plenty, according to that of the Wise man,
Prove. 10. 4
The hand of the diligent makes rich; and again, Prove. 13. 4
the soul of the diligent shall be made fat; i. e. shall be enriched with
outward blessings. And truly it is very rare, but that a blessing does
accompany a diligent hand; the Greeks say, that plentifulness follows
painfulness, (...). Strpb.
and that all things are made servants to care and industry. Caution 1.


I shall give you two Cautions.

1 Be not so diligent in (...) thy particular Calling, that thou neglect the
Duties of thy general calling as a Christian; I mean, be not so eager in
fo^lowing thy worldly businesses and employments, that thou neglect thy
spiritual businesses, as thy morning and evening devotions unto God, etc.

2 Labor to be heavenly-minded in earthly employments; Caution 2.
to follow worldly businesses with spiritual affections, often lifting up thine
heart unto God in some heavenly ejaculations; As thou art eagerly following thy
worldly businesses, often meditate on that excellent saying of our Savior, Mark
8. 36.
What will it profit a man, if he shall gain the whole world, and love his own
soul?

III. Resolve and strive to be faithful and sincere in all the works of thy
calling; and with a kind of disdain abhor to get any thing by wicked and
deceitful courses, as knowing that a little ill got may empoyson a man's whole
estate, and bring a curse upon all that he possesses; let there be therefore
truth, equity, and plainness in all thy dealing with men; circumvent no man,
according to that of the Apostle, 1 These. 4. 6
Let no man go beyond, and defra^d his brother in a^y matter, because the Lord
is the avenger of all such. Where the Apostle disswadeth us from all fraudulent
and deceitful dealing, by an Argument taken from the dangerous and dreadful
consequence of such Sins, laying us open to the vengeance of that God who is in
his wrath a consuming fire. Heb. 12. 29
In all thy dealings with men observe that royal law, and standard of all
equity, Mat. 7, 12
which is, to do as thou would be done by, for as our Savior speaks,
This is the Law and the Prophets, i. e. the sum of that which in the Law, and
by the Prophets is delivered concerning our carriage toward our Neighbor, and
dealing with him.

IV. As often as thou receivest any blessing from God, (...).
forget not to return unto him the praise and the glory thereof, acknowledging
that whatsoever the means has been, that he is the chief cause, and principal
author of all those benefits and blessings which thou enjoyest for, the truth
is, There is nothing more acceptable to God than a grateful mind, Chrysostom.
Hom. 52. in Genesis
it being one of the sacrifices wherewith he is well pleased.

CHAP. XII.
Of our Behavior in Secret.
IN regard of the manifold temptations whereunto we are subject, both when we^
are by our selves alone, and also when we are in company with others; It is
our duty, and will be our wisdom to keep a narrow watch over our selves, both
in our soluariness, and also in company.

First, When we are alone, our care must be, that we be neither ill
employed, nor idle and unfruitful, but that we be taken up with spiritual and
heavenly Meditations.

1 For Solitariness is the Devils opportunity, which he has always been
careful to embrace, 2 Samuel 12. 2.
and improve to the utmost advantage; as we see in David, who when he was
walking alone upon the roof of his house, then the Devil set upon him, tempted
him unto lust, and prevailed with him. And therefore how does it concern us to
be then especially watchful over our selves?

2 Because we are then in most danger to be overtaken and foiled with out own
sinful lusts; then are we most apt to let out our hearts in speculative
wantonness, and contemplative wickedness, by feeding our fancies, and pleasing
our selves in lascivious, ambitious, revengeful, and other wicked thoughts. In
which respect we ought in our solitariness carefully to watch over our hearts,
being then in greatest danger of these spiritual rapes.

To this end I shall commend that excellent, but too much neglected duty of
Divine Meditation, which is twofold.

1 Sudden and occasional. 2 Set and deliberate. Of which severally. And first
of sudden and occasional Meditation.
For the better clearing whereof I shall show 1 The nature thereof, what it is.
2 Add some Motives to quicken thee up to a frequent use thereof.


I. For the nature of occasional Meditation; It is a sudden fixing of the mind
upon some profitable subject, occasioned by some thing that we see or hear.
The which may be done at all times, and in all places, when thou art at home
about the works of thy Calling, or walking abroad. Of this sudden and
occasional Meditation there may be much use, by reason of the ^^riety of
Objects, which present themselves to our view; for every creature that we
behold, does afford unto us plentiful matter of spiritual and heavenly
Meditation; from each of them thou may take occasion to meditate of God, and
of his Attributes shining in them, as the Power, Wisdom, Goodness, and other
Attributes of God.

II. For Motives, take these three.

1 It will be a special means to keep worldly, wanton, frivolous thoughts, and
idle motions out of thine heart; for if thou give up thy self to idleness, not
laboring to possess thy mind with some good and profitable Meditation, thou
art sure to be pestred with vain and wicked cogitations.

2 A frequent use of occasional Meditations, will fit thee for set and solemn
Meditation, in that it will both furnish thee with matter, and prepare thine
heart to commune with God.

3 Hereby thou shall make a right use of the creatures; the creatures are half
lost unto thee, if thou only employ them, and not take out some spiritual
lesson from them.

Thus much of sudden and occasional Meditation.

Come we now to the set, solemn, and deliberate Meditation,

For the profitable handling whereof, I shall show thee 1 The Nature thereof. 2
Some Rules and Directions to be observed therein. 3 An Example or Pattern
thereof according to the Rules.


1 For the first, viz. the Nature of it, what it is? I answer, a set and
deliberate Meditation, Meditari nil aliud est quam mul^oties rem aliquam
considerare. Th. Aquia.
is a serious applying of the mind to some spiritual or heavenly subject,
discoursing thereof with thy self, to the end thine heart may be warmed, thine
affections quickened, and thy resolutions heightened to a greater love of God,
hatred of sin, etc.

Come we now to the Rules and Directions for the right manner of performing the
same. To this end I shall treat 1 Of the Time, when this duty is to be
performed, 2 Of the Place where. Of the Manner of setting about it, and
performing it.


1 Touching the Time when this duty is to be performed, and how often, it is
hard to give any set or certain Rule. For difference must be made between such
as are rich, and wealthy, who have much spare ^ime; and poor men who live by
their daily labor, and have ^ittle time to spare from the same, for the
performance of holy and religious duties. Now such as have time and leisure,
and are at their own dispose, ought to be frequent in the exercise of this
duty. How frequent such should be, I will not undertake to determine, Psalm. 1.
2. Psalm. 119. 97. 148.
because men's several occasions may vary it. But in general, that it be
frequent, the Scripture requires. And truly the more frequently it is
performed, the more easy and delightful will it be unto thee.

Questionless every one, whether he be rich or poor, Master or Servant, ought
to make conscience of performing this duty on the Lords day, which being
appropriated to spiritual duties, does especially challenge this, which is so
eminently spiritual.

For the choice of other days, and set times therein, it must be left to
Christian prudence, which will teach thee what time thou can best spare from
thine ordinary employments, and when thou art best disposed and fitted for the
performance of the same.

II. The next thing to be considered is the Place, for this duty ought to be
private, in some private, retired place, where thou may be free from company,
and whatsoever may distract thee. For when thou art most retired from the
world, then art thou most fit to have communion with God. Therefore Isaac when
he would meditate, and by Meditation converse with God, Genesis 24. 63. Psalm. 63.
6.
walked alone into the fields. And David meditated upon his bed, as himself
tells us.

III. For the Manner of setting upon this duty.

I. Having withdrawn thy self from worldly company, thou must for the time
wholly lay aside all worldly thoughts, for otherwise it may and will fall out,
that when thou art separated from the company and society of men; thou may
be in a crowd of worldly businesses through thy worldly and wandering thoughts.

II. In the entrance upon this duty, lift up thine heart in some short prayer
unto God for his direction, assistance, and blessing thereon.

III. Having thus prepared thy self in some measure, then pitch upon the
subject matter whereupon thou intendest to meditate; such as may be fit for thy
souls nourishment; Herein observe these Directions.

1 Let the subject matter of thy Meditation be wholly spiritual and divine.
Thus any part of the Scripture is a fit subject for thy Meditation, as also
God, or any of his Attributes, as (...) Omnipotency, Eternity, Immutability,
Om^ipresence, Omnisciency, (...), Wisdom, Mercy, Justice, Love, Faithfulness,
and other excellencies of God: As also the blessed and happy estate wherein our
first Parents were created by God, and that miserable estate whereinto they
implunged themselves, and all their posterity, by their disobedience against
God in eating the forbidden fruit; and the state of Redemption by Jesus Christ,
and the transcendent love of Christ in undergoing a bitter cursed death for us.

2 Let the particular subject thou pitchest upon for thy Meditation, be
suitable to thy present state and condition; and to that end in setting upon
this duty, it will be thy wisdom to observe the frame and temper of thy heart.
If thou find thine heart sad and heavy, then fix thy Meditation upon thy
sins, that so thou may turn thy sorrow and sadness for outward things, into
a sorrow for thy sins. But if thou find thine heart lightsome and cheerful,
then fix thy Meditations on the incomprehensible love of God, or on the
freeness of his grace, or on the bounty of God, especially toward thy self.

3 Having pitched thy thoughts upon some particular subject suitable to the
present frame and temper of thine heart, continue thy thoughts upon it, till
thou have found thy heart warmed, and thine affections quickened therewith,
which indeed is the main and principal end of this exercise.

4 Having spoken of preparation to the work, come we now to the work it self,
which consists of three particular heads.

1 The first I may call Cogitation, whereby I mean a discoursing of the
understanding about the subject matter pitched upon, a calling to mind of
several truths that belong thereunto. As if the subject of thy Meditation be
Death, then call to mind, and seriously think, as of the certainty of Death, so
also of the uncertainty thereof, both in regard of the Place where, the Manner
how, and the Time when. And then to argue the necessity of a continual
expectation of^ and preparation for Death.

2 The second is Application, to make some close application to thy self of
those truths thou have called to mind, for the warming of thine heart, and
quickening of thine affections.

3 The third and last particular is Resolution; a resolved purpose of heart to
do this or that, or to leave this or that. As if the subject of thy Meditation
has been Death, and finding thine heart thoroughly affect^^ with the
apprehension thereof, especially of the uncertain^ of the time of thy death,
resolve thereupon to be the more careful in embracing every opportunity of
doing good, thinking it may be the last that will be afforded unto thee; as
also to live in a continual expectation of, and preparation for death, by a
daily renewing thy peace with God.

Having thus given some Rules and Directions for the better helping thee in
this heavenly exercise of Divine Meditation:

III. I shall now give thee an Example and Pattern thereof, according to the
former Rules and Directions, for the better clearing it to thee.

Suppose the subject thou propoundest for thy Meditation be Sin, then having
lifted up thine heart unto God in prayer for his Direction and Assistance,

First, Fall upon the duty of Cogitation, calling to mind some plain truths
which apper^ain thereunto. As

I. Think of the nature of sin; How it is a transgression of the Law of God. 1
John 3. 4.


II. Of the kinds of sin, viz. Original and Actual.

1 Let out thine heart in a serious Meditation of that corruption of nature,
which thou and every man brought with him into the world; and how it is not
only a sin, but an heinous sin, comprehending in it the seeds of all sins,
even of the most abominable that can be imagined.

2 Let out thine heart in a serious Meditation of thine actual sins, and of the
several kinds of them, viz. Evil Thoughts, evil Words, and evil Actions.

III. Think of the evil qualities of sin. As

1 That it is most foul and filthy, yea far more filthy than a con^luence of
all the most filthy, nasty, loathsome things in the world. And therefore in the
Scriptures it is not only called filthy, but filthiness it self. 2 Cor. 7. 1.


3 Think how it is most infectious, having a pestilential quality, that
pollutes every thing, turning all our spiritual services, even our Prayers,
Hearing, Meditation, etc. into abomination.

4 Think how sin is most deceitful, which though it appear at first with a
Sirens face most delightful, yet it will prove at last to have a Serpents
sting, and to wound mortally. And though for the present the way of sin may be
very pleasant and delightful, yet the end and issue thereof will be very
bitter, if not fearful and doleful.

IV. Think of the fearful effects, and cursed ^^^^uents of sin; As

1 How it makes a separation between God and our souls; so that there can be
no sweet communion between God and us, whereby sin appears to be a greater
evil than poverty, imprisonment, flame of fire, or the like, for a man may lie
under all these evils, and yet lie in Gods bosom.

2 Think how in exposes thee to all the miseries and calamities that can
befall man both here and hereafter: For it brings upon him hardness of heart,
horror of conscience, vexation and anguish of soul, and all kind of spiritual
evils, the least of which is far worse than all the plagues of Egypt.

4 It likewise subjecteth his body to weaknesses, sicknesses and diseases. Yea
sin, while it remains unpardoned, subjects a man to all the dreadful fruits
and effects of Gods wrath, which are all judgments and plagues here, and
eternal torture and torments in that everlasting lake, where is nothing but
weeping, and willing, and gnashing of teeth.

Having thus done with the work of Cogitation, Then fall upon the work of
Application, to apply these forementioned truths unto thy self, for the
warming of thine heart, and quickening of thine affections.

1 Make this application to thy self, to look after Jesus Christ, and to value
him above all things. Let the consideration of thy manifold sins drive thee
unto Jesus Christ, who alone can free thee from the guilt of them, and
punishments due unto them. Happy is he whom the sense of his sins makes to
long in his soul for Christ, and to count all things but dross and dung in
comparison of him; Zech. 13. 1.
and that rejoices in that fountain of grace which the Lord has opened for
sin, and for uncleanness; and triumphs in his spirit, because of the hope to be
discharged by another, of that, for which himself cannot satisfy.

2 Admire the wonderful patience of God, in bearing with thee so long,
notwithstanding thy manifold provocations. It may be thou have been a swearer,
a Sabbath-breaker, an unclean person for many years, and yet God has spared
thee; Oh thence take occasion to admire the long-suffering and forbearance of
God toward thee.

3 Let the consideration of the heinous nature of sin, and fearful punishments
due unto thee for the same, ravish thy soul with an admirat^^^ of the love of
Christ, yea and inflame thy heart with a (...), who has born thy sins for
thee, and by his death satisfied Gods justice for the same.

Having thus done with the work of Cogitation and Application, then proceed to
Resolution against sin for the time to come Resolve therefore to give sin a
Bill of divorse, to be more watchful against sin, that it may not rule nor
reign in thee, as formerly it has done; say with thy self, Though I cannot
utterly destroy sin, but that it will remain and abide in me, yet I am
resolved, with the assistance of Gods grace, so to keep it under, that it shall
not reign in me; that though it do keep possession in me, yet that it shall
not have dominion over me. To this end I will carefully shun and avoid all the
occasions and means which may allure and draw me unto sin.

And then for a conclusion, beg of God, that as he has been pleased to put
any good purpose and resolution into thine heart, so he would enable thee by
his holy Spirit to bring it to act and execution* that he would strengthen
thee to perform what thou have promised. With an acknowledgement of thine own
weakness and inability, beg power and strength from God: for it is his power
that must strengthen thee against the power of thy lusts and corruptions.

CHAP. XIII.
Of our Behavior in Company.
AS thou must be watchful over thy self when thou art alone, so likewise when
thou art in company, looking unto thy behavior therein; and the rather,
because we are generally more apt to transgress in company, than when we are
alone; experience teaches us, that many who in secret are watchful over their
thoughts, laboring to improve their privacy by some heavenly meditation, and
sweet communion with God, are in company very apt to forget God, and themselves
too, by giving too much way to the satisfying of their carnal lusts and
pleasures, whereby they fall into many sins. And therefore it will not be amiss
to set down some directions to guide thee when thou art in company.

But before I lay down these Directions, I shall premise an Argument or two to
persuade thee to make choice of the good, and godly, and by no means of wicked
and ungodly ^^sons for thine ordinary converse. As also a preparatory advice or
(...) for the better fitting and preparing of thee to improve thy converse with
men to the best spiritual advantage.

1 Therefore highly prize, and earnestly seek the company of such as are godly,
because thou will find a greater increase in thy Piety, Knowledge, Faith,
Zeal, and all other graces thereby; if you look into the Primitive times, you
shall find, that when the Christians did most frequently associate themselves
together, delighting in the communion of each other, then did they most of all
thrive and increase, as in Piety, so in Knowledge, Faith, Love Zeal, and all
other graces. And it may be observed, that where the people of God do not
associate themselves in holy communion, there is little thriving in grace and
godliness, though they live under never so powerful a Ministry.

2 Avoid as much as may be the society of wicked and profane persons,
especially such as are scoffers at Godliness and Religion. Because we are very
apt to be perverted by evil company, and corrupted with the contagion of their
sins; such pitch will defile our garments.

3 Avoid the society of wicked men, because we are thereby in danger to be
involved in their temporal plagues. All profane men being liable every moment
to those fearful plagues, and judgments, which their sins justly deserve, and
earnestly call for; If God should shower them down upon them, while the godly
are in their company, how can they expect immunity from the same?

4 Avoid their company, because we shall thereby encourage and imbolden them
in their wicked and profane courses. For it is a great encouragement unto
wicked men to go on in their wicked and sinful courses, when as they are
countenanced with the society of the godly.

Now for the better fitting and preparing thy self for profitable converse when
thou art in company, I shall only give thee these two advises.

1 That thou may be the better furnished with matter for useful discourse,
often, and seriously meditate with thy self on some general head of Divinity;
as of our wretched and miserable condition by nature, of the all sufficiency of
Christ's sacrifice, of the vanity and uncertainty of all earthly things; of the
shortness of this life; of the day of judgment. By often contemplating of
the^^ things, or the like, with thy self in secret, thou will be bett^^ ^^abled
to talk and discourse of them (...) of others, and that to their good and
edification, as well as to thine own.

2 Before thou go into company, be earnest with God in prayer for grace so
to order thy conversation, and discourses, that they may tend, as to the glory
of his name, so to thine own and others good, and spiritual advantage.

These things thus premised, come we now to the Directions for the good
government of thy self when thou art in company; which I shall lay down 1 More
generally. 2 More particularly.


1 In reference to thy behavior in good company.

2 In reference to thy behavior in bad.

The general Directions for thy behavior in company are these.

I. Let thy carriage and conversation be humble, willing to communicate thy
counsels, comforts and experiences to the poorest and meanest Christians, and
to partake of their counsels, comforts, and experiences; not disdaining to
learn any good thing of those, who in several respects are much thine
inferiors.

II. In all thy conversings with men, labor to be fruitful and profitable,
both to thy self, and others, by receiving and doing all the good thou can.

1 To thy self, by receiving all the good thou can from others. To this end,
when thou art in the company of others, diligently observe in what gifts and
graces any does excel (for God has dispensed various gifts unto his people, 2
Cor. 12. 4, 8, 9, 10.
all are not alike qualified) and then labor to draw forth those gifts and
graces to thine own spiritual good and advantage.

2 To others, by communicating unto them such good things as thou conceivest
most suitable unto their present state and condition. The more good thou
communicarest unto others, the more will God communicate unto thee.

III. Often lift up thine heart unto God in some short ejaculatory prayer, that
he would open thy lips, that thy mouth may show forth his praise, Psalm. 51. 15.
that he would enable thee so to speak, that thy words and discourses may tend
to the good and edification of others, ministering grace to the hearers. Ephesians
4. 29.


Having thus given thee general Directions for thy behavior in com^^^; come
we now to the more particular directions (...) good company.

I. When thou art in good company, Nihil de Scripturis, nihil de salute agitur
animarum, sed nug^, and risus, and verba proseruntur in venturs. Bernard.
trifle not away thy time with worldly conferences and discourses, as the
common fault of too too many is, whereof Saint Bernard complained in his time.
But let the subject of thy discourse rather be some spiritual matter.

II. Labor to turn the current of worldly discourses into spiritual; to that
end watch every opportunity which may occasion any digression from worldly
matters, into some spiritual and heavenly subject.

III. Be ready to communicate and impart such spiritual gifts and graces as
thou have received. Have thou any competent measure of saving knowledge?
communicate thy knowledge unto others, by acquainting them with the mysteries
of salvation. Have thou found comfort after thy spiritual troubles and
desertions? Have thou found support under thy trials and temptations? Have thou
found gracious answers and returns to thy prayers? Have thou got the victory
over any lust or corruption? freely and willingly communicate and impart unto
others the experiences thou have had of Gods Mercy, Power, and Goodness in thy
several straights, and exigencies, directing them to such ways and courses
wherein thy self have found much good and benefit. This we find expressly
commanded. 1 Per. 4. 10.


The particular directions referring to our behavior in bad company, are these.

I. When by reason of some common occasion thou art in bad company (for
otherwise, as we showed before, thou art by all means to avoid it) see that
thy conversation be with a Dove-like innocence, blameless and harmless,
according to that exhortation of the Apostle, in Philip. 2. 15. The truth is,
there is scarce a better means to propagate the Gospel, and to fasten it on the
affections of natural men, than the fair carriage, and honest conversation of
the Professors thereof. It is as the odout of Christ's ointment, the fragrancy
whereof draws the affections of others.

II. Be careful that thou partake not of their sins; Which Direction the
Apostle gives, Ephesians. 5. 11.
saying, Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness: He means,
that they should no way communicate, or be partakers with their sins, which he
calls works of darkness.

Quest. How may we be said to partake with others in their sins?

Answ. ^en partake of others sins, as by provoking them to sin, so by approving
their sin. Men approve others sins openly, or covertly ^ Openly, by Word, or
Deed.

By Word. Prove. 24. 24.
1 When they commend others for their sins. Prove. 17. 15.


2 When they patronize and defend them in their sins. Isa. 5. 20.


3 When they soothe them up, Acts 8. 1. and 22. 20.
and flatter them therein. Men approve others sins by Deed, Lev. 5. 1.
when they be companions and agents with them in the same sins. Covertly men
approve others sins, Deuteronomy. 13. 6, 7, 8. and 21. 7.
when they tacitly consent unto them. He may be said tacitly to consent, that
either reveals not the sin he knows, when he ought; ut malus scrmo in ducit
in peccatum, sic malum silentium relinquit in peccato. Augustine.
or shows no dislike of it, when he beholds it. And this oftentimes is as
hurtful, in respect of the offender, as ill counsel; for as evil speech moves
men to sin, so evil silence leaves men in sin.

III. Grieve and mourn for the sins thou discernest amongst them. It is noted
often, Deuteronomy. 9. 18, 19.
and commended as a special grace in sundry of Gods Saints, Neh. 1. 4.
that they have been greatly troubled in themselves at the dishonor done to
God even by the sins of others; Psa. 119. 158.
as Moses, Nehemiah, David, Jeremiah, Jer. 13. 17.
and others.

IV. When thou observest any wickedness committed by thy neighbor, reprove him
for the same; Levit. 19. 17.
which duty we find much pressed upon Gods people in the Scriptures. Thou
shall not hate thy brother in thine heart, thou shall in any wi^e rebuke thy
brother, and not suffer sin upon him. Wherein are implied two things.

1 That he who does not reprove his brother when he sees him do amiss, does
indeed hate him, and not love him; for there is no love like the love of
reproof.

2 That by not reproving thy brother, thou suffer him to run on* and
continue in his course of sin, which will at last prove his destruction.

For the right manner of performing this duty, both certain General Rules must
be observed, and also Particular, according to diverse circumstances. General
Rules are these.

1 He that reproves another, must lift up his heart in prayer unto God, that
he would so guide his tongue, and move the others heart, that his reproof may
be profitable unto him. For without Gods blessing, all our admonitions and
reproofs will prove but words spoken in the air.

2 Our reproof must be done in love, aiming therein at our brothers good, and
not at all at his disgrace. For (...) the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 16. 14.
All things must be done in love; And as (...) things, so especially this of
reproof. Concerning Particular Rules, both the state of the party reproving,
and of the party reproved* and the quality of the sin, together with time and
place must be observed.

1 The state and condition of the party reproving must be observed. As they
who have authority over others have greater liberty to reprove, so if they have
to deal with notorious scandalous offenders, they then may and must do it.

1 With authority, Tit. 2. 15.
as the Apostle exhorts, T^t. 1. 13. (...)
Rebuke with authority.

2 Sharply, So the Apostle commands, Rebuke them sharply. The word in the
Greek translated sharply, properly signifies cuttingly, or to the quick. Ely
failed herein; though he reproved his sons for their wickedness, yet it was
not sharply, and to the quick, but with too much gentleness and mildness.

2 The mind and ^isposition of the party reproved must be observed: For if he
be flexible and ingenuous, Gal. 6. 1.
he must with mildness be reproved, even with the spirit of meekness, as the
Apostle Paul expresses it. But yet severity must be used when lenity prevails
not.

3 The state and condition of the party reproved is to be observed. For

1 If it be our Superior, it must be done with all reverence and humility,
rather beseeching and exhorting, than plainly rebuking, as Naamans servants did
their Master. 2 King. 5. 11, 13.


2 If the party to be reproved be our equal, then it must be done without all
bitterness, even with all love. Reproof is a bitter pill, and therefore it must
always be rolled with Sugar, expressing much meekness of spirit, and
compassion of heart; showing in the hatred of our brothers sin, our love of his
person.

4 The quality of the sin reproved must likewise be observed.

1 Private offenses must be privately reproved; For says our Savior, Mat.
18. 15.
If thy brother trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between thee
and him alone. But open and scandalous offenses must be reproved openly. For
says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 5. 20.
Them that sin, viz. openly, and with scandal, rebuke before all, i. e. before
the whole assembly of the Church, that others also may fear.

2 Sins directly tending to Gods dishonor, must be reproved with an holy zeal
and indignation. Christ thus often reproved the Scribes and Pharisees. And thus
Peter reproved Simon Magus. Act. 8. 20.


5 The se^^onableness of the time must with great wisdom be observed. To
rebuke a drunkard in his drunkenness is folly; Abigal knew as much, 2 Samuel 25.
26.
and therefore said nothing to Nabal in his drunken fit, but in the morning,
when the wine was gone out of him. So neither is it seasonable to reprove a man
for his passion in his passion; wait rather for a fit time, till a man's fit and
passion be over.

6 The seasonableness of the place must likewise be observed. Unless it be
for due and just censure, let it not be in public Assemblies, open streets,
with the like. But if by the way thou observest a man sin, whom thou know
not whether ever thou shall see him again, or no, then as privily as thou
can, thou may meekly rebuke him. Thus shall thou manifest thy Zeal for Gods
glory, thine hatred of sin, and thy care for thy brothers salvation.

CHAP. XIV.
Directions to the Rich.
AS the Apostle Paul knew how to be abased, Phil. 4. 12.
and how to abound, how to be full, and how to be hungry, i. e. he had
learned in the School of Christ, how to carry himself Christian-like, in a rich
and in a poor estate. So it will be a point of special wisdom in us, to know
how to carry our selves Christian-like through variety of conditions, how to
manage every estate. For your better help herein, I shall give you some
Directions.

1 How to carry your selves Christian-like in a rich and full estate.

2 How to carry your selves Christian-like in a poor and mean estate.

I. Look up unto God, and often think of him as the author and donor of all the
good things thou do enjoy. When thou have gotten wealth, say not, This I have
gotten by my own wisdom and policy, by mine own travel, pains and endeavor.
But say with Job, This the Lord has given; Job 1. 21.
acknowledge his hand of providence in what thou have. This direction the Lord
gives his own people by Moses, When thou art grown rich, Deuteronomy. 8. 17, 18.
say not in thine heart, my power, and the might of my hand has gotten me
this wealth; but thou shall remember the Lord thy God, for it is he that
gives thee power to get wealth. Noting wealth and riches to be the special
gift of God.

II. Bless God for what thou have. This duty likewise the Lord required of his
own people. Deuteronomy. 8. 10.
When thou have eaten, and art full, then thou shall bless the Lord thy God.

III. Labor to see Gods special love to thee in common mercies. For what good
will the enjoyment of any thing do thee, unless thou can see Gods love, as
well as his bounty, therein?

Quest. How may I know that these outward mercies which I do enjoy are bestowed
upon me in love and favor?

Answ. 1 If they inflame thy heart with a love to God, causing thee to love him
the more, because he has been so bountiful unto thee.

2 If thou find in thy self a willingness to honor God in the use of those
good things thou have received from him, by laying out a portion thereof
toward the maintenance of Gods worship, or the releef of Gods poor, then thou
have a comfortable evidence that they are bestowed upon thee in love.

3 If it be the grief of thine heart that thou do not answer the loving
kindness of the Lord toward thee; that thy conversation is so unsuitable to
his gracious dispensations toward thee. This is an evident sign, that what
thou have received from God, was bestowed upon thee in love.

IV. Beware of being puffed up with Pride. (...).
For wealth and riches are very apt to make men proud, as the Apostle
intimates, 1 Timothy 6. 17. Charge them that are rich in this world, that they
be not high minded, implying, that riches are very apt to make men
high-minded, to think of themselves above what is meet, especially such as are
raised out of nothing unto a great estate.

V. Therefore labor to be humble under thine abundance; to be low in thine
own thoughts, when thou art high in the world; which indeed will prove thy
glory: for humility is an ornament, as the Apostle Peter implies under that
phrase, (...). 1 Pet. 5. 5.
Be clothed or decked with humility* as with an ornament. Many men think
humility a debasement, but the Spirit of God counts it an ornament.

VI. Labor for the true spiritual Riches, Animas hominis dives, non arca
appellari solet, quamvis illa fit plena, dum te inanem videbo, divitem non
putabo. Cic.
namely, saving, sanctifying graces, that thy self may be rich, and not thy
chest only. And truly, rich men, of all others, stand in most need of
sanctifying graces; in regard their riches are great snares unto them, and
occasions of sin, as a long coat is in greater danger to be dagled, than a
short one. Oh therefore beg of God that he would not (...) thee off with the
things of this world, but that together with his outward blessings, he would
give thee his inward blessings, true, saving, sanctifying graces, especially
the grace of spiritual poverty, which is the foundation of blessedness; for,
says our Savior, Mat. 5. 3.
Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. It was
an excellent speech of Luther, Valde protestatus sum, me nolle sic ab eo
satiari. Luther.
when the Princes of Germany sent him in great presents, I profess, says he,
the Lord shall not put me off so. Do thou in like manner, take up the same
resolution.

VII. Communicate out of thy store toward the relief of others; Giving to the
poor, as it is a duty incumbent upon all that are able, so especially upon the
rich. 1 Timothy 6. 17, 18.
The Apostle Paul therefore wills Timothy, to charge such as are rich in this
world, that they do good, that they be rich in good works, etc. Job is a
worthy pattern herein for rich men, Job 31. 19
he having abundance would not see any perish for want of clothing, Lev. 19.
9, etc.
nor any Poor without covering; Deuteronomy. 14. 19
the Law which enjoins such as had Harvest and Vintage, to leave gleanings and
after-gatherings for the Poor, shows, that of men's abundance the poor must
have a part.

The better to quicken you up to this Duty, consider these two Arguments.

1 This is an especial end of Gods giving more to some than to others, that
they who have more abundance should thereout give to them that need. This
inference does Saint Paul make (2 Cor. 8. 14, 15) from the distribution of
Manna, Exodus 16. 18. for they that gathered more than was needful for
themselves, and their Households, gave of their abundance to such as had not
enough.

2 Rich men are not Lords of the abundance which they have, but Stewards, Luke
16. 2
and therefore must dispose it according to the mind of the Lord; and that is,
some part thereof to the poor, hereof they shall give an account.

And therefore of all unmerciful men, such as are rich, and have enough for
themselves, and others too, are worthy of most blame; such an one was that rich
man in the Parable, Luke 16. 19, etc.
of whom it is said, that he was clothed in Purple, and fine Linen, and fared
sumptuously every day, and yet it is implied, that he afforded not to poor
Lazarus the crumbs that fell from his table. Let such unmerciful rich men well
weigh the end of that rich man, and be henceforward stirred up to take due
notice of a main duty that lies upon them, which is, to be free and forward,
liberal and bounti^^l in distributi^^ to the necessities of the poor. Knowing
He that sows bountifully shall reap bountifully; though God reward none by
way of merit for their works sake, 2 Cor 9. 6.
yet he will render to every one according to his deeds; Romans 2. 6
so as rich men shall lose nothing by being rich in good works, but rather gain
very much thereby.

CHAP. XV.
Directions to the Poor.
HAving given Directions to the Rich, I come now to give Directions to the
Poorer sort, who stand in as much need as the former.

I. Labor to be content with thine estate, as being that portion God has
allotted unto thee; and repine not against his Providence, because thou have
not a larger allowance; which is the counsel of the Apostle Paul, 1 Timothy 6. 8
Having food and raiment, let us be therewith content.

Q. Wherein does this contentedness consist?

A. In bringing down your minds to your present state and condition. It is the
great mistake of many, to think that contentedness consists in abundance, in
raising up their estates to such a pitch, conceiving they should then be
contented; whereas indeed true contentedness consists rather in an evenness,
suitableness, and proportion between a man's estate and his mind.

The better to persuade the Poorer sort to this Duty of Contentedness, I shall
propound some few considerations.

1 That such as have convenient food and raiment enjoy as much as the richest
men on earth; whereupon says the Apostle in the forementioned place, Having
food and raiment, let us be therewith content. Though a man possess never so
much of this worlds goods, 1 Timothy, 6. 8
yet does he enjoy no more thereof than himself eats, and wears, for the
rest goes to others, and is nothing to him.

Obj. Happily thou will say, that though his belly can hold no more than thine,
yet his fare is better, and more delicious?

Ans. Though his fare may be much better, and more delicious, yet his delight
therein may be less than thine in thy courser diet; and his delicious fare does
usually prove hurtful to him, as the Wise man notes, Eccles. 5. 12.

2 A little with the fear of God is much better than great treasures with
trouble and vexation of spirit, as the Wise man expresses it, Prove. 15. 16.
Better is a little with the fear of the Lord, than great treasures and trouble
therewith; intimating, that a small estate with the fear of God is far more
comfortable than a great and plentiful estate without the fear of God, which is
usually accompanied with much trouble and vexation of spirit.

3 That every man's estate is ordered by God, who as he is the sovereign Lord
of Heaven and Earth, and may do with us as he pleases; so he is infinite in
Wisdom, and thereby knows what estate is best and most convenient for us,
even better than we our selves; yea, and is rich in mercy and goodness, and
thereby willing and ready to do that which in his wisdom he knows to be
best and most convenient for us; which if it were seriously considered, would
be a special means to work up our hearts to some measure of contentedness in
our meanest estate and condition.

4 That our blessed Savior Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 8 9
though he was rich, yea Heir of all things, Mat. 8. 20
yet for our sakes became so poor, that as himself expresses it, he had not
where to l^y his head. And we read that Women ministered unto his necessities.
Luke 8. 3
Christ became thus poor for gracious ends; as,

1 That he might sanctify Poverty to all his members: for Christ by
undertaking it, sanctified it.

2 That he might minister comfort to his poor members: for in his example it is
evident, that Gods dear Children may live here in a poor and mean estate.

3 That he might by his example teach us to submit our selves to the Divine
providence, resting contented with our poor and mean estate, if God shall call
us thereunto.

II. Labor to be humble; Humility is commendable in all, but especially it
becomes such whom the Lord has brought into a low condition, that so they may
walk suitably and answerably to their condition; so much the Wise man
intimates, when he says, It is better to be of an humble spirit with the
lowly; Prove. 16. 19
implying that with a low condition there should be an humble mind and spirit.

III Labor to be rich in grace; yea the poorer thou art in purse, labor to
be the richer in grace, and then thy worldly Poverty will be no hinderance to
thy spiritual preferment, but rather a furtherance, in that it puts thee into a
better capacity, seeing they are the Poor of this world, Jam. 2. 5
whom the Lord usually makes rich in faith, and heirs of his kingdom; stir up
thy self therefore by fervent praying, diligent reading, and frequent hearing
of the Word, to grow in grace, yea to grow rich in grace, that though thou art
poor here, yet thou may be an heir of Heaven, and when thou dyest, with
Lazarus be received into Abraham's bosom.

IV. In thy greatest wants and exigencies labor to live by faith in Gods
Providence, resting confidently upon him for a comfortable supply of all
needful temporal good things. For thine encouragement hereunto take notice of
that gracious promise, The young Lions do lack and suffer hunger, Psalm. 34. 10
but they that seek the Lord shall not want any good thing; he does not say,
they shall have abundance, but they shall want nothing that is good for them;
and therefore said our Savior to his poor Disciples, Take no thought for your
life, Mat. 6. 25, 26
what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink, nor yet, for your bodies, what
ye shall put on; Is not the life more than meat? and the body than raiment?
Behold the Fowls of the air, for they sow not, neither do they reap, nor
gather into barns, yet your heavenly Father feeds them; are ye not much
better than they? Here our Savior by several Arguments labors to dissuade his
Disciples from all distrustful thoughts and cares about their food and raiment,
and to persuade them to live by faith in Gods Providence for the same.

1 The first Argument is taken from the greater to the less, Argumentum ^
majori ad minus.
as thus; God has given you the greater thing, therefore he will give you the
less; he has given you life, therefore he will not deny food; he has given
you a body, therefore he will not withhold raiment. This argument our Savior
expresses in these words, Is not the life more than meat? and the body than
raiment?

2 The second Argument is taken from the less to the greater, Argumentum a
minori ad majus.
and may be thus framed; He that provideth for Fowls will much more provide
for men; But God provideth for the Fowls of the air, therefore much more will
he provide for men; which argument is here amplified and confirmed by two
reasons.

1 First from the means of provision afforded to men, which the fowls of the
air want; for whereas men Plow, and Sow, and Reap, and gather their Corn into
Barns, and thereby have means of provision which the Fowls of the air want, for
they sow not, neither do they reap, nor gather into barns; i. e. they have
not, neither do they use the means of provision which men do, yet are they
not unprovided of convenient food, for God feeds them; Why then should men,
who have such means of provision, distrust Gods Providence?

2 From the excellency of Man above Fowls, expressed in these words, Are ye
not much better than they? intimating, that men are much better than the Fowls
of the air; and therefore seeing God provideth for the Fowls of the air, much
more will he provide for men, especially for his own children; for who is
there that feeds his Hawks, and his Hounds, that will suffer his Children to
starve for want of convenient food? and therefore you have good cause in all
your straights and exigencies to live by faith in Gods providence.

CHAP. XVI.
Of Christian-like carriage under Reproaches.
I. BEware of manifesting any Distemper or Passion under your Reproaches. I
deny not but you may, and ought to be sensible of the wrong done to your name,
Cant. 1. 3
for as a good name is a precious ointment, so to have an evil name is a great
judgment: and therefore you ought not to be insensible of the wrong done to
your name by slanders and reproaches, saying, Let men speak of me what they
please, I care not, so long as I know mine own innocence; for though the
testimony of your own innocence be a ground of comfort unto you, yet your care
must be not only to approve your selves unto God, but also unto men, to be as
careful of your good names as possibly ye can; but yet you are not to manifest
any distemper or passion upon the reproachful speeches of others against you.
For,

1 That will give others just occasion to conclude, that you are verily guilty
of those things whereof you are reproached; so: in truth there is no greater
symptom of guiltiness than your falling into passion, and being exasperated
when you are reproached.

2 Your distemper and passion will much disquiet your spirits, and indispose
you to the right manner of performing any good duty.

II. Beware of returning reproach for reproach, or rai^ing for railing, which
is very unbeseeming a Christian, being therein so unlike unto Christ, Pet. 2. 23
who as the Apostle Peter speaks, When he was reviled, reviled not again. If
therefore you profess your selves to be Christians, far be it from you to
return reproach for reproach, for by seeking to right your selves by raising
speeches, you take the cause into your own hands; whereas if you would with
patience commit your cause to God, Tu sile, tu tace, tu contemn^, etc. Bernard.
he would clear up your innocence and thereby take off the reproaches which are
cast upon your names; therefore Bernard advises his Friend to be dumb and
silent at the reproaches of his enemies. Sermon. 42. demod^ (...).


III. Seem to take little or no notice of those reproaches that are cast upon
you. Prove. 19. 11
The Wiseman says, It is the glory of a man to pass over a transgression; i.
e. to seem to take no notice thereof. And truly, it is the best kind of revenge
you can take of your reproachers; for there can be no greater vexation to your
malicious reproacher, Nec prudc^^iae quic quam in se esse (...) o^tendet, qui
(...) sen.
than to see you take little or no notice of his reproaches against you, and
whosoever will make trial, shall find that his Adversary is more vexed with his
silence, than if he should return like for like.

IV When an evil report is raised of you, be not so much inquisitive who raised
it, as to make a good use and sanctified improvement thereof. To this end know,
and consider, that the report raised of you is either true or false; if true,
then you may discern the Finger of God at your enemies tongues end, pointing
unto you your sins, and calling upon you to humble your selves for the same.
But if the report raised of you be false, yet you may hearken to it as to a
Call from God, to look more narrowly over your selves, lest you be overtaken
with that sin wherewith at the present you are falsely charged; for God knowing
your temper and disposition, happily sees that you are inclinable thereunto,
and therefore suffers others to charge you therewith, though falsely, merely
for the preventing thereof, that you may not be overtaken therewith; and thus
may you make a good use of the falsest and bitterest objections of your
adversaries against you.

V Labor to walk contrary to what is charged upon you, though falsely. As for
instance* If you are charged with Hypocrisy, that you are no better than
Hipocrites; labor the more for sincerity, and resolve to perform all you do
out of respect to God, more than unto men; if you are charged with Pride, carry
your selves the more humbly and lowly, that your humility may appear unto all,
and so your conversation give your enemies the lie.

VI. Go and spread your reproaches before God in Prayer, as good Hezekiah did
the reproaches of Rabshekah, and make known your case unto him, Isa. 37. 14
desiring help and strength from him, to bear them Christian like, and then you
shall not need to doubt of his gracious comfort and support.

CHAP. XVII.
Of our Carriage in reference to Crosses and Afflictions.
IN regard that all men so long as they live here in this world are subject to
manifold Losses, Crosses, and Afflictions; therefore it is necessary that I
should give you some directions how to carry your selves in reference thereunto.

The Directions are these.

I. Forecast what Losses, Crosses, and Afflictions may befall you. When you
abound in plenty, Quic quid fieri potest quasi futurum cogitemus, Sen. Epist. 24
think a time may come when your plenty may be turned into penury; when you
enjoy health and ease, think a time may come when your health may be turned
into sickness, your ease into pain; when you are taking your greatest delight
in your Yoke Fellow, Children, or Friends, even then consider they are mortal,
and may suddenly be snatched from you; look upon all Creature comforts, as
indeed they are, mutable, and moveable; thus did Anaxagoras, Anaxagoras apud
Plutarch, de tranquil. animi.
of whom it is recorded, that when tidings was brought him of the death of his
Son* he meekly replied, I always looked upon him as mortal. In like manner
should we look upon all our Creature comforts as mortal, and moveable. This
likewise was Jobs practice, as appears from that expression of his, Job 3. 25
The thing which I greatly feared is come upon me, and that which I was afraid
of is come unto me; intimating, that in his greatest prosperity he had thoughts
and fears of a change, yea of those los^es and crosses wherewith he was now
exercised.

II. Prepare for Losses, Crosses, and Afflictions; the former without this will
be of little or no use, a foresight of Afflictions will little avayl us,
unless we likewise prepare for them.

Q. How may we prepare our selves for Losses, Crosses, and Afflictions?

Ans. I. Earnestly desire, and seriously labor in the use of all means for an
interest in Jesus Christ; for,

1 Though the condition of man at all times is very sad without in interest in
Jesus Christ, yet the condition of a man in and under his afflictions, without
an interest in Christ is more sad, in that his Conscience is then most usually
awakened with the sense and apprehension of his sins and fearful Judgments due
unto him for the same, of which there is no hope or possibility of escaping
without an interest in Christ.

2 On the other side, the man that has an interest in Christ, has abundant
ground of comfort in the greatest troubles and afflictions, in that Christ by
his Sufferings has taken away the sting of them, which is Sin, and changed the
nature of them, by turning them from punishments into fatherly chastisements,
for our profit and amendment.

2 As you would be prepared for Afflictions, be careful to get and keep a good
conscience: for assuredly, the testimony of your own consciences, that you have
walked as in the sight and presence of God, endeavoring to have your
consciences void of offense both toward God, M^^us a^eneus esto, ^il conscire
sibi.
and toward men, will be as a wall of brass, yea as armor of proof unto you
in the day of trouble and distress; so that your hearts shall not shrink at any
affliction.

Though in the time of health and prosperity you may seem to be rather losers
than gainers, by keeping a good conscience in all things, yet in times of
trouble and affliction (next to an interest in Jesus Christ) nothing will be
more available to you than a good conscience; therefore let your main care be
to keep your consciences pure and clean from sin, not maintaining peace with
any sin.

3 Our preparation for affliction consists in a frequent resignation of our
selves, and of all our comforts, into the hands of God, and to his will, for
disposal as he pleases. By this means we shall be the more willing to part
with them, when God shall be pleased to call for any of them, especially it
this resignation of all unto God be fresh upon our hearts and spirits.

4 Our preparation for afflictions consists in casting all our cares, fears,
and troubles of mind about those evils which may befall us, upon God, who has
promised to sustain us under the same, according to that of the Psalmist, Psalm.
55. 22
Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he will sustain thee; i. e. he will comfort
and support thee; To this the Apostle Peter likewise exhorts, 1 Pet. 5. 7
Cast all your care upon him, for he cares for you* and truly Gods caring for
us may well take us off from all inordinate, excessive, and distrustful care
about our afflictions; and move us to lay the stress of our afflictions upon
him, considering he cares for us.

5 Would you be prepared for afflictions, then be often putting cases to your
selves of such straights and troubles, of such trials and afflictions as
probably may fall out, and then return into your own souls to search and try
what strength you have to hold out, if you should fall into such trials and
afflictions? When you enjoy abundance of this worlds goods, say to thy self, It
may be before I dye I may be stripped of all these, and reduced to great
straights, what shall I then do? Will not my faith then fail? Now I am at
liberty, and enjoy the comfort of my relations, my friends and acquaintance,
happily I may shortly be cast into Prison, and be deprived of all my outward
comforts, what shall I then do? how shall I be able to bear up under these sad
changes? it is good to put such cases to your selves, which will be an
excellent means to strengthen your faith against the evil day, against the day
of trouble and distress, and to make you with the greater confidence to trust
in God. Thus the Saints of old were wont to put the hardest cases to themselves
for the better strengthening of their hearts and faith, as Psalm. 6. 2, 3.

III. When God shall exercise you with any losses, crosses, or afflictions,
labor to bear them Christian^like; to that end observe these rules.

1 Bear them sensibly; the Lord expects we should be sensible of the weight of
our afflictions; he would not have us as Stoics, or Stocks, which are not
affected with his stripes; but like Children, he would have us sensible of the
smart of the rod. Job 1. 20
Thus was Job.

There are two Extremes whereunto we are very prone to run in times of
afflictions, the one is a despising of afflictions, the other is a fainting
under them, both which are hinted to us by the Author to the Hebrews, Heb. 12. 5
My Son, despise not thou the chastening of the Lord, nor faint when thou art
rebuked of him; these are the two extreans we are carefully to avoid in times
of afflictions.

1 Not to despise or slight the chastisement of the Lord* saying, If God will
have my estate, let him have it; if he will have my Husband, or Wife, or
Child, let him have them; this is a despising of the chastening of the Lord,
(...).
a little regarding, yea a contemning thereof, as the Greek word implies,
which is very displeasing unto God.

2 Not to faint under our losses, crosses, and afflictions, as when Children
dye, then the spirit of the Parent to dye also; or when the Husband dies, then
the spirit of the Wife to dye also; this is a fainting under the burden of our
afflictions, (...).
as if they were unsupportable, not to be endured, as the notation of the Greek
word implies.

2 If you would bear your afflictions Christian-like, bear them with patience
and silence, according to the example of David, who when God laid his hand upon
his back, he presently laid his hand upon his mouth, as appears by his own
expression, I was dumb, I opened not my mouth, because thou did it. Psalm. 39.
9


This patient silent bearing of Afflictions is opposed to two things.

1 To an inward repining at the Dispensations of God toward you. 2 To an
outward complaining and murmuring at them, both which you must carefully avoid.
1 You must carefully avoid all inward repinings at the dispensations of Gods
Providence toward you: whatsoever storms are without you, yea and blow upon
you, yet your hearts within you should be calm and quiet; what though the Lords
dealings with you be very sharp? yet you ought not to repine at them, but
quietly and silently to submit thereunto, acknowledging the equity of Gods
proceeding with you, that as he is righteous in all his ways, so in particular
toward you, and thereupon to say with good old Ely, 1 Samuel 3. 18 Luke 22. 42
It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good; and with our blessed
Savior, Father, not my will, but thy will be done. And if you bear your
afflictions thus quietly, you shall bear them with much more ease at present,
and find them more profitable in the end.

2 As you must carefully avoid all inward repining, so likewise all outward
complaining, and murmuring under the sad dispensations of Gods providence. As
you must not entertain any hard thoughts of God, as if he punished you above
your deservings, or more than you are able to bear, so neither must you express
any discontented words against the Lords dealings with you; for though a
Christian may mourn under sad Providence, yet may he not murm^^e at them;
though he may groan, yet not grumble; but quietly bear all losses, crosses, and
afflictions, both in opposition to all inward repining, and outward murmuring.

3 If you would bear your afflictions Christian-like, you must bear them
willingly and cheerfully.

To help you herein, take these few considerations.

1 That no afflictions befall any without the wise ordering Providence of God,
Job 5. 6.
as Eliphas implies, when he says, That affliction comes not forth of the
dust, neither does evil spring out of the ground; Truly, there is not a Warrant
comes to Arrest thy Body with Pain or Sickness, but it comes under the Hand and
Seal of thy heavenly Father; there is not a Habeas Corpus comes to remove thy
Yoke Fellow, Child, or Friend, but it is signed by thy heavenly Father. This
consideration has been a ground of comfort unto the people of God in all their
afflictions; Job 1. 21
The Lord, said Job, has given, and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the
name of the Lord. And this must needs be a ground of comfort, yea and joy unto
all the people of God, especially if you shall consider in the next place,

2 That the end God aims at in your afflictions is to do you good, yea some
special good. that could not be done so well in any other way: The Lord
chasteneth us for our profit, Heb. 12. 10
says the Apostle; every Cross will bring with it some blessing or other, if
the fault be not in our selves; yea the greatest cross will bring the greatest
blessing.

3 As God does intend our good th^reby, so when it has effected that good
which God intended thereby, he will soon remove your affliction from you, for
the Lord takes no delight or pleasure in your pains or sufferings, but
delights in mercy; Mich. 7. 8
and therefore will not, neither can he suffer his afflicting hand to lie
longer upon you, than in his wisdom he sees to be needful and necessary, for
the effecting of that good which he intends you thereby; and therefore if your
afflictions seem long unto you, know it is no longer than needs must, and that
that good for which God sent it, is not yet effected.

4 That God will either proportion your afflictions to the measure of your
strength, or your strength. to the measure of your affliction, laying no more
upon you than he will enable you to bear, according to that of the Apostle, 1
Cor. 10. 13
God is faithful, and will not suffer you to be tempted above what you are
able to bear.

IV. If you would bear you afflictions Christian-like, you must bear them
fruitfully, by laboring to make a sanctified use and improvement of them,
whereby they will become comfortable blessings unto you; for a sanctified
affliction is a great blessing.

Q. What course should I take to have my afflictions so sanctified unto me,
that I may be able to say with David, Psalm. 119. 71
It is good for me that I have been afflicted?

A. I. In every Affliction take notice of the displeasure of God against thee;
for though the Lord does sometimes afflict his Children for the trial and
exercise of their Graces, rather than for any displeasure he has conceived
against them, as in Jobs case it was, yet usually he strikes not till he be
provoked by our Sins, and therefore it will be thy wisdom in every affliction
to take notice of the displeasure of God against thee.

II. Search into thine own heart, and labor to find out the cause of Gods
displeasure against thee; for it is not for naught that God afflicts thee,
something or other is amiss in thee which God would have amended and reformed,
and considering that the Lord does not only in general correct us for Sin, but
visits our special Sins with special Judgments and Afflictions, therefore
whenever the Lord visits thee with Sickness, or exercises thee with any
affliction, know it is thy duty to make a strict search, and diligent enquiry
into thine own heart, for the special Sin, or Sins, God aims at therein, to
find out the plague of thine own heart. Thus did the people of God under their
sad affliction, yea they called upon one another to the practice of this duty;
Let us search and try our ways;, said they, Lam. 3. 40. for as a Disease can
never be well cured till the cause thereof be first found out and discovered:
so neither can any affliction be sanctified and removed, till that which has
occasioned it be in some sort found out and discovered.

For the better discovery of the particular Sin or Sins God aims at in thine
afflictions, take these few rules and directions.

1 When God visits thee, or any of thy dear relations with Sickness, or
exercises thee with any Affliction, or does but shake his Rod over thee, set
thy self as in his sight and presence, and then examine thy Soul and Conscience
thoroughly, make an exact survey and search into every corner thereof, to find
out the particular Sin God aymeth at.

2 Take notice what sin thy Conscience does first bring to thy remembrance: for
Conscience is Gods Deputy to convince thee, Nihil sic peccata in memoriam
revocare consue^it, ut p^na, and castigatio. Et hoc m^nifestum est ex fratribus
Joseph.
and to tell thee, that by living in the practice of such and such a Sin, or in
the omission of such a Duty, thou have justly brought upon thee such a
Judgment; as thou may see in the example of Joseph's brethren, who for their
cruelty toward their brother, adjudged themselves worthy of all the ^iseries
which they suffered; for their Consciences it seems in their distress chiefly
checked them for that, therefore they had good ground to suspect that to be
the cause of their present distress; under every Cross and Affliction therefore
listen to the voice of Conscience, which will deal impartially with thee.

3 Take special notice of the kind of thine affliction: for it is Gods usual
manner to punish Sin in kind, by way of retaliation, observing an analogy,
proportion, and similitude between the quality of the Sin, and the punishment
which he inflicteth, and so leads us as it were by the hand, that we may
come to find and feel it by his guidance and direction, for men's punishment
often bears the image and superscription of their sin upon it. Thus God
oftentimes punishes Drunkards with Dropsies, In quibus peecamus, in ^isdem
plectimur.
and Covetous men with Thieves, who rob them as they have robbed others. Thus
God often punishes our profaning of his Sabbaths, by inflicting some
judgment upon us on that day; and our careless neglect of Family Duties, by
taking away a Family-relation. Thus there is oftentimes a proportion between
men's Practices, and Gods Punishments, by comparing whereof we may many times
come to find out the particular Sin, or Sins, for which God afflicts us.

4 When Gods afflicting hand is upon thee, consider for what Sin especially
thou have often been reproved, either by the motions of Gods Spirit, or by the
admonitions of his Ministers, or by the checks of thine own Conscience, and yet
have refused to reform the same; thereupon suspect that Sin in special to be
the sin at which the Lord aymeth in thy present affliction; A verbis ad verbera
pro reditur Deus.
for it is usual with God to proceed from words to blows, to make us give more
diligen^ (...) thereunto.

5 Be earnest with God in Prayer, that he would help thee in this search, that
he would discover and make known unto thee the Sin, Job 10. 2
or Sins at which he especially aymeth; thus did Job, Show me, says he,
wherefore thou contendest with me; i. e. for what Sin or Sins thou do thus
afflict me. And afterward he cries out in his afflictions, Make me to know my
transgression, and my sin. Job 13. 23
In like manner do thou in thine affliction fly unto God by Prayer, beseeching
him to show unto thee wherefore he does so contend with thee, and to make known
unto thee what is thy transgression, and thy sin, that has provoked his
displeasure against thee.

III. Having fo^nd out the particular Sin God a^med at in thine affliction,
then go and confess it unto God in Prayer, with the aggravating ci^cumstances
thereof; freely judging and condemning thy self before God for the same, 1 John
1. 9
with a broken and contrite heart. And to such as confess their sins there is a
promise of forgiveness made. To thy confessions add earnest and fervent Prayer
unto God for the pardon and forgiveness of thy sins, for and through the merits
of Jesus Christ.

IV. Wherein soever upon thine examination thou find thy self to have been
faulty, Lam. 3. 40 Vera paenitentia est, quando sic paenitet hominem p^^casse,
ut ^rimen non repetat. Bern.
thou must endeavor to amend and reform; for as the end of thy search is to
discover what is amiss in thee, so the end of thy discovery is to amend and
reform what has been amiss in thee. And truly without this it will little
avail thee to pray unto God for the removal of thine Affliction, for the Lord
himself note^h continuance in sin to be the chief cause of the continuance of
his hand of affliction upon his people. Isa. 9. 12, 13.

V. Though Afflictions are special opportunities for Spiritual advantages, yet
seeing they are not of themselves able to work any good in thee, without the
special assistance of Gods Spirit working together with them; be earnest with
God in Prayer for a sanctified use and improvement of them; that as he does
afflict thee, so he would teach and instruct thee by his holy Spirit, how to
make a good use thereof, to the spiritual advantage of thine own soul. In all
thy addresses unto God in Prayer, beg of him, that no affliction may pass
away unsanctified; and pray more for the sanctification of them, than for their
removal.

VI. In the time of thy affliction vow and promise unto God better obedience
for the time to come; that thou will be more careful in the avoiding of those
sins, for the commission whereof, and in the performing of those Duties, for
the omission whereof thy Conscience checks thee. Psalm. 66. 14
David speaks of Vows which he had made unto God in the day of his trouble and
distress; and truly this vowing unto God newness of life, better obedience, and
a greater watchfulness over our selves for the time to come, is a necessary
duty to be often performed by us, especially in the time of our Sickness, and
that in regard of the weakness of our flesh; for howsoever in our sicknesses
and afflictions there may be good motions, Per votum immobiliter voluntas
firma^ur in bonum, Aqui. Su^. 2. 2. q. 88. art. 6.
purposes, and intentions in our minds, yet through the weakness of ^our flesh,
we are apt to start from them. Now a Promise and Vow is a special means to keep
us from starting from our good motions and purposes

VII. Be careful to perform the Vows and Promises thou make unto God in the
day of thy trouble and distress, for by thy Vow thou have bound thy self to
performance; and therefore says the Wise man, Quia jam vovisti, jam ^e
obstrinxisti. Aug. Epist. 45. an Arment.
When thou vowest a vow unto God, defer not to pay it, for he has no
pleasure in fools; noting it to be egregious folly in any to be forward in
making Vows unto God, and then afterward to be backward in performing what
they vowed. Eccl. 5. 4, 5


CHAP. XVIII.
Of Dying well.
IF thou apprehendest thy Disease to be mortal, and that it is like to be thy
last Sickness, then it will be thy wisdom to prepare thy self after the best
manner thou can for death.

For thy better help herein, take these Directions.

I. Set thine House in order; I mean, settle thine outward estate, by making
thy Will; which will no way hasten thy death (as many foolishly do imagine)
but rather put thee into a better capacity, to set thy Soul in order for a
blessed departure. And as God has blessed thee with an estate, so fayl not to
give some proportionable part thereof for the relief of the poor members of
Jesus Christ. Though that charity which is exercised in a man's lifetime is
questionless the best, and the most acceptable unto God, Beneficium est quod
quis dedi^, ^um posset and non dare. Sen. de Benif. l. 3. cap. 19
when we make our own Hands our Executors, and our own Eyes our Overseers; yet
I condemn not that Charity which is showed at the last, for better late than
never.

II. Send for some godly Minister, or experienced Christian, to advise thee
about setting thy Soul in order, in reference to thy great change. This
direction the Apostle James gives, for says he, Is any sick among you? let
him call for the Elders of the Church, and let them pray over him. Jam. 5. 14
And this I would advise thee to do in the first place, not putting it off to
the last, when thine understanding and memory begin to fayl thee, as the
practice of the most is, who when the Physician has done with them, and in a
manner given them over, then send for the Divine to begin with them, as if a
short Prayer, and a few words of Ghostly counsel, were enough to send them to
Heaven.

III. Labor to make, or rather to renew, thy peace with God; for though the
making of thy peace with God ought not to be put off to thy Deathbed, yet must
it then be renewed in an especial manner, as being the last time of doing it.
In order thereunto,

I Look back into thy former course of life, and call to mind the manifold
aberations thereof; as the vanity of thy thoughts, how vain and empty how
carnal and profane they have been; as also the unsavouriness of thy words and
speeches, how Godless, and Christless, yea how unprofitable they have been for
the most part; as also the wickedness of thine actions. And in examining thy
self concerning thine actions, call to mind, as thy sinful Omissions, and
Commissions, I mean, as what Duties thou have omitted, and what Sin^ thou have
committed; so likewise thy sinful manner of performing holy Duties, how thy
most religious Services have had a mixture of Sin in them. Likewise run over
the several Ages of thy life, and consider what Sins thou committedst in thy
Childhood, what in thy Youth, and what in thy riper years.

And together with the number of thy Sins, conside^ the aggravating
circumstances of them; as how thou have sinned against a gracious God, a loving
Father, and bountiful Lord and Master; how thou have sinned against the
admonitions of Gods Ministers, the motions of his Spirit, and the checks of
thine own Conscience; against the patience and long-suffering of God, which
should have lead thee to repentance; against the manifold vows and promises
thou have made unto God for newness of life, and better obedience; and how thou
have sinned out of a presumptuous hope of mercy, making the mercy of God an
occasion of Sin, and thereby turned the very grace of God into wantonness. Thus
go on aggravating thy sins, till thou find thine heart in some measure
affected with grief and sorrow for the same; and then,

2 Confess thy sins unto God in Prayer; spread them before him in a true and
unfeigned acknowledgement and confession of them, freely judging and condemning
thy self before God for the same.

That thy Confession may be performed after a right manner, it must have these
properties,

1 It must be particular; and of special Sins; I mean, in thy confession thou
must descend to thy special and particular Sins; the prophanest wretch in the
world may in a general manner confess, and say, I acknowledge my self to be a
Sinner. But if thou will make a true confession of Sin, thou must lay open thy
Sins in particular before God; and for thine encouragement thereunto, know,
that the more particular thou shall be in thy confession, the more comfort thou
shall find therein.

^ Thy Confession must be as particular in respect of Sins, so likewise full in
regard of the aggravations of them. This did David in his confession of that
Sin of numbering the People, I have sinned greatly, says he, 2 Samuel 24. 10
in that I have done, and now I beseech thee, O Lord, take away the iniquity of
thy Servant, for I have done very foolishly; see what terms of aggravation he
heapeth up. 1 I have sinned; 2 I have sinned greatly; 3 I have done foolishly;
4 Very foolishly. And as thou desire pardon of thy Sins, set them forth to
the full, let no circumstance of aggravation be wanting, by which they may
appear the more foul and filthy.

3 Thy confession must be with inward remorse, and sorrow of heart, that thou
have sinned against so good, and so gracious a God; Thou must not content thy
self with a mere verbal acknowledgement of thy Sins and Transgressions, being
affected with no more grief in the confessing of them, than thou wast in the
committing of them. But every Sin confessed should be as a Dagger piercing thee
to the very heart; at least thou should grieve that thou can no more
grieve for thy Sins; thine heart should bleed, because thine eyes cannot weep.

3 Having thus confessed thy Sins, as thou desire to renew thy peace with
God; earnestly beg of him the pardon, and the forgiveness of them in and
through the merits of Jesus Christ; for thou can look for it only through the
Free Grace and Mercy of God in Jesus Christ. 1 John 1, 9
And as there is a promise of forgiveness to such as unfeignedly confess their
Sins, so there is likewise a promise of forgiveness to such who heartily pray
for the same; for says the Lord in answer to Salomons Prayer, 2 Chro. 7. 14
If my People which are called by my name, shall humble themselves, and pray,
and seek my face, then will I hear from Heaven, and will forgive their sins;
and therefore if thou can pray heartily unto God for the pardon of thy Sins,
thou have thereby some comfortable evidence of their forgiveness; for as the
Lord in the Parable forgave his Servant that was indebted to him, Mat. 18. 27
and had nothing to pay, even because he prayed him; so if thou can pour out
thy Soul in a true and hearty Prayer unto God for the pardon of thy Sins, he
will questionless forgive thee, even because thou prayest unto him; for as
David speaks, The Lord is not only ready to forgive, Psalm. 86, 5
but plenteous in mercy to all them that call upon him.

4 Sprinkle thy Soul with the blood of Jesus Christ. Ephesians* 2. 4
Christ is our peace, as the Apostle calls him; neither can thou (by all that
thou art able to do) make thy peace with God, but only th^ugh faith in his
blood. Exodus 12. 23
When the destroying Angel saw the blood of the Lamb sprinkled on the Posts of
any Door, he passed by that House, and they within were safe; so that Soul
which is sprinkled with the blood of Jesus Christ, is so safe from the
destroying Angel of God, that he shall not do it hurt; for death is an
advantage to that Soul which is sprinkled with the blood of Christ, being the
door of Life, Ianua vitae. Cyprian.
and a gate to Heaven, as Cyprian calls it. Though the blood of Christ be the
means of our peace and reconciliation with God, yet unless that blood be
sprinkled on thy Soul, thou can find little peace there; and therefore the
Apostle Peter speaks not only of the blood of Christ, 1 Pet. 1. 2
but of the sprinkling of the blood of Christ. It is not enough that Christ
has shed his blood, but there must be besides the shedding of it, the
sprinkling of it. Christ's blood was shed upon the Cross, yet all men are not
reconciled unto God thereby. And what is the reason? Surely because that blood
is not sprinkled upon their souls; and peace and reconciliation with God must
be had, not only from Christ's blood poured out, but from his blood sprinkled.

Quest. How is Christ's blood sprinkled upon our souls?

Ans. By Faith, applying the blood of Christ unto our own souls comfort; Faith
is the hand of the Soul, and the soul by faith puts her hand into the Wounds of
Christ, takes of his blood, and besprinkles her self therewith, applying the
merits and the virtue thereof unto it self, and thence follows peace, and
reconciliation with God.

Obj. I would willingly apply the Merits of Christ's Death and Passion unto my
self, but oh, I am conscious of so much unworthiness, seeing nothing in my self
why the Merits of Christ's death should belong unto me, that I cannot, yea I
dare not apply them to my self.

Ans. 1. It is good to be conscious to thy self of thine own unworthiness, but
not so as to be kept thereby from applying of Christ, and the Merits of his
Death and Passion unto thy souls comfort. And truly, if thou would but
consider, that God respects his own goodness, and not ours, in the offering
of his Son, and that his grace is everyway most free, this conceit of thine
unworthiness can be no just plea against the applying of Christ, with the
benefits of his Death and Passion unto thine own souls comfort; it should
rather be an encouragement unto thee, because the more unworthy thou art in
thine own sight and sense, the more worthy thou art in the account of Christ.
The greatest worthiness that any Christian can here attain unto is, to be
sensible of his own unworthiness.

2 Thou who complainest of thine unworthiness, I would ask thee, Whether any
man before he made application of Christ, and of his Merits unto himself, did
see any thing in himself why Christ should belong unto him rather than to any
other? The Scripture says, There is no difference, for all have sinned.

Obj. 2 My Sins are so many for number, Romans 3. 23
and so heinous in their quality, that I cannot imagine that Christ should
belong unto me, and therefore dare not apply him, nor the benefits of his Death
and Passion unto my self.

Ans. The more sinful thou art in thine own sense and apprehension, the fitter
thou art to close with Jesus Christ, and to apply the Merits of his Death unto
thy self; for in that gracious invitation of Christ, Mat. 11. 28
we find no other qualification put in, but a sense of sin, Come unto me all
ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest; where the
Parties invited to come unto Christ, are such as are sensible of, and thereupon
groan under the weight and burden of their sins, (...).
as the words in the Greek there properly signify; and Luke 5. 32. Christ
professes, He came not to call the righteous, but sinners; not such as were
righteous in their own conceit, but such as were Sinners, in their own sense
and apprehension, truly sensible of their sins; so that sense of sin is the
only qualification requisite to an application of Jesus Christ.

Obj. 3 I have often sinned against knowledge and conscience, and therefore
fear I have committed that unpardonable Sin, the Sin against the Holy Ghost,
and so dare not apply Christ's blood unto my self.

Ans. Though the Sin against the Holy Ghost be a Sin against knowledge and
conscience, yet every Sin (yea every grievous Sin) against knowledge and
conscience, is not the Sin against the Holy Ghost; for they may be without
malice of heart, which this cannot be; and therefore though thou have often
sinned against knowledge and conscience. yet if thou have not sinned with a
malicious heart, i. e. thou have not sinned merely because thou would
displease God, and grieve his Spirit, thou have not committed the Sin against
the Holy Ghost.

IV. Having made thy peace with God, then make thy peace with men, by an hearty
forgiving of all who have wronged thee. This is a duty to be per^ormed by thee
in the whole course of thy life, as any occasion thereof is given, without
which the Lord will not accept of any Christian service, and sacrifice that
thou offerest unto him; and therefore says our Savior, Mark 11. 25
When thou stand praying, forgive, if thou have ought against any; for
indeed, how can thou ask God forgiveness of thy sins, when thou will not
forgive man his offenses against thee? How can thou beg peace and
reconciliation with thy heavenly Father, when thou will not be reconciled on
earth to thy Brother? As therefore this Duty is to be performed by thee in the
whole course of thy life, so especially in thy last Sickness, for thereby thou
may gain some assurance in thine own Soul of the forgiveness of thy Sins
committed against God; which our Savior implies in that expression of his, If
ye forgive men their trespasses, Mat. 6. 14
your heavenly Father will also forgive you; would thou therefore be assured
of Gods mercy toward thee in the forgiveness of thy sins committed against
him? search narrowly into thine own soul, and if thou can find thou do as
heartily forgive thy Brother, as thou do desire forgiveness of God, then
may thou assure thy self of Gods mercy to thee in the forgiveness of thy sins
committed against him; so much is hinted to us in the fifth Petition of the
Lords Prayer, Forgive us our trespasses, Mat. 6. 12
as we forgive them that trespass against us; which latter clause is added,
partly to stir us up, readily to forgive those who have wronged us; and partly
to strengthen our faith in the assurance of the forgiveness of our sins
committed against God, from our readiness to forgive those who have wronged us;
in that our forgiving of our Brother is a fruit proceeding from Gods forgiving
of us.

V. Labor to clear up thine Evidences for Heaven, that thou may upon good
ground be able to say with the Apostle Paul, 2 Cor. 5. 1
I know that when the earthly house of this tabernacle is dissolved, I shall
have a building with God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens.
The Scripture lays down sundry clear evidences of a true right and title unto
Heaven, which who so finds in himself, may rest assured of a blessed life after
this; I shall instance only in one, which indeed is the principal of all, and a
very comprehensive one, viz. Faith in Jesus Christ, which we find often set
down in Scripture, Joh. 3. 16
as a sure evidence for Heaven, for says our Savior, God so loved the world,
that he gave his only begotton Son, that whosoever believes in him should not
perish, but have everlasting life; and says John Baptist, Verse. 36.
He that believes on the Son has everlasting life; i. e. he is as sure of it,
as if he were in actual possession of it.

Q. How may I know whether I have a true s^ving faith?

A. Most Divines do hold forth the frui^s and effects of faith, as the only
signs thereof, and means whereby men should try and examine their faith; but
the truth is, the fruits of a saving faith in many Christians are often times
so weak* that if they should examine their faith only by them, they would be
apt to question the truth thereof, yea to conclude against themselves that they
have no true faith at all, therefore I shall briefly show thee the Antecedents
of Faith, by declaring the ordinary method o^ Gods Spirit in working true faith
in the soul, which is this,

1 God by his Spirit in the Ministry of the Word, does awaken a man's
Conscience, and makes him to see and discern, as, his manifold sins and
transgressions, so, his misery by them, in regard of the dreadful punishments
due unto him for the same. This method the Lord observed in those three
thousand Converts mentioned, Acts. 2. 37. Examine therefore whether thou have
by the Ministry or the Word been convinced of thy Sins, and of thy miserable
condition thereby; how thou art liable to the Wrath of God, to all Judgments
and Plagues here, and to Eternal Death and Condemnation hereafter; for till
thou be convinced of thy sins and misery, thou can see no need, nor want
of Jesus Christ. Hence the Law is said to be our Schoolmaster, to bring us to
Christ, because it does discover, as our sins, and our misery by reason of
them; so our need of Christ.

2 The next Work of Gods Spirit, is to make the soul sensible of its wretched,
miserable condition, affecting it with some measure of grief and sorrow for the
same. This method likewise the Lord observed in those three thousand Converts,
mentioned Acts 2. 37. where it is said, When they heard this, i. e. when they
were convinced of that horrible Sin of theirs, in Crucifying the Lord of life,
they were pricked in their hearts, viz. with the sense and apprehension of
their wretched, miserable condition. Examine therefore whether thou have been
truly sensible of thy wretched, miserable condition, and whether the sense
thereof has affected thee with true grief and sorrow for the same. Though all
men are no^ alike afflicted with a sense of their wretched, miserable
condition, but some much more deeply than others; yet few pass through the
pangs of their New Birth, without some throws, some grief and sorrow for their
sins; neither can I conceive how any should cloze with Jesus Christ as their
Savior, till they have been so sensible of their sins, as that they are
sensible of their need of a Savior.

3 Another Work of the Spirit is to convince the Soul of its own
unrighteousness, that so it may the more willingly seek out after the
righteousness of Christ, to be clothed therewith; for so long as a man is
conceited of any righteousness of his own, he will never be beholding unto
Jesus Christ for life and for salvation: for as our Savior says, Mat. 9. 12
The whole need not a Physician, they need neither Physic, nor Physician, and
therefore care for neither. In like manner, such as are strongly possessed with
a good conceit of their own estate and condition, of their own righteousness,
see no need they have of Christ and his Righteousness, and so regard him not.
Examine thy self therefore, whether thou have ever been truly and thoroughly
convinced of thine own unrighteousness, whether thou have discerned the Sins of
thy holy services, whether thou have cried out with the Church, Isa. 64. 6
All my righteousness is as filthy rags? etc.

4 The next Work of the Spirit, is to convince the soul of the perfection of
Christ's Righteousness, and of the All Sufficiency of his Sacrifice; that his
righteousness is a most perfect and exact righteousness; that his sacrifice
upon the Cross was a full satisfaction to Gods Justice, for the sins of all the
Elect, it being the sacrifice of the Son of God, even of him that was God, as
well as Man; which indeed added an infinite value to all which Christ did, and
suffered for man's Redemption, in which respect the redemption wrought by Christ
is called plenteous redemption; Psalm. 130. 7
enough and enough for all the sins of his people, how many or how heinous
soever they were. Now, examine whether thou have found this work of the Spirit
upon thy soul, so that thou art convinced thoroughly, as of thine own
unrighteousness, so of the perfection of Christ's righteousness, and of the
all sufficiency of his Sacrifice, which far exceeds the merits of thy sins.

5 The next Work of the Spirit is to convince the soul of Christ's willingness
to receive all poor Sinners, sensible of their sins, who will come unto him,
and cast themselves and the burden of their sins upon him, by affecting them
with a serious apprehension of the manifold gracious invitations of Christ unto
poor Sinners, Isa. 55. 1
as that in Isaiah, H^, every one that thirsts come ye to the waters, he
that has no money, i. e. no goodness nor righteousness of his own, let him
come; and that forementioned place, Mat. 11. 28. Come unto me all ye that
labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Examine thy self
therefore whether thou have been thoroughly convinced of Christ's willingness to
receive all poor Sinners that will come unto him, and cast the burden of their
sins upon him.

6 The next Work of the Spirit is, to stir up in the soul some earnest
longing desire after Jesus Christ, so that the soul cries out, Oh that Christ
were mine, oh that upon any terms my soul might enjoy him; which desires are
the lifting up of the doors and gates of the soul for the receiving of Jesus
Christ.

7 The Spirit of God having thus prepared the soul to a closing with Jesus
Christ, then he works the grace of faith in it, whereby it throws it self into
the arms of Christ, rolls it self upon him, and rests upon his perfect
righteousness, and all-sufficient Sacrifice, for the pardon and forgiveness of
its Sins here, and for eternal life and salvation hereafter. Thus have I showed
thee the ordinary way and method which the Lord uses for the working of true
saving faith in the hearts of his people.

Would thou then know whether that faith thou pretendest to, be a true saving
faith, try and examine it by the forementioned particulars; consider whether
it was thus kindly wrought in thee, according to the ordinary method of Gods
Spirit; if so, then though the fruits of faith are very weak in thee, yet thou
have a comfortable evidence of the truth thereof, and so consequently have a
sure evidence for heaven.

Obj. Though I cannot deny these forementioned particulars to be wrought in
me, yet notwithstanding I have no comfortable evidence and assurance of Heaven,
nor of my interest in Jesus Christ.

Ans. For answer hereunto, I shall lay down three comfortable considerations.

1 A man may have the faith of adherence and dependence, though he has not the
faith of evidence and assurance, For the better understanding whereof you must
know, there is a twofold faith, as Divines distinguish, viz. The faith of
adherence, whereby we roll our selves upon Christ, and rest upon him and his
Merits alone, for ^ife, and for salvation; and the faith of evidence and
assuran^e, whereby we know and are assured of our interest in Christ, and
consequently of our right and title unto Heaven. This latter is the refle^ act
of the soul, by which a Christian clearly sees his own happiness, whereas the
former is the direct act of the soul. Now, a man may have the faith of
adherence, which is true justifying faith, that gives him an interest in
Christ, and a right to Heaven, and yet may want the faith of evidence and
assurance, so that he knowert not his own happiness. As the child may truly
hang about the mothers neck, or cast it self into her arms, and yet receive
neither kiss nor smile from her, so a poor soul may truly roll it self upon
Christ, cast it self into his arms, and rest in his bosom (which is true
faith) and yet have neither kiss nor smile from him; therefore far be it from
thee to question the truth of thy faith merely for want of Christ's smiling upon
thee, or to question thy faith of adherence, because thou have not the faith of
evidence and assurance.

2 Assurance of our interest in Christ, and of our future happiness, though it
be requisite to the consolation of a Christian, yet not to his salvation;
though to his comfort, yet not to his safety; his condition may be safe, though
not very comfortable at present: for a Christians safety does not at all depend
upon his assurance, but upon his faith. That Christian that can by faith roll
himself upon Christ, cast himself into his arms, resting upon his merits alone
for life, and for salvation, his state and condition is safe, though he has
not that assurance which he does desire: for the promise of life and salvation
is made to faith, and not to assurance; the tenor of the Gospel is, Believe
and thou shall be saved, as Ioh. 3. 16. God so loved the world that he gave his
only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have
everlasting life. It is not said, that whosoever has assurance of his interest
in Christ, and of eternal life and salvation, but whosoever believes in Christ
shall be saved. This consideration may revive many drooping souls, who though
they do renounce all confidence in themselves, and in any righteousness of
their own, and place their whole confidence upon the righteousness of Jesus
Christ, and the merits of his Death and Passion, yet have no comfortable
assurance in their own souls of their interest in Christ, or of their eternal
life and salvation; let such know, that their condition may be good and safe
for all that.

3 Assurance of Salvation is not so ordinary as many Christians do imagine,
for indeed they are but for Christians who do here attain to a clear evidence
and full assurance of their salvation; such whom the Lord here calls forth to
hard services, or great sufferings, to them he is pleased many times to give
some clear evidence and assurance of their eternal life and salvation, for
their better comfort and support. Thus many Martyrs have expressed their full
assurance of a better life after this, whereas such a measure is not usually
granted to ordinary Christians, their trials being but flea-bites in comparison
of the others.

VI. Then especially act the graces of Gods Spirit in thee; as,

1 Thy Falth, which is a grace of special use to thee so long as thou live in
this world, but most of all at thy last Sickness, and in the time of Death;
therefore then especially be often actuating, and exercising thy faith in
Jesus Christ; with the eye of faith look upon Christ hanging upon the Cross,
there offering up his life as an all-sufficient Sacrifice, and full
satisfaction to Gods Justice for thy Sins, and cast thy self into the arms of
Jesus Christ, resting upon his Merits alone for life and for salvation: with a
disclaiming of all confidence in thy self, or any righteousness of thine own,
place thy whole confidence upon the righteousness of Jesus Christ, and upon the
merits of his death and passion.

2 Then especially act thy zeal for Gods glory, by giving good counsel to those
who are about thee, or come to visit thee; it is the last time thou can do
any thing for God in this world, therefore then show thy love to him, and zeal
for his glory, by calling upon others to fear him, and serve him, by a
conscionable discharge of the duties of their places, callings, and relations;
persuade them to mind the things of this world less, and the things of Heaven
more; to prize health, and improve it for the good of their souls; to lay up a
stock of graces and comforts against the evil day, and to get their evidences
for Heaven clear, before they be cast upon their Deathbeds. Words of dying men
are of most efficacy and authority, and therefore improve thy dying speeches to
the glory of God, and the good of thy neighbor. Joh. 13. 14, 15, 16, 17
Thus our blessed Savior, when he was to leave the world, showed his zeal for
Gods glory, and love to his Disciples, in leaving with them many precious
counsels, comforts, and exhortations; Acts 20. 18, etc.
and the Apostle Paul being aged, and knowing the time of his departure was at
hand, called for the Elders of the Church of Ephesus, and leaves with them many
excellent and weighty exhortations.

3 Act thine obedience, by resigning up thy self unto the Will of God,
Culpaiest nolle mori, culpaque velle mori.
to be at his dispose, either for life or death; As thou must not be unwilling
to dye when God calls thee, so neither must thou be over eager to dye before
he call thee; thou may not desire Death out of coffeehouse of mind,
because of some present miseries and afflictions which lie upon thee; nay, thou
may not absolutely wish to dye out of a desire to be rid of thy sins, and to
be with Christ, but it must be with a submission to the Will of God, if he see
it meet and convenient for thee; though Paul knew it were far better for him to
dye than to live, Phil. 1. 23
yet did he not desire death absolutely, but with a submission to the Will of
God.

VII. Be frequent in reading the holy Scriptures, or cause them to be
frequently read unto thee, for there thou shall find,

1 Examples of Gods mercy showed to the afflicted.

2 Instructions how to bear, and improve thy present Visitation.

3 Comfortable promises of support under the sorest trials. And know for
certain, that one Promise in the Book of God will be more effectual to yield
thee comfort on thy Deathbed, than all the counsel of thy friends that shall
be then about thee.

VIII. Be often lifting up thine heart to God in Prayer. And when through
weakness of body, and faintness of spirit, thou art not able to pour our thy
soul in any set and solemn Prayer, send up some short ejaculatory Prayer unto
God, as that of the poor Publican, Lord be merciful to me a Sinner; Luke 18. 13
and also that of the poor man, Lord I believe, Mark 9. 24
help thou my unbelief; and that of the Apostles, Lord increase my faith; Luke
17. 5
and that of Stephen, Lord Jesus receive my spirit. Acts 7. 59
These ejaculations going from the heart, they are acceptable and pleasing unto
God; let us therefore as Austine advises us, endeavor to dye praying, Demus
operam ut moriamu^ in precatione.
by a frequent breathing forth of these or such like ejaculatory Prayers.

Aug. de v^ra (...). cap. 33
IX. Be often resigning up thy soul into the hands of God, saying with our
blessed Savior, Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit. Luke 23. 46
Little Children for the most part desire to dye in their Fathers bosom, or
upon their Mothers lap; even so should thou in the hour of death, cast thy
soul into the arms of thy heavenly Father, and rest in the bosom of Jesus
Christ.

If thy Disease be painful, turn to those Direction; in the foregoing chapter
How to bear afflictions willingly and cheerfully.

CHAP. XIX.
Directions to such as visit the Sick.
VIsiting the Sick being a work of Mercy, it will be thy wisdom so to manage
and improve the same, that thou may both benefit thine own soul thereby, and
likewise do good to the sick Party.

I. That thou may benefit thy self thereby, take these few directions.

1 In visiting thy sick Neighbor take occasion to think of thine own
mortality, Scito omnem conditionem versabilem esse and quicquid in alium
incurrit, posse in te quoque ineurrere. Sen. de tranq.
and proneness to fall into Sicknesses and Diseases: for that which befalls one
man may befall another, in that we all carry about us, as mortal, so frayl
bodies, subject to the like calamities; which the Lord knows how soon may
befall any of us.

2 Lift up thine heart in thankfulness unto God, for that health and strength
of body he is pleased still to continue unto thee. Health is a greater mercy
than most do imagine. Ask the sick man what he thinks of health, and he will
tell thee, it is the greatest of Temporal mercies, Carendo magis quam habendo.
Sol nisi cum deficit spectatorem non habet. Seneca,
and in it self a mercy not to be valued; the truth is, all Mercies are prized
by the wanting of them, more than by the having and enjoying them. As no body
admires the Sun but when it is eclipsed; so neither does any esteem health, but
when by sickness they are deprived thereof,

3 Labor to be compassionately affected with the miseries and afflictions of
thy brother, Job 6. 14
for as Job speaks, To him that is afflicted pity should be showed from his
friend. Which duty is often urged and pressed in Scripture, Romans 12. 15.
as by the Apostle Paul, Rejoice with them that rejoice, and weep with them
that weep; and by the Apostle Peter, in this phrase, 1 Pet. 3. 8 (...), i. e.
esto^e mu^uo molestiarum sensu ^ffecti. Beza.
Having compassion one of another* which Beza Paraphrastically well turns, Be
touched with the sense and feeling of one another griefs. And truly that
communion and nearness of conjunction that sincere Christians have one with
another, does call for this duty; for as they are all sons of one Father, so
are they members of one body, in respect whereof there should, nay there ought
to be such a compassion and sympathy in the members of the Mystical body, I
mean among Christians, as there is in the members of the Natural body. Now, you
know that in the Natural body if one member suffer, all the members suffer with
it; as the Apostle expresses it, 1 Cor. 12. 26. which place Saint Augustine in
his Works often expounding, Aug. in Ps. 130 and Tract. in soar.
most excellently shows the mutual compassion betwixt the members of a Natural
body; Behold, says he, the foot treads on a thorn, and see how all the
members condole it; the Back bends it self, the Head stoopeth; the Eye, though
remote in place, diligently searches it out; the Tongue complains, as if it
self were pricked; and the Hands do their best to pluck it out; and yet
neither Back, nor Head, nor Tongue, nor Eye, nor Hand, nor any member but the
Foot was touched with the thorn; and surely such a sympathy and fellow-feeling
there ought to be amongst true Christians, who are all members of one body,
whereof Christ Jesus is the head. Romans 12. 5


II. As in visiting the Sick, thou must be careful to benefit thine own soul
thereby, so likewise to do what good thou can to the sick Party.

To that end observe these few Directions.

1 Forbear to talk of any vain, worldly, or needless matter before him; but let
thy discourse be as savoury and Spiritual, so in some measure suitable to his
condition; as of Death, and preparation thereunto; of the Day of Judgment, of
the happiness of those who have an interest in Christ, and his Righteousness,
and the like.

2 Persuade the sick Party to settle his estate, by making his Will, (if he
have not done it before) that so he may with more freedom wholly mind the
spiritual good and welfare of his soul. This counsel did the Prophet Isaiah
give unto King Hezekiah, Isa. 38. 1
when he was first struck with sickness.

3 If thou apprehendest his Disease to be dangerous, flatter him not with a
hope of recovery, lest thereby thou betray his soul to eternal death; but deal
faithfully with him, by declaring unto him his weak and dangerous condition,
and advising him, as to think of death, so to prepare for it, telling him, that
the fitter he is to dye, the fitter he will be to live, if the Lord should
add more days to his life.

4 If thou perceive him to be ignorant, instruct him in the Principles of
Religion, especially touching man's miserable condition by Nature, and the state
of redemption by Jesus Christ.

5 If thou perceivest that he has not a due sense of his Sins, endeavor to
affect him with a sense and apprehension of his Sins, and the hainousness of
them; as also of his miserable condition in regard of the punishments due unto
him for the same, which are all Judgments and Plagues here, and eternal death
and damnation with the Devils and damned in Hell.

6 Question him concerning his willingness to dye, and his hope of a better
life after this, and upon what foundation he builds his hope of salvation;
whether upon his good meaning and desires? or upon his just and honest dealing
with men? or upon his frequent performance of holy duties? If thou perceivest
that he builds his hope of Salvation upon any of these, or upon any thing
besides Jesus Christ, labor to take him off from those false bottoms, by
showing him the insufficiency of his good meaning and desires, yea of his civil
and religious righteousness to salvation, how they are but rotten foundations
whereon to build the hope of his Salvation.

7 Having taken him off from his false bottoms, and rotten foundations, then
instruct him in the only true ground of Salvation, whereon he may safely
bottom his hope of Salvation, viz. Christ and his righteousness, with the
Merits of his Death and Passion.

8 Labor to convince him that there is no way or means of Salvation, but only
by believing in Jesus Christ, by receiving him as his Priest and King, by
resting upon his all-sufficient Sacrifice for the pardon and forgiveness of his
sins here, and for eternal life and salvation hereafter.

9 Persuade him thereupon to go out of himself unto Christ, to adventure his
soul upon him, with a disclaiming of all his own righteousness as filthy rags,
to place his whole confidence upon the righteousness of Jesus Christ, and upon
the merits of his Death and Passion. To this end set forth unto him the
perfection of Christ's righteousness, the all sufficiency of Christ's Sacrifice,
with his willingness to receive and embrace all poor Sinners that will but come
unto him, and cast themselves, and the burden of their sins upon him.

10 Persuade him from his heart to forgive those who have wronged him, as he
expects forgiveness at the hand of God; and if he has wronged any by acts of
injustice, Non remittitur peccatum nisi restit^atur ablatu^ Aug. (...). 54 1
Cor. 11. 3
persuade him to make what restitution and satisfaction he is able, telling
him, that goods ill gotten will prove a moath to consume, and a fire to burn
his whole estate.

11 Because, as the Apostle speaks, If we judge our selves, we shall not be
judged of the Lord. Persuade him to keep a Day of Judgment in his own Soul, by
calling to mind his Sins, together with the aggravating circumstances of them,
and then to arraign and condemn himself for the same, judging himself guilty,
as of all Judgments and Plagues here, so of eternal torments in Hell
hereafter; and then to fly unto Jesus Christ for the pardon and forgiveness of
his Sins, who is a true City of refuge to all those who fly unto him, against
the Hue and Cry of their Sins, Joh. 6. 37
and will in no wise cast out any who come unto him.

CHAP. XX.
How to cloze the Day with God.
HAving showed you how to walk with God all the day long, I come now to show
you how to cloze the day, and lie down with God in the evening.

The Directions may be brought to these two Heads.

1 Such as concern our behavior in the Evening, before our going to bed.

2 Such as concern our behavior at our going to bed.

I. The Directions which concern our behavior in the Evening before we go to
bed, are these.

1 Withdraw thy self into some secret and retired place, and there look back,
and call to mind how thou have spent the day; consider how thou have performed
the forementioned Duties, belonging to the several parts of the day; call to
mind what thy carriage has been in secret, and what in company; how thou have
improved the one and the other; Optimus ille trapezita est qui quotidie vespere
lucrum ac detrimentum computat. Climac.
and whether thou have discharged the duties of thy place, calling, and
relations. As he is the best Tradesman, that every day in the evening takes
an account of his worldly losses and gains; so he is the best Christian, that
every day in the evening takes an account of his Spiritual losses and gains,
whether he go forward, or backward, in the ways of godliness. And therefore,
as many Shopkeepers have their Day-books, where into they enter all their
buyings and sellings, even all their worldly transactions, which they usually
review in the evening: so will it be a point of Spiritual husbandry in us,
every evening to review the passages of the day, and our transactions therein,
which would tend exceedingly to the good and welfare of our souls. History
tells us of many Heathens who were wont every evening to review the
transactions of the day; Faciebat hoc quotidie Sextius, ut consumma^o die cum
se ad nocturnam quietem recepisset, interrogaret animum suum; quod hodie malum
tuum sanasti? cui vitio obstitisti? qua part melior es? Senec. de Ira. l. 3.
c. 36 Psalm. 111. 4.
as of Sextius the Roman Philosopher, of whom it is recorded, that every
evening as he was going to bed, he would question his soul, what Evil he had
healed, what Vice he had withstood that day; in what regard he was better then
before; an example worthy our Christian imitation, and a shame it would be to
us to fall short of Heathens herein.

II. Call to mind the passages of Gods Providence toward thee, and treasure
them up in thine heart and memory, laboring to make a right use of them. The
truth is, it is an argument of a profane and irreligious heart, to let the
remarkable passages of Gods Providence pass away without any due observation of
them; for as the Psalmist speaks, The Lord has so done his mavelous works,
that they ought to be had in remembrance; and therefore it is thy duty, and
will be thy wisdom, as in the day, to take notice of all the passages of Gods
Providence toward thee; so in the evening to call them to remembrance, that
they may take the deeper impression upon thee.

III. If thou have been moved to anger in the day time, Ephesians. 4. 26
let not the Sun go down upon thy wrath; which is the counsel of the Apostle
Paul, whereby he implies such a speedy suppression of anger, that it may not
sleep with thee, for says he in the next verse, This is to give place to the
Devil, Verse. 27.
who, like the Lion that is greedy of his Prey, Quietis tempore ad animum ira
cundi accedit, etc. Gregor.
when the Sun is down creeps forth, seeking whom he may devour; and in the
night season, coming to the angry man in his bed, says Gregory, he sets
before him the greatness of the wrong done unto him, and aggravateth the ^ame,
by all the amplifying circumstances thereof, to heighten up his anger to a
revenge; Ut ira die orta cum die decidat. Ambros. in Ephesians. 4. 26
and therefore says the Apostle, Let not the Sun go down upon your wrath; but
if you have been moved un^o anger, it must not live past a day, lest in the day
having conceived some displeasure, thou travel with revenge in the night, and
in the morning bring forth some mischief or other; and therefore as we say of
the Toad-stool. Oritur ^o^itur.
it grows up in a night, and dies in a night; so should this poisonous weed of
anger, dye on the day wherein it was born.

IV. Before thou go to bed, be sure to offer unto God thine evening
sacrifice of Prayer and Thanksgiving; this is hinted unto us under the Law,
where the Lord required his Evening Sacrifice, as well as his Morning, Exodus 29
38, 39
Now, this is that which thou shall offer upon the Altar, two Lamb^ of the
first year, day by day continually; the one Lamb thou shall offer in the
Morning, and the other Lamb thou shall offer at Even. This was the daily
ordinary Sacrifice, which the Lord required under the Law, and therefore much
more does he require a Morning and an Evening sacrifice of Prayer and Praises
now under the Gospel. And truly, if thou shall lie down in thy sins unrepented
of, thou may happily awake with Hell flames about thine ears; and therefore
far be it from thee to presume to go to thy bed, before thou have offered
unto God thine evening sacrifice of Prayer, and therein heartily begged the
pardon and forgiveness of all thy sins, in and through the merits and mediation
of Jesus Christ. Should thou put off the performance of this duty till thou
art in thy bed, as the practice of too too many is, it is very likely thou will
fall asleep before thou have made any great progress therein; and those prayers
which thou make in thy bed will prove but drowsy yawning prayers at the
best; therefore be sure to offer up thine evening sacrifice before thou go
into thy bed, and if conveniently thou can, before supper, for by experience
we find that our bodies are much more drowsy, and our spirits much more dead
and heavy after supper than before.

Q. Whether a man finding his body drowsy, and his spirits dead and heavy,
had better fall upon the duty of Prayer, or forbear it for that time?

Ans. Drowsiness of body, and deadness of heart, is no sufficient warrant for
the omission of thine evening sacrifice of Prayer, but thou ought to ^erform
it notwithstanding, as well as thou can, and that for these Reasons.

1 Because the Scripture gives us no warrant for the omission of a bounden
duty, because of some present drowsiness and indisposition thereunto, but does
rather expressly hold forth the contrary, enjoining Christians to pray always,
Luke 21. 36
and to pray continually, Romans 12. 12
with sundry the like expressions: Which imply, as a frequent lifting up our
hearts to God in ejaculatory Prayers, so a constant observance of our set times
of solemn prayer.

2 As man that has little or no appetite to his meat, yet by forcing himself
to eat a bit or two, he begins to have a better stomach thereunto; so when a
Christian has no mind or disposition unto Prayer, but finds his body drowsy,
his spirit heavy, and his heart dead; yet by forcing himself thereunto, though
against his mind, does many times find his affections ^^ickned, and his spirits
raised up in Prayer; yea it is wonderfu^ what quicknings and enlargements do
many times come upon an adventurous soul, upon a soul that will adventure upon
duty, against deadness, drow^ness, and such like discouragements; and therefore
let not the drowsiness of thy body, nor the heaviness of thy spirit, so far
prevail with thee, as to forbear and omit thy course of praying; But fall upon
it, and for ought thou know, thou may feel and find the lively
quicknings and inlargements of Gods Spirit upon thy spirit in the performance
thereof.

3 When a Christian feels and finds his body drowsy, his spirit heavy, and
himself very indisposed unto the duty of prayer, yet he may do it with much
uprightness and sincerity of heart, that is, he may do it in obedience to the
command of God, as in the sight and presence of God, with a desire to approve
himself unto God in the doing of it, and herewith he may exceedingly comfort
himself against deadness and drowsiness; for such is the excellency of this
grace of sincerity, that it makes all our services to be pleasing unto God,
though they be performed with deadness of heart, and dullness of spirit.

4 Though our prayers be performed with much deadness of heart, and
indisposition of body, yet being put up in the name of Christ, they find
acceptance with God in and through his Mediation and Intercession. Let us
therefore put up our prayers in the name of Christ, and by Faith cast our
selves and our services upon him, and then we shall not need to doubt of Gods
acceptance of them. Thus have I showed thee the duties to be performed by thee
in the evening before thy going to bed.

I come now to the duties to be performed by thee at thy lying down.

I. As thou art going to bed, take all occasions of holy and heavenly
Meditations. To give you some hints,

As thou art putting off thy clothes, think how it will not be long before thou
be stripped of all, and go out of the world as naked as thou came into it;
which Job excellently expresses, Naked says he, Job 1. 21
came I out of my Mothers womb, and naked shall I return thither; q. d. I came
into the world destitute of clothing, and of all outward comforts whatsoever;
and naked shall I return thither, not into his Mothers womb again, Joh. 3. 4
for that is impossible, but to the grave, the womb of the earth, and common
Mother of all; so that his meaning is, I shall go out of the world, as naked as
I came into it. 2 Cor. 5. 4
Hence Death is called an uncloathing, because it strips a man of all his
ornaments, not only of his apparel, but also of his honors, wealth, and riches.

How should the consideration thereof stir thee up to labor for the true
riches, and spiritual clothing, I mean the saving graces of Gods Spirit, and
the robe of Christ's Righteousness, and then thou shall not go out naked, but
adorned and enriched.

As thou art laying thy self down in thy bed, let the bed mind thee of thy
grave, thy sheets mind thee of thy winding sheet, and thy sleep mind thee of
death, for death is but a kind of sleep; sleep is a short death, and death is a
long sleep: Hence Sleep and Death are often put the one for the other in
Scripture, Deuteronomy. 31. 16
Dan. 12. 2 John 11. 11
and death is often set out by sleep. That thou may lengthen out this
meditation, think of the several resemblances between Sleep and Death; as,

1 Men asleep are at rest, free from all trouble, from all toil and travel; so
the dead do rest from their labors, as Revel. 14. 13. blessed are the dead
which dye in the Lord, for they rest from their labors; that is, from their
troubles and travails.

2 Men asleep rise again: so the body after it is dead and laid in the grave,
Job 19. 25
shall arise again; death is but a sleep somewhat longer than ordinary.

3 Sleep refreshes the body of a man: so does death the bodies of the Saints;
for the body lies down a weak, frail, mortal, corruptible body, but rises a
strong, glorious, immortal, and incorruptible body; so much the Apostle Paul
plainly expresses, where speaking of the resurrection of the body, he says,
It is sown in corruption, 1 Cor. 15. 42, 44.
it is raised in incorruption; it is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory;
it is sown in weakness, it is raised in power; it is sown a natural body, it is
raised a spiritual body.

4 Sleep oftentimes comes upon a man unexpectedly: so does death; for how many
dye on the sudden, when they least of all looked for it; and therefore how does
it concern us to live in a continual expectation of, and preparation for death?

5 Sleep comes acceptably to some men, so does death to believers, who welcome
death as their best friend next to Jesus Christ. Thus let thy sleep mind thee
of thy death, and that not as far off, but as near at hand, thinking thou
may this night sleep the sleep of death; Cuivis potest accidere quod cuiquam
potest. Sen.
for how many have gone well to bed, and been dead before the morning? and that
which happens unto one may befall another.

II. As thou art going to sleep, commend thy self, thy relations, wife,
children, servants, and all that thou have, into the arms of Gods protection,
knowing, that they are safe whom the Lord keeps.

And then labor to fall asleep as thou art meditating of some good thing, for
then will thy sleep be more sweet, thy dreams more comfortable, and thine
heart will be in better plight when thou awakest.

CHAP. XXI.
Of the Morality of the Sabbath.
HAving showed you how to walk with God on the Week days, I shall now show you
how to walk with God on the Sabbath Day; so as it may prove a comfortable day
unto you. To this end I shall

1 Prove the Morality of the Sabbath.

2 Give you grounds for the change of the Sabbath, from the last day of the
week to the first, proving our Lords Day to be now the true Sabbath.

3 Give you Directions how to sanctify the same.

4 Add some Motives to quicken you up to a conscionable observation of the
directions.

1 Because there are many who are not convinced of the Morality of the Sabbath,
and so not of the continuance thereof, therefore it is requisite that I first
prove the Commandment of the Sabbath to be moral and perpetual, and to
continue in force even to the end of the world, for that is accounted Moral,
which (as a rule of life) binds all Persons, in all places, at all times.

Arguments proving the Morality of the Sabbath.

1 Because it was sanctified in the time of Adams innocence, as we read, Genesis
2. 3, 4. now Adam in his innocent estate was a Public person, the great
representative of all the World, that therefore which was commanded to him in
his innocence, appertained to all his Posterity even to the end of the world.
And if God saw it necessary for our first Parents in the time of their
innocence to have a Sabbath Day to serve him in, that they might more freely
and fully give themselves to holy and religious exercises. Then what need have
we the Posterity of Adam, now in our corrupted estate, to have a Sabbath, to
take our thoughts off from our worldly businesses, and bestow them wholly on
God, and the duties of his Worship and Service?

2 The Commandment concerning the Sabbath is placed in the number of the Moral
Commandments, for when God renewed the whole Moral Law, delivering it most
solemnly on Mount Sinai, and ingraved it in two Tables, he placed this
Commandment concerning the Sabbath amongst the rest, and made it one entire
Precept, so as if the morality thereof be denied, and this Commandment made no
part of the Moral Law, then the Moral Law would consist but of nine
Commandments, Exodus 34. 28 cut. 4. 13. and 10. 4
which is contrary to the Word of God, which often makes express mention of
Ten.

3 The manner of the delivery of this Commandment confirms the morality and
perpetuity of it; and shows, that it is of as great force as any of the other
Nine.

1 For first, Exodus 20. 1
God by his immediate Voice commanded this, as well as the rest.

2 This Commandment was written by the Finger of God, Exodus 31. 18
Deuteronomy. 5. 22
in Tables of Stone, as well as the other, as to signify* the hardness of our
hearts, so likewise the continuance and perpetuity of this Commandment.

3 It was placed in the very heart of the Ten Commandments, as that which by a
careful and conscionable performance of the duties required therein, would give
life to the keeping of all the rest. And it is a certain truth, that he who
makes no conscience to keep holy the Sabbath Day, will make little conscience
of keeping any of the other Commandments, so he may do it without discredit
of his reputation, or danger of man's Law. Look how a man is careful and
conscionable in the performance of the duties of piety to God on this Day, in
like manner is he careful and conscionable in the performance of the duties of
righteousness toward his neighbor on the week days.

Obj* Gal. 4. 10
I Some object that of the Apostle, Ye observe days, months, and times, and
years; Col. 2. 16
as also that to the Colossians, Let no man judge you in meat, or in drink, or
in respect of an holy day, or of the new Moon, or of the Sabbath Day.

Ans. The Apostle here condemns not the Moral Sabbath, which we now call the
Lords Day, but he speaks of the Levitical Sabbaths, which were the first day of
every month, and the first and last days of every one of their solemn Feasts,
Lev. 23. 37, 38, 39.
which were called Sabbaths, all which are now abrogated.

Obj. 2 Some object, that to a Christian every day is a Sabbath, and therefore
say, that we should not restrain it to one day more than to another.

Ans. 1 True it is, every day should be a Sabbath to a Christian in two
respects: 1 In a resting from Sin. 2 In a readiness to serve God.


For as we should at all times rest from Sin, so we should be always in a
readiness and disposition to serve God.

Yet are we not bound to spend every day as a Sabbath, by laying aside the
lawful works of our Callings, and giving up our selves wholly to the solemn
duties of Gods Worship and Service, which is contrary to the command of God,
who says, Six days shall thou labor, Exodus 20. 9, 10.
and do all thy work, but the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God,
in it thou shall not do any work; where the Lord does require of us as well to
follow the works of our Calling on the six days, as to keep holy the Sabbath
Day, by a conscionable performance of his Worship and Service.

I deny not but Divine Worship is to be performed unto God every day: as under
the Law, we read they had their Morning and Evening sacrifice every day; so we
should every day offer up our morning and evening sacrifice of Prayer; and
truly by duties of piety to God are our worldly businesses sanctified and
seasoned, and therefore are every day to be performed, but yet so as the duties
of our ordinary Callings be likewise performed, and not neglected by us.

2 Upon the same ground, neither Adam, nor the Jews before Christ should have
observed any Sabbath, because they were bound to rest from sin, as well as
Christians.

3 Neither are we to keep days of fasting, because we are to fast from sin
every day.

Having thus proved the Morality of the Sabbath, and answered some Objections
against it.

II. I shall in the next place give you the grounds for the change of the
Sabbath, from the last day of the week to the first.

1 Divine institution, even the institution of Christ himself, which appears
two ways.

1 By the title given to the first Day of the Week, namely, the Lords Day: for
whatsoever in Holy Writ is said to be the Lords denominatively, fo that Christ
is the Author and institutor; as for instance, The Lords Supper, because he
instituted it; The people of the Lord, because he chose them; the Lords
Messengers, because he sends them. Upon the same ground the first day of the
week is denominatively called the Lords Day, and that not by Creation, for so
every day is his from the beginning, but by Divine institution, because it was
instituted by Christ the Lord, for Divine Worship and Service, Dom nicum diem
Apostoli r^ligiosa s^lemnitate habendum sanxerunt, quia in eodem Redemptor
noster a mortuis resurrexit, quique ideo Dominicus appell ^tur. Aug. Sermon. 151.
de Tempore.
Acts 1. 2, 3
and for the memorial of the great work of Redemption wrought by him. Agreeable
hereunto is that of Augustine, who says, that the Apostles appointed the Lords
Day to be kept with all religious solemnity, because in that day our Redeemer
rose from the dead, and therefore is called the Lords Day.

2 By the practice of the Apostles, who constantly assembled together on the
first day of the week, which is our Lords Day, and that without doubt, upon the
command of Christ himself; for whereas he continued forty days on earth after
his resurrection before he ascended into Heaven, it is said, in that* time he
gave Commandments unto his Apostles, and spoke unto them of the things
pertaining to the Kingdom of God; that is, he instructed them how they should
change the bodily sacrifices of Beasts, into the spiritual sacrifices of Prayer
and Praises; the Sacrament of Circumcision into the Sacrament of Baptism, the
Sacrament of the Passover, into the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. And then
likewise he instructed his Apostles touching the change of the Sabbath into the
Lords Day. Non humana traditione, sed Christi ipsius observatione and
instituto. Iunii prelect. in. Genesis 2. 3
To which agrees that of learned Iunius, who says positively, that the change
of the Sabbath was not by the tradition of men, but by the observation and
appointment of Christ, who both on the day of his resurrection, and on every
seventh day after unto his Ascension into Heaven, appeared to his Disciples,
and came into their assemblies. Hereupon we read the Apostles met together on
every first day of the week* to preach the Word, and to communicate the Lords
Supper, as Ioh. 20. 19, 26. Acts 2. 1. Acts 20. 7, and in diverse other places.
And we find it expressly ordained by the Apostle Paul, that the weekly
Collections for the Poor should be on that day. 1 Cor. 16. 1, 2
Now concerning the Collection for the Saints, as I have given order to the
Churches of Galatia, even so do ye; upon the first day of the week, let every
one of you lay by him in store, as God has prospered him, etc. And why on that
day? surely no other reason can well be imagined, but that their assembling
together to partake of the Ordinances of God, was wont to be on that day; And
therefore, because works of charity suit well with duties of piety; and that by
the Ordinances then dispensed, they might be stirred up to a more free and
cheerful contribution; the Apostle ordained also, that the Collections for the
poor should be on the same day, viz. the first day of the week.

2 Another Argument proving the first day of the week, commonly called the
Lords Day, to be the true Christian Sabbath now under the Gospel, may be
taken from the constant practice of the Church and People of God since the
Apostles times. As I have showed you, that it was the practice of the Apostles
to observe the first day of the week, which is argument enough to warrant the
day, they being guided by the Spirit of Christ in an especial manner: So it
does clearly appear, that it has been the practice of all holy men since the
Apostles times, to observe this day, and that under the name of the Lords Day.

Ignatius, who lived in St. John's time, says, Let every one that loves Christ
keep holy the Lords Day, which is the Queen of days. Omnis Christi (...)
Domini (...), reginam and ^ incipem dierum omnium. Ignat. Epist. 3. ad Magnes.
Eusebius. l. 4. cap. 22.
Eusebius in his Ecclesiastical history plainly shows how the Church and People
of God in several ages after the Apostles times observed the first day of the
week, as instituted by Christ, and ordained afterward by the Apostles. I might
spend much paper in showing how this day has been observed in all ages, from
the Apostles times to these days. Now the constant custom of the Church is
not to be slighted. That expression of the Apostle, ^ Cor. 11. 16.
If any man seem to be contentious, we have no such custom, neither the
Churches of God, shows, that the custom of the Church is a matter to be
regarded.

3 The Resurrection of Christ both gives a ground for the sanctifying of our
Christian Sabbath, and likewise shows a reason for the changing of the day,
For the work of Redemption wrought by Jesus Christ, being far more excellent
than the work of Creation, did much more deserve a weekly memorial. That the
work of Redemption was more excellent appears, In that it cost more to redeem
the world of Gods Elect, than to create the whole world; for to create the
world, it cost God but a word, as it were; Psalm. 148. 5.
He but spoke the word, and it was done. But to redeem the world of Gods
Elect, it cost no less than the precious blood of the Son of God. So that this
work has swallowed up the former, as the Temple did the Tabernacle. 2 King. 8.
4.
And we who live after Christ's Resurrection, are as much bound to the
celebration of the first day of the week, as they who lived before, to the last.

It is very observable, that a seventh day has been observed to the honor of
God ever since the Creation; and such a seventh, as never a week in the
alteration was without a Sabbath, and never a week had two Sabbaths; for as the
week ended with the former Sabbath, so the next week began with our Sabbath,
which could not have been, if any other seventh day had been chosen.

If any shall ask why the change of the day is not more clearly expressed in
the New Testament, I answer, because there was no question moved about the same
in the Apostles times; which may likewise serve as a reason why in the New
Testament there is no express command for the baptizing of Infants in
particular, namely, because there was no question moved about the same in the
Apostles times.

III. Come we now to the Directions how to sanctify the Lords Day.

To the sanctification whereof two things are required.

1 An observing of a rest. 2 A consecrating of that rest wholly to the worship
and service of God.
I. There must be a resting, and that from several things. As

1 From all the ordinary works of our Calling, which is expressly set down in
the Commandment; ^ Exodus 20. 9, 10.
Six days shall thou labor and do all thy work, but the seventh day is the
Sabbath of the Lord thy God, in it thou shall not do any work. viz. of thy
Calling. And let not any pretend the greatness of their charge, as a plea for
their working; But know assuredly, that what you get that day by your labor,
will contribute little toward your charge. For whatsoever is got on that day,
will not be blessed of the Lord, but will prove like Achans wedge of gold,
which being got contrary to the command of God, brought the fire of Gods curse
upon all the rest which he had lawfully gotten.

2 From all kinds of recreations, especially such as tend to carnal and ^ensual
delight, which though they may be lawful at other times, yet are unlawful on
the Lords Day, being as expressly forbidden by God himself, as the works of our
Calling, as you shall find, in Isa. 58. 13. where the Lord requires of his
People, That they turn away their feet from doing their own pleasures on his
holy day. And that they call the Sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord,
honorable, and honor him, not doing their own wai^s, nor finding their own
pleasures. And it is found by experience, that recreations do more steal away
our affections from heavenly meditations, Quanto (...) est arare, quam saltare
in Sabbato. Aug. in enarrationem tituli Psalm. 91.
and distract us in Gods service, than the works of our Calling. Whereupon
says St. Augustine, How much better is it to plow on the Lords Day, than to
dance?

3 From all immoderate eating and drinking, whereby we are fitter to sleep
than to attend upon the Ordinances of God. And therefore how blameworthy are
they, who make the Lords Day a day of Feasting their neighbors and friends?
For though it be lawful upon this day to make such provision as shall be
convenient for our own families, or for the relief of our poor neighbors, yet
to make solemn feasts upon this day (as is the custom of too many) whereby
servants are kept from the public Ordinances, and our selves and guests are
more indisposed to the duties of Gods worship and service, must needs be
unlawful. And therefore, though we be not forbidden upon the Lords Day to
kindle a fire for the dressing of meat, yet we must take heed, that we make
not such a flame, as shall kindle the fire of Gods wrath against us.

4 From all worldly words, and discoursing of earthly affairs, which the Lord
himself expressly forbids by the Prophet Isaiah, Not speaking thine own
words, Isa. 58. 13.
which imports talking and discoursing of worldly matters on the Sabbath day;
For where the Lord has commanded the whole man to rest from worldly works,
there he commands, as, the hand to rest from working, so the tongue from
talking of worldly matters. But in the fourth Commandment, the Lord has
commanded the whole man to rest from worldly works, where he says, Exodus 20.
10.
Thou shall do no manner of work, etc. Therefore he commands the tongue to
rest from talking of worldly matters, as well as the hand from working of
servile and worldly works. How blameworthy then are they, who make the Lords
Day a reckoning-day with workmen, and servants, or at least a visiting day
amongst their friends and neighbors, and so confequently a day of idle tattle
about their profits, pleasures, or other men's matters?

5 As from worldly words, so from worldly thoughts, as much as we can. For

1 Know, that every Commandment extends to our very thoughts, binding them, as
well as to the outward actions, ex. gr. The sixth Commandment from murtherous
thoughts* as well as from the act of Murder. The seventh, from adulterous, and
lustful thoughts, as well as from the act of Adultery. The eighth, from
covetous thoughts, as well as from the act of Covetousness.

2 Know, that the Lord requires not only the outward man, and external
actions, to be consecrated unto him, but especially the inward man; in which
regard we ought, Luke 10. 27.
as much as possibly we can, to sequester our thoughts from worldly matters,
that they may be wholly taken up with spiritual and heavenly Meditations.

6 There is another rest expected from every one on the Lords Day, and that is
a resting from sin, which we ought to do, as much as in us lies, at all
times, but especially on the Lords Day, which ought to be kept as an holy rest.
And truly, we cannot offer unto God a greater indignity, than to serve the
Devil in the works of darkness on the Lords Day, which is consecrated to the
honor and service of God.

Thus much of the first particular requisite to the sanctification of the Lords
Day, namely, an observing of a rest.

II. Come we now to the second, viz. A consecrating that rest wholly to the
worship and service of God. For it is not enough that we keep a rest, but we
must keep an holy rest; barely to rest on the Sabbath day, is but a Sabbath of
beasts. We must remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy. For this is the
chief end whereunto the outward rest tends.

Now the consecration of the Sabbaths rest, consists,

1 In our preparation thereunto.

2 In a conscionable performance of those duties the Lord then requires of us,
which may be brought to two heads, viz.

1 Duties of Piety. 2 Works of Mercy.
Duties of Piety are of three sorts, viz 1 Public. 2 Private. 3 Secret. The
which, because they are interchangeably mixed with one another, therefore I
shall interchangeably speak of them.

The duties to be performed by way of preparation, are these.

1 Remember the day beforehand, to the end you may so order and dispose of your
worldly affairs, that they may be dispatched in convenient time on the Eve of
the Sabbath, that so both your selves and servants may go to bed in such time,
that your bodies may be well refreshed with sleep, and your minds fitted for
the duties of the day. Exodus 20. 8.
This the Lord intimates in the beginning of the fourth Commandment, saying,
Remember to keep holy the Sabbath Day; where by remembering it, may be meant a
minding of it before hand. How blame worthy then are they, who sit up
themselves, and keep their servants so late up in the night before the Sabbath,
that they are enforced to lie longer in their beds than ordinary on the Sabbath
Day, yea and when they are come into the Congregation, are fitter to sleep than
to hear; Is this to remember the Sabbath to keep it holy?

2 At your first awaking in the morning, lift up your hearts to God in Prayer
and Thanksgiving, for that comfortable rest and sleep he has vouchsafed unto
you the night past; Psalm. 127. 2
For, it is he that gives his beloved sleep, and who renews his mercy every
morning. And then beg of God the assistance of his Spirit, Lam. 3. 22, 23
to carry you through all the duties of the day.

3 Rise early on the Sabbath Day; for in regard there are, as secret duties of
Piety to be performed by you in your Clossets, so private duties of Piety in
and with the Family (if you live in a Family) before you go to the public
Congregation; ye ought to rise so early, that you may have convenient time for
these duties, and be at the Church at the beginning of the Exercises. How blame
worthy then are they, who on the week-dayes can rise betimes to follow their
worldly businesses, but on the Lords Day do lie longer in bed than ordinarily,
giving themselves up to their carnal ease and rest? Is this to keep holy the
Sabbath Day, thus to sleep away the first and chiefest part thereof?

4 In your rising, let out your hearts in a serious meditation of Jesus Christ,
and of the great things he has done and suffered for you, and of the many good
things whereof in and through him you are made partakers. Meditate likewise on
the infinite Majesty of God, whom the glorious Angels adore with covered faces,
that your hearts being possessed with an aweful apprehension thereof, you may
perform the duties of Gods worship and service with such everence as becomes
so sacred a Majesty.

5 So soon as you are up and ready, withdraw your self into some priva^e
place, and there read some por^ion of the Scriptures, which will be an
excellent means to season your hearts, and compose your minds; yea hereby you
will be the better prepared to hear the Word preached, and the better enabled
to try the Doctrines delivered, 1 These. 5. 21
according to the exhortation of the Apostle, Prove all things, hold fast that
which is good.

6 As Prayer is a duty to be performed every morning, so especially on the
Lord's Day morning; which is in some measure to be suitable thereunto. Having
therefore confessed your sins, and begged the pardon of them, together with
power against them, and grace to serve God: then pray both for the Minister,
and for your selves.

1 For the Minister, that God would give him a door of utterance, that he may
open his mouth boldly to publish the Mysteries of the Gospel; yea that he may
speak the Word truly, sincerely, powerfully, and profitably, delivering that
which is suitable and seasonable to your condition.

2 For your selves, that God would banish out of your heads all worldly
wandering thoughts, which may distract your minds in the hearing of the Word,
and so choking that heavenly seed, make it fruitless. And that he would give
unto you, as attention to hearken, so understanding to conceive, wisdom to
apply, judgment to discern, faith to believe, memory to retain, and grace to
practice what you shall hear; that so the Word may prove unto you a savor of
life unto life, and not a savor of death unto death.

These two last duties of reading the Word, and Prayer, are not to be performed
only alone in secret, but likewise in and with your Families, if so be you be
Parents, and Masters of Families; and therefore before you go to the public
Ordinances, call your Family together, and pray with them, as for other things,
so in special for the influences of the grace of God, and the incomes of his
Spirit upon your hearts and spirits in the good duties you shall take in hand,
that so you may perform them after such a manner, as glory may redound to Gods
name, and some spiritual good and advantage to your own souls.

These are the duties to be performed by way of preparation. Having thus fitted
and prepared your selves,

I. Call your F^mily together, your Children and Servants, and take them along
with you to the public Congregation; and ^et Ioshuahs resolution be often in
your mind, Josh. 24. 15
As for me and my house, we will serve the Lord. And as you are going,

1 Consider whither you are going, viz. Not to a Fair or Market, but to the
House of God, where God himself is present to behold you, yea where God himself
speaks by the mouth of his Ministers.

2 Go with a readiness of heart, and resolution of mind, to receive every truth
that shall be made known unto you out of Gods Word; with such an heart came
Cornelius, to hear Peter. We are all here present before God, Act. 10. 33.
to hear all things that are commanded thee of God, (...). Acts 17. 11.
said Cornelius to Peter. And it is said of the Bereans, that they received the
Word with all readiness of mind.

II. Being come into Gods House, observe these Rules and Directions.

1 Set your selves as in the sight and presence of God, who not only observes
your outward carriage and behavior, but likewise understands all the
imaginations of your hearts, and is privy to every wandering thought in praying,
hearing, and other holy duties, which will be a special means to keep your
minds from roving after other matters.

2 Labor to hear the word with profit.

To this end and purpose I find four special virtues commended in the
Scripture, viz.

1 Humility. 2 Honesty. 3 Attention. 4 Faith.

1 Humility, for when a man is of an humble, lowly, meek, and contrite spirit,
then is he fit to hear the Word, because hi^ heart being emptied of pride, and
self-conceitedness, there will be room for the Word to take place; Psalm. 25. 9.
therefore says David, The meek will the Lord guide in judgment, and the meek
will he teac^ his way. And says the Lord himself by his Prophet Isaiah, To
this man will I look, Isa. 66. 2.
even to him that is poor (viz. poor in spirit) and of a contrite spirit, and
trembles at my word

2 Another virtue requisite to the profitable hearing of the Word, is Honesty,
or uprightness of heart, whereby a man sincerely purposes in every thing to
approve himself unto God, as to avoid every sin whatsoever, that the Word
condemns, be it never so delightsome or profitable unto him; so to endeavor
himself to the performance of every duty belonging to his place and calling,
which the Word commands. This is that honest and good heart which our Savior
intends, Luke 8. 15.

3 As Honesty, so Attention is requisite; while the Word is preaching, you must
diligently attend thereunto, as they who would be loath to lose a word that
should be delivered. This particular is noted of those that heard
Christ-preach, of whom it is said, That they were attentive to hear him; or as
the Greek text has it, (...). Luke 19. 48.
All the people hanged on him to hear him, i. e. They were very attentive, as
unwilling to let any thing pass them: So should you be as attentive to the
Ministry of the Word. To this end, keep your eyes steady on the Preacher. And
as he passes from point to point, think briefly on the point which is past,
which will exceedingly help your memory.

4 Faith is another virtue requisite to the profitable hearing of the Word, I
say, Faith, whereby we do not only believe that which is taught us out of the
Word to be true, but also apply it unto our selves, as if it were in special
directed unto us. The Gospel is the power of God unto salvation* Romans 1. 16.
says the Apostle, but to whom? even to every one that believes. And says
the Author to the Hebrews, Heb. 4. 2.
The Word preached did not profit them, not being mixed with Faith in them that
heard it. In whose heart there is true Faith, that man will apply the whole
Word of-God unto himself, whether it be the threatenings of the Law, to terrify
him from sin, or the sweet promises of the Gospel to allure him to holiness;
and so makes much profit of every Sermon he hears.

Thus much for your hehaviour in the public Congregation.

But you must not rest here, thinking you have thereby sanctified the Sabbath
day. For there are likewise both Private and Secret duties of Piety required to
a true sanctification of the Lords Day, of which you ought to be as careful and
conscionable, as of the public duties in the public Congregation. For God
requires the whole day, and not a part only. As therefore you would not be
contented your servants should work for you only an hour or two on each of the
six days: So neither should you yield less unto God, than you require for your
selves. By Private duties of Piety, I mean such as are perfo^med in a private
Family. And by Secret, such as are done in some secret and retired place,
between God and ones self alone.

Now the Private duties of Piety which are especially required of such who are
Parents and Masters of Families, and wherein every member thereof are to join,
are these.

I. Repeating the Sermons they have heard with their family, and examining them
one after another what they remember, explaining the same unto them, which is
commended to us by the practice and example of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, who when he was come home, Mat. 13. 51.
said unto his Disciples, Have ye understood all these things? viz. that he
had preached to the multitude; And St. Mark says, When they were alone, he
expounded all things to his Disciples. Mark 4. 34. Christus suo exemplo, etc.
Chemnit. examine. cap. de. dieb. (...)
Whereupon one observes, That Christ by his example does instruct every Master
of a family how to carry himself in reference to those under his charge on the
Lords Days after their departure from the public Congregation.

And truly a treble benefit will follow hereupon.

1 In respect of your selves: for the more you build up others, the more your
selves are built up in Knowledge, Faith, and every grace of God.

2 In respect of your children and servants, for it will make them to hearken
more attentively to that which is delivered in the public Congregation, if
they know they shall be called to an account for the same when they come home.

3 It would much help both your selves and servants in the understa^ding and
believing of that which you have heard in the public, if at home you would
repeat it, and confer of it, and examine the proofs that have been delivered
for the confirmation of it.

II. Another private duty is singing of Psalms, for this may and ought to be
performed in your families, as well as in the Congregation. This David commends
for one duty of the Sabbath, as Psalm. 92. 1. The title of the Psalm is, A Psalm
or Song for the Sabbath day. And thus it begins, It is a good thing to give
thanks unto the Lord, to sing praises unto thy Name, O most High. This
Ordinance being questioned by some, and denied by others, I shall

1 Prove the lawfulness thereof.

2 Give you some directions for the right manner of performing the same.

First the lawfulness of singing Psalms does appear both from Scripture,
Example, and Reasons.

1 For Scripture-proofs there are many, both in the Old and New Testament; but
not to mention those in the Old Testament, which may not prove so convincing.
In the New we find it commanded by the Apostle to the Ephesians* Speak to
your selves in Psalms and Hymns, Ephesians. 5. 19.
and spiritual songs, singing, and making melody in your heart to the Lord. And
says the Apostle James, Is any among you afflicted? James 5. 13.
let him pray. Is any merry? let him sing Psalms. Where you see it is in
express terms commanded, and that as a Gospel duty.

2 We find it commended, both by the example of our Savior, and the practice
of the Apostles, and other Saints of God in the Primitive times.

1 By the example of our Savior, of whom it is recorded, that (as at other
times) so the night in which he was betrayed, he sung a Psalm, Matthew. 26. 30.
together with his Disciples; And when they had sung an Hymn, or Psalm, they
went out into the Mount of Olives.

2 By the practice of the Apostles, and other Saints in the Primitive times.
Act. 16. 25.
For we read, That at midnight Paul and Silas prayed, and sang praises unto
God, and the prisoners heard them, Plinius Secundus, Hymnos anteelucanos. Plin.
secund. lib. 3. cap. 33.
though an Heathen, who lived about two hundred years after Christ, testified
of Christians, that they had their morning songs, using to rise before day to
sing Psalms.

2 Reasons commending this duty, may be taken from the benefits accompanying
the same; For

1 By this duty jointly performed, our own spirits will be much quickened and
enlivened.

2 We shall thereby quicken and enliven the spirits of others.

3 We shall all thereby be made the more cheerful in serving God, which may be
one reason why Paul and Silas joined singing of Psalms with their prayers. Act.
^6. 25.


4 It manifests an holy zeal that we bear unto our God, and witnesses that
we are not ashamed to profess and praise his holy Name; and therefore our
tongue does with cheerfulness sound out aloud the praises of God. This holy
zeal did David express, saying, I will give thanks unto thee (O Lord.) among
the Heathen, Psalm. 18. 49.
and sing praises unto thy name.

Having thus proved the lawfulness of this duty by Scripture, Example, and
Reason.

II. Come we now to the Directions for the right manner of performing the same,
which are set down by the Apostle in these words, Col. 3. 16.
Singing with grace in your hearts to the Lord.

1 First therefore it must be in the heart, or with the heart, i. e. our hearts
must go with our voices, the one must be lift up as well as the other. John 4.
24. Non vox, sed votum, non cho^dula musica, sed cor.
For God is a Spirit, and therefore will be worshipped with our hearts and
spirits, as well as with our bodies. And truly, singing with the voice, without
the concurrence of the heart and spirit, is no more pleasing to God, than a
sounding brass, Non cantans, sed amans, cantat in aure Dei.
or tinkling Cymbal.

2 As we must sing with the heart, so with grace in the heart, that is, we must
exercise the graces of Gods holy Spirit in singing, as well as in praying;
laboring to express the same affection in singing the Psalm, as David had in
penning the same; as if it be a Psalm of Confession, then to express some
humility and brokenness of heart and spirit in singing it. If it be a Psalm of
prayers and petitions, then must our affections be fervent. If a Psalm of
praises and thanksgivings, then must our hearts be cheerful. And thus must the
affection of the heart be ever suitable to the quality of the Psalm.

3 It must be to the Lord, that is, as in the sight and presence of the Lord,
and to his honor and glory. As the Apostle expresses it in the next verse,
Col. 3. 17.
Whatsoever ye do, in word or deed, do it as in the name of Christ, so to the
praise and glory of God, making his glory the main end and aim of what you do.

III. Another private Duty to be performed with our Family, is Prayer; For if
this duty ought to be performed every day, twice at least, viz. in the morning
and evening, then especially on the Lords Day, which the Lord has wholly
consecrated to his worship and service.

The Directions for the right manner of performing this duty of Prayer, so as
it may be an acceptable service and sacrifice unto God, you may find in
Chapter second, about the latter part thereof.

IV. Reading the Scriptures is another Duty to be performed in and with our
Family, that so they may be acquainted with the Body of the Scriptures; yea
and with the Precepts and Promises, the Directions and Consolations of the
Word, for their direction and comfort. Directions for the more profitable
reading of the Scriptures, see Chap. 4.

These are the Private duties of Piety to be performed on the Lords Day.

Besides the Public and Private, there are likewise secret duties to be
performed by every one alone in their Closets or Chambers; which are briefly
these.

1 Reading some part of Gods Word, or other good Books.

2 Meditating of what you have heard or read that day; which is an excellent
means to make the Word both read and preached profitable unto you. For as meat,
though it be never so wholesome, nourishes us not, if it be not concocted and
digested: so is it with the Word of God, the food of our souls, if it be not by
meditation concocted and digested, it will nothing at all profit us; but being
by meditation digested, it will then prove effectual to the nourishing of our
souls.

3 Examining your selves, as of your former life and conversation, so
especially of your carriage the last week, and of the manner of your performing
the duties of the day; and as you should be humbled for your faylings therein,
so you should resolve, with the assistance of Gods grace, to be more watchful
over your selves for the time to come, and to be more careful in sanctifying
the Lords Day, by a conscionable manner of performing the duties thereof.

4 Praying unto God is another duty to be performed by you in secret, as well
as publicly and privately; yea you should double and treble your Prayers on
the Lords Day. Under the Law, we read how the Lord required double Sacrifices
on the Sabbath Day; for besides the daily Sacrifices, two Lambs more were
appointed to be offered up on the Sabbath day, Nuni. 28. 9, 10
four in all, to show the holiness of the day. And in like manner ought you to
double your spiritual sacrifices of Prayer, and Praises on the Lords Day,
earnestly beseeching him for Christ's sake to pardon, as your sins in general,
so in special the manifold infirmities and imperfections which have passed from
you in the performance of your holy se^vices, and to enable you by his Spirit
to perform them for the time to come with more life and vigor, with more
fervency and affection.

Having thus showed you both the Public, Private, and Secret duties of Piety
to be performed on the Lords Day,

Come we now to the Works of Mercy, which is another Head of duties which ought
to be performed on thatday; and therefore to duties of Piety you must add
Works of Mercy on the Sabbath day: in a conscionable performance of both which
consists the true sanctification of the Sabbath. And because man consists of
two Parts, viz. of Soul and Body, and both of them are subject to many
Maladies, therefore the Works of Mercy may be brought to these two Heads: 1
Such as concern the Soul. 2 Such as concern the Body of your Neighbor.


I, The Works of Mercy which concern the Soul of your Neighbor are these, and
such like.

1 To instruct the ignorant in Points of Doctrine needful and necessary to be
known; herein Job expressed his charity, as Eliphas testifies of him, Job 4. 3
Thou have instructed many; viz. in the knowledge of God.

2 To draw Sinners to repentance, by setting before them, as the severity of
Gods Justice against all impenitent Sinners, so the freeness of his grace, and
riches of his mercy to all peniten^ Sinners.

3 To comfort such as are comfortless, through an apprehension of the number
and hainousness of their sins, by setting before them the All Sufficiency of
Christ's Sacrifice, Mat. 11. 28
and the gracious offers in the Gospel to all who find their sins a burden to
them.

4 To exhort and stir up such as have begun well to hold on patiently, Heb.
10. 24 (...).
and constantly; whereunto the Apostle exhorts us, Let us, says he, consider
one another, to provoke unto love, and to good works, or to whet on to love and
good works, as the word in the Original properly signifies.

5 To reprove and rebuke such as are scandalous and offensive in their ways.
Thus John reproved Herod for Herodias his brother Philips wife, Luke 3. 19
and for many other evils.

6 To resolve the doubtful.

7 To strengthen and establish such as are weak in grace.

These indeed in one respect may be called works of Piety, namely, as they are
instructions, directions, and consolations gathered out of the holy Scriptures:
But in another respect they are works of mercy, namely, as they tend to the
good of your neighbors souls: In which the poorest that are may be rich in
good works.

II. The works of mercy, which concern the body of our neighbor, are these,
and such like.

1 Relieving such as are in want. The Apostle enjoining the Corinthians to lay
up some thing in store, 1 Cor. 16. 1, 2
every first day of the week (which is the Lords Day) implies, that that is a
very fit season, not only to do such works of mercy, which are then offered
unto us, but also to prepare for other times. And surely, if every one would
every Lords Day set apart something out of his commings in that week, for a
stock to give to charitable uses, much good might be done thereby. For as men
by this means will have more to give, than otherwise they will find in their
hearts to do on the week days: So they will give both more bountifully, and
more willingly, because the stock out of which they give is prepared
beforehand; and (it being a sacred Stock, by their voluntary setting it apart
to such an use) their conscience will account it sacrilege to lay it out any
other way. If poor men that live by their days labor, and servants that live
on their wages, would every Lords Day lay up some half-pennies, or pence, for
this end and purpose, they might have without any sensible damage to
themselves, a stock for the poor. How much greater store would be for the poor,
if rich men, according to Gods blessing on them, would so do?

2 Visiting the sick, and such as are otherwise restrained of liberty. This we
find practiced by our Savior, and that upon the Sabbath day, after the
public ordinances were ended; as Mark. 1, 29, 30. where we read, that our
Savior with some of his Apostles, After they were come out of the Synagogue,
went to visit Peter's wives Mother, who lay sick of a Fever; which shows,
That Christ accounted it a work of mercy, suitable to the Sabbath, to visit the
sick. From whence we may learn, as just occasion is offered, to spend some time
of the Sabbath in visiting the sick, it being an especial work of mercy proper
to the Sabbath; yea and an especial means to fill our minds with spiritual
Meditations, and our mouths with holy conferences, which are parts of private
sanctification of the Sabbath. What time therefore others spend in idleness, or
vain company, or sitting at street-doors, or walking abroad in the streets and
fields, let us spend in this, and such like works of mercy.

Directions for the right manner of visiting the Sick, see in Chap. XIX.

Besides these duties of Piety, and works of Mercy, which are commanded to be
done on the Lords Day, There are some things which the Lord permits unto us in
regard of the weakness and infirmities of our bodies, viz. Sleep, Food, and
Apparel. Because we cannot with strength and delight spend the whole day in
Sabbath duties, without competent rest, food and apparel; therefore it is
lawful for us to spend some time, as in sleep, so in apparelling our selves,
and in refreshing our bodies with food, which otherwise would be ready to
faint: But by a moderate use of these, we are enabled to do the things we take
in hand the more cheerfully.

But herein two Cautions ought carefully to be observed.

1 You must spend no more time about them than needs must. Wherefore your
bodies being refreshed with moderate sleep, you ought to get up early on the
Lords Day, as about six or seven of the clock, and to use all possible speed in
dressing your selves; and not to sit longer than needs must at your meals; that
so you may have the more time for the duties of Gods worship and service on his
day. And truly, since the Lord is so good and gracious unto you, as to afford
you some part of his own day for the refreshment of your bodies; Far be it from
you to abuse his goodness, by lavishing away more time therein than needs must.

Second Caution, Do them as Sabbath-dayes-works, which is done two ways.

1 By doing them for this end, that thereby you may be the better enabled to
serve God. Thus, when at your lying down the evening before the Sabbath, you
desire God to give you quiet, comfortable sleep, that thereby your weak bodies
may be refreshed, and you the better enabled to serve him the next day in the
duties of his worship and service, this is a Sabbath-sleep.

In like manner, when you eat and drink, for this very end, that your bodies
may be refreshed, and your spirits revived, and you thereby the better enabled
with cheerfulness to serve God the remaining part of the day, this is a
Sabbaths-eating and drinking.

2 By raising spiritual and heavenly Meditations from the same. At your first
awaking, you should call to mind what day it is, and having blessed God for
your comfortable rest and sleep that night you should beg of him the special
assistance of his grace, to carry you through all the duties of the day. When
you are rising out of your beds, you should think, as of the Resurrection of
Christ's body out of his grave early on that day, so likewise of the
Resurrection of your Souls here out of the death of sin, to the life of
holiness, and of your bodies at the last day, out of the grave of the earth, to
the life of glory in Heaven. In your apparessing your selves, you should then
think of the long white Robe of Christ's Righteousness, and of the happiness of
those who have an interest therein. When you are washing your hands and your
faces, from the cleansing virtue of the water, you should take occasion to
meditate of the cleansing virtue of Christ's blood, which alone washes your
souls from the filthy spots and stains of sin. When you go to your Tables, to
partake of Gods good creatures, your corporal food for the nourishment of your
bodies, should minister occasion of meditating on the spiritual food of your
souls, whereby they are nourished unto everlasting life; The bread on your
Tables should mind you of Jesus Christ, who is the bread of life that came
down from Heaven to quicken your dead souls. Thus from every thing should you
endeavor to draw matter of spiritual and heavenly meditation, laboring to
keep your hear^s in an holy frame all the day long. For what our Savior said
to his Disciples concerning the loaves and the fishes, Gather up the fragments,
let nothing be lost; The like he seems to speak unto you concerning the
Lords Day, gather up the parcels thereof, let no part of the day be lost, no
not the least minutes, which are precious, as the least filings of Gold.

As the Lord does permit unto you some things which your weak bodies stand in
need of, that thereby you may be the better enabled to serve him on his day: So
he is pleased to allow some things to be done by you, even on his day, though
they hinder the performance of the proper works thereof; and they are such
things as are of absolute necessity.

Quest. If you ask what I mean by works of absolute necessity?

Answ. Such as must needs be done, and yet could not be done the day before the
Sabbath, nor put off to the day after, without great prejud^ce. But on the
other side, such things as do no way further the sanctification of the day, but
rather hinder the same, and may as well be done the day before, or the day
after, or some other time, ought not to be done on the Lords Day.

Having thus done with the Directions for the right sanctification of the Lords
Day,

IV. Come we now to the Motives to quicken you up to a conscionable observation
of the Directions.

1 A right sanctification of the Lords Day, makes much to the honor of God.
Mark what the Lord himself says to his Church in this case, by his Prophet
Isaiah, If thou tu^n away thy foot from the Sabbath, Isa 58. 13.
from doing thy pleasure on my hely day, and (...) the Sabbath a delight, the
holy of the Lord, honorable, and (...) honor him. Here it is expressly said,
that by a right sanctifying of the Sabbath, we honor God.

2 A right sanctification of the Sabbath is profitable to your selves, and that
in a double respect.

1 In regard of your outward temporal estate.

2 In regard of your inward spiritual estate.

1 The sanctification of the Sabbath is profitable in regard of your outward
temporal estate. For the more conscionable any man is in sanctifying the
Sabbath day, the greater blessing he may expect from God upon his labor on
the six days. For it is not your own labor and toiling, Prove. 10. 22.
but the blessing of God that makes rich, i. e. that, and that alone, does it,
as the Wiseman speaks.

2 The sanctification of the Sabbath will be profitable in regard of your
inward spiritual estate. For this was one main end why the Sabbath was
ordained, namely, that God might by it in the use of his ordinances enrich our
souls with spiritual blessings in heavenly things. And accordingly the
sanctification of the Sabbath is an especial means both to beget grace, and to
strengthen grace; for the Lord has ordained it to be as a Market Day to the
soul. And truly, were we but as sensible of the good of our souls, as we are of
out bodies, the best husbands that be should not more diligently keep
Marke-daies, and Fair-daies, than we would the Lords Days.

3 A right sanctification of the Sabbath is very delightful to the people of
God, in that they do enjoy intimate society and communion with God in his
ordinances on that day, which is the greatest happiness poor creatures can
possibly attain unto in this life, being an heaven upon earth to enjoy
communion with God, and some degree of those heavenly joys which we shall
enjoy hereafter more fully in Heaven. How should the consideration hereof stir
you up to a careful, conscionable sanctifying of the Lords Day, that so you may
taste of those sweet comforts and refreshments, which others have so
plentifully enjoyed?

4 Another Motive may be taken from the Equity of sanctifying this day. For in
that the Lord has afforded unto us six days in seven for our own work, an
reserved to himself but one for his worship and service; whereas he might have
required six days for his worship, and afforded but one for our work; is it
not most just and equal that we should make conscience of giving unto God his
Day, by consecrating it wholly to his worship and service? As Joseph said to
Po^^phars Wife, when she tempted him to uncleannes (...) Master has not kept
back any thing from me, Genesis 39. 9.
but thee, because thou art his wife; How then can I do this great wickedness,
and sin against God? In like manner say thou to thy vain companions, when thou
art tempted any way to profane the Sabbath, God the Sovereign Lord, and Master
of the world, has kept back no time from me, but one day, because it was his;
How then can I do this great wickedness, and sin against God?

CHAP. XXII.
Of the Sacramen of the Lords Supper:
TO the worthy partaking of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, there are three
sorts of duties required.

1 Duties Antecedent, i. e. Such as must go before the Sacrament. 2 Duties
Concomitant, i. e. Such as must accompany the action of receiving. 3 Duties
Subsequent, i. e. Such as must follow after.
I. For the Duties Antecedent, though they are many, yet they may be all
brought under this one head of Examination, which is not only commended by the
Apostle, But let a man examine himself, 1 Cor. 11. 28.
and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of that cup; But urged and pressed
upon us with greater severity than any P^ecept in the Book of God; For faith
the Apostle in the same place, Verse. 27.
he that, through a neglect of this duty of Examination, eats and drinks
unworthily, Verse. 29.
1 He is guilty of the body and blood of Christ. 2 He eats and drinks
damnation to himself.

1 To be guilty of the body and blood of Christ, is in some measure to have
^ur hands in his bloody death and passion, and so by consequence to be partners
with Judas in betraying him, with the Scribes and Pharisees in accusing him,
with Pilate in condemning him, and with the cruel soldiers in crucifying him.
Whose heart does not rise with indignation against these, when he reads or
considers their cruel handling of our blessed Savior, in whipping and
scourging him, in mocking and deriding him, in piercing and crucifying him? And
therefore take heed lest thou in like manner be guilty by thine unworthy
receiving of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, through thine unprepared coming
thereunto. We read how the blood of innocent Abel, did lie so heavy upon Cain,
Genesis 4. 13.
that he cried out, My punishment is greater than I can bear. How heavy then
will the blood of Jesus Christ, who was not only an innocent man, but more than
a man, lie upon them that are guilty thereof? You know it lay so heavy upon
Judas, that he hanged himself. Mat. 27. 5.
And you cannot be ignorant how heavy it has lain upon the whole Nation of the
Jews for these many hundred years, Mat. 27. 25.
according to that cursed wish of theirs, His blood be on us, and on our
children. As therefore thou would not be found guilty of this horrid and
dreadful sin, put in practice the Apostles counsel, 1 Cor. 11. 28.
namely, To examine thy self before thou presumest to partake of that Ordinance.

2 He that eats and drinks unworthily, 1 Cor. 11. 29.
eats and drinks damnation to himself; so our translators render it. And
truly this is a necessary consequence from the former; for he that is guilty
of the body and blood of Christ, how can he but incur the danger of damnation?
(...).
Indeed, the word in the Greek translated damnation, may as well signify
temporal chastisement, as eternal punishment. And questionless, as hypocrites
and unbeleevers, while they eat and drink unworthily, eat and drink damnation
to themselves, if they repent not; so also such as are faithful and sincere
Christians, when they through infirmity and negligence do partake of this
ordinance unworthily, incur thereby temporal judgments, as sickness,
weakness, and sometime death it self For says the Apostle, speaking of the
be^eeving Corinthians, who had not prepared themselves as they should to that
ordinance; 1 Cor. 11. 30.
For this cause many are weak and sickly among you, and many sleep, or dye. For
what cause? namely, because they received the Sacrament unworthily, and
irreverently, without any preparation, or examination of themselves. I grant,
the best men cannot be said in themselves to be worthy to partake of this
ordinance: Yet if thou be a believing Christian, and do sincerely
endeavor to receive it in that manner, and with such affections as the Lord
does require of thee, thou may be said (how unworthy soever thou art
otherwise) to be a worthy receiver.

Having thus showed the Necessity of the duty of Examination, Come we now to
the Extent thereof, which may be brought to two heads, viz.

1 Thy graces. 2 Thy sins.

First, Thou must examine thy self of thy graces, more especially of thy
Knowledge, Faith, Repentance, and Love.

Touching Knowledge I shall show

1 What Knowledge is required of every worthy Communicant.

2 The Necessity. 3 The Trial thereof.

I. For the first, what Knowledge is required?

I answer in general, Knowledge of all the fundamental Principles of Religion.

In particular, Knowledge of the Doctrine of the Sacrament.

Fundamental Principles of Religion are such as our salvation is founded upon,
without the knowledge whereof a man cannot be saved, and they are these.

That there is a God. That there is but one God. That that only true God is
distinguished into three Persons; Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, all equally God.
That that God is the Creator and Governor of all things. That all things were
made good by him, and are still governed by him righteously. That man in
particular was made perfectly righteous by him. That man continued not long in
his happy estate, but fell by transgressing the Commandment of God in eating
the forbidden fruit. That we are all guilty of Adams sin, being in his loins
when he committed that sin. That every one of us brought into the world
corrupted and polluted natures, natures as full of sin, as a Toad is of poison.
That unto this original corruption, we have added a numberless number of
actual transgressions, and that in evil thoughts, evil words, and evil deeds.
That by our sins we have made our selves liable to the wrath of God, to the
curse of the Law, to all judgments and plagues here, and to eternal death and
condemnation hereafter. That no man can free himself out of that miserable
condition, whereinto by sin he has plunged himself, neither can any mere
creature help him. That God out of his free grace, and rich mercy, did send his
own Son out of his bosom into the world to take our nature upon him, that
therein he might become our Surety and Redeemer. That Christ was both God and
Man in one person. That he was conceived by the Holy Ghost, and born of the
Virgin Mary. That he died upon the Cross to save his people from their sins,
That he rose again the third day from the dead, ascended into Heaven, sits at
the right hand of God, and makes continual intercession for us. That by Faith
we are made partakers of Christ, and of the benefits of his death and passion.
That Faith is the gift of God wrought in us by the Spirit of God through the
Ministry of the Word, whereby we rest upon Christ alone for the pardon of our
sins, and for eternal life and salvation. That it has pleased God to make with
us in and through Christ a new Covenant of Grace, wherein he has promised the
pardon of our sins, and the salvation of our souls, upon the alone condition of
a lively Faith.

Particu^ar Principles concerning the Sacrament of the Lords Supper are these,

That it was ordained by Christ himself, as a memorial of his great love, in
offering up his life a Sacrifice for our sins. That this as well as the other
Sacrament of Baptism, is a seal of Gods Covenant, whereby he binds himself to
perform his promises made to us in Christ, for strengthening our Faith therein.
That the outward signs in the Lords Supper are Bread and Wine, by which are set
forth the body and blood of Christ, which the worthy receivers by Faith do
partake of in this Sacrament. That whosoever eats and drinks unworthily, is
guilty of the body and blood of Christ; and therefore that every one is to
examine himself, lest he eat and drink judgment to himself.

Having thus showed what is that knowledge which is required of every worthy
Communicant,

II. I shall now show the Nec^ssity thereof, which appears,

1 Because without this knowledge a man can never attain to any of the other
graces; for an ignorant man can neither believe, nor repent, nor love God or
his neighbor aright.

2 Because without this knowledge, a man cannot discern the Lords body, 1 Cor.
11. 29.
which if he do not, he eats and drinks damnation to himself. And therefore
it is absolutely necessary that all who receive the Lords Supper, should
discern the Lords body, i. e. should perceive that there is more to be received
than that which is seen with the eye of the body. To the bodily eye there
appears nothing but Bread and Wine upon the Table, but by virtue of the
divine institution, there is also Christ's body and blood; if this be not
discerned, the benefit of the Sacrament is lost. But it is not possible without
knowledge (which is the eye of the soul) to discern that body and blood under
the elements of bread and wine, therefore is the forementioned knowledge
absolutely necessary.

III. For the third particular, viz. The Trial of thy knowledge, whether it be
a true saving knowledge, thou may know it by the properties thereof; some
whereof are these.

1 True saving knowledge is Experimental, whereby a Christian has a spiritual
sense and feeling of what he knows. He has not only a general, and a notional
knowledge of God, and of his own miserable condition by nature, and of Jesus
Christ; but he has likewise an experimental knowledge of God, and of his
Attributes; as of his power in supporting him under his trials and temptations,
of his faithfulness in making good his promises unto him. He has likewise a
sensible feeling of his own wretched condition by nature. And an experimental
knowledge of Jesus Christ, so that he knows Christ to be his Savior and
Redeemer, and rests upon his merits alone for life and for salvation. By this
then try and examine thy knowledge, etc.

2 True saving knowledge is Humble, and joined with meekness of spirit. For the
more true knowledge a man has, the more he discerns his own ignorance, yea and
vileness by reason of his sins. And therefore you shall find, those Christians
who were most eminent both in knowledge and grace, to complain most, as of
their ignorance, so of their own base and naughty hearts; as you may see in
Paul and others. Romans 7. 24. Ephesians. 3. 8.
And no marvel, considering that true saving knowledge discovers unto a man his
own vileness and wretchedness by reason of his sins; his own unworthiness, yea
his own emptiness and nothingness, in regard of any goodness of his own.
Whereas unsanctified knowledge is apt to puffed a man up with pride, and
self-conceit, even to the contemning and despising of others, 1 Cor. ^. 1.
which the Apostle plainly expresses, where he says, Knowledge puffs up. By
this then try and examine thy knowledge, whether it be a saving knowledge or no.

3 True saving knowledge is active and operative, being ever accompanied with
practice and obedience, so that it works reformation in the heart and life of
him that has it. By this then try and examine thy knowledge, whether it be
saving, sanctifying or no.

II. The second grace necessarily required of every Communica^t, whereof thou
must examine thy self, is FAITH. Conce^ning which I shall show you,

1. What Faith this is. 2. The Necessity thereof. 3. Some signs and notes for
the trial thereof.

I. For the first, what faith this is. I answer, a true saving, justifying
faith, may be thus described. Faith is a grace wrought in the heart of a
sinner, by the spirit of God, through the ministry of the word; whereby being
convinced of his sinful, miserable condition, and of all disabilitie in
himself, or any other mere creature to free him out of the same, he goes
wholly out of himself unto Jesus Christ, and receiving him as his
all-sufficient Savior, and Sovereign, rests upon his perfect righteousness,
and all-sufficient Sacrifice, for the pardon and forgiveness of his sins here,
and for eternal life and Salvation hereafter.

II. The Necessity of this grace of Faith to every communicant appears.

1. Because without faith it is impossible to please God in any holy ordinance:
Heb. 11. 6.
as the Apostle expresses it. But true faith will commend both our persons and
services unto G^d, so that they shall find acceptance with him, though they be
full of weaknesses, and imperfections. Heb. 11. 6. Non Pla^as se^ peccas. Bern.
super ^ant. Sermon. 24.
This made Abels sacrifice so acceptable to God. If therefore thou come to this
ordinance without faith, instead of pacifying God, thou shall purchase his
heavy displeasure.

2. Except thou have faith before thou approachest to that ordinance, the
Sacrament comes but like a seal to a blank, and serves only to seal up thine
unbelief to condemnation; So that faith is necessarily required of every worthy
communicant, before he comes to the Lords Supper: for that ordinance is not
instituted for the working of faith, but for the strengthening thereof. A man
may come to the ministry of the word though he be faithless, because it is an
ordinance instituted by God for the begetting of faith, Romans 10. 17.
according to that of the Apostle, Faith comes by hearing; But none are to
come to the Sacrament, but such as have faith wrought in them. Because that is
not an ordinance instituted by God for the begetting of faith, but rather for
the strengthening thereof. It was not instituted for such as are out of Christ,
to bring them in, but for such a^ are in Christ, to bring them up in him. As a
man must be born before he can eat; so he must be begotten again by the Spirit
of God, before he can feed upon the Body and Blood of Christ for his spiritual
nourishment. I do not say, that all who come to the Sacrament must have the
same measure of Faith, but it is necessary that they all have the fame truth of
Faith.

III. For the third Particular, the trial of thy Faith, whether it be true and
saving; thou may know it by these two Characters, to omit many others.

1. True faith does receive Christ in all his Offices, not only as a Priest,
to make satisfaction, and intercession for us; but also as a Prophet to teach
and instruct us; and as a King to rule and govern us. The true believer does as
willingly cast himself at the feet of Christ, in subjection to him, as into the
arms of Christ, for Salvation from him: He is as willing to serve Jesus Christ*
as to be saved by him, as desirous to submit to his services, as to enjoy his
privileges. By this therefore may thou try the truth of thy faith.

2. True faith is an heart-purifying grace, it purifieth the heart. This
character of faith the Apostle Peter expresses, Act. 15. 9. Purifying their
hearts by faith. Faith purifying the heart implies two things.

1* That the believer makes conscience of his inward thoughts; whereas
unbelievers with the Pharisees, make clean the outside of the cup, labor to
keep themselves from gross and scandalous sins, but suffer their hearts to
range and rove into a world of vain and wanton thoughts, of profane and
fruitless imaginations, and that without any remorse, or check of conscience.

2. That faith puts a purifying disposition into the heart, so that it loathes
and detests sin, yea and strives against it, though it cannot altogether purge
and free it self from sin: when the heart is once seasoned with faith, it will
not willingly harbor sin, but labor to work it out more and more. By this
then try the truth and soundness of thy faith, whether it has wrought in thee,
a purging, purifying disposition, to strive against thy corruptions, and to
work them out of thine heart more and more.

III. The third grace necessarily required of every communicant is Repentance,
concerning which I shall show

1. The nature of Repentance, what it is.

2. The Necessity thereof to a worthy partaking of the Lords Supper.

3. Some signs and notes for the trial thereof.

I. For the first, what true Repentance is, I answer, It is a grace of Gods
Spirit, whereby both the heart and affections within, and also the life and
actions without are reformed. In this description I take the full nature of
Repentance to be comprised. Many do add hereunto an inward sorrowing and
mourning of the heart, which does indeed always accompany true Repentance, but
it is not of the nature thereof: For then, wheresoever sorrow for sin were,
there should be true Repentance, which is not so, as the examples of Saul,
Judas, and other wicked men do declare. Briefly to open this d^finition of
Repentance.

First, I say, It is a grace of Gods Spirit, i. e. a gift freely given of God,
and wrought in us by his holy Spirit; so that it proceeds not from man's free
will, nor from any power and ability of his nature.

Again, Repentance is a Reformation, wherein consists the very nature thereof,
as the words of turning, renewing, changing, and the like, which in Scripture
are attributed to Repentance, do imply. Now this Reformation must first be of
the heart; for the heart of a man is the fountain of all his actions; now in
reason the fountain must be cleansed and purged, before that which issues and
streameth from it can be wholesome. There must be therefore first a renewed
heart, before there can be a reformed life; for it cannot be that the stream of
our actions should be good, if the fountain of our heart be corrupt. Hence it
is that the Prophets so often call for the cleansing of the heart, and the
Apostles for the renewing, and changing thereof, without which all external and
outward reformation is but mere Pharisaical ostentation. In the last place is
added, A reformation of the life and actions without; for as to make some
outward show of Reformation, without reforming the heart within, is but
Pharisaical ostentation, whereby we deceive others: So to pretend an inward
Reformation, without the outward fruits of amendment, is but mere folly,
whereby we deceive our selves. For it cannot be that Reformation should be
truly rooted and grounded in the heart, but that it will bud forth, and show it
self in the fruits of a godly life. That man therefore deceives himself, who
thinks his heart is purged and reformed, when his life is polluted. For as the
fruits declare the tree, so the actions of men manifest their affections.

II. The Necessity of this grace of Repentance in every worthy Communicant,
upon his approaching to the Lords Table, appears, because we come to receive
a sacrifice for sin; but to offer to receive a sacrifice for sin, without
turning from sin, is to count the blood of the Covenant an unholy thing. We are
not ignorant, that one main end of our approaching to the Lords Table, is to
receive Christ as he has offered himself a sacrifice and price of Redemption
for our sins; for so he is set forth in that Sacrament, the breaking of the
bread, and pouring out of the Wine, import as much. Yea Christ expressly says
of the Sacramental Cup, Mat. 26. 28.
This is my blood which is shed for remission of sins. Now he that looks for
pardon of sin, must have a full purpose, and according to his purpose, a
faithful and resolute endeavor to forsake sin, which is, and will be the mind
of every true penitent, and so also it ought to be. The Lord therefore
requires of them, who bring their sacrifices to him for pardon, That they take
away the evil of their works, and cease to do evil, and learn to do well, and
thereupon infers this gracious invitation, Come now and let us reason
together. Isa. 1. 15, etc.
With what face then dares an impenitent sinner, that is not touched with any
remorse for his sins past, nor has any purpose to turn from his sins for the
time to come, offer to take that body which was broken, and that blood which
was shed for sin? Such an eating and drinking of Christ's body and blood, is a
plain trampling of the Son of God under foot, and a counting of the blood of
the Covenant an unholy thing, a thing that may be mixed with impu^e and unholy
things. If this be not to be guilty of the body and blood of Christ, what can
be?

III. For the Trial of thy Repentance; whether it be found and sincere, thou
may know it by these signs and notes.

1 By a godly sorrow for sins past. (...).
By a godly sorrow, I mean, such a sorrow as makes God its object, that is,
when we grieve and mourn for sin, more out of respect to God, than for fear of
punishment; that we have offended so good a God, so gracious a Father, so
bountiful a Lord and Master. I deny not but it is good and commendable to
grieve and mourn for sin in respect of punishment, for fear of Hell; For it is
a good preparatory to a godly sorrow. But we must not rest therein. By this
therefore try and examine the truth of thy Repentance, for wheresoever there is
true Repentance, there must be this godly sorrow.

2. A turning from those evil ways, wherein we have formerly walked; as you
may see in the example of those penitents, that are recorded in Scripture, as
of Paul, Peter, Zacheus, and others, who upon their repentance turned from
those evil courses wherein they had formerly walked. Hereby therefore try the
truth of thy repentance: Has it wrought a change and alteration in thy course
of life? are old things done away? is there a forsaking of former sins? have
thou le^t thy swearing, thy drunkenness, thy whoredoms, thy cousenings by
false weights and measures? can thou say of thy self, as Paul did of the
Corinthians, I was once a swearer, a drunkard, an adulterer, a reviler, an
extortioner, a covetous person, and the like: But now I am washed, now I am
sanctified, yea and justified in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, and by the
spirit of my God. 1 Cor. 6* 10, 11.
Can thou thus say of thy self; and that in truth and sincerity of heart?
then thou have some comfortable evidence of the truth and soundness of thy
repentance. But how vainly do they deceive themselves, who, because they have
made confession of their sins unto God, and happily with some few ^ears,
flatter themselves with a conceit of true repentance: when yet they still live
and continue in their former sinful courses, wall owing like swine in the
filth of sin, and mire of sinful filthiness.

3. A turning unto God: Ubi emendatio nulla, ibi panitentia vana. Tertul.
for where there is true repentance, there is not only a turning from sin, but
likewise a turning unto God. Whereby I mean a sincere endeavor to serve and
please God in newness of life and better obedience. Has then the sense and
smart of thy former wanderings, made thee earnestly to wish, that thou might
please God better for the time to come? make much of such affections in thy
soul, for it is an evident sign of some change there.

IV. A fourth grace necessarily required of every Communicant before he presume
to come to the Lords Table, is LOVE.] ye^ a two fold Love is required of every
Communicant, viz. 1 A love of God and of Christ. 2. A love of his Neighbor.

Both which are unseparably knit together: yet for a more distinct handling of
them, I will sever them in my discourse, and treat of them apart, showing you,

1. The necessity of them, to a worthy partaking of the Lords Supper.

2 Some sings and notes for the trial of them.

I. First, For the Love of God, that is necessarily required of every
Communicant, because the greatest evidence that ever was given of Gods Love, is
there set before us. For Jesus Christ the only Son of God, and Savior of man,
is the greatest evidence of Gods Love, that ever was, or can be. Should God set
himself to make another world, and to confer on that world a greater gift than
he has conferred on this world, namely, his only begotten, and dearly beloved
Son, we may boldly say, he could not. Neither can the creatures receive, nor
the Creator give a greater gift, and that both in regard of the excellency of
the gift it self, and also in regard of the need wherein we stood thereof, and
of the good we reap thereby. Therefore Gods love in this evidence thereof, is
so set out, as goes beyond all expression. God so loved the world, Joh. 3. 16.
that he gave his only begotten Son, etc. So unutterably, so unconceivably, so
infinitely, as who shall endeavor to express this SO to the full, shall do it
but So, So. Seeing then such an evidence of such love of God to man, is set out
at the Lords^ Table; should not every one who approaches thereunto, to partake
of that evidence of Gods love, come with an heart filled with a love to God,
and with a resolution to show forth all fruits of a true love of God on all
occasions?

And as we must come with a love to God, so with a love to Jesus Christ, who so
loved us, as to dye a cruel cursed death for us. And thereby manifested greater
love to us, than to himself, to the members of his mystical body, than to the
members of his natural^ body. For he offered up his natural body as a Sacrifice
for the redemption of his mystical body. What greater love than this can be
imagined Oh how does it then concern us to go to that ordinance with hearts
inflamed with a love to Jesus? This much of the necessity of our love to God,
and to his Son Jesus Christ.

II. For the Trial thereof, you may know it by these notes and characters.

1 Where there is a true hearty love to God, and to Jesus Christ, the heart
will be much taken up with the thoughts of them. Such an one will be often
thinking of God, and of Jesus Christ, and of their transcendent love manifested
in the great work of Redemption. David having said, Oh how do I love thy Law?
he presently adds, Psalm. 119. 97.
It is my meditation all the day. And indeed, whatsoever and whomsoever we
love, we cannot but frequently think and meditate on. Indeed, such as love God,
and the Lord Jesus Christ, in truth and sincerity, may have multitude of vain,
wanton worldly, covetous thoughts in their hearts, but they take no true
delight in them, they are rather their grief and their burden; but the thoughts
of God and of Christ are very sweet and comfortable unto them. By this
therefore try and examine the truth of thy love unto God, and Jesus Christ.

2 Where there is an hearty love to God, and to Jesus Christ, such an one will
be often speaking of them. For the tongue cannot but be speaking of those
things and persons upon whom the heart is set. If the heart of a man be set
upon the world, and the things thereof, his tongue will be most frequently
talking and discoursing of them. In like manner, if the heart of a man be set
upon God, and Jesus Christ, his tongue will be frequently talking and
discoursing of them. By this therefore try and examine the truth of thy love
unto God, and Jesus Christ. For he that says he loves God, and the Lord
Jesus Christ, and yet seldom thinks of them, or speaks of them, certainly he
deceives himself; for we cannot but be thinking, and speaking of those whom
we truly love.

3 Where there is an hearty love unto God, and Jesus Christ, it will make a man
willing to do any thing for them. Genesis 29. 20.
Jacob loved Rachel, and what did he not do for her? He served two
Apprentiships, and yet all seemed nothing to him for the love he had to her.
And therefore where there is a sincere love to God, and Christ, it will
constrain such an one to lay out himself to the uttermost for them, to put
himself upon the practice of such duties, which are hard and difficult, and
require much labor and pains. By this then try and examine the truth of thy
love unto God, and his Son Jesus Christ.

4 Where there is an hearty love to God and Jesus Christ, it will make a man
willing to suffer any thing for them. It is said of the Primitive Saints, Heb.
10. 34.
that out of their abundant love unto the Lord Jesus Christ* they accounted not
their estates too dear for him, but took joyfully the spoiling of their goods.
Neither did they account their lives too dear. Rev. 12. 11.
For it is expressly said, They loved not their lives to death for him, i. e.
they despised their lives in comparison of Christ: they willingly exposed, not
only their goods and estates to the spoil, and their persons to all manner of
shame and contempt, but also their bodies to painful deaths for the cause of
Christ. By this then try and examine the truth of thy love unto Jesus Christ,
namely, by thy willingness to suffer for the cause and truths of Jesus Christ.

II. Love of thy neighbor is another branch of that love which is required of
every Communicant. Touching which I shall briefly show

1 The Necessity thereof in every Communicant.

2 The Trial thereof.

I. The Necessity thereof appears, in that the Lord will not accept of any
service thou performest unto him, if thou be not in love and charity with thy
neighbor; as our Savior himself speaks in that known place, Mat. 5. 23, 24.
If therefore thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and there remembrest that thy
brother has ought against thee. Leave there thy gift before the Altar, and go
thy way, first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come, and offer thy gift.
This phrase, Thy brother has ought against thee, may be indefinitely taken of
one that has provoked another, or has been provoked himself: has ought
against thee, whether by thy default or his. So that hereby is implied, whether
wrong be done by thee, or to thee, if there be any variance between thee and
thy neighbor* peace and reconciliation must be speedily sought. For without
it, God will not accept of any worship or service thou offerest unto him.
Though Christ here instanceth but in one kind of worship, which was the
offering up of Sacrifice, yet under this he comprehends all the parts and
kinds of Gods worship, as praying, hearing, receiving the Sacrament, or the
like. So that Christ's meaning is, that whenever thou set upon any part of
Gods worship and service, and then remembrest that thy brother has ought
against thee, i. e. that thou have any way wronged and offended thy brother; or
as Mark has it, Mark 11. 25.
If thou have ought against thy brother, i. e. if he has wronged thee, first
be reconciled to thy brother, and then go to the ordinance of God.

II. For the Trial of the truth of thy love to thy brother, thou may know it
by these notes.

1 If thou have truly forgiven thy brother, thou will be so far from doing him
any harm (though it lay in thy power) that thou will not wish any harm unto him.

2 If thou have truly forgiven thy offending brother, thou will willingly
embrace occasions of doing him good, that so he may know and be assured that
thou art reconciled to him. Mat. 5* 44.
This our Savior requires of all his Disciples, where he says, Love your
enemies, i. e. those who have any way wronged you; and as an evidence of the
truth of your love, he adds, Do good to them that hate you; intimating, that
it is not sufficient that you speak friendly and peaceably to your enemies, but
you must likewise take all occasions of doing them what good you can, which is
true Christian love and charity.

Having thus spoken largely to the first head of Examination, namely, our
graces; I come now to the second, namely, our sins; wherein I shall study
brevity. As it is the duty of every Communicant to examine himself concerning
his graces, so likewise concerning his sins, which are like that accursed
thing, whereof God speaks to Joshua (Josh. 7. 11.) they must therefore be
searched out. Yea they are like the wild gourd, that brought death into the
pot. 2 King. 4. 39, 40.
If they be not searched out, and cast away, they will turn the Sacramental
bread and wine into spiritual bane. Psalm. 28. 13.
He therefore that covers his sins shall not prosper, but who so confesses
and forsakes them shall have mercy.

It is said of the Viper, that when she goes to join with her Mare, she
casts out all her poison. How much more ought thou, when thou go to
have communion with thy heavenly Spouse, the Lord Jesus Christ, cast out thy
sins, which are a spiritual poison, worse than the poison of any Viper? In this
Examination, as thou must search after thine evil thoughts, wo^ds, and deeds,
and after thy sins of omission and commission, so likewise and especially after
the sins thou have committed since thy last receiving of the blessed Sacrament,
and such as are most against the vows and covenants that formerly thou made
with God, and which do mostgaul thy conscience, or most disgrace thy
profession, or are greatest occasions of dulling thy spirit; that these being
found out, they may be the more lamented, and pardon for them more earnestly
desired. In the examining thy self, it will be a good help to read such a
Treatise as does in particular set out the several sins against the several
Commandments. For when by such a Treatise thou art showed that such a thing is
a sin against such a Commandment, thy conscience will, upon the reading of
such sins, tell thee, that therein thou have sinned. Having examined and
searched thine heart thoroughly of all thy known sins, then humble thy self
before the Throne of Grace, in a true and unfeigned acknowledgement, and
confession of them, freely judging and condemning thy self before God, with a
broken and contrite heart. Directions to help thee in the right manner of
confessing thy sins, See in Chap. 20.

And having confessed thy sins, pour out thy soul in hearty prayer unto God for
the pardon and forgiveness of them all. And then be earnest with him to make
the Sacrament effectual to thy comfort, effectual to the mortifying of thy
lusts, to the strengthening of thy graces, especially to the confirming of thy
Faith in the assurance of the pardon and forgiveness of thy sins, etc.

III. Having showed the duties Antecedent, come we now to the duties
Concomitant, i. e. such as must accompany the action of receiving.

But first I shall premise some few Directions touching the Manner of thine
approaching to the Lords Table.

1 Having thus prepared thy self, go not in the strength of thy preparations,
but only in the strength of Jesus Christ, looking for acceptance only in and
through his merits and mediation. For though thou have prepared thy self after
the best manner that thou can, yet if with an impartial eye thou shall look
back upon thy preparations, how full of weaknesses, infirmities and
imperfections will thou find them? So that if Christ do not cover both thy
person and thy preparation, with the Robe of his Righteousness, and sprinkle
them with his blood, neither thy person, nor thy preparation will find
acceptance with God. Cast therefore all thy preparations at the feet of Jesus
Christ, and say, Lord, I come not in the strength of my preparations, but only
in thy strength; I come in thine alone name and mediation, to partake of thy
body, and of the benefits of thy death and passion. And thou may then be
confident that God will overlook thy manifold weaknesses and imperfections in
the work of preparation, and accept of thee and of thy services in and through
his beloved Son Jesus Christ.

2 As thou art going, meditate on the ends and benefits of that solemn
ordinance; some whereof are these,

1 The remembrance of the death of Christ, (...).
it being instituted as a memorial thereof.

2 The spiritual nourishment of our souls.

3 The strengthening of our Faith in the assurance of the pardon and
forgiveness of our sins.

4 The sealing of the Covenant of Grace, with all the blessings thereof, unto
the believing soul.

5 The increasing of our spiritual union and communion with Christ, and all his
members. A serious meditation of these will be a special means to stir up in us
some spiritual appetite after the ordinance, that we shall go with hungring and
thirsting desires after the same.

3 Go with a strong expectation to receive much from Christ in and through that
ordinance, knowing that Christ will enlarge himself un^o all those, who come
with enlarged hearts, with a strong expectation of many good things. Psalm. 81.
10.
Open thy mouth wide, says the Lord, and I will fill it. So that if thou open
thy mouth wide, in a longing expectation of great matters, he will fill it. Yea
the more thine heart is enlarged in desire and expectation, the more will Gods
heart be enlarged in bounty toward thee. As therefore God has promised in the
Covenant of Grace to pardon thy sins, to subdue thy corruptions, to give thee a
soft heart, and the like, go with an expectation of these and such like
blessings, and thou shall not be disappointed of thine hopes.

4 Approach to the Lords Table with all holy reverence, in respect of Gods
glorious Majesty, Levit. 10. 3.
who is in a special manner present at that ordinance to behold his guests, and
will be sanctified by all those who draw nigh unto him.

5 Approach thereunto with all humility, in respect of thine own vileness and
unworthiness, who art but sinful dust and ashes, and (if thou have any light of
grace in thee) can not but be conscious to thy self of more corruption in
thine own heart, than thou know to be in the heart of another. And therefore
say not, Such an one is ignorant, and such an one is loose in his life and
conversation, but say, Lord, I am ignorant, I am unworthy to draw nigh unto
thee in so holy an Ordinance, not worthy to gather up the crumbs under thy
Table. And know, that the more unworthy thou art in thine own account, the
worthier guest thou art in the account of God.

6 As thou art going to the Lords Table, cast all thy worldly thoughts and
businesses out of thine head, which otherwise will carry away thine heart from
the ordinance, and exceedingly disturb thee thereat. In Job 1. 6. we read,
There was a day when the Sons of God came to present themselves before the
Lord, and Satan came also amongst them. In like manner, on the day when Gods
Children present themselves before the Lord in that solemn Ordinance, Satan
will be sure to appear amongst them, to disturb and distract them therein (as
much as possibly he can) by casting into their heads vain and impertinent
thoughts. And therefore it concerns thee to be watchful over thy thoughts,
and to keep thine heart close to the ordinance. To that end it will be thy
wisdom often to eye the outward elements of bread and wine, and diligently to
observe the outward rites and actions in the ordinance, and thereupon to
meditate of the spiritual things signified thereby.

These things premised, Come we now to the Duties to be performed at the
Ordinance, which are these,

I. When thou art present at the Ordinance, put forth all the strength thou
can in the partaking thereof, I mean, the strength of thy affections. For
though thou art very weak, yet if thou put forth thy weakness, God will accept
thereof. Content not thy self therefore with a mere outward participation of
the Lords Supper, but let thy care be to bring up thine heart, and thine
affections to the Ordinance, and to put forth what strength thou can.

II. Remember the death of Christ, which is Christ's command in the institution
of this Ordinance; for says he, (...). Luke 22. 19.
This do in remembrance of me, viz. in remembrance of my bitter death and
passion. For the Apostle Paul explaining this remembrance of Christ, applies
it to his death, 1 Cor. 11. 26, 27.
and the showing it forth. This do, says he, in remembrance of me: For as
often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do show the Lords death till
he come. So that this Ordinance of the Lords Supper was instituted for a solemn
Memorial of that great Sacrifice, the Lord Jesus Christ, that his death might
never be forgotten, but be ever fresh in our memories. And why must his death
be thus remembered? Surely because thereby was the Covenant of Grace ratified
and sealed, our Redemption purchased, our sins expiated, our reconciliation
made with God, and the foundation of our peace laid. And therefore at the
Table, let out thine heart in a serious meditation of the manifold sufferings
of Christ, which is the main business of this Ordinance. (...).
And meditate not only of his sufferings at his death, but likewise in the
whole course of his life, even from his cratch to his Cross, from his birth to
his death. For his whole life was a continual suffering. Meditate therefore of
his mean birth, and flight in his infancy, of the manifold reproaches which
were cast upon him from time to time; yea of his manifold persecutions, of
their cruel handling of him at the time of his death, when they apprehended him
like a thief, bound him, arraigned, and condemned him as a Malefactor, buffeted
him with their hands, beat him with staves, scourged him with whips, making
long furrows on his back, platted on his head a Crown of sharp Thorns, laid an
heavy cross on his back, nailed his hands and feet to that Cross, give him Gall
and Vinegar to drink, and sundry ways much afflicted him. Thus was his body
broken with torments. In relation hereunto, it is said of him, That he was a
man of sorrows, Isa. 53. 3
and acquainted with griefs. Especially when thou art present at the Sacrament,
take a turn with Christ in the Garden, by meditating of his bitter Agony,
wherein he sweat drops of blood, which was never read, or heard of in any
before or since; yea the blood which Christ then sweat was not thin watery
blood, Luke 22. 44
but thick blood, as St. Luke expresses it, Being in an agony, his sweat was
as it were great drops of blood, Non guitae sed grumi, as (...) the word in the
Original properly signifies.
falling down to the ground; which latter clause shows, that the blood of
Christ passed through the pores of his body in such a plentiful manner, that it
trickled down to the ground in great abundance; so that not only the eyes of
Christ, but all the parts of his body did seem to weep, and that tears of
blood, as Bernard speaks.

In this sweat of Christ there are three things remarkable, Non solum oculis,
sed membris omnibus flevisse videtur. Bern.
which do exceedingly set forth the greatness of his Agony.

1 It was in a cold night, for which cause afterward they kindled a Fire in
the Highpriests Hall; Luke 22. 55
and cold drives the blood inward.

2 He lay upon the cold ground, which was enough to drive the blood inward.
Mat. 26. 39


3 He was in exceeding great fear, Mark 14. 33
which naturally draws the blood from the outward parts to the Heart; and yet
in a cold night, Mat. 26. 39
lying upon the cold ground, and being in great fear, he sweat drops of blood.
Who can imagine the bitterness of our Saviors Agony at that time? And what was
it which put him into that agony? questionless, the apprehension of what he
was to suffer, as appears by his Prayer in his Agony, Father, if it be
possible let this cup pass from me. Now, if the apprehension of what he was to
suffer was so bitter, oh how bitter think you were his Sufferings upon the
Cross, Mat. 27. 46
when he cried out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? which words do
not imply, that the Deity was severed from the Humanity, but that the Father
had withdrawn from him all sensible feeling of his loving favor, had
restrained the influence of those beams which might any way refresh his
troubled soul; ^am. 1. 12
so that Christ might well take up the words of the captive Jews, and say,
Behold, and see if there be any sorrow like to my sorrow, wherewith the Lord
has afflicted me in the day of his fierce anger.

These things call to mind in the time of the administration of the Sacrament,
not only when thou art eating the Bread, and drinking the Wine; but also when
thou see the Bread broken, and the Wine poured forth, then thou should
think how Christ's Body was broken with torments, and his Blood shed for
remission of sins; and also when thou see others taking the Bread, and the
Wine, thou should then be steeping thy thoughts in the meditation of Christ's
bitter death, and manifold sufferings.

This remembrance of Christ's Death at the Sacrament, must not be a bare
Historical remembrance thereof, contenting thy self with a remembrance of the
History of Christ's death, as it is set forth by the Evangelists, but it must be
an operative, and practical remembrance, working up thine heart,

1 To an unfeigned love of God, who out of his free grace, and rich mercy, did
send his dearly beloved Son out of his own bosom into the world, to take our
Nature upon him, and therein to dye a bitter cursed death for man's redemption.
Who can sufficiently admire the riches of Gods love to man therein? How may we
with David cry out, and say, Lord, what is man that thou art mindful of him?
especially that thou should be so mindful of him, as to give the Son of thy
love to suffer a cursed death upon the Cross, to make us, who were children of
Wrath, and bondslaves of Satan, Sons of God, and Heirs of eternal life and
salvation. And how should this incomprehensible love of God, fire and inflame
our cold and frozen hearts with a fervent love unto him again?

2 The remembrance of Christ's death should work up our hearts to an ardent love
of Christ, for that wonderful love of his, in giving himself for us, his Body
to be crucified, his Blood to be shed, and his Soul to bear the intolerable
burden of his Fathers Wrath due to our Sins, which made him sweat drops of
blood in the Garden, and to cry out on the Cross, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? Oh how should this ravish our souls with admiration of so great
love? and inflame our hearts with love again unto him, who did, and suffered so
much for us? How should the meditation of the manifold sufferings of Christ,
especially of his bitter Death and Passion, work in us an holy passion of love?

3 The remembrance of Christ's death should work in us a care to please him in
all things, to be willing to do and suffer any thing for him, who has done
and suffered so much for us; which Christ declares to be a good proof of our
love to him, Joh. 14. 15
saying, If ye love me, keep my Commandments. And though we cannot exactly
keep the Commandments of Christ, yet we may and ought sincerely to endeavor
the keeping of them, without which our profession of love is but vain and
fruitless; in show, and not in truth.

4 The remembrance of Christ's death should work in us a godly sorrow for our
sins, as the true cause of his sufferings. For the truth is, it was not so much
Judas that betrayed Christ, nor the Scribes and Pharisees that accused him, nor
Pilate that condemned him, nor the Soldiers that Crucified him, nor the Devil
that set them all on work, as our sins that were the true cause of Christ's
sufferings. The Soldiers that Scourged him, and Crucified him, were but our
Executioners, to inflict on him those punishments which our Sins deserved, and
Gods Justice imposed for the same. They were our Sins which envenomed those
Whips that scourged his innocent Body, those Thorns which pricked his Temples,
and those Nayls which pierced his Hands and Feet, and made them so bitter unto
him. Oh therefore that we could so look upon him whom we have pierced by our
Sins, that we might mourn as one that mourns for his only Son; and be in
bitterness, as one that is in bitterness for his firstborn.

5 The remembrance of Christ's death should work in us the death of Sin; we
should so remember the death of Christ, as to dye unto Sin. For the Apostle
Paul urges our death to sin from the death of Christ, Romans 6. 2
that as Christ dyed and rose again, so we should dye to sin, and live to God.
To this end, let us hate and loath Sin as the greatest evil, resolving with the
assistance of Gods grace to leave and forsake all manner of sins for the time
to come; for why should any sin seem light to us, which lay so heavy upon our
Savior, as to cast him into a bloody sweat? Why should any sin be sweet to us,
which was so bitter to our Savior? Far be it from us, by our renewed sins,
to tear open his Wounds afresh, and Crucify him again.

6 The remembrance of Christ's death should work u^ our hearts to some due
thankfulness unto God, and his Son Jesus Christ, for their unspeakable love and
mercy toward us therein. Thankfulness is a grace, not only to be exercised
after our receiving of the Sacrament, but likewise while we are present at the
Ordinance, when our hearts are affected with the apprehension of the
incomprehensible love of God the Father, in giving his beloved Son out of his
own bosom to dye for us; and of the unspeakable love of Christ, in offering
his own Body a Sacrifice upon the Cross for our Sins, then should they break
forth in praises and thanksgivings unto God the Father, and his Son Jesus
Christ.

III. Another Duty to be performed at the Ordinance, is the exercise of thy
graces, more especially thy faith and repentance. It is not enough that thou
bring faith, repentance, and other graces to the Sacrament, but thou must
likewise there stir up thy graces, and exercise the same, or else thou will
be an unworthy receiver. For not only a wicked man that wants grace, but
likewise a child of God that has true grace, may receive the Sacrament
unworthily, and go away without any comfort or benefit at all; namely, if he
do not there stir up and exercise his graces. For Sacraments do not work as
Physic, by a virtue inherent in them, but according to the disposition of the
party that partaketh of them. Non ex opere operato, sed ex opere operantis.
And therefore, as thou would be a worthy guest, and partake of the comfort
of the Ordinance, stir up and exercise thy graces. As

I. Thy Faith. This is the chief grace to be exercised at the Sacrament; for
Faith is the eye of the Soul, whereby it sees and discerns the body and
blood of Christ under the elements of bread and wine; Qui fide vacuus dente non
mente monducat. Chem. Exa.
it is likewise the hand of the Soul, whereby it receives Jesus Christ; and
the mouth of the Soul, whereby it feeds upon Jesus Christ. And therefore
without the exercising of thy Faith at the Sacrament, thou can receive no
benefit at all.

There is a threefold act of Faith to be exercised at the Lords Supper.

1 To look out for Jesus Christ. 2 To receive Christ. 3 To apply and
appropriate him unto thine own self.

1 The first act of Faith, is to look out for Christ; and therefore when thou
art present at the Lords Supper, rest not in the outward elements, in the
beholding and taking of them; but with the eye of Faith discern the body and
blood of Christ under the elements of bread and wine, which indeed do
spiritually, sacramentally set forth the body and blood of Christ, as is clear
from Christ's own expression, for holding the bread in his hand, he said of it,
Mat. 26. 26.
This is my body, i. e. Mystically, and Sacramentally, by way of
representation; as if he had said, This bread represents my body. And
holding the cup that had wine in it, and speaking of the wine therein, Mat. 26.
27.
he says, This is my blood, i. e. Mystically and Sacramentally, by way of
representation, q. d. This wine represents my blood.

And as thou art not to rest in the outward elements, so neither in the outward
rites and actions, but in the beholding of them thou art with the eye of Faith
to see and discern the spiritual things signified thereby. When therefore thou
beholdest the Minister breaking the bread, then meditate of the manifold
sufferings of Christ, and with the eye of Faith, look upon Jesus Christ hanging
upon the Cross, there conflicting with his Fathers wrath, and groaning under
the weight and burden of our sins. Behold his blessed body broken and torn with
stripes and wounds, with whips and nails. The Apostle St. Paul thus brings in
Christ himself applying that rite of breaking the bread, for says he, Christ
took bread, 1 Cor. 11. 24.
and brake it, and said, This is my body which is broken for you; which yet is
not to be so understood, as if his blessed body, or any part or member thereof
were broken in two pieces. (For that charge of not breaking a bone of the
Paschal Lamb is applied to Christ, John 19. 16.
in that his legs were not broken.) But of the breakings of his flesh by
thorns, whips, nails, etc. and other sufferings which he endured in his body,
till his blood was shed. This rite also of breaking the bread, implies, tha^
the sufferings of Christ were so many, and so great, that they did even break
him again. For we use to say of one that has endured much pain, or other
great grief, that has wasted his flesh, or dried up his blood, See, how he is
broken; and in this sense also may Christ be said to be broken.

Again, when thou see the Minister pouring out of the wine, then exercise and
actuate thy Faith in the blood of Jesus Christ, and the shedding thereof, which
indeed shows the extent of Christ's sufferings, even to the taking away of his
life, which is the furthest extent of a man's suffering in this world. These two
therefore, The breaking of Christ's body, and the shedding of his blood, are
fitly joined together; the former to show the extremity of Christ's sufferings;
the latter, the extent thereof, even as far as possibly could be, to the
shedding of his blood.

Again, when thou see the Minister offering the bread and wine to the
Communicants, then by the eye of Faith see Gods love in offering his Son to
every believing Communicant. For as verily as the Minister does offer the bread
and the wine, so truly does God really offer Christ, with all the benefits of
his death and passion to every believing Communicant. I do not say carnally,
but really; not the flesh of Christ, but Christ with all the benefits of his
death and passion, as Reconciliation, Redemption, Remission of sins, etc. For
there is not a mere Representation, but a real and true exhibition of Christ,
as broken for our sins.

II. Another act of Faith to be exercised at the Lords Supper, is to receive
Jesus Christ. For the Believer having seen Christ with the eye of Faith under
the outward elements, and forementioned rites, then he receives him into his
heart with much joy and gladness. As therefore thou stretchest forth the hand
of thy body to receive the bread and wine, stretch forth the hand of Faith to
apprehend and receive Jesus Christ, and to rest upon him for life and for
salvation. For Faith is that instrument whereby we receive Christ and all his
benefits, as they are offered to us in the Gospel, and sealed up to us in the
Sacrament. Faith is to the soul, as the hand is to the body, that which is
offered to a man for his good, the hand readily receives, and what the hand so
receives is a man's own. Thus God offering his Son unto us, Faith persuades the
heart of Gods good will to man, and of his true intent to have man made
partaker of his Son, and thereupon apprehends him, and receives him for his
own, and Christ is truly his.

III. Another act of Faith to be exercised at the Lords Supper, is to apply and
appropriate Christ to thy self, which is implied under the Rites of eating the
bread, and drinking the wine* whereby is meant, a feeding upon Christ by Faith,
which is an applying of him. When therefore thou art eating the bread, and
drinking the wine, fee^ upon Christ by a particular application of him, and all
his benefits, to thine own souls comfort. By Faith assure thy self that Christ
was born for thee, that he might be thy Savior, to save th^e from thy sins.
That he performed perfect obedience unto the Law, that his Righteousness might
be imputed unto thee. Thus he died a bitter cursed death to free thee from
eternal death and condemnation, which thy sins had deserved. Thus thou ought
to apply Christ with all his benefits unto thine own souls comfort. And thus to
act Faith, is to eat and drink indeed, to communicate indeed. The truth is,
this act of Faith, in applying Christ, is the most suitable to the Ordinance of
the Lords Supper. And the more thou can put forth the act of application
therein, the greater comfort shall thou receive from the Ordinance; for
propriety in Christ is that which sweetens all. Yet lest weak Christians, such
as are weak in Faith, should be discouraged, and think themselves incapable of
comfort, because they cannot thus ^eed upon Christ by Faith, they cannot apply
Christ, nor the benefits of his death unto themselves.

I desire such to take notice, that though this act of application is the most
suitable to the Ordinance, yet the former act of receiving Christ, and resting
upon him, gives us a true interest in him, whereby Christ and all his benefits
become ours, which puts us into a blessed and happy condition. Yet I would
advise all such who have attained to that measure and degree of Faith, as to
lay hold upon Jesus Christ, and to receive him as their Savior, and thereupon
to rest upon him alone for life and salvation, that they would strive to raise
it one pitch higher, namely, to apply christ, with all the benefits of his
death and passion, unto their own souls comfort. Because this act of Faith does
especially make to our comfort and consolation, as well as to our spiritual
benefit.

II. Another grace to be exercised at the Lords Supper, is Repentance; For a
broken Christ requires a broken heart. Whereas in true Repentance there is a
godly sorrow for sins past; And a full purpose and resolution of heart to leave
and forsake them for the time to come, and to walk more closely with God. While
you are at the Sacrament, you should exercise your Repentance in both these
particulars.

1 You should labor to be affected with a true grief* and sorrow for your
sins. To that end seriously meditate of the manifold sufferings of Christ; for
ce^tainly a due and serious meditation of what Christ has suffered for our
sins, cannot but affect our hearts with some measure of grief and sorrow for
the same; for shall Christ bleed for our sins, and shall not we weep for them?
was Christ broken with torments for our sins, and shall not the consideration
thereof break our hearts for them?

2 You must engage your selves by a solemn Vow and promise, unto God to be
more watchful over your selves against sin for the time to come; and to walk
more closely and exactly with God. As often as you partake of the Lords Supper,
so often God renews the Covenant on his part, he ingageth himself afresh, to
be your God, to pardon your sins, to subdue your corruptions, to write his Law
in your hearts, that is, to work in you, as a desire and disposition to the
keeping of his Laws and Commandments; so a sincere endeavor after the same.
And therefore it is your duty to renew the Covenant on your parts, to engage
your selves afresh in the strength of Christ, to walk as a people in Covenant
with God, to be more watchful over your selves against sin, for the time to
come; to be more his faithful servants, than ever you were before.

Having showed both the Duties Antecedent, and Concomitant, Come we now to the
Duties Subsequent, such as must follow after the action of receiving: For it is
not enough that you duly prepare your selves to that Ordinance, and reverently
carry your selves at it, but you must likewise walk in some measure suitably
thereunto. To that end observe these Directions.

1 So soon as you get home, withdraw your self into some secret place, and
there upon your knees from your heart bless God, as for h^s manifold favors,
mercies, and blessings, so especially and above all for the fountain of all
blessings, the Lord Jesus Christ, for his Covenant of Grace made unto you in
him, for adding the Sacraments as Seals to the Covenant of Grace for the
strengthening of your Faith, and for making you that day partakers of his
blessed Sacrament, and for that comfort and refreshment which you find
therein. I hope you are not such beasts as to forget to return thanks to God
for the food wherewith your bodies are refreshed. And will you bless God for
your corporal food, Omne bonum ab ipso, etc. Aug. de Doct. Christi.
and not for your spiritual food, whereby your souls are nourished unto
everlasting life? Will you bless God for a crumb, and not for a Christ? in whom
are all good things contained in a most eminent manner.

2 Did you find your hearts cheared and warmed at the Lords Supper, beware of
quenching that spiritual heat which was there kindled in you, by a sudden
falling into worldly conferences, and fruitless discourses; But labor to keep
alive that sacred fire which you found then kindled in your hearts by prayer,
meditation, and holy conferences; for know, that a sudden quenching of the
Spirit, will exceedingly tend to the hardening of your hearts.

3 Maintain a stricter watchfulness over your selves against sin for the time
to come. Were your souls washed at the Sacrament, with the blood of Christ,
from the filthy spots and stains of sin, and will you s^on after with the Sow
wallow again in the filth of sin, and mi^e of sinful filthiness? 2 Pet. 2. 22
Did you upon your approaching to that Ordinance, cast up your sins by
confession? and will you now with the Dog, return to your vomit again? Did
you there by the eye of faith see Christ crucified for your Sins, under the
rites of breaking the Bread, and pouring out the Wine and will you now, by a
fresh committing of sin, crucify him again? rather resolve, and strive hence
forward to crucify your sins, for which Christ was crucified, to hate, abhor,
and abandon every Sin as much as in you lies.

4 Labor to live more soberly, Tit. 2. 12
righteously, and godly in this present world. More soberly toward your
selves, Haec tria sint vitae regula sancta tuae.
more righteously toward your Neighbors, and more godly toward God. As you
have been made partakers of an Ordinance not common to all, but peculiar to
Saints, so your lives should have somewhat peculiar in them, which is not
common to wicked men. You should live convincing lives, by exceeding others in
holiness, and in righteousness. You must be more frequent and fervent in
Family Duties, more careful in sanctifying the Lords Day, more just and honest
in your dealings with men, living so as you may credit your Profession, and
adorn the Gospel of Jesus Christ. And when you are tempted to any sin, thus
reason the case with your selves; Was I not lately at the Lords Table, and did
I not there vow and promise to be more watchful against Sin, and more careful
to walk in the ways of godliness, and shall I now step out of the way of
godliness into the way of sin? Thus lay your temptation to the touchstone of
your vow, and try whether it be not against it: which through the blessing of
God may prevent many a Sin.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of the Common mutual Duties betwixt Husband and Wife.
HAving showed the general Directions which appertain to Christians as
Christians.

I come now to the particular Duties which appertain to thee in thy several and
distinct relations. For it is not sufficient that thou make conscience of the
general Duties of Christianity, but thou must also be conscionable in the
performance of the particular duties of thy several relations, whereby much
good is both mutually communicated one to another, and received one from
another. Whereas the Apostle Paul in setting down the severul Duties of
relations, does still bring them under three Heads, viz. Husbands and Wives,
Ephe. 5. 22. etc.
Parents and Children, Masters and Servants; I shall follow his Method, Col. 3.
18, etc.
showing thee the duties of each of these.

For the Duties of Husband and Wife, they may be drawn to two Heads.

1 To such as are common to both. 2 Such as are proper and peculiar to each
severally.
The common and mutual Duties are these.

I. A loving affection of one to another. I call this a mutual Duty, because as
the Husband is to love his Wife, Ephesians. 5. 25, 28, 33,
so the Wife is to love her Husband. Tit. 2. 4
Love is a duty which every Christian owes to another, Mat. 22. 39
Love thy neighbor as thy self, says our Savior. Where by Neighbor is meant
every man, every woman, so that we are bound to love every one, even our
enemies, for Christ's sake. But the nearer any are knit together, the more they
are bound to this duty of love, and to abound therein. Now, who are so nearly
knit together as Husband and Wife? and therefore there ought to be a mutual
loving affection between them, and that love which one shows to the other
will stir up the other to requite that love again, so as there is nothing
lost by love.

II. Outward concord and agreement. H^b. 12. 14
This should be, as far as is possible, with all men, i. e. so far as may
stand with faith and a good conscience; but more especially between Husband and
Wife, who are so nearly knit together. For without concord and agreement
between Husband and Wife, what comfort can either find in their house? The
truth is, every one lives more or less comfortable in his house, Prove. 15. 17
as there is concord and agreement there. And therefore says the Wise man,
Better is a dinner of herbs, or roots, where love is, than a stalled Ox, and
hatred therewith. And again, Prove. 17. 1
Better is a dry morsel, and quietness therewith, than an house full of
sacrifice, with strife; i. e. slender fare, yea a dry crust, with peace and
concord, is more comfortable than good cheer, with strife and contention; for
that will so imbitter the sweetest Meats, that a man can find little relish in
them.

For the better preserving of concord and agreement betwixt Husband and Wife,
take these few Directions.

1 Labor to suppress and keep down all furious Passions, which do usually
occasion discord and dissension; especially when one is passionate it will be
the wisdom of the other to act patience, and to express a spirit of meekness;
for when both are hot and angry together, then the fire of contention is like
to increase to such a flame as will not suddenly be quenched. And therefore I
would commend this rule to Married persons, To beware of be^ing both angry
together, but rather let one be to the other like David's Harp, to apt ease
Saul's fury.

2 Though the fire of contention be kindled at home, yet let it not break forth
into thy neighbors house; but be sure thou keep it within thine own walls.
For it is found by too frequent experience, that differences between Man and
Wife being once divulged, are more hardly made up.

3 When any difference is risen, let each strive who should first seek after
peace and reconciliation, for theirs is the glory who first begin. I have read
that there was sometimes a variance between two famous Philosophers, Aristippus
and Aeschines, Aristippus at length comes to Aeschines, and seeks for peace
and reconciliation, and withal said, Remember, though I am the elder, and the
Party wronged, yet I fought the peace. True, said Aeschines, and for this I
will ever acknowledge thee the worthier man, for I began the strife, but thou
the peace. But how many of us come short of Aristippus (though an Heathen
Philosopher) in this particular, thinking it a disgrace, first to seek after
peace and reconciliation?

III. Another mutual Duty which Husband and Wife owe one to another is Prayer.
They ought to pray one for another. In a conscionable performance whereof, may
Husband and Wife be helpful each to other, Mat. 7. 7
in all things needful to either of them, it ^eing the means which the Lord
has sanctified for obtaining of every good thing, ^am. 5. 16
both for our selves and others. Genesis 25. 21
It is recorded of Isaac, That he entreated the Lord for his Wife, because she
was ^arren, and the Lord was entreated of him; i. e. the Lord heard his Prayer
and granted his request.

IV. Another mutual duty is, A provident care of one for ano^ther, seeking the
good of one another, even as of themselves. This their care of one for another
respects especially both the Soul, and the good name of each other.

1 There ought to be a provident care for one another Souls; as,

1 If a believing Husband or Wife be married to an unbeleever, they ought to
use all the means they can to win the other. This the Apostle Peter presses
upon Wives, for he commands them so to carry themselves toward their Husbands,
That they may without the Word be won by the conversation of their Wives. 1
Pet. 3. 1.
And the Apostle Paul intimates this to be the duty of Husbands toward their
Wives; 1 Cor. 7. 16.
For, says he, How know thou, O man, whether thou shall save thy wife? viz.
by thy godly conversation. And if either of you shall be a means of the
conversion of the other, how entirely will it knit your affections one to
another?

2 If both Husband and Wife be in the state of Grace, they should be watchful
one over the other, as to prevent sin in one another, so to redress it the best
way they can when either of them are fallen thereinto, by seasonable
admonition, yea and reproof also, if admonition will not serve; Herein Husband
and Wife should more respect the mutual good of one another, than fear the
giving of offense.

And it is likewise a special duty incumbent upon Husband and Wife, to help
forward the growth of grace in each other, as by a frequent conferring together
of good things, especially of what they hear in the public Ministry of the
Word; so likewise by a constant performing family duties, especially Prayer.
Though this duty appertain chiefly to the Husband, yet the Wife ought to put
her Husband in mind thereof, if he forget it, and to stir him up, if he be
backward.

2 There ought to be a provident care in Husband and Wife, as for one another
souls, so for one another good name. The Husbands good name ought to be as
dear to the Wife, as her own. And the Wives good name ought to be as dear to
the Husband as his own. And truly, great reason there is, that parties so
nearly knit together, should be careful of one another good name, because a
name is more precious than all the goods they enjoy.

V. Another mutual duty is, Vitiis nemo siac nascitur. Hor.
To conceal and cover the infirmities of one another. There is no man or woman
without their infirmities; it will be therefore your wisdom to conceal the
same, so far as you can with a good conscience. Charitas tolerat quos amat.
Greg. in Ezekiel.
And truly this is one special act and exercise of love, to seek to cover and
conceal the infirmities of those whom they love. How blameworthy then are they
who take all occasions to spread abroad one another infirmities, and many
times belie one another? This fault is so much the greater in two especial
respects.

1 Because the Husband and Wife know more of one another infirmities; and
therefore if they be so ill minded, can more discredit and defame one another,
than any other.

2 Because, of all other parties, they are most bound to conceal one another
infirmities, by reason of their near union.

CHAP. XXIV.
Of Husbands Duties to their Wives.
HAving showed the Common-mutual duties appertaining both to the Husband and
the Wife, I come now to the special and particular duties belonging to each of
them severally.

And first of the duties of the Husband, all which may be comprised under this
one word LOVE; Ephesians. 5. 25, 33.
for we find that often expressly set down and mentioned as the chief duty of
the Husband. Col* 3. 19.


For the more profitable pressing whereof, I shall show

1 The manner how it ought to be performed.

2 The particulars in which it ought to expressed.

I. For the manner, the Apostle St. Paul sets it down in two phrases.

1 As Christ loved his Church, Husbands love your Wives, even as Christ loved
his Church, and gave himself for it. (...).
The note of comparison, EVEN AS, requires not an equality, as if it were
possible for an Husband to love his Wife as much as Christ loved his Church;
but it notes a similitude and likeness, and implies two things.

1 That you must endeavor to come as near Christ herein as you can, never
thinking you have loved enough, because you can never love so much as Christ
did.

2 That though your love in quantity cannot be equal to Christ's, yet in quality
and condition it ought to be like his, viz. True, Free, and Constant.

1 As Christ's love to his Church was a true, Ephesians. 5. 25.
real love, which he expressed, by giving himself for her: So should the
Husbands love to his Wife be a true, and real love, not loving her in word
only, but in deed also, manifesting his love by some real expressions thereof.

2 As Christ's love to his Church was a free love, for his love arose wholly and
only from himself, there being nothing in the Church to move him to love her:
So should the Husbands love to his Wife be a free love, loving her, though
there were nothing in her to draw his love, but only that she is his wife.

3 As Christ's love to his Church is a constant and continued love, for whom he
once loves, John 13. 1.
he love^h to the end: So should the Husbands love to his Wife be a constant
and continued love, no^ only by fits, for a while, but constantly till death.

2 The Husband ought to l^ve his wife as his own body; as the Apostle St. Paul
speaks, Ephesians.. 5. 28.
So ought men to love their Wives, as their own bodies. Though the former
comparison, taken from Christ's Example, be the more excellent, laying fort^ a
more p^rfect pa^tern, yet this other taken from a man's body, is more sensible,
and better discerned of man. For every man knows how he loves his own body,
viz. with all tenderness and compassion; fit^y therefore is it added by the
Apostle. And it is to be taken both as a Motive to stir up the Husband to love
his Wife, because she is as nearly joined to him* as his body; and also as a
Pattern, to show him how he should love his Wife, even as he does his body,
truly and tenderly, as the Apostle in the following verses more fully
expresses it; Verse. 29.
For no man ever yet hated his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it.

II. The particulars in which an Husband ought to express his love to his Wife,
are these, and such like.

1 By honoring her as his companion and yo^k-fellow, 1 Pet. 3. 7.
which the Apostle Peter expresses; for speaking of the Husbands duties, he
reckons this, of giving honor to the Wife. Genesis 2. 18.
The title given to the Wife by God himself, An help meet for her Husband,
implies a kind of fellowship with him. Genesis 2. 25.
And also the place whence the woman was taken, viz. his side, where his heart
lay, implies as much; for she is as the heart in the body, far more excellent
than any other member under the head, and almost equal to the head. It is
observable, that when the woman was made, she was not taken out of the man's
head, because she was not to rule over him; nor out of his feet, because she
was not to be subject to him as a slave, or servant; but out of his side, that
he might take her as his yoak-fellow and companion, which he ought to do,
considering they are joynt-partakers of many special prerogatives which are
common to both, being Ioynt-Parents of the same children, (...).
Ioynt-Governours of the same household, Ioynt-Partakers of the same goods (in
regard of the use of them) and Ioynt-Heirs of the grace of life, as the Apostle
Peter speaks. 1 Pet. 3. 7.


2 By delighting in her. This the Wiseman commends, in Prove. 5. 19. Let her
be as the loving Hind, and pleasant Roe, let her breasts satisfy thee at all
times, and be thou ravished always with her love, that is, be thou enamoured
with her, even to delight. Mark how the Lord terms the Wife of Ezekiel, Ezekiel.
24. 16.
The desire, or delight of his eyes, because he delighted in her, and she was
exceeding dear unto him. And truly, if a man exceed not the bounds of civility
and sobriety, his affection toward his Wife cannot be too great. Hiply thy
Wife is not so beautiful, nor so delightful in her self, as some other women
are. Yet as Parents love and delight in their children, not so much because
they are comely, witty, or the like, but because they are their children; So
thou ought to delight in thy Wife, not so much because she is beautiful,
wise, or the like; but because she is thy Wife, even the Wife which the Lord
has allotted unto thee, believing her to be the fittest Wife for thee, with
whom thou ought to rest satisfied.

3 By treating her mildly. The Husband must show himself mild and gentle in
all things toward his Wife. This mildness is urged by the Apostle under the
contrary Vice, Bitterness; for says he, Col. 3. 19.
Husbands love your Wives, and be not bitter against them. Where bitterness is
opposed to mildness, gentleness, familiarity, and the like. So that both the
speech and carriage of the Husband toward his Wife, must be with much
mildness and gentleness; If he instruct her, it must be with all meekness and
mildness; If he command any thing to be done, it should be by way of
entreating; he should not be too peremptory in commanding; If he reprove
her, Gal. 6. 1.
it must be with all mildness and meekness that may be. If a Brother is to be
restored with a spirit of meekness, as the Apostle speaks, how much more a
Wife? For this end a Husband must observe both his own present temper, and his
Wives, and forbear to reprove when himself or his Wife is in passion; for while
himself is in passion, he is unfit to reprove, because passion is apt to blind
reason, so as it knows not how to keep any mean or measure. And if she be in
passion, she is unfit to be reproved, because passion so fills the heart, that
it is not capable of any good advice. And as an Husband in reproving his Wife
should observe a fit time, so likewise a fit place, forbearing to do it
openly, before Children or Servants, but privately between her and himself; for
her honor and credit is to be maintained before Children and Servants, as much
as may be, because she is a Joynt-governour with him over them; now for her to
be checked and controlled before them, will make them despise her. Herein
therefore great wisdom is to be observed.

Qu. Whether an Husband may lawfully strike, or beat his Wife?

Ans. Though the Husband has some authority over his Wife, yet it does not
appear that he has any power or liberty thereupon to beat her.

1 For first, we find it neither commanded, nor commended to us in the
Scriptures, there being neither precept, nor president for the same.

2 What fruit can be expected from an Husbands beating of his Wife? but a
return of blows, and scratches, to the utmost of her strength. For this is
most certain, that if a man who has no authority over another, strike him, he
will turn against him, and do him all the mischief that he can. Now therefore
there being no ground to persuade Wives, that their Husbands have such
authority over them, as to strike them for their faults; what hope is there
that they will patiently bear it, and be bettered by it? or rather, is it not
more likely that they will not only rise against them, but if they can,
over-master their Husbands, and ever after cast off all subjection to them?

3 The near conjunction and communion that is between man and wife, will not
stand with such base and servile dealing, that the Husband should beat and
strike his Wife. This is the next way to have her despised of Children and
Servants, and so deprive her of all government.

4 Another particular wherein an Husband ought to express his love to his
Wife, 1 Pet. 3. 7
is, By a diligent endeavoring of her spiritual good. Hence the Husband is
commanded to dwell with his Wife as a man of knowledge; i. e. able and willing
to instruct her in the knowledge of the truth; 1 Cor. 14. 35.
wherefore else is she to ask him at-home? And how otherwise shall he be the
guide of her youth? Prove. 2. 17
if he be not able and willing to guide her feet in the way of peace. Luke 1. 79
But of this I spoke in the Common mutual Duties of Husband and Wife, set down
in the foregoing Chapter.

CHAP. XXV.
Of the Duties of Wives.
HAving showed the Duties of Husbands in reference to their Wives, I come now
to show the Duties of Wives toward their Husbands.

As the main duty on the Husbands part was love, so the main duty on the Wives
part is subjection; Ephesians. 5. 22
under which many particulars are comprised.

The subjection of the Wife to the Husband implies two things.

1 That she acknowledge a superiority in her Husband. 2 That she put in
practice such duties as do issue and flow from the acknowledgement of that
superiority.
I. The former is not only a duty, but the ground of all other duties
whatsoever; for till the Wife be fully satisfied about the superiority of her
Husband, no duty will be performed by her as it ought. Therefore Wives ought to
learn this point in the first place, viz. That their Husbands are their
superiors; which clearly appears,

1 By the order of Creation. The Man was first created, and thereupon had the
Birthright. Ius primog^^^turae.


2 By the institution of God, who said to the woman, Genesis 3. 16
Thy desire shall be subject to his, and he shall rule ^ver thee,

3 By the names and titles given in Scripture to the Husband, 1 Pet. 3. 6
which do imply a superiority in him, Prove. 2. 17
as Lord, Guide, Head, etc. 1 Cor. 11. 3
I grant indeed there is but a very little disparity, and small inequality
between Husband and Wife, being both governors of the same Family, Parents of
the same Children, 1 Pet. 3. 7
and heirs together of the grace of life, yet God having so expressly appointed
subjection on the Wives part, it ought to be acknowledged.

II. As the Wife ought to acknowledge and yield a superiority in her Husband,
so she ought to put in practice such duties as do issue and flow from the
acknowledgement thereof, which may be branched into three particulars.

1 Honor. This God requires of all inferiors toward their Superiors, Exodus
20. 12
in the fifth Commandment, and therefore is a duty incubent upon all Wives in
reference to their Husbands, who are their superiors, as being their Lords,
Guides, and Heads. This honor Wives ought to express,

1 By their inward esteem of their Husbands, accounting them worthy of honor
for their place sake, because they are their Husbands, whether they be richer,
or poorer; elder, or younger than selves.

2 By their outward respect, which they should manifest, both by their reverend
carriage, and speech, giving them such title; as signify superiority, and
savor of respect.

2 Another Branch of the Wives subjection, is Meekness; which she ought to
show,

1 In a quiet taking of reproof from her Husband. As it is the Husbands duty to
reprove his Wife upon just occasion, so it is her duty to take it with all
meekness, and mildness; and to endeavor to amend and reform what is justly
reproved. Yea, though the Husband should chance to reprove his Wife wrongfully
(as even the best and wisest sometimes may do) it will be a part of wisdom
in the wife, rather to take it meekly and patiently, than to break forth into
passionate expressions; yet in such a case she may clear her own innocence, and
show her Husbands mistake; but if he will not believe her, or turn away from
her, she ought to bear it with meekness and mildness.

2 In being willing to be advised by her Husband, and ready to follow his good
advice; yet (...) the Wife has a clearer sight, and sees better than her
Husband what God has commanded, though she may not usurp authority over her
Husband, 1 Timothy 2. 12
yet she may and must in all humility persuade and advise him to that which is
good. And happy is that Husband (if he can see his own happiness) in whose
bosom the Lord has laid so good a counselor.

3 Another Branch of the Wives subjection is, Obedience; and indeed this is
the principal part of that subjection which the Apostle requires of Wives to
their Husbands, Ephesians. 5. 22.
Wives submit your selves unto your own husbands. And the Apostle Peter
commands this duty unto Wives, 1 Pet. 3. 6
by the example of Sarah, who obeyed Abraham.

Now Sarahs obedience to Abraham was eminent in two things especially.

1 In doing what he required of her; for when on a sudden there came three men
to Abraham, Genesis 18. 6
and he was desirous to entertain them, he bid his Wife make such and such
provision with all possible speed, and accordingly she did.

2 In forbearing to do any thing without his consent. Though Sarah was highly
provoked by Hagar, who despised her Mistress, yet would she not deal roughly
with her, much less turn her out of doors, till she had her Husbands consent,
who said unto his wife, Do to thy Maid as it pleases thee. Genesis 16. 4, 6
In like manner, should Wives manifest their obedience to their Husbands.

1 In a ready and willing doing of what their Husbands require of them.

2 In a forbearing to do things which appertain to their Husbands authority,
without their particular, or at least general consent. When an Husband, from
the experience he has of his Wives wisdom and faithfulness, gives liberty
unto her to do what she pleases in the Household affairs, then the Wife may
do much without a particular consent from her Husband, but otherwise she shall
do well to forbear, unless upon good ground she is confident her Husband will
not dislike the doing of such a thing.

For the kind of obedience which the Wife is to yield to the Husband, Eph^s. 5
22
the Apostle sets it down in two expressions, As unto the Lord, Col. 3. 18
and in the Lord.

The former hints unto us, (...)
that the Wives obedience must be a conscientious obedience, that is, in
obedience to God, to his Ordinance and Commandment, who requires it of them;
so that it must be in conscience of the Ordinance of God, and in obedience to
his command; and thus will their obedience to their Husbands be an acceptable
service unto God. For as they releeve Christ in the Poor, Mat. 25. 40
who releeve them for Christ's sake, so those Wives obey God in their Husbands,
who obey them for Gods sake, I mean out of conscience to the ordinance and
command of God.

The latter expression, (...).
in the Lord, hints unto us, that the Wives obedience must be in all lawful
commands, not extending to any thing against the Will of God; so that if
Husbands command any thing against the revealed Will of God, their Wives are
not bound to obey them: for their Husbands power is subordinate to the Power of
God, and the subordinate power must ever yield to the supreme power. And
therefore if Wives shall out of respect to, or fear of their Husbands, yield
obedience to any unlawful command, doing that which is evil, their Husbands
command will be no good plea, much less sufficient excuse for them.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of the Duties of Parents.
HAving showed the Duties of Husbands and Wives, I come now to show the Duties
of Parents and Children.

The Duties of Parents in reference to their Children, are these.

I. To see that they be admitted into the Church by Baptism in conven^ (...),
i. e. within some few days after they are born. The Jew. Genesis 17. 12.
vere commanded to circumcize their children on the eighth day; But though
Baptism succeeded in the room of Circumcision, Col. 2. 11, 12.
as the Apostle hinteth; yet are not we now under the Gospel strictly tied to
that day; notwithstanding from that command of God to the Jews, we may
doubtless infer, that the Children of Christians may and ought to be baptized
within some few days after they are born.

II. To train them up in the fear and nurture of the Lord. This duty the
Apostle Paul in special presses upon Parents, Ye Parents, says he, Ephesians.
6. 4.
bring up your Children in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, q. ^. Let
your main care be, not how to make them rich, but religious, how to work the
sincere fear of God into their souls, that as God of his infinite goodness has
made them your children by natural Generation, so you should strive and
endeavor to make them his Children, by a godly and religious education. Austin
in his fifth Book of Confessions, Majori solicitud^ne me parturicbat spiritu,
quam carne, etc. Aug. Confess. lib. 5. cap. 9.
speaking of his Mother Monica, says, That she traveled with greater care,
and stronger pai^ for his spiritual birth, than for his natural birth. And
truly the like care and pains should be in all Paren^^ toward their Children.
Not thinking it sufficient that they have brought them up to some good Trade,
whereby they may live another day: But they must likewise bring them up in the
fear of God, teaching them so to serve him here, that they may live with him
eternally in the Heavens.

For your better help herein take these few Directions.

1 Instruct them in the Principles of Religion, by teaching them some good
Catechism, which should be frequently, if not daily performed, though but a
very little at once, to prevent wearisomeness in your children.

Q. How soon should we begin to teach our children?

A. When they are able to learn any thing that is evil, Prove. 4. 3, 4.
it is high time to teach them something that is good. Solomon says, when he
was young and tender, Prove. 31. 1, 2.
his Father taught him. And that his Mother did so too, you may read in the
last chapter of the Book of Proverbs.

2 Betimes instruct them in the practical part of Christianity, by calling upon
them frequently to read the Scriptures; daily to offer up a morning and an
evening Sacrifice of prayer and praise unto God; constantly to give thanks
before and after meals, carefully to avoid all known sins, and diligently to
perform every known duty, and that out of conscience. Genesis 18. 19.
This the Lord commended in Abraham, I know him, says God, that he will
command his children, and his household after him, to keep the way of the Lord,
to do justice and judgment.

3 Bring them with you to the House of God, so soon as they can remember any
thing which they hear. When Joshua read the words of the Law before the
Congregation of Israel, Josh. 8. 35.
it is expressly said, That the women and the little-ones were amongst the men.

4 Examine your children at home of what they have heard in the public
Congregation, and labor to make it more clear and plain to their understanding.

5 Be often speaking before them of the great things the Lord has done for
his Church and people, both of old, Josh. 4. 6.
and in your days. This the Lord commanded the Israelitish Parents to do to
their children, Psalm. 78. 4, 5, 6.
which we find accordingly practiced by them. As children generally have good
memories, so they are excellent at the remembering of stories.

6 Be patterns of piety and godl^ness unto your children. For the truth is,
there is great force in Examples to draw others either to good or evil. And it
is usually the disposition of Children to follow their Parents; And therefore
how does it concern Parents to look to their ways and courses, especially how
they behave themselves before their children, who are much inclined to follow
their example? Oh that all Parents would seriously think of this, that the
consideration hereof might reclaim them from all loose and wicked courses, lest
by their evil example they make their children twofold more the children of
Hell, than they were by nature!

7 Be sure you forget not daily to pray to God for them, especially that he
would indue them with his saving, sanctifying graces, that as they grow in
years, so they may grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ. And for your encouragement know, that children of many prayers
seldom miscarry. Parents are generally careful to lay up wealth and riches for
their children, oh that they would be as careful to lay up a stock of prayers
for them in Heaven, which will questionless prove their childrens best portion!

Oh that all Parents would thus endeavor to bring up their children in the
fear and nurture of the Lord, that as they were instruments to beget them in
the flesh, so they might be instruments to beget them in the Faith! which is
the main duty incumbent upon Parents in reference to their children.

III. Another duty is, To provide for the bodies of their children, as well as
for their souls. This the Apostle intimates, where he says, 1 Timothy 5. 8.
If any provide not for his own, and specially for those of his own house, Hac
part fidelis, si curam suorum nen habeat, infideli deter^or est; absolute
deteriorem esse, non est necesse. Estius.
he is worse than an Infidel, viz. in this point, because he by the light of
nature knows this to be a duty. And again says the Apostle, in 2 Cor. 12.
14. Children ought not to lay up for their Parents, but Parents for their
children; as God shall bless them. But yet beware of withholding thy hand from
works of charity, because of many children, nay rather, the more children thou
have, the more liberal thou ought to be, that so the Lord may double his
blessing upon thee and thine; for the seed of the merciful, says the Psalmist,
Psalm. 37. 26.
are blessed. And says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 9. 6.
He that sows bountifully, shall reap bountifully.

IV. It is the duty of Parents to rebuke their children when they do amiss,
whereby you may both free your selves from the guilt of your childrens sin* and
prevent much evil in your children. For questionless the want thereof is one
special cause of so much wickedness and profaneness in many children.

V. When reproof prevails not, you ought to correct them for their faults. This
duty the Scripture often presses upon Parents; Chasten thy Son while there is
hope, Prove. 19. 18.
and let not thy soul spare for his crying; or, as the Original properly
signifies, Let not thy soul spare to his destruction. Intimating, that the
Fathers sparing of his child, may tend to his destruction, or as we use to
say, bring him to the Gallows. So that too much lenity, may prove the greatest
cruelty in the issue. An Ancient Father in the Church relates a sad story of a
youth, Gregor. Dial. l. 4. cap. 18.
whose usual custom it was upon auy thing that crossed him, to curse and
blaspheme, and not being duly corrected for the same, he continued in that
wicked course to his dying-day; and as the story notes, the Devil was seen to
carry him away. But herein two extremes are carefully to be avoided, viz.
Lenity, and Severity. As Parents ought not to be too indulgent toward their
children, which was Elies fault for which, sore judgments befell both him and
his children: Ephesians. 6. 4.
So neither should they be too severe in correcting their children, Col. 3. 21.
as some are, having no respect either to the fault, Patres non oportet asperos
esse circa fi^ios. Cyp. Testim. l. 3. cap. 71.
age, or disposition of their children. Therefore the Apostle gives this
dehortation unto Parents, Not to provoke their children unto wrath.

VI. Another duty is, To bring up their children in some honest Calling, it
being the ordinary means, as to prevent idleness, which is the bane of youth,
so to enable them to live in the world, and to be serviceable to the Kingdom
wherein they live. In the choice of a Calling, respect should be had, as to the
childrens ability and fitness, so to their disposition and inclination,
carefully observing to what Callings they are most disposed.

VII. To provide fit Matches and Marriages for their children, It being the
means the Lord has sanctified for the keeping their bodies chaste and
undefiled. This the Lord gave in commandment to his people of old, by his
Prophet Jeremy, Jer. 29. 6.
saying, Take Wives to your Sons, and give your Daughters to Husbands. In the
choice of an Husband or Wife, the Parents ought to have greater respect to
piety and prudence, th^n to wealth and riches, for thereby shall they procure
much happiness to their children in their Marriages.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of Childrens Duties.
HAving showed the Duties of Parents toward their Children, I come now to show
the Duties of Children in reference to their Parents, which may be brought to
three heads, viz. 1 Obedience. 2 Honor. 3 Gratitude.

I. Obedience, This is often pressed in Scripture as the main and principal
duty of Children in reference toward their Parents. Their Obedience ought to
be expressed,

1 By a cheerful yielding to their Precepts and Commands, readily doing what
they require of them, and that for conscience sake, even to the command of God,
who requires this duty at their hands; for says the Apostle, Children obey
your Parents in all things, Col. 3. 20.
for this is well-pleasing to the Lord. And again, Children obey your Parents
in the Lord, Ephesians. 6. 1.
for this is right. In the former place, (...).
it is in all things. In the latter, it is in the Lord; whereby is implied,
that Childrens Obedience must be in all things honest and lawful, agreeable to
the Word of God; so that if their Parents should command them to do any thing
contrary to the Word of God, they must therein obey God, and not their Parents.
For children are no further bound to obey their earthly Parents, than may stand
with obedience to God their heavenly Father.

2 Children ought to express their obedience to their Parents, in harkening to
their good instructions. It being the duty of Parents to instruct their
children, it must needs be the duty of children to hearken unto, and to obey
their good instructions, which Solomon much presses upon children. Prev. 1. 8.
My Son, says he, hear the instruction of thy Father, and forsake not the Law
of thy Mother. Where he does not only command children to obey the wholesome
instructions of their Fathers, but does likewise infinuate, that they should
not slight and reject the advice of a Mother, because of the weakness of her
sex. As children ought to hearken to the good instruction of their Parents in
all things, so more especially in two things.

1 In the choice of their Callings. 2 In the choice of their Matches.
1 The former is commended in the Scripture by the approved practice of godly
children, Genesis 28. 2.
as of Jacob, Samuel, David, and others. And truly, 1 Samuel 1. 28.
in regard that Parents are the means of bringing up their children in the
world, 1 Samuel 17. 15.
till they are fit for Callings, and that not without much care and cost, is it
not most meet and just that their counsel and advice should be taken in the
choice of their Calling, and course of life? And as in their Callings, so
likewise in their Marriages, and not to marry without their consent, which the
very light of nature teaches, and God himself commands, when he lays a
charge upon Parents, Deuteronomy. 7. 3.
to give their Daughters to Husbands, and to take Wives for their Sons, which
does necessarily imply, Filli sine consensu parentum rite and jure nubere non
possunt. Tertul. ad uxor. lib. 2.
that children ought not to take unto themselves Wives or Husbands without,
especially against their Parents consent. Such Marriages have by the Fathers of
the Church been declared unlawful; yea and to be of no force till the Parents
do ratify them. And therefore such children as shall adventure to join
themselves in Marriage without their Parents consent, how can they expect a
blessing from God upon them? yea they have rather cause to fear the curse of
God upon them, and their posterity. How did the curse of God fall upon Esau,
and his posterity, because he married against the consent of his Parents,
taking unto himself Wives, Genesis 26. 34, 35.
which were a grief of mind unto Isaac and Rebeckah?

II. Another duty which children owe unto their Parents, is, Honor and
Reverence. This the Lord in express terms requires of all children in the
fifth Commandment, Exodus 20. 12.
Honor thy Father and thy Mother. This honor and reverence children must
manifest,

1 By their modest silence before their Parents, not forward to speak in their
presence without leave from them.

2 By their humble speeches, speaking unto them submissively and reverently,
giving them fitting titles, as Father, Sir, and the like.

3 By their respective carriage, which they should show by uncovering their
heads, bowing their body, standing up before them, with the like. Joseph,
though highly advanced, yet when he appeared before his Father with his two
Sons, Genesis 48. 12.
the text says, He bowed himself with his face to the earth. Yea though his
Father was blind through age, and therefore could not see what respect his Son
showed to him, yet notwithstanding he bowed to the very ground. And when
Solomon heard of the approach of his Mother, the Text says, 1 K^^g. 2. 19.
He rose from the Throne to meet her, and bowed himself unto her, and set her
at his right hand, and all this in token of his reverence, and to give good
example unto others.

III. Another duty which children owe to their Parents, is Gratitude, a
thankful requital of their love, and care, which the Apostle in express terms
requires of all children, 1 Timothy 5. 4.
namely, to requite their Parents, for that, says he, is good and acceptable
before God. This requital may and ought to be manifested seve^ral ways. As

1 By releeving them according to their need, if God give ability, Joseph's
practice herein is set before us as a Pattern, who being in prosperity, and his
Father in want, first sent him corn freely out of Egypt, Genesis 42, 25
and afterward sent for him into Egypt, and there furnished him plentifully
with corn, Genesis 45. 9
and all other needful things; insomuch that the text says, Genesis 47. 12
Joseph nourished his father and brethren, and all his fathers household with
bread; according to their families. And it is recorded of Ruth, that she did
not only glean for Naomi her Mother in Law, but having food given her by Boaz
servants for her refreshment, Ruth 2. 18
she reserved part thereof, and gave it to her mother. I have read of a
Daughter, whose Father being sentenced to be famished to death, Val^r. Mar.
and thereupon none being suffered to bring him Meat, she gave him suck with
her own breasts. How blameworthy then, yea and unnatural are such Children,
whose Parents being poor, and themselves able to releeve them, do
notwithstanding (...) them to want things needful? 1 John 3. 17
Saint John says, That the l^ve of God dwells not in him who shuts up his
bowels of comp^ssion from his brother. How then can it dwell in that Child, who
shuts up his bowels of compassion against his own Father or Mother? who
having not only a sufficiency, but also an affluency of worldly things, suffers
his Parents to want necessaries?

2 By loving their Parents. And truly that love which Parents bear unto their
Children, and have manifested by bringing them up in the world, should by the
law of equity stir up in Children a love to their Parents? for love deserves
love.

3 By concealing and covering their infirmities, which will evidence the truth
of their love to their Parents, and procure Gods blessing upon them. Genesis 9.
22, 23
Shem and Iaphet we read were blessed for this, because they would not behold
the nakedness of their Father, when being drunken he lay uncovered in his Tent;
and Cham, for discovering and making known his Fathers nakedness, was cursed of
God. As therefore Children would avoid Chams curse, let them carefully shun
Chams Sin, forbearing to blazen abroad their fathers infirmity.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Of the Duties of Masters.
THe last Head of Family relations is Master and Servants.

The Duties of Masters in reference to their Servants, may be brought under two
Heads.

1 Such as concern the Bodies of their Servants. 2 Such as concern the Souls of
their Servants.
The Duties of Masters, in reference to the Bodies of their Servants, are.

1 To provide fitting raiment for them, such as may fence them against the
extremity of the weather. I mean if by agreement they are bound to find them
apparel, as is the condition of most Apprentices.

2 To give them wholesome and sufficient food. As their food must be wholesome
for the preservation of their health, so sufficient for the increase of their
strength, that they may be the better enabled with cheerfulness to do their
Masters service. Prove. 31. 15
Solomon's Housewife among other things is commended for her giving meat to her
household, and a portion to her maidens. Whereby is meant a sufficient portion
and quantity of meat to her servants. Oh that all Huswives would imitate her
herein, and not pinch their Servants bellies, which too many do!

3 To afford them Physic when they are sick. For Masters are commanded to give
unto their servants that which is just and equal. Col. 4. 1.
And is it not just and equal that those servants who labor for their Masters
in the time of their health, should be cared for by their Masters in the time
of their sickness? Mat. 8. 6
The Centurions care for his sick Servant is left upon record for our
imitation, who used the best means he knew for his Servants recovery; which was
to go unto Christ. The humanity of this Centurion being a Gent^le, may be a
witness against the inhumanity of many Christians, who take little care for
their sick Servants.

4 Not to oppress them with labor, by over-working them, requiring more of
them than they are well able to perform. This would be cruelty in a man to his
Beast, much more in a Master to his Servant. Indeed the Egyptians dealt so
cruelly with the Israelites, that they groaned under their burdens, Exodus 3.
7, 8
whose groans ascended unto the ears of God, who thereupon came down to deliver
them from their bondage. And let Gods hearing the cry of those oppressed
Servants, and revenging them of their Oppressors, make all Masters beware of
laying heavy burdens upon their Servants, requiring more of them than they
are well able to perform, lest their groans ascend up unto God.

5 To pay them their wages when it is due, without delaying it, or defrauding
them of any part thereof. Deuteronomy. 24. 14
It is reckoned in Scripture as a crying Sin, Levit. 19. 13
to keep back and withold the Laborers, or Servants wages; Jam. 5. 4
a sin that cries unto God for vengeance, who is the Poors avenger; and as he
takes special notice of their wrongs and oppressions, so will he take care to
avenge the same.

II. The Duties of Masters in reference to the Souls of their Servants are,

1 To instruct and Catechize their Servants in the Principles of religion. For
if it be a duty incumbent upon all Masters of Families to provide for the
nourishment of the bodies of their Servants, how much more then should they be
careful for the nourish-of their souls? yea let all Masters of Families know,
that they are as expressly charged to teach and Catechize their Servants, as the
Minister is to instruct his Flock; Deuteronomy. 6. 7
witness Gods command to the Israelites, Thou shall talk of my Laws when thou
fittest in thine house, and when (...) walk by the way, and when thou lie
down, and when thou risest up. And God has manifested his approbation thereof,
Genesis 18. 12
by commending Abraham for his practice therein.

2 To cause the Scriptures to be frequently read in the Family. We read that
under the Law the people of Israel were commanded to cause the words of the
Lord to be written upon the Posts of their Houses, Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 9^
to the end they might be frequently read by every one in the House. And says
the Apostle Paul, Let the Word of Christ dwell in you. By the Word of Christ,
the Apostle means the Doctrine of the Gospel, Col. 3. 16
which was published by Christ, and is contained in the Old and New Testament.
Valt Doctrinam Evang^^^^ illis esse (...). Call. in loc.
Let this word, says the Apostle, dwell in you, i. e. be ye much employed in
the reading thereof, as in your Closets, so in your Families; or as Calvin
interprets it, Make the Word familiar to you, by giving it household
entertainment. But oh! what a stranger is the Word to most Families? how
seldom is it read amongst them? If that house be an Hell where the Scriptures
are not read, as Luther said, Oh how many houses are there as so many hells,
for want of reading the Scriptures?

3 To pray daily in and with their Family. To offer up a morning and an evening
Sacrifice of prayer and praises unto God in their Family. For the better
stirring you up to this much negle^ted duty of Family Prayer, I shall commend a
few Arguments.

1 Taken from the practice of the faithful in all ages. Genesis 12. 8. and 13. 4.
and 21. 33.
We read it was Abraham's practice wheresoever he came, to build an Altar to
God, where God should be called upon jointly by him and his family. We read
likewise it was Jobs practice, as you shall find, Job 1. 5. And Ioshuahs, as
appears by his protestation, as for me and my family, we will serve the Lord.
Josh. 24. 15.
In the New Testament it is recorded of Cornelius, Act. 10. ^.
That he was a devout wan, who feared God with all his house, and prayed to
God always; which implies he kept a constant course in prayer. Now these
things are recorded for our learning, that so we might write after their Copy,
by following their Example in so excellent a duty.

2 Every Master in his Family is both a King, a Prophet, and a Priest. He is a
King to govern his Family, a Prophet to teach and instruct his Family, and a
Priest to offer the sacrifice of prayer and thanksgiving, not only for himself,
but also for all those who are committed to his charge. Let therefore all
Masters of Families know, that it is their duty which God will require of them,
not only to pray by themselves (and yet I would to God all did but that) but
also to call together all their family, and to be their mouth unto God in
prayer, unto which they may be encouraged by Gods gracious promise, Mat. 18. ^0.
That where two or three are gathered together in Christ's name, there he will
be in the midst of them.

3 A Master of a Family by his daily offering up a morning and evening
Sacrifize of prayer and praise, will make his house an house of prayer, or
little Temple, which God will fill with his presence. Yea a Christians house is
hereby made Gods Church, by a constant performance of holy duties, which is a
great honor unto a family.

4 Family-prayers are a special means to bring down Gods blessing upon the
whole family, 2 Samuel 6. 11.
and upon all their lawful undertakings. As God blessed the house of Obed-Edom
for the Arks sake: So will God bless those families in which his name is called
upon; For godliness is profitable unto all things, as well in families, as in
any other societies.

5 Another Argument may be taken from the danger of neglecting this duty of
Family Prayer, for such do incur the danger of Gods wrath and fury. Jer. 10. 25.
Pour out thy fury upon the Heathen that know thee not, and upon the families
that call not upon thy Name, says the Prophet Jeremiah. Which words contain a
fearful imprecation against all prayerless-families. And it is observable, that
such as neglect this duty of prayer in their family, are joined with the
Heathen; and truly very fitly, for wherein do they differ from the Heathens,
who have not so much as a form of godliness in their families, upon whom God
will power out his fury? Oh think of this all ye who make no conscience of
praying daily with your families, consider it well, and lay it to heart! Are
ye not under that Prophetical curse, and liable to the pouring forth of Gods
wrath and fury, both upon your selves, and upon all that belong unto you? even
your Wives, your Children, your Servants, yea and very wares and goods? It may
well be written upon the doors of such houses, as one says, Lord have mercy on
us; for surely the plague of God is not far from them, but nigh unto them.

Obj. Me thinks I hear some saying, they are convinced of the necessity of the
duty, and fain they would do it, but oh they cannot, they know not how to pray.

Answ. I would advise such rather to read some good prayer, than altogether to
omit the duty; for many Masters of Families who are not able to conceive a
prayer of themselves, yet if they meet with a form of prayer answerable to
their occasions, can pray heartily and earnestly. Yet I would not have them
ever content themselves with reading a form of prayer, but to labor to pray of
themselves without a book. And for your help therein, take these two Directions.

1 Carefully observe the prayers of others, their order and method.

2 Take notice of your own sins in particular, and of your particular wants,
what graces you stand in need of, and desire. As also take notice of the
particular blessings God bestows on you, and thereby you will be enabled in
some measure to pray your selves, by confessing your sins unto God, and
begging, as the pardon of them in and through the merits of Jesus Christ, so
such graces as you stand in need of. And when once in any competent measure you
can pray for your selves, then by degrees you may come to pray with your Family.

CHAP. XXIX.
Of Servants Duties to their Masters.
HAving showed the Duties of Masters in reference to their Servants, Come we
now to the Duties of Servants in reference to their Masters; which may be
brought to three heads viz. 1 Obedience. 2 Diligence. 3 Faithfulness.

I. Obedience is that the Apostle St. Paul often presses upon Servants, Ephesians.
6. 5, 6.
as a main and principal duty. Col. 3. 22.
And indeed no inferiors are more bound to obedience than Servants. Your
Obedience must be manifested in two particulars.

1 In a ready yielding to your Masters commands. For indeed it is the proper
work of a Servant to hearken to his Masters Precepts, and to yield ready
obedience unto them.

2 In a patient bearing of reproofs and corrections, yea though the correction
be wrongfully inflicted, without just cause, which the Apostle Peter expressly
requires of Servants, for says he, Servants be subject to your Masters with
all fear, 1 Pet. 2. 18, 19, etc.
not only to the good and gentle, but also to the froward: For this is
thank-worthy, if a man for conscience toward God, endure grief, suffering
wrongfully. For what glory is it, if when ye be buffeted for your faults, ye
take it patiently? but if when ye do well, and suffer for it, ye take it
patiently, this is acceptable with God. And if unjust correction ought
patiently to be born, then much more unjust reproofs. But if the reproof or
correction be just, then you ought speedily to amend and reform the things for
which you are ^ustly reproved or corrected. For the Manner of Servants
Obedience, the Apostle sets it down in several expressions. As

1 It must be a sincere Obedience. This the Apostle Paul sets down with two
expressions in one verse. (...). Col. 3. 22.


1 Negatively, Not with eye-service. 2 Affirmatively, With singleness of heart.
Not with eye-service, which implies a mere outward service only, to satisfy
the eye of man, But with singleness of heart, q. d. Let not your Obedience be
hypocritical, merely to be seen of your Masters, but let it be in truth and
uprightness of heart, doing service to your Masters in the sincerity of your
hearts, without any hypocrisy or dissimulation, laboring in your Masters
absence as well as in his presence, remembering Gods eye is ever upon you.

2 Your obedience must be conscientious, for conscience sake, because the Lord
requires it at your hands; so much the Apostle expresses, Col. 3. 23
for speaking to Servants, he says, Whatsoever ye, do, do it heartily, as
to the Lord, q. d. whatsoever service ye do to your Masters, do it for the
Lords sake, because he has commanded it, and therefore do it out of
conscience to the Word, and command of God, who requires you to yield sincere
service and obedience to your Masters, for this will stir you up to do it
after the best manner you can, that so God may accept thereof, and reward you
for the same.

3 Your obedience must be cheerful. This the Apostle intimates, Collos. 3. 23.
where he says, Whatsoever ye do, do it heartily: i. e. whatsoever ye do
in the service of your Masters, (...).
do it from the heart, as it is in the Greek, that is, with good will, as the
Apostle in another place expounds himself, saying, Ephesians. 6. 7 (...).
With good will doing service; or us the Greek word properly signifies, with a
good and cheerful mind. So that Servants ought not to do their work
grudgingly, or discontentedly, as it were with an ill will, but cheerfully,
with a good will.

4 Your obedience must be universal unto every thing which they require of you;
(...). Col. 3. 22.
so much the Apostle expresses, Servants, says he, obey your Masters in all
things, i. e. not only in such things as seem easy, and most pleasing to your
fancy, but whatsoever they command you, being not contrary to the Word of God,
but are in themselves honest and lawful; for if they shall command you to lie,
swear, or to use false weights and measures, which are things forbidden by God,
you ought not therein to yield to their commands, but to say unto them, Joseph
servus est, fed pravis Domin^ suae cupiditatibus servire nescit. Gregor.
as Joseph did to his Mistress, How shall I do this great wickedness, and sin
against God? though he was a Servant to his Master, yet would he not be a
Servant to his Mistress lusts.

II. Another Duty incumbent upon Servants is, Diligence in dispatching their
Masters work and business, without loitering, or minding their own ease and
pleasure; but as their strength and time is their Masters, so they ought to put
forth their strength, and employ their whole time in their Masters service; I
say, their whole time, excepting some part thereof for their secret devotions,
especially their Morning and Evening Prayers unto God: for Servants must have
respect to their Master in Heaven, as well as to their Master on earth, and
make as much conscience of performing their duty to him, as to their Masters
according to the flesh; for indeed, the Lord is the best Master, who gives the
best wages, and largest rewards.

III. Another Duty is Faithfulness. Servants must show all faithfulness to
their Masters, Tit. 2. 10
as the Apostle expresses. Both that trust that is reposed in Servants, and
that account that is to be taken of them require faithfulness. Do you not
remember what the Lord said to his Steward, Give an account of thy stewardship?
Luke 16. 2 Mat. 25. 19
And were not all the servants to whom talents were committed called to an
account? How then does it concern all Servants to be faithful to their Masters,
which they ought to express both in their words and deeds.

1 In words, not daring to excuse any unwarrantable act with the telling of a
lie, which is to add sin unto sin; let all lying Servants consider the fearful
Judgment executed on Gehaz^, who when his Master asked him where he had been,
presently answered him with a lie, 2 King. 5. 25
saying, Thy servant went no whither; whereupon he went out of his presence a
Leper as white as snow.

2 In deeds, and that several ways.

1 Not disposing their Masters goods at their own pleasures, either to
themselves, by taking more than is allowed them, or to others, by giving any
part thereof away. Many Servants think they may lawfully give away Victuals,
and other things of their Masters to the Poor; but though they may inform their
Masters, or Mistresses, of such things in the house meet to be given away, and
likewise of persons fit to receive such alms; yet have they no power of
themselves to give away any thing of their Masters: and pretense of Charity is
no good excuse for Theft.

2 Not pilfering and purloyning their Masters goods to their own private use,
which the Apostle expressly condemns in Servants, Tit. 2. 10. Let all
pilfering Servants know, that there is a Book full of Curses and Plagues
against every one that steals, or swears, which Book is large, twenty
cubits long, and ten cub its broad, Zech. 5. 2, 3
and yet is filled with Curses that shall come swiftly upon them, as the
Prophet Zechary speaks.

3 But rather laboring to preserve, and increase their Masters estate by all
good and lawful means. Tit. 2. 10.
Thus the Apostle Paul expresses the duties of Servants, Not purloining, but
showing all good fidelity, viz. to their Masters, in increasing their estate,
which is highly commended in that faithful servant in the Parable, for which
he received from his Lord and Master, both a gracious approbation, in these
words, Well done good and faithful servant, thou have been faithful in a few
things, and also a plentiful remuneration, in the next words, I will make thee
Ruler over many things, enter thou into the joy of thy Lord. So that he that
is faithful in a little, takes the best course to become Ruler of much, if the
Lord see it good for him.

CHAP. XXX.
Of resting upon Christ alone for Life and for Salvation.
HAving in the foregoing Chapters given you several practical Directions for
your Christian Conversation in the world, showing you how to walk with God all
the day long, in your several Callings, Conditions, and Relations; I shall
close this Treatise with one general Caution, namely, That when you have in
some measure put in practice the foremetioned Rules and Directions, you would
beware of resting therein, and of looking for life and for salvation in and
through them. And truly, there is good reason for this Caution, because it is
natural for men out of Christ to seek for salvation by their own works, and to
rest on them, which is one of the most dangerous things in the world; For so
long as a man does so, he is incapable of Christ, as seeing no need he has
of a Savior. Romans 9. 32.
It is said of the Jews, that they lost salvation, because they sought it not
by Faith, i. e. by Faith in Christ's Righteousness, in what he had done and
suffered, but sought it by the own Righteousness, i. e. by resting in their own
works, which indeed is the highway to hell and destruction, as well as the way
of sin, though it be somewhat a cleaner way. For there is a double way to hell,
The way of Sin, and the way of Duty. The way of Sin is a filthy, dirty way,
whereas the way of Duty is a fairer, cleaner way; I mean Duties rested in are
the ready way to hell and destruction. Whereupon it was the counsel of Luther,
To take heed not only of our sins, but also of our duties, i. e. of resting in
them, and building our hope of salvation upon them. Therefore to take you off
from that, I shall commend to your serious consideration two fundamental
Principles, necessary to be known of all that will be saved.

1 That Jesus Christ is the only way and means of salvation.

2 That believing in Christ is the only means of partaking of him, and of
salvation by him. As there is no salvation but by Christ, so there is no having
Christ and salvation but by Faith.

1 The former is clear from many places of Scripture; as first from that known
place, Act. 4. 12.
Neither is there salvation in any other, etc. Here the Apostle plainly shows,
that there is no salvation but by Christ, for which he gives a sufficient
reason in the next words; For there is no name under Heaven given among men
whereby we must be saved; implying thereby, that if through Gods free Grace we
be saved, it must necessarily be in and by Jesus Christ. For it is not the name
of a man's own duties or righteousness whereby he can be saved, they are full
of infirmities and imperfections, whereupon the Church cries out, lsa. 64. 6.
All our righteousnesses are as filthy rags, i e. the best works of the best
men, performed after the best manner that they can, are as a menstruous cloth,
full of spots and stains, full of weaknesses and imperfections. Neither is it
the name of a man's graces, whereby he can be saved, for they likewise are
weak and imperfect, there being a mixture of sin, as in our best duties, so in
our best graces; a mixture of pride with our humility, of hypocrisy with our
sincerity, of unbeleef with our faith, etc. I grant indeed that Christians may
look to their graces as evidences of their part and interest in Jesus Christ,
and of salvation by him, but not as causes of their salvation. They may
likewise make use of duties as means to bring them unto Christ, but not to be
saved by them. Christ, and Christ alone, is the only cause and Author of their
salvation, and therefore he styles himself the way, the truth, and the life,
saying, Joh. 14, 6. (...), Via illa certissima, as B^za in loc.
I am the way, the truth, and the life, i. e. the true way to eternal life, the
only way by which we may certainly, and out of which it is impossible we
should ever attain unto eternal life and salvation. In which respect he is
often styled A SAVIOR. (...). Luke 2. 11. 2 Pet. 3. 18. (...).
Yea he is termed the Author of eternal salvation, Heb. 5. 9. The word in the
Greek properly signifies a cause, even the efficient cause of of our
salvation; and that he is both by purchase from his Father, and by conquest
over Satan, whose slaves and vassals all mankind were. Heb. 2. 10.
In this respect he is likewise called the Captain of our Salvation. Luke 2.
29.
Yea he is styled Salvation it self. (...).
And on this ground was the name Jesus given him, Mat. 1. 21.
Because it was he who should save his people from their sins. Mat. 7. 24.
And therefore as he is the wise builder, who built his house upon the Rock:
So he is the wise Christian, who builds his hope of salvation only upon this
Rock, the Lord Jesus Christ. And the truth is, all other things besides Jesus
Christ, will prove but rotten and sandy foundations to all those who shall
build their hope of salvation upon them. And yet how many foolish Christians be
there who build their hope of salvation upon other things besides Jesus Christ.
As

1 Some upon their freedom from scandalous sins, they are not so bad as other
men, and thereupon flatter themselves with a conceit of their good estate, yea
and hope of salvation; which was the deceit of the proud Pharisee, Luke 18. 11.
who thought himself a good man, because he was not so bad as others. Whereas
in truth it is not he who is not so bad as others, that has a well-grounded
hope of salvation, but he who goes wholly out of himself unto Christ, that
with a disclaiming of all Righteousness of his own, does place his whole
confidence upon the Righteousness of Jesus Christ, and the merits of his death
and passion, for life, and for salvation.

2 Others build their hope of salvation upon some good desires in their hearts
now and then by fits. But alas! they are much mistaken and deceived, who think
with a few good desires to break open the gates of Heaven. I grant indeed that
good desires in the soul, I mean, desires of grace and holiness, are a good
sign of some beginnings of grace, for it is grace to desire grace. But if you
rest contented with your desires after grace and goodness, and not go unto
Jesus Christ the fountain of all grace and goodness, you may lie down in
sorrow, and fall short of eternal life and salvation.

3 Others build their hope of salvation upon their bare outward profession of
Religion, they have been baptized, and profess the true Christian Faith, and
thereupon think themselves as good Christians as the best. Mat. 21. 19.
But as Christ cursed the Fig Tree which had leaves only, and no fruit; so will
he curse them who bear the leaves of Profession, but want the fruits of a
godly life and conversation. And it is like to fare with them, as it did with
the five foolish Virgins, who had their Lamps of Profession, as well as the
wise Virgins, but for want of oil in their Lamps, i. e. of grace in their
hearts, were shut out of the Bride-chamber, i. e. out of Heaven, which is the
Bride-chamber of Jesus Christ.

4 Others build and bottom their hope of salvation upon their civil
Righteousness, and moral honesty, their just and upright dealing with men, and
the like, when as many Heathen who had no knowledge of Jesus Christ, and so
fell short of Heaven, have gone further in Morality and Civil Righteousness
than these men.

5 Others build their hope of salvation upon their Religious Righteousness,
their frequent performance of holy and religious duties; they are frequent in
hearing, praying, reading, partaking of the Lords Supper, etc. and hereupon
flatter themselves with an hope of salvation: whereas their best services,
should they be weighed in the balance of the Sanctuary, would be found too
light, and insufficient to salvation, being full of weaknesses, infirmities,
and imperfections, for which the Lord might justly condemn them, should he
deal with them according to the rigor of his justice.

6 Others build their hope of salvation upon their sorrow and humiliation;
finding their hearts in some measure affected with grief and sorrow for their
sins, especially if they do but drop a few tears; oh then they flatter
themselves with an hope both of the pardon and forgiveness of their sins, and
of eternal life and salvation, which they ground upon that promise of our
Savior. Come unto me all ye that labor, Mat 11. 28.
and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Conceiving that Christ had
promised rest and peace, yea life and salvation unto all that found their
hearts affected with grief and sorrow for their sins, without any more ado*
whereas I conceive it is not so much a promise of rest and salvation unto
humbled souls, as an invitation unto such (because they are most apt to be
discouraged) to come unto Christ, from whom alone peace and comfort, rest and
salvation is to be had. Such therefore as having found their hearts affected
with grief and sorrow for their sins, do rest satisfied therewith, and seek not
out for Jesus Christ, they are like to sit down without Christ, and so fall
short both of true peace here, and of salvation hereafter.

7 Others bottom their hope of salvation upon their partial repentance; I mean
their leaving and forsaking some sins, when in the mean time they wittingly
live in the practice of other sins, which in truth is but a seigned and
hypocritical repentance, like that of Herod's, who upon John Baptists preaching
is said to leave many sins, but yet would by no means part with his Herodias,
his darling and beloved sin. Nay, though your repentance be true and full, yet
if you stay there, and not look beyond it unto Jesus Christ, you will fall
short of salvation.

8 Others bottom their hope of Salvation upon their Works of Charity, thinking
to purchase Heaven by their good Works, and so wholly exclude Christ's merits,
which they ground upon that sentence of Absolution pronounced by our Savior at
the Day of Judgment unto his Elect, Mat. 25. 34
wherein he gives Heaven to them who have expressed their charity to his poor
members, in feeding, clothing them, and the like; whereas our Savior
instanceth in these Works of Charity, as the fruits of their faith, whereby
they did evidence their faith to be a true and lively faith, which manifested
its life by those works of charity; so that works of charity in themselves can
be no good ground to bottom your salvation upon, but only faith in Jesus
Christ, which is ever accompanied with works of charity, if true and sound.

9 Others bottom their hope of Salvation upon the Mercy of God. They will
confess themselves to be poor, wretched, sinful Creatures, but they hope the
mercy of God will pardon their sins, and accept their poor services. Thus many
make the Mercy of God to eik out their own righteousness, and so both put
together they think will be a means of atonement and reconciliation with God,
yea and of obtaining eternal life and salvation. But such do wonderfully
mistake the proper work of Gods Mercy, which is not to eik out our
righteousness, but to show us our unrighteousness and misery, and then to show
us Jesus Christ, the perfection of his righteousness, the all sufficiency of
his Sacrifice, with his willingness to receive all poor Sinners that will come
unto him, and then to stir up our hearts to receive Jesus Christ as our
Priest, Prophet, and King, and to rest upon him for life and for salvation. And
thus might I go on, showing you the many false and rotten foundations upon
which the greatest part of men do build their hopes of Salvation; whereas in
truth Christ is the only true solid foundation, whereon we can safely build the
hope of our Salvation. 1 Cor. 3. 11
And therefore says the Apostle, Other foundation can no man lay, th^^ that is
laid, the Lord Jesus Christ; intimating Christ to be the only true foundation.
So that he is the wise Christian that builds his hope of salvation only upon
that rock the Lord Jesus Christ. And so I pass from the first fundamental
Principle to the second, namely,

II. That believing in Christ is the only means, as of partaking of Christ, so
of salvation by him. This was typified by the means of the Israelites cure of
the sting of the fiery Serpents, and that was by looking upon the brazen
Serpent; for as the Israelites by looking upon the brazen Serpent were
perfectly cured of the sting of the fiery Serpents: In like manner all poor
Sinners, sensible of the sting of Sin, by looking with the eye of faith upon
Jesus Christ lifted up upon the Cross, shall be perfectly cured of the sting of
their sins. This application of that Type our Savior himself makes, Joh. 3.
14, 15
for says he, As Moses lifted up the Serpent in the Wilderness, even so must
the Son of Man be lifted up, that whosoever believes in him should not perish,
but have everlasting life. So that believing in Jesus Christ is the only means
of partaking of Christ and of salvation by him,

What this faith is which makes us partakers of Christ, and of Salvation by
him, I have formerly showed, in the Directions for the worthy receiving of the
Lords Supper.

How should the consideration hereof stir you up, to labor above all things
to believe in Jesus Christ? that is, to go wholly out of your selves unto
Jesus Christ, and to receive him as he is offered in the Gospel. Mind this work
most of all, for it is the All in all to your Salvation; and yet how do the
greatest part of you mind your pleasures, and your profits more than this? Can
they give you an interest in Christ, or a right to Salvation? Why then should
your pleasures and your profits be so minded, and sought after by you? even
more than faith, which only can give you an interest in Christ, and a right
unto salvation in and through him. Surely it is a thing to be lamented, that men
should so much mind worldly things, and in the mean time forget spiritual
things; That they should be so politic for their bodies, and so foolish for
their souls; That they should with Martha, be so much troubled about earthly
things, and not with Mary, mind this one thing necessary; but resolve hence
forward to give no rest to your souls till you have attained to this saving
grace of faith.

The means God has sanctified thereunto may be brought to three Heads.

1 The removing of some lets and impediments. 2 The embracing of some truths. 3
The practicing of some Duties.
The lets and impediments are of two sorts.

1 Such as keep Natural men and women from believing in Jesus Christ. 2 Such as
keep off many a sincere brokenhearted Sinner.
I. The lets and impediments that keep off Natural men and women from believing
in Jesus Christ, are these, and such like.

1 A love of their lusts; For this men generally know, that as Dagon fell down
before the Ark: so their lusts must fall down before Jesus Christ; they know
that when Christ is received into the heart by faith, their lusts must be cast
out, for Christ will not be received into that heart which is full of base and
sinful lusts. Now men's lusts are dear unto them, and very unwilling they are to
part with them, they had as lieve part with Christ as part with their lusts.
Joh. 3. 19
This our Savior intimates, where he says, Light is come into the world, and
men love darkness rather than light; where by Light is meant principally Jesus
Christ with his Gospel, and by darkness men's lusts, which they prefer before
Jesus Christ, and will not part with them for the gaining of Christ, with all
the benefits of his Death and Passion. Oh that any man should be so sottish,
as to prefer a base sinful lust before Jesus Christ! Surely that man has a low
mean esteem of Christ, who thinks him not able to recompense the loss of a base
lust.

2 An overmuch love of the world and worldly things. The truth is, that soul
that is not in some measure divorsed from the world, cannot by faith embrace
the Lord Jesus Christ as her Husband. O therefore let it be your daily Prayer,
and earnest endeavor, to wean your hearts more and more from the love of these
earthly things, that ye may not love them so much, as thereby to be kept from
loving and embracing of Jesus Christ.

3 Spiritual Pride, grounded upon a man's over-valuing conceit of himself, and
of his own estate. How many are apt to think with the Church of Laodicea, that
they are rich and full, and have need of nothing; when in truth they are poor,
and blind, and naked, wretched, and miserable, being empty of all grace and
goodness? yea they are the more wretched and miserable, because they know not
their misery, and so see no need, no necessity they have of Jesus Christ; which
is the saddest condition in the world: for such are furthest off from going
unto Christ, and believing in him. He therefore that would embrace Jesus
Christ as his Savior, must come with an empty hand and heart, receiving him
with an empty hand of Faith, into an empty heart, emptied of all self, as self
righteousness, self-worthiness, self-goodness, etc.

II. The Lets and Impediments that keep off many a sincere, brokenhearted
sinner from clozing with Jesus Christ, and believing in him, are these, and
such like,

1 A deep apprehension of the number and heinousness of their sins; For the
removal of this, let such consider,

1 That the more and greater their sins are, the greater need they have to go
unto Jesus Christ, and to cast themselves, and the burden of their sins upon
him. For as the more sick any are in body, the more need they have of a
Physician: So the more sinful any souls are, the more sick of sin, the more
need they have to go unto Jesus Christ, who is the only Physician of the soul,
who both can and will heal all their sins, which are the spiritual diseases of
their souls, as readily as he healed bodily diseases, when he was upon the
earth, if they will go unto him.

2 Let such know and consider, that the apprehension of the number and
heinousness of their sins, should be so far from keeping them from going to
Christ, and receiving him, that it should be a forcible Argument to drive them
unto Christ, Mat. 9. 13.
seeing Christ professes* he came into the world to save sinners; where by
sinners are meant, such as are truly sensible of their sins. And thereupon all
such sinners are invited to come un^o him; Mat. 11. 28.
Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, viz. with the weight
and burden of your sins. And therefore the Apostle Paul averreth this truth
with a glorious preface; 1 Timothy 1. 15
This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, viz. That Jesus
Christ came into the world to save sinners, and that without exception of sins
or persons; yea that he came to save the chief of sinners. Why then should the
apprehension of thy sins keep thee off from going unto Christ, and resting upon
him for salvation? when as he came to save such sinners as thou art, nay
worser, even the chief of sinners.

2 A second Let and Impediment is, A doubting of Christ's willingness to receive
them, if they should go unto him. For the better convincing such of Christ's
willingness to receive and embrace all poor sinners, that will but go unto him,
and embrace him with the arms of their Faith, I shall lay down three grounds
thereof

1 The first is the several gracious invitations of Christ to poor sinners to
come unto him, as Isa. 55. 1. Mat. 11. 28. Ioh. 7. 37.

2 Christ's willingness appears, in that he has instituted and appointed his
Ministers, he has dispatched Ambassadors in his name to woo, instruct, and
beseech men to come in unto him, and to accept of that Reconciliation which he
has purchased by his blood. 2 Cor. 5. 20.


3 Christ's willingness does appear, in that he ^oth accept of the least and
lowest degree of Faith, and will not discourage the weakest soul that comes
unto him. Mat. 12. 20.
A bruised reed shall he not break, and smoking flax shall he not quench. As
by a bruised need is there meant a weak Christian, so by smoking flax, such an
one as has corruption mixed with grace. For the flax there mentioned is the
weick of a Candle, which if it smoke, gives but little light, and yields a
stinking savor. Though true believers by reason of the flesh in them may be
such, yet will not Christ quench that little light of Faith that is in them.

3 A third Let and Impediment, is a fear and jealousy that they are not
sufficiently humbled under the sense of their sins; and the rather, because
they do not find their hearts so broken, as the hearts of others have been.
For the removal of this, I desire such to take notice of these things.

1 That a man may be sufficiently humbled and broken for his sins, though not
so deeply as others; for true humiliation admits of degrees, and all Christians
have it not in a like measure. And therefore far be it from any to conclude
that they are not sufficiently humbled, because they have not attained to such
a measure and degree thereof, as some others have.

2 Though* thou art not so deeply humbled as some others have been, yet if thou
art so sensible of thy sins, and of thy misery thereby, that thou art truly
sensible of the need and necessity thou have of Jesus Christ, it is sufficient,
and thou may with boldness go unto Jesus Christ, roll thy self into his
bosom, and cast thy self into his arms. Though thou never knew what belongs
to the bitter throws, and stinging pangs which others feel in their new birth,
yet that work being done, for which deep humiliation is required (namely, to be
sensible of the need of Christ, and thereupon to long after him) thou may
be encouraged to go unto Jesus Christ, and to rest upon him, as for the pardon
of thy sins here, so for eternal life and salvation hereafter.

3 Know, that if thou be not at present so deeply humbled and broken for thy
sins, as thou would be, yet thou may be more humbled after thy believing
in Christ. For a Christians sorrow and humiliation for sin and misery is not
all at first, but often^imes it is more and greater after a clozing with Jesus
Christ, and a sensible feeling of Gods love, than it was before. Yea the le^s
humiliation before Faith in Jesus Christ, the more many times follows after.
And that is true humiliation, and Evangelical Repentance, which follows after
Faith.

4 Another Let and Impediment that keeps off many a sincere Christian from
going unto Christ, and clozing with him, is a fear and sealousie that their day
of grace is past; and that it is now too late, having so long stood out against
the tenders and offers of Jesus Christ. For the removal of this, I shall
propound four things to your serious consideration.

1 It is not for any man to say his day of grace is past, for that is one of
those secrets which belong only unto God to know. And we must not meddle with
Gods secrets, but check our selves for it.

2 If thou have stood out against Christ hitherto, thou have now therefore the
more reason to come in, and cloze with the tenders and offers of Jesus Christ.

3 If thou have an heart desirous to cloze with the tenders and offers of Jesus
Christ, it is certain thy day of grace is not yet past, Christ still knocks at
the door of thine heart, therefore now resolve to open unto him.

4 Consider, that Christ has several seasons of bringing men home to himself;
some he brings home to himself in the latter end of the day, who questionless
refused him in the former part thereof; and therefore so long as life lasts,
do not say it is too late, but stir up thy self to receive Jesus Christ as he
is offered in the Gospel, and to rest upon him, and his merits alone for life
and salvation.

Having thus showed you the Lets and Impediments to be removed,

II. I proceed now to the truths to be embraced, which are these,

1 That every man out of Christ is in a wretched miserable cond^tion, liable to
the wrath of God, to the curse of the Law, to all judgments and plagues here,
and to eternal death and condemnation hereafter, with the Devils and damned in
Hell flames. Yea every Christless man and woman hang over the very mouth of
Hell, by the rotten thread of their lives, which is ready every moment to crack,
and then what can be expected but an irrecoverable downfall into Hell.

2 That no man is able to help himself out of this wretched, miserable
condition, 2 Cor. 3. 5
for as the Apostle speaks, We are not sufficient of our selves, so much as
to think a good thought, much less can we do any thing of our selves to free
our selves from so great a bondage and slavery as sin has brought us into.

3 That God himself out of his free grace and rich mercy did send his own Son
out of his bosom into the world to take our Nature upon him, Gal. 4. 45
that therein he might redeem us out of our wretched, miserable condition.

4 That Christ is an all-sufficient Savior, who by his Death has made full
satisfaction to Gods Justice for all our sins, (...).
and therefore is able to save us to the uttermost, to the uttermost of our
sins, yea to the uttermost of our fears and doubts.

5 That Jesus Christ is willing to receive and embrace all poor sinners who
will but go unto him, Heb. 7. 25
and cast themselves, and the burden of their sins upon him; Isa. 55. 1
as appears by his manifold gracious invitations unto poor Sinners, Mat. 11. 28
who are but sensible of their sins, Joh. 7. 37
to come unto him. Rev. 22. 17


6 That there is no way or means of Salvation, but only by believing in Jesus
Christ; and believing is necessary to salvation in two respects.

1 As it is the Command of God, Necessitate praecepti.
that we should believe in the name of his Son Jesus Christ; as 1 Ioh. 3. 23.
This is his Commandment, that we should believe on the name of his Son Jesus
Christ.

2 As it is the condition or means that God has set down for the obtaining of
eternal life and salvation; Necessitate ^^edii.
as Ioh. 3. 16. For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son,
that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.
Hence it is that unbelief is made the only ground and reason of men's Damnation.
Joh. 3. 18, 36
Though men shall be punished for all other sins, yet not believing is the
ground and reason why they perish by their sins, because believing in Jesus
Christ is the only means of Salvation.

These are the Truths to be embraced.

III. Come we now to the Duties to be practiced.

1 Upon a serious apprehension of thy miserable condition without Christ,
labor to stir up in thy soul some affectionate, longing, restless desires
after the Lord Jesus Christ, that thou may in truth from thine heart, say, Oh
that Christ were mine! oh that upon any terms my Soul might enjoy him. This is
the lifting up of the doors and gates of the Soul, that so the King of glory
may enter in, and dwell there.

2 Being convinced that there is no way or means of Salvation, but only by
going out of thy self unto Jesus, and casting thy self upon him; Adventure thy
soul upon Christ, cast thy self into his arms, and be sure thou give not way to
carnal reasonings, to doubtings and temptations from the number and hainousness
of thy sins, or from thine unworthiness, but reason from the intent and
freeness of Gods offer of Christ, and from Christ's willingness to receive all
poor Sinners that will but adventure their souls upon him, saying with Job,
Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him, Est. 4. 16
Job 13, 15. and with Ester, I will go; if I perish, I perish; I will perish
trusting upon Jesus Christ.

3 Diligently frequent the public Ministry of the Word, Romans 10. 14, 17
it being the ordinary means God has sanctified for the working of faith in
our hearts, according to that of the Apostle, Faith comes by hearing, and
hearing by the Word of God. And the hearing of the Gospel, is called the
hearing of faith, Gal. 3. 2
because by hearing the Doctrine of Faith, the Spirit works the grace of faith
in our hearts. This is the still Voice in which he speaks to the hearts of
Sinners; and when God by his Spirit does begin to work upon thine heart in the
hearing of the Word, do thou second the work of Gods Spirit, by often meditating
thereon, and applying it unto thy self more and more. And whenever any sin is
pressed home upon thy Conscience by the Minister, and awakens thee, labor to
drive the nayl home to the head, strive to maintain the power of it upon thine
heart all the week after.

4 Be earnest with God in Prayer, that whatsoever he denies thee, he would not
deny thee the saving grace of faith; Ephesians. 2. 8
Faith is not of our selves, it is the free gift of God, as the Apostle
teaches us. Now the means God has sanctified for the obtaining of every good
gift, is Prayer; As therefore thou desire faith, earnestly beg it of God,
resting assured that he will not deny thee, if thou do from thy heart ask it
in the name of his Son Jesus Christ. Joh. 16. 23
Oh therefore be not wanting to thy self herein, but seeing faith may be had
for asking, ask and ask again; and with patience wait upon God for the
inclining thine heart to close with the tenders and offers of Jesus Christ.
Prescribe him not any time, for as he works on whom he pleases, so he
works when he pleases; Hab. 2. 3
and therefore though he tarry, wait; for God never failed any that continued
to wait on him, but at length he satisfied the longing desire of their souls.

FINIS.

