PAPISTS PROTESTING Against Protestant-Popery. IN Answer to a Discourse
Entitled, A Papist not Misrepresented by Protestants. BEING A VINDICATION Of
the Papist Mis -- represented and Represented, And the Reflections upon the
Answer.

LONDON, Printed by Hen. Hills, Printer to the King's most Excellent Majesty,
for his Household and Chapel. 1686.

PAPISTS PROTESTING AGAINST Protestant-Popery.
MY Replier begins with Complements; and I cannot but admire his art of weaving
raillery into them so neatly, that every Eye will not discern which is which.
But of all his Complements I take the Reply it self to be the greatest. Now in
good manners I should take my turn with my compliments: but am forced to drop
these, and stand upon my guard; for the Replier, while he Compliments me with
one hand, is giving me a box with the other; in his very next lines calling in
question my honesty, without any mincing it at all. In the Misrepresentation of
a Papist, he says, I have showed some Art, but very little Honesty. The Replier
said just before that he would compliment no more, and is as good as p. 1.
his word. As for me, I am much mistaken, if I find not upon occasion, more
vouchers for my honesty, then Art: If I did by chance stumble into it, 'twas
against my inclination, and I am sure I fell up-hill.

But he would have my Art lie in this; that whereas I was told in the Answer,
that some of those misrepresentations, which I had made of a Papist, and given
out for the Protestant Character of Popery, were my own ignorant, or childish,
or willful Mistakes, I craftily insinuate, that they grant all my
Mis-representations of a Papist, to be ignorant, childish, or willful Mistakes.
Which is in short the Answer gives some, and I take all. And yet those two
little words, upon which the whole Stress and Truth of his charge lie, are
neither in the Answer nor Reflections; but are providentially juggled in here
by himself, to give the Reader an early taste of his own Honesty, while he
challenges mine. The Answerer had said, must the Character now supposed to be
common to Protestants, p. 10.
be taken from his ignorant, etc. Mistakes? The Reflecter says, Because you say
my Character is made up of false apprehensions, ignorant, etc. Mistakes. What
difference is here in sense at all? And what difference even in words; save
that I add false apprehensions, which the Answerer likewise has in the very
next page? Neither of us mention all or some, which the Replyer, not without
reason, suspects of craft. As the Answerer thereof meant, I assure him, I
meant; the whole Character, if he meant so; and part only, if he meant no more:
Nor did I ever think of extending his Authority farther than he extended it
himself. If the Replyer find any Art in this, I for my part, find no
dishonesty; and think I have ill luck to fall into his bad opinion, for keeping
precisely to my Adversaries sense, and almost precisely to his words.

The Replyer comes after this with full Cry, and asks, what is the meaning of
all this pother and noise about this double Character of a Papist
Misrepresented p. 3.
and Represented? Truly I cannot tell, and think he would do well to ask those
who make it; for they in all likelihood know best. I for my part thought it a
very inoffensive thing, to let people know what Papists are, and pray God there
be not a fear they should appear what they are, least they be found to be
unlike what they are made appear. They have been cried out upon, for keeping
the people in Ignorance of their Doctrines; and when they expose them to open
view, it is strange there should be a noise about it. Truly I did not expect it,
and I could not imagine a bare Narrative of matter of Fact should fructify
into Answers, and Reflections, and Replies. I did but relate, playing the
Historian, not the Controvertist: Not but that, with the liberty of Historians,
who deliver their own judgment of the matters they relate, and their reasons
for it, I discovered what I thought, and sometimes said briefly why: But every
Body will see, I made not Disputing my business. And yet, I know not how, it is
taken it seems, for a piece of Controversy, and which is more unreasonable,
against the Church of England, and defenses made for her, as if my
Misrepresented Papist, were a Represented Church of England Protestant: Whenas
I never gave that Character out for a Church of England Character of Popery,
thought nothing of her Rule or Judgment, nor dreamt of concerning her, or any
Body in my Mis-representation, whose Conscience does not of it self concern
them. All those, who have such Idea's of us, as I there draw, I said
Mis-represent us; and to those who have not, I said nothing. He that would know
whether he be concerned or no, has but to ask his own Heart, to which I did
then, and do still leave him.

And yet notwithstanding this harmless justifying our selves, there is a pother
and noise it seems about the Papist Misrepresented and Represented, and it is
as fiercely assaulted on every side, as if it came to declare open war, and bid
defiance to the world. The Answerer set upon it in the Mis-repesenting part,
and will have that to be false apprehensions of the Author, to be taken from
his ignorant, Childish or Wilful mistakes: And then the Papist Represented he
endeavors to overthrow with whole vollies of Objections. Now comes the
Replier, and tho he makes it wonderful hard (p. 40.) to know what the Faith of
a Papist is; yet he acknowledges it in the same page to be true, as the
Representer has declared it, excepting some few points; and therefore passing
by the Papist Represented with some light touches only, his main attack is
against the Papist Misrepresented: and not being willing this should be
understood, as if made up of Childish, Ignorant or Wilful Mistakes, he will
have it to be the very avowed Doctrine p. 3.
and Practice of the Church of Rome. He will have the Papist Misrepresented
and Represented to be all the same, excepting some very few cases.

And this he has urged so far, that I think, it is not now so much my Personal
concern, to make an Answer, as the concern of as many as throughout the whole
World profess themselves Catholics, to consider the truth of what is here
charged against them. The Salvation of their Souls, their Eternity is at stake.
If what is here positively asserted against them be true, it is high time for
them to reform, and to leave off the Doctrine and Practice of so much
Heathenism, under a Christian Name. Protestants in hopes of a mutual
condescendence, may flatter them as they please, and tell them, they have
Charity enough to think they may be saved; for my part I declare, if Popery be
guilty of what he says, it cannot enter into my thoughts, there is any room for
it in Heaven: and that there is any more possibility of a passage for its
monstrous extravagancies through the Narrow way, then for those of Barbary and
Turkey. The Popery, this Author describes, seems to me a flat Contradiction to
the Commandments and the Gospel; and the Professors of it can have no other
portion then with Idolaters, Murderers and Adulterers, whose Eternity is to be
in utter darkness.

He declares plainly that Popery is really that Antichristian Religion, which
Protestants say it is; that it teaches and practices all those Fopperies,
Superstitions, and Nonsense, which have been at any time charged against it by
Protestants. His very Title of A Papist not Misrepresented by Protestants, is
a condemnation of the Religion to all those horrid shapes and monstrous forms,
it has been at any time exposed in by Members of the Reformation. He tells his
Reader in the name of all his Brethren, We charge them (the Papists) with
nothing, but what they expressly p. 4.
profess to believe, and what they practice: And in this one Assertion vouches
for the Truth of all that Infamy, and profaneness which is laid at their doors.
And so gives assurance, that their complaint of being Misrepresented is but
vain and idle; for that, what they call a Mis-representation, is in reality a
Representation in all the material Points, of the avowed Doctrine and Practice
of the Church of Rome. That the Papist p. 2. 3.
Represented (excepting some very few cases) professes to believe all that the
Papist Misrepresented is charged with. This the best and wisest Men, he says
(viz. of the Reformation) have believed of them. p. 2.
And in Fox's book of Martyrs we read how many were burnt for not believing, as
the Papist Misrepresented believes. This is the General Character of a Papist
according to the freshest and most Modern draught of our Adversary; So that now
to receive a true information of the Papist's Creed, we are not to consult the
Council of Trent, or the Catechism ad Parochos, but the writings and Sermons of
Protestants: For however Papists may not know what they believe themselves; yet
Protestants give a true and exact account of them, and are so far Infallible,
that the Papists certainly are, what they say they are; believe what they say
they believe, since they charge them with nothing, but what they expressly
profess to believe, and what they practice. Upon the assurance of this
Affidavit, methinks, 'twill not be amiss here to receive the satisfaction of
knowing, what a Papist really is, and what he certainly believes, beyond the
possibility of all exception. For since all that proceeds from a Popish hand of
this nature, is suspected and challenged, and the double Character of a Papist
Misrepresented and Represented (about which, as the Repliers says, there is so
much pother and noise) is questioned as to its Method, its Sincerity and
exactness, we will now follow our Authors call, and learn what Popery is, from the
Pens of Protestants: and especially from some of those, who are supposed to
know what Popery is; but for the bad man, which the Replier excepts against,
we will make no advantage of him, but let a better P. 3.
Man take his room.

What Papists are according to the Character given by the most Reverend Father
John sometime Lord Archbishop of York in his Book Written for the use of a
Lady, to preserve her from the danger of Popery, where he brings in a Papist
thus declaring the Belief and Doctrine of his Church.
WE must Believe the Church of Rome, whether it teach true or false.

If the Pope Believe there is no Life to come, we must Believe it as an Article
of our Faith.

We teach that the Gospel is but a Fable of Christ.

That the Pope can dispense against the New Testament, that he may check when
he pleases, the Epistles of St. Paul, and control any thing avouched by all
the Apostles.

That there is an eternal Gospel, to wit, that of the Holy Ghost, which puts
down Christ's.

That Christ is the Savior of Men only, but of no Women: For Women are saved
by St. Clare and Mother Jane.

That we put away Mortal sins, by becoming Franciscans, by a Bishops Pardon for
Forty days, and a Cardinals for a Hundred, and the Popes for Ever.

That to become a Monk or a Nun, is as good as the Sacrament of Baptism.

That Whoredom is allowed all the Year long, and another sin for June, July,
August, which you must not know: Allowed for this time by Sixtus Quartus to all
the Family of the Cardinals of St. Lucie.

That the Pope can make that Righteous, which is Unrighteous.

That the Bishop of Rome is a God.

That the Pope may dispense with all Duties, and that our Principles set Men
loose from all obligations in all relations whatsoever, between Magistrates and
Subjects, Lords and Tenants, Husbands and Wives, Parents and Children, Masters
and Servants, Buyers and Sellers.

That there is not any sin, but is or may be Indulged amongst us; and scarce a
known sin, but there is a known price for it, and at our Market-rate you may
commit them when you will.

What is the Belief and Doctrine of the Papists, as it is delivered by Tho.
Beard D.D. in his Book Entitled, Antichrist the Pope of Rome.
THey Believe that Saints departed ought to be Worshipped and invocated with
trust and confidence as God himself.

That the Pope can Canonize them to this Worship at his pleasure.

That Images are to be adored with the same degree of honor as is due to their
Patterns, contrary to an express precept of the Law.

That the Pardon of sins here in this Life, and deliverance out of Purgatory in
the Life to come, may be bought for Money, and where no Money there no remission.

They make their unwritten Traditions, not one, but the principal part of Gods
word

They place diverse counterfeit Books, disguised under the Name of some of the
Apostles, or their Disciples, full of Fables, Blasphemies, and Contrarieties,
and yet commend them to the World as parcels of the written word of God, and
Believe in them as Holy Scripture it self, as the Gospels of St. Nicodemus, of
St. Thomas, etc.

The Pope has set up a new God in the Church, namely a piece of Bread in the
Mass -- and to their Breaden God they ascribe power to forgive sins, to defend
from evil both Men and Beast, and to bring to Heaven -- when as in the mean
while most horrible Blasphemies against Christ himself are tolerated and
slighted over.

The Pope is above Angels and Magistrates, he exalts himself above all that
is called God, yea, above God himself.

They prefer their Saints before Christ: They rely more upon the mediation and
intercession of Saints, then upon the mediation of Christ.

They not only equal St. Francis and St. Dominick unto Christ, but in some
things prefer them before him.

They affirm that whoever dies in St. Francis's habit cannot be Damned, and
that it is as forcible for the remission of sins as the Sacrament of Baptism.

What the Papists are as Represented by Mr. Sutcliffe in his Survey of Popery.
THere is no point almost, wherein the Papist vary not from the ancient Church,
the Article concerning the holy Trinity only excepted.

They teach novelties and false Doctrines concerning the very grounds of Faith;
for they believe the Church to be built upon the Pope.

They speak what they can, in disgrace of the holy Scripture.

They give the Office of Christ's mediation to the Virgin Mary, to Angels and
to Saints, they make also Saints our Redeemers etc.

For God they Worship Creatures, not only giving divine honor to the
Sacrament, but also to Crucifixes and Images of the Trinity made of Wood etc.
and they do adore not only Saints, but rotten bones and rags, they know not of
whom.

They overthrow grace and ascribe the merit of our salvation, not to God's
mercy through Christ, nor to the merit of his passion, but properly to our own
works and merits.

They cut out the Second commandment, because it cannot stand with the Popish
worship of Images.

They pray before Stocks and Stones, nay they put their trust in them.

They make no conscience to cut Christian men's throats for not yielding to all
their abominations, and think it conscience to obey the Popes decrees, tho very
unlawful.

The Fourth commandment concerns the sanctifying the Sabbath, but the Papists
profane it by Worshipping Idols, and frequenting the Idolatrous Mass.

Papists think they do God good service when they murder true Christians.

Amongst Papists, Adultery and Fornication are reckoned among lesser sins.

By the Doctrine of Papists the Devils of Hell may be saved -- To this purpose
they say, that not only wicked and reprobate men, but also the Devils of Hell
may have true and justifying Faith.

Papists blasphemously make Christ not only a desperate Man without hope, but
also an infidel without Faith.

They deny Christ to be (...), and affirming that his divine Essence had a
beginning from some other, they fall within the Compass of the error of the
Tritheites; which Heresy does tear the Unity of the Godhead in pieces, and
plainly makes more Gods then one.

Papists do diminish the merit of Christ's satisfaction; and enervate, as much
as in them lies, the Cross of Christ, and the effect of his death and passion
-- They are teachers of Antichrist, opposite to Christ, and enemies of his
Cross.

That Christ is not the redeemer of all Mankind.

They make Christ inferior to Saints and Angels, and prefer the Pope before
Christ.

Papists make St. Francis and Dominick, equal to Christ in diverse things, and
in some things Superior.

They give equal honor to a Cross of Wood and Metal, and to Christ, and
looking on a Wooden crucifix they say, thou have redeemed us.

They suppose the Virgin Mary more merciful then Christ.

Papists account it a small sin to use common Women.

Papists believe diverse were by their Saints fetched out of Hell.

Papists by their irregular Doctrines and Traditions, have not only corrupted,
but also disanul'd, for the most part, the law of God.

They deny the Gospel to be a rule of perfection, but they doubt not to give
that honor to the rules of Bennet, etc. they speak more Blasphemously of the
Holy Scriptures, then the Turks or Saracens.

To the Images of the Cross and crucifix, they give as much honor as they do
to God.

They fall down like Beasts before the Pope, and Worship him as God, ascribing
to him most blasphemously the honor due to Christ.

Popery as a sink, has together with Heresy received into it self most gross
and Heathenish Idolatry.

Papists say they put no trust in Images, but never did the Gentiles trust so
much in the Images of Juno or Jupiter, as the Papists trust in the Images of
our Lady of Loretto, James of Compostella, etc.

They give divine honor to Images, which they themselves cannot deny to be
Idolatrous.

They ascribe man's justification to his Works, and exclude justification, both
by Christ's justice, and by Faith, etc.

The Papists teach their disciples to distrust Gods grace -- and to trust
rather in their own Works and Merits.

Popery is nothing else, but a pack of old and new Heresies.

Papists despise marriage as Pollutions and fleshly life.

Bennet, Dominick, Francis and other authors of feigned religions took not
their Rules from the Gospel, but thought they could frame a more perfect
religion then the Gospel.

As the Gentiles had one principal God, and diverse demi and inferior Gods, so
have the Papists.

As the Gentiles believed that every one had his good and bad Genius, so the
Papists assign to every Christian a good and bad Angel.

The second Council of Arles cap. 23. shows it to be a custom of Pagans, to
worship Trees or Stones, or Fountains, yet our English Papists cease not to go
on pilgrimage to St. Winifrides well, nor to worship Stock's and Stones.

The Romish Church consists of a pack of Infidels.

They forbid honest Wedlock.

The Papist Preachers seldom teach the people, and when they do it, they preach
their own inventions, and tell idle tales without edification.

Both Priests and People are most ignorant of Matters of Faith, where Popery is
profes'd.

The Scriptures and Fathers they read not.

In a member of the Catholic Church, (they say) neither inward Faith nor other
virtue is required, but only that he profess outwardly the Romish Religion, and
be subject to the Pope.

The Papists promise Heaven to their followers, so they profess and set forward
the Popes cause, whether they be Murderers of Kings, or Massacrers, or Robels,
or filthy Whoremongers, or Sodomites.

They make more conscience to abstain from flesh on Friday, then to murder
Christians.

Diverse points of Popish doctrine are specially said to proceed from the Devil.

It is a common practice amongst Papists to give divine Worship to dead men.

The Popish Church has no true Bishops.

The Pope is Antichrist.

The Popish Synagogue has no true Priests.

Popery in many points is more absurd and abominable, then the doctrine of
Mahomet.

Papists, that positively hold the heretical and false doctrines of the modern
Church of Rome, can not possibly be saved.

What Papists are according to the Book of Homilies.
IMages in Churches and Idolatry go always both together -- Images in Churches
have been, be, and ever will be none other but abominable Idols.

Oenomaus and Hesiod show that in their time, there were Thirty thousand Gods;
I think we had no fewer Saints to whom we gave the honor due to God, and they
have not only spoiled the true living God of his due honor in Temples, Cities,
etc. by such devices and inventions that the Gentile Idolaters have done before
them, but the Sea and Waters have as well special Saints with them, as they had
Gods with the Gentiles, etc.

Papists make of true Servants of God, false Gods, and attribute to them the
power and honor which is Gods, and due to him only.

Image maintainers have the same opinion of Saints, which the Gentiles had of
their false Gods.

Image maintainers Worship Stocks and Stones, they give also the honor due to
God to their Images, even as did the gentile Idolaters to their Idols.

Who can doubt but that our Image maintainers agreeing in all Idolatrous
opinions, agree also with them in committing most abominable Idolatry?

In many points our Image maintainers have exceeded the Gentile Idolaters in
all wickedness, foolishness, and madness, and if this be not sufficient to
prove them Image-Worshipers, that is to say, Idolaters, Lo you shall hear etc.

The Learned and Unlearned, Laity and Clergy, all Ages, Sects and Degrees of
Men, and Women, and Children of whole Christendom have been at once drowned in
abominable Idolatry, the space of Eight hundred years and more.

This is the Protestant Character of a Papist, and such as I always looked upon
no other, than of a Papist Misrepresented; and whoever will take the pains to
compare it, with what I set down under that Title, will find there is little
other difference between them, but that this is the Fouler. But now it seems it
must be no longer a Papist Misrepresented, but Represented, and it is what the
Best and Wisest Men have Believed of them. And here now what shall I p. 2.
say? Our Replier says, these are Great and Good Authorities, and we may well
suppose they knew what Popery was. And for my part because I love not
quarelling, I shall so far join with them; that if this be the Popery they have
hitherto prosecuted with so much Fervor and Zeal; if this be the Popery, from
whose infection they have so industriously Labored to deliver the Christian
World, they have done nothing but what is the duty of every true Believer. And
if 'twas for the not Embracing this Popery, those Martyrs Recorded by Fox
passed the Fiery Trial, their Cause was surely a Glorious Cause; and I question
not the Triumphs and Crowns of Glory that waited for them in Heaven, were not
inferior to what those enjoyed, who suffered under Decius or Dioclesian. And
for my part I am so far in earnest, had I a Thousand lives, I would rather
choose by the assistance of Heaven, to loose them all at the Stake, than in the
least assent to so much Heathenism, to so Foul and Monstrous a Religion. And
what need now of any longer disagreement? What necessity of keeping up Names of
Division? Protestant and Papist may now shake hands, and by one Subscription
close into a Body, and join in a fair and amicable correspondence. Popery has
been hitherto the only cause of Separation; one part seeming to avow and
support it, the other as Zealously endeavoring its overthrow. And all the
strife it seems has been about a Word. For now we have been informed from Great
and Good Authorities, what this Popery is; what Papist in the World is there,
that will not so far become Protestant, as to give his hand for the utter
suppressing this kind of Popery? And when Protestants and Papists concur for
the rooting out of Popery, what possibility of Farther Divisions?

But if on the other side, this Character of a Papist be intended, for the
setting forth the Doctrines and Practices of the Church of Rome; if this be
designed as a True Representation of the Faith and Religion of Roman
Catholics: Then returns afresh my complaint of their being Misrepresented;
that they suffer under the greatest injustice imaginable; that they are exposed
in Bears and Tigers Skins, so to become a Bugbear to the Multitude: That they
are malign'd and rendered odious for the maintaining such Doctrines, which they
as heartily Detest, as those that urge the charge; and that it is no wonder that
Papists are put in the List with Turks and Infidels, since their Religion is
thus injuriously loaded with Calumnies, and they made the Professors of such
Tenets, which bid open defiance to Truth, Honesty, and Christianity, which
strike at the Worlds Redeemer, and are impossible to be entertained by any
Creature, that is one degree above a Beast.

I will not deny, but whosoever will look into the Church of Rome, as the
Scavanger does into the City, who stops no where but at a Dunghill, may rake
together so much as to defame her with the Inconsiderate and Unwary; alas the
Vices of Men in her Communion, their abuses of the most Sacred things, too
abundantly furnish matter of this kind. But yet whosoever shall expose this for
the Doctrine and Practice of their Church, and describe her, and all in her
Communion by these Rubbish Collections, cannot possibly avoid the scandal of
being unjust, and might with as good reason decipher London by those loathsome
heaps where all her filth is emptied. And now since it is evident, the
Adversaries of the Church of Rome do generally thus deal by her, scraping out
of every corner of that vast Communion and in every Age, whatsoever can
possibly contribute to make her infamous; there is too too much reason to
complain of her being Misrepresented, and no just exception can be made
against the Character of the Papist Misrepresented, which lays open to the
World the Artifice of these unwarrantable proceedings.

But here now strikes in the Replyer, who undertakes to explain a Mystery in
this Character; and the Reflecter, he says, will have no reason to glory, that
he gave the occasion of it. And this Mystery it seems, P. 3.
are some faults he has discovered in the Mis-representation.

1st. He says such things are put into this Character of a Papist, as no Man in
his wits ever charged them with: And yet those very things almost in express
terms, and others far more absurd, we see charged (as is showed above) by the
Best and Wisest of Men, of great and good Authority with the Replyer, as he
confesses himself. (p. 2.) And this too is to me a Mystery as well as to him;
that what no Man in his wits ever urged, and what the former Answerer calls
Childish, and Ignorant, or Willful mistakes should be now seen Fathered upon
Men of so high a Character.

2ly. and 3ly. He complains, that the Opinions of Protestants, and the
consequences they draw from P. 4, 5.
Popish Doctrines, are put into the Character of a Papist Misrepresented, as
if they were his avowed Doctrine and Belief. This is a pretty speculative
quarrel, I confess, and might deservedly find room here, were it our business
to consider the due method of Mis-representation in the abstract: But as our
present concern stands, here is a quaint conceit lost, for coming in a wrong
place. For what had the Author of the Papist Misrepresented to do with these
Rules? He did not intend to Mis-represent any body. His Province was only to
draw forth the Character of a Papist, as it is commonly apprehended by the
Vulgar, or the Multitude, with the common prejudices and mistakes that
generally attend such a notion. Now I would fain know, whether this Character,
as it lies in the peoples heads, is distinguished into Antecedents and
Consequents: Whether they, when they hear one declaiming against Popery, for
committing Idolatry, as bad or worse than that of the grossest Heathens,
Worshipping Stocks and Stones for God, distinguish between the Doctrine of the
Papists, and these Interpretations and Consequences charged against it. Alas
they swallow all down greedily and in the lump; Antecedents and Consequents go
down with them all at once. Neither do I find much care used to prevent this
misunderstanding in the People. For who is there in laying open the folly, as
they will have it of the Papists, and positively charging them, that They make
Gods of Stocks and Stones, that They make Gods of dead Men, and raise the
Virgin Mary to be co-partner with Christ in Heaven, etc. Does afterward tell
his Auditory, that This is not what the Papists themselves Believe and Teach;
but only what himself Believes and Infers from their Doctrine, as the
Consequence or Interpretation of it, but they deny.

Truly were our Adversaries so sincere as to tell their hearers, that all their
charge against Popery is nothing more, than what they think of our Faith and
Doctrine; I would so far agree with the Replier, that this ought not be called
Mis-representing, but only saying of us, what is not true. But they go beyond
this, and instead of saying we think so, they positively say so it is: And
possess as many as take Ideas from their words, not barely that they think we
Teach and Practice Idolatry, v.g. but absolutely, that we do. Nay our
Image Worship, is Worshipping Stocks and Stones for Gods, says the Replier in
his very next leaf without remembering his thinking.

And when the People read Books, intended as preservatives against the danger
of Popery, they are still exposed to the like deceit. For what ordinary Reader
is there, that finds it positively asserted as above by the Archbishop of
York. Papists Believe the Church of Rome, whether it teach true or false. And
if the Pope Believes there is no Life to come, they must Believe it, as an
Article of their Faith. What ordinary Reader, I say, is there, that will not
swallow this presently as the Faith and Doctrine of the Papists; when at latter
end it is only what he thinks, and a Consequence far fetched to discredit Popery
with the Vulgar? And when he is told by another hand, that the Common Answer of
Catholics to excuse themselves from Idolatry in their adoration of the
Eucharist, is because they Believe the Bread to be God: Has not he here a fair
occasion again of taking this for the Belief of a Papist; and that he Worships,
what he Believes to be a Breaden God? Certainly he must be no small Logician
that can discover, whether this be an Antecedent or Consequent, whether it be
the Faith of the Papist, or only a Consequence of it. For my part, when I see
Popery described, as if none could be of that Communion, but he that can bring
his mind to Believe the Word of God to be writ but for a few Years only, and
afterward to be abrogated and annulled. That whatsoever God says, shall be
null and void, unless the Bishop of Rome, will and command the same. When I
hear that the Pope is Antichrist, and Rome the Whore of Babylon, that the
Papists have taken away from the People the Holy Communion, the Word of God,
the true Worship of the Deity, the right use of the Sacraments and Prayers, and
instead of them, have given to please them, Salt, water, Oil, Spittle, Bulls,
Jubilees, Indulgences, Crosses, Incense and an infinite number of mere Toys and
Baubles, and that in these they have placed all Religion; when I hear, I say,
Popery thus described to the People by eminent Apologizers for the Church of
England, I cannot conceive, but it is to let them know, what notion to frame of
it. And yet whosoever shall suppose, that after such directions, they will
conceive a regular Idea of it, without a confusion of Faith with its
Interpretations, of Doctrine with its charges, must conclude them to be better
at Separating than the Chemists, and that in subtle distinctions they are able
to outdo Aristotle himself. But it is too much to be feared, that those who
expose Popery to the People after this way, are not willing they should
apprehend it in its genuine Purity, and as free from this disingenuous mixture:
It Is so like those who impose upon the Multitude with artificial Monsters, by
putting the wrong end forward, and showing the Tail for the Head; that if they
are not deluded into a mistake, it is because they are not so credulous as they
should be, and suspect something of a Trick in him that makes the show.

And has not the Reflecter now reason to repent after all, that he gave
occasion to the Replier of explaining the Mysteries, he has discovered in the
Character of the Papist Misrepresented; since the faults he endeavors to lay
open, are not in the Mis-representation, but in those, who by Mis-representing
the Papist, raised a false Idea of Popery in the Peoples heads? The Character
of the Papist Misrepresented, was intended only, as the Author expresses
himself in his Introduction, for a Copy of Popery as Painted in the Imagination
of the Vulgar: And being conform to that, it is exact and perfect: And if there
be any faults in it, the blame must fall on those who drew the Original. But
however we will compound here again for this; if the Replier will but undertake to
undeceive the People, and give them a more exact Notion of Popery, the
Reflecter will undertake to reform the Character accordingly. But till then the
Character of the Papist Misrepresented stands good; and till the abused people
are taught to distinguish between Antecedents and Consequents, between the
Faith of Papists and the Consequences charged against it; the Character must
remain as it is; and any Reformation in it would but make it irregular, and
unlike that from whence it was taken. The Replier therefore might very well
have spared the almost Forty pages he has spent on this Subject; in which, tho
he has learnedly distinguished between matters of Dispute and of
Representation: Yet this distinction being not to be found in the Notion the
People have of Popery, it is nothing to our purpose. And the only end it can
possibly serve for, is to let the World understand, how much the Papists are
generally wronged in their reputation; whilst so many gross absurdities, which
are often positively exposed for Articles of their Faith, are here acknowledged
by the Replier himself, not to be their Faith, but only the Interpretations and
Consequential charges of their Adversaries.

These are the Mis-representing Arts and Faults he mentions. For the
Representing Faults he alleges. 1. That I deny the Belief of their
Interpretations. And the reason is, it may be, because he thinks, no body
charges us with that Belief: Which if it be but true, then I have not so much
as contradicted any body, and there is no fault, I hope, in that. 2. I
generally own the Doctrines and Practices, which they charge us with. And how
could this possibly be otherwise, if they charge us with none, but what we
expressly profess to own? 3. That in some cases I disown that to be the Doctrine
and Belief of our Church, which manifestly is so and has been proved on them.
Then for all his word to the contrary, we are in some cases charged with more
than we expressly profess to Believe. As for his manifestly, and his proving,
let that go for no more than what it is, his Opinion: It Is none of mine, and I
think 'twill be no bodies else, when the matter comes to a Trial.

And here now we must turn over so many Leaves, till we meet with some other
matter in the Reply. And the first that occurs, are some exceptions against the
Rule observed by the Representer in declaring the Faith of a Papist, who to
clear himself from the Scandal of Interpreting the Council of Trent by his own
private sense and opinion, alleges the Catechism ad Parochos, which he had
followed in delivering the sense of the Council. This the Replier could not
pass by without an Answer, and therefore gives a satisfactory one. And is he
sure, says he, that all his Representations are conformable to the sense of
this Catechism? May he not play tricks with the Catechism, and expound that by
a private Spirit, as well as the Council? Thus a Question or two is a full
Confutation of the Reflecter.

He alleged again the Bishop of Condom's Exposition of the Doctrine of the
Catholic Church, which being approved and attested by the Pope himself, by
several Cardinals and Bishops, brought along with it the Authority of the Sea
Apostolic. But this it seems, works nothing upon the Replier: Canus has put a
scruple in his head; and because he finds in this Author, that That is not to
be accounted the judgment of the Apostolic See, which is given only by the
Bishop of Rome privately, maliciously, (a word slipped over by the Replier) and
inconsiderately, or with the advice only of some few of his own mind; he cannot
therefore think, but that the Bishop of Condom's Exposition comes short of the
Authority of the Apostolic See; and that the Reflecter is out, in taking
shelter under one, whose Authority is nothing, as he says downright, page 46.

This is Answering I confess with a witness, thus to endeavor to overthrow so
considerable and Reverend an Authority, without any Authority at all, besides
that of an ungrounded and ill-turn'd consequence; viz. Because that is not to
be accounted the Judgment of the Apostolic See, which is given only by the
Pope, privately, maliciously, and inconsiderately, or with the advice only of
some few of his own mind; therefore this Learned Prelate's Exposition of the
Catholic Faith is to be thrown by, as of no Authority. So that our Replier,
has here concluded without any more ado, that the approbation of this Book was
only given privately, maliciously, inconsiderately, or else with the advice
only of some few of the Popes own mind, otherwise the Consequence will not
hold. But to show how little the Replier has weighed this matter, and with how
little pains he can undervalue any thing when he pleases: I need only remit the
Reader to the perusal of the Book it self, which is lately published in
English; the Advertisements affixt to it will satisfy him, that there has not
a Book appeared in this Age supported by greater Authority than This. He Will find
it examined with all due deliberation, approved with all solennity imaginable,
by Men of known Integrity, Piety and Learning, by Abbots, Cardinals, Bishops,
and by this present Pope himself, and recommended by his Holiness to be Read by
all the Faithful. He Will find it not only thus approved, but even twice Printed
at Rome it self, and in the Press of the Congregation de Propaganda Fide,
Translated out of the Original French, into diverse Languages, as Latin,
Italian, English, Irish, Flemish, High Dutch, and this done by eminent Men of
these Nations: So that besides the Attestations of those great Men there
specified, it may be said to have the General Approbation of all these
Catholic Prelates, who in proposing it to their Flock, sufficiently recommend
it for a True Exposition of the Doctrine of the Catholic Church. And yet
notwithstanding all this, with the Replier, it has not the Authority of the
Apostolic See; nay its Authority is just nothing.

Now methinks, I would willingly here know of the Replier, whether Those Great
and Good Authorities above mentioned, who pretend to make a Survey of the Faith
and Doctrines of Catholics, have better Authority and Grounds for what they
assert and charge, than this Reverend Prelate for the Exposition which he
gives. And whether it be not a great Mystery, that every Divine of the
Reformation shall be thought to have Authority sufficient, for defaming the
Church of Rome, with whatsoever extravagant Opinions he can but find in one or
two Writers of what condition soever: And yet a Catholic Prelate, Eminent in
the Church for his great Virtue and Learning, in expounding the Faith of his
Church, with the Consent, Approbation, and Authority of the Greatest Men of his
Communion, and even of his Supreme Pastor, shall be slighted, and thrown by as
of no Authority at all. For my part I cannot understand this uneven kind of
justice, and reasoning: Or why those who profess a Religion, and depend on it
as to their Salvation, shall be thought less to understand it, than others who
protest against it, and look no farther into it, than to render it Ridiculous.
But it must be so in an Age, in which a Papist is not to pass for a Christian,
and must not be believed; we will therefore go on to the other points.

And for the clearing the most material of them, we need not look beyond the
Exposition delivered by this Prelate.

1st. As to the Invocation of Saints he declares expressly, that They have no
other capacity of assisting us, but only by their Prayers. And tho the Replier
pretends, there is no such limitation found in this Author; yet methinks he
should not have been so popositive, in a case, in which he is so easily
disproved. The French Edition Printed at Paris 1681. has it expressly, page 32.
The First English Edition Printed likewise in Paris 1672. page 29. And now this
last Correct Edition, which came forth the last Week, page 9. So that, tho the
Answerer has made some little objection; yet the Representer is sufficiently
vindicated, in thus declaring the Faith of a Papist: since what he said, is
founded not upon his own private sense, but upon an Authority beyond all
exception, besides that of mere Cavil.

2ly. And 3ly. As to the Popes personal Infallibility, and the Deposing Power,
the Representer declared, that, tho there were Men of his Communion maintaining
these Points by way of Opinion, yet that they were no part of the Catholic
Faith; and that Papists had no obligation from their Church of assenting to
such Doctrines. And for thus delivering a matter of Fact, he has the Authority
again of this Great Prelate, who having declared the Primacy of St. Peter, and
acknowledged the same in his Successors in the Sea of Rome, immediately adds:
As for those things, which we know are disputed of in the Schools, tho the New
Edit. p. 50.
Ministers continually allege them to render this Power odious, it is not
necessary we speak of them here, seeing they are not Articles of the Catholic
Faith. It is sufficient we acknowledge a Head established by God to conduct his
whole Flock in his Paths, which those, who love Concord amongst Brethren, and
Ecclesiastical Unanimity, will most willingly acknowledge.

And is not this a sufficient discharge of the Representer from all the
exceptions of his Adversaries? For if this learned Author, having proposed the
Primacy of St. Peter's Chair to be acknowledged as the common Center of all
Catholic Union, does purposely wave all other Points relating to the Authority
of that Chair, as being no part of the Catholic Faith: And his Book in this
form is owned and approved by the Pope himself, by the most eminent of the
Cardinals, and other great Prelates of the Churh after a most strict
examination, what ground of quarrel with the Representer in his following this
so Authentic a Rule? 'Twas the main design of the Bishop of Condom in that
Treatise to separate the opinions of Divines and School Debates, from the
Doctrine of the Catholic Faith. And since he omitted to expound those Points
of the Popes Personal Infallibility and the Deposing Power as not belonging to
the Catholic Faith, with so full and Authentic an approbation, as has been
declared; where is the crime of the Representer in not allowing them a place in
that List?

And here I cannot but run the venture of another smile from the Replier, upon
the reinforcement of my former Proposal. I desired that the decision of the
quarrel with the Representer might depend upon the experiment of any ones being
judged capable of being received into the Catholic Church, upon his assenting
to matters of Faith, in that form as delivered by the Representer. The Replier,
having smiled first, thought it not fit to put it to that issue; but chose
rather to own that the Faith, as declared by the Representer, was really the
Faith of a Papist, excepting p. 40.
the Deposing Doctrine, and some other few Points. Here then let him make the
Proposed Trial, if he pleases, or any friend for him; and if, notwithstanding
his refusal to admit the Deposing Doctrine and the Popes Infallibility, but as
Stated by the Representer (that is, not as Articles of Catholic Faith) he be
not judged sufficiently qualified as to those points, to be received into the
Communion of the Roman Catholics, I will grant he has reason to charge the
Representer not to have done his part in those Particulars. This will be a much
shorter and surer Conviction then twenty Answers and Replies, fit only to cast
a mist before the Readers eyes, and which such a trial as this will quickly
dissipate.

And this now is all that is requisite for a full Vindication of the
Representer. For it being franckly owned by the Replier himself, that he has
made a p. 40.
true Representation of the Faith of a Papist; with the exception only of some
few Points. And it being here made evident, that what the Representer delivered
as to those very Points, is according to the sense of the Sea Apostolic, of
the greatest Prelates, nay, I may say of the whole Church: The Papist
Misrepresented and Represented, stands untouched. And all that has been said
against it, have been nothing more, then so many artificial endeavors to
persuade the World, that the Protestant understands better, what the Faith of a
Papist is, then the Papist does himself; which will be easily answered after
his manner, with a smile.

What the Replier adds after this, belongs not to the Representer, who being to
Represent, and not to Dispute, is not concerned with those tedious arguments;
however, not to be uncivil, we will go so far with him, tho it be out of our way.

1. He proves at large that all Definitions of Faith, declared in General
Councils are not concluded with Anathema's; and in this we willingly agree with
him: p. 51.
But this does not at all prove, that whatsoever is declared in such a Council
without an Anathema, is an Article of Faith; and therefore nothing against us
deserving any farther answer.

2. He endeavors to prove the Deposing Power not to be a matter of Discipline
and Government, but to p. 53.
be a Point of Doctrine, and this from a Principle lately published in the
vindication of Dr. Sherlock's Sermon, viz. that To decree what shall be done,
includs a virtual definition of that Doctrine on which that Decree is founded.
And this he says, as we have been lately told. But what respect can I possibly
have for what has been lately told us by another hand, since the Replier
himself, however he urges it in one page, plainly undervalues it and
contradicts it in his very next; where he tells us, that in the Council of p.
55.
the Apostles at Jerusalem there was a Decree of Manners, yet it contained no
Definition of Faith. And for my part I think the Replier in the right, and must
needs stand with him against the Vindicator of the Sermon; that to decree what
shall be done, does not include a virtual Definition of Doctrine. And the
example produced by the Replier evidently shows it: For tho the Apostles in
their Council (Acts 15.) decreed abstinence from blood and strangled meats: Yet
this Decree of what was to be done, did not include a virtual Definition of
that Doctrine, on which the Decree was founded: For if it had, then the
Doctrine of abstaining from blood and strangled meats, had been an Article of
Faith; which I am sure is not agreeable either to the Principles or Practices
of either of our Churches. And the reason of this may be, because Decrees of
what shall be done, are often made with relation to particular circumstances,
of time, persons, place, etc. and not built upon Definitions of Faith, but upon
Prudential Motives, upon Probable Opinions, upon the Testimonies and
Informations of Men; and so may be suspended or quite abrogated, as also
confirmed a new, or wholly changed, according to the alteration of
Circumstances: Nothing of all which can stand with Articles of Faith, which
being the indispensable Doctrine of Jesus Christ, are not subject to change or
alteration.

3. But suppose this Decree to be ranked only among the Decreta Morum, which
concern only the Discipline p. 54.
and Government of the Church, yet our Adversary here urges out of Canus and
Bellarmine, that General Councils cannot err even in such Decrees, when they
relate to things necessary to Salvation, and concern the whole Church. And when
the Replier has proved the Deposing Decree to be of this Nature, and esteemed
as such by our Church, he may then deserve a farther consideration.

What the Replier adds of this Subject (p. 57.) That the Pope permits the
positive Assertors of the no-Deposing Power to pass without any Censure of
Heresy, because he wants Power to do it, is spoke like an Oracle I confess;
but because these are ceased now a days, we may very well suspend our assent,
till we have some better Argument, than his bare assurance of what the Pope
would do if he had Power.

The Last Argument, is concerning the veneration p. 63.
of Images. And tho the Answerer was willing, without any more ado, to condemn
the Papists of Constructive Idolatry from some external Acts of Adoration used
before Images: Yet our Replier readily grants, that those Actions are in
themselves indifferent and capable of being paid to God and Men, and to be used
as the expressions either of a Civil or a Religious Honor. But he has given us
an infallible Mark, by which to distinguish between Civil and Religious Honor,
notwithstanding the very same External p. 66.
Actions being used in both; and it is, that Civil relates to this World, and
Religious to the Invisible Inhabitants of the next. This he says is a
distinction allowed by all the rest of Mankind; and though by all the rest he
seems willing to exclude me, yet since he has given his word for it, I Will come
in for one of that number, at lest so far as to suppose it. So that here we
have it now laid down as a Principle by common agreement, that External Actions
of Honor paid to things relating to this World, is a Civil Honor, Respect,
Veneration or Worship. And when they are paid to things relating to the
invisible Inhabitants of the next, it is a Religious Honor, Respect,
Veneration, or Worship. And hence it is concluded by him, that these External
Acts of Honor expressed to any Image, that has Relation to some Invisible
Being must of necessity be a Religious Honor. This is what the Replier proves,
and we at present agree to. But if he thinks, as he says, that this puts an end
to the Dispute, I think him mistaken, we being as yet only in the beginning.
For tho it hence follows that Papists give a Religious Honor to Holy Images,
yet till it be proved that all Religious Respect and Honor, is so a Divine
Honor, as to make a God of the thing to which it is paid, at lest
constructively; he has not concluded Papists to be Idolaters, or guilty of
constructive Idolatry; which is the thing he intended and undertook. And that
he cannot possibly prove it from these Principles, without proving too much,
and bringing himself in for a share, I think may easily be made appear.

For if Papists must be condemned of this constructive Idolatry, because they
use External Acts of Adoration to an Image, which has a Relation to some
invisible Being: must not all those come into the same List, who use the like
External Acts of Adoration to other things, which have a like Relation to the
same invisible Being? What excuse shall there be for him, who Bows to the
Altar, or Communion Table, to the Name of Jesus, etc. All these things Relate
to the invisible Inhabitants of the next World, and all External Acts expressed
to them must by consequence be a Religious Worship: then, in the words of our
Replier, If to Worship any Invisible Being, be to give Divine Honors to it;
then to be sure, to Worship the thing Relating to such an Invisible Being, must
be p. 67.
Religious Worship also. For if the Worship be referred to that Invisible Being,
which the thing relates to, it cannot be Civil but Religious Honor; and
whosoever gives Religious Honor to a thing, does immediately ascribe Divinity
to the object of that Worship, and in our Repliers Phrase, by construction of
Fact is an Idolater.

And now how many here are included in this consequence? Certainly as many as
admit of any Religious Respect besides to God: Which yet the Replier himself
was not unwilling (p. 60.) to give to Relics, allowing a due Veneration and
Religious Decency to the Bodies of Saints and Martyrs: And the Learned Dr.
Stillingfleet is well enough disposed to acknowledge Def. p. 862. 603.
a Reverence and Religious Respect due to Sacred Places and Things. So that I
believe the Replier has overshot himself in this Argument: And that upon
consideration, he will admit of some Degrees in Religious, as well as in Civil
Honor: And that every thing is not immediately set up for a God, which is
Honored with a Religious Respect, however this Honor may be ultimately
terminated in God.

And this thought now brings into my mind, a close piece of Arguing used by the
Replier, in urging this matter; and it lies thus: (p. 66.) Civil Respects are
confined to this World; But we have no intercourse with the other World, but
what is Religious: Therefore as the different kinds and degrees of Civil Honor
are distinguished by the sight of the Object, to which they are paid, tho the
External Acts are the same: So (says he) the most certain mark of distinction
between Civil and Religious Worship is this, that the one relates to this
World, the other to the invisible Inhabitants of the next. Here we have a
Consequence and a Comparison, and both so excellent in their kinds, that if any
better connection can be found in them, than betwixt the Monument and the
May Pole, it must be by one, who has found one trick more in Logic, then ever
Aristotle knew. If instead of his So in the end of his Conclusion, he had made
this application, So are the different kinds and degrees of Religious Honor
distinguished by the Intention of the Givers, or by some visible representation,
or determination of other circumstances. This might have been inferred with some
dependence on the Premises: And by it we might have compounded for the matter
in hand: but as the Replier has it, it neither proves, nor is any thing.

Another Argument we have just before this, which proves again too much, and is
so unlucky as not to harm us, without cutting the Throat of his own Cause: The
sorce of it may be thus expressed: No intention can alter the nature of
Actions, which are determined by a Divine or Humane Law; Therefore since the
External Acts of kneeling or bowing to or before an Image, are determinately
forbidden by the Divine Law, the intention of doing no evil in them, cannot
excuse them from Sin. For does not this as severely strike at the Bowing down
to the Altar, and Kneeling to the Sacrament as at us? For those very Actions
are part of the Divine Worship, and Bowing down is the very Idolatrous Action
exprefly forbid in the Commandment: And then, If there be any such thing, (as
the Replier says here) as External and Visible Idolatry, it must consist in
External and Visible Actions; for we can never know what Men's intentions are,
but by their Actions; and then (says he) if Men do such Actions as are
Idolatrous, how can the intention excuse them from Idolatry? So that by this
way of reasoning he can never throw us down, but we must fall both together.
For tho the Sacrament, or the Altar are not expressed in the Commandment; yet
since the External Action of Adoration is a Religious and Divine Worship
(according to the Repliers Principle before established) the Bowing down and
Kneeling to them cannot be excused from the guilt of Constructive Idolatry. And
whatsoever hole the Replier can possibly find, to get out at with his Altar,
the Representer will easily follow him at the same with his Image.

But that the Replier may see, how far his Argument concludes, I would fain
know whether a Quaker might not as reasonably make use of the same, for the
justifying his Yea's and his Nay's, and his other points of Quakerism? For if
he should say; No intention can alter the Nature of Actions, which are
determined by a Mat. 5. 24.
Divine or Humane Law: But Swear not at all, Neither Mat. 23. 10.
be ye called Masters, and let your Communication be Yea, Yea, Nay, Nay, are
Actions or things determined Mat. 5. 37.
by the Divine Law: Therefore the Intention of doing no Evil in them cannot
excuse the doing otherwise then is there determined, from the guilt of sin.
This has equal force from a Quaker as from a Replier, and makes evident, that
the same Arguments which persuade to a Reformation from Popery, do upon the
same grounds plead still for a farther Reformation.

Thus far have I followed the Replier beyond my business of Representing, and I
hope I have so far obliged him in it, that however he has Questioned my
Honesty, he will not at lest, now call me Uncivil. Before I take my leave, I
will be so free as to offer him a Request or two, which will not be thought
unreasonable, I hope, since he himself has put them into my Mouth.

1. That he will use his interest with Protestants, to hold to what he says
they do, and charge us with nothing, but what we expressly Profess to Believe
and Practice.

2. That they pick not up the Abuses of some, the Vices and Cruelties of
others, the odd Opinions of particular Authors, and hold these forth for the
Doctrine and Practice of our Church. And that in charging any Practices, they
charge them upon no more then are concerned.

3. That as often as they tell what they think of our Doctrines and Practices,
They would likewise at the same time inform their Hearers, that those Thoughts
are, as the Replier says, Opinions, Interpretations and Consequences, of their
own, concerning our Doctrine, and not our avowed Doctrine: But that we think as
ill of those Crimes which they charge, as they themselves do; and that We, our
Doctrine and Practices, are as free from them, as They think of their own; and
that in this consists the Difference betwixt us.

These are but very Reasonable Requests, I think, and what every Man may very
well expect from his Christian Neighbor; they being not so much Favors as
Duties: And what every one, who understands that Golden Rule, of Doing as they
would be done by, will comply with without long entreaties. This is desired by
those of the Reformation too, who require in their Synod of Dort, that None
judge of the Faith of their Churches, from Calumnies picked up here and there,
or passages of Particular Authors, which are often falsely cited, or wrested to
a sense contrary to their Intention: But from the Confessions of Faith of
Conel. Syn.
their Churches, and from the Declarataion of their Orthodox Doctrine
unanimously made in that Synod. And this is a caution of so great importance,
that where it is not observed, it is no wonder to see Men contending for the
Truth of Christianity, and to lose it amidst their Uncharitable Dissentions.

'Twas my intention not to increase, but to diminish these heats, and for this
end I put forth the double Character of a Papist Misrepresented and
Represented. 'Twas this was the design of the Bishop of Condom in his
Exposition of the Faith of the Catholic Church, and of the Clergy of France,
in the Acts of the General Assembly lately published. The method is
inoffensive, and free from provoking Reflections; and if by this I have let the
World know what our Church Believes and Teaches, it is what I intended: And as
for Disputing I leave that to such, who think it worth their while.

FINIS.

