Love given over: OR, A SATYR AGAINST THE Pride, Lust, and Inconstancy, etc. OF
WOMAN.

Amended by the AUTHOR.

LONDON, Printed for R. Bentley and J. Tonson. 1686.

TO THE READER.
THE Pious Endeavors of the Gown, have not proved more ineffectual toward
reclaiming the Errors of a vicious Age, than Satyr (the better way, though less
practiced) the amendment of Honesty, and good Manners among us. Nor is it a
wonder, when we consider that Women, (as if they had the ingredient of
Fallen-Angel in their composition) the more they are lashed, are but the more
hardened in Impenitence: and as Children in some violent Distemper, commonly
spit out those cherishing Cordials, which, if taken, might chase away the
Malady: So they (inspired as 'twere with a natural aversness to Virtue) despise
that wholesome Counsel, which is Religiously designed for their future good, and
happiness. Judge then, if Satyr ever had more need of a sharper sting than now:
when he can look out of his Cell on no side, but sees so many Objects beyond
the reach of indignation. Nor is it altogether unreasonable for me (while
others are lashing the Rebellious Times into Obedience) to have one fling at
Woman the Original of Mischief. I Am sensible I might as well expect to see
Truth and Honesty uppermost in the World, as think to be free from the
Bitterness of their Resentments: But I have no reason to b^ concerned at that;
since I Am certain my design's as far from offending the good, (if there are
any amongst 'em that can be said to be so) as those few that are good, would be
offended at their Reception into the Eternal Inhabitations of Peace, to be
Crowned there with the Sacred Reward of their Labors. As for those that are
ill, If it Gall them, it succeeds according to my wish; for I have no other
design but the amendment of Vice, which if I could but in the least accomplish,
I should be well pleased; and not without reason too; for it must needs be some
satisfaction to a young unskilful Archer, to hit the first Mark he ever aimed
at.

Love given over: OR, A SATYR AGAINST WOMAN.
AT length from Love's yile Slavery I am free,
And have regained my ancient Liberty:
I Have shook those Chains off which my bondage wrought,
Am free as Air, and unconfined as thought;
For faithless Sylvia I no more adore,
Kneel at her feet, and pray in vain no more;
No more my Verse shall, her fled worth proclaim,
And with soft praises celebrate her Name:
Her frowns do now no awful terrors bear;
Her Smiles no more can cure or cause despair
I Have banished her for ever from my Breast,
Banished the proud Invader of my rest;
Banished the Tyrant-Author of my woes,
That robbed my Soul of all its sweet repose:
Not all her treach rous Arts, bewitching Wiles,
Her Sighs, her Tears, nor her deluding Smiles,
Shall my eternal Resolution move,
Or make me talk* or think, or dream of Love.
The whining Curse I Have banished from my Mind,
And with it, all the thoughts of Womankind
Come then my Muse, and since the occasion's fair,
Against that Sex proclaim an endless War;
Which may renew as still my Verse is read,
And live, when I am mingled with the dead.
Woman! by Heavens the very Name's a Crime,
Enough to blast, and to debauch my Rhyme.
Sure Heaven it self (intranc't) like Adam lay,
Or else some banished Fiend usurped the sway
When Eve was formed; and with her, ushered in
Plagues, Woes, and Death, and a new World of Sin.
The fatal Rib was crooked and unev'n,
From whence they have their Crab-like Nature given;
Averse to all the Laws of Man, and Heaven.
O Lucifer, thy Regions had been thin,
Were It not for Woman's propagating Sin:
It Is they alone that all true Vices know;
And send such Throngs down to thy Courts below:
Nay there is hardly one among 'em all,
But Envies Eve the glory of the Fall:
Be cautious then, and guard your Empire well;
For should they once get power to rebel;
They Would surely raise a Civil-War in Hell,
Add to the pains you feel; and make you know,
We Are here above, as Cursed as you below.
But we may thank our selves; is there a Dog,
Who, when he may have freedom, wears the Clog?
But Man, vain Man, the more imprudent Beast,
Drags the dull weight when he may be releas't:
May such (and Ah! too many such we see)
While they live here, just only live, to be
The mark of Scorn; Contempt, and Infamy.
But if the Tide of Nature boisterous grow,
And would Rebelliously its Banks overflow,
Then choose a Wench, who (full of lewd desires)
Can meet your floods of Love with equal fires;
She only damns the Soul: but an ill Wife
Damns that, and with it all the Joys of Life:
And what vain Blockhead is so dull, but knows,
That of two Ills the least is to chose?
But now, since Woman's Lust I chance to name,
Woman's unbounded Lust I Will first proclaim:
And show that our lewd Age has brought to view,
What Sodom, when at worst, had blush't to do.
True, I confess that Rome's Emperial Whore,
(More Famed for Vice, than for the Crown she wore)
Into the public Stews (disguised) would thrust,
To quench the raging Fury of her Lust;
And by such Actions bravely got her Name,
Born up for ever on the Wings of Fame:
Yet this is poor, to what our Modern Age
Has hatched, brought forth, and acted on the Stage:
Which for the Sex's glory I Will rehearse;
And make that deathless, as that makes my Verse.
Who knew not (for to whom was she unknown)
Our late prodigious Bewley? (true, she is gone
To answer for the numerous Ills she is done;
For if there is no Hell for such as she,
Heaven is unjust, and that it cannot be.)
As Albions Isle fast rooted in the Main,
Does the rough Billows raging force disdain,
Which though they foam, and with loud terror rore,
Yet they can never reach beyond their shore.
So she with Lusts Enthusiastic Rage,
Sustained all the salt Stallions of the Age.
Whole Legions she encountered, Legions tired;
Insatiate yet, still fresh Supplies desired.
Illustrious Bawd! may thy name live, and be
Abhorred by all, as it is abhorred by me;
Thou foremost in the Race of Infamy!
But Bodies must decay; for it is too sure,
There Is nothing from the Jaws of Time secure.
Yet, when she found that she could do no more,
When all her Body was one putrid Sore,
Studded with Pox, and Ulcers quite all over;
Even then, by her delusive treacherous Wiles,
(For that is most specious still, which most beguiles)
Sh' enrolled more Females in the List of Whore,
Than all the Arts of man e're did before
Pressed with the Ponderous guilt, at length she fell,
And through the solid Center sunk to Hell:
The murmuring Fiends all hovered round about,
And in hoarse howls did the great Bawd salute;
Amazed to see a sordid lump of Clay,
Stained with more various bolder Crimes than they:
Nor were her torments less; for the dire Train,
Soon sent her howling through the rolling flame,
To the sad seat of everlasting pain.
Creswel, and Stratford, the same Path do tread,
In Sin's black Volume so profoundly read,
That whensoe're they die, we well may fear,
The very tincture of the Crimes they bear,
With strange infusion may inspire the dust,
And in the Grave commit true acts of Lust.
And now, if so much to the World's revealed,
Reflect on the vast Stores that lie concealed,
How, often into their Closets they retire,
Where flaming Dil -- does inflame desire,
And gentle Lap-d -- s feed the amorous fire.
How cursed is Man! when Brutes his Rivals prove,
Even in the sacred Business of his Love!
Unless Religion pious thoughts instill,
Show me the Woman that would not be ill,
If she conveniently could have her will.
And when the Mind's corrupt, we all well know,
The actions that proceed from't must be so.
Their guilt's as great who any ill would do,
As theirs who actually that ill pursue,
That they would have it so their Crime assures;
Thus, if they durst, most Women would be Whores.
That is (and it is what all men will allow)
There Is many would be so that yet seem virtuous now,
Forgive me Modesty, if I have been
In any thing I have mentioned here, Obscene;
Yet stay -- Why should I ask that Boon of thee,
When it is a doubt if such a thing there be?
For Woman, in whose Breasts you are said to reign,
And show the glorious Conquests thou do gain,
Despises thee, and only Courts the Name:
(Sounds, though we cannot see, yet we may hear,
And wonder at their ecchoing through die Air)
Thus, led by what delusive Fame imparts,
We think thy Throne's erected in their Hearts;
But we are deceived, as faith we ever were,
For if thou art, I Am sure thou art not there:
Nothing in those vile Mansions does reside,
But rank Ambition, Luxury, and Pride.
Pride is the Deity they most adore,
Hardly their own dear selves they cherish more:
Survey their very Looks, you will find it there;
How can you miss it when it is every where?
Some through all hunted Natures Secrets trace,
To fill the Furrows of a wrinkl'd Face;
And after all their toil (pray mark the Curse)
They Have only made that which was bad, much worse.
As some in striving to make ill Coin pass,
Have but the more discovered that 'twas Brass.
Nay those that are reputed to be fair,
And know how courted, how admired they are,
Who one would think God had formed so complete,
They had no need to make his Gifts a Cheat;
Yet they too in adulteration share,
And would in spite of Nature, be more fair.
Deluded Woman! tell me, where is the gain,
In spending Time upon a thing so vain?
Your precious Time, (O to your selves unkind!)
When it is uncertain you have an hour behind
Which you can call your own; For though you are Fair,
And beautiful as Guardian Angels are;
Adorned by Nature, fitted out by Art,
In all the Glories that delude the Heart:
Yet tell me, tell; have they the power to save?
Or can they privilege you from the Grave?
The Grave, which favors not the Rich or Fair;
Beauty with Beast lies undistinguished there.
But hold -- methinks I Am interrupted here,
By some vain Fop I neither Love nor Fear;
Who in these words his weakness does reveal,
And hurts that Wound which he should strive to heal.
Soft Sir, methinks you too inveterate grow;
And more your Envy, than Discretion show.
Who'd Blame the Sun because he shines so bright,
That we cannot gaze upon his daz'ling light,
When at the self-same time he cheers the Earth,
And gives the various Plants, and Blossoms birth?
How does the Winter look, that naked thing,
Compared to the Fresh Glories of the Spring?
Rivers adorn the Earth; the Fish, the Seas;
Flowers, and Grass the Meadows; Fruit, the Trees;
The Stars, the Fields of Air through which they ride;
And Woman all the works of God beside:
Yet base detracting Envy will not allow
They should adorn themselves; then pray, Sir, now
Produce some Reasons why you are so severe;
For, envious as you are, you know they are Fair.
And so were Sodom's Apples heretofore,
But they were still found rotten at the Core;
Nature without dispute made all things fair;
And dressed 'em in an unaffected Air:
The Earth, the Meadows, Rivers, every Flower,
Proclaim the skill of their great Maker's power;
But they, as they were made at first, remain,
And all their ancient Luster still retain.
Nothing but vain fantastic Woman's changed;
And through all Mischief's various Mazes ranged:
Yet that they are beautiful is not denied;
But tell me, are the Unhandsom free from pride?
No, no; the Strait, the Crooked, Ugly, Fair,
Have all, promiscuously, an equal share.
Thus, Sir, you see how they are estranged and strayed,
From what by Nature they at first were made.
Already many of their Crimes I Have named,
Yet that is untol'd for which they most are Famed:
A sin (tall as the Pyramids of old)
From whose aspiring top we may behold
Enough to damn a World! -- what should it be,
But (Curse upon the name!) Inconstancy?
O tell me, does the World those Men contain
(For I have looked for such, but looked in vain)
Who never were drawn into that fatal Snare?
Fatal I call it, for he is cursed that is there.
Inspired then by my Fellow Sufferers wrongs,
And glad I am, the Task to me belongs;
I Will bring the Fiend unmask't to humane sight,
Though hid in the black Womb of deepest Night.
No more the Wind, the faithless Wind, shall be
A Simile for their Inconstancy,
For that sometimes is fixed; but Woman's Mind
Is never fixed, or to one Point inclined:
Less fixed than in a Storm the Billows are,
Or trembling Leaves the Aspen-Tree does bear,
Which never stand still, but (every way inclined)
Turn twenty times with the least breath of Wind
Less fixed than wanton Swallows while they play
In the Sunbeams, to welcome in the Day:
Now yonder, now they are here, as soon are there,
In no place long, and yet are every where.
Like a tossed Ship their Passions fall and rise,
One while you would think it touched the very Skies,
When straight upon the Sand it grovling lies.
Even she her self, Sylvia, the loved and fair,
Whose one kind look could save me from despair;
She, she whose Smiles I valued at that rate,
To enjoy them I scorned the frowns of Fate;
Even she her self, (but Ah! I Am loath to tell,
Or blame the Crimes of one I loved so well;
But it must out) even she, swift as the Wind,
Swift as the airy motions of the Mind,
At once proved false, and perjured, and unkind.
Here they to day invoke the Powers above,
As Witnesses to their Immortal Love;
When (lo!) away the airy Fantom flies,
And e're it can be said to live, it dies:
Thus all Religious Vows, and Oaths they break,
With the same ease and freedom as they speak.
Nor is that sacred Idol, Marriage, free,
Marriage! which musty Drones affirm to be
The tie of Souls, as well as Bodies! nay,
The Spring that does through unseen Pipes convey
Fresh sweets to Life, and drives the bitter dregs away!
The Sacred Flame, the Guardian Pile of Fire,
That guides our steps to peace! nor does expire,
Till it has left us nothing to desire!
Even thus adorned, the Idol is not free
From the swift turns of their Inconstancy.
Witness the Ephesian Matron --
Who to the Grave with her dead Husband went,
And closed her self up in his Monument;
Where on cold Marble she lamenting lay,
In sighs, she spent the Night; in Tears, the Day,
And seemed to have no use of Life, but mourn it all away.
The wondering World extolled her faithful Mind,
Extolled her as the best of Womankind:
But see the World's mistake; and with it, see
The strange effect of wild Inconstancy!
For she her self, even in that sacred Room,
With one brisk, vigorous Onset was overcome,
And made a Brothel of her Husband's Tomb:
Whose pale Ghost trembled in its Sacred Shroud,
Wondering that Heaven the Impious Act allowed:
Horror in Robes of Darkness stalkt around;
And through the frighted Tomb did Groans resound:
The very Marbles wept, the Furies howled,
And in hoarse Murmurs their amazement told.
All this shook not the dictates of her Mind,
But with a boldness, suited to her kind,
She made her Husband's Ghost, (in Death, a Slave!)
Her necessary Pimp even in his Grave!
What need I fetch these Instances from old?
There now live those that are as bad, and bold,
Of Quality too, Young, Vigorous, Lustful, Fair;
But for their Husbands sakes their Names I spair.
Are these (ye Gods) the Virtues of a Wife?
The Peace that Crowns a Matrimonial Life?
Is this the Sacred Prize for which we fight,
And hazard Life and Honor with delight?
Bliss of the Day? and Rapture of the Night?
The Reins, that guide us in our wild Careers?
And the Supporter of our feeble Years?
No, no, it is Contradiction; rather far
They are the cause of all our Bosom-war;
The very Source, and Fountain of our Woe,
From whence Despair, and Doubt for ever flow:
The Gall, that mingles, with our best delight;
Rank to the Taste, and nauseous to the Sight:
A Days, the weight of Care that clogs the Breast,
At Night the Hagg that does disturb our rest,
Our mortal Sickness in the midst of Health;
Chains in our Freedom; Poverty in Wealth:
The Eternal Pestilence, and Plague of Life;
The Original, and Spring of all our Strife;
These rather are the Virtues of a clamorous Wife!
O why, ye awful Powers, why was it your Will
To mix our solid Good with so much Ill?
But you foresaw our Crimes would soar too high,
And so made them your Vengeance to supply:
For not the wild destructive waste of War,
Nor all the endless Lab'rinths of the Bar,
Famine, Revenge, perpetual loss of Health,
No, nor that grinning Fiend, Despair it self,
When it insults with most tyrannick sway,
Can plague or torture man so much as they.
But hold -- don't let me blame the Powers Divine;
Or at the wondrous Works they made, repine.
All first was good, formed by the unerring Will,
Though much has since degenerated to ill:
Even Woman was (say they) made chaste and good;
But Ah! not long in that blessed State she stood:
Swift as a Meteor glides through air she fell,
And showed, to love that Sex too much, is one sure way to Hell.
But stop my Pen; for who can comprehend,
Or trace those Crimes which never can have an end?
The Sun, the Moon, the Stars that gild the Sky,
The World, and all its glories too must dye,
And in one universal Ruin lie:
But they even Immortality will gain,
And live -- but must for ever live in pain;
For ever live, damned to eternal Night,
And never more review the Sacred Light.
Beware then, dull deluded Man, beware;
And let not vicious Women be the Snare,
To make you the Companions with 'em there:
Scorn their vain Smiles, their little Arts despise,
And your Content at that just value prize,
As not to let those ravenous Thieves of Prey
Rifle, and bear the sacred Guest away;
It Is they, it is they that rob us of that Gem;
How could we lose it were it not for them?
Avoid 'em then, with all the gaudy Arts,
They daily practice to amuse our Hearts;
Avoid 'em, as you would avoid their Crimes,
Or the mad Follies that infest the Times.
But now, should some (for doubtless we may find
Many a stupid Ass among Mankind,)
Should such contemn the wholesome Rules I give,
And in contempt of what I Have spoke, still live
Like base soul'd Slaves, and Fetters choose to wear,
When they may be as unconfined as Air,
Or the winged Race that do inhabit there;
May all the Plagues an ill Wife can invent,
Pursue 'em with eternal Punishment:
May they -- but stay, my Curses I forestall;
For in that Curse I Have comprehended all --
But say, Sir, if some Pilot on the Main
Should be so mad, so resolutely vain,
To steer his Bark upon that fatal Shore,
Where he has seen ten thousand wrack't before,
Though he should perish there; say, would you not
Bestow a Curse on the Notorious Sot?
Trust me, the Man's as much to blame as he,
Who ventures his frail Bark out wilfully,
On the Wild, Rocky, Matrimonial Sea;
When round about, and just before his Eyes,
Such a destructive waste of fatal Ruin lies.
FINIS.

