THE COURT OF THE GENTILES: OR, A Discourse touching the Original of HUMAN
LITERATURE, both Philologie, and Philosophy, from the SCRIPTURES, and JEWISH
CHURCH: In order to a Demonstration, OF 1. The Perfection of Gods Word, and
Church Light. 2. The Imperfection of Natures Light, and mischief of Vain
Philosophy. 3. The right Use of Human Learning, and especially sound
Philosophy.


PART II. Of Philosophy.

By THEOPH. GALE, M. A. late Fellow of Magd. Coll. Oxon.

(...) (Philosophis Ethnicis) (...).

Orig. cont. Cells. lib. 6. Philosophia Mosaica omni Sapientia Vetustior. Aug.
Steuch. Eugub. de Peren. Phil. lib. 7. cap. 11. Eam ( Christianam intelligit)
veram, perfectamque probari Philosophiam, quae supra caeteras omnes ostendit
Deum; clariusque Principia, Causasque omnes ad hunc suum revocat Fontem.

Idem l. 10. c. 9. OXFORD: Printed by WILL: HALL, for THO: GILBERT. 1670

THE PREFACE.
Philosophy was in its first descent, a generous, Noble thing, a
Virgin-beautie, a pure Light, born of the Father of Lights, in whose Light
alone we can see light. But, alas! how soon did she lose her original
Virginity, and primitive purity? how soon was she, of an Angel of Light,
transformed into a child of darkness? Adam no sooner fell, but Philosophy
fell with him, and became a common Strumpet, for carnal Reason to commit folly
with. And oh! how have the lascivious Wits, of lapsed humane nature, ever since
gone a Whoring after vain Philosophy? But such was the infinite Benignity,
and Condescension of Sovereign Light, and Love, as that he vouchsafed to
Irradiate a spot of the lapsed world, even his Holy Land, and Elect Seed, with
fresh, and glorious rays of the Light of Life, conveyed in, and by Sacred
Revelations. And oh! how beautiful, how ravishing were those bright beams of
Divine Light, which shone on Judea? Were not all the adjacent parts illuminated
hereby? Yea, did not Greece it self (esteemed the eye of the World) light her
Candle at this Sacred Fire? Were not all the Grecian Schools hung with
Philosophic Ornaments, or Contemplations, stolen out of the Judaick
Wardrobe? Were not Pythagoras's College, Plato's Academie; Aristotle's
Peripatum, Zeno's Stoa, and Epicurus's Gardens, all watered with rivulets,
though in themselves corrupt, originally derived from the sacred Fountain of
Siloam? Whence had Phaenicia, Egypt, Chaldea, Persia, with our Occidental
Parts, their Barbarick Philosophy, but from the sacred Emanations of Sion? The
Demonstration of this is, (...), the original Idea of this Discourse.

But yet, notwithstanding those rich, and resplendent Derivations of Divine
Revelation, how much did the Gentile world solace it self in its own native
darkness? what mixtures of vain Imaginations with Judaick Traditions? what
muddie, dirtie phantasmes did they mingle with those broken Traditions, they
received from the waters of the Sanctuary? Neither was this the crime of the
Pagan world only, but also of the Church of God; which has in all Ages, so far
as the spirit of Apostasy prevailod, been greatly fond of vain Philosophy:
And (which is a prodigious matter of astonishment) those very Philosophic
Traditions, which the thirsty greedy Grecians imbibed, originally from the
sacred Fountain in Judea, and afterward, by many successive Metamorphoses,
adulterated with their own fabulous, and ridiculous infusions, I say, these
very Philosophic Traditions, thus Sophisticated, both Jews, and Christians,
have in their declined state, drank in, with as much greediness, as the Minor
Poets did Homer's Vomit. And hence indeed, even from this bitter Root of Vain
Philosophy, have sprung all pestiferous, and noxious Heresies, and Idolatries,
which have caused such miserable Declensions, both in the Judaick, and
Christian Churches. The Demonstration hereof is the ultimate, and supreme end
(next to the Glory of God) I have had under Intention, in the composure of
these Philologick, and Philosophic discourses. And albeit I can promise
nothing, whether ever, or when such an undertakement may see light, yet take
this ensuing Specimen, or Abstract Idea of what is designed herein.

1. The Vanity, and manifold defects of Pagan Philosophy may be demonstrated
from its Causes: For the Effect cannot be more perfect, or noble than it is
Cause: If the Springhead be poisoned, the Streams must needs have the same
tincture and taint. What were the main springs of Pagan Philosophy, but some
broken Judaick Traditions adulterated, and poisoned with their own ignorant
Inventions, Curiosity, Pride, Presumption, Confidence, Contentious Disputes,
Opinionativenesse, Dogmatisings, Carnal Policy, Idololatrick Inclinations, and
fabulous Imitations? were not these the great Prolisick principles of all Pagan
Philosophy? And may we expect a wholesome Issue, or Progeny, from such
envenomed Parents?

2. The various defects of Pagan Philosophy, may be measured by its Matter,
and Parts. How full of contentions is Logic; The Vanity of Pagan Philosophy,
from it is Parts.
especially as delivered by Zeno, and Aristotle's Commentators the Arabians?
what gross mistakes are there in (the greatest among Pagan Philosophers)
Aristotle in his Physics? Not to mention any lower, and lesser ones against
Reason only, which some quarrel him for; as namely, touching the first
Principles of Bodies; his making I know not what Chimerical first Matter a
Principle of real, and even Privation it self of positive Bodily Beings, and
the like: I shall instance only in that his great Signal Contradiction to
Faith, and Reason together, the Eternity of the World; to Faith, Heb. 11.3.
and very many other Scriptures: and to Reason; since that very same Argument of
his (drawn from that grand absurdity of the Part being equal to the Whole)
whereby he disproves the possibility of its Infinity in Extension, would give
as clear baffle to the possibility of it is Infinity in Duration also.
Besides, how extremely defectuous are the Pagan Ethics, both as to Matter,
End, Rule, and Principles? Are not also their Oeconomicks, Politics, and
Mathematics, greatly defective, and vain? But that, which gives us a more
black Idea of the Vanity of the Grecians Philosophy, is their Metaphysics,
or Natural Theology. It Is true, Pythagoras, and Plato, had clear Traditions of
the Deity, and Divine Perfections; but yet what a mass of fabulous
narrations, and phantasmes of their own do they contemper therewith? How
superstitious, yea ridiculous, are their Daemon-gods, and Worship? Yea, what a
Monstrous Satanick spirit of Hell inspired their whole Systeme of Divination,
by Dreams, Maladies, Animals, Plants, Men, Elements, Stars, and things
Artificial, as Glosses, etc.

The sad effects of Pagan Philosophy.
3. But nothing affords us a more evident Demonstration, of the defects, and
vanity of Pagan Philosophy, than the monstrous, mischievous effects it has
produced among men. Not to mention the pestiferous Influence it had on the
Pagan world, 1. In the Judaick Church.
for the Improvement, and propagation of Atheism, Polutheisme, Superstition,
and Idolatry: We shall begin with the malignant Contagion, which the Judaick
Church received from vain Philosophy. So long as the Judaick Theology
continued under it is own native, simple habit of Divine Revelation, without
commixtures of vain Philosophy, it retained its primitive Purity, Beauty,
and Glory. It Is true, there was a great Declension, and Apostasy, as to
Worship, even shortly after their establishment in Canaan: But whence sprang
this, but from the Phenician, and Chaldaick Philosophy, touching Planetarie
Deities, and Demons, called by the Phenicians Baalim? Yet still the Judaick
Doctrine continued entire, and pure; till some time after the Babylonish
Captivity, the Grecanick Philosophy began to incorporate therewith. And the
Rise hereof was this; when the sacred Garden of Judea was laid waste, and the
Grecians became Lords of the Oriental parts, the carnal Jews, out of a fond
compleasance, began to plant this Garden of the Lord, their Schools, and
Church, with Grecian Sciences; which proved the fatal subversion of their
Sacred Theology. Neither were the Godly Reforming Jews, without a prevision of
the cursed Effects, which would follow on this commixture of Pagan Philosophy
with their sacred Oracles: and therefore in the time of the Hasmoneans, Grotius
^u Colos. 2.8.
or Macchabees, there was a constitution made, That whosoever taught his Son
the Grecian Philosophy should be anathematized. But yet, as the Judaick
Reformation begun by Ezra, and others, degenerated into Formalitie, and
Superstition, the Jews more and more imbibed the Grecanick Philosophy, which
proved the Foundation of their chiefest Heresies, and Superstitions. For we no
way doubt, but (in it is time, and place) to demonstrate, that the main Errors
of the Pharisees, Sadduces, and other Judaick Heretics, received their first
Formation, Lineaments, and Improvement from Grecian Philosophy, especially the
Pythagorean. Yea, we doubt not, but to ^vince, that the chief of the Jewish
Talmud, or Systeme of their Oral Traditions, which the Pharisees call the
Traditions of the El^ers, Mark. 7.3.5. were no other than Pythagorean Dogmes,
and Institutes; and thence styled by our blessed Lord, The Doctrines and
Traditions of men, Mark 7.7, 8.

The first great Errors that infested the Christian Churches, 2. In the
primitive Christian Churches.

The Gnostick Errors.


were those of the Gnostics; who pretended unto a very sublime (...), or
Mystic Theology; which was no other than a corrupt complexum of Orphaick,
Pythagorick, and Judaick Infusions. For whence borrowed they their (...),
Conjunctions, and Genealogies, namely, touching the conjunction of one thing
with another; and thence the generation of a third; as they say, [ out of the
conjunction of Night, and Silence, was generated the Chaos] but from the
Mythologick, and Symbolick Philosophy of the Pythagoreans, etc. Again, it
seems very probable, that all their Will Worship, and voluntary humility,
mentioned Col. 2.18. were but corrupt Imitations of Pythagorean Dogmes, and
Institutes, as Col. 2.8.

Neither want we sufficient evidence to evince, that vain Philosophy was the
chief Seminary, and Nurse of the main Errors broached in the four first
Centuries after Christ. This Tertullian was greatly sensible of; and therefore
he styles the Philosophers, A Giry, Apologetick. Tertul. Preface.
the Patriarchs of Heretics. Yea, a French Author informs us, That Tertullian
did puissantly Combat the Vanity of Philosophy, which he had formerly so much
affected; because he knew full well, that it was the principal foundation of
Superstition, etc. Ir is not difficult, from an enumeration of particulars, to
demonstrate, that the most malignant Heresies, which so greatly infected the
primitive Churches were fermented in, and breathed from the Schole of
Alexandria, which was then the Source, and Fountain of Gentile Philosophy.
Whence had Paulus Samosatenus his Blasphemous Infusions, Samosatenus his Errors.
but from Plotinus (successor to Ammonius in his Schole of Alexandria) who
Philosophizing here, of the Eternal (...), Word, (and that according to the
Platonic Mode) Samosatenu^, his Auditor, drew hence his Grand Impostures, that
our blessed Savior was only Man; and that by (...), John 1.1. We may not
understand any subsistent person, but only the manifestative word of promise.
Arrianisme.
And did not Arrius in like manner derive his blasphemous Persuasions touching
Christ, from the very same poisoned Fountain? For he being a Presbyter in the
Church of Alexandria, and too much drenched in those Platonic speculations,
touching the Divine (...), made it his (...) (as Samosatenus before him) to
reconcile John's explication of (...), The Word, with that of Plato. So a great
French Divine informs us, Morel. Discipl. Libr. 2. cap. 4. fol. 87.
Pelagianisme.
That the Arrian Heresy had it is rise from the particular Conferences of
learned Men in the City of Alexandria. And had not the Pelagian Heresy the
same pestiferous root? This is incomparably well demonstrated by Janseniu^, in
his Augustinus, Tom. 1. lib. 6. cap. 13. where he shows, how Origin (Scholar to
Ammoniu^, in his schole of Alexandria) by mingling Platonic Contemplations
with Scripture-Revelations, gave Matter, and Form to the chief Pelagian
Dogmes. Yea, it is generally confessed, that Pelagius himself visited this
schole of Alexandria, and other parts of Egypt, where gaining intimate
familiarity, and conversation with the Origenistick Monks, successors of
Origin, he had thence huge assistance for the formation of Pelagianisme: Not to
mention what advantages, and aides he received from other of the Greek-Fathers,
who followed Origin, as the Latin Fathers Augustine.

Having explicated the black Character, or heretical Impresses,
Antichristianisme from Pagan Philosophy.

1. Mystic Theology.


which the Gentile Philosophy left on the primitive Churches, we now proceed
to the body of Antichristianisme, (which is a Complexum of Heresies, and
Apostasies) to discover what prodigious, and venomous Influences it received
from Pagan Philosophy. The first Lineaments of this Mystery of Iniquity,
were formed out of a Mystic Theology, composed by the Alexandrine, and other
Egyptian Monks, successors of Origin, out of that Pythagorean, and Platonic
Philosophy, which flourished in this Schole of Alexandria. For that the
chiefest parts of that Mystic Theology, which gave the first lines to the
body of Antichristianisme, were formed out of Pythagorean, and Platonic
Philosophy, seems most evident, both from the Matter, Form, and first Formers
thereof. What are the chief materials of this Mystic Theology, but
Pythagorean, and Platonic speculations? An Egg is scarcely more like an Egg,
than those Mystic contemplations coined by Origin, and his successors, are
like Pythagorean, and Platonic Infusions. Neither do they agree only in
Matter, but in Form also. For as the Pythagoreans, and Platonists delighted
much to wrap up their philosophizings in Symbolick, Parabolick, Aenigmatick,
and Allegorick Modes: just so those Monkish Divines their Mystic Theology.
Lastly, that this Mystic Theology, which gave the first formation to
Antichristianisme, was but an Ape of Pythagorean, and Platonic Philosophy, is
very evident from the first formers thereof, who were the Origenistick Monks,
successors of Origin; not only as to their manner of Life, but mode of
Theology also; which they endeavored to render Conformable to the
Pythagorean, and Platonic Philosophy. Yea, not only their Theology, but also
their monastic Life, and Discipline, seems to be no other than a corrupt Idea
borrowed from the Pythagorean College, which will appear to any, that shall
compare them together, according to the account we have given of the
Pythagorean College, Book 2. Chap. 6. Thus learned Bochart, in his Treatise
against Veron (Part. 3. Chap. 25.. 4. Art. 1.) proves at large, That the
Injunction of Celibate, and Monastic Life, was one of the Superstitions
brought out of Egypt by Pythagoras; who forbad Marriage to those of his Sect,
and erected a Cloistre, etc.

(...)
Another vital part of Antichristianisme consists in Scholastic Theology, as
it has long flourisht in the Papacy, and been for many Ages the Main of their
Divinity; so formed, and calculated, as might be most advantageous for the
confirmation of the Doctrine of Antichrist, and that in Imitation of, and
Derivation from Aristotle's Philosophy, though not simply, and as delivered by
him, yet as explicated, and taught by the Arabians, Averroes, and Avicenna his
Commentators; who as much corrupted his Sense, as they little understood his
Language. For look as the first Monks were wholly drencht in Platonic, and
Pythagorean Philosophy: so the Scholemen gave up themselves to Aristotle thus
corrupted into an Artificial kind of contentious Disputation, as that which
best suited with their Design; which was to support the Papal Empire by force
of Argument, and wrangling Dispute; the cunning contrivers of the Antichristian
Religion, first forging the Doctrines, and then committing them to the subtle
Scholemen to be maintained, and defended.

The last Branch of Antichristianisme, I shall here mention, is the Canonists
Theology, The Canonists Theology.
touching the Canonization, and Worshipping of Saints, The Directorie of the
Inquisitors calls the Canonization of saints, their Apotheosis, i. e.
Deification. Bochart. cont. Veron. page 815.
which stands in such a Compliance with the Pagan (...), and Daemonolatrie, as
seems not to have been accidental, and casual, but studied, and contrived: The
very Popish Directorie of the Inquisitors sticks not to call the Canonization
of Saints their Apotheosis, i. e. Deification: And that the whole Papal (...),
or Saint-Worship, is but an Imitation of the Pagan (...), or Daemon-Worship, is
excellently explicated, and demonstrated by Judicious Mede, on 1 Timothy 4.1, 2.
touching the Apostasy of the latter times. This we may (perhaps in due time,
and place) demonstrate by a parallel 'twixt the Papal Saints, and Pagan
Demons. 1. In their Origin; 2. In their Formal (...); 3. In their Mediatorie
Offices; 4. In their Festivals; 5. In their Images, and Relics; 6. In the
Offerings made to them; 7. In their Exorcismes, and Miracles; 8. In the
Invocation of them; 9. In the sacred Rites, and Ceremonies performed to them;
10. In that Hierarchy, and Supremacy assumed by the Pope, that great
Demonarch. In all these regards there seems to be an intimate Symbolization
between the Papal (...), and Pagan (...); which was the great figment of the
Philosophers, as we may hereafter demonstrate. Thus we have given a concise
Idea of what is intended touching the defects, vanity, and mischiefs of Pagan
Philosophy.

Sound Philosophy.
But now to disabuse the minds of any such, as may ungroundedly conceit, that
all Philosophy is useless, as also to lay a foundation for a Systeme of sound
Reformed Philosophy, we are not without some formed Intentions (if Providence
favor the same) to make an Essay, for the casting of the whole body of sound
Philosophy into one Systeme, whereof Logic must be the Key. At present it
must suffice to hint, that he, who will imbue his mind with a true Idea of
Philosophy, must -- Nullius jurare in Verba Magistri: must not tenaciously
adhere to the stiff Dogmes of any particular Sect of Philosophers whatsoever;
which is usually the way to prepossesse the Mind against more of Truth, than it
possesses it of: but he must keep his Judgment free, and apt to receive any
Impressions of Truth, from whatsoever objects, or persons they flow. He that is
inclined, (...), to serve an Hypothesis, will never be brought (...). to
sacrifice to Truth. And therefore the Design of the New Platonists in the
Schole of Alexandria, who called themselves (...) (of whom see B. 3. C. 4..
15.) was thus far honorable, in that they espoused not any one Sect, but
endeavored to Cull, what was most Eligible, out of every Sect. It is good
advice, which Grotius (Epist. 16.) gives a Student in Philosophy, to observe
(especially in Ethics) the differences of the Sects: what were the Sentiments
of Pythagoras; what those of the severe Stoics; what those of the Old, and New
Academie; and what those of Epicurus. For these being unknown, there arises a
great Darkness, etc. This is one great Inducement, which drew us to fill up
this whole Discourse with the Historick Narration of Philosophy; that so young
Students might have a more free, and open air of Philosophy to breath in; and
not be tied up to the confined Dogmes of any one Sect; which has proved a great
detriment not only to Divine, but also to humane Wisdom.

In Opus hoc Eruditione pari, ac Industria Elaboratum.
SInceros Ignes Coelesti ex Arce Prometheus
Vafra in Terrenum transtulit Art Focum.
De Sacris furtim accendit Sophia Ethnica Flammis,
Hebraeorum Arae queis caluere, Faces.
Utque solent Fures gnari celare, Figuris
Assumptis, nunc Se, nunc sua Furta, novis:
Cantatus sic hinc Sophos Ethnicus, inde Poeta
(Nam pariter Plagii est hujus uterque Reus)
Surripit e priscis, Artis Monumenta, Sepulchris
Funera post Veterum vivere digna Patrum.
Sacrilegove Ausu Sacram Salomonis in Aedem
Involat, and Ritus abripi^ inde Sacros.
Quin Coelum imperitur; Cooloque Augustior ipso
Gentili, lacera est Pagina Sacra, Manu.
Omnis at, in Vario Fabellae tincta Color,
Asservanda aliis clam sua Furta putat.
Haecque Sibi Authori tribuit, cui nescio Divum,
Illa (decet fictum Fabula ficta Deum)
Hujus enim Aegyptis Author Ter Maximus Hermes, Aegyptus.

Istius Serapis, illius Isis erat.
Nocturnae Interpres Josephus Imaginis, idem
Naturae Mystes maximus, atque Dei,
Tanto erat his Hermes Titulo insignitus Honoris,
Et, Fidei ut Nobis, his Pater Artis Abram.
Sus Agri hos Artem docuit lutulenta Colendi
(Art hac Discipulis digna Magistra suis)
Sus lutulenta; Agrum Rostro dum Sulcat Aratro;
Puraque mox facta est Sus lutulenta Dea.
Sed pronam in Terras ad Coelos tollere Mentem;
Ducere per, Coeli Machina, quicquid, haber;
Naturam Astrorum, Numerum, Motumque docere;
Haec Ars in Coelos ut vehit, inde venit.
Sanctae Orbi Gentis, Genti Coelestis and Author
Artis Abram, hanc didicit primus, and hanc docuit.
Appulit huc Oculos, Mentem huc, ubi Sidera jusso
Ut numeret, dictum est, Sic tibi Semen erit.
Nec solum ad Sanctam traducta Scientia Prolem
Stellarum ad Numerum quae numeranda fuit.
Seeds nempe aptas Aegyptum Nube Serenam
Seligit haec, apta in Sede potita Throno.
Et Patriarcharum Primum sibi nacta Magistrum,
Rege and Discipulo Nobilitata suo.
Evchit h^c Abram Pharetatem ad Sidera, Vulgo
Dum Sus Culturam soetida grunnit Agri.
Ars media has arts inter Geometria Regem
Cultores medios Vulgus and inter, habet.
Istamne hos Artem Numen docuisse Suillum;
Et Sulco ut Rostrum, Metro habuisse Caput?
Qui Terram in terrae sundavit Pondere, justos
Mensurae and Fines jussit habere suae.
Hic nullo discit Lancis tentamine Pondus;
Metrica Mensuram Virga nec ulla docet.
Pondere, Mensuraque Opifex, qua fecit, ^adem
Mensurat Terras, Ponderat atque Manu:
Metitur facilis totas Divina Potestas:
Sudat in exiguis Partibus Artis Opus.
Prima per Aegyptum transivit Metrica Virga:
Verum in Josephi Metrica Virga Manu.
Nec prius Aegypto succurritur Artis egenti,
Hebraeo Primus quam foret Artis Honos.
Discretis fines Nili Vis eripit Arvis:
Ars hos Confuso reddit Hebraea Solo.
Phoenicia.
In totum Commune ferunt, Mare qua patet, Orbem
Phoenicum Naves Mercis, and Artis Onus:
Laudum and plena vehit Phoenices Bucca Magistros;
Quaqua Ventorum Carbasa plena Rates.
Hinc Sanchoniathon docto audit Magnus in Orb;
Hinc Magnus docto Mochus in Orb sonat.
Multa petunt a Mose ambo sibi Dogmata; si non
Alter and a Mosis Nomine Nomen habet.
Quae prius in tenues prolata evanuit Auras
(Nunc mera nil nisi Vox, nunc and inane nihil)
Vox stetit in Graecis Magica Cadmi Art figuris
Firma; Sonusque Oculis excipiendus erat.
Aegyptum Virtute Magum qui praestitit Omnem,
Phoenicem hunc picti praevenit Art Soni:
Ipso ex Ore Dei quam plurima Verba loquentis
Excipit, e Manibus primaque Scripta Manu.
Quae. Cordi indiderat, jam pene Erasa, Columnis
Instaurat primus Jura notata Deus.
Signata Hebraeas dant Voces Marmora; Moses
Hoc juxta Exemplar Scriba Secundus erat:
Quisve huic Discipulus, quove Ordine, nescio, Cadmo
Hac Praeceptoris praestitit Art Vices.
Nec Graiis prius iste docet Signare figuris,
Quam suit Hebraeae nota figura Scholae.
Hac nota, Nemo quantillae, nesciat, Artis
Sit variare Notos, non variare Sonos.
Antiquas Babylonis Opes miramur, and Arts; Chaldae^.

Supremum domiti dum Caput Orbis erat.
Omnis Opes, Gens una Arts invexit Hebraea:
Captivi Dominos erudiere suos.
Forsan and Artis Abram Chaldaeae Elementa reliquit
Tum post Se, Secum cum tulit inde Fidem.
Nec stetit in triplici furandi Gente Reatus: Graecia.

Docta iterum furtim Graecia Furta rapit.
Dividit at plures inter sua Furta Latrones;
Fraus ist^ melius posset ut Art tegi.
Primum hoc Pythagorae Inventum, primum idque Thaletis,
Istud Anaxagorae, Socratis illud erat.
Multa Sagax cudit Xenophon, Dius Plato plura;
Plurima dat Magno parva Stagira Duce.
Ut sua nempe crepant aliorum Inventa, tenobris
Abdita Figmenti, pristina Vera, novi.
Nil non acceptum, Nil quicquam far videri
Acceptum Antiquis Turba novella ferent.
Multi hinc multa Dei Afflatu Dignissima ducunt:
Hujus Apollo, hujus Pallas and Author erat.
Re tamen apse sua ( furtiva scilicet) Art
Istis Mercurius paginam utramque facit.
Quin ipse Afflatus, vero ex Afflamine fictus,
Furti in se Culmen Mercurialis habet.
Falsum istum retegit, ficta e farragine Divum,
Verus nunc Christi de Grege Mercurius.
Authorem en gnarum, Vestigia nota legendo,
Hanc Furum turmam docta per Antra sequi.
Hic Spolia a victis Raptorum amplissima Castris,
Antiquis Dominis restituenda, rapit.
Ethnica furtivis nuda est Cornicula Plumis:
Formosa est Plumis Sancta Columba suis.
Fabellae longum putidae Conclusa Palude,
Sacrum iterum Fontem, Dogmata Sacra, petunt.
Post iter emensum longum, multumque Maeandrum,
Sic Flumen refluas in Mare volvit Aquas.
Idem de Opere, and Authore iisdem.
Una ( Volente Deo) Divinae Ecclesia Matter,
Humanae Sophiae Matter and una fuit.
Nata est Gentiles regat haec, ut Luna, Tenebras;
Gentis Sanctae, instar Solis, at ^lla Diem.
Inque Domo Domini hac, illi data Summa Potestas;
Haec Servum An cillae dum sibi Munus habet.
Hanc neque Splendidior mirere quod ornet Amictus;
In morem Ancillis hoc abiisse palam est.
Illius sed pura, gravis, Venerandaque Vestis;
Quaeque revelante est undique digna Deo.
Nec Sancto Soli insinuat se Lumine Menti,
Intima vel penetrat Corda Calore Sacro.
Gentilis Lumen Sophiae ( Lampyridis illi
Haud impar) Lumen, praetereaque Nihil.
Lumen, and Influxum geminum Foetum (aemula Phoebi
Mate^) Scripturae parturit Omne Jubar.
Quin Mentem and Renovans primum sensim indit Acumen:
Imbuit and Summi Cognitione Dei.
Res hinc rimandas melius descendit ad Omnes:
Naturam noto, nesciat illa, Deo.
Terna Dies olim Noctem mutatur in unam;
Fitque ex Compactis Noctibus una tribus.
Afflictam Aegyptum Spissae invasere tenebrae,
Palpari facili quae potuere Manu.
Interea Sancti minime interrupta Popelli
Lux fulget laetis alma Domiciliis.
Gens and in Aegypto haec Goshen invenit, in Orb
Lucis and haec Goshen Gens melioris erat.
Ut Tenebris Numen secrevit Lumina primis:
Atque alternantes jussit habere Vices.
JVSTITIAE sic SOLI olim Communis Horizon
Judaeaeque, Deo sic statuente, fuit:
Hanc extra, praeter Tenebras, and Opaca Locorum,
Haec Mundi exhibuit tetrica Scena Nihil.
Linea mutata est dudum hic Ecliptica; Signa
Zodiaci nec bis Sex, velut ante, Tribus.
Cursus abhinc idem, quamvis non passibus aequis
U^rivis Soli perficiendus erat.
Solemn Evangelicum sed quem videt Ethnicus Ortum,
Occiduum mox hunc Israelita videt.
Sic erat irriguo sicca olim Vellere Terra:
Sic Terr^ Siccum Vellus and irrigu^.
Judaeae quin una Fidem Nox vidit, and Artem
Occiduas, Ortas vidit ut una Dies.
Lux gemina haec Geminis impar Coelestibus; Alter
Ortum ubi Suspensum, dum Cadat alter, habet.
Tyndareis impar Geminis; dum scilicet alter
Horum absque alterius vivere Morte nequit.
Lux gemina Hippocratis Geminis par haec; ubi Risus
Alter in alterius Solvitur, and Lacrymas.
Ut quo laetifico ridet Sol blandior Ore,
Hoc illi arridet laetior alma Soror.
Ille alio offensum si quando vertat Ocellum;
Indutis luget Vestibus ista nigris.
Sic Sacra quo proprior Lux est, ur Culminet Orb,
Ingenuae magis hoc Eminet Artis Apex.
Ad quem deprimitur Scriptura Lumen, eundem
Ars and confestim verg^t ad usque Gradum.
Quando super Gibeone (Diem ut produce^et Hostis
Excidio) tutilos Sol ^etinebat Equos:
Et ( Fratri contenta Vices concedere) Valle
Vicina albidulas Luna repressit Equas.
Dum bis quinque Gradus Hez'chiae tempore Phoebus
Regreditur, Phoeben tot retroire putes.
Sese inter Servant sic Progressusque, Regressusque
Atque Moras dubias Arsque, Fidesque pares.
Procreat hinc ^lures Meretricia Roma Sophistas:
Casta Agni plures dat tibi Sponsa Sophos.
Selecta in Terris Genti (Sic Fata volebant)
Ars primae, sol^ Gratia danda fuit.
Ars Sancto quaevis accepta ferenda Popello;
Sanctorum ut Virtus est referenda Deo.
Accep^a a Virtute Deo est Ecclesia grata,
Mu^do etiam cur non esset ab Art data*
Scilicet Ars hujus fuerat gratissima Mundo;
Ni fuerat Mundo Gratia grata minus.
Dum tamen ignaro Lucem Artis foenerat Orbi,
Vel sic est Lucis, Filia grata, Patri:
Gratiae and ingratum Lumen sparsura per Orbem,
Humana Munus si foret illud Opis.
Ad Vivum Pictura resert, cum ducitur ipsa
A Facie Artifici, Linea quaeque, Manu:
Sapius Exemplar ducatur ab Exemplari,
Hinc minus evadet Prototypo simile.
Sic quo Judaeae Gens ulla propinquior olim,
Longius aut fuerat dissocia^a Loco;
Illius hoc veras edocta fidelius Arts,
Figmentisve magis falsa erat ipsa suis.
Unde Salutari magis and Phoenicia Verax,
Audire and Mendax Graecia jure potest.
Haec ita Figmentis scater undique, ut Vrinator
Vero expiscando Delius esset Opus.
Doctae autem Genti^ si quilibet alter, habendus
Hic merito Vere Delius Author erit.
Figmenti in fundum se immergens eruit Indis
Majores Gemmis, Indi urinandi long peritissimi ad Montium in Mari delitentium
Radices usque penetrantes pretiosissimas inde extrahunt Gemmas.
Indus ut alter, Opes.
Nec Soli Sapuit Sibi, Sudavitve; fr^endas
Has aliis Gazas exhibuisse juvat.
Unde feret Lauds OPIFEX Artisque, Laborisque,
Aut Grates meritas Vtilitatis OPUS?
Nempe iterum, ut Sileant, Oracla Profana jubentur;
Ore licet Sacris Liberiore loqui.
THO: GILBERT.
Ad Authorem, de Opere hoc utrisque jam partibus, numerisque Omnibus Absoluto.
GAllia Visa parum tibi; Colloquiumque BOCHARTI,
Quo Galli majus nil habuere, parum est.
Res Asiae, Aegyptique, and Romae, sedulus Author,
Doctaque perquiris Graecia quicquid habet:
Supremus labor est Solymarum visere seeds;
Nec prohibent adytis te sacra Templa suis.
Imo tibi SANCTUM SANCTORUM, haud Atria solum,
Gentibus antiquis quae patuere, patet.
Abdita Judaea pandis Mysteria Gentis;
Exuis and Velum Ritibus omne Sacris.
Dura Vrim Vexent, Thummimque Vocabula Mystas;
Responsum potius tu mihi, Gale, dabis.
Non ego, V. Schiekardum c. 1. Mispat hammelech.
Literulis Responsa micenine, morabor:
Haec modo Luce tua consuluisse licet.
Aegyptus tenebras, rerumque Aenigmata jactet;
Dum Goshen Scriptis fit mihi clara tuis.
OUENUS PRICAEUS. A. M.
On the Second Part of this Learned WORK.
1.
THough beauteous Nature, with her numerous Race,
Does still replenish this unbounded Space;
Is still in vigor Seen,
Of all harmonious things the Queen:
Has nothing of her strength by Age, or Labors spent,
Throughout the teeming Earth, or Rolling Firmament:
But still in numbers smooth and fleet,
With as^ery all and silent feet,
Holds on the mighty Dance,
Her Maker bad her first advance:
Though too as he of old throughout the forming Mass,
Whilst in the boundless womb of Nothing 'twas,
Did strength, and beauty sow:
She yet retains them both, and with eternal love
Pays grateful homage to the King above:
And useful Tribute to the Prince below.
2.
Yet strange it is Philosophy alone,
For Natures prospect borne, and contemplation;
Should not so constant, and so faithful prove;
Should the disease of age, not reason have:
Not nakedness of truth, but shadows love:
And seem so near her grave:
That in the World's great Room when set,
Her self, and settled business should forget:
Her self in learned Mazes loose;
Some pretty Scheams of things, not the supreme Idea choose,
Which was entire and bright,
In the Original light;
But rather will descend the vast Abyss,
Where darkness is,
With rocks of horrid Termnes, and hard Hypotheses;
Where all the Arts, like the fallen Angels, lie
In chains of darkness bound:
The worse because so knowing Misery:
And still with dreadful noise do sound.
Thus with dejected Eye
In standing pooles we seek the sky:
To find the milkie way,
Not only lose the day:
But down to Caverns, and vast tracts of night
Go to improve the sight.
Mean while neglect the glories, and the gentle influence
Of all the wide and fair Circumference;
Losing both God, and his Intelligence.
3.
Were It not a too unkind Relief
To present grief,
Our bliss to think upon,
That Is past and gone;
I Would bless the day, when Arts proportioned right,
Framed more for use, then wild delight,
Did not some Private Patron raise,
But solemnized their greater Authors praise;
Large as his Works, unbounded as his Rule,
That Is founder of the Universe his School.
When none of numbers made this mighty Frame,
Pythagoras did find
In's Arithmetic mind,
Those we may Ciphers name.
Arts did not then design to dwell
In some inglorious Cell:
The Rigours of the Stoa, to maintain;
Or from Stagira date their Reign;
Nor from the Gardens shade,
Which Epicurus made:
As if the Tree of Knowledge were
Replanted, and to flourish there.
4.
'Twas never thought of then, Descartes pride
Should over Schools, and God in triumph ride;
That e're from matters liquid bowls should fall
This Universal greater Ball;
Or from his Whirle-pooles should e're ehbe, and flow
All this vast Tide of things below.
At first there was no place for Fancies stage;
Or the wild images of learned rage:
Arts close to things, and natures business sit,
She^w'd then the Strength, and Innocence of wit.
But Knowledge like a River in its Course;
Making to its Original sourse;
Its purity does lose, and to the spring
In foaming Torrents filth does bring.
5.
Thanks to this Learned Authors pen,
Truth now appears in Innocence again;
Through all the Vailes of things, and Men.
Sure he came from the Holy Place,
So bright is all the Face:
And in his Gentiles Court so Sacred is the view,
We luster find, and Inspiration too.
He does with Rods correct the Heathen School:
As the great Savior did in's Temple rule.
Truth now extends her Conquest far,
The Heathen Oracles struck dumb, and Authors are.
They to so just a Triumph their submissions owe,
And now congratulate their overthrow.
Dethroned they are, yet Privilege enjoy:
Highly promoted while they bow
I the House of God so low;
As he was deemed, who so himself demeaned
In Rimm^n's House, while on his hand his Master leaned
How great then our Triumphal joy!
When that proud Empire of the Arts we see
A tributary Province to Divinity.
The Heathen Authors are corrected so,
Their poison now for Antidote may go.
Through their profane we see Diviner Theames,
Since thus our skilful Joseph has explained their Dreams.
To the Author on both Parts of this Learned Work.
1.
He Is a wise Master of a Feast,
And bravely treats the Guests he did invite,
Who first presents unto their sight
That Food whose grateful taste
Will edge the Appetite,
And with a pleasing Sharpness still
Prepare the Stomach it does fill:
Reserving that till last
Whose more substantial Good
Deserves the name of Satisfying Food;
And is besides the Choicest Dish of all the Rest.
So prudently have you
Contrived the Learned Banquet here
Set out and offered to our view;
In that you first excite
And whet the Mind's delight,
And in the Rear,
Vouchase to Entertain it with the daintiest Cheer.
From your first great Performance we can tell
Where Letters, Words, and Languages
Began, and how they did increase:
By whom the Infant World was taught to spell,
And Lisp a Syllable:
By what Gradations then it grew
In Age, and Learning too;
Until with times, and pains expense
At length it came to Read, and Write in sense.
2.
History
First History presents us in her scene
The brave Achievements of Heroic men,
Whose deathless Actions rightly claim
To them a never dying Name:
Their praises with their Better Parts do crave
A just exemption from the Grave,
And outlive all transactions that have been,
Since Chance upon our rolling Orb a sporting sat,
And laughed to see,
A Mimick Ape, that she
Made all things suhject unto Change like that.
Next sprightly Poetry took birth,
Poetry
That fair Minerva of the Brain,
Which is the only Child on Earth,
Since heavy Curses taught it how to mourn,
And Mourn in Vain,
That ever yet was Born
Without the Parents groans and Pain.
She on impolish'd Natures homely Face
Stroak'd the rude Features into fair,
And many a Beauteous grace
She lively painted there,
Where before dull, and Swarthy Colors did appear.
The Last in Time, not Dignity or Name,
Smooth Oratorie came
Oratorie
By Nature smooth, by Culture gay,
Since she has got the Artful trick
To Cloth her self in the Array
And Trappings of Trim Rhetoric,
And all her graceful Colors to display:
These little Arts that we were taught before;
Branches of Knowledge and no more,
Refreshed our Minds; how ravished shall we be
Now you produce Philosophi^,
Philosophy
Which to these frugall Branches is the well grown Tree?
A Tree whose Heavenly Fruit
The Worlds sunk vigor does recruit;
Forces those Spirits briskly to advance
That soaking lay in sottish Ignorance;
A Tree that is pleasant to the eyes,
Like that which grew in Paradise,
And much to be desired to make one wise:
Only in this their Difference does appear:
Not Touch, not Taste, not Eat
Was written on the Fruit of that,
'Twas fruit indeed, but not for meat,
And only to be feared, and Wondered at:
Each man from this, that will,
May pluck, and Eat, aed eat his fill;
Nothing but Abstinence alone forbidden here.
3.
While man was yet so just and good,
That nothing he of evil undestood,
The very Deity
Took pleasure in his Company,
Came often from his Paradise above
Where Everlasting pleasures flow,
Drawn by the Cords of Love
To visit that below,
And read his Adam Lectures of Philosophy.
But he with knowledge sated wanton grew,
And his Proud Will
Would know not only Good, but Ill;
And would indeed be God-like too:
Complain's his Stock is scant, and small,
And by a reach at more he forfeits all:
All but enough to make him see
From whence he fell, and so bewayl his Misery
Then not without Industrious Pain
Some Scraps of what was lost he did regain,
In Equal sweat of the same Brow
Both eat his Bread, and earned his Knowledge too:
By piecemeal serving from his Memory,
What blur'd, and blotted there did lie.
So little the Philosopher
Did in his Judgment Err,
That said Man's Learning is no more
Then to Remember what he knew before.
From the First Parent of Mankind
Sin, and Philosophy.
Was all the Patrimony left behind
For bank erupt Posterity
Thus he together to his tainted Blood
Transmits so great an Ill, so great a Good.
Dealing with us as one who brought
A deadly Poison, and an Antidote.
From Adam Seth, to thee
(Thou worthy Grandchild of the Deity)
descends Philosophy:
She with thy Learned Pillars stood,
Ma^gre the Envious washings of the Flood:
Those Pillars as a stable Ark she found
To keep her too from being Drowned.
But the greatest Danger that she er'e was in
The mighty Deluge was of sin,
Where sadly she, as justly did complain
That a lewd Pagan train
Debauchd her with slight Sophistry,
With superstition, and Idolatry:
Whence she became more frothy, and more vain,
Then very Ignorance could be:
Best things abused prove worst of all: So he
That scoffs at Scripture, falls to Blasphemy:
But was she no where pure? no where
Allowed her Virgin-Garb to wear?
Of all the Earth Iudea's little spot
Defiled her not:
There she reigned Queen, and had the chief Command,
Next Holiness, the Empress in that Holy Land.
4.
No sooner was she seated on the Throne,
But winged Fame flew out,
Phenicia
Informing all the Neighbors there about:
Phenicia first; Phenicia first went down
Pretending to congratulate
Iudea's blissful State;
But her design was to improve her own:
Nor were her thoughts without success, and vain,
Fot fraighted well with Knowledge she made back again:
Hence was it first Phenicia knew
What fruit on Palm Trees grew:
Palm Trees she had before, which stood
An Idle, and an Useless Wood,
Barren as Females, when ^he Male's not by:
'Twas now they did begin t'o increase and multiply.
Egypt
Next up does Egypt come
And all she finds she carries home:
'Twas here Philosophy a Goddess proved
Enjoyed her Temple, and her Shrine,
Egypt, that worshipped what she feared, or loved,
L^v'd her, and then adord her as Divine,
Then to Chaldea was she Captive lead, Chaldea.

And tempted there to sin;
She that above 3 thousand years had been
Modest, and Humble, now perks up the Head;
For in Chaldea did she find
Sparks of the old Ambitious mind,
Of reaching Heaven, and scorning odds
To live Inferior to the Gods.
Go too, say they,
What though our Fathers Babel-plot
Succeeded not,
But in their Tower's Confusion ruined lay;
However 'twas nobly don,
And the Design was Generous, and High;
Let us their Children try:
The Father he may creep on earth, Astrology.
whilst the bold son
With more of Scorn, than Pity views, him from the distant sky.
Then up she got amongst the Stars,
And sat her down by Destiny
There learned of her the lower world's affairs;
Common concerns she did reveal,
But the great Business of the world conceal,
And bid her there less eagerly to pry:
But as the Destiny did look,
And turned the leaves that were
Writ in a dismal Character,
She slily peeped into the Doomsday Book,
And whispered down the Fates
Of slaggering Kingdoms, and declining States.
5
When Learning thus in the East grew great, and when
Philosophers as common were as Men,
Then first Adventurous Greece Greece.

In little ships swom over the Main,
In quest of This famed Golden Fliece,
More rich then that their Jason did obtain,
With much more Danger, and with much less Gain.
Some to Phenicia sail, and some
Down into Egypt, and Judea come;
Where straight they found
That Truth out-did Fames Trumpet's sound:
For every common Merchant there
Vented his Learning with his ware,
Both kept enough, and had enough to spare.
Had not the far famed Samian Peer
Been Tutour'd, and Instructed here,
His Transmigrating Soul had been
In Speculation Weak, and Thin
Void of it is Learned Superstition
It might to Greece, and us unknown
Have fitly passed into the silly Ass again.
Here was the soaring Plato taught
Each lofty, and refined Thought;
Diviner Notions framed to raise
Man above Dreggy Matter, and
Whatever does deservedly command
As much our Admiration, as our Praise,
Was all made his at second hand.
His Honey'd Eloquence,
In which he is yet alive,
Was all transported hence,
With greedy Lips sucked from the sacred Hive:
So much he does to Moses owe
For what we thought in his own Mouth to grow.
Nor must we him of all forget,
Whom Learning's Jaded Children yet
Grace with the Character,
And swelling Style of the Philosopher.
He to the learned Nilean strand,
If not even to the Holy Land
With his victorious Scholar went,
(More likely Jove's then Philip's son
Who conquered Earth, as he the Heavens had done)
The Learned world to subjugate intent
As he the whole to overmaster meant:
Accordingly they carried it;
That a Monopoly of power, and this of wit:
This in a proud design to raise
Eternal Pillars to hi's immortal Praise,
He plunders all the Learning of the East,
Rifles each famous Library,
Each Treasury of Learned pains,
Dragging old Authors from their Rustie chains
Into a worse Captivity:
But still reserving to himself the Best,
He cruelly condemned to fatal flames the Rest,
So did the Aged Asian Phoenix burn,
And to the Stagirite that European Phoenix turn.
6.
Thus have we seen thee Greece assume,
And put on wisdom, as a borrowed plume:
W' have seen thee in thy Ruff, and Pride,
When as thou did not only those
Flout, and deride,
From whom thy Greatness rose,
But stamp'dst Barbarian the whole world beside.
We see thee now of all thy Braverie bereft,
Quite stripped, and naked left,
Thy self at Length inheriting that Name
Thou others proudly gav'st, and well deserve the same.
And now thou glorious Light,
Since Greece is wrapped in gloomie Night,
(For it is thy absence makes it so)
Tell me, next whither did thou go,
Freely to scatter, and Dispense
Thy Blessed Influence?
This Sun below, like that above,
Was surely born in th'e East,
And does with that the same way move,
Still travayling on tow'ards the West.
And here could I but have my will,
That which has paralleled the Sun before,
Should do the same in one thing more;
As that has done,
Once over the Plains of Gibeon;
This Radiant Illustrious Light should over the West stand still:
Should over the West
In full Meridian Luster stand,
And there the lesser Lights not darken, but command;
That so they jointly all
In smooth, and equal Harmony may fall,
And prove officious Handmayds to the best,
The best, and clearest Light that does adorn
Our Hemisphere; who to give proof that she
Was Heaven-born,
Wears no less Style then of Divinity;
And while preserved in her bright Purity
Will in the British Firmament
No less be our defense, then Ornament:
Here fixing her own Tutelarie God,
Who in the floating world has so long settled her Abode.
On the Parts of this Learned Work THE COURT OF THE GENTILES.
Of LEARNING if you would have the Total, add
Together Things with Words; that Total's had.
Of Learning Words challenge but for their Share
The surface; Things the Solid Body are.
Bodies their Surface offers to our Eyes;
Our Mind by Words (their Surface) Things descries
Words without Things a Parot's Learning give:
Things without Words make grown Men Infants live.
Learning of Words and Things composed is then
It Self made perfect, and makes perfect Men.
PHILOLOGIE of Words the Knowledge brings;
PHILOSOPHIE's the higher Schole of Things:
But Scholars both, to SCRIPTURE, and the JEW,
For what in either Kind is rare, if true.
The Jews now Cruel once were Kind; when they
Both Treasures lent, both without Usury,
To Stranger Gentiles; who yet proved to be
As unjust Debtors, as the Jews were free
And friendly Creditors; and having gained
Their Goods in hand; in hand their Goods detaind:
At length deny the Principal; and plead
Their Stock of Learning all of their own Breed.
A COURT erected; the AUTHOR to extract
A fair Confession of so foul a Fact,
Puts them upon the Learned Rack; and shows
The Jewish Book for all the Gentile ows.
In all finds for the Jew: and was it not fit,
The Author JUDGE in his own COURT should sit?
Where both he so performs, you will doubt, which he
Better PHILOLOGER, or PHILOSOPHER he?
Favor in one were in the other Spite:
BOTH BEST conclude him, and you do him Right.
A Synopsis of the Contents.
Book I. Of Oriental and Occidentall Barbarick Philosophy.
CHAP. I. Of Philosophy in General; and Sacred Philosophers.
THe Greek (...) from the Hebrew Sophim. 12 Philosophy so called from Love of
Wisdom. 3.4. Philosophers called (...) etc. from the Jewish Mysteries. 4. God
the first Idea, and Efficient of Philosophy. 5. Philosophy sprang from
Admiration. Ib. The first Institutors of Philosophy Divine. 6 Adam the
greatest human Philosopher. 7 The Philosophy of Seth, and Enoch. 8 Abraham's
philosophy. 9 10.11. Joseph's philosophy. 12.13. Moses's philosophy. 14.17.
Solomon's philosophy. 17.18.19. The Jewish Schools, and Philosophy. 19.20.21
CHAP. 2. Of Egyptian Philosophy, and its Traduction from the Scriptures etc.
THe Egyptians repute for Philosophy. 22.23 24 The Egyptians Mathematics from
the Jews 24 1. Their Astronomy, its rise etc. 24 2. Their Geometry. 25 3.
Their Geographie. 26 The Egyptians Natura Philosophy 26 Their Medicine. 27
Their Moral Philosophy, and Politics. 28 The Egyptian Laws, and Politics
from the Jews. 28.29 The Egyptian Theology from Joseph. 29 Egyptian Rites
Imitations of the Jewish. 29.30 Of the Egyptian Hieroglyphics, their
origination from the Jewish Symbols. 32.36 Testimonies to prove the Traduction
of Egyptian Philosophy from the Jews. 36.37 How Sacred Dogmes were traduced to
the Egyptians from the Jews. 38 Joseph's care to instruct the Egyptians. 39 The
original of the Schole of Alexandria, and the Advantages it had from the Jews.
40 The Derivations the Schole of Alexandria received from the Gospel, and
Christian Church. 41.42
CHAP. 3. Of the Phenician Philosophy, its Traduction from the Jews, and
Scriptures.
HOw the Phenicians traduced their Philosophy from the Jews. 43.47 The
Phenicians skill in Navigation, Geographie, Arithmetic, Astronomy etc. 44 45
Their skill in Mathematics in general. 45 The Grecians borrowed much of their
philosophy from the Phenicians. 45.46 Farther evidence, that the Phenicians
received their Philosophy from the Jews. 46.47 Of Sanchoniathon his
origination. 47.48 His skill in Philosophy, and Mythologie, 48.49
Sanchoniathon's Philosophy from Taautus, who possibly was Moses. 49 The
original of Sanchoniathon's Philosophy from the Jewish Church proved. 50.58 1.
From Testimonies of Philo, and Porphyrie. 50 Jerombalus, from whom Porphyrie
makes Sanchoniathon to have derived his Philosophy, the same with Gideon. 51
2. From Sanchoniathon's Mythologick mode of Philosophising, which is Judaick.
52 3. The matter of Sanchoniathon's Philosophy Hebraick. 1. his Metaphysics.
53 His Theogonie of Hebraick origin- Ib. Beelsamen, from (...) Ib. Eliun from
(...) Genesis 14.19 54 Ilus from (...): Eloeim from (...) Ib. Betylia from Bethel.
Ib. Sanchoniathon's imitation of Abraham's offering up his son Isaac. 55 Of
Angels, and the human Soul. Ib. 2. Sanchoniathon's Physics. 56 His Chaos from
Genesis 1.2. Ereb from Genesis 1.5. Ib. His Mot from (...) Mod, and (...) etc. 56.57
3. His Chronology, and Geographie. 57. Of Mochus his Origination etc. 58.59.
Mochus's Philosophy Physiologick, or a natural History of the Creation. 59
60. Mochus the first that philosophised of Atoms, which he had by Tradition
from Genesis 1.60. A general proof of the Traduction of the Phenician Philosophy
from the Jews. 60.61 The Gospel vouchsafed to the Phenicians. 61.
CHAP. 4. Of the Chaldaick Philosophy, and Philosophers.
THe Division of Philosophy into Barbarick and Grecian. 62. The Chaldaick
Philosophy its rise etc. 63.64. The Chaldeans famous chiefly for Astronomy 64
How Astronomy was communicated to the Chaldeans, by the Patriarchs, and holy
seed. 65. The first Patriarchs much versed in the contemplation of Celestial
Bodies etc. 66 How natural Astronomy, and Astrology degenerated into Judicial
Astrology. 66 67 The Pagan (...) answerable to the Jewish Teraphims. 67. The
Chaldaick Theology among the Zabij, with their original, and Rites. 68. One
Rite of Zabiisme Job. 31.26.27. Ib. Another, piece of Zabiisme consisted in
their (...) mentioned Lev. 26.30. 69. Why the Sun was worshipped under Fire. Ib.
Other Sects of the Chaldeans. 70 The Chaldeans instructed by the Jewish
Schools. 71
CHAP. 5. Of the Magi, Gymnosohpists, Druides, And other Barbarick Philosophers.
THe original of the Persian Magi. 72^ The Magi instituted by Soroaster, and
their correspondence with the Zabij. 73 The Indian Philosophers, Gymnosophists,
Germans, Brachmanes. from Manes. 74.75. The African Philosophers, 1. Atlantic
75.76 2. Ethiopick, whose Divinity came from the Jews. 76. European
Philosophers. 1. Scythian, 76. 2. Thrachian, 3. Spanish 77. 4. Druides, their
original. 78 The Druides first in Britannie, and thence in Gallia Ib. Their
Academies, Privileges, Degrees etc. 79. Their Philosophy Natural, Moral,
Mathematick. 79. Their Rhetoric, Theology, and Discipline. 80. The Druides
Worship, and Sacrifice, etc. 81 The Druides called also Saronides Ib. Their
Distribution into Bardi, Evates etc. Ib. The Druides Oke-Religion from
Abraham's Oak of Mamre, and worship there 82
BOOK. II. The Original of the Ionick, but Chiefly of the Italick, or
Pythagorick Philosophy.
CHAP. I. The Traduction of the Grecian Philosophy from the Patriarchs, and
Jewish Church proved by Universal Consent
THe Grecian Philosophers recourse to Egypt, and Phenicia. 83 That the Grecian
Philosophy was derived from the Jews is proved by Testimonies of 1. Heathen
Philosophers viz. Plato, Numenius, Hermippus, Aristotle, and Diogenes Laertius.
84.85. 2. Jews, Aristobulus, and Josephus. 85.86 3. Christian Fathers,
Tertullian, Clemens Alexand Justin Martyr, Eusebius, Minucius Faelix,
Theodoret, Ioannes Grammaticus, 86.87 4. Modern Papists, Steuchus Eugubinus,
Justinian. 87.88. 5. Protestants, 1. Foreign, Melancthon, Serranus, Julius, and
Joseph Scaliger, Vo^sius, Heinsius, Bochart, Grotius, Hornius, Amirault. 89 2.
English, Jackson, Usher, Richardson, Preston Ralegh, Owen, Stillingsleet,
Seldom. 90
CHAP. 2. Of Mythologick Philosophy, and its Traduction from the Jews.
OF Mythologick Philosophy in general 91. Mythologick Philosophy first seated
among Poets, Orpheus, Homer, Hesiod, etc. 92 93 How these Poets disguised
Oriental Traditions. 94. The use, and abuse of Mythologick Philosophy. Ib.
Symbolick, and Enigmatick Philosophy from the Jewish Types, and Enigmes. 95
Metaphorick, and Allegorick Philosophy from the Jews. 96 The matter of
Mythologick Philosophy from sacred Works, and Truths. 97.98. The Causes of
Mythologick, Philosophy. 98. 1. Ignorance, (1.) of the Hebrew Idiome. 98. (2)
of the matter of Judaick Traditions. 99 (3) of the Judaick form of Doctrine.
99. (4) from the Imperfection of Judaick Traditions. 100. 2. Admiration another
Cause of all Mythologick Philosophy, with Aristotle's account. 100.101 3.
Imitation a cause of Mythologick Philosophy. 102.103. Plato's Imitation both
Theoretick, and Practick. 103.104. 4. Curiosity, and Affectation of Noveltie
another Cause of Symbolick Philosophy. 104.105. 5. Pride- 6. Idolatry. 7.
Carnal Policy. 105
CHAP. 3. Of Ionick Philosophy begun by Thales and its Iudaick Origin.
THe first Distribution of Grecian Philosophy into Ionick, and Italick. 107.
Ionick, and Italick Philosophy received its first impressions and lines from
God's Church. 107.108. Thales's extract from Phenicia. 109. The Seven Wise men,
and their Philosophy. 109.110. An Abstract of Thales's Philosophy. 110
Thales's Philosophy from the Egyptians, and Phenicians immediately, but
Originally from the Scriptures, and Iudaick Church. 110. Thales's great
Principle, That Water was the first Matter of all things; immediately from the
Phenicians, but originally from Genesis 1.2. etc. 111.112.113. Thales's
Metaphysics of God, etc. 115.116. Thales's Scholars, and Successors. 116.117
Empedocles, Heraelitus, Democritus, Hippocrates. 117
CHAP. 4. Of Pherecydes's Philosophy, and its Traduction from the Jews.
PHerecydes's original from Syrus. 118 Pherecydes's Parents, and Birth. 119
Pherecydes's philosophy from the Phenicians, and Jews. Ib. Pherecydes the
first, that writ Philosophy in Prose. 120 Pherecydes's philosophy
Mythologick. 120 Pherecydes's Heliotrope from the Jews. 120 Pherecydes's (...),
or Theology. 121 Pherecydes held the Souls Immortality. 126
CHAP. 5. Of Pythagoras, and the Traduction of his Philosophy from the Jews.
THe several Sects of Philosophers. 123 That Pythagoras traduced the main of
his Philosophy from the Scriptures, and Jews, is proved by Testimonies: 1. of
Pagans, and Jews. 124 2. Of Christian Fathers. 124.125 3. Of Modern Papists,
and Protestants. 125 Pythagoras's extract from the Phenicians. 126 Pythagoras's
Praeceptors in Greece. ^27 Pythagoras's Travels into Phenicia; and converse
with the Successors of Mochus, and Priests there. 128 Pythagoras his Travels
into Egypt, and correspondence with Jews there. 128.129.130 Pythagoras his
Travels to Babylon, and converse with the captive Jews, who inhabited there.
130.131.132 Pythagoras his coming to, and abode in Italy. 133.134 Pythagoras
his character by Jamblicus, Diog. Laertius, Apuleius, and Justin. 134.135.136
CHAP. 6. Pythagoras his College, and Discipline from the Jews.
PYthagoras his twofold Schole, and Disciples. 137.138 1. His Homoco^ion, or
common Schole. 137 2. His (...), or ^ollege. 137.138 Pythagoras his Schools
from the Jews. 138.139 The Pythagorean 5 years Probation, and Silence from the
Judaick Church. 139 140.141^ The Discipline of Pythagoras his schole. 142
Pythagoras his College, and Confederation from the Jewish Church. 142 143.144
Pythagoras his Symbol of Salt, an imitation of God's, Covenant of Sal^, Levit.
2.13. 144.145.146 The Idea of Pythagoras his College from the Essenes. 14^ 148
The Pythagoreans, as the Essenes, great Separatists. 148.149^ 2. The
Pythagoreans, as the Essenes, shunned Pleasures. 149. 3. The Pythagoreans, and
Essenes enjoyed all things in common 149 4. The Pythagoreans Celibat from the
Jews, and Essenes. 150 5 Pythagorean Abstinences from the Jews, and Essenes.
151 6 The Pythagorean Purifications. 7. their Festivals from the Jews. 152. 8.
The Pythagorean white distinctive Vestements from the Jews. 152. 9. The
Pythagorean Silence from the Jews. 153, 154 10. The Pythagoreans Reverence to
their Doctors. 154 11. Their owning Providence; and their Devotion. 154 13.
Their daily Studies. 14. Their daily Exercises, Inspections, and Examens of
their Actions. 155 15. Their zele against Apostates. 156 16. Their
Excommunication. 156 17. A general Parallel betwixt the Essents, and
Pythagoreans. 156
CHAP. 7. Of Pythagoras's Philosophy Natural, and Moral; with its Traduction
from the Jews.
THe Distribution of Pythagoras's Philosophy. 157 The several parts of
Pythagoras's Philosophy; both what he received from Orpheus, Egypt, Chaldea,
and Phenicia, from the Jews originally. 158, 159. Pythagoras's Mathematics.
159 Pythagoras's Arithmetic from Phenicia. 160 Pythagoras's Music. 160
Pythagoras's Astronomy. 161 The Earth's Motion. 161 Pythagoras's Geometry,
and Measures. 161 Pythagoras's Physics: 1. Contemplative. 162 The Origin of
the Universe. 162 The First Matter, and Form. 162 Pythagoras's notions of Fire.
163.164 2 Pythagoras's Medicine from the Jews. 165 Pythagoras's Moral
Philosophy. 165 1. His Ethics, Dogmatick, Exhortative, and Characteristick.
166, 167, 168. 2. Pythagoras's Politics. 169, 170.
CHAP. 8. Pythagoras's Theology traduced from the Jewish Church.
PYthagoras's Theology was the Center of his Philosophy. 172, 173
Pythagoras's Tetracty from the Judaick (...). 173 Pythagoras's Metaphysick
contemplations of God's Being (...), from Exodus 3.14. 174, 1^5 Pythagoras's
Scriptural Tradition of God's Unity. 176 Pythagoras of Gods Simplicity. 177
Pythagoras his Divine. Idea's the same with the Scriptural tradition of Gods
Decrees. 178-183 Parmenides his opinion of Idea's. 179, 180 Timaeus Locrus his
Doctrine of Idea's. 181 Divine Idea's either primarie, or secondarie 181 All
things made according to God's Exemplar. 182 Pythagoras, of God's Providence
over all. 183 Pythagoras's Model of Divine worship. 184^ 187 1. Against all
Images in Divine worship. 184 2. That God is to be worshipped by Rites of his
own Institution. 185 3. Pythagoras his exactness in Divine worship. 186
Pythagoras his Demons, their office, and nature, in Imitation of the Messiah.
187, 188 Of the Pythagorean Aeones. 188 Pythagoras his Metempsychosis a corrupt
tradition of the Resurrection. 188, 189 A general Idea of Pythagoras's
Philosophic, Mystic Theology. 189, 190 Pythagoras his Divination. 190
CHAP. 9. Of Pythagoras's Symbols, and their Judaick Original, etc.
PYthagoras his Mode of Philosophizing Judaick, and Scriptural. 191, 192 An
enumeration of Pythagoras his Symbols, which proves their Judaick original. 193
1. Give the right hand of fellowship to none but Pythagoreans. 194 2. Abstain
from things dead. 194, 195 3. Set down Salt, a Symbol of Amity. 195 Pythagoras
his Ethick Symbols. 196 Pythagoras his Metempsychosis Symbolick. 197
Nebuchadnezar his Metempsychosis. 198 Pythagoras his Abstinence from flesh
Symbolick. 198, 199 Pythagoras his Abstinence from beans Symbolick. 199, 200
Numbers Symbols of things Divine. 200 Pythagoras his Symbols of Divine Worship,
of Judaick extract. 200.201 Of Pythagoras's Works. 201 Pythagoras his
Sectators, and their destruction. 202 The Pride of the Pythagoreans, and all
other Philosophers congenial. 204
CHAP. 10. Of the Eleatick Philosophy, etc.
XEnophanes the Founder of the Eleatick Sect. 205 Parmenides his Philosophy.
206 Zeno the Eleatick, Inventor of Logic. 206 Leucippus his Doctrine of
Atoms. 207 Democritus, with his opinion of Atoms. 207 His skill in
Experimental Philosophy. 208 His Ethics, and (...). 208 Of the Heraclitians,
Epicureans, and Scepticks. 209
BOOK III. Wherein briefly of the Socratick, but more largely of the Platonic
Philosophy.
CHAP. I. Of Socratick Philosophy, its Original, etc.
SOcrates the Author of Moral Philosophy. 212 Why Socrates applied himself
chiefly to Morality. 212, 213 Socrates an Universal Scholar. 213 Socrates his
Metaphysick contemplations, and their Judaick Origin. 214, 215 That all Virtue
comes from God. 215 That all true knowledge is by Divine Infusion. etc. 215
Socrates his Demon, his office, etc. 216 Socrates his Active Philosophy, how
far contemplative, and wherein not. 217, 218 All Philosophy ought to end in
Virtue. 218, 219 To know our selves, the first principle of Socrates his
Philosophy. 220 His advice for the Government of the Tongue. 221 Socrates his
Mode of Philosophizing natural, and familiar, answerable to the Jewish. 221 His
Rhetoric mode Ironick. 221 His Dialectick by Induction, and Interrogations
from the Judaick Schools originally. 221, 222 The occasion, and Instruments of
his Death, etc. 223 Socrates his Character. 224 His Scholars, and their
different persuasions. 224, 225
CHAP. 2. Of Platonic Philosophy, and its Traduction from the Jews.
THat Plato borrowed his choicest notions from the Jews, is proved 1. By
Testimonies. (1) of Pagans. 226 Plato his own confession hereof. 227, 228 Plato
his ^henician fables Judaick. 228 Plato his (...) some Judaick Tradition. 228,
229 Plato his Divine Word Judaick. 229 Plato h^^ probable Fables Jewish. 229,
230 Why Plato conceled the name of the Jews. 230 The Testimony (1) of
Numenius. 231 (2) Of Jews, Aristobulus, and Jose^ 231 (3) Of Christians, more
Ancient (...) Martyr, Clem. Alexandrinus, Ambrose, A. 232, 233 (4) Of Modern
Christians, Lud^es, Luther, Seldom, Cudworth, Stillingfleet, Hornius, etc. 233,
234, 235
CHAP. 3. Of Plato's Life, and Travels for the procurement of Oriental
Traditions.
THe History of Plato's Life. 236 Plato his Ancestors, and first Instructors.
236, 237 Plato his Travels into Italy, and his Instructions from the
Pythagoreans. 237, 238 Plato his Travels into Egypt, where he informed himself
in the Jewish wisdom. 239 Plato, whilst in Egypt, learned from the Jewish
Doctrine (1) the Origin of the Universe. (2) the Fall. (3) of God, etc. 240
How Plato might receive Information from the Jewish Records, whilst in Egypt.
241 Plato's skill in the Egyptian, and Phenician Languages, gave him advantage
to read the Scriptures. 241, 242 Plato his collections from the Phenician
Theology, and Philosophy. 243, 244 Of Plato his Academie. 244, 245 Plato his
Character, and Works. 245, 246
CHAP. 4. Of the Academicks, and New Platonicks of Alexandria.
THe Old Academie, and its difference from the New in point of suspension. 247,
248 Whether Plato dogmatized? 248, 249 Plato his Successors in the old
Academie. 249 The New Academicks, and their (...), and (...), with its origin.
249, 250 The difference between the New Academicks, and Scepticks. 251 The
original of the New Platonists, and their Schole at Alexandria. 251, 252 Of
Potamon, Ammonius, Plutarch, Philo. 252 Of Ammonius the head of the sacred
succession, his borrowing his choicest notions from the Scriptures. 253-255 Of
Plotinus, and his Character. 255 Of Porphyrie, his origination, etc. 256
Jamblicus, Syrianus, Proclus. 257, 258 Of Johannes Grammaticus. 258, 259
Maximus Tyrius, Alcinous, Apuleius. 259 These New Platonists, called Electicks;
because they chose out the best of all Sects. 260, 261 The general design of
these New Platonists to reform Philosophy. 261, 262 The defects of this
Platonic Reformation, begun by Ammonius. 262, 263 Too great extolling of
Platonic Philosophy even above the Scriptures. 263 Particular evils, that
followed upon this Platonic Reformation. 264 1. As to the confirmation of
Paganism. 264 2. As to the corruption of Christianisme. 265
CHAP. 5. Plato's Pythagorick, and Socratick mode of Philosophizing; with the
original of both from the Jewish Church.
PLato his Symbolick mode of Philosophizing, and its various uses. 266, 267 How
Plato his Symbols ought to be regulated. 268 Plato his Symbolick mode of
Philosophizing from the Jews. 268, 269 Plato affects the Socratick mode of
Philosophizing, y^^ with some differences. 270, 271 Plato his mode of reasoning
by Dialogues, of Jewish origin. 272
CHAP. 6. The several distributions of Platonic Philosophy.
THe Distribution of Plato his Philosophy, as to its matter, into Pythagorick,
Herachtick, Socratick. 274 Plato as to Theologicks, Pythagorizeth 274, 275 As
to Sensibles, Plato follows Heraclitus. 275 As to Morals, Plato follows
Socrates. 275, 276 A second Division of Platonic Philosophy, into
Contemplative, and Active. 276 A third distribution of Plato his Philosophy
into Moral, Natural, and Rational. 277, 278 A fourth distribution of Platonic
Philosophy into Organick, and Essential. 278 The last distribution of
Platonic Philosophy into Organick, or Rational, Natural, Moral, and
Supernatural. 279, 280, 281 Plato his Natural Philosophy. 280 Plato his
Mathematics. 281 Plato his Moral Philosophy. Ibid. Plato his Metaphysics.
281, 282
CHAP. 7. General Idea's of Platonic Philosophy, and Philosophers.
PLato his Idea of Natural Philosophy. 283, 284 The Generick notion of
Philosophy is Appetition. 283 The object of this Appetition, Sciences. 283 1.
Intelligence, the knowledge of first Principles. 284 2. Science, or
Demonstrative Discourse. 284 3. Faith. 4. Imitation. 285 The Simple object of
Philosophy. 285 The Specific Act, contemplation. 285 The Qualities of this
contemplation. 286 The Effect, and end of this contemplation, Truth, as Truth.
286 Plato his Idea of Moral Philosophy. 287 The Genus (...), or Prudence. 287
The ultimate end of Moral Philosophy, humane Beatitude. 287 The Intermediate
object, Agibles. 287, 288 The offices of Moral Prudence. 288 The parts of Moral
Prudence, 1. (...), Providence. 288 2. (...), Dexterity, or Sagacitie. 288,
289 3. (...), Experience, or Sensation. 289, 290 The subject of Moral Prudence
Conscience. 290 The (...), or Seat of Principles. 291 The (...), or Reflective
light of Conscience. 291, 292 The Rule of Moral Prudence (...), etc. 292
Subjective Fight Reason, What? 292, 293 Plato his Divine Philosophy in the
contemplation, affection, and Imitation of God. 294, 295 Plato his (...), and
(...). 294 Plato his (...), and (...). 295, 296 Plato his character of a
Philosopher. 296 1. A Philosopher must be (...). 296 2. Well instituted. 296 3.
(...), a Lover of Truth. 297 4. Wholly devoted to Philosophy. 297 5. Not
covetous. 6. Nobly disposed. 297 7. Courageous. 8. Not Morose. 298 9. Of an
harmonious, Musical nature. 298 10. Virtuous. 299, 299
CHAP. 8. Of Plato's Logic, and its derivation from the Jews.
PLato his form of Logic, Dialogick. 299, 300 The original of this
Dialogizing mode from the Pleatick Schole. 300, 301 Plato his Dialogizing
Logic originally from the Jews. 301 The Scriptural mode of disputing by
Dialogues. 302 Logic a Key, or Organ for the Disquisition of Truth. 303 Plato
his Logic Precepts for the Disquisition of Truth. 304 1. A Logician must be of
mature Age, grave, moderate, not vainglorious. 304 How far the old Academie
was guilty of contentious Disputes. 304, 305 2. The matter of Logic Disputes
momentous. 305 3. Lay good foundation-Principles. 305 4. A methodick procedure
from particulars to generals; from the part to the whole. 306 5. The use of
Exemplifications. 306, 307 6. Distinguish well 'twixt Truth, and Falsehood. 307
7. State the Affirmative well. 307 8. In the Definition of things, expect not
more of certainty than the matter will bear. 307, 308 9. Liberty in our
examens of Things. 308 10. Value Reason, more than Authority. 308 11. Modesty,
and Moderation in Disputes. 309 Alcinous of Plato's Dialectick. 309-311
CHAP. 9. Of Plato's Physics, and their Traduction from Sacred Story.
PLato's Physics, the story of the Origin of the Universe. 313 That Plato
had his Story, concerning the Origin of the Universe, from Moses, is
demonstrated; 1. From his own confession. 2. From the Testimony of others.
313, 314 Plato follows Moses, Genesis 1.1. in asserting the beginning of the
Universe. 314, 315 How Plato affirms the World to be Eternal. 315 God the
first cause of all things. 316 God's Ideal Efficience. 316 Plato his
Intelligible World. 316, 317 The difference betwixt Plato his Ideas, and
Exemplar. 317 God's Energetick Efformative Efficiencie. 318, 319 Plato his
(...), Soul of the Universe, what it imports. 319 Plato his Universal Spirit
exactly answers, 1. To the Spirit's Efformative Virtue. 319, 320, 321 2. To the
Spirit's Conservation, and Providence. 321 3. To the Harmony of the Universe.
322 4. Plato h^s Ignisick Virtue: how far it may be styled the Universal
Spirit. 322 The Body of the Universe, and its original Matter. 323 The
Parallel betwixt Moses, and Plato in the Description of the first Matter.
324-326 Moses's (...) the same with Plato's (...). 324 Moses's (...) the
origin of Plato's (...). 324 Plato's (...) from Moses, Genesis 1.5. 325 Genesis 1.2.
Moved on the face of the Waters. 326 The Body of the Universe is composed of
the four Elements. 326, 327, 328 Plato received this distribution of the
Universe from Moses. 328-330 The form of the Universe, its Order. 330, 331 The
Affections of the Universe. 331-336 1. Its Perfection. 332-334 2. Its Unity.
3. Its Finiteness. 334 4. Its Figure. 5. Its Colors. 335 6. Time. 7. Mobilitie.
8. Generation. 9. Duration. 336 The particular part of Physiologie. 337 The
Creation of Angels. 337 The Creation of the Heavens, their nature Ignite, or
Waterie. 337 That the Sun, and Stars are composed of Fire, demonstrated
largely. 338, 339, 340, 341, 342 Of the Wind, Air, Water, etc. 342, 343 Of
Active Physiologie, touching Plants, and Animals. 343 Of Man's Original, and
Formation, according to the Image of God. 344 The Soul's Divine origin,
Immortality, etc. 344, 345 The Humane Intellect, and its Sciences. 345 The
Will its Definition. 346 Plato his Notions about the Soul from Scripture. 346
Physical Aphorisms for the conservation of human health. 346 Of Prophylactick
Physic. 347 1. The Causes of Diseases to be avoided. 347, 348 2. Nature must
be maintained in her due offices, and exercises. 349, 350 1. Excretion. 2.
Perspiration. 3. Activitie of Spirits. 4 Respiration, etc. 349 3. Rules for
Aliment. 350 Of Therapeutick Physic. 350, 351 The Character of a good
Physician. 351, 352
CHAP. 10. A brief Abstract of Plato's Moral, and Metaphysical Philosophy.
PLato's Ethics, 1. Of the chiefest good. 354 2. Of Virtue. 3. Of Sin. Ibid.
4. Of the Affections, their Moderation. 354, 355 5. And particularly of Love.
355 6. Of Justice. 355 Plato his Oeconomicks, and Politics. 355 Plato his
Metaphysics. 355 1. Of God, his Essence, and Attributes. 355, 356 2. Of the
Humane Soul. 356
BOOK IV. Of Peripatetick, Cynick, Stoic, Sceptick, and Epicurean Philosophy.
CHAP. 1. Of Aristotelick, or Peripatetick Philosophy, its Traduction from the
Jews.
THe Traduction of Aristotle's Philosophy from the Jews, proved 1. By
Testimonies of Aristobulus, Clearchus, Steuch. Eugubinus, and Seldom. 358, 359
Rational Arguments to prove, that Aristotle traduced the choicest parts of his
Philosophy from the Jews. 360, 361 Aristotle his first Mover, God. 361 The
Soul's Spiritualitie, etc. 361 Aristotle his Metaphysics. 361, 362 Why
Aristotle rejected the more sublime Judaick Traditions. 362 Aristotle his
Ethics, and Politics. 363 Aristotle his Life. 363, 364 Aristotle his
Character. 364, 365 A comparison betwixt Plato, and Aristotle, as to Rhetoric,
Logic, and Metaphysics. 366 Aristotle his Doctrines Acroatick, or Exoterick.
367.368 Aristotle his Works, what genuine. 368, 369 Aristotle his Books how
conveyed to Posterity. 369, 370 Aristotle his Successors, Theophr^stus, etc.
370 Aristotle his ^ommentat. Aphrodiseus, etc. 371 Arabian Comment Averroes,
and Avice^na. 373 A general Idea of Aristotle's Philosophy by Ammonius. 374,
375 The end of Aristotle's Philosophy to know God. 375 Aristotle his mode of
Philosophizing. 375 The Characters of a genu^ne Auditor, and good Expositor of
Aristotle. 376 The distributi^n of Aristotle his Philosophy. 3^6, 377
Aristotle his Logic. 377 383 A Scheme of Logic. 378, 379 Aristotle of Method.
380, 381 A Scheme of Ramus his Logic. 382, 383 Aristotle his Ethics. 383 1.
Characters of the chiefest Good. 383-386 2. Of Man's formal Beatitude. 386 (1)
Its formal Reason in Operation. 386 (2) Its proper subject, the human Soul. 387
(3) Virtue the Soul's Qualification. 387 (4) The state of human Beatitude is a
perfect Life, Intensively, and protensively. 387, 388 The principles of human
Acts. 389 1. Practick knowledge. 389, 390 2. Volition, its end, and object.
390, 391, 392 Consultation: 1. its Object; 1. Things Practick. 2. In our Power.
3. The Means. 4. These Finite. 5. Things Parmanent. 6. Things Contingent, yet
in our Power. Its main Work to find out means most conducible. 393, 394 2. The
Subject; He who has his Wits about him. 395 3. The Act, Practick Disquisition.
Ibid. Election. 1. Its Difference from Consult. and Volition. 2. Object, the
Means. 3. Subject, Rational Will. 4. Act; 1 Rational. 2. Determined, and fixed.
396 5. Difficulty. 6. Effect as to Virtue. 7. Definition. 397 Essential
Adjunct of Human Acts, Voluntarinesse, or Liberty: Voluntary defined. 398
Coactive Necessity alone exclusive of Liberty. 399 Indifferency, and
Contrariety, unessential to Liberty. 400 Liberty Essential to the Will.
Ibid. God's Necessitating Concurse destroys not Liberty. 401 God's
Predetermination of the Will, makes him not the Author of Sin. 402 Touching the
Morality of Human Acts. Ibid. 1. Of Moral Good, or Virtue. 403 1. Virtues not
Passions; 2. Not Powers. 404 3. Virtues Habits; what an Habit is? 405 Formal
Nature of Virtue in Mediocritie. 406 How Virtue consists in Mediocritie. Ib.
407 Mediocritie of Virtue, Harmony. Ibid. The Rule, or Measure of Mediocritie,
Right Reason, or the Law of Nature. 408, 409, 410 Idea, or Definition of Moral
Virtue. 411 1. Virtue consists in the best End, and Work. 412 2. All Virtues
have the same general Idea. Ib. Wh^t Vice is? Ibid. 413 Aristotle his Physics.
413 1. God's General Causalitie as the first M^ver. 414 2. That Man's Soul is
Incorporeous, and Immortal. Ibid. Aristotl^ his Metaphysics, called by him the
first Philosophy, or Theology. 415 A Character of his Sapience; the Object
whereof 1. Things most Universal, 2 M^st Difficult, 3. The first Causes. Ibid.
It Self, 1. Most desirable for it self. 2. Architectomical, and Principal, etc.
Ibid. Aristotle his Sapience applicable only to God, and things Divine. 416
CHAP. 2. Of the Cynicks Sect, and their Philosophy.
CYnicks Original from Antisthenes, his Schole the Cynosarges. 417 Cynicks why
so called. 418 Professors, Antisthenes, Diogenes, Crates, Demetrius. Ibid.
Affinity 'twixt Cynicks, and Stoics. 419 Principles of Cynicisme. 1. Virtue
our Chiefest Good, 2. External Goods not desirable. Ibid. A Wise man enjoys
all in God. 420 Cynicks abhorring Flattery, bearing Reproaches. Ibid. Cynicks
affected a kind of Impudence, great Reprovers of Vice, especially Pride. 421
Rejected all Philosophy besides M^ral. 422 Their Religion without
Superstition. Ibid. Their Justice, and Faithfulness. 423 Their esteem of
Liberty. Ibid. Virtue with them teachable. Ibid. Cynick Philosophy from the
Jews. Ibid.
CHAP. 3. Of the Stoic Sect, and Philosophy its Original.
ZEno his Original, and Instructors. 424 His Instituting the Stoic Sect, and
his Character. 425 His Successor Cleanthes, his Character. 426 Di^g. Babyl.
Antipater Sidon. Possidonius. 427 Roman Stoics, Cato, Varro, Antoninus,
Tullie, Seneca. Ibid. Christian Stoics, Pantaenus, Clem. Alexand. Ib. Stoic
Philosophy, from Jewish Theol^gie. 428 Stoicisme in general, its combination
with other Sects. 429 Agreement with Cynicks, Difference with Peripateticks,
and Contests with New Academicks. Ibid. Particular Dogmes of Stoicisme. Ibid.
1. Comprehension, 2. Of God, and his Nature, 3. His Creation, and Providence,
4. Of Fate, 5. God's Providence over Mankind. 430, 431 Stoics Physics; 1. Of
the Soul, 2. The (...). Ibid. Their Ethics, 1. Appetition, and that firstly of
Self-preservation, 2. That Passions are Irrational. 432, 433 Stoic
Philosophy, its contradiction to Christian Religion; a cause of Pelagianisme,
Ib. and 434
CHAP. 4. Of Scepticisme.
THe Scepticks several Names. 435 Pyrrho their Founder, his Character. Ibid.
His chief Dogme, that nothing could be known. 436 Formal Idea of Scepticisme,
the Scepticks business to overthrow all Dogmes of other Sects. Ibid. Sceptick
suspension how far it extended. 437 Its Original from Heraclitus, and Plato his
Schole. Ibid. Plato, and the Old Acad. Dogmatick, not Sceptick. 437 New Acad.
wherein differing from Scepticks. 438 Scepticks avoided all Dogmatizing. Ibid.
Scepticisme a great Enemy to Christian Religion. 439
CHAP. 5. Of Epicurisme.
EPicurus his Original. 440 His Institution of his Sect, and Character. His
Pride, and Contention. 441 Temperance, as reported by his friends. 442 His
Industry, Works, and Disciples. Ibid. Epicurus's Physics; 1. of Atoms. 443
His Canon, Contempt of Logic, Rhetoric, Mathematics. Ibid. His Ethics; 1.
Pleasure the chiefest Good, 2. this Pleasure Mental, in Virtue. 444 Maxims
touching Pleasure, and Pain. Ib. Atheistical Conceptions of God, his
Providence, etc. 446 How he undermined God's Providence. 447 He denied the
Soul's Immortality. Ibid. Pagan Philosophy determined in the Epicureans. Ib.
and 448
Index of Scriptures explicated.
Genesis.
Chapter 1. Ver. 1 page 314, 316 Chapter 1. Ver. 2 page 56, 111, 164, 119, 324, 326 Chapter
1. Ver. 3 page 338, 342 Chapter 1. Ver. 5 page 56, 114, 325 Chapter 1. Ver. 9 page 332,
343 Chapter 1. Ver. 16 page 53 Chapter 1. Ver. 26, 27 page 344 Chapter 1. Ver. 31 page 113,
182 Chapter 2. Ver. 19, 20 page 6 Chapter 2. Ver. 21, 2^, 23 page 344 Chapter 13. Ver. 18
page 82 Chapter 14. Ver. 19, 22 page 54 Chapter 18. Ver. 17, 19 page 65 Chapter 44. Ver. 5
page 1^ Chapter 47. Ver. 22 page 39 Chapter 50. Ver. 2 page 27
Exodus.
Chapter 3. Ver. 5 page 201 Chapter 3. Ver. 14 page 174, 175 Chapter 19. Ver. 5, 6 page 143
Leviticus.
Chapter ^. Ver. 13 page 144 Chapter 26. Ver. 30 page 69
Numbers.
Chapter 6. Ver. 6 page 194 Chapter 18. Ver. 19 page 144, 146 Chapter 23. Ver. 14 page 2
1 Samuel.
Chapter 1. Ver. 1 page 2 Chapter 19. Ver. 18, 19 page 2
1 Kings.
Chapter 4. Ver. 30 page 23
Ezra.
Chapter 4. Ver. 14 page 144
Job
Chapter 4. Ver. 3 page 19 Chapter 31. Ver. 26, 27 page 68
Psalms.
Chapter 105. Ver. 22 page 13 Chapter 135. Ver. 4 page 143
Ecclesiastes.
Chapter 5. Ver. 1 page 186 Chapter 9. Ver. 8 page 152
Daniel.
Chapter 4. Ver. 32, 33 page 198
Matthew.
Chapter 2. Ver. 1, 2 page 68 Chapter 7. Ver. 6 page 149, 194 Chapter 8. Ver. 22 page 194,
195 Chapter 13. Ver. 3 page 97
Mark.
Chapter 8. Ver. 11 page 1^^ Chapter 9. Ver. 49 page 145
Luke.
Chapter 11. Ver. 53 page 222, 273 Chapter 13. Ver. 26 page 144 Chapter 14. Ver. 34 page
145 Chapter 15. Ver. 24 page 167
Acts.
Chapter 7. Ver. 22 page 23 Chapter 14. Ver. 5 page 12 Chapter 17. Ver. 21 page 104
Romans.
Chapter 1. Ver. 21 page 98
Galatians.
Chapter 2. Ver. 9 page 148, 194
Philippians.
Chapter 3. Ver. 12 page 141 Chapter 3. Ver. 15 page 141
Colossians,
Chapter 2. Ver. 16 page 151 Chapter 2. Ver. 21, 22 page 151
1 Timothy
Chapter 3. Ver. 6 page 141 Chapter 4. Ver. 3 page 152
1 Peter.
Chapter 2. Ver. 9 page 143
The Court of the Gentiles. Part II. Of Philosophy.
Book I. Of Oriental, and Occidental Barbarick Philosophy.
Chap: I. Of Philosophy in General, and Scripture Philosophers.
The Greek (...) from the Hebrew Sophim i. e. Watchmen. Pagans defined
Philosophy a Love of the highest and best Wisdom, answerable to the Scriptures
Phrasiologie. Philosophers called also (...) and (...), from the Jewish
Mysteries. God the first Exemplar, Matter, and Efficient of all Philosophy. Of
the first Divine Philosophers, Adam, Seth, Enoch, Abraham. Of Joseph his
instructing the Egyptians. Moses's Writings, the Source of Phenician, Egyptian,
and Grecian Philosophy, viz. Physics, Metaphysics, Mathematics, and
Politics. Solomon's Philosophy; also Jobs; and of the Jewish Schools.

. 1. WE now proceed to discourse of Philosophy, its Original and Traduction
from the Jewish Church. And before we engage in the formal Explication; and
Demonstration hereof, we shall first give a more general Idea, or Notion of
Philosophy, (both name and thing) and then proceed to its original causes,
etc. Philosophy, The Greek (...) from the Hebrew Sophim.
in its first Introduction amongst the Grecians, was called (...), and
Philosophers (...), as Heinsius (exercit. Sacr. lib. 1. cap. 2.) presumes,
from the Hebrew (...) Sophim Watchmen: thence it is said Numb. 23.14. Number. 23.14.
that Balak brought Balam into a place, on the top of Mount Pisgah, called
(...), which the English Version, printed at Geneva 1560, renders Sede-Sophim,
the Seat of the Watch men. And that the Greeks derived their Sophi from this
Sophim, Heinsius affirms it without a peradventure; because the Greek (...)
Sophi were wont, on such high hills, to observe the course and motions of the
Heavens. That the Hebrews, as well as Phenicians, called their Wise men or
Prophets (...) Sophim, Watchmen, is most evident to any that observe the
Scripture Phrasiologie. So 1 Samuel 1.1. 1 Samuel 1.1.
we read of Ramathaim Sophim of Mount Ephraim: on which the Geneva Annotators
observe, That in this City, in Mount Ephraim, were Sophim, that is, the
Learned and Prophets. Thence the Syriack Version renders it, the hill of the
Watches, or Watchmen. Yea, more particularly, that this Ramathaim Sophim was
the chief Academie of their Wise men, or Schools of their Prophets, is apparent
from 1 Samuel 19.18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. v. 18. 1 Samuel 19.18, 19.
It is said, that David dwelt with Samuel, at Najoth in Ramah. Najoth, say the
Geneva Annotators, was a Schole where the Word of God was studied. Thence v.
20, etc. it is said, there were a Company of the Prophets there. And what more
common in the Scripture Dialect, than the stiling the Hebrew Prophets or Wise
men (...) Sophim, i. e. Watchmen? Hence it is most likely (if not without doubt
as Heinsius will have it) that the Greeks derived their (...); who were also
styled (...), Speculatores, Watchmen; and thence (...) Wisdom, or Philosophy,
is also called, by some of them, (...) Speculation: Whence that common division
of Philosophy, into (...), speculative and practick Philosophy.

Others derive the Greek (...) from the Punick Sufes, which in that Language
signifies a Magistrate. So Hornius. Historiae Philosoph. lib* 1. cap. 1. We
will that the original of the word (...), be fetched from no other than the
Punick Sufes, who, as it is well known, drew their tongue from the
Syrophenicians or Cananites. And he gives this account of the Origination: In
times past, says he, none but Wise men were admit^ed to the dignity of
Magistrates. Such Sufes, in the days of old, were Charondas, Solon, Lycurgus,
and other Legislators, who were both wise men and Magistrates. So that there is
no doubt to be made of it, but that (...) descended ence. This being granted,
yet it contradicts not the former Origination of Heinsius: for Hornius seems to
grant, according to that of Scaliger in Festum, that Sufes was deduced from
(...), which signifies an accurate speculation or contemplation, and so is the
same with the Greek (...), or (...), or (...): it is used in Scripture for the
Contemplation of sublime matters.

Camero Myroth cap. 2. Math. derives (...) from the Hebrew (...), others from
(...), which signifies to cover, or hide, and so answers to the Greek (...),
and differs but little from (...), which is of the same import. And that which
makes for this origination is Joseph's Egyptian name, who was called by Pharaoh
(...) i. e. an Interpreter of Secrets. Hence also the Persian Kings are, even
to this day, caled Sophi, which signifies Interpreters of the Gods and Wise
men. So amongst the Arabians Sophus imports a Religious and Wise man, as Horn.
Hist. Philos. lib. 1. cap. 4. So much for that proud title (...).

, 2. Philosophy so called from the love of wisdom answerable to the Scripture
Phrasiologie.
But Pythagoras (as it is conceived) judging the term (...) too proud and
swelling for degenerate nature, styles his wise man (...) a friend of wisdom,
as Solomon, almost every where, in his Proverbs, describes his wise man, a
Lover of wisdom, etc. whence Christ calls his wise men friends and children of
wisdom. Thus Plato also defines a Philosopher, (...): A Philosopher is a friend
to nature and a Kinsman of truth. And elsewhere he calls Philosophers, (...),
Cum majus homine Sapientis nomen esse deprehendisset, ( Pythagoras) coram
Leonte, Phi^asiorum sive Sicyoniorum Tyranno, non (...) se, sed (...) h. c. ut
veteres explicant, (...), professus est. ^^c^. lib. 8. Horn^us Hist. Philos. l.
3 c. 11.
sincere and friendly Contemplators of truth. Answerably whereunto Philosophy
is by him styled, (...) love of truth: on which, in his Cratylus, he gives this
gloss, (...), q, (...) i. e. a Divine evagation, or wandering of the mind after
the first Wisdom and divine Truth. Whence he asserts, that a true Philosopher
has the true Knowledge (...) of things: thence he defines him thus: (...) a
Philosopher is one that covets all wisdom: and so true Philosophy is by him
styled, the Knowledge of the fairest and choicest good, and not only of its
picture: Which in his sixth Book of his Common Wealth, he tells us plainly is
no other than the Knowledge of God, which he calls (...), The Idea of the
chiefest good, and (...) the highest Discipline, and (...), the genuine
Philosophy; namely because it is (says he) (...), the Introduction of the
Soul from a certain night-day, to the true discovery of the first being.
Whence he adds, that his (...) or (...) consists, not only in the
contemplation of some lower objects, and Arts; but it is conversant (...)
(...), about the true being of beings, and the first beauty: thence (says he)
he that contemplates (...), many beauties, but not the one first, and chiefest
beauty, is not a Philosopher, but a dreamer, one that has only an opinionative
knowledge of things. So Aristotle in his Rhetoric, speaking of true knowledge,
says, (...), Knowledge or Philosophy is the erection and elevation of us into
our natural state. And Cicero defines a Philosopher one that studies to know
the causes and natures of all things Divine and human, etc. and Philosophy he
terms the contemplation of death. Philosophum oportet nihil sic agere, quam ut
semper studeat animam corporis consortio separare, and ideo existimandum
Philosophiam esse mortis affectum, co^suetudinemque moriendi, Apuleius lib. 2
de Philosophia.
So Plato in Theage, defines Philosophy, (...), a contemplation of death, And
Pythagoras made Philosophy to be the contemplation of Truth; which Architus
understood of the Principle of Principles, and Plutarch of the Divine Majesty:
Whence a Philosopher, in the Pythagorean estimation, is the same with (...).
Lastly Plato in Phaedone, calls Philosophy, (...), an assimilation to God so
far as it is possible for man. Whence the same Plato defines Philosophy, (...),
the knowledge of Divine and human affairs, with their causes: which agrees with
that of Cicero lib. 2. Offic. Philosophy is the knowledge of Divine and human
things. Lastly Plato assures us, that to philosophize, is to know, love, and
imitate God: which he makes to be the sum not only of speculative and moral
Philosophy, but also of Politics: for (says he) that Common-w^alth is most
happy in which Philosophers are Kings, or Kings Philosophers.

Philosophers called (...) from the Jewish (...).
. 3. Hence also the Greek Philosophers, especially the Pytha^oreans, when they
came to the perfect comprehension of their mysteries and principles, were
called (...) perfect, in opposition to their Novices or learners; which phrases
and custom they seem to have borrowed from the Jewish Schools, and Colleges,
wherein there were diverse orders; and the highest therein were called (...)
perfect: whereunto the Apostle Paul seems (unto some) to allude Phil. 3.12.
(...), and v. 15. (...) perfect, Daily on Phii. 3.12. and 15. of which see
Book. 2. chap. 6. par. 5.
of which more hereafter when we come to treat of the Pythagoreans; who were
also called by the latter Philosophers (...) and (...), Mythologists and
Philomythists; because of their great imitation of, and symbolizing with the
Jews, in mysteries and wisdom, from whom they borrowed the most of their
Discipline and Philosophy. From these general hints and intimations we may
easily collect, what cognation the Pagan Philosophy had with the Jewish
Wisdom: neither can we imagine how those dark capacities of Heathen
Philosophers, should come to be informed with such clear contemplations of God,
and Jewish mysteries, but by some derived traditions, and fr^gments borrowed
from the Scriptures and Jewish Church, as hereafter^

4, But to run up Philosophy to its first source and spring head; God the
first efficient and examplar of all Philosophy as well as its first object, or
matter.
we must remember that God (who is the original Idea of all truth, the eternal
wisdom and fountain of all light) is the first Exemplar, and Efficient of all
Philosophy. For as God made all things according to the eternal universal idea
of his own Wisdom and Decrees, so likewise has he stamped, and deeply
impressed, on the very beings and natures of all things made, certain
characters or intelligible ideas and resemblances of his own divine wisdom,
which the Schools usually term the light and law of nature; which is nothing
else but those created emanations, or rays of light and order stamped on the
beings of things, and scattered up and down in the Universe, which offering
themselves to the human understanding, become the objective matter of
Philosophy. So that it is apparent, Philosophy, as all other Sciences, owes
its original to the Divine Intellect and Wisdom; which beaming it self forth on
the works of its hands, and diffusing some derivation of wisdom, light, and
order into every creature, for the government and direction thereof unto its
respective ends, becomes the objective idea, or matter of all Philosophy; and
then the same Divine Wisdom irradiating the mind of man, to contemplate those
bright Ideas of created wisdom, which lie hid in the creature, and enabling it
to gather up the same into several branches or Sciences, it becomes the prime
efficient of all Philosophy. So that whether we consider Philosophy
objectively, as lodged in the natures of things, or formally, as brancht forth
into several sciences, it all owes its original to the bosom of Divine Wisdom.

. 5. Hence it follows, that the original impulsive cause of all Philosophy,
was Admiration of the admirable Wisdom, Power, Philosophy from Admiration. See
Vossias de Philosophia l. 1. c. 2.. 6. and Hornius Hist. Philos. l. 1. c. 10.
and Goodness of God shining in his works of Creation and Providence, as Romans
1.19, 20. So Plato in his Theaetetus tells us, that (...) The great Pathos or
affection of a Philosopher is to admire: neither had Philosophy any other
original than this. The like Aristotle asserts, in the Proeme to his
Metaphysics, (which Stobaeus Sermon. 3. cites) (...), etc. Men now, as formerly,
begin to Philosophize from admiration: for men first began to admire things
less wonderful, Eus^b. l. 1. Praep. c. 6. scribit, Aegyptios ferunt primos
omnium cum oculos in caelum sustulissent, modum, ordinem, and quantitatem
corporum caelestium admiratos, Solemn and Lunam Deos p^tasse. Haec nimirum illa
admiratio fuit, quam inter Philosophiae caussas antiqui retulere Horn. Hist.
phil. l 2. c. 5.

That all heath^n Philosophy sp^ung from admiration of Gods wonders in nature
o^ in his Church see Dr. Jackson on the Sc^^ptures fo^o 47 la^^ Edition


then proceeding thus by degrees, they doubted of greater matters, as of the
origin of the Universe, etc. whence he concludes (...) wherefore a Philosopher
seems to be, in some sense, a Philomythist: (or Mythologist, i: e: a relator of
Fables and wonders) for a Fable consists of things wonderful. The same see
Arist. Metaph. lib. 2. cap. 2. In which words Aristotle gives us an exact and
full account, of the original ground and impulsive cause of all Philosophy,
both Mythologick and Simple. For, whence was it that the Phenicians, Egyptians,
and their Apes the Grecians, so much delighted themselves in their Philosophic
contemplations of the origin of the Universe, etc. but from some fabulous
narrations, or broken traditions which they had traduced to them, from the
Jewish Church, touching the wonders of God which appeared in his works of
Creation and Providence, especially toward his Church which these purblind
Heathens greatly admired, though they understood them not, and so mixed their
own Mythologick or fabulous conjectures with them. And that this was the true
Origin of all the Pagan (...) night Philosophy (which is Plato's own phrase)
will be more evident hereafter, when we come to treat of the Grecian
Philosophy.

. 6. As for the created causes of Philosophy; they may be reduced to these two
common heads, 1. Its first Institutors or Authors. 2. Its constitutive
principles both material and formal, or the essential parts thereof. We design
some discourse on both, thence to make good our Demonstration touching the
Traduction of all Philosophy from the Scriptures and Jewish Church. And to
proceed methodically herein, The first Institutors of Philosophy Divine
We shall begin with the first human Institutors, or Authors of Philosophy;
who were indeed Divine, and divinely illuminated; so that the wisdom we find
scattered up and down amongst the Pagan Philosophers, was but borrowed, and
derived from these Divine ^ights, who were enlightened by the Divine Word, that
life and light of men, which shined in the darkness of the Pagan World, but the
darkness comprehended it not. as John 1.4, 5. the light, etc.

Adam the great^ human Philosopher Genesis 2.19, 20
The first created Divine Institutor of all Philosophy was Adam, who, without
all peradventure, was the greatest, amongst mere mortals, that ever the world
possessed; concerning whom the Scripture tells us, G^n. 2.19, 20. That he gave
names to every living thing, etc. which argues his great Sagacitie and
philosophic penetration into their natures. For look a^ our conceptions, if
true, so also names, if proper, should be, and, as we may presume, at first
were no other than (...), images of things: So both Aristotle and Plato call
names (...) imitations of things. Adam could, by his profound Philosophy,
anatomize, and exactly pry into the very natures of things, and there
contemplate those glorious Ideas, and Characters of created Light and Order,
which the increased Light and Divine Wisdom had impressed thereon; and thence
he could by the quicknes of his apprehension immediately collect, and form the
same into a complete system^ or body of Philosophy; as also most methodically
branch forth the same into particular sciences, etc. whereas all Philosophers
since Adam, having lost, by his fall, this Philosophic Sagacitie, of prying
into the natures of things, they can only make some poor conjectures (in
comparison) from some common accidents, and the external superficies, or
effects of things; and therefore cannot receive conceptions, or give names
exactly suited to the natures of things, as Adam before them did.

And that Plato had received some broken tradition touching this Philosophy of
Adam, is evident from what he lays down in his Politicus, (and elsewhere)
touching the golden Age, or the state of Innocence, wherein, says he, our
first parent was (...), the greatest Philosopher that ever was. And Bal^us (de
Script. Brit. cent. 10. praesat.) tells us, That from Adam all good Arts and
human Wisdom flowed, as from their Fountain. He was the first that discovered
the motions of the celestial bodies; the natures of Plants, of Living, and all
other creatures; he first published the forms of Ecclesiastic, Politic, and
Oeconomick Government. From whose Schole proceeded whatever good Arts and
Wisdom were afterward propagated by our Fathers unto mankind. So that whatever
Astronomy, Geometry, and other Arts contain in them, he knew the whole
thereof^ Thus Baleus. The like Hornius Hist. Philosoph. lib 1. cap 2. Adam
therefore being constituted in this Theater of the Universe, he was ignorant of
nothing, that pertained to the Mystery of Nature. He knew exactly, and that
without error, the Natures of all Animals, the virtues of Herbs, and the
causes of things. The Light of Reason, which we now call Logic, altogether
unspotted, and without cloud, overcame the obscurity of things, and dispelled
darkness, if there were any. Now there was the highest (...), exactnes of
Oeconomicks, and Politics; for man was never so much as then (...) (...) a
sociable creature. Which the ancient Mythologists are wont to adumbrate under
the Golden Age, wherein Sponte sua sine lege fidem, rectumque colebant. The
seat of this most noble Philosophy is, in the sacred Scriptures, styled (...)
the Garden of Eden. For there is nothing more excellent given, by the great
God, to mankind than that pleasure, which arises from the contemplation of
things. The Chaldees call this Garden of Pleasures (...), and the Greeks
following them, (...), Paradise. Thus Hornius, who, cap. 11. repetes the same
in these words, All Arts, as mankind, had their beginning from Adam, who among
the pleasures of Paradise, learned Philosophy even from God himself. And
K^ckerman, Tract. 2. Praecogn. Logic. cap. 2. says, that he doubts not, but
that our first Parents delivered over to their Posterity, together with other
Sciences, even Logic also, especially seeing they, who were nearest the
Origin of all things, had an intellect so much the more excellent than ours,
by how much the more they excelled us in length of life, firmitude of health,
and lastly in air, food, etc.

Seths Philosophic.
. 7. From Adam sprung Seth, who, according to Josephus lib. 1. Antiq. cap. 3.
followed his father in the pursuit of wisdom, especially that part thereof
which concerns the Celestial bodies, their (...), in which kind of Philosophy
he proved a very eminent Doctor, as Josephus. So Hornius Hist. philos. l. 7. c.
2. The first mentition of Letters falls upon Seth's times; who being mindful of
his Fathers Prophecy, foretelling the Universal Dissolution of things, the one
by the Deluge, the other by fire, being not willing to extinguish his famous
Inventions of Astrology; he thought upon some monument, to which he might
concredit these Mysteries: At length it seemed good unto him to engrave Arts
and Disciplines on two great pillars of Brick, thereby to preserve them from
destruction. And that this Tradition is not vain, is proved by the Authority,
and (...) of Josephus; who witnesses, that one of these pillars remained in
Syria even to his time, and was seen by him.

Enochs Philosophy.

Ab Enoch se Astrologiam accepisse professus est Abraham test Alexandro, ac
Eusebius. lib. 9. praepar. c. 5. De Mathusalah Artabanus apud Eusch. l. 9 praepar,
c. 5. cum ab Angelis multa cognovisse, quae cae^eros docuerit, Hornius Histor.
Philosoph. lib. 1. cap. 11.


. 8. The learned also reckon Enoch amongst the first Divine Philosophers,
especially for his supposed skill in Astrology and Astronomy: so Eusebius de
praepar. Evang. lib. 9. and out of him Bochart Phaleg. lib. 2. cap. 13. fol.
101. I cannot but add (says he) what is found concerning the same Enoch in
Eusebius, out of Eupolemus, of the Jews. He says that Abraham, when he taught
Astrology and other Sciences at Heliopolis, af^irmed, that the Babylonians
attributed the invention of the same to Enoch, and that he was the first
inventor of Astrology. It follows, not far after, that the Grecians attribute
the invention of Astrology to Atlas; and that Atlas was the same with Enoch,
etc. In which words we may note that Enoch and Atlas are reputed for the same.
Perhaps from hence, that as Atlas by the Carthaginians is called Duris, and
Dyris, so Enoch by the Arabians, (...) Idris: thus Bochart. How far these
Traditions deserve assent, as also those other of Enoch's engraving his
Prophecies and Astrology on pillars, which, they say, continued after the
sloud, it concerns us not to debate: only thus much we are assured by Jude 14,
etc. That Enoch had certain Prophecies touching the worlds dissolution by fire,
and the last judgment, etc. And that the Stoics derived their (...), or
purification of the world by fire, from some broken tradition of this Prophecy
of Enoch, is not without ground conjectured by Grotius and other Critics.
Baleus (de Script. Brit. cent. 20 fol. 3.) tells us, that Enoch, a man famous
for Prophecy, is supposed to have written before the flood of Divine matters,
etc.

. 9. Another Scripture Philosopher is Abraham, who is supposed, Abraham's skill
i^ Astronomy. See mo^^ of this chap. 4. Sect. 3. of Abraham's communicating
Astronomy to the Chaldeans.
even by Pagan Historians, to have taught both the Chaldeans, where he was
first seated, and also the Egyptians, Knowledge in Astronomy. So Lud. Vives,
in August de Civit, Dei lib. 18. c. 2. Not only sacred, but also many of the
profane Writers have mentioned Abraham: as Hecataeus, who writ a Book
particularly of Abraham; so Eusebius de praep. Evang. Also Alexander the
Polyhistorian; who says, that Abraham, born in the tenth generation after the
Flood, was the Inventor of Astrology amongst the Chaldeans, etc. Damascenus
Hist. lib. 4. writes, that Abraham coming from Chaldea with an Army, reigned
at Damascus. Hence he passed into Canaan, leaving a great memory behind him at
Damascus. But when Canaan was pressed with famine, he traveled thence into
Egypt, and entering into debates with those Priests, he much profited them both
in the Knowledge of things, and also for piety, and the ordering of their
manners, and life. Alexander reports that he lived some time in Heliopolis,
neither did he profess himself to be the Inventor of Astrology, but to have
received it from his Ancestors, by whose hands it was conveyed unto him, even
from Enoch. Artapanus reports, that the Hebrews were so named from Abraham, who
lived twenty years in Egypt, where he taught Pharetates the Egyptian King the
Knowledge of the Stars, and thence returned into Syria, So Lud. Vives. Baleus
(de script. Brit. cent. 10. fol. 3) tells us, out of Phil. Welphius of the lives
of learned men, that Abraham found out the Syriack and Chaldee Letters, also
many principles of Astrology; for he was a prudent and holy man, and
excellently learned as to human matters. And after his abode amongst the
Egyptian wise men, he was the first that instructed them in Astronomy and
Arithmetic: for before his coming into Egypt, the Egyptians were altogether
ignorant of these Sciences. So B^l^us, G^r. Vossius de philosophorum sectis
lib. 2. cap. 8.. 7, 8. gives us this account of Abraham's Philosophy: But
whether (says he) Abraham the Patriarch drew his Astrology from the
Chaldeans, or rather the Chaldeans received it from Abraham; this Science came
by Abraham first to those of Palestine, or the Canaanites, and afterward to
the Egyptians. That Abraham passed from Vr of the Chaldeans into Palestine, is
sufficiently known by Scripture: and that he was also skilled in Astrology,
Berosus shows in these words: (...). In the tenth Age after the Flood, there
was among the Chaldeans a just and great man, and well skilled in the Knowledge
of the Heavens. J^se^hus Antiquit. l. 1. c 7. cites this passage of Berosus,
and adds, that Abraham, who was the tenth from Noah, was signified by it. And
this is confirmed by what is said of Abraham by Eupolemus, in Eusebius, (...),
that he was the Inventor of Astrology, and the Chaldaick Art of Divination.
Which is an evident confession of an Heathen. It is also enough credible that
the Canaanites, and amongst them the Phenicians learned much touching the
Natures of things from Abraham, who sojourned amongst them. Moreover it is well
known, that when Canaan was pressed with famine Abraham went into Egypt; where he
said his wife Sarah was his sister, whom the King had abused, had he not been
admonished by God. But being taught who Abraham was, (as Josephus lib. 1. cap.
8. relates) he gave him power of conversing with the most excellent and the
most learned of the Egyptians. Then Abraham (says he) (...) (...), bountifully
communicated unto them Arithmetic and Astronomy, for before the coming of
Abraham, the Egyptians were ignorant of these Sciences: for they came from the
Chaldeans to the Egyptians and from them to the Grecians. This Philosophy of
the Jews derived from Abraham was two fold, partly natural, whereof Astrology
was a part; and partly Divine, of God and his works, etc. How far these reports
touching Abraham may deserve credit, I shall not contend. I find a great
confirmation of what has been mentioned touching Abraham's Philosophy in
Hornius Hist. Philos. l. 2. c. 10. Amidst these darknesses (speaking of
Nimrod's Apostasy) of depraved Philosophy, shone forth, as an hopeful star,
Abraham, a person of a famous ingenie, who was contemporarie with Ninus,
Semiramis, and Zoroaster, as Eusebius. He was a man renowned not only among
sacred, but also profane writers; namely of whom Hecataeus writ a whole book:
and Berosus, Nic. Damascenus, Alexander, Eupol^mus, M^la, with many others
cited by Eusebius l. 9. praepar, c 4. make mention of him. He being in his
first years educated in the Institutes of the Magi, or Chaldeans, Jos. 24.2.
drank in a corrupt Philosophy from his Parents, in which notwithstanding he
made a better proficience than all others. For he being a very wise and
eloquent person, as also invested with a great sagacitie, observed from natural
things, that there was a God, and that he was to be worshipped by us; as
Josephus lib. 1. Ant. c. 8. and Philo teach us; But his mind being not as yet
irradiated with any Divine Light, it was envelopped in the darknesses of many
errors; which, so soon as he was commanded by God to depart out of Chaldea, he
exchanged for a more bright Light, and so of a Magus he became an Hebrew, or
Christian Philosopher, studious of sacred wisdom. In whose family there was a
famous Academie and seat of Philosophy. For Abraham had a great name for
wisdom, not only among his own, but thorowout all the East. Josephus, out of
Berosus, attests, that he communicated to the Egyptians the science of Numbers,
or Arithmetic; and that of the Stars, called Astronomy, of which sciences the
Egyptians were then very ignorant. And Alexander tells us, that the Heliopolitan
Priests, and others made use of his Institution in Astrology, Arithmetic,
Geometry, and other parts of wisdom. And who can doubt of his skill in
Astrology, seeing he drew his original from Chaldea. Whence what Orpheus
sung, that God of old reveled himself to one Chaldean only, they suppose to be
meant of Abraham: when therefore he came into Canaan, it may not be doubted,
but that the Phenicians drew from him the rudiments of purer wisdom; for he was
much in favor with the Princes of that Country, and venerable among their
Kings. Thence, whilst his children dispersed Golonies into diverse Regions,
his more pure Philosophy was communicated together therewith; which was soon
contaminated by the errors of Cham's Posterity. This wisdom his son Isaac
receiving from him, as an inheritance constantly to be retained, according to
the example of his Father, propagated in Canaan, and in Egypt. The same may be
said of Jacob, whose great sagacitie and experience in Natural Philosophy, is
sufficiently discovered in the wonderful artifice he used for the conception of
the Cattle Genesis 33.37, etc. There is also in his History, some mention made of
the Astrology of the Syrians, etc. Thus Hornius more largely.

Of Joseph his instructing the Egyptians and by them styled Hermes or Mercurius.
, 10. Amongst the Divine Philosophers we must not omit the mention of Joseph,
who is said, and that upon solid Scripture grounds, to have instructed the
Egyptians in their wisdom, and Philosophy; and in after Ages passed amongst
them under the name of Hermes, or Mercurius Trismegistus. Thus much is asserted
by Cluverus in his History of the world page 12. Joseph, says he, having
attained to a mesure of wisdom, as it seemed above human, he obtained the whole
administration of Egypt, and a dignity the next to the Regal. Hence the common
sable, that Hermes, that is, Interpreter, was the first inventor of Arts and
Sciences amongst the Egyptians. For the wisdom of the Egyptians owes its self
unto Joseph, who by the Kings authority taught them both divine and human
Arts. So Cl^v^rus. The name Hermes (...), which signifies an Interpreter, seems
to be given, and that most properly unto Joseph, because of his Divine Art in
the interpreting of Dreams. And that he was esteemed by the Egyptians, as a
person endowed with an extraordinary faculty of divining, and interpreting
Dreams, or things secret* is most evident from Genesis 44.5. Genesis 44.5.
where they mention his divining, etc. Though they knew not the Divining power
by which he was inspired, but imputed it to his cup, yet the thing it self was
manifested by his interpreting the Dreams of Pharaoh, his Butler, etc. That
this Art of Divining, or interpreting things was also attributed by the
fabulous Pagans to Mercury, Act. 14 5.
is apparent from Act. 14.12. where Mercury is called (...) an Interpreter.
The Egyptians called their Hermes Theuth, and supposed him to be the inventor
of all their Arts and Sciences. That Joseph was indeed the Instructor of the
Egyptians, and that by the Kings appointment, is most clear from Psalm. 105.22.
Psalm. 105.22.
where he is said to be appointed by the King to teach his Senators wisdom: but
the old Geneva Edition ( an 1560.) renders it more properly: and teach his
Ancients Wisdom, (...) to instruct their Elders, that is, their Priests, That
Joseph taught the Egyptians Geometry, etc. see Vossius de Philos. Sect. l. 2.
c. 2.. 2. as hereafter in the Egyptian Philosophy.
etc. That Joseph took a particular care of the Egyptian Priests, not only by
instituting a College for them, and making provision accordingly, as Genesis
47.22, but also by instructing them in the Knowledge and service of the true
God, the motions of the Heavens, and other parts of sound Philosophy, will
afterward appear, when we come to treat of the Egyptian Philosophy. At present
it shall suffice us to give his character, as drawn by Hornius Histor. Philos.
l. 2. c. 10. Joseph, says he, was of a great name; who after various
Vicissitudes of Providence, was at length, after having happily interpreted the
Kings Dream, by the public suffrage of the King and people reputed, as indeed
he was, the most wise of all the Egyptians, and so honored with that splendid
Title, (...) i e. an Interpr^ter of secrets (Genesis 41.39, 45.) Neither may we in
any measure doubt, but that, whatsoever there was of Truth agreeable to
Scripture, to be found among others, especially the Egyptian Philosophers, that
they received it from the Hebrews, among whom they frequently and long
conversed, even from Abraham's times. But especially from Joseph they received
much of their Wisdom, whom, seeing he was next the King, no one of them durst
contradict. Whence there are not wanting some who write, that there were
Schools of Wisdom and Virtue erected by Joseph in Egypt. And indeed that there
were such, appears, from the History of Moses, whom the Scripture makes to be
learned in all the Wisdom of the Egyptians, Which seems to be made good by what
David notes Psalm. 105 22. that Joseph was commanded by Pharaoh, to teach his
Princes according to his pleasure, and to instruct his Elders in Wisdom. For so
the Vulgar renders the word (...), from which version, seeing it is most plain,
we may not recede. For it may be deduced as well from (...), as from (...) etc.
(...) signifying as well to instruct as to chastise. Whence I wonder, what came
into their minds, who contend, that Joseph's Doctrine was not publicly
approved. For seeing it was publicly delivered in their Schools and Academies,
who can deny, that it was publicly authorized by the King, and Nobles of the
Kingdom? His Placits were so far from being contradicted, as indeed no one
durst murmur against him Genesis 41.39, etc. They do ill allege the event. For the
Egyptians after the death of Joseph, and their King, who favored him, returned
again to their Vomit, and abrogated the true Philosophy. This is well observed
by Philip in Chronico l. 2. Not long after the death of Joseph, the Egyptian
Kings, rejecting his Doctrine again worshipped Idols, and embraced Magic Arts.
Yet there remained some rudiments, and (...) of truth. For, that the ancient
Egyptians held the world to have a beginning, and that they thought the year to
begin from Libra, which they supposed also to be the beginning of the World;
these Traditions they drew from no other fountain than Joseph, as Jos. Scaliger
ad lib. 1. Manil^i admonishes. From the same Joseph also they learned the
Souls immortality, which presently was changed into that monstre of their
(...). As therefore the Egyptians owe not the least part of their wisdom to the
Hebrews, so also they participate with them in many names, which is even yet
discovered, in many of the names of their Gods, as we have before often
demonstrated. See Part 1. Book 2. c. 7. of Egyptian Gods.

Of Moses's Philosophy.
. 11. But amongst all the Divine Philosophers, there was none that opened a
more effectual door, for the propagating of philosophic principles and light,
than Moses; who by his writings, Cumque Mo^es tot cum Deo ipso colloquia
habuerit, tot leges conduderit, rerum ipsam natur^m primigeniam descrips^^t,
d^bium non est, quia profundissima sa^^entia praeditus fuerit. Qua etiam apud
G^atile^ ^^heme^ter incla^^it. Qui, ut de aliis antiquis patribus pauca, ita de
M^se plurima cogno ^runt. Ho^^ius Hist. Philos. l, 2. c. 13.
contained in his five books (besides his personal Conferences) laid the main
foundations of all that Philosophy, which first the Phenicians and Egyptians,
and from them the Grecians were masters of. Whence was it that Sanchoniathon,
and the Grecian Philosophers after him, had such clear notions of the original
of the world, the first Cha^s or Matter, out of which God framed all things?
Was it not from Moses's descriprion of the Creation Genesis 1.2? Lud. Vives de
Veritate fidei, speaks thus; The Creation of the World was so described by
Moses, that the greatest Philosophers admired the depth, and embraced the truth
of the narration; especially the Pythagoreans (whom Plato in his Timaeus
follows) who expressed the said production of the world, sometimes in the very
same words. Plato (in his Timaeus fol. ^9. being to treat of the origin of the
Universe, acknowledges, this could not be known but by some probable fable or
Tradition, (...), etc. which came originally from Moses's History of the
Creation. This will be evident by the enumeration of particulars.

1. How came Sanchoniathon, that great Phenician Philosopher, to the Knowledge
of his (...) i. e. (...) Cauth Ereb, Sand oniathon and Mochus their Philosophy
from Genesis 2.
but from Genesis 1.2. and darkness, etc. only the word (...) from v. 5 Hence all
the Poetic fictions of the first Chaos, and the philosophic contemplations of
the first matter, privation, etc. Hence also Mochus, another Phenician
Phisiologist, received his traditions about Atoms, Anaxago^as pron^ncia^^t
omnii^ verum principium (...), i. e. mentem -- Eidem menti omnia dabat
Anaxago^as a^^. M^ses apud Hebraeos St^uch ^^gub^a de pe^^. ^hil ^. l. 1. c. 4.
which he makes to be the first principles of the world, etc. Whence also drew
the Egyptians their philosophic persuasions of the worlds beginning, etc. if
not from this Mosaic Fountain? How came Plato to discourse so accurately of
the order, beauty, harmony and perfection of the Universe, the contemplation
whereof (says he) was exceeding pleasing to its maker? Could he possibly have
discoursed of these things in such Scriptural Phrasiologie, had he not received
some Traditions from Moses Genesis 1.31, etc? Whence came his conceptions of Anima
mundi, the Soul of the world, but from Jewish Traditions touching Gods framing
and governing the world by his Spirit and Providence (which Plato calls (...))
in the most perfect harmonious manner, as the soul governes the body Genesis 1.2?
Hence Plato (according to his Allegerick manner of discourse) supposes the
world to be an Animal, Joh. Grammat. de mundi Creat. lib. 6. cap. 21.
yea a visible image of the in^isible God; that is, says Johannes Grammaticus
(that excellent Christian Philosopher) what Moses affirmed properly of man,
Genesis 1.27. that he was made according to the image of God, Plato transfers to
the wh^le Universe. Yea indeed the whole of the Grecian Physiologie, touching
the Origin of the world, its first matter, privation, and form, etc. in all
likelihood, owes its original to some Mosaic tradition from the first chap. of
Genesis, etc.

2. As their Physics, so also the Metaphysics, Plato's M^taphysick
contemplations of God and the Soul from Moses's Philosophy.
laid down by the Grecian Philosophers, seem evidently to be derived, and
borrowed from Moses's sacred Philosophy. We read Ex^d. 3.14. of Gods name I
am, whence Austin puts it beyond all doubt, that Plato traduced his notions of
(...), which he ascribes to the first and most perfect Being. From the same
Scripture Fountain also came his contemplations about his (...), etc. as Genesis
1.2. whence the Platonicks generally assert a (...) Trinity answerable to the
Scriptures: and, in sum, never Heathen Philosopher treated more distinctly, yea
divinely of God, his Nature, and Attributes, as also of the Soul, its
spiritualitie, infinite capacity, immortality, etc. than Plato: which,
according to the common vogue of the Learned, he received, by conference with
some Jews, or by tradition from Moses's writings: of which more else where.

Pagan Geographie and Politiks from Moses.
3. Farther, that the Pagan Geographie had its original from Moses's Narration
Genesis 10. how the world was peopled by Noah's posterity, is asserted and made
evident by the Learned Bo^haert, in his Phal^g; where he demonstrates, that the
Pagan Geographie exactly answers to Moses's description. The like may be
affirmed of the Pagan Chronology, and History, of which before part 1. book
3^ chap. 2.. 6 7. So in like manner, that the Heathen Politicians, or
Lawgivers, viz. Lycurgus, Solon, Part 1. B. 3. C. 9.
Minos, Draco, Plato, etc. received the chief, if not the whole of their
Politics from Moses's Laws, is generally affirmed by the Learned, and will be
made farther evident by what follows.

We find a good Character of Moses, and his Philosophy in H^rnius Hist.
philos. l. 2 c. 13. Moses, says he, had a mind most capacious for all things:
who being educated from his childhood among the Egyptian Priests, drew from
them all their wisdom, even their most abst^use mysteries: which seems to be
the cause why he is reckoned by the Grecians among the Magicians. Pliny l. 10.
c. 10. There is another faction of Magic, which sprang from Moses. And Moses
indeed has obtained a great name even among profane Writers. Eupolemus says,
that Moses was the most wise man; and that he delivered Letters first to the
Jews, and that the Phenicians received them from the Jews, as the Greeks from
the Phenicians. Artapanus relates, that Moses was called by the Grecians
Musaeus; and that Orpheus learned many things from him. Some conceive that
Moses is mentioned in that of Orpheus; (...). For that Moses was thence so
called, because drawn out of the water, is the persuasion of Learned men.
Others make Moses the same with the Egyptian Mercury, to whom they ascribe the
Invention of Letters: of which see Part 1. B. 1. C. 10., 4. That Moses arrived
unto the top of Philosophy, and by the Inspiration of God, was taught the
secrets of Nature, is affirmed by Philo in Eusebius. praepar. l. 8. c. 5. And the
same Eusebius in Chronico writes, that Moses philosophized in the Desert 40
years; namely being a wise man he spent his time in Contemplation of things
Natural and Divine. Origin and Austin (lib. 2^ Quaest. in Gen.) prove that
Moses being skilled in all the Wisdom of the Egyptians, could not be ignorant
of Geometry. Some also suppose him to have been a Chemist, which they collect
from his exquisite skill in reducing the Golden Calf into Ashes. That Orpheus,
Pythagoras, Plato, Homer, and others borrowed many of their choicest notions
from Moses, is shown by Justin Martyr, in his Exhortation to the Gr^eks, of
which hereafter. To conclude this discourse touching Moses's Philosophy, It is
apparent from Scripture that he was not only skilled in sacred Philosophy, but
also excelled in all the Wisdom of the Egyptians: as Act. 7.22. Now the
Egyptians (as Macrobius and others tell us were the Parents of all Philosophy;
to whom the Grecian Philosophers had recourse, age after age, for their
Philosophy) who without doubt received great improvement in their Wisdom by
Moses, and his writings: for hence they received their Hieroglyphics, etc. (as
hereafter). Though the Egyptians, being unwilling to seem beholding to the Jews
for their wisdom, pretend they received it from Hermes, etc. We find Moses
mentioned amongst the Egyptians under the fable of Typhon, etc.

. 12. Of Solomon his Philosophy.
Another great (yea the greatest next to Adam in innocence) Divine Philosopher
was Solomon, of whom God himself gives this Character 1 Kings 3.12. that he had
a wise, Superavit ^m^ium mortalium ingenia Solomon. In quo D^us, quid in maxima
Rege summa sapientia posset, ostendit: De cujus capacissima sapientia ita
scriptura s. loquitur 1. Reg. 4.29, 30, 32, 33, 34. and cap. 10. Hornius
Histor. Philos. l. 2. c. 13.
and understanding heart (or as the Hebrew, an amplitude of heart, so that
there was none before, or after, like unto him. And more particularly it is said
1 Kings 4. from v. 29. to 34. That Solomon's wisdom excelled the wisdom of all
the East Country, and all the wisdom of Egypt: For he spoke 3000 Proverbs,
etc. and v. 33. he spoke of Trees from the Cedar, to the Hysop: also of Beasts,
Fowls, Creeping things, and Fishes, etc. Moreover that Solomon committed this
his Philosophy to writing, is affirmed by the Learned out of Eccles. 12.10,
12. and the Wisdom of Solomon (Apocrypha) chapter 7.13. Thus Hornius Hist. Philos.
l. 1. c. 13. In the Book of Wisdom cap. 17.17, 18, 19, 20, 21. the Amplitude of
Solomon's wisdom is egregiously expounded. For he was the greatest
Contemplator, especially of things Physic, and admirable, a Disputer of the
most acute Questions with the Tyrians, and the Queen of Sheba. For having
contracted a great friendship with the King of Tire, (whom Eupolemus calls
Syros) it came to pass that they often conferred of the most subtle points.
(For the Tyrians, among whom the Phenician Theology resided, were famous in
this Age.) Josephus makes mention of the Tyrian King, and Solomon their
provoking men to the Study of Wisdom, by great rewards; and that Solomon on
that occasion joined some Cities, belonging unto the Kingdom of Tire, unto his
own. And Josephus in his Antiquit. lib. 8. writes, That Solomon composed Books
of Songs 1005; of Parables and Similitudes 3000 Books; and that he disputed of
every kind of Plant, as in like manner of Beasts, Fishes and all other living
creatures, etc. for he was not ignorant of, neither did he leave unexamined any
Being or Nature, but philosophized of all things, eminently expounding their
natures and proprieties, Solomo primus subtilissimam Philosophiam posteritati
literis consecravit. Inde Graeci caeperunt id, velut proprium sibi, vendicare
scribendi munus Hornius Hist. Philos. l. 7. c. 2.
etc. so Lud. Vives in Aug. de Civit. De^, l. 17. c. 20. And Eusebius writes,
that these Books of Solomon's Proverbs, and Songs) wherein he discoursed of the
nature of Plants, and of all kinds of Animals; as also of Medicine or the
curing of diseases) were removed out of the way by Hezekiah, because the people
did thence seek the curing of their diseases, without recourse to God for the
same. See Wendelin in his Preface to his Physics. Solomon's Wisdom is farther
evidenced by the Queen of Sh^ba her Addresses to him, and his Responses to her,
mentioned 1 Kings 10. And some relate, that the Sabeans retained the Books of
Moses, brought to them by the Queen of Sheba, even from Solomon's time:
Josephus also indeed reports, that this Queen, upon Solomon's permission,
carried with her, into her own Country, a Colonie of ten thousand Jews. Which
if granted, will give us some account how the Zabii, and Chaldean Philosophers
came so well acquainted with Jewish Dogmes, even before the Babylonian
Captivity. This Concession of Solomon some gather from 1 Kings 10.13. And that
the same of Solomon's Philosophy (as also its main principles) was diffused
not only Eastward, as 1 Kings 4.34. but also Westward, amongst the Grecian
Philosophers, is very probable. For certain it is, that Solomon had great
correspondence both with the Phenicians, and Egyptians; by whom, we may
presume, his wisdom was communicated to the Grecians Have we not sufficient
ground to conjecture, that Pythagoras, and Plato traduced much of their
Symbolick and Parabolick Philosophy hence? Also the Stoics their Moral
Philosophy; and Hippocrates his Medicinal Science; and even Aristotle his
History of Animals; as his Scholar and Successor Theophrastus that of Plants:
which have all great Affinity with Solomon's Philosophy. As for the Writings
of Solomon, especially such as were Philosophic, the Jews say, that they were
lost in the Captivity. There are some, who say, that what was more useful
therein was, by the Spirits Dictate, collected; and is now extant under the
Title of Solomon's Proverbs, which contein the Ethics of Solomon, Eusebius.
praepar. l. 2. c. 2.

. 13. We might also mention here amongst the Divine Philosophers Job, Of Job.
who has many accurate philosophic discourses touching several parts of
Natural Philosophy; the Meteors, etc. But I shall content my self with the
character given him by Hornius and others. Horn. Hist. philos. l. 5. c. 9.
says, That Job was a famous Doctor of Philosophy, than whom there was not a
more ancient, more learned, and more sublime to be found throughout all
Antiquity. Lipsius cent. 1. ep. 99. says; Behold amongst the most ancient
Job, whom they conceive not to be of the elect Nation, and yet he writ all
select or choice matters. His Book, adds Hornius, is Dialectick: For, as Jerome
to Paulinus says, He determines all according to Dialectick Laws; by
Proposition, Assumtion, and Conclusion. Moreover he shows the manner how to
solve fallacious Arguments. His friends also, who were very learned in
Philosophy, and without peradventure proceeded from Job's Schole, when they
sport themselves with perpetual Paralogi^mes, are egregiously convinced by Job.
Who not only propagated this wisdom among his own, but also opened public
Schools, as Job 4.3. Eliphaz the Temanite testifies: where among other Elogies
he says (...) thou have taught many. Neither have we more ancient Disputations
than those which occur in his admirable Book. His friends are the Opponents,
and he Respondent: which mode of Disputing was invented by Job, as Ambrose. l.
1. de officiis c. 12. It is commended in Plato, that, in his Polity, he brings
in him, who disputed against Justice, craving leave to oppose what he approved
not, etc. By how much more ancient was Job, who first found out these things.

. 14. We shall conclude this chapter, Of the Jewish Colleges and Academies.
with a brief account of the Jewish Academies, or Schools, of which we find
frequent mention in the Scriptures; as 1 Samuel 1.1. we read of the City of the
Sophim or Learned, so 1 Samuel 10 10, 11. and 1 Samuel 19.18, 24. where we find
Societies of the Prophets or Students, of whom the more ancient were called
Doctors or Rabbis, perfect, and Prophets, (...), as Samuel: but the younger
students were called Novices, or Sons of the Prophets, etc. We find a good
account of these Schools of the Prophets in Hornius Hist. philos. lib. 2. c.
13. Samuel revived the pristine fame of wisdom among his Country men: for
there were then erected Schools of the Prophets, unto which the Jews sent their
Children for Institution: Which Custom continued long after. Some one of the
Prophets, more conspicuous for wisdom, and piety, presided over them. Among
these Schools, Ramatha in Gilead was mostly celebrated: where there was (...),
or an Academie, as the Chaldee intimates. Thence those most eminent Wits David,
and Solomon, were given to the world; both egregious Candidates of Divine, and
Human Wisdom: both excellent Doctors of the Mosaic Sapience. And that the Jews
had Schools in Babylon, Of the Pythagoreans symbolizing with the Essenes see
Godwins Jewish Antiquities of the Essenes.
Diodati proves, and observes on Psalm. 137.1. After the Captivity those who
instructed the Youth were called Scribes, as it appears out of Esdras, and
Nehemiah; and in Christ's time, Doctors, Luke 2.46. Amongst whom there were
none more famous, than the Essenes, who had their Colleges and Philosophy,
which was principally Medicine; with whom the Pythagoreans did greatly
symbolize, as hereafter. Viret, in his Interim, page 122, treating of the
Essenes says, That they retired from the crowd of Politic and Ecclesiastic
affairs (wherein the Pharisees, and Sadducees were plunged) into certain
Colleges, where they addicted themselves to Gardening; but principally to the
Study of Medicine: And for the better ordering of their Studies, they divided
the day into times for Prayer, Reading of Lectures, Private Studies, Labors
with the hand, and for Refreshments of Nature: in such sort, that all things
were transacted amongst them with very good order. And as they lived in common,
so had they all one common purse. In sum; their state, at that time, was an
excellent Schole of Medicine, of Doctrine, and of examples of Virtue: and, I
suppose, the first Christian Monks took their patterns from them. Eusebius,
praepar. Evang. lib. 11. de morali, naturali, rationali, and intellectuali
Philosophia Hebraeorumlate agit. Hornius Hist. philos. l. 2. c. 13.
Thus Viret. That the Pythagoreans had a great affinity whith them, see Book.
2. Chap. 6.. 7. etc. Ger Voss. de Philosophorum sectis lib. 2. cap. 1.. 8. tells
us, That the Philosophy of the Jews, which they derived originally from
Abraham, was two fold. For it was partly natural, whereof Astrology was a
part: and partly Divine, or of God, his works, and will. The latter Jews named
their Philosophy from (...), to receive, Cabala: because it was received from
God. This they divided into (...) Beresith: and (...) Mercacia. The former
treated of celestial, and elementary bodies, in which Solomon excelled; the
latter treated of God, and his worship. Johannes Picus Mirandulanus was an
admirer of this Cabala, who gloried that he had LXX. books of it, Judaei
dispersi duas celeberrimas Academias, Pumpedunthanum, and Tibericusem
erexerunt. Hornius Hist. philos. l. 7. c. 3.
which he bought at a vast price; and that he found in them the Religion
delivered by Moses, and Christ, etc. Thus Vossius. But Bishop Usher judged all
these Rabbinick and Cabalistick writings as cheats, and not ancienter than 600
years, etc.

Touching the Jewish Schools after the Babylonian Captivity, Hornius Histor.
philos. l. 7. c. 3. writes thus: The Jews, after their return from the
Babylonian Captivity, erected many Schools, both at Jerusalem, and elsewhere.
Before the Destruction there were reckoned in the Hierosolymitan Academie,
Synagogues, or Colleges more than 40. in each whereof were two Schools: one was
(...) the house of the Book, wherein the written Law was read: the other,
wherein the Misnajoth, or Traditions, and exegeses of the Ancients, the
received Sentences, the forensick decisions, and other things of that sort were
taught. This was called (...) the house of Doctrine. All these were destroyed
by Vespasian, as Rab. Phinees in Gem^ra Hierosol.

I shall conclude this Chapter of Divine Philosophy, with that of Hornius Hist
philos. l. 2. c. 10. Wisdom, as we know, began first in Paradise, and was
afterward cultivated by the sacred Fathers, and propagated to Posterity. For
God always raised up some, who, relinquishing the errors of profane men,
endeavored, even by the study of Wisdom, the restoration of the Image of God.
Such were, after Noah, the Hebrews, as Abraham of the Posterity of Sem, a man
of a Divine Ingenie, and famous for his admirable Knowledge, etc. of which see
what precedes 9. Of the Jewish Schools in Babylon, etc. see what follows C. 4..
8.

CHAP. II. Of the Egyptian Philosophy, and its Traduction from the Scriptures,
etc.
The Egyptians great repute for wisdom: Their Skill in the Mathematics,
Astronomy, Geometry, Arithmetic, Geogrophie, etc. Their Natural Philosophy,
Medicine, etc. Their Moral Philosophy, especially their Politics, both
Legislative, and Administrative, from the Jewish Church. The Egyptian
Theology, and Gods from Joseph, etc. Of their Hieroglyphics, and other ways
of expressing things. The Traduction of the Egyptian Philosophy from the
Jewish Church, and Scriptures, proved both by Testimonies, and Artificial
Demonstration. Joseph's Provision for the College of Egyptian Pri^sts: His
informing them in the Knowledge of God and true Philosophy. The Advantages
which the Schole of Alexandria received from the Jews, and Scriptures,
translated into Greek by Ptolomie's request. Of Ammonius, the great master of
the Alexandrian Schole, his mixing Scripture Notions with his Philosophy. The
Christian Church at Alexandria, its influence on, and advantages from the
Schole.

The great repute the Egyptians had for Wisdom and Philosophy.
1. BEing now to enter on the Eastern Pagan Philosophers, we shall begin with
those of Egypt, who were exceeding famous, even to a superlative degree, for
being the first Parents of Philosophy, and conveighers of it unto the
Grecians. We find mention in the Scriptures of the Egyptian Wisdom, and wise
men, so Gen 41.8. (...) Exodus 7.11. And Apulcius 6. Florid. gives this as the
peculiar Character of the Egyptians, that they were wise. So Gellius lib. 11.
cap. 8, says of the Egyptians, that they were very exquisite in the finding
out of Arts, and endowed with a peculiar sagacitie for the Disquisition of
things. So Macrobius tells us, that the Egyptians were the Parents of all
philosophic Sciences, Jamblicl^s asserit Pythago^am and Platonem dogmata sua
ex Columnis Trismegisti exscripsisse Hornius Hist. phil. l. 2.6.
and Arts. And that a great part of the Grecian Learning was originally
borrowed from the Egyptians, is very evident by the Confession of the Greek
Philosophers; as also from matter of Fact. Thus much is confessed by Plato (in
his Timaeus fol. 22.) who making mention of Solon, his Kinsman's travels into
Egypt, to inform himself about the ancient pieces of Learning, he says, that
one of the Egyptian Priests told Solon, that the Grecians were but children, as
to the true Archaeologie; but the Egyptians were Masters of the most Ancient
Wisdom, etc. Of Solon's being in Egypt, and getting Wisdom thence, see Vossius
de philos. sect. l. 2. c. 2.. 3. Diodorus Siculus Biblioth. l. 1. tells us, that
all those, who were renowned amongst the Greeks for Wisdom and Learning, did,
in ancient time, resort to Egypt; and that not only the first Poets, Homer,
Orpheus, etc. but also the first Lawgivers, Lycurgus, and Solon, as also
Philosophers, Pythagoras, Plato, etc. gained most of their Knowledge out of
Egypt. And indeed we need go no farther than the Scriptures, to evince the
great repute the Egyptians had for human Wisdom: for in 1 Kings 4.30. it is
said, that Solomon's Wisdom excelled all the Wisdom in Egypt. By which it is
evidently implied, that the Egyptian Wisdom was very considerable, in that it
is made the measure of Solomon's Wisdom. We have the like honorable mention of
the Egyptian wisdom Act. 7.22. where it is said, that Moses excelled in all the
Wisdom of the Egyptians. Without doubt, had not the Egyptian Philosophy been
very considerable, the spirit of God would not have made such use of it, to
adorn Moses's Character, who was otherwise sufficiently accomplished with many
eminent qualities. Vossius de philos. sectis l. 2. c. 2.. 4. tells us, Sane
Sacerdotes Aegyptiorum in sacris libris scriptum inveniunt, Orphea, Musaeu^,
Melampoda, Daedalum, Homeru^, Lycurgum, Solonem, Platonem. Pythagoram, Eudoxum,
Democritum, Enopidem Chium, Aegyptium petiisse. Hornius Hist. philos. l. 3. c.
1.
that in ancient times the fame of the Egyptian Priests was very great: Yet in
Strabo's time they were of no repute. See Strabo l. 17. where he says, That
when he was in Egypt he saw vast houses, which the Priests in times past
inhabited, who were both Astrologers, and Philosophers: but these Sciences were
in his time so defective, that there was scarce one to be found skilled
therein. All that their Priests could do, was, to enumerate to strangers the
Rites of their Sacreds, etc. Clemens Alexandrinus lib. 6. tells us, That the
Egyptians had 42 books, which belonged to their Priests, written by their
Mercury, whereof 36 contained the whole of the Egyptian Philosophy, their
Laws, their Gods, and the discipline of their Priests; wherein their Cantor,
sacred Scribe, Astrologer, Curator, and Prophet ought, each according to their
respective Offices, to be versed. The other 6 Books belonged to such as were
called (...) i. e. who wore the Cloak, which contained their Medicine, Agyptii
Philosophi Sacerdotes ac Prophetae appellabantur. Laertius l. 1. de vitis.
etc. see Vossius de phil. sect. l. 2. c. 2. The Egyptian Philosophy lay
amongst their Priests: so Strabo Geogr. l. 17. (...), their Priests embraced
Philosophy and Astronomy etc.

. 2. But to treat a little more particularly, The Egyptians skill in
Philosophy.

The Egyptian Philosophy comhrehended the liberal Sci^nces, Hieroglyphics,
Mathematics, Physics, Ethics, Politics, Theology*


and distinctly of the Egyptian Philosophy, and Wisdom. Vossius de
philosophorum sectis l. 2. c. 2.. 8. gives us this general account of the
Egyptian Philosophy, and its extent: How large the Egyptian Philosophy was,
is known by this, that it comprehended the Liberal Sciences, the Hieroglyphick
mode of writing, the Knowledge of the Stars, and of Universal Nature, the
Situation of the earth, and particularly of Egypt; and of the increases of
Nile, the Discipline of Virtues, and of Laws, the Nature of the Gods, and the
mode of worship by Sacrifices, and various ceremonies, also the whole of
Medicine both Prophylactick, for the preservation of health; and Pharmaceutick,
for the restoration of health; as also Chirurgick. Yet notwithstanding, all
these were not required in all Philosophers; but the Cantor, or Musician, took
one part to him; and the sacred Scribe another; the Horoscope, or Astrologer
assumed other parts; the (...), or Curate of the sacred Rites, others; the
Pastophori, and Prophets others. Clemens Alexandrinus lib. 6. delivers,
concerning the Egyptians, that they had (...) a certain peculiar or mystic
Philosophy, which, says he, appears by their sacred ceremonies, etc. Diogenes
Laertius, and others, divide the Egyptian Philosophy into four parts,
Mathematick, Natural, Divine, and Moral. We shall speak something of each, and
endeavor to show, what advantages, and assistances they had from the Jewish
Church, and Scriptures, for their improvement thereof.

Mathematics.
As for the Mathematics, the Egyptians were reputed to be well skilled in
Astronomy, Geometry, Geographie, Arithmetic and Music; for the improvement
whereof they had considerable helps from the Jewish Church, and Patriarchs.

Astronomy.
As to their great insight into Astronomy, it is asserted by Strabo, Herodotus,
and Diodorus; and it is sufficiently manifest, in that they, as it is generally
affirmed, were the first, who found out the course of the year by the Sun's
motion, which, as it is supposed, was the invention of the Priests of
Heliopolis. Thence says Herodotus lib. 2. The Egyptians were, of all, the
first, who found out the Course of the Year; distinguishing it into twelve
Months, which they gathered from the Stars. This Calculation of the year,
Thales (who was the first amongst the Grecians that distinguished the seasons
of the year) seemed to have learned in Egypt. Clemens Alexandrinus lib. 6. tells
us, That the Egyptian Horoscope, or Astrologer, carried in his hand an
Horologe, and Palm, the Symbols of Astrology, who had always in his mouth
the four Astrologick Books of Hermes, whereof one treated of the five Planets,
the second of the Sun and Moon, the third and fourth of the rising and setting
of the Stars: The rise of Planetary Deities and judicial Astrology from
Astronomy. See more of this in Dr Owen De Ortu Idolol. lib. 3. cap. 4.
see Vossius de philos. sect. l. 2. c. 2. By reason of these their Astronomick
observations and experiments, the Egyptians fell into a superstitious
admiration of these glorious celestial Bodies, and thence into an opinion that
they were Gods. Thus Diodorus Siculus lib. 1. tells us, that the ancient
Inhabitants of Egypt, contemplating the Celestial World, and the Nature of the
Superior World; they, with great stupor, admired the Sun and Moon, esteeming
them as the first eternal Gods; whereof the Sun they called Osiris, and the
Moon Isis. The same Lactantius lib. 2. cap. 2. observes. And this Idolatrous
persuasion, that the Stars were Gods (which sprang from natural Astronomy) was
the original of all Idolatrous worship, especially that we call Zabaisme, or
the worship of those planetary Deities, so much in use amongst the Chaldeans;
whence also sprang judicial Astrology, as it will evidently appear in our
Discourse of the Chaldaick Philosophy, chap. 4.. 4. As for the occasion, which
the Egyptians had for the improving of Astronomy, even unto Idolatry; we have
it well described by Eus^bius praepar. l. 1. c. 6. They report that the
Egyptians were the first, who lifting up their eyes to Heaven, and admiring the
mode, order, and quantity of those celestial bodies, thought the Sun and Moon
to be Gods. So Lactant. lib. 2. Inst. cap. 14. The first of all, those, who
possessed Egypt, began to contemplate and adore those cel^stial bodies. And
because they lived, by reason of the Quality of the air, without covered
houses, they thence had opportunity to note the Courses and Defects of the
Stars; and thence fell into the admiration, and adoration of them.

As for the Egyptians skill in Geometry, Geometry.
Porphyrie assures us, that they have been for a long time very studious
therein. Cumenim Nilus, subinde exuadans, agrorum limits confunder^^, quidam
sagaci ingenio Geometriae rations invenerunt, quarum indicio, sua cuique
portio, bona side restitueretur, Inde res in immensum excrevit. Horn. Hist.
philos. l. 2 c. 7.
And Proclus in Euclid. 2.4. faith, that Geometry was invented by the
Egyptians, taking its beginning from measuring of fields; it being necessary
for them, from the inundation of Nilus, which washed away their bounds. Austin
de Civit. Dei l. 18. c. 39. gives us a clear account of the whole: The Wisdom
of the Egyptians, what was it (says he) but principally Astronomy, etc?
Ludovicus Vives on this place* gives this account: The Ancient Egyptians much
exercised themselves in Astronomy, Geometry, and Arithmetic. As for
Geometry, necessity taught them that, which they greatly needed, when the
bounds of their fields were broken down by the overflowing of Nilus; neither
could they, any other way, divide their grounds etc. Whence Geometry is so
termed from measuring of the earth.

As for Astronomy, Touching this serenitie of the heavens, Bochart informed
me, That it is only in the upper part of Egypt, where the heavens were always
clear: but in the lower parts they had not these advantages.
the commodiousnes of their situation gave them great advantage for improvement
therein, they, having their nights always clear, and serene, and the Heavens
lying open to them without clouds, could easily contemplate the risings, and
settings, of the Stars, with their progresses, and regresses, etc. Then to
these two, Arithmetic was added, as subservient, without which the former
could not be attained. Thus Lud. Vives.

And that our Astronomy came much of it, if not the whole, from the Egyptians,
and those Eastern parts, seems very probable from those Hypotheses, or
Hieroglyphick Signs, which are used by Astronomers in the Zodiac, and other
parts of the Celestial Globe, to express the Celestial Bodies, and their
motions by: which way of expressing things was in much use amongst the
Egyptians, and by them called (...); which they derived (as it is supposed) from
the Jewish Church, their Rites, and Ceremonies.

Geographie.
Neither were the Egyptians unacquainted with Geographie; as it appears from
Clemens Alexandrinus (Strom. l. 6.) his description of the sacred Scribe, in
the solemn procession; of whom it was required, that he should be skilled in
Hieroglyphics, Cosmographie, Geographie, the motions of the Planets, the
Chorographie of Egypt, and the description of Nile. Eustathius, in his Notes on
Dionysius, attributes the invention of Geographick Tables to Sesostris, who
caused the Lands he had conquered, to be described in Tables, and so
communicated it to the Egyptians, and from them to others, as Stilling. Orig.
Sacr. Book 2. c. 2. Vossius de phil. sect. lib. 2. c. 2.. 8. We find a good
general account of the Egyptians skill in Mathematics, given by Hornius Hist.
philos. lib. 2. c. 7. They so handled the Mathematick Sciences, that if they be
compared with other Nations, they may be said, not so much to perfect, as
invent them; which they affected out of a humor of vain glory. Especially
there were famous among them Petosiris, and Necepson: by whose Prudence (they
are the words of Julius Firmicus) there was an access made to the very secrets
of Divinity. They vindicated to themselves the invention of Geometry,
Astrology, and Astronomy.

Their Natural Philosophy.
. 3. That the Egyptians had in like manner the Knowledge of Natural
Philosophy, especially of Medicine, and Anatomy (which are but branches
thereof) is generally affirmed by the Ancients. Its true their superstition
kept them from dissecting, 1. Experimental.
and prying into the natures of those creatures, to which they attributed a
Deity, yet were they not without many choice experiments, and curious
observations, even in the experimental part of Natural Philosophy: for Blinie
(Hist. l. 19. c. 5.) tells us, that it was the manner of their Kings to cause
dead bodies to be anatomized, to find out the Structure, or Composition of
Man's body, with the causes, and nature of Diseases. 2. Their Natural History.
Besides they were exact in making philosophic observations touching any
curious natural events, or their irregularities. For when there happened any
prodigy, or irregular thing in nature, they did, says Strabo, with much
curiosity, lay i^ up amongst their sacred records; and Herodotus adds That
more things of this nature were observed by them, than by any other Nation;
which, says he, they not only diligently preserved, but frequently compared
together, and, from a similitude of Prodigies, gathered a similitude of Ev^nts.
Thus much also Plato in his Timaeus fol. 22.33. observes concerning them, in
his relation of S^lon's Conference with the Egyptian Priest: where Solon,
having a curiosity to find out the truth, and original of those ancient great
events, touching Phoroneus, Deucalion, and Pyrrhus, etc. the Egyptian Priest
unfolds these mythologick fabulous narrations, by an historick relation;
wherein he seems to reduce the Story of Deucalion to that of Noah's Flood; and
that of Pyrrhus his wife, to the Burning of Sodom, (...) signifying fire: as
also that of Phoroneus to the drowning of Pharaoh in the Red Sea: Phoroneus,
and Pharaoh being according to the Hebrew, and so the Egyptian tongue (which
differed little from it) conjugates,

And that the Egyptians had some natural history of the first Creation, (which
could not be traduced to them by any hand, See Stillings. Orig. Sacrae Book 3.
chapter 2.
save that of Moses, originally, Genesis 1.) is apparent out of Diogenes Laert.
(proem page 7.) where he says; that the Egyptians did constantly believe that
the World had a beginning, and was corruptible; that the Stars were of the
nature of Fire; and that the Soul was immortal, etc.

But that, for which the Egyptians were most famous abroad, Their skill in
Medicine both conservative, purg^tive, and Chirurgick see Vossius de sec^is
Ph^los. l. 2. c. 2.. 8. and Still^^. Orig. sacr. book 2. c. 2.
was their skill in Medicine; which is so much spoken of by Homer, Plato,
Herodotus, Plutarch, Diogenes Laertius, etc. Pliny tells us, lib. 29. c. 1.
that the original of Physic, or Medicine amongst the Egyptians, was from the
relations of those, who by any remedy were cured of any Disease; which for a
memorial to posterity were recorded in their Temples. The Egyptians had also
excellent skill in the embalming of dead bodies, for their conservation (which
appertains to Medicinal Philosophy) as it appears from Scripture: Genesis 50.2.
Their embalming Genesis 50.2.
where Joseph commands the Physicians to embalme his Father. Clemens
Alexandrinus lib. 6. treating of the Egyptian Philosophy, contained in 24
books written by their Mercury, tells us, that 6 of these Books concerned
Medicine, which were studied by their (...) ( i. e. those who wore the Cloak)
wherein was distinctly handled the Fabric of Man's Body, the Nature of
Diseases, and Medicaments; and particularly the Medicine of the Eyes, and of
Women's Diseases, etc. Diodorus makes the Egyptians the first Inventors of
Medicine. And what their dexterity in Anatomy was, is evident by that of
Gellius lib. 10. Noct. At. cap. 10. Appion, in his Egyptian Books, says that
Human Bodies being dissected, and opened, according to the Egyptian mode, it
was found out, that there was a certain most tenuous Nerve, which passed from
one singer to the heart of man. Farther, how much the Egyptians were verst in
Medicine is discovered by that pleasant Character of Homer (who conversed much
with them) Odyss. (...).

(...)
(...)
Thus Hornius Hist. philos. l. 2. c. 7. The Egyptians greatly studied Natural
Philosophy, wherein how much they excelled appears from Medicine it self,
which they strenuously exercised. See Vossius de Philos. sect is l. 2. c. 2.. 8.

Their Moral Philosophy and Politics. The Egyptians Laws the Source of the
Grecian. Stilling. Origin. sacr. Book. 3^ chapter 2.
. 4. Neither were the Egyptians defective in Moral Philosophy, especially as
to Politics, for which they had a great repute amongst the ancients, both for
their excellent Laws, and also for their good Administration, and execution
thereof. As for their Laws, they are highly commended by Strabo, and Diodorus;
and so greatly esteemed by Lycurgus, Solon, and Plato, as that they were not
ashamed to borrow many of their Laws, and politic Constitutions from them. It
is most certain, says Stillingfleet, that those who formed Greece first into
civil Societies, and well ordered Common Wealths, were such as had been Traders
for Knowledge in other parts. To which purpose Diodorus Siculus (Biblioth. lib.
1.) informs us, that Lycurgus and Solon, as well as the Poets, Orpheus,
Musaeus, Melampus, and Homer; and the Philosophers after them, Pythagoras,
Plato, etc. had gained most of their Knowledge, and Wisdom out of Egypt: nay he
says in general, (...): All those who were renowned amongst the Greeks, for
Wisdom and Learning, did in ancient time resort to Egypt, there to participate
of Learning, and Laws, etc,

The Egyptian Laws from the Jews.
And as the Grecians received their Learning, and Laws from Egypt; so we need no
way doubt, but that the Egyptians received the best part of their Laws from the
Mosaic Constitutions, besides what they had immediately from Joseph their
great Legislator, as hereafter. The Egyptian Politic, or Government of State
from the Jews.
As for the Egyptians Wisdom, in their politic Administration, or Government
of State, it is evident from Esa. 19.11, 12. where the King of Egypt is styled
the Son of the Wise. Besides the continuance of their State so long in peace,
is a sufficient demonstration of their State Policy, or prudent management of
State Affairs; for the improvement whereof, we have reason enough to judge,
they received much light from the Mosaic judicial constitutions; as also from
Solomon's Politics, with whom they had great affinity (by reason of Solomon's
Wife) and commerce, or correspondence: Though indeed they owed much of their
Polity and Government to Joseph; who passes amongst them under the names of
Hermes, Apis, Serapis, etc. as in what follows.

. 5. We now come to the Egyptian Theology, The Egyptian Theology from Joseph.
for which they were greatly reputed; the original whereof they owe to Joseph,
and Jewish Traditions, as it will appear by the parts thereof. Clemens
Alexandrinus (so called by reason of his same in the Church, and Schole of
Alexandria in Egypt was greatly versed in Egyptian Rites, and Worship, whereof
he gives us this account, lib. 6. The Egyptians, says he, have a proper, or
mystic kind of Philosophy, which appears from their sacred Ceremonies. For
first (...) the Cantor precedes with a Music Symbol, 1. Their Cantor.
and those 2 books of Mercury, the one containing the Hymns of the Gods, the
other an account of the Kings life. After the Cantor follows the Horoscope,
with an horologe, and palm, 2. Their Horoscope, or Astrologer.
the Symbols of Astrology in his hand. This has always in his mouth the four
Astrologick Books of Hermes. The Horoscope is received by the (...) or sacred
Scribe, 3. Their sacred scribe.
carrying in his head Feathers, and in his hands a Book with a ruler, wherein
is an inkhorn, and pen to write. This person ought to be skilled in
Hieroglyphics, Cosmographie, Geographie, the order of the Sun, Moon, and 5
Planets, the Chorographie of Egypt, and the Description of Nile, and all sacred
Rites, and Places, with their Dimensions; and whatever belongs to Sacreds.
After the sacred Scribe follows the (...), or Ornator, 4. Their Ornator.
who has the Cubit of Justice, and the sacrisicing cup. This person is
instructed both in the (...) i. e. such things as conduce to Learning, and the
Liberal Sciences; and also in the (...), i. e. the Doctrine of the Sacrifices
of Calves, and the Ceremonies appertaining thereto. All these things the
Egyptian Religion contained, Prayers, Pomps, Festival days, Sacrifices, first
Fruits, Hymns, and other things like hereunto. In the last place goes their
Prophet, 5. Their Prophet.
who carries in his bosom a Water pot, and is followed by those who carried the
panes emissos, i. e. bread set forth. This person is the Governor of the
Sacreds; and he learned (...) the 42 Sacerdotal Books, written by their
Egyptian Mercury, which treated of Laws, Gods, and the whole Priestly
Discipline. These Egyptian rites but corrupt imitations of the Jews
In all of which this Prophet is to be versed, because he is also to oversee
the distribution of Tributes, etc. So Vossius de philos. sectis l. 2. c. 2.
That the chief of these Egyptian Ceremonies were borrowed from the Jewish Rites
will be evident to any, that consider, how parallel they are. The Egyptian
Cantor to the Jewish Singer; their sacred Scribe to the Jewish; their
sacrificing Cup to that, wherein the Jews offered their Libamina, or
Drink Offerings; their panes emissi, or bread set forth to the Jewish panes
propositionis, show bread; their Calve-Sacrifices to the Jewish; as their
Prayers, Festivals, Sacrifices, first Fruits, Hymns to those amongst the Jews.

Philip Melancthon, in his Chronichon lib. 2. concerning Abraham, tells us, that
Joseph settling the College of Priests in Egypt, informed them with the
Knowledge of God, and planted a Church amongst them, which pious Institution of
his, in after times, degenerated into Superstition and Idolatry, etc. As for
the Egyptian Gods, it is evident, they are all younger than the Patriarchs;
and, as it is supposed, had their original from them, especially from Joseph.
Melancthon makes Osiris, Their Gods Osiris, Apis and Serapis Symbols of Joseph.
which signifies auxiliator, or a blessed man, to be contemporarie with
Abraham; but I should rather judge him an Hieroglyphick of Joseph, who helped
them in their famine. That the memory of Joseph was preserved amongst them
under the Egyptian Apis, Vossius (de Idol. lib. 1. c. 29.) makes very probable,
from the testimonies of Julius Maternus, Stilling. Orig. sacr. B. 3^ Chapter 5.
Ruffinus, and Suidas, as also from the great advantages, which the Egyptians
received from Joseph, which no Hieroglyphick could express more emphatically,
than the Egyptian Apis, which resembled the fat and lean Kine. 2. It was the
manner of the Egyptians, to preserve the memories of their great Benefactors,
by such Symbols, which were at first designed only for civil use. 3. He proves
it also from the names of Apis and Serapis. Apis he conceives to be the sacred
name of Joseph, from (...) father; so Genesis 45.8. Joseph himself says he was a
father to Pharaoh. And Serapis, as Suidas, and Ruffinus tells us, had a bushel
on his head, from (...) Sor, a Bull, and Apis. Yea that the Egyptian Demons had
their rise from Joseph, Their Demons from Joseph.
whom they esteemed as one of their chiefest Demons, and Heroes, is very
probable: so Mr Bochart, in a Sermon at Caen, affirmed, that the Egyptians had
a City, which they styled the City of their Heroes, as some think, from
Joseph, whom they accounted amongst their Heroes, or Demons. That the Egyptians
had their Demons is asserted by Iamblicus, etc. Orus Joseph.
As for Orus (which signifies Light, from (...) Or) who is said to have taught
the Egyptians their Wisdom, Melancthon (chron. l. 2.) thinks that he was
instructed by Abraham, and thence instructed the Egyptians in the Knowledge of
the true God, as also in the Motions of the Heavens, etc. But may not this name
be more properly applied to Joseph; who is expressly said Ps. 105.22. Psalm.
105.22.
to teach them Wisdom? Whence he was by the Greeks called (...): to which the
Egyptian, or Hebrew Orus, (...) Or, exactly answers.

Isis was later, Isis.
and (as Learned Bochart told me) the same with Pharaoh's Daughter, who adopted
Moses: so the name Is^ha signifies Virago. as Melancthon. As also Busyris,
Busiris.
which, according to Melancthon, signifies Munitor, Of these Egyptian Gods see
Kircher. O^dip. Ae^gypt Tom. 1. Syntag. 3. cap 3, 4, 5, 6, etc.
and is supposed to have built the Egyptian Pyramids, by the hands of the
Children of Israel. See more of the Egyptian Gods. Part 1. B. 2. C. 7.. 10. of
Egyptian Gods.

Yea not only the matter of Egyptian Theology, but also the Instruments, and
Promotors of it, seem evidently of Judaick, sacred Extract. For look, as the
Jewish Theology was seated among the Priests, and Prophets: so also the
Egyptians had, in imitation of these, their Priests, Distincti autem fuerunt
Sacerdot^s, and Prophetae. Illi enim praecipue sacra curabant, h^ vero oraculis
praeerant; edisser^bant quoque res divinas, quod nunc Doctores Academiarum
sacere solent. Quae omnia lucem ca^ient ex Exodus 7.1. Horn. Hist. Philos. l. 2.
c. 7.
and Prophets. Thus Diogenes Laertius lib. 1. tells us, that the Egyptian
Philosophers were styled Priests, and Prophets. So Apulcius de Dogm. Plat.
says, that Plato went to Egypt, that he might learn there the Rites of the
Prophets. This also gives us the reason, why their chief Philosophers were
called Priests; namely because the chief Matter of their philosophizings was
Theologick. Thus Hornius Histor. philos. l. 2. c. 7. They were called Priests
by reason of their ancient Philosophy, which was joined with Theology. For
they discoursed of the Gods, their Natures, and Worship; and of things natural,
which they esteemed also a^ Divine, because Nature was with them as a God. The
like he adds (...) what follows: The Philosophy of the ancient Egyptians took
in al^ as has been said, Theology it self, which they who mostly studied, for
distinction sake, were called (...) Priests: Which is the very ^otion by which
the Jewish Priest is expressed. Some distinguish their Egyptian Priests, and
Prophets thus: the former they make to be employed about Sacreds, the latter
about Oracles, and the prediction of futures. Which also answers to the Jewish
Distribution. Touching the Egyptian Mysteries, or Mystic Divinity, it was
couched under Hieroglyphics; of which we are now to treat.

Of the Egyptian Hieroglyphics and their original from the. Jews.
. 6. We have done with the matter of the Egyptian Philosophy, both
Mathematick, Natural, Moral, and Theologick. We now proceed to their manner of
philosophizing, which was by Hieroglyphics, or Symbols answerable unto, and,
as it is very probable, derived from those in use amongst the ancient Hebrews
and Jews. So Lud. Vives, on Austin de civitat. Dei. l. 18. c. 39. Primi
Aegyptii per siguras animalium sensus effingebant, and antiquissima monumenta
ingeaii humani impressa saxis cernuntur. Tacitus lib. 11.
Artapanus (says he) reports that Moses gave Letters to the Egyptians -- and
if any shall inquire in what letters that Wisdom of the Egyptians, in which we
read Moses was instituted, was contained, he will find, peradventure, it was
wont to be traduced and received by vocal Tradition, and so conserved in the
memory of the Teachers, and of the Hearers: if they had any forms of letters,
they were no other than Images of Animals, or other Creatures, which they
called (...), that is, Letters engraven in Sacreds, etc. The same Ludovicus
Vives tells us, that we find some mention of these (...) Hieroglyphick Letters
(which were the forms, or images of beasts engraven on their Sacred Symbols)
in the fragments of Orus, that ancient Egyptian Writer, etc. Vissius de philos.
sectis l. 2. c. 2.. 7. says, that the Egyptian Philosophy, for the most part,
was couched under Allegories: which way of philosophizing ought not to be
rejected: For every where in the Old Testament we find Allegories. And Christ
himself in the Evangelist says, I will open my mouth in parables, and in dark
sayings will I speak of the ancient matters. Also the Evangelist says, that
Christ spoke to the people in parables.

Athanas-Kircherus Oedip. Egypt. Tom. 3. cap. 1. gives us this Origination of
an Hieroglyphick. An Hieroglyphick derived (...), i. e. from sacred Sculpture,
is nothing else but a Symbol of a sacred thing engraven on stones. It Is called
a Symbol, to indicate the reason of its mysterious sense. It is said to be of a
thing sacred, thereby to constitute the difference 'twixt sacred, and profane
Symbols. For there was a two ^^ld kind of Egyptian Parables, the one (...),
which comprehended vulgar similitudes; the other (...), drawn from their Sacred
Doctrine. Clemens Alexandrinus Strom 5, says that they who are taught by the
Egyptians, The sundrykinds of expressing things amongst the Egyptians.
learn first of all the method of the Egyptian Letters, called
Epistolographick; secondly the Hieratick, used by those, who write of sacred
things; the last, and most perfect, called Hieroglyphick, whereof there is one
Curiologick ((...)) another ((...)) Symbolick: of the Symbolick also there are
three sorts, the one is spoken properly, by imitation; Of the three fo^d manner
of writing among the Egyptians vulgar, sacred and Hieroglyphick.
the other is written as it were tropically; another, on the contrary, does
allegorize by Enigmes. As for instance; in the Curiologick way to express the
Sun, they make a Circle, to express the Moon, a Crescent. Tropically they, by
resemblance, traduce, transfer, and express, by changing some things, and
variously transfiguring others. Thus, when they deliver the praises of Kings in
Theologick Fables, A^gyptii ad hoc denotandum, Sphi^gem ante sua templa
constituere soliti sunt, innuentes sua placita (...). esse Horn. Hist. philos.
l. 7. c. 6.
they write by A^aglyphicks* In the third kind, by Enigmes, they liken the Sun
to a B^^tle, because they say, this Creature lives six Months under ground.
see Stanly of Pythag. We have an instance of their Hieroglyphick Mysteries in
that famous Hieroglyphick of Diospolis, of which we find so much mention
amongst the Ancients; where, to express our coming into the World, they used a
child; and to notify our going out of the world, an old man; they expressed
God by an Hawk; hatred by an Hippotamus; Impudence by a Crocodile. And all this
to express this pretty Apothegme. O ye that come into the world, and go out of
it, God hates Impudence. so Stilling. orig. sacr. book 2. c. 2. Vossius de
philos. sect. lib. 2. c 2.. 5. tells us, that the first Discipline of the
Egyptians consisted in their threefold Scripture: one vulgar or common, De
opertis adyti pro^ert quosdam l b^os literis ignorabilibus praenotatos, partim
figuris cu^uscemodi animalium, concepti sermonis compendiosa verba suggereates,
partim nodosis, and in modum rota^ ^ortuosis capreolatimque condensis apicibus,
a curiosa profanorum lectione munitos. Apuleius lib. 11.
which was used in writing Epistles, another sacred which they used in writing
sacreds; and a third Hieroglyphick, or the Sculpture of sacred Images, etc.
These sacred Hieroglyphics are called by Apuleius lib. 11. Pictures and
Images, which says he, they used to preserve their Philosophy from contempt,
and oblivion by. Benjamin Tudelensis in (...), acquaints us, that at
Alexandria, on the shore, there was to be seen a Marble Sepulcher, whereon all
kind of Birds, and other Animals were engraven. Whence it is conceived, that
these Egyptian Hieroglyphics were not so much letters or words, as some
conjecture, as entire sentences, ye complete Discourses, for the more easy
preservation of the memory of things. So under the form of a Be making honey,
they expounded the office of a King. Lucan wittily styles these Hieroglyphics,
Magicas Linguas, Magic Languages, because they denoted not single letters, or
words, but entire orations; as Hornius Hist philos. l 7. c 6

Hieroglyphick Philosophy translated by Pythago^as from Egypt into Greece.
. 7. This Hieroglyphick and Mystic way of philosophizing, though it has little
of substance in it, yet did it make a great noise, and was exceeding taking in
the infant state of the world; as it is the property of children, to be taken
more with sensible forms, shadows, or pictures, which please the fancy, than
with solid reason. So the Gymnosophists, and Druides were wont to wrap up their
Philosophy in obscure and enigmatick sentences, as Laert. lib. 1. The like is
said of Ta^utus the Phenician, as Sanchoniathon in Eusebius. praepar. l. 1. c. 7.
For the first Philosophers delighted to concele their more hidden Mysteries,
from the Vulgar; whence they bound their Auditors by an oath o^ secrecy (...),
which words are taken out of a famous formule of the oath, whereby Vettius
Valcus the Antiochene Astrologer bound his reader, as Seld^^ Prol. 3. de Diis
Syris and Synt. 1. c. 1. H^rnius Hist. Philos. l. 7. c. 6. This kind of
philosophizing, Pythagoras translated immediately from the Egyptians, but
originally from the Jews, into Greece. Porphyrie in the life of Pythagoras tells
us, that it was permitted unto Pythagoras, when he was in Egypt, to acquaint
himself with all the Studies of the Egyptian Priests at Thebes; Eum modum
(Symbolicum) ex orient in Graeciam Pythagoras tulit, cujus Philosophia nil
nisi arcana mysteria erant. Hornius Hist. philos. l. 7. c. 6.
which was never granted to any Forreigner besides. Diogenes says, that whilst
he lived with these Priests, he was instructed in the Learning, and Language of
the Egyptians, and in the three modes of writing, Epistolographick,
Hieroglyphick, and Symbolick, whereof the one imitates the common way of
speaking, the rest are Allegorick, by Enigms, etc. as Clemens Strom. 5. Plato
also took up the same mode of allegorick, or symbolick philosophizing, though
not so expressly, as Pythagoras. And indeed this kind of philosophizing was
extremely pleasing to these first Ages, and Philosophers; as Amyraldus well
observes in his Salmurian Thes^s de Imaginibus. In the Egyptian Hieroglyphics
(says he) the (...), manners and passions were figured by the shapes of
Animals, and other creatures. which were very delightful to sense; etc. Athan.
Kircher. Oedi^s Aegyptiaci tom. 2. part. 1, cap. 1. says, that the Egyptians
were the first amongst men, who insisted on this mode of philosophizing by
Symbols. For they, being of an acute, and subtle ingenie; as also continually
versed in a certain profound contemplation, and disquisition of Truth,
delighted themselves in these mystic expressions, etc. And the same Kircherus,
in what follows cap. 2. gives us the Origin of this Symbolick Doctrine. It
stands thus (says he) with human condition, that if men have any thing that is
precious, rare, and beautiful, they not only hide it under secret forms, but
also concele it under enigmatick and mysterious words, that none but the more
wise, and quicksighted, may come to the manifest notice thereof. Which, as it
has been the custom of all times, so especially amongst the ancient wise men.
For seeing they had, as it was most mere, so high an esteem, for those great
secrets of Divinity, communicated, by successive Tradition, from the
Patriarchs, as containing the in exhausted treasures of eternal felicity; they
thought it dangeorus to expose these rich treasures, to the ignorant people,
and dull ingenies. Wherefore they endeavored, by all means possible, to couch
them under such symbolick coverts, that vulgar capacities might penetrate only
the bark, or outside of the words; the marrow, or sense, being still hid from
them. And then in what follows cap. ^3. the same Kircher. gives us the
Interpretation of many Hieroglyphick Symbols, out of Zorcaster. Moreover cap.
4. he interprets many Hieroglyphick Symbols used by Orpheus. And cap. 5. The
Symbols of Pythagoras are interpreted by him, Whence he proceeds cap. 6, 7, 8,
9, etc, to explicate many Hieroglyphick Symbols used by Plato, Proclus, Picus
Mirandulanus, and others. Thence in the second part of his second Tome, he
interprets many Mathematick, Mechanic Medicinal, Chymick, Magic, and
Metaphysick Hieroglyphics: from Classis 7. to 12.

This ancient mode of expressing things worthy of memory, The extent and
benefit of this Hieroglyphick way of philosophizing: and of its traduction from
the Jews.
by certain hieroglyphick forms, or symbols, was very common amongst the
ancients, both Poets, and Philosophers: For in this infancy of the world,
knowledge being impolite and imperfect, they took delight to shadow forth
their highest mysteries, and contemplations, by terrene Images, and sensible
forms; which way of conveighing, and preserving knowledge is not only helpful
to the memory, and delightful to the fancy, but also very efficacious, as to
the moving of Affections; and therefore the wise God made use of this familiar
way and method, for the instructing of his own people, in the nonage of his
Church, shadowing forth, and signifying to them, the most sublime heavenly
mysteries of his Gospel, by earthly Symbols, or Types. Whence that great
maxim (...), sensible forms are imitations of Intelligible things. Thus were
the greatest pieces of Jewish wisdom couched under the covert of Symbols, or
Types. Whence the Egyptians, as the other Eastern Philosophers borrowed their
Hieroglyphick manner of philosophizing by fables, etc. which will more fully
appear hereafter, in the life of Pythagoras, and Plato. See more of these
Egyptian Hieroglyphics in Athan. Kircher. O^dipi Aegyptiaci Tom. 3. cap. 1.

That the Egyptian Philosophy was traduced originally from the Hebrews and
Scriptures.
. 8. Having given some account of the Egyptians Philosophy, both as to the
matter, and manner of their philosophizing, I shall now proceed to give a more
particular demonstration, that the chiefest parts, if not the whole thereof,
descended originally from the Jewish Church, or Scriptural Tradition. I shall
begin with Inartificial Arguments, or Authentic Testimonies of such whose
skill in Antiquity, and faithfulness in their relations thereof, is generally
acknowledged, and received. Lud. Vi^es's Testimony.
We gave some Testimonies hereof before in our account of Abraham, Joseph, and
Moses, their Philosophy; to which we shall add, 1. that of Ludovicus Vives on
August. de Civit Dei lib. 8. cap. 9. The Philosophy of the Egyptians (says
he) is very ancient, but for the most part derived from the Chaldeans,
especially from Abraham; though they, as Diodorus writes, refer it to Isis,
Osiris, Vulcan, Mercury, and Hercules. Thus Lud. Vives. First this old
Tradition, that the Egyptian Philosophy, and thence the Grecian sprang from
the Chaldeans is, and that not without great probability, by the Learned
interpreted of the Hebrews: for Abraham their Ancestor was a Chaldean: and the
Hebrews themselves lived under the Chaldean Empire, at that time when this old
saying began amongst the Grecians, mentioned by Plato, etc of which more
hereafter. 2. Lud. Vives expressly says that the Egyptian Philosophy came
principally from Abraham; for which he has much of Pagan Antiquity on his
side, as we mentioned on Abraham* Josephus A^tiquit. sud lib. 1. cap. 16.
judges that the Egyptians learned their Arithmetic, and Astrology from the
Patriarch Abraham, who brought these Sciences from Chaldea. But the Egyptians
are wont to refer their Philosophy to Isis, Osiris, Vulcan, Mercury, and
Hercules; as Diodorus Siculus. The Doctors of this wisdom are, by Clemens
Alexandrinus, called Prophets, by Suidas (...) ( as amongst the Ethiopians) by
Eusebius, in an Egyptian name, Arsepedonaptae. These drew their wisdom from
Abraham, as before; and perhaps from Joseph also, who first taught the
Egyptians the use of Geometry, as Artapanus in Josephus testifies. And this
opinion, as some think, may be founded on Psalm. 105.22. It is credible also,
that they got some things from the Israelites, who also descended from Abraham;
and hence Aristophanes, in Avibus, calls them (...); which Suidas also observes.
Thus Ger. Vossius de philosoph. sectis. l. 2. c. 2.. 2. 3. The Confession of
the Egyptians themselves related by Diodorus, The Confession of the Egyptians.
seems clearly to intimate, and prove our Assertion. For in that they refer
their Philosophy originally to Isis, Osiris, Mercury, A nonnullis Aegyptiorum
Sacerdotibus, quidisciplinam nostram altius considerarunt, Dei homines Gens
nostra est appellata. Eleazar. Pontifex ad Ptol. 2. apud Eusebius. praepar. l. 8.
c. 3.
etc. it is very probable that these feigned names were originally given to the
Patriarchs, especially to Joseph, by the Egyptians, who being unwilling to own
the Hebrews, as Authors of their Wisdom, gave these borrowed names unto Joseph,
etc. according to the custom of that infant Age. Athan. Kircher. Oedipi
Egypt. Tom. 3. c. 1. makes Herm^s Trismegistus the Author of the Egyptians
Hieroglyphick Philosophy. Yet so, as that we received the first Lineaments
thereof from the Patriarchs. His words are Hermes Trismegistus contemplating
this world composed of so great variety of things, as a Scene distinguished
with most polite Images, he rightly supposed, that these creature-images were
(...), Symbols of God, etc. And hence the first rudiments of Hieroglyphick
(...) proceeded; which being adumbrated by the first Patriarchs, Adam, Enoch,
Noah, C^am, and perfected by Hermes, sprang up unto the form, by the
stupendous architecture of Hieroglyphics. That Mercury called by the
Grecians Hermes, could be no other than Joseph, has been already proved in the
Story of Joseph's Philosophy: as also Part 1. Book 2. Chap. 7.. 10. of the
Egyptian Theogonie. Serranus's Testimony.
But Serranus (that great Philologist) in his Preface to Plato, speaks more
fully and expressly touching the traduction of the Egyptian Philosophy from the
Patriarchs and Scripture Revelation. His words are these, That the Egyptians
retained many things from the Traditions of the Patriarchs, the ancient
History of Moses demonstrates: and that they derived many things from the
clear fountains of the Scriptures, which yet they contaminated by their own mud
(or fables) is no way to be doubted. Thus Serranus: but of this more hereafter
in the life of Pythagoras, and Plato. Neque ullo modo dubitari potest quin,
quaecunque vera and Scripturae consentientia cum apud al^os, tum imprimis,
Aegypti^s Philosophos inveniuntur, ea omnia ab Ebraeis, quibuscum jam a
temporibus Abrahae frequenter, and diu ^onversati sunt, acceperint. ^^primis a
Josepho, pl^rima, cui, cum proximus a Rege esset, con^^adicere ^^mo ausus est.
Ho^nius Hist. philos. l. 2. c. 10.
The like Hornius Hist. philos. l. 2. c. 10. which see in what precedes of
Joseph chap. 1.. 9.

. 9. To make good yet farther our assertion, touching the Traduction of the
Egyptian Philosophy from the Jewish Church, we now shall endeavor to give some
Artifiicial Argument, or Demonstration, from the (...), or cause; by showing
what influence the Patriarchs, and Jewish Church had on the Egyptian Wisdom, as
well in its first rise, as after improvement. First, that the Egyptians were no
way famous for Wisdom, or Philosophy, before the abode of the Patriarchs with
them, is evident by their own concessions: for they confess they owe all their
wisdom to their Gods; Isis, Osiris; but principally to Mercury, or Theuth,
whom they call Hermes, etc. So Plato in Phaedro brings in Socrates relating,
Alii s^ ri^sisse de sapientia Mercurium non negant, sed haer, quae hodie
circumferuntur, (...), Mercurii esse, id vero pernegant. Olim enim Librarii, ut
quaestum uberiorem ex suis nugis co^raderent, (...) libros lectoribus
obtrudebant. Hornius Hist. philos. l. 2. c. 6.
that the Egyptians worshipped a certain God whom they called Theuth, who found
out, and taught them all Arts and Letters, in that time, when Thamus held the
Empire of Egypt. This Theuth is the same with the Egyptian Mercury, of whom
Iamblichus (most skilful in the Egyptian Theology) lib. de Myster. Aegipt.
cap. 1. thus writes: The Egyptians report Mercury to be the M^derator, and
God of Wisdom, and Eloquence; and they declared that by him not only Letters
were found out, and reduced into order; but also that the principles of all
Learning were collected, and published, in many thousand books by him, Mr
Bochart in a conference told me that none of the Egyptian Gods were more
ancient than the Patriarchs.
Now that all the Egyptian Gods were younger than the Patriarchs, or at least
but borrowed names given to them, is generally asserted by the Learned;
especially that Mercury, or Hermes was Joseph, or Moses. Carrion in his
Ch^oni^on lib. 2. of Abraham, tells us, that after the great Famine in Egypt,
Joseph altered the constitution, or form of the Egyptian Kingdom (he having
bought in all the Land, that belonged to the people) and erected a College for
the Priests which was endowed, Joseph's provisib^ for the College of Egyptian
Priests, and his instructing of them as also of their King in the knowledge of
God, etc. of which see more in what precedes chapter 1.. 9* of Joseph.
etc. His words are these, After the Famine the form of the Egyptian Kingdom
was constituted, and Tributes appointed, and Revenues for the College of the
Priests; that so they might be conservators of Learning* And although the
Knowledge of God was, after Joseph's death, changed, yet the Knowledge of the
Celestial motions, and of the nature of things, was conserved in Egypt,
throughout all the four Monarchies of the Assyrians, the Persians, the Greeks,
and Romans, even unto the Barbarians of the Mahometans, almost 3000 years.
Jacob saw the flourishing state of this Kingdom, which then had a pious King,
with whom he had frequent conference, and who took care, that the true Doctrine
should be propagated far and near, and in the famine afforded relief to many
neighboring Nations. Thus far Carrion, or Melancthon. By which we see what care
Joseph took, for informing the Egyptian Priests, in the Knowleedge of the true
God, and sound Philosophy. The Scripture also makes an honorable mention of
Joseph's care of, and provision for the Priests; as Genesis 47.22. Genesis 47, 22*
by assigning them Portions, and settling their Lands. And as he took this care
for their Bodies, and Succession in following Ages; so we cannot conceive, but
that he took much more care for their Souls, and the Souls of the whole
Kingdom, with which they were entrusted. Can we imagine that Joseph made such
large provision for these Egyptian Priests, that so they might be the better
qualified to serve the Devil, and Idol Gods? no; without doubt, his great
design was to lay a foundation, for the Knowledge and Worship of the true God,
as well as, and much more than, for human Philosophy, and other ingegenious
Sciences) for the accomplishment whereof, he had an huge advantage, in that,
having been an instrument to save the Nation, he had thereby gained the King's
Ear, and Heart, who, if we may credit Carrion, was piously inclined: and we may
also, not without good ground, conjecture as much from Joseph's Instructions
of, and Jacob's Conference with him. And indeed the unparalleld kindnesses he
manifested to Joseph, his Father, and Brethren, argues some pious inclination
in him. But this holy and great design of Joseph, in erecting a College for the
Egyptian Priests, and making such ample provision for their Instruction in the
Knowledge of God, and human Philosophy, after his decease determined in
miserable superstition, and Idolatry: so also Carrion lib. 2. of the going out
of the children of Israel out of Egypt, says, That Egypt excelled in Arts, and
Laws, and other Learning: Joseph had planted a Church there; but after his
death the Kings turned aside to Idols, and in the following times Egypt was
full of Idols, and Magic Arts. Thus Carrion: so Hornius as before Chap. 1.. 9.
Thus we have seen what foundation was laid by Joseph, and the rest of the
Patriarchs for Divine and human Philosophy, and its improvement in Egypt: unto
which we have ground enough to conjecture, that Moses, by his writings, and
Solomon by his, gave no small additional advance, as it has been already
observed in its place.

. 10. We now proceed to demonstrate, what improvement the Egyptian Philosophy,
and Wisdom received from the Jewish Church, after the Babylonian Captivity.
When the Jews were carried captive to Babylon, we find that many remainders of
them fled to Egypt, where we may presume they had their Schools, as in Babylon;
or at least some way of communicating their Knowledge to the Egyptians, who,
without doubt, would be very inquisitive into their mysteries. And when
Alexander upon personal conversation with the Jews, and observation of their
Institutes, and Solemnities, began to have a kindness for them, multitudes of
them were, by Alexander's favor, settled at Alexandria; where they had huge
advantage to season that Fountain of Learning with Scripture Light, which
immediately after their settlement, began to flourish; and being afterward
abundantly supplied with the Waters of the Sanctuary, I mean with the sacred
Fountain of the holy Scriptures translated into Greek, this Schole of
Alexandria proved the most flourishing in the world. The advantage the
Egyptians received from the Jews as to Philosophy after the Captivity by the
Greek version, or LXX.
For the greatest advantage that the Egyptians, and Grecians had, for
improvement in Divine, and human Philosophy, was the Translation of the Hebrew
Testament into Greek by the appointment; as it is supposed, of Ptolomeus
Philadelphus King of Egypt; whereof Carrion Chron lib 2. of the Kings of Egypt
after Alexander, gives us this account. Ptolomeus Philadelphus (says he)
reigning with peace in Egypt, and finding the profession of Sciences confined
to the Priests, and the Egyptian Tongue, The beginning of the Schole at
Alexandria.
and Letters; he caused Learning to be translated into the Greek Tongue, and
instituted Studies (or Colleges) at Alexandria; where it was, thence forward,
common for all that would, to study and learn: and the King called thither
from all parts Learned men; he erected a copious Library, and searched after
ancient monuments, amongst diverse Nations. Wherefore Callimachus writ a book of
the origin, and migrations of the Nations, and of the Builders of the ancient
Cities, and their Laws; which book being lost, is of great detriment to
Antiquity. But when Ptolomie understood that the Jews had the ancient series
of the Fathers, and saw that the Law of the Jews did mostly accord with reason,
touching the unity of God, and right manners he took care to have the books of
the Jews translated into the Greek Tongue. By the labor and bounty of this
King Ptolomeus Philadelphus, the Studies of Sciences were restored to mankind,
and largely propagated. And it is written, that he was moved by the Counsels of
the most learned Aristas, Strabo, and Demetrius Phalerensis, Callimachus,
Apollonius, Aratus, Bion, Theocritus, Conon, and Hipparchus the Mathematician,
who resided with him, etc. The Studies of the Sciences, instituted in the reign
of Philadelphus, flourished greatly at Alexandria, in the reign of Eu^rgetes
his son; who also was very bountiful toward the Jews. In his time Jesus the
son of Syrach, being in Egypt, gathered his sentences; which are yet extant;
which (says he) were written by his Grandfather, but augmented by himself, and
translated into Greek. The reading of which is most profitable and sweet, etc.
Thus Carrion (or Melancthon, who added to him) by which it is apparent, what
great advance the Egyptian Wisdom, and the Schole of Alexandria (which
henceforward became the seat thereof) in its first constitution, received from
the Scriptures, and Jewish Church.

. 11. This Schole of Alexandria grew exceeding famous for its Library (wherein
was treasured up this rich Jewel of the Old Testament, The fame of the
Alexandrian Schole for its Library wherein were treasured up the sacred
Oracles.
in its Greek Version) whereunto Mark Antonie, out of Love to Cleopatra,
afterward added the famous Library of Pergamus; so that this Schole was the
great Nurserie of all Philosophy, and ingenious Sciences, in the first
dawnings of the Christian Religion. For the sacred Scriptures, as well as the
Egyptian Philosophy, being translated into Greek, it proved an efficacious
attractive to draw all the Candidates of Learing, and Philosophy hither. The
head of this Schole in Origens time, was that great, and so much renowned
Philosopher Ammonius, Ammonius the great Master of the Alexandrian Schole his
mixing Scripture with Platonic Philosophy.
from whom all those Platonic Philosophers, who were styled (...), of the
sacred Succession, derived their notions. Such were Herennius, Origin, and
Plotinus, who were his Scholars; and Porphyrie, who was Scholar to Plotinus, as
^amblichus the disciple of Porphyrie. This Ammonius, if we may believe Eusebius
(Eccles. Hist. l. 6. c. 9.) and Jerome, lived and died a Christian, though
Porphyrie endeavors to confute this opinion. Certain it is, that his
Philosophy which he communicated to his Scholars, had much of the Scripture
revelations mixed with it: so that the Platonic Philosophy, which we find in
Plotinus, Porphyrie; Proclus, Hierocles, and the latter Platonists, owed not
its original, as they would persuade us, so much to Plato, or Pythagoras, as to
the Divine Revelation, which Ammonius was well versed in, and made the
foundation of his Philosophy. Take this in the words of Dr. Owen, in his
learned Treatise of Theology lib. 3. cap. 6. page 204. After Ammonius
Alexandrinus the Coryphaeus or head of the Philosophers of his Age (whose
Scholars were Origin, Herennius, and Plotinus the praeceptor of Porphyrie, as
he of Iamblichus) had sown in the minds of his Auditors, some seeds of the
heavenly Doctrine, they, who, by reason of their own inveterate prejudices, and
the Worlds enmity against the Christian Religion, would not receive the same,
desisted not however to manure and improve those seeds they had received, but
mixing of them with Plato's muddy Philosophy. Add hereto, that some of them
by reading our books, drew forth many no^io^s from those hidden mysteries of
the Gospel. Of this number were Numenius, Proclus, Amelius, Plotinus,
Herennius, Porphyrius, Iamblichus, Hierocles, Marinus, Damascius, and others;
who, though they quitted not the curious speculations of the Platonicks, nor
the Magic Enchantments of the Pythagoreans, yet they mixed many sparks of the
heavenly Truth with them. More of this hereafter. Book 3. ^. 4.. 5. What
advance the Schole of Alexandria received from the Church there.


. 12. There was also, in the first planting of the Gospel, a famous Church of
Christ in this City of Alexandria, whence this Schole, as we may justly
presume received much Light, etc. To which purpose, Morelius in his Treatise of
Church Discipline Lib. 3. c. 14. page 260. St Mark, says he, having performed
the office of a Teacher in the Church of Alexandria, the charge of the Schole
was afterward given first to Panthenus, then to Clemens Alexandrinus, and
after him successively to Orig^n, Heraclus, Dionysius, Athen^dore, Malcion, and
Didymus, who reached to the year 350. The which Doctors gave an admirable
advance to the Church. The Town was for this reputed as the universal Schole
of the Church. The truth is, Philosophy and Curiosity corrupted this Schole,
and by consequent the Church, which is greatly to be heeded, because these two
evils are natural to Scholars, who contenting not themselves with the
simplicity of the Gospel, would fain adorn it with the ornaments of human
Eloquence, and Philosophy; and from a rage to learn, would feign mount higher
than their Teachers, etc. Hence the same Mor^lius lib. 2. cap. 4. page 87.
shows how the Arian, and Pelagian Heresies were hatched out of the vain
philosophizings in this Schole of Alexandria, which at last proved the
dissipation and ruin of the said Schole, and Church. Thus have we gone
thorough the whole series of the Egyptian Philosophy, with endeavors to
demonstrate, that it received not only its Primitive Foundation, but also its
continued advance and improvement in all Ages from the Divine Oracles seated in
the Jewish, and Christian Churches.

CHAP. II. Of the Phenician Philosophy, its Traduction from the Jews.
The Phenicians traduced Philosophy themselves, and derived it into Greece,
and other parts, from the Jews. Of the Phenician Philosophy, and its
propagation to the Grecians. Of Sanchoniathon, and the original of his
Philosophy from the Jews. Porphyrie's Testimony of Sanchoniathon's traducing
his Philosophy from Jerombalus, Priest of the God Jao, i. e. Gideon; or some
Jewish Priest. Sanchoniathon's Mythologick mode of philosophizing from the
Jewish Church. The Matter of his Philosophy from the Jews: His (...),
Theogonie, or Genealogy of the Gods. Beelsamen from heb. (...) Genesis 1.16.
Eliun from (...), Ilos from (...): Eloeim from (...): Baetulia from (...);
Israel from (...). Of Angels, and the Soul from Genesis 2.7. Sanchoniathon's
Physiologie: His Chaos from Genesis 1.2. Ereb. from Genesis 1.5, etc. Mot, and (...)
from Genesis 1.2. The Greek Philosophers concurrence herein. Sanchoniathon's
Geographie. Sanchoniathon's Natural History continued by Mochus the
Physiologist, who was the first Founder of the Doctrine of Atoms, which he
makes to be the first principle of all things; which he received by some Jewish
tradition from the History of the Creation Genesis 1. of Addomenus. Vossius's
account of the Traduction of Phenician Philosophy from the Jews, as the Ionick
and Italick from the Phenicians.

. 1. WE now proceed to the Phenicians, their Philosophers, Of the Phenicians
their traducing Philosophy into Greece, and other parts from the Jews
originally.
and Philosophy; with its Traduction from the Jewish Church, etc. And to make
the (...),, or way to our demonstration more clear, we must reflect on some
considerations, laid down in our former Discourse of Philologie, touching the
Origination of these Phenicians from the old Cananites, who, being expelled
Canaan, by Joshua, came and seated themselves on these Maritime Coasts of
Palestine (called by them afterward Phaenicia) West of Judaea: whence, being
too populous for this narrow Country, they transplanted Colonies, and with
them Human Philosophy, and other Sciences, into Greece, Africa, Spain, and the
chief parts of Europe; especially such as bordered on the Midland Sea, of which
see more Part 1. of Philologie B. 1. chap. 3, 4, 5, 6, etc. I shall only add a
Quotation, or two, out of the Learned Ludovicus Vives, and Bochart, which will
greatly conduce to the confirmation, and illustration hereof. Lud. Vives speaks
though in a few words, fully to our purpose) thus. The Phenicians, says he,
for lucre's sake, passed in their Ships thorough the whole world, whither they
traduced Knowledge, and Philosophy from the Jews.

The Phenicians skill in Geographie and Navigation, etc.
This great Bochart does more copiously explain, and demonstrate in the Preface
to the second part of his Geographie, styled Canaan fol. 9. From what we have
said, it clearly appears, that the Grecians were greatly exceeded by the
Phenicians, as well in the skill of Navigation, as of Geographie. For the
Phenicians began long before the Grecians, to view the world. And indeed, this
was almost the only Study, which was innate to this Nation, even from their
Origin, to sail throughout all parts of the world, and plant Colonies;
whereunto they were incited, either from the thirst of Glory, or the irksomnes
of their own Country, or the desire of Empire, or Curiosity (the ^nquisitor
of natures secrets) or the unsatiable desire of Lucre. Thence they, amongst
them who first ventured their persons at Sea, were so much admired by
posterity, that they were, for this noble exploit, numbered amongst their Gods.
Such were Saturn, and Astarte; whom Sanchoniathon describes, circuiting the
Earth, etc. The like the same Bochart mentions fol. 6, 7. Therefore, says he,
if these monuments of the Phenicians were now extant, there would thence accede
great light to sacred and profane History (we might add also Philosophy) and
that great hiatus, or gap, which is betwixt Moses and the Grecians, would be
made up: We should also learn many things touching the ancient Inhabitants of
the Earth, and the migration of the Nations. But time having long since
consumed, to the great damage of Learning, these Monuments we have nothing
remaining of the History of the Phenicians, but a few fragments scattered here
and there in the writings of the Grecians, and Romans, etc.

The Phenicians skill in Astronomy and Arithmetic.
. 2. And more particularly touching the Phenicians skill in Philosophy,
especially the Mathematics, we have a good account in Bochart, part 2. of
Canaan cap. 8. fol. 410. thus. This was peculiar to the Phenicians, to direct
their course by the inspection of the Stars. So Strabo lib. 16, The Sidonians
are reported to be Masters of many, and of the best Arts: moreover they were
skilful in Astronomy, and Arithmetic, which they acquired at first from the
Art of Calculation, and Navigation. Pliny lib. 5. cap. 12. says, That the
Nation of the Phenicians gained a great glory for their invention of Letters,
Astronomy, Navigation, and Military Arts. Thence the Cynosura was so called
by the Phenicians. And that Arithmetic was greatly in use amongst the
Phenicians, by reason of their Merchandise, and traffic, is generally
affirmed by the Learned. That they were also well skilled in Natural
Philosophy will hereafter appear, in what is mentioned of Sanchoniathon, and
Mochus the Physiologist. The Phenicians skill in Mechanics.
But the greatest excellency of the Phenicians consisted in their Mechanic
Arts (which belong to Experimental Philosophy) of making Glass, mixing
Purple, weaving fine Linne, etc. Whereof we have a full account in Bochart his
Phaleg. lib. 4. cap. 35. His words are these: God indulged the Inhabitants of
Tire, and Sidon (the chief Cities of Phaenicia a sharp vivid ingenie, flexible
to all things: Arithmetic, and Astronomy flowed from them to the Grecians.
And (not to mention the modern Phenicians) Mochus began to philosophize of
Atoms at Sidon before the Trojan Wars, And Abdemonus the Tyrian was bold to
provoke, or engage King Solomon by his questions proposed to him. But their
chief repute was for Mechanic Arts. At Tire the mixture of Purple, at Sidon
Glass making, and the Texture of fine Linen (thence called Sindon) of the
smallest thread, are reported to be first invented. And Solomon, in his Epistle
to Hiram King of Tire, greatly commends the skill of their Carpenters 1 Kings
5.6. 1 Kings 5.6.
For thou know that there are none among us, that can hew Timber like unto
the Sidonians. Hence it is, that Homer calls them (...), manifold, or universal
Artists. And if there were any thing more excellenly wrought in garments, or
vessels, that was usually attributed to the industry of the Sidonians. Thus
Bochart of the Phenician Learning.

. 3. The Phenicians being thus renowned for ingenious Arts, The Grecians
borrowed much of their Philosophy from the Phenicians.
and Philosophy, the Grecians were very ambitious of commerce, and
correspondence with them: For besides the Phenician Colonies, and with them the
Alphabet translated into Greece by Cadmns, and other Phenicians (of which
before Part 1.) the first and chiefest of the Grecian Philosophers had recourse
to Phenicia, to furnish themselves with Philosophic Principles, and
Contemplations: Vossius (de Hist. Graec. l. 3. page 375. edit. 2.) proves that
Thales was (though a Milesian by birth) originally a Phenician; who is said to
have learned Astrology from the Phenicians, especially the Cynosura (or
constellation of the lesser Bear) which was first observed by the Phenicians,
who sailed thereby; and thence Vossius derives Cynosura from (...) a collection
of light. Also that Thales received his opinion, of water to be the first
matter, from the Phenician (...), which signifies Slime, will be evident
hereafter. That Pherecydes was in like manner of a Phenician extract (though
born at Syra, one of the Cyclades) and much versed in the Phenician Mysteries;
from whom he borrowed his (...), or Generation of the Gods (contained in 10
books) also his invention of the Heliotrope, and Mythologick Philosophy, will
appear in the Story of his Philosophy.

So likewise Pythagoras, the Disciple of Pherecydes (as it is generally
supposed by the Learned) borrowed his Symbolick Philosophy from the
Phenicians, and Egyptians. Iamblichus in the Life of Pythagoras cap. 13. tells
us, that Pythagoras made a voyage to Sidon, where he conferred with the
Prophets, the Successors of Mochus the Physiologist, and with the Phenician
Priests; and was initiated into all the Mysteries of Byblus, and Tire, etc. And
Grotius on Mat. 7.6 assures us, that Pythagoras brought his Symbolick
Philosophy, either out of Egypt, or Syria, where his Master Ph^recydes was,
and as some think, Pythagoras himself. The like will hereafter be evinced of
Plato, who makes frequent mention of his Phenician (...), or fables etc. I
shall add for the Confirmation hereof the Testimony of Learned Bochart in his
Preface to Canaan fol. 12. That I may (says he) add to these somewhat of the
Sciences, and Arts which flourished amongst the Phenicians, in that age, in
which the Grecians were Barbarians, or very little instructed: whence it came
to pass, that the most ancient Grecian Philosophers had Phenician Masters;
neither have a few of Phenician words both Philosophic and Mechanic crept
into the Greek Tongue. That Democritus, and after him Epicurus received their
Philosophic Contemplations of Atoms from Mochus the Phenician Philosopher,
will appear in his Story.

The Phenicians received their Philosophy from the Jews.
. 4. As the Grecians derived the choicest parts of their Knowledge, and
Philosophy from the Phenicians; so these, as it is more than probable,
received theirs from the Jewish Church: For indeed, Phenicia was but the great
Mart, which receiving Philosophic Traditions from Judea, transported them into
Greece, and other parts. Thus much has been already hinted out of Ludovicus
Vives, whose words are these, Phaenices quaestus gratia totum orbem navigiis
peragrabant, unde scientiam, and philosophiam traduxerunt a Judaeis. And
Grotius, in his Annotations on Mat. 24.38. speaks fully to this purpose thus,
Quod ex Phaenicum Theologia veteres Philosophi hauserunt, and ex illis Poet^,
Phaenices ab Hebraeis hauserant. What the ancient Philosophers drew from the
Theology of the Phenicians, and the Poets from them, the Phenicians drew from
the Hebrews. Yea we are not without probable grounds for this conjecture, that
whereas the ancient Grecians, Plato, and others, mention the Phenicians, and
Syrians as the Authors of their Mythologick Traditions, they, under these
titles, comprehended also the Jews. For it is apparent (as was before
mentioned) that the Jews were, by reason of their vicinitie, often styled
Phenicians, and Syrians. So in Herodotus, those Ph^nicians, who were
circumcised after the Egyptian manner, are the same with the Hebrews, and
Lucian does use the Phenician, and Hebrew names promiscuously. Yea in the
Scripture Dialect, the Hebrew is called the Language of Canaan, or Phaenicia:
so Esa. 19.18. which proves that there was a great affinity, and
correspondence betwixt the Phenicians, and Hebrews, both in Names, Language,
and Sciences, as before Part 1. B. 1. C 3, 4, 5, etc.

. 5 But to proceed to the (...), the manner how, The manner how Philosophy was
traduced out of Judea into Phaenicia.
and chief Instruments, by whom the Jewish Mysteries, and Philosophy were
traduced into Phaenicia. How near neighbors the Phenicians were to the Hebrews,
what a great cognation, or rather Identitie, there was betwixt their Languages,
and what constant commerce there was betwixt these two nations, even from their
first constitution, not only in external, but also mental commodities, is
sufficiently known to all, who are verst in the first rudiments of Antiquity.
Yea the Scriptures fully inform us, touching this great affinity, and
correspondence 'twixt the Phenicians, and Jews, not only in Solomon's Reign,
but before, and after. Our main work will be to treat particularly of the two
great Phenician Philosophers, Sanchoniathon, and Mochus; with some inquiry,
and discovery, how they traduced their Philosophy, which was chiefly
Mythologick, and historick, from the History of Moses, or some Jewish
Traditions. Of Sanchoniathon his origination.


. 6. The first great Phenician Philosopher (from whom the Grecians traduced
their chiefest philosophic Traditions) we shall mention, is Sanchoniathon, a
person indeed of great Antiquity; who, Bochart Canaan lib. 2. cap. 17.
as Bochart conceives, writ before the Trojan War. P^rphyrie, and Suidas make
him contemporarie with, if not more ancient than, the Tr^jan War. G. Vossius de
Hist. Graec. lib. 1. cap. 1.
Ger. Vossius tells us, that Greece had no Writer, but who was much younger than
Sanchoniathon. Theodor^t, out of Porphyrie, explains his name thus, (...).
Sanchoniathon, who according to the Phenician dialect, is Philalethes, i. e. a
l^ver of truth, or a Philosopher; for so Plato defines his Philosopher to be
(...). Philo calls him (...), the learned, and curious Inquisitor, etc. The
Learned Bochart (in his Canaan lib. 2 c. 17.) gives his name this Phenician, or
Hebrew origination; viz. (...) Sanchoneatho, which, word for word, signifies,
the Law his Zele; or a Zelot of true Learning. For (...) San, from (...)
curtaild, signifies, amongst the Phenicians Doctrine, Law, or Canon Law. Hence
the same Phenician City is sometimes called (...) Judge. 1.11, 12. Josh. 15.15,
16. Kiriath Sepher i. e. the City of Learning, and sometimes (...) the City
of Learning, or of the Law, as Jos. 15.49. Kiriath Sannath. The Chaldee renders
it (...) the City of the Archives, where their Learning was lodged: answerably
whereto, the Greeks translate it (...), the City of Letters. The radix (...)
firstly signifying to whet, or sharpen; thence in its borrowed notion, to teach
exquisitely. So that Sanchoniathon seems to have received his Name, or Surname
rather, from the time, wherein he began to apply his mind to Learning, thereby
to signify that he was (...) a Candidate of Truth. So in like manner Roman.
16.15. we read of one called (...) Phil^logus, which, as Grotius on the place
supposes, was a Surname given him, from that he addicted himself to the Study
of Philologie, or human literature.

Sanchoniathon's skill in Philosophy, Mythologie, and Natural History.
. 7. That Sanchoniathon was a person greatly versed in the Philosophy, or
rather Mythologie, of those Ages, is generally concluded by the Learned, both
Ancient, and Modern. Philo tells us, that Sanchoniathon was (...), See more
Bochart Canaan lib. 2. cap. 17.
learned, and curious, and above all things, most greedy to know, what were the
first Originals, and Principles of all things. This inquisitive humor has put
him upon prying into Moses's History, whence he traduced the best part of his
Historick Narrations, of the Originals of things; which he clothed with many
fabulous forms, and shapes, (according to the custom of those childish Ages)
thereby to disguise the truth, and concele its parentage. That Sanchoniathon
was Master, and Professor of Philosophy, as well as Theology, we have
assurance from Suidas: He writ, says Suidas, (...), of the Physiologie of
H^rmes: and (...), the Egyptian Theology; which, says Bochart, without doubt,
he took out of the books of Taautus. So Philo assures us, that, with great
diligence, he searched into the books of Taautus, who is said to be the first,
that found out the use of Letters. Philo often cites him, and in the beginning of
his book, whatsoever he has of the Creation of the world, he says, he found
it, (...), in the Cosmogonie of Taautus. This Taautus, whom the Greeks call
Hermes, is said to have written 42 books as Astrology, of Geographie, of
Medicine, of Politics, of Th^ologie, of Religion, etc. The Catalogue of which
Books is given us by Clemens Alexandrinus Strom, lib. 6. The great difficulty
will be, to discover who this Taautus, or Hermes was, whence Sanchoniathon
received his Physiologie, Of Taautus his origin, etc.
and Theology. That the Egyptian Hermes is originally applicable to none more
properly than to Joseph, has been already made probable. So in like manner, we
are not without probable conjectures, that this Phenician Taautus, or Hermes,
whence Sanchoniathon traduced his Physiologie, or Philosophy, might be Moses.
For it is well known, Taautus the same with Moses.
that it was very common in those Ages, for differing nations to give the same
Titles of Honor to differing persons, suitable to their own humors, and
interests. Hence it is, that we find mention of so many Jupiter's, and
Hercules's, etc. So that those blind prejudiced Heathens, being unwilllng to be
thought so much obliged to Moses, that servant of the true God, for their
Learning, ascribe it to, I know not what, Hermes. That, de facto, the chief
matter, and parts of Sanchoniathon's Philosophy, and Theology were but
corrupt fragments of, and derivations from the History of Moses, will be
hereafter manifest by particulars. At present that Sanchoniathon had a general
Vogue amongst the Ancients, for a great Philosopher, as well as
Historiographer, is confirmed by the Learned Isaac Casaubon, in his notes on
Athenaeus lib. 3. cap. 36. Thus of Sanchoniathon, that ancient Historian, is
mention made in many places by Philo, Josephus, Porphyrius, and others: some
call him a Berytian, as Porphyrius; others a Tyrian, as Athenaeus; Suidas says
(...), Sanchoniathon the Tyrian Philosopher writ memoir^s of the Tyrians in the
Phenician dialect. Thus much also has been asserted by Porphyrius (who was a
Tyrian) in his second book of Abstinence, Josephus lib. 1. contra Apion: and
amongst the Modern Philologists by Ger. Vossius de Hist. Graecis lib. 1. cap.
1. page 3. and Learned Bochart Canaan lib. 2. cap. 17. fol. 856. as anon.

. 8. We now proceed to the main of our demonstration: to prove, that
Sanchoniathon traduced the body of his Philosophy (which laid the foundations
of the Grecian Wisdom) from some Scriptural, or Jewish Traditions; The original
of Sanchoniathon's Philosophy from the Jewish Church.
which we shall endeavor to make good. 1. From the confessions of his friends,
and followers. 2. From his manner of philosophizing; and 3. From the matter of
his Philosophy. First touching the original of Sanchoniathon's Philosophy,
Philo tells us, that he gathered it out of the hidden Learning, or Mysteries of
the Ammoneans. These Ammoneans Heb: (...) ammanim, Aben Ezra on Lev. 26 30.
expounds Temples made for the worship of the Sun. And so indeed amongst the
Hebrews (...) amma signifies the Sun. It Is possible under this disguise of the
Ammoneans, were originally intended no others, than the Ministers of the true
God, expressed under these borrowed appellations. That Sanchoniathon did indeed
derive the best part of his historick Philosophy, or Mythologie from some
Jewish Priest, or Minister of the true God, is openly acknowledged by
Porphyrie, who was his own Countryman, a Tyrian (being called in the Tyrian
Tongue Malchus (...)) and therefore best able to know; Porphyrie's tessimonie
to prove that Sanchoniathon derived his Philosophy from some Jewish Priest.
as also a great admirer of Sanchoniathon, but bitter enemy of the Christians,
and so, as we may presume, would not mention willingly any thing, that might
tend to the honor of the Christians God. Yet this Porphyrie plainly confesses
(in his lib. 4. against the Christians) That Sanchoniathon, besides the help he
had from the Commentaries of the Cities, and from the monuments or memoires of
the Temples, had for his assistance in the composing of his history, (...). So
Eusebius. Praeparat. Evang. lib. 10. cap. 3. and Bochart Can. l. 2. cap. 17. Ger.
Vossius de Hist. Graec. lib. 1. cap. 1. gives it us in these words, Greece has
none, who is not much younger than Sanchoniathon. Porphyrie says, that Moses,
and Sanchoniathon give the names of persons, and places alike; and that
Sanchoniathon drew his Historick Observations, partly from the Annals of the
Cities; partly from the books kept in the Temple, which he received from
Jerombalus, Priest of the God (...), etc. That this can refer to no other, but
some Jewish Priest seems most evident.

1. If we consider who this Jerombalus was, by whose memoires, or Traditions
Sanchoniathon is said to have so much profited himself. I am not ignorant, that
the Learned differ in their conjectures hereabouts: but none seems to me more
probable (whatever Dr Stillingfleet objects to the contrary out of Jos.
Scaliger) than that of Learned Bochart, who by Jerombalus understands Gideon.
His words are these, Bochart Can. lib. 2. cap. 17.
Jerombalus is the same with Jerubbaal, as the Learned have formerly observed.
Now it is most known, that Jerubbaal is the Surname of Gideon. as Judge. 7.1.
compared with Judge. 8.35. Suidas says (...): which is expressly mentioned Judge.
6.32. (...) let Baal plead against him. Sanchoniathon's receiving the chief
materials of his Philosophy from Gideon.
Gideon might be called the Priest of Jao, because he was Prince, or Judge of
those, by whom Jao, the true God, was worshipped. That which augments the
suspicion is, that presently after Gideons death, the Israelites worshipped
Baal Berith, or Beryti, from the City called Berytum, whence Sanchoniathon
sprang. So Judge. 8.33. and made Baal Berith their God. The like Judge. 9.2, 4.
i. e. the Idol of Berith, or the Berytian City. Whence it is most likely, that
Gideon making a League, or having frequent Commerce with some Berytian person
of great fame, it gave the occasion of this piece of Jewish Idolatry,
otherwise unknown: for we find not the name Baal Berith mentioned elsewhere.
Nonnus teaches us, that this Town of Beryth or Berytum, received its name from
Beroe, the Daughter of Venus, and Adonis, who was worshipped in those parts for
a Goddess. Thus Bochart. Certain it is, from the Scriptures above mentioned,
that those of Berith or Berytum, where Sanchoniathon lived, had a great
commerce, or correspondence with the Jews, in, or immediately upon, Gideon's
time: and as the Jews received from those of Berith their Idol Baal Berith, so
we may also suppose, that they communicated to these Phenicians, some of their
own Scriptural Traditions, out of which Sanchoniathon composed his History.
Lastly the Transmutation of Jerubbaal, Gideons name into Jerombaal, or
Jerombalus (from whom Sanchoniathon is said to receive the chief materials of
his History) is most easy, by the exchange of one of the B^ into M, viz:
Jerobbaal into Jerombaal.

2. Whoever this Jerombalus was, from whom Sanchoniathon is said to have
borrowed the chief materials of his History, yet certain it is, Jerombalus
Priest of Jao, i. e. the God of Israel.
if we may credit Porphyrie, he was a Priest of the God Jao. i. e. of Jehovah
the true God. For the Greeks seldom express the ineffable name of God, by any
other word. So in the Oracle of Clarius Apollo (...) (...), let him be thy
greatest God, whose name is Jao. So Diodorus lib. 1. says that Moses amongst
the Jews owned the God called Jao, as the Author of his Laws. And the Gnostics
in Irenaeus lib. 1. cap. 34. reckon up seven names of God, whereof Jao is the
second And Jerome in his commentaries on. Psalm. 8. reads it Jaho; which seems
little differing from the name (...) Jehovah, or (...) Jah; as Bochart Can.
lib. 2. c. 17. see more Part 1. B. 2. C. 1.. 8.

Sanchoniathon's mythologick mode of philosophizing from the Jewish Church.
. 9. Farther, that Sanchoniathon traduced the main of his Philosophy from the
Jews will be evident, if we consider the manner of his philosophizing; which
was Historick, or rather Mythologick, answerable to Moses's manner of
philosophizing. For the whole of his History seems to be but some mythologick
fragments, or fabulous traditions of what Moses more nakedly, and purely laid
down, as it will be more fully evident, when we come to treat of the Matter of
his Philosophy. Touching Sanchoniathon's Historick manner of philosophizing,
we find a good account in Bochart Can. lib: 2. cap. 2. fol. 783. Sanchoniathon
writ, before the Trojan Wars, his History of the Phenicians, even from their
first Origin, in the Phenician Tongue. Philo Byblius, who lived under the
Emperor Adrian, rendered the same History into Greek. Eusebius. praep. Evang. lib.
1.
Eusebius has preserved for us a famous fragment of this Version; wherein many
Phenician things occur, not unworthy of our commentation. Thus Bochart. Suidas,
who makes Sanchoniathon to have lived about the time of the Trojan War, speaks
to the same purpose. So Porphyrie lib. 2. (...); speaks thus (...). The
Phenician History is full of those who sacrificed; which Sanchoniathon writ in
the Phenician Tongue. And Philo Byblius interpreted him in 8 books. As
Sanchoniathon's mode of philosophizing was historick, correspondent unto Moses;
so likewise mixed he many mythologick, or fabulous Stories, and Symbols with
his writings; wherein he seems to affect an Imitation of the Jewish manner of
expressing their mysteries, by Types, and figurative Symbols. And indeed this
ancient symbolick, mythick, or fabulous mode of philosophizing, so common not
only amongst the Egyptians, and Phenicians, but also amongst the first Grecian
Philosophers, Thales, Pherecydes, Pythagoras, and Plato, seems to be wholly
taken up by Tradition from, and in imitation of the Jewish Church, their manner
of expressing their Rites, Mysteries, and other pieces of Wisdom. So Clemens
Alexandrinus Strom. 1. (...) The ancient manner of philosophizing was, as the
Hebraick, and Enigmatick; for they chose a short manner of speech (by Symbols)
which is most apt for admonition, and most profitable. In this mythick,
symbolick mode of philosophizing, the Phenicians (as the Egyptians) those
Jewish Apes, couched not only their Secrets of Nature, and Theologick
Mysteries, but also their Moral Precepts, and Examples of Prudence, Justice,
Fortitude, and other Heroic Virtues. Hence the Greek Poets first, as Homer,
Orpheus, etc. and then their chief Philosophers, both of the Ionick, and
Italick Sects, derived their mythologick, and symbolick mode of philosophizing,
as hereafter.

. 10. The matter of Sanchoniathon's Philosophy. His (...) or (...), i. e. his
Theology and Generation of the Gods.
We proceed now to the matter of Sanchoniathon's Philosophy, which will give
us a farther demonstration, that it was traduced from some Scriptural, or
Jewish Traditions. Touching his Metaphysics, and Theology; Sanchoniathon
treats of God, his worship, etc; of Angels, and of the Soul. That Sanchoniathon
writ of the Phenician Theology, Theodoret Therapeut. Sermon. 2. assures us, out
of Porphyrie, in these words; (...). Sanchoniathon the Berytian writ the
Theology of the Phenicians. And Porphyrie greatly admires Sanchoniathon, etc.
Suidas also tells, that besides the Institutes of the Phenicians, Sanchoniathon
writ also of the Theology of the Egyptians. Now this Theology, of which he
treated, consisted chiefly in his (...), or origination of the Gods, and the
Sacrifices, or worship they gave unto them. As for his account of the original
of their Gods, it is evident, that they received their Names, and Attributes,
the chiefest of them, from some Scriptural Relation, or Tradition of the Jews,
which will easily appear by a brief enumeration. The chiefest of the Phenician
Gods, was the Sun, called by Sanchoniathon Beelsamen: Of Beelsamen from (...)
Genesis 1.16.
in the Phenician, and Hebrew dialect, (...); that is, the Lord of Heaven. So
Philo Byblius, out of Sanchoniathon's Theology of the Sun (Eusebius. praepar.
lib. 1.) (...), This they say is God, whom they repute the only Lord of Heaven,
calling him Beelsamen, which is amongst the Phenicians Lord of Heaven. This
seems to be but a corrupt Tradition of Genesis 1.16. Genesis 1.16.
where it is said, that God made the greater Light to rule the day, and the
lesser light to rule the night: whence the Phenicians style the Moon Belsisama,
the Queen of Heaven: because, as the Sun rules by day, so the Moon by night.
But Sanchoniathon (in the fore quoted Eusebius. praep. lib. 1.) proceeds to give
the extract of his Gods, in these words, (...), by these was produced Eliun
called the most high. Eliun in the Phenician, and Hebrew, Eliun from (...).
Genesis 14.19.
(...) Elion, is one of the names the Scripture gives unto God, and signifies
the most high: So that we cannot rationally doubt, but that Sanchoniathon
borrowed this Iaol-God from some Scriptural relation. Then he adds that this
God Eliun begat the Heaven and Earth; which seems evidently to be taken from
Moses's words Genesis 14.19, 22. Genesis 14.19, 22.
(...), To the most high God, that produced the Heaven. For (...) signifies
also to produce, as the LXX renders it Zach. 13.5. (...), and so it is rendered
Genesis 4.1. Then Sanchoniathon proceeds thus, The first born of the Sons of
Heaven, (...), Ilos from (...).
was Ilos, who also was called Kronos, or Saturn. Ilos is apparently from
(...) El, a name of God, which the Phenicians gave to their Idol Saturn. So
Damascius, (...). The Phenicians, and Syrians name their Saturn El. Whence the
Grecians call the Sun (which was the Phenician Saturn) (...). Elocim from
(...).
Then it follows (...), The companions of Ilos (Phaen. (...) or (...) Eloah) i.
e. Saturn are called (...) Elohim, as if one should say the Saturnes. Thus
Sanchoniathon. By which it seems evident, that he had not only some Tradition
of the God of Israel, his several names (...) and (...), but also some broken
fragments of the Trinity, which he here seems to express under his (...) and
(...): Hence the Platonists seem to have traduced their (...), B^tulia from
(...) Bethel.
(...), as hereafter. It follows; (...) The God Vranus (i. e. Heaven)
excogitated or imagined the Baetulia, when he framed the living stones. That
these Baetulia, or stones, which the Phenicians worshipped, were taken up by
them in imitation of Jacob's anointing the stone, and consecrating the place,
where he had received a vision, is very probable, if we consider Genesis 28.18.
where it is said, he called the place Bethel, and Genesis 31.13. I am the God of
Bethel, where thou anointedst the stone. And if Bochart's conjecture hold true
(as it seems probable) Sanchoniathon's original of (...) was (...) i, e.
anointed stones. So that the Translaror transporting (...) and (...) for (...)
anointed, read (...) living. That these Baetulia, which the Phenicians
worshipped, had their rise from Jacob's consecrated stone at Bethel, is
generally asserted by the Learned Jos. Scalig^r on Eusebius, etc. as elsewhere.
Part 1. B. 2. C.

. 11. To these pieces of Sanchoniathon's Theology, Of the Phenician
Sacrifices, etc.
translated by Philo Byblius, Eusebius adds a place, or two, out of Porphyrie,
his book (...); in which the same Saturn is, by the Phenicians, called Israel.
His words are, (...), Israel from (...)
etc. Saturn, whom the Phenicians call Israel, etc. This Saturn is said also
to have an only son by the Nymph Anobret, whom he called (...) Jeud, and
sacrificed. So Sanchoniathon (...), He sacrificed his only son, speaking of
Saturn. And that all this is but an imperfect Tradition of Abraham his
resolution to sacrifice his own son Isaac, is evident. For the name Jeud,
Hebrew (...) Jehid, is the Epithet given to Isaac Genesis 22.2. Anobret from (...)
So Anobret is properly given to Sarah: for the Phenician, and Hebrew word
(...) Anobret or Annobret signifies one conceiving by grace, which is rightly
said of Sarah Heb. 11.11. only what Abraham did in intention only, Porphyrie
and Sanchoniathon make Saturn to do actually: which 'twas the policy of
Satan to make them believe, thereby to induce following Ages to offer their
sons to Molech, or Saturn; which was the great Idol of the Phenicians.
Porphyrie in his lib. 2. (...) tells us, that the Phenician History, composed
by Sanchoniathon, was full of such kind of sacrifices, etc. which, it is very
evident, the Phenicians at first traduced from the Jews, as the J^ws not long
after received the same Idolatrous, and inhuman mode of sacrificing their sons
to Molech, from the Phenicians. So much for Sanchoniathon's Theogonie, and
Theology, which gave foundation to the Grecian Mythologie about their Gods.

. 12. Of Angels and the human Soul.
Sanchoniathon (according to Philo Byblius's Version cited by Eusebius. praep.
lib. 1.) has other pieces of Metaphysics, which seem to be borrowed from
Scripture relations. He makes mention of (...): which Bochart interprets of the
Creation of the Angels. Also the first men are by him said to be made (...).
This Colpia, which he attributes to the wind, is the same with (...) Col-pijah,
the word or breath of Gods mouth, according to Genesis 2.7. and breathed into his
nostrils; and Psalm. 33.6. by the breath of his mouth. As Bochart Can. lib. 2.
cap. 2.

. 13. But one main piece of Philosophy, which Sanchoniathon is most famous
for, Sanchoniathon's Physiologie or Natural Philosophy.
is his Physiologie, or Natural History of the worlds origin, and its first
matter; whence the Poet, Hesiod, and his followers, received their first Chaos,
and the Philosophers their Materia prima; which all originally descended, by
some corrupt derivations, from the first Chapter of Genesis; as it will appear,
if we consider the particulars of Sanchoniathon's reports. In the beginning of
his History (according to the Version of Philo Byblius, quoted by Eusebius) we
find, His Chaos from Genesis 1.2.
in the beginning of things there was (...) a spirit of dark air, which he calls
(...) i. e. according to the Phenicians (...) Chauth Ereb, night, or evening
darkness: which seems to be taken from Moses's words Genesis 1.2. Ereb from Genesis
1.5.
and there was darkness, etc. The word Ereb is taken from v. 5. (...), and it
was Ereb; i. e. evening. Whence H^siod (...), which Varr^ thus imitates, Erebo
creata fuscis crinibus nox, te invoco. That the Greek (...) signifies sometimes
the same with the Hebrew (...) evening; see Bochart Canaan lib. 2. cap. 2. Or
it is possible, that Sanchoniathon's (...) might be borrowed from the Hebrew
(...) bohu Genesis 1.2. being easily turned into; whence also we may suppose the
Greek Philosophers traduced their Physic privation; which they make one of
their first principles.

Mot from (...).
It follows in Sanchoniathon thus: From the Commixtion of the spirit with the
Chaos, there arose (...): the words are (...), or (as B^chart conjectures)
(...). From the Commixtion of the spirit with the Chaos, was produced Mot,
which some call (...) ( or (...)) that is, matter, or slime: what Philo Byblius
translates (...), Est enim humida natura, quod apud Antiquos Chaos, a fusione,
humiditate, terra, aqua, commista, hyle, id est literis inversis (...), limus,
humus. Steuchus Eugu. de peren. Philos. l. 1. c. 10.
the Phenicians write (...) M^d: it being very common with the Greeks to change
the Hebrew into t so in (...), by them derived from (...). Now (...) amongst
the Hebrews, and Phenicians signifies that matter, out of which all things were
at first made: which the Arabians call (...) (whence it is possible the Latin
materia came) from the root (...). Therefore Sanchoniathon, having called that
(...) slime (or (...), the first matter) adds (...) out of this [matter] was
produced the whole seed of the Creation, and the generation of the whole: which
is as as much as if he had said, This Mot was the first Matter of all things.
For although the Hebrew word (...) Mod be not found in Scripture, yet we have
the thing fully expressed Genesis 1.2. and it is possible also the Jewish
Philosophers might use the same word, and so the Phenicians by Tradition from
them, though Moses, writing for the peoples sake, in the plainest terms, did
purposely abstain from all philosophic terms. That Sanchoniathon traduced
these his coutemplations of (...), or (...), and (...), with the spirits mixing
with them, from Genesis 1.2.5. Genesis 1.2, 5.
I conceive, is sufficiently evident: whence H^siod's (...), as Plutarch, and
Or^heus's (...) (slime) (...); also Thales his opinion of water being the first
matter. And Plato's first matter, which he makes to be (...) etc, as
Aristotle's first matter being ingenerable, incorruptible, indefinite, without
form, but capable of all forms, etc. which are but broken fragments of Genesis
1.2.

. 14. That Thales, Pythagoras, Thales, Pythagoras, Plato concur with
Sanchoniath^:, and they all with Moses.
and Plato concur with Sanchoniathon, and they all with Moses, about the first
matter of the World, will be farther evident, if we consider their several
expressions, with their agreement amongst themselves, as also with Moses's
words. Thales held water to be the first matter of all things (whence Pindar's
(...)) which is the same with Sanchoniathon's (...) i. e. mixture of mud, and
water together: which Orpheus also makes to be the Principle of the Universe,
and it is the same with Sanchoniathon's (...). So Philo Byblius, (...) This
Mot, or Ilus of Sanchoniathon i. e. mud, slime, or fluid matter, which Thales
calls (...), water, Pythagoras, and Plato call (...) (by ^ inversion (...)) that
is, matter: all of which agrees with Moses's words Genesis 1.2. Genesis 1.2.
And the spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters: i. e. all at first
was but mud, slime, and water, or fluid matter. So Paulus Fagius, from Kimchi,
renders (...) matter, which fluid matter was agitated, or moved by the Spirit
of God; so (...), from this mixing of the spirit with the Chaos, was begotten
Mot, which some call slime, or watery mistion, which was made the seed of all
creatures, etc. This the Stoics call (...), or (...); and Chrysostom (...), a
vivifick energie; according to Psalm. 33.6. (...), whence Plato, Thales,
Pythagoras, Heraclitus ascribe the Original of Individuals, to the various
agitations, or motions of this fluid matter, viz: as moved by the spirit of
God, so the Phenicians called this motion (...), a dark, and blustering wind,
or spirit: see Stillingf. Orig, Sacr. book 3. cap. 7.

. 15. Sanchoniathon also was not a little versed in the Chronology,
Sanchoniathon's Chronology and Geographie.
and Geographie of those times and places, wherein likewise he accords with
Moses, from whom, we may presume, he received both the one and the other. So
Eusebius praepar. Evang. l. 10. c. 3. out of Porphyrie lib. 4. against the
Christians, makes Moses, and Sanchoniathon to give the same names to Persons,
and Places: as Ger. Vossius de Histor. Graec. lib. 1. c. 1. page 3.

Of other Phenician writers especially Mochus.
. 16. Sanchoniathon's Natural or Mythologick History was continued by others,
some in the Phenician, some in the Greek Tongue, Of the Phenicians, there were
Theodotus, Hypsicrates, and Mochus* whose books Chaetus translated into Greek.
Tatianus, the Assyrian, in his Orat. against the Grecians, speaks thus. The
Phenician affairs proceeded thus; there were amongst them three persons,
Theodotus, Hypsicrates, and Mochus, whose books were translated into Greek by
Chaetus In Eusebius. praep. Evang. l. 10. (where Tatian's place is cited) for
(...) we have (...). Theodotus's Phenician name, as Bochart conjectureth, was
Elnathan or Nathaniel. But the most renowned of these three was Mochus, whom
Bochart conceives to be, in the Phenician style, called (...) Maacha, taken
from Compression. Josephus Ant. l. 1. cap. 4. shuts up his History touching
the long-lived Antidiluvians, with this Epiphonema. And Mochus, and Hestiaeus,
and Hieronymus the Egyptian (who prosecuted the Egyptian story) consent to
these things I affirm. Bochart Can. lib. 2. cap. 17.

. 17. Concerning Mochus we find this mention in Is. Casaubon his notes on
Athenaeus lib. 3. cap. 36. Mochus, says he, is named amongst the Authors of
the Phenician affairs by Tatianus, in his last book, Vossius de Hist. Graec.
lib. 3. page 390. edit. Ludg. 1651. These words which Vossius cites out of
Casaubon, I could not find in Casaubons animadversions, but found the contrary:
namely his citing of Tatianus touching Mo^h^^ as also Eusebius. (...).
which place it is worth our while to transcribe, (...). Ger. Jo Vossius de
Hist. Graec. lib. 3. page 390. Adds to Casaubon thus: Mochus the Phenician
committed to writing the affairs of his Country in the Phenician Tongue.
Athenaeus in lib. 3. makes mention of him; where Cynulcus thus bespeaks
Vlpianus the Tyrian, (...) according to their Citizens Syniaethon (i. e.
Sanchoniathon) and Mochus, who writ of the Phenician Affairs. Casaubon lib. 3.
Anima^v. in Athen. cap. 36. says, I remember not that Mochus is to be found
elsewhere: and peradventure (...) or (...) is the name of some Tyrian, who in
his own Country was called (...) Mosche, or according to the custom of
writing Moses. Thus Casaubon. And truly that Moschus is a Phenician name I
learnt also one of Strabo lib. 16. where he makes men^ion of Moschus a
Sidonian, and that he was the Author of the opinions of Atoms; also that he
was more ancient than the Trojan War. Neither is any thing in Athenaeus to be
changed, for (which occurred not to that excellent man Casaubon) there is
mention made of this Author, not only once, amongst Ecclesiastic writers: as
in Josephus lib. 1. Antiqu* cap. 8 (or according to others 50) where you read
(...). Also Manetho the Egyptian writer, and Berosus the Chaldean
Historiographer, and Mochus, Hestiaeus, and Hieronimus the Egyptian, who
prosecuted the Phenician Affairs, consent with us. Also we have a famous place
touching Mochus, in Tatianus his oration against the Pagans page 217. in
Orthodoxogr. which is also cited by Eusebius lib. 10. de praepar. Evang. (page
289 Edit. Rob. Steph.) And Georg: Cedrenus transcribing Josephus (almost in the
beginning of his Compendium page 10.) does in like manner make mention of
Mochus amongst the Phenician Historiographers. Thus Vossius de Hist. Graec.
lib. 3. page 30.

. 18. And that Mochus was a famous Philosopher, Mochus his Philosophy.
as well as Historiographer, is evident, from the mention we find concerning
him in lamblichus, of the life of Pythagoras cap. 13. where he says, that
Pythagoras, being at Sidon, conferred with the Prophets, Successors of Mochus
the Physiologist, etc. By which also we see what piece of Philosophy Mochus
was chiefly verst in, namely in Physiologie, or Natural Philosophy, which was
the main Philosophy, these first Ages, and Philosophers thirsted after. This
Thales brought out of Phenicia, etc. And in brief, this kind of Physiologie,
which the Phenicians, and the Grecians so much delighted in, was indeed no
other, than a Natural History, or some broken fragments of the History of the
Creation, delivered by Moses Genesis 1, etc. Thus much I was assured of by learned
Bochart, upon oral conference with him, to whom proposing some Queries,
touching this Mochus, he answered me, that Mochus lived before the Trojan War,
and was contemporarie with Sanchoniathon, as Strabo affirms; calling him upon
a mistake, Moschus; and that his Philosophy was nothing else, but the History
of the Creation, the same with that of Sanchoniathon. As for other particulars
touching Mochus, the original of his name from (...) Maacha, etc, he referred
me to his Canaan lib. 2. c. 17. Strabo lib. 16. and Athenaeus l. 3. c. 36. with
Casaubon. That Mochus did really traduce his Physiologie, or natural History
from the History of the Creation, written by Moses, will be farther evident,
if we consider the main Principle for which he was renowned amongst the
Ancients, viz. the doctrine of Atoms. So Strabo lib. 16. makes mention of
Moschus the Sidonian, who was the Author of the opinion of Atoms, etc. The
same B^chart Phaleg. lib. 4. cap. 35. having made mention of Arithmetic, and
Astronomy, being derived from the Phenicians to the Grecians, adds thus: that
I may be silent as to latter Philosophers, Prima mundi materia fuit disperforum
Atomorum chaos, nulla sua part coharens. Comen. physic. c. 2.
Mochus began to philosophize of Atoms at Sidon, before the Trojan War, etc.
Hence Democritus borrowed his Notions of Atoms, as Epicurus from him; and that
the whole Doctrine of Atoms to be the first principles of the Universe came
from Moses's History of the Creation, see Comenius's Physics, of Materia
prima. cap. 2.

. 19. Bochart Phaleg. lib. 4. c. 35. makes mention of another Phenician
Philosopher, Abdomenus the Tyrian, Of Abdomenus.
who, by his questions, was so bold as to provoke King Solomon to disputation,
etc. But I shall confirm this discourse of the Phenician Philosophy, and its
Traduction from the Jewish Church with the observation of Learned Vossius de
philosophorum sectis lib. 2. cap. 10.. 24, Vossius's account of the Phenician
Philosophy its traduction from the Jews, as the Grecians from them.
etc. The Philosophy of the Phenicians (says he) is very famous: and in as
much as that Nation was most like to Judea, they had a mighty advantage of
Learning many things from the Jews: some things also they gained by Tradition.
For the Phenicians springing from Sidon, the son of Canaan, the Nephew of Cham,
descended also from Noah. They used the help of their Priests in writing
History, as Josephus lib. 1. contra Apion. Who also quotes some things out of
the Annals of the Tyrians. Concerning their Theology, Sanchoniathon the
Berytian writ in the Phenician Tongue, who was more ancient than the Trojan
War, as Porphyrie lib. 4. contra Christ. etc. Thence. 25, etc. he adds, To
this Nation the Grecians owe their Letters: whence they are called (...). Also
they attribute Arithmetic to these Phenicians, because they excelled in
Merchandise; to which the Knowledge of Numbers is greatly necessary. Ochus the
Persian Philosopher was also a Phenician. Thales likewise, who was the first
founder of the Ionick Philosophy, had his original from the Phenicians. Also
Pherecydes the Praeceptor of Pythagoras, who was Contemporary with Thales, and
Author of the Italick Sect, drew his contemplations from the hidden books of
the Phenicians. Also Zeno, the Prince of the Stoic Sect, was of a Phenician
extract: for Cittium a Town in Cyprus, where he was borne, was peopled by a
Phenician Colonie. Then he concludes. 31. But if we acknowledge the Phenician
Philosophy, how much more justly must we Christians acknowledge the Jewish?
especially seeing the Phenicians, without all peradventure, traduced many
things from the Jews their neighbors, as also the Egyptians. And hence it is
apparent why the most Ancient Philosophers delighted so much in brevitie, and
symbolick Learning. The Ancient mode of philosophizing was Hebraick, and
Enigmatick. Thus Vossius. We may add hereto that of Hornius Hist. philos. l.
3. c. 14. Joh. Serranus makes Plato to speak many things, which he understood
not, drawn out of the Phenician Theology. So Scaliger Exer. 61.. 3, which
opinion seems very probable to me. For as to the Phenicians, they were given to
Mercature, familiar to the Grecians: and they sent frequent Colonies into
various parts of the world. Also their Theology was well known: from which
Musaeus, Linus, Orph^us, and other old Theologists drew most of their notions.
Nothing hinders therefore, but that Plato might attain to a more intimate
Knowledge of their Theology, whereunto Pherecydes had before opened the door,
who also, as they say, brought some of their commentaries into Greece. But now
the Phenicians had many things common with the Hebrews, drawn either from daily
conversation with their Ancient Fathers and their Posterity, or else from the
inspection into, and reading of Moses; whereof they, being not ignorant of that
tongue, might partake. Thence therefore Plato drew those things which rendered
him so admirable to all Posterity.

. 20. And as there were some broken beams, As the Law, so the Gospel shone in
its first promulgation, or dawning on the Phenicians.
or Traditions of the Law, and Old Testament Light conveyed from the Jews to
the Phenicians, and thence to the Grecians; so in like manner the Gospel in the
first publication thereof, shone, with bright rays on Phaenicia: For the Woman
of Canaan, whose Faith Christ so much applauded, was a Phenician, And, upon the
dispersion it is said Acts 11.19. They which were scattered abroad upon the
persecution, that arose about Steven, travailed as far as Phenice, and Cyprus,
and Antioch, preaching the word to none, but the Jews only. By which it is
apparent that there were Jews inhabiting amongst the Phenicians (and it is not
improbable, but that there were some scattered thither even at the first
Babylonish Captivity) as also in Cyprus (where were Colonies o^ the Phenicians
and Jews) to whom God in his Providence ordains the Gospel first to be preached
(as the Jewish Traditions of old) that so it might thence receive the more
speedy conveighance into the Western parts, Greece, Italy, Spain, France,
Britannie, etc. with which parts the Phenicians had frequent Commerce, and
Trading; as it has been largely proved Part 1. of Philologie book 1. chap. 3,
4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.

CHAP. IIII. Of the Chaldaick Philosophy, and Philosophers.
The Advantages the Chaldaick Philosophy might have from the Church of God,
Noah and his family, Shem, Abraham, etc. The Chaldeans famous for Astronomy,
which was communicated to them, by Church Tradition delivered by Abraham, etc.
Genesis 1.16. The People of God much taken up in contemplation and admiration of
the glory of God, shining in the Heavens, Ps. 136.4, 5, 6, 7. This gave
foundation to Astronomy. How Natural Astronomy degenerated into Judicial
Astrology, from an Idolatrous admiration of the Celestial bodies, as Gods,
Romans 1.19, 20, 21. The Jewish Teraphim, and Popish Agnus dei answered to the
Pagan (...), or Images dedicated to the Sun Judge. 17.5. The Chaldaick Theology
lay chiefly amongst the Zabii, or Sabeans. Balaam one of the Zabii. The wise
men, or Magi Mat. 2.1. of these Zabii. Many Zabian Rites mentioned in
Scripture, as Job 31.26. beholding the Sun, thence Sternutation a Pagan Rite.
So Job 31.27. kissing the hand, is bowing unto, and adoring the rising Sun, The
Pagan (...) eternal fire, which was a Symbol, whereby they worshipped the Sun,
as Lev. 36.30. from the opinion that the Sun was fire. The Judaick Schools in
Babylon, and other parts of Chaldea.

The Division of Philosophy into Barbarick and Grecian.
. 1. THe Ancients were wont to distinguish Philosophy into Barbabick and
Grecian: by Barbarick, is usually understood that, which was taught out of
Greece, and Italy, in Egypt, Phaenicia, Judea, Chaldea, etc. This by general
vogue is held to be the more Ancient. Thus Diogenes Laertius prooem; (...). It
is affirmed by some that Philosophy had its beginning from the Barbarians.
Which Isaac Gasaubon in his Notes on this place thus explaines, And of the
Grecians, those who were best natured, and most ingenuous have always thus
thought. And those Ancient defenders of our Religion against the Gentiles, have
so defended the truth on this part, and so broken the pride, and arrogance of
those who were otherwise minded, that none may doubt of it. There are at hand
those who have written on this Argument, Tatianus, Clemens, Theophilus,
Eusebius, and others. So Clemens Alexandrinus lib. 1. Teslantur autem non modo
s. literae Graecos a Barbaris natos, ut supra, sed ipsimet Graeci, se juniores
Barbaris esse, and doctrinam, sermonemque ab illis acceptum* Omniumque est
testimonium, Pythago^a^ in Aegyptum, Solonem, Eudoxu^, Platonem accessisse, ut
andi rent little Sacerdotes. Steuch. Eugub. De peren. philos. l. 2. c. 2.
(...). Philosophy a thing variously useful, in times past flourished amongst
the Barbarians, shining from Nation to Nation, till at last it came to the
Grecians. Austin lib. 8. de civit. Dei cap. 9. gives us an account of these
Barbarian Nations, who were reputed skilful in Philosophy; where having made
mention of the two great Sects of the Grecian Philosophers, the Ionick and
Italick, he adds, And if there be found any others of the other Nations, who
are reputed wise men, or Philosophers, the Atlanticks, Lybicks, Egyptians,
Indians, Persians, Chaldeans, Scythians, Gauls, Spaniards. Here Augustine makes
no mention of the Phenicians, and Jews, who, I think, were mainly understood by
the Ancients, under the name of Barbarick Philosophers. But of this we have
already discoursed; as also of the Egyptians: we shall proceed therefore to
those, who remain of the Barbarick Philosophers; and begin with the Chaldeans,
who were greatly famous for their skill in Astronomy, and Astrology (which as
the Learned suppose, they were masters of, before the Egyptians) for their
improvement wherein, they had great advantages, The Chaldaic^ Philosophy, and
its advantages from the Church of God in Noah's family.
not only from the situation of their Country, which lay plain, but also from
the Church of God; which after the Flood was first planted, and seated amongst
them; and furnished not only with Divine, but also Human Knowledge. For Noah
and his family, which was then the seat of the Church, living before the
Flood, had the advantage of gathering up all the Wisdom of the old World, and
conveighing of it, by Tradition to their Posterity, especially to such as were
of the Holy Seed, who, as we may presume, would be most curious in searching
into, and inquiries after the great works of God, both as to Creation, and
Providence: amongst whom we may reckon Abraham, who is said to teach the
Chaldeans Astonomie.

The Chaldeans famous for Philosophy.
. 2. But to proceed gradually in our Discourse: First that the Chaldeans had a
great reputation for the Antiquity of their Philosophy, we have the
Testimony of Cicero lib. 1. de Divinat. Where he says, Vossius de philos.
sect. l. 2. c. 1.
that the Chaldeans were the most ancient kind of Doctors. And particularly,
that they taught the Babylonians, and Assyrians Philosophy, we have for it the
Authority of Aristotle (...), and of Sotion, in his books (...), if we may
credit Laertius. So Diodorus tells us, Their main Philosophy consisted in
Astronomy.
that the Egyptians received their Philosophy from the Chaldeans. Now the
great piece of Philosophy the Chaldeans were at first famous for, was
Astronomy, and Astrology. So Strabo lib. 12, and 15. Hence Pythagoras is said
to derive his Knowledge of the Stars from the Chaldeans, as Porphyrie, Chaldaei
in Astrologiae studio sibi pa^es non habuere. Nam ut ex Simplicio Comment. 46.
in Aristo^clem l. 2. de Coelo constat, Callisthenes Aristotelis rogatu, in
Graeciam misit observaiones Chaldaeo^um, ab annis 19^3. ante Alexandri tempora,
i. e. ducentis circiter ante natum Abrabamum annis. Has observationes se
vidisse Porphy^ius testatur. Hornius Histor. philos. lib. ^. cap. 3.
in the life of Pythagoras. Whence also the name Chaldeans passed in the Roman
Empire for Astrologers. And Quintus Curtius lib. 5. tells us, that Alexander
entering Babylon, whereas others approving themselves otherwise, the Chaldeans
showed the motions of the Stars, and the stated vicissitudes of times.
Wherefore as Simplicius in Arist. lib. 2. de Coelo affirms) Aristotle, that
great Inquisitor of Nature, gave it in command to Callisthenes his Kinsman and
Disciple, who travailed with Alexander into Asia, that he should send him
Commentaries of such things, as the Chaldeans had observed touching the
Celestial Bodies. And Callisthenes sent him observations of two thousand years.
Tullie tells us, they had much convenience for such Astronomick observations by
reason of the plain situation of their Country. So Vossius de philos. sect. l.
2. c. 1.. 9. Neither is it to be wondered, says he, if persons, so ingenious,
were so well skilled in the Knowledge of the Stars, who inhabiting a large, and
even Country, could always behold the face of the Heavens: neither is it more
to be wondered if those first Chaldeans observed so many things, who in
Aristotle's time gloried in the experience of 2000 years. How Astronomy and
Astrology were communicated to the Chaldeans by Abraham, etc.


. 3. But though it may be granted that these Chaldeans had some advantage for
the improvement of their Astronomick Skill from the convenience of their
Country, which lay on a level; yet have we both Authority and Reason to
judge, that the original of this their Art was more Divine. That the Chaldeans
received their skill in Astrology from Abraham was before (chap 1.. 8. of
Abraham) asserted, and proved out of Berosus, Eupolemus, Josephus, and Vossius:
so Lud. Vives on Aug. de civ. Dei l. 8. c. 9. asserts the Traduction of
Philosophy from the Chaldeans to the Egyptians, by Abraham. The truth of which
assertion will be more evident, if we consider the original causes of this
Astronomick Science. We need no way doubt, The History of the Creation and
Providence conveyed down by Church-Tradition.
but that Noah had been fully instructed by Church-Tradition, from his Godly
predecessors Methuselah, Enoch and Seth, touching the Creation of the World by
God; and particularly touching the excellent fabric of the Heavens, the Nature
of those Celestial Bodies, their Harmonious Order, and Motion; that the Sun was
made to govern by Day, and the Moon by Night, as Genesis 1.16. and Psalm. 136.7,
8. Genesis 1.16. Ps. 136.7, 8.
that these Celestial had a mighty influence on all Sublunarie Bodies, etc.
These and such like considerations, which greatly conduced to the enhanceing
the Wisdom, Power, Sapientes ex Noachi schola viri, in campis Babyloniae
Senaar, Philosophiae dediti, imprimis Astrologiam excolebant. Quod praeter
Mosem, etia^ Gentilium eruditiores, ex Chaldaeorum traditione, non ignorarunt.
Hornius Histor. philos. lib. 2. c. 2.
and Goodness of God, in his works of Creation, and Providence, we may not
doubt, were very frequent, by Church-Tradition, in the Hearts and Mouths of
those Sons of God, before and after the Flood. And it is the opinion of some,
(which is not without probable grounds) that the whole story of the Creation,
written by Moses, was conveyed down even from Adam to his time, by a constant
uninterrupted Tradition to the Holy Seed, and Church in all Ages. And indeed if
God vouchsafed to any the manifestation of his glorious works of Creation, and
Providence, to whom can we suppose it should be, if not to his darlings and
friends, the faithful and holy Seed? who both could and would best improve such
contemplations, for their Makers glory, and most faithfully hand them over to
posterity. Thus God himself gives Abraham this Character Genesis 18.17. Genesis
18.17, 19.
Shall I hide from Abraham the thing which I do? 19. For I know him, that he
will command his children, etc^ God gave Abraham the Knowledge of things not
only past and done, but to come; because he knew Abraham would make the best
improvement, and conveighance thereof to his posterity. And thus we may
conceive how Abraham having the Knowledge of Gods glorious works of Creation
and Providence, especially as to the Celestial Bodies, their Natures, Order,
Harmony, Government, Motions, Influences (which takes in the whole of true
Astronomy, and Astrology) communicated to him partly by Church-Tradition,
partly by the blessing of God upon his own meditations and contemplations (if
not also from some Divine Inspiration even of this Natural Knowledge) could not
but conceive himself in duty obliged to communicate the same, not only to his
own Posterity, but also to his Kindred, and Country men the Chaldeans.

The people of God much taken up in the contemplation, and admiration of the
glory of God shining in those celestial bodies which gave foundation to
Astronomy.
That the people of God were, in the infant state of the Church, much ravished
with holy contemplations of the Glory of God, that shone so brightly in those
Celestial Bodies, their Order, Government, Motion, and Influence, is evident,
by many Philosophic, yet gracious Meditations we have to this purpose in the
Psalms: as Ps. 19.1. The Heavens declare the glory of God, etc. to the end. So
Psalm. 136.4. To him who alone does great wonders: and v. 5. To him that by
Wisdom made the Heavens, etc. 7. To him that made great lights. 8, 9. The Sun
to rule by day, the Moon and Stars to rule by night, etc. So it is said of
Isaac, he went out into the field to meditate; where he could no sooner open
his eyes, Ps. 136.4, 5, 7.
but contemplate the wonders of God, in those Celestial Bodies. Thus were these
holy men Abraham, etc. ravished with the admiration (which as Plato, and
Aristotle assure us, was the first cause of all Philosophy) of the Glory of
God, that shone so brightly in those Celestial Bodies, the Sun, Moon, and
Stars, their admirable natures, positions, conjunctions, regular motions, and
powerful influences, which is the sum of Natural Astronomy, and Astrology;
which was, as we have endeavored to prove, communicated to the Chaldeans, by
Abraham or Shem, etc.

How natural Astronomy and Astrology, degenerated into Judicial. Romans 1.19,
20.21.

See more of this in our account of the Egyptian Astronomy. chap. 2.. 2.


. 4. This Astronomy, and Astrology, which the Chaldeans (according to the
common presumption) received from Abraham, did soon by their holding the truth
in unrighteousnes (as Romans 1.18, 19, 20 21, 22.) degenerate into that Black Art
(deservedly so called, because from Hell) of Judicial Astrology, or
Divination; which was thence called (...) the Chaldaick Art: the original of
which was this; (as we find it Romans 1.20, 21.) These Chaldeans, besides the
Traditions they received from Abraham, and the rest of the Patriarchs, touching
these Celestial Bodies, their glorious natures, order, situations, regular
motions, and governments, as Genesis 1.16. they themselves, by their own
Astronomick observations and experiments, contemplating a mighty Beauty, and
Ornament in the Heavens, a regular course in the Motions of the Stars, an
excellent Harmony and Order in the distances and conjunctions, and a powerful
influence descending from them on sublunarie Bodies, the more they contemplated
these glorious creatures the more they admired them; 'till at last their
admiration determined in adoration of them, as Gods. Thus was that Scripture
fulfilled Romans 1.21. Romans 1.21.
they became vain in their imaginations, and their foolish hearts were darkened.
That this was the original of their Zabaisme, or worshipping the Celestial
Bodies, is gathered from Deuteronomy. 4.19. Deuteronomy. 4.19. See more of the original of
this Zabaisme in Dr. Owen de Idolelat. lib. 3. c. 4. p. 117, etc.
And lest thou lift up thine eyes to Heaven, and when thou see the Sun, etc,
should be driven to worship them. When they grew vain in their imaginations,
no wonder if such a glorious sight of their eyes, was followed with the
Idolatry of their foolish hearts. Now this Phenomenon being granted, that the
Stars were Gods, the Hypotheses of Judiciarie Astrology easily followed. So
Maimonides More Nevoch. p. 3. c. 29. See Stilling. Orig. sacr. book 1. chap. 3.
speaking of these Chaldeans, says, that they had no other Gods but the Stars,
to whom they made Statues or Images, which derived an influence from the Stars,
to which they were erected, and thence received a faculty of foretelling
things future. These images the Greeks called (...), and were much the same
with the Teraphim, they being both exactly made according to the positions of
the Heavens. The Heathen (...) answerable to the Jewish Teraphims Judge. 17.5.
and the Popish Agnus Dei.
So Grotius says, that the (...) Teraphim Judge. 17.5. were Images made with
figures; according to the position of the Stars; which also the Idolatrous Jews
made use of for divination, as Zech. 10.2. whence the Ephod accompanies the
Teraphim Judge. 8.27. And this Idolatrous mode of Divination continues yet to
this very day amongst some, who are pretenders to this Judicial, or rather
Satanick Astrology. For they make Figures, and Images, which they pretend to
answer to the form of the celestial bodies: thence they persuade the foolish
people, that these Images receive influence, and virtue from the Celestial
Figure. (near of kin whereunto is the Agnus Dei amongst the Papists) All of
which Magic trumperies are but imitations of those (...), or Talismans, so
much in request amongst the Chaldeans, and other Idolaters: of which see
Plotinus Enead. 4. lib. 3. cap. 11. where he unfolds the whole Mystery of the
(...), or Images, and their manner of Divination by them; which, upon the
supposition of the Chaldeans, that the Stars are Deities, might admit of some
probable pretext, but without this Hypothesis of allowing a Divinity to the
Stars, I cannot see what shadow of Reason those pretenders to Judiciarie
Astrology can have to salve their Phenomenon. See more of this Owen de
Idololat. l. 3. c. 7.

. 5. This leads us to the Theology of the Chaldeans, which comprehended a
chief part of their Philosophy. The Chaldaick Theology among the Zabii.
So Diodorus Siculus lib. 3. tells us, That the Chaldeans were most skilful in
Astronomy, Divination, and sacred Offices. This their sacred Philosophy, or
Divinity was chiefly studied by, and preserved amongst their (...) Zabii, who,
according to Scaliger's account, were the most Eastern Chaldeans: which he
gathers from the origination of the word Zabii from Saba the Son of Chus. See
Stilling, Orig. sacrae book 1. chap. 3.
Salmasius thinks these Zabii were the Chaldeans, inhabiting Mesopotamia. If
so, it is very probable that Balaam that famous Magician, or Diviner, was one
of these Zabii. For Mesopotamia seems to be Balaam's Country, thence Numb.
22.5. Numb. 22.5.
Pethor, where Balaam lived, is said to be by the river, i. e. says the
Chaldee Paraphrase, Euphrates. That Balaam was a Magician, or Conjurer is
evident from the whole of the Story. Balaam one of these Zabii.
Thus Stillingfleet Orig. sacrar. lib. 1. chap. 3. To which he adds these
words, Hence we may conclude, that these Zabii were the same with the Persian
Magi instituted by Zoreaster: which farther appears from the Magi, Mat. 1.2.
These wise men Zabii.
that were guided by the Star unto Christ, who are said to come from the East (
i. e. Sabea, or Arabia Foelix) with presents, which are peculiar to that
Country. That Balaam was a Zabean, and of these Zabii, or wise men mentioned
Mat. 2.1, 2. may be gathered from what Deodate observes on that place v. 2.
viz. that this Star was the sign that the King of the World should be born in
Judea, which perhaps might come to their notice, by the Prophecy of Balaam
Numb. 24.17. continued amongst them, etc.

The Rites of the Zabii mentioned in Scripture.
. 6. Concerning these Zabii, Maimonides tells us, that the understanding their
Rites would give light to many obscure passages of Scripture: I suppose he
means such as relate to the Original of Idolatry or the Worship they gave to
those Planetarie Deities: for, says he, they had no Gods, but the Stars, to
whom they made Statues (or pillars which the Greeks styled (...)) and Images
(...). We find one Rite or Ceremony of this Zabaisme, or Planetarie Worship
Job. 31.26, 27. If I beheld the Sun when it shined, Job 31.26, 27. Beholding
the Sun a piece of Pagan Worship.
etc. This holy man (who, as it is supposed, lived amongst these Zabii about
Joseph's time (as Jerome) when this their Idolatry was come to some maturitie)
speaks openly of this Planetarie Worship, then so common. And the first part of
this Zabaism, he so industriously a moves from himself, is Beholding the Sun
when it shined: Not the simple beholding of it, that is only a Natural Act of
our Natural Sense, and has no more of Moral Evil in it, than the Natural Shine
of the Sun beheld by it: But beholding it with such an Eye, as secretly steals
away the heart from the Worship of the Creator, affecting the Soul with, and
carrying it out in an Idolatrous Adoration of that so glorious a Creature (as
in some it did, to such an height, Job. 31.27. Kissing the hand bowing to or
adoring the Sun.
that Plato says Socrates underwent (...) an Exstasie in worshipping the Sun)
for so it follows Job. 31.27. And my heart has been secretly enticed. Job
shows here that the original Seat of this Zabaisme was the Heart: for by long
contemplation, and admiration of the eyes the heart was drawn away to worship
those Celestial bodies as before. So it follows, or my mouth has kissed my
hand, i. e. adored the Sun: for kissing the hand and bowing to the Sun was a
main ceremony they used in their worship. So the worship of Christ the Sun of
Righteousness is, under that ceremony of kissing, commanded Ps. 2.12. And Hos.
13.2. the worship of the Calves expressed by that ceremony reproved. There
were other parts of Zabaisme, or Star-worship, namely Images and Fire; of which
we find some mention in Scripture: so Lev. 26 30. God threatens to destroy
their (...) Images of the Sun, as some, but rather their (...), their hearths
where they kept their perpetual fire, for these are called (...) from the Heb.
(...) which signifies both the Sun, and Fire. Hence from (...) comes the Greek
(...) ( q. (...)) and the Latin Caminus a Chimney, or Furnace* So in like
manner the Hebrew (...), which signifies the Light of the Sun, is used also for
fire (as the Greek (...) is by Plato used for both fire and light) whence some
derive Vr in Chaldea, Lev. 26.30. Why they worshipped the Sun under the Symbol
of Fire.
which was the Seat of this Idolatrous worshipping the Sun by Fire, from (...),
or Light. Now the reason of this piece of Zabaisme, or worshipping the Sun by
Fire, seems this. These Zabii, or Chaldean Philosophers were possessed with
this opinion (which afterward was taken up by many of the Greek Philosophers
(that the matter of the Sun was Fire, The Pagan (...) from that opinion that
the Sun was Fire.
which it is possible they might take up from some broken Tradition, touching
the Creation of those greater Lights, as Genesis 1.16. And the words (...) and
(...) that signify the Sun, and its Light are used also to express Fire.
Plato in his Timaeus calls the Sun (...), an heavenly Fire: and Job. 31.26. calls
the Sun (...), which also signifies Fire, thence Vr in Chaldea was so called
because it was the Seat of their eternal fire, and the Stoics of old held that
the Sun was Fire. So Grot. on 2 Pet. 3.7. and Comenius in his Physics. Thus
the French Conferences, par les beaux exsprits tom. 1. conf 6. so Willis de
febribus says the Light is but a greater flame more dilated. And Ames. Medul.
Theol. l. 1. c. 8. these. 50. Subtilissima illius massae part sursum evocata,
facta suit lux i. e. ignis lucens. That the Sun is of an ignite fiery nature
was generally believed amongst the ancient Philosophers; particuarly by Thales,
Plato, Heraclitus, Anaximenes, Xenophanes, Theophrastus, Anaximander,
Anaxagoras, Philolaus, Empedocles, Democritus, Cleanthes, Zeno, Chrysippus, and
others, as we intend to prove in what follows of Plato's Physics, of which see
more Part 1. B. 3. C. 3.. 9. And that the Sun, and Fire agree, not only in
name, but also in nature, I am apt to think, is the more probable conjecture,
if we compare their properties, influences, and effects, which are very near
akin, if not the same. However we have sufficient ground to conclude this to be
the reason why these Zabii worshipped the Sun under this Symbol of Fire.
Moreover Maimonides tells us that Abraham had his conversation amongst these
Zabii. That he lived in the Country of Vr in Chaldea, the Scripture assures
us; whence he wanted not opportunity of communicating Knowledge in these and
other things, to these Chaldeans as before. Batricides attributes the original
of the Religion of these Zabii to the time of Nahor, which disagrees not with
what has been laid down. I shall conclude this with the words of Learned Owen
de Ortu Idol. l. 3. c. 4, page 187. Sabaisme consisted in the worship of the
Sun, Moon, and Stars: Hellenisme added the Daemon-worship; the adoration of
Images [(...)] and pillars [(...)] was common to both: the beginning of
Idolatry was in Sabaisme or the worship of celestial bodies. The Sects of the
Chaldeans.


. 7. Besides the Zabii, there were other Sects of these Chaldeans: for some
were called Orcheni, others Borsippeni. They were also distinguished by other
names, as it often happens among Sects who have different apprehensions of the
same things: of which see Strabo lib. 16. Amongst the Chaldeans, who writ in
Greek touching Astrology, Berosus gained the greatest repute, especially
amongst the Greeks. Of whom Pliny lib. 7. cap. 37. gives this character.
Berosus was famous for Astrology; to whom, for his Divine predictions, the
Athenians gave a golden tongue, which was placed publicly in their Schole, as
Vossius de philos. sect. l. 2. c. 1.

The Chaldeans received much light from the Jewish Schools.
. 8. Besides the advantages, which the Chaldeans had from the first Patriarchs,
Abraham, etc. without doubt, they received many Scripture Traditions, and much
light touching the origin of the Universe, etc. from the Jewish Doctors, and
Schools, which were settled at Babylon, in the time of their Captivity. That
the Jews had Schools in Babylon, Deodati has well observed on Psalm. 137.1.
according to the French thus, Being near the Rivers of Babylon] He has regard
to certain Towns in Chaldea, mentioned in Histories, which were assigned to
the captive Jews for their abode, in the which they had their Synagogues,
Schools, and places for the service of God; which were nigh the River
Euphrates, etc. thus Deod. To which Stillingfleet orig. sacr. l. 1. c. 3.
adds, that In order to the spreading of sacred Scripture Traditions, the
Jewish Church, which before the Captivity was as an enclosed Garden was now
thrown open, and many of the plants removed and set in foreign Countries, not
only in Babylon, where even after their return were left three famous Schools
of Learning Sora, Pompeditha, and Neharda, etc. By which it is evident what
mighty advantages the Chaldeans had from the Jewish Church and Schools for
improvement in their Philosophy, at first received from the Patriarchs,
Abraham, etc. And indeed whereas it is said that Pythagoras, and Democritus,
with others traveled into Chaldee, to acquaint themselves with the first
principles of Philosophy, and that they received much of their Philosophy
from the Chaldeans, why may we not by the Chaldeans understand the Jewish
Church, and Schools which were then settled in Chaldea, and under that Empire.

CHAP. V. Of the Magi, Gymnosophistae, Druides and other Barbarick Philosophers.
Of the Persick Philosophy preserved by the Magi, who were instituted by
Zoroaster, with the origination of his name, etc. Of the Indian Gymnosophists,
both Brachmanes, and Germans. The Phrygian Philosophers. The African
Philosophers, both 1 Atlantic or Lybick. 2 Ethiopick. The European Barbarick
Philosophers, 1 In Scythia. 2 In Thracia. 3 In Spain. 4 Britannie, and Gallia,
who were called Druides from (...) an Oak; in the Celtick Tongue deru, and in
the British drew. The Druides first in Britannie; thence they translated their
Sect and Discipline into Gallia. Their Academies, Degrees, Privileges and
Studies. Their Philosophy Natural, Moral, Medicine, Geographie, Astronomy,
Magic, Their mode of philosophizing symbolick; which they learned from the
Phenicians, with their distinctive habits. Their Theology, touching God, and
the Souls immortality. Their Ecclesiastic Discipline, and Worship, by human
sacrifices. Their names Taronides, Bard, Euates. Their Oak Religion from
Abraham, etc.

. 1. HAving dispatched the Jewish, Egyptian, Phenician, and Chaldean
Philosophy, we now proceed to the remaining Sects of the Barbarick
Philosophers, both Eastern and, Western; and shall begin with the Persians,
Of the Persick Philosophy.
who had a considerable repute for their Philosophy, from whom the Grecians
received many things, especially such as referred to their Gods. Thus Porphyrie
in the Life of Pythagoras, tells us, that as Pythagoras received his Arithmetic
from the Phenicians, his Geometry from the Egyptians, The chief Philosophers
among the Persians called Magi.
his Astrology from the Chaldeans, so also what appertained to the worship of
the Gods, and to other Studies, which regard conversation, he learned from the
Magi, or Persick Philosophers. So Pliny lib. 34. c. 37. testifies, that
Democritus had recourse to them. Laertius tells us that Pyrrhus, the head of the
Scepticks, and companion of Anaxarchus, had conversation with them. And
Philostratus 5. de vita Apollonii informs us, that Apollonius Tyanaeus (that
great Magician, who is by the Heathens extolled above Christ for his miracles)
in his travels into India, made some stay in Persia, partly to visit the King,
and partly to consider their Wisdom, (...), studied by their Magi: with whom he
conversed twice every day; and being asked his judgment concerning them, he
answered (...) they are wise men, but comprehend not all things. So Vossius de
philos. sect. l. 2. c. 1.. 7. These Magi were the Interpreters of Human, and
Divine Laws; and of so great reputation among the Persians, that as Cicero lib.
3. de Not. Deor. writes, no one could attain to the Persian Empire, but he, who
had been instructed in the Science, and Discipline of the Magi; who taught
(...), and instructed their Kings in the mode of Government. So Apuleius,
Apolog. informs us, that Magic is taught among the chief Regal Affairs;
neither was it permitted to any among the Persians rashly to undertake the
office of a Magus, no more than that of a King. Neither were these Magi less
prevalent in the Affairs of their Gods. Plato joins both their politic, and
sacred capacity together, Alcibiad. 1, (...) [ sc. (...)] (...) Magic is a
Ministry of the Gods: it teaches also things that appertain to the Regal
Office. Lucian de Longaevis, says (...) (...), etc. Apollonius Tyanaeus Epist
ad Euphrat. says, (...), The Magus is a Minister of the Gods; which Porphyrie
interprets, (...), wise about sacreds, and ministering in the same. To which
agrees that of Laertius lib. 1. (...), etc. Among the Persians the Magi, were
Authors of Philosophy, who employed themselves about the worship of the Gods.
The like Suidas, who calls these Magi (...). The Magi instituted by Soroaster
had many rites from the Zabii and Chaldeans.


. 2. That the Magi were the Authors, and Preservers of the Persick Philosophy,
is affirmed by Aristotle (...), and Sotion in his books (...). As Laertius.
These Magi are said to be instituted by Zoroaster. So Lud. Vives in Aug. civit.
l. 8. c. 9. Thus Hornius Histor. philos. lib. 2. c. 6. Zoroaster therefore was
the first most illustrious Doctor of Magie in Persia: neither did he deliver
this Art by oral Tradition only, but also in large Writings, according to
Pliny, and Aristotle. For he writ concerning it an hundred thousand Verses;
which Hermippus is said to illustrate by his Commentaries. There are yet extant
certain, Geek Poems, which pass under the Inscription of Zoroaster's Chaldaick
(...), and are not unlike to Theognes's Sentences, yea in many things they
resemble much the Sacred Scriptures. But Beza, Magia sine dubio orta in Perside
a Soroastre Plin. hist. lib. 3. cap. 8.
and others justly suspect that these are but the spurious Comments of some
Semi-Christian. Concerning the origination of Zoroaster's name, there are
various opinions, but none more probable than that of Learned Bochart, who
derives the name from (...) contemplari and (...) Astrum, q. d. (...), for
which Dinon in Persicis calls him (...). This Soroaster, who is reputed the
Founder of the Persick Philosophy, and Worship, was indeed but the Promoter of
it: for the main of the Persian Rites and Wisdom, wherein their Magi were
instructed, Salmasius Magos dictos vult a Zoroastre, cui cognomen Mog fuerit,
unde Magus factum Hornius philos. lib. 2. c. 3.
were traduced from the Zabii, or Chaldean Philosophers, with whom they agreed
in the chief points of their Idolatry, viz. in the worship of the Sun by
Images, and kissing their hand, as Job 31.26, 27. also in their (...) or
hearths, where they preserved their eternal fire, the Symbol of the Sun, Lev.
26, 30. as before chap 4.. 6. So Stillingfleet orig. sacr. book 1. c. 3.
Plutarchu de Isid. tradit Zoroastrem apud Chaldaeos Magos instituisse, quorum
imitatione etiam Persae suos habuerint. Horn. l. 2. c. 5.
Hence probably the Rites of the Zabii are the same with those of the Chaldeans
and Persians, who all agreed in this worship of the Sun, and of Fire, etc.
Neither had the Persians only their Magi, but also the Medes, Vossius de philo.
sect. l. 2. c. 1.
Parthians, and other neighbor Nations; as Lucian de Longaevis, and Pliny calls
the Arabian wise men Magi. One chief Philosopher amongst the Persians was Ochus
the Phenician, who, as we may presume, instructed them in the Phenician, and so
in the Jewish Wisdom. See Suidas in (...).

Of the Indian Philosophers viz. the Gymnosophists, Germans, and Brachmanes so
called from Manes.
. 3. Austin, de civ. l. 8. c. 9. makes mention of the Indian Philosophers, and
Lud. Vives on that place adds thus, The Indians had their Philosophers, whom
they called the Brachmanes, of whose Life, and institutes Philostratus, in the
Life of Apollonius, has given us many things, as Strabo, and such, who have
written of the things done by Alexander. So Apuleius Florid. 15. The Brachmanes
are the Wise men among the Indians. And Bardisanes Syrus in Eusebius. lib. 6.
praepar. Evang. cap. 8. gives us a more full account of them thus: Among the
Indians, and Bactrians there are many thousand of men called Brachmanes^ These,
as well from the Tradition of their Fathers, as from Laws, neither worship
Images, nor eat what is animate: they never drink Wine, or Beer: they are far
from all Malignitie, attending wholly on God. These Brachmanes some derive from
(...) Barac, Horn. Hist. phil. l. 2. c. 9.
he praised, or worshipped: Others make the name to be compounded of (...) ab
rec the Father of the young King, as Onk^los and Rabbi Judas. Some of the
Ancients make several Sects, or Societies of these Indian Philosophers, namely
the Brachmanes, Gymnosophistae, Samanaei and Calani. The chief of the
Brachmanes, and Samanaei is by Philostratus lib. 3. de vita Apollon. Tyan.
called Iarcha. The Head of the Gymnosophists is, by Hieronymus, contra Jovin.
named Buddas. But Vossius de philos. sectis l. 2. c. 1. tells us that the common
Appellative of these Indian Philosophers was Gymnosophists, as Aristotle (...),
and Sotion in libris (...) according to Laertius; as also Strabo, Clemens,
Apul^ius, Indi nihil antiquius habuerunt, quam sapientiae, neglectis caeleris
rebus, operam dare Hornius Hist. philos. l. 2. c. 9.
Solinus, etc. These Indian Gymnosophists were of two sorts some were called
Brachmanes, as before, others Germans. And amongst the Germans some were
called Hylobii, because they lived in Woods, for that is the import of the Greek
word (...). To these the name Gymnosophists properly belonged. See Strabo l.
15. and Clemens (...) 1. Amongst the Brachmanes there was one named Buddas
Preceptor to Manes the Persian, who was the Founder of this Sect, as Suidas,
etc. These Brachmanes held a (...) and (...) or Transmigration of Souls into
Beasts, The Brachmanes
especially into Oxen. They held also the worlds Creation by God, and his
Providence in governing of it. So Strabo lib. 15. of these Brachmanes says
(...), etc. They agree with the Grecians in many things viz. touching the
worlds production, and destruction, and that God is the Creator and Governer of
it: which opinions of theirs, Owen questions not, but they had, by ancient
Tradition, from the Church of God. Owen Theol. l. 1. c. 8. Hence, as we justly
conjecture, from this cognation 'twixt these Indian Philosophers, and the Jews
in some Divine Dogmes, sprang that mistake of Clearchus the Peripatetick, and
Megasthenes, who thought the Brachmanes and Calani to be the same with the
Jews. Of which see Eusebius. l. 9. praep. c. 3. Amongst the Greeks, who resorted
to these Indian Philosophers, we may reckon Democritus, so Aelian lib. 4. Var.
Histor. and Laert. Also Pyrrho the Head of the Scepticks is said to have
conversation with the Gymnosophists in Indiae as Laertius. Apollonius Tyanaeus,
that great Pagan Antichrist, is said to have spent much conversation among
these Indian Philosophers. Eusebius contra Hieroclem l. 5. brings him in thus
characterizing of them: The Indians, contracting Philosophy for the greatest
advantage, comprehend it in the Divine and sublime Nature. These truly I have
greatly admired, and esteem them blessed, and wise. By which it appears that
their Philosophy was mostly Theologick. Apulcius Florid. l. 5. says, that the
Philosophy of the Brachmanes was composed of many severals: viz. what were the
documents of Souls, what the exercitaments of Bodies, what the parts of the
Mind, what the turns of Life, and what were the Torments, and Rewards, which
the Gods appointed to all, according to their Merits.

. 4. Amongst the Asiatick Philosophers we might reckon the Phrygians, The
Phrygians.
who had also their Philosophy, which had been better known to us, if
Democritus's (...) which Laertius makes mention of lib. 9. were extant.
Concerning their Theology see Diodorus Siculus, and Eusebius: so Vossius.

. 5. We now proceed to the African Philosophy; The African Philosophers. 1.
Atlantic Philosophers.
and passing by the Egyptian, of which we have already treated, we shall begin
1. with the Atlantic or Lybick Philosophers, of which Lud. Vives, in August.
civ. l. 8. c. 9. thus speaks; The Atlanticks inhabit the places in Africa
bordering on the Ocean, whose ancient King was Atlas, the brother of Saturn,
and son of the Heaven, who being a great Astronomer (whence he was said to bear
up the Heavens) taught his son Hesperus, and others of his kindred, and people,
the same Art: from whom this Science of Astronomy crept into the inner Lybia;
where also Hercules philosophized. By which it seems most probable that the
Atlanticks, and Lybicks received their Philosophy from the Phenicians; for
Hercules, as its well known, was a Phenician; and so, I doubt not, was Atlas.
Also Laertius, in his Preface makes mention of Atlas the Lybian, amongst the
ancient Philosophers. And Diodor. Siculus l. 4. reckons up some fables
concerning the Gods, which these Atlantic Philosophers held. Atlas is said to
bring Astronomy out of Lybia into Greece, whereof Orion is said to be the
first Author in Baeotia, whence the Star Orion received its name: so Carrion.
Chron. lib. 2. But Bochart makes Atlas the same with Enoch as before chap.
1..7. V^ssius tells us ( de philos. sect. l. 2. c. 2.) That the Lybick
Philosophy came from Atlas, especially Astrology, whence Atlas is said to
hold up Heaven with his shoulders, and the mountain called Atlas received its
name from him, etc. Plin. l. 7. c. 56,

2* Ethiopick Philosophers.
2. The Ethiopians also had their Philosophers called Gymnosophists, so Jerome l.
4. in Ezech. cap. 13. makes mention of these Ethiopian Gymnosophists, who
received both their Name, and Philosophy from India, as Philostratus in the
Life of Apollonius lib. 6. Touching the Ethiopick Philosophy, and its
Traduction from the Mosaic, we have this particular account in Hornius,
Histor. Philosoph. lib. 2. c. 8. Touching the Philosophy of the Ethiopians,
little is mentioned by Antiquity; and what has been mentioned, is well nigh
all lost, by the iniquity of the times. But this is certain, that they
received all their Divine, and Human Dogmes from the Egyptians. Whence their
very names were confused. For the Romans called the Ethiopians Egyptians;
because indeed they descended from Egypt. Moreover there is no doubt to be made
of it, but that they drew somewhat of more sound Wisdom from Moses.

European Philosophers.
. 6. Amongst the European Barbarick Philosophers we shall first mention the
Scythians (who according to their ancient bounds lay partly in Asia, partly in
Europe) of whom August. Civit. l. 8. c. 9. makes mention, and Lud Vives on that
place speaks thus. The Scythians in times past philosophized and contended with
the Egyptians touching their Antiquity. The Scythians.
They are a people stout, simple, and just, ignorant of vice, and malice, and
got that by their natural ingenie, which the Grecians could not attain unto by
all their magnifick and illustrious Sciences: see Justin l. 2.

Thracian Philosophy.
. 7. But we pass on to the Thracians, who had anciently a great repute for
Philosophy, which some think, they owed to Zamolxis a Thracian (whom some make
the servant of Pythagoras) but others derive their Philosophy from the
Grecians, as Laertius lib. 8. What the Philosophy of the Thracians was, may be
known by the Doctrine of Orpheus, who was a Thracian. Many Anciently writ
(...), or Poems according to the Doctrine of Orpheus, of which see Suidas in
Orpheus's Philosophy (delivered in Poesy) which was chiefly Moral, and
Theologick; for by his Music, and Rhetoric, he had so great a power on the
Thracians, to civilize them, as that he was said to have drawn Trees and
Beasts. Justin Martyr calls him, (...), the first master of Polytheisme, or
multiplicitie of Gods; which he brought from Egypt, with many superstitious
Ceremonies and Vsages, and set them up amongst the Thracians, and Macedonians,
etc. see more in our relation of Orpheus Part 1. B 3. C. 1.. 5.

. 8. But to come to our Western Philosophers; Spanish Philosophy.
and firstly the Spaniards; of whom Aust de Civ. Dei l. 8. c 9. makes mention;
and Lud. Vives on him speaks thus. In Spain, before the veins of Gold and
Silver were found out, and Wars begun, there were many Philosophers; and the
people lived holy and quiet lives, being every where governed by such
Magistrates, as were men most excellent for Learning and Probitie: Their
affairs were transacted according to Justice, and Equity, not by the number of
Laws: and if any were written, 'twas principally amongst the Turdetans, in the
most ancient times. There were scarce any quarrels or controversies amongst the
people: and all the disputes were touching Emulation of Virtue, the nature of
the Gods, the reason of Nature (or Natural Philosophy) of good manners (or
Morals) which their Learned men, on stated days, publicly disputed of, the
women also being present. But when the mountains, big with metals, brought
forth Gold, and Silver, men began to admire this new matter. Hence the
Phenicians, who sailed far and near, for lucre sake, traded here, and drew
multitudes of men, from Asia and Greece hither, who taught us the Grecian, and
Asiatick Vices: there remain yet some few fragments of our Antiquities in Greek
and Latin, whence I hope in time to illustrate the Origin of my Nation. Thus
Lud. Vives. That the Phenicians brought into Spain, with their Colonies, not
only the Phenician Letters, but also Sciences, and Philosophy, we have reason
to believe by what has been before asserted out of Bochart, etc. Part 1. B. 1.
C. 5.

Of the Druides.
. 9 We shall conclude this Discourse of Barbarick Philosophy with that in use
among the old Britains, and Gauls, whose Philosophers are by Hornius Hist.
philos. l. 2. c. 12. Primus Romanorum J. Caesar Druidun Ritus, Leges,
Philosophiam mandavit Scriptis. Seldom. Jani Anglor. p. 16.
reduced to two Sects, the Bardi, and Druides. The Bardi were an inferior sort
of Philosophers, and for the most part Poets, according to that of Lucan. l. 1.
Plurima securi fudisti carmina Bardi! Who notwithstanding, as the ancient Greek
Poets, arrogated to themselves no small reputation for Wisdom. But the Druides
were accounted the more worthy, yea almost Divine Philosophers, and obtained no
small Authority among the people. These Druides, who in ancient times
philosophized amongst the old Britans and Gauls, and were indeed a peculiar and
distinct Sect of Philosophers, differing from all the world besides, both in
their mode of philosophizing, as also in their Religious Rites, Of the
Phenicians trading with the Britains and Gauls, see part 1. book. 1. chap. 7.
and Mysteries: yet we may not doubt, but that they received much of their
Philosophy, as well as Theology from the Ph^nicians, who traded amongst them,
as before. As for the name Druides, Pliny l. 16. c. 44. deduceth it (...),
from an Oak: For, says he, The Druides so called from (...) an Oak, thence
deru and drew.
the Druides have nothing more sacred than an Oak. Even now, they of themselves
chose groves of Oaks; neither do they perform any Sacreds, without that leaf;
so that hence they seem to be called, according to the Greek interpretation,
Druides. Bochart (Canaan lib. 4. c. 42.) assents to this Origination of Pliny;
to which he adds Neither is it to be wondered that the Druides were so called
from this Greek name, when as an Oak amongst the Celtae, was called Deru. The
Britains in England write drew (so Drewstenton in Devon) and our Country men
deru. That Drewstenton, and names of like sound, came from these Druides, it is
not without probability Vossius de Orig. and Progr. Idolotr. l. 1. c. 35.
thinks that the name Druides ought rather to be fetched from the Celtick name
deru. So Dickins^n. Druidum origo p. 35. I assent most to them who fetch the
Druides from the Celtick name Deru, i. e. an Oak; which the Cambro-Britains or
Welsh to this day call Drew. And I am so far from believing that the Druides
were so called at first from (...), that I rather think (...) was formed out of
the Celtick deru.

The Druides first in Britannie.
. 10. This Sect of the Druides began first in our Country of Britannie; and
hence it was translated into Gallia. Thus Caesar de Bello Gall. lib. 6. Their
Discipline, says he, was first found out in Britannie, and thence translated
into Gallia, according to the common opinion. The like Bochart acknowledges.
Can. l. 1. c. 42. These Druides instituted their Academies, for the promoting
of Learning, in Groves; Their Academies and privileges.
in which tbey had their Schools filled with studious youth; so Caesar, also
Mela l. 3. c. 11. They spent twenty years, before they were admitted to the
degree of Doctor. That which allured them to study, Their Degrees. Druides a
bello abesse consueverunt, neque tributa una cum reliquis pendunt, mi^itiae
vacationem, omniumque rer^m habent, immunitatem. Caesar l. 6. Seldom Jan. Ang.
l. 1.
was the many privileges of their Students, and the great Authority their
ancient Doctors obtained. So Caesar lib. 6. tells us, that the Druides were
exempted from War, and paying Tribute. The which privileges are still continued
in our Universities. As for the method of their Studies, the same Caesar tells
us, they were wont to get by heart a great number of verses. They affected
various, and almost all kinds of Philosophy. Strabo l, 4. relates, that,
besides the Science of natural causes, they were also exercised in Moral
Philosophy. And Pliny lib. 3. c. 1. makes them to be skilled in Medicine, and
Magic. Touching their Skill in Moral Philosophy or Ethics, Diogenes
Laertius, in the Proeme to his Book, gives us this account; (...)^ Their skill
in the chiefest parts of Philosophy natural, Moral, Medicine, Magic.

Their symbolick mode of philosophizing from the Phenicians and Jews.


And they say the Druides were wont to philosophize enigmatically, that the
Gods were to be worshipped, that no evil was to be done, that fortitude was to
be embraced. By which also we learn, that the mode, or manner of their
philosophizing was symbolick, or enigmatick; which, we need no way doubt, they
learned from the Phenicians (as these had it from the Jews). Hence their famous
symbolick Image of Hercules Ogmius, who was a Phenician, as Bochart proves at
large Can. l. 1. c. 42. The Gauls, says he, called Hercules Ogmius, as Lucian
in Hercul. (...) Ogmion, that is, (...) agemion, a stranger, so in the Arabic:
Namely because Hercules came from Phaenicia, or Africa, or the Gades, and after
his many and great Labors arrived amongst the Gauls; thence his picture in
Lucian Hercul. (...) etc. a decrepit bald old man, Gray, and wrinkled, as old
Mariners, etc. Farther, Their skill in Geographie, Astronomy, etc.
that these Druides were skilled in Geographie, Astronomy, and Natural
Philosophy, we have the testimonies both of Caesar, and Mela. Caesar Comment
l. 6. speaks thus of them: They dispute, and teach their Scholars many things
touching the Stars, and their motion; also concerning the Magnitude of the
Universe, the nature of things, the force, and power of the Immortal Gods. Mela
lib. 3, cap. 2. says, that the Gauls have their Masters of Eloquence, and
Wisdom from the Druides. These profess they know the magnitude, and form of
the earth, and world* they teach many Noble persons of their Nation privately.
One thing which they commonly teach is, that Souls are eternal.

Their distinctive babits.
As for their habit, it was (as in our Universities) distinctive and peculiar,
thereby to gain the veneration of the people. In their sacred Offices they used
a white Vestment (answerable to the Jewish Ephod) as we are informed by Pliny
lib. 6 cap. ultimo. Their Rhetoric.
They also gave themselves to the study of Eloquence* so M^la l. 3. as before.
Caesar adds farther concerning these Druides, That they learnt by heart a
great number of Verses: Therefore some of them continued twenty years in
study. Neither did they conceive it meet, to commit their studies to writing,
whereas in other affairs, both public, and private, they used the Greek
Letters.

Their Theology, the Souls immortality.
. 11. But these Druides had a special vogue for their Theology, wherein they
taught many things peculiar, and some things excellent, as Owen Theol l. 3. c.
11. particularly they asserted the immortaltie of the Soul* Caesar l. 6. dogma
boc iis tribuit: non interire animas, sed ab aliis post mortem transire ad
alios, hinc animosi in praeliis Luc. lib. 1. Vossius de philos. sect. lib. 2.
cap. 3.. 7. Their Ecclesiastic dignities, power and discipline.
so Strabo (...): the like Caesar. The Druides held also a Metempsychosis, or
Transmigration of Souls, which some conceive they received from the
Pythogoreans, as these derived it from the Jews, as Seldom Jan. Anglor. l. 1.
p. 22. Strabo also tells us, that they held the World should be at last
destroyed by Fire: which, without doubt, they had from some Jewish or Phenician
Tradition. They taught also that one God was to be worshipped, as Origin on
Ezech. 4. This one God was the Sun; to whom the Moon was added, which was
worshipped by the Women.

. 12. As for their Ecclesiastic Discipline; they being many, reduced
themselves unto a Hierarchy, under one President, who ruled them all. So
Caesar, and out of him Seldom Jani Anglorum l. 1. p. 18. The Druides have one
presiding over them, who holds the supreme Authority amongst them. This being
dead, he that excels most, succeeds in his Dignity; but if there be many
equal, they choose by suffrage. And to strengthen this their Imperial
Authority, they made use of a politic religious excommunication, as Caesar,
and Grotius, de Imper. sum. p^test. of excommunication. Thus Seldom, Jani
Angl. p. 17. (out of Caesar) If any private person or people amongst them*
submit not to their Decree, they excommunicate him from their Sacrifices. This
is amongst them the higehst punishment. They, who are thus interdicted, are
esteemed in the number of the most impious, and wicked; all separate from them,
they avoid any conversation, or discourse with them, lest they should receive
damage from their Contagion. Neither is the Law open for such, neither is any
Honor given to them. The same Caesar tells us, that they had so much Authority
amongst the people, that they determined almost all controversies, both public
and private. So Seldom Jan. Angl. lib. 1. They determine all controversies,
both public and private. If there be any crime committed, if any murder done,
if there be any controversy about inheritance, or bounds, the same decree, and
constitute rewards and punishments. Hence we may gather whence the mystery of
iniquity gathered much of its power.

. 13. As to Rites and Worship, Their worship and sacrifices.
the main Sacrifices of the Druides was (...) Human Sacrifice: whereof there
were 2 sorts, the one private; when any sacrificed himself, or another, Vtut se
^eshabet, constat hinc liquido vetustissimos inter Gentium Philosophos,
antiquissimos inter little LL. Custodes suisse Druidas. Seld. Jani! Anglor. p.
22.

A brief account of the Druides their Philosophy.


for some others safety: the other public, not unlike that which the
Phenicians offered to their Molec; from whom, we have reason enough to persuade
us, these Druides received this, as other Rites. By reason of these cruel
inhuman human Sacrifices the Romans endeavored, though in vain, to take away
all their superstitious worship; as Strabo de Gallis lib 4. Owen Theol. l. 3.
c. 11. We have a good, though brief account of these Druides in Lud. Vives on
August. Civ. l. 8. c. 9. There were, says he, amongst the Gauls, the Druides,
as Caesar l. 8, who were Priests, Poets, Philosophers, and Divines; whom they
called Saronides, as Diodorus l. 6. They had also their Diviners, to whom the
people referred their affairs. Neither was there any Sacrifice performed
without a Philosopher, i. e. one skilled in the Divine Nature: by whose advice
all things, at home and abroad, were administered. That the Druides were
Philosophers, Strabo l. 4. relates. That the Saronides were the same with the
Druides Bochart (Can. l. 1. c. 42. They were called Saronides from (...) an Oak.
) proves out of Diodorus l. 5. These Philosophers, and Divines, says he, were
in great veneration amongst them, (...) whom they call Saronides: which name
has the same origination with that of the Druides, namely from an Oak; which
anciently was by the Greeks called (...) or (...). Thus Pliny lib. 4: c. 5.
And Hesychius calls (...) Oaks having an hiatus, by reason of their antiquity.
So Callimachus in his hymn on Jupiter, (...), ^numeras quercus liquidus
producit Jaon Desuper.

The Bardi, Euates, and Druides.


where the Scholiast renders (...) i. e. Oaks. Caesar l. 6. comprehends all the
wise men of the Gauls under the name of Druides: so Cicero 1. de Divinatione.
But Strabo divides them into 3 sorts, (...), the Bardi, the Euates, and the
Druides: the Bardi, adds he, were Singers, and Poets: the Euates, Priests, and
Physiologists: the Druides (especially so called) to Physiologie added Moral
Philosophy. The like Marcellinus lib. 15. as Vossius de Philos. sect. l. 2. c.
3.. 6.

The Oaks of Mamre the original Idea of the Druides Oak religion.
. 14. Now that the Druides derived much of their Philosophy from the Mosaic
History is farther evidenced from that of Learned Dickinson, Druidum Origo (at
the end of his Delphi Pheniciz.) page 36. Farther, thou may demand whence
this Oak Religion (of the Druides) sprang? namely from the Oaks of Mamre: under
which, in times past, those holy men (in whose hands the administration of
Divine Service and Worship was) lived most devoutly: the shadow of which Oaks
afforded an house to Abraham, and a Temple to God. This I sucked from the Dugs
of Truth, namely from the sacred Scriptures* Abraham dwelt (says the
Hagiographer Gen 13.18. Genesis 13.18.
) (...) in, or (as the Arabic has it) among the Oaks of Mamre. Which the Lxx
renders (...), Genesis 14.13.
and chapter 18. (...). Under which Oak he fixed his Tabernacle, erected an Altar,
and offered to the Lord Calves, Goats, Rams, and other Sacrifices of like kind;
Genesis 15.9.
and performed all Sacerdotal Offices. Yea under this tree he entertained God
himself, Ad sacros Druidum Ritus, and doctrinam quae ulterius attinent, praeter
Caesarem, Strabo, Plinius. Diodorus Siculus, Lucanus, Pomponius Mela, Ammianus
Marcellinus; Heurnius in Barbariae Philosophioe Antiquitatibus, alii satis
explicate tradiderunt. Seldom Jani Anglor. l. 1.
together with Angels. He here had conference with God, and entered into
covenant with him, and was blessed of him. These are indeed admirable praeconia
of Oaks. Lo the Oak Priests! Lo the Patriarchs of the Druides! For from these
sprang the Sect of the Druides, which reached up at least, as high as Abraham's
time (for they report that the Druides Colleges flourished in the time of
Hermio, who was King of the Germans, immediately after the death of Abraham).
For because this holy man and Priest, Abraham lived under Oaks, and enjoyed God
for his companion, performing worship to him, our Divines (the Druides) from
this so famous example, chose Groves of Oaks for their Religious Services, etc.
See more of the Druides, their Doctrine, and Rites, Caesar Com. l. 6. Strabo l.
4. Diodor. l. 5. Owen Theol. l. 3. c. 11.

BOOK II. The Original of the Ionick, but chiefly of the Italick, or
Pythagorick Philosophy.
CHAP. I. The Traduction of the Grecian Philosophy from the Patriarchs and
Jewish Church proved by Universal Consent.
The Grecian Philosophers recourse to Egypt, and Phaenicia. That the Grecian
Philosophy was originally traduced from the Jewish Church, and Scriptures, is
proved by Testimonies. 1. Of Heathens, and Grecians themselves, Plato,
Numenius, Hermippus. 2. Of Jews, Aristobulus, Josephus. 3. Of the Fathers,
Tertullian, Justin Martyr, Minucius Foelix, Clemens Alexandrinus, Eusebius,
Theodoret; as also Joh: Grammaticus. 4. Modern Papists, Steuchus, Eugubinus,
Justinianus on Joh. 1.1. 5. Foreign Protestant Divines, and learned men,
Serranus, Julius and Joseph Scaliger, Vossius, Heinsius, Hornius, Bochart,
Grotius, Diodate. 6. The Testimonies of English Writers, Jackson, Usher,
Richardson, Preston, Sir Walter Raghley, Owen, Hammond, Stillingfleet, Mede,
Cudworth, Seldom, Dickinson, etc.

. 1. HAving finished our Discourse of Barbarick Philosophy, The Grecian
Philosophers recourse to Egypt and Phoenicia.
and Philosophers, we now proceed to the Grecian; which owes its original to
the former. So much Plato in his Cratylus (and else where) acknowledges, that
they received their Learning from the Barbarians, and Ancients* who lived near
the Gods, etc: so Clemens Alexandr: lib. 1. says, that Philosophy, a thing
variously useful, in times past shined from Nation to Nation amongst the
Barbarians; whence afterward it came into Greece. What these Barbarick Nations
were, from whom the Grecians received their Philosophy, has been already B. 1.
Chapter 4.. 1. demonstrated: and it will be farther evident by what follows in the
enumeration of particulars; how Thales had recourse to Egypt, and Phaenicia for
his Philosophy, Ph^recydes to Phaenicia for his; Pythagoras to Phaenicia,
Egypt, and Chaldea for his; Socrates and his Scholar Plato, traduced theirs
from Egypt, and Phaenicia: Solon his Laws from Egypt, and Zeno his Morals from
Phaenicia: As Democritus, and Epicurus their Atoms from Mochus: And Aristotle
his Natural Philosophy of the first principles, matter, form, and privation,
etc. from Sanchoniathon's History of the Creation: of each whereof in its
respective place. At present, we shall only endeavor some general
demonstration, that the Grecians traduced the chiefest part, if not the whole
of their Philosophy originally from the Scriptures, either by personal
conversation with the Jews, or Traditions from them; which they gleaned up in
Egypt, Phaenicia, and Chaldea, etc.

That the Grecian Philosophy was derived from the Jews.
. 2. That the Egyptians, Phenicians, and Chaldeans received their Philosophy
from the Jewish Church and Scriptures; we have, in the former Book, endeavored
to prove, both as to the (...), and (...): which might suffice to make good our
position, on this supposition (which is universally granted, The Testimony of
Heathen Grecian Philosophers Plato, etc.
and shall be hereafter proved) that the Grecians received their Philosophy
from these aforementioned Egyptians, Phenicians, and Chaldeans. But to make our
demonstration more valid, we shall give some more immediate (though at present
only general and inartificial) proofs, that the Grecian Philosophy was
traduced from the Jewish Church and Scriptures. And we shall begin with the
Testimonies of the Grecian Philosophers themselves, Plato, with others. Plato
in his Gratylus tells us plainly, that they (the Grecians) received their
Learning from the Barbarians, who were more ancient than themselves. These
Barbarians, Clemens Alexandrinus, Justin Martyr, Epiphanius, Nicephorus, and
Serranus understand to be the Jews (as before) whose name Plato conceled,
thereby to avoid the envy of the people (who were professed enemies of the
Jews, and their Religion) as also to gain the more credit to himself. But
Plato, in his Philebus, speaks more plainly to this purpose, acknowledging,
that the report or tradition he had received of the Unity of God, as to his
Essence, and plurality of persons, and Decrees, was from the Ancients, who
dwelt nearer the Gods, and were better than they (the Grecians). Who certainly
could be no other than the Patriarchs, and Jewish Church, from whom all those
Traditions, touching the Unity of God, and Plurality of persons, and Decrees,
were traduced. Whence also Plato acknowledges, that the best, and surest
course to prove the immortality of the Soul was by some Divine Word (...), as
in his Phaedo. The like he acknowledges elsewhere, that he received his
knowledge of, (...) or providence governing the World, from the wise, i. e. as
it is conceived, the Jews. And Serranus, in his Preface to Plato does
confidently affirm, that Plato received his symbolick Philosophy from the
Jews, i. e. from the Doctrine of Moses, and the Prophets; as all the learned,
and ancient Christian Doctors have judged; though he industriously avoided the
naming of the Jews, which was odious. We have also the Testimonies of other
Pagan Philosophers concurring herein; as that famous saying of Numenius the
Pythagorean, Numenius.
what is Plato, but Moses Atticizing? Also that of Hermippus, Hermippus,
a most diligent, and ancient Writer of Pythagoras's Life, who plainly affirms
(as Josephus contra Ap. lib. 1.) that Pythagoras translated many things out of
the Jewish Institutes, into his own Philosophy. So Aristotle, in his Books of
Politics, makes mention of many things taken out of the ancient Lawgivers,
which exactly suit with Moses's Laws, as Cunaeus observes. Thus Diogenes
Laertius in his Proeme to the Lives of the Philosophers begins with these words
(...). Some affirm that Philosophy had its origin from the Barbarians. That
by the Barbarians must be understood ( inclusively, if not exclusively) the
Jews, is affirmed by Justin Martyr, Clemens Alexandrinus, Epiphanius, and
others, as in what immediately precedes. 2. Thus Steuchus Eugubinus de peren.
Philosoph. l. 1. c. 12. whence it is manifest that the Philosophers thought,
and spoke those things, which they had learned from the Barbarians. The first
Barbarians were the Chaldeans, Egyptians, and, whom we ought to place in the
first rank, the Hebrews.

. 3. We may add hereto the Testimonies of Jews; Testimonies of Jews.
Aristobulus.
as that of Aristobulus, the Egyptian Jew, affirming, that Pythagoras
translated many of his opinions out of the Jewish Discipline. The like he
affirms of Plato, as Eusebius praep. Evang. l. 9. c. 6. and Clemens Alexand.
Strom. 1. who also Strom. 5. says, that Aristobulus affirmed the same of the
Peripatetick Philosophy, viz. that it depended on Moses's Law, and other of
the Prophets. Josephus l. 1 contra Apion. says of Pythagoras, Josephus.
that he did not only understand the Jewish Discipline, but also embraced many
things therein; Whence he gives this character of him, out of Hermippus, who
writ his life, (...) he was an Imitator of the Jewish Opinions. So the same
Josephus Antiq. l. 11. c. 2. brings in Demetrius Phalereus, commending the Law
of Moses, and giving this reason, why their Heathen Poets, and Historians made
no mention of this Law; because (says he) it being holy, ought not to be
delivered by a profane mouth. Its true the Jews mixed with these their
relations many sigments, yet this notwithstanding is sufficiently manifest
hence, that they had a strong and fixed persuasion, that the Grecanick
Philosophy was traduced from them and their Sacred Oracles; as Learned Seldom
has observed de Jure Not. Hebrae. lib. 1. c. 2.

Testimonies of the Fathers.
. 4. If we consult the Memoires of Christians, both Ancient, and Modern, we
shall find abundant Testimonies conspiring to make good this Assertion, that
the Grecians traduced their Philosophy from the Scriptures and Jewish Church.
Amongst the Ancients we have Tertullian Apol. c. 17. Tertullian.
who of the Poets, says he, who of the Sophists was there, who did not drink
of the Prophets fountain? Hence therefore the Philosophers quenched the thirst
of their ingenie. Thus Justin Martyr in his Paraenesis to the Greeks, shows,
how Orpheus, Pythagoras, Clement Alexand. De quo argumento praeter Eusebium,
prolixe agunt prisci patres, Cl. Alexand. passim, imprimis lib. 1 and 5. Strom.
Theophilus lib. ad Autolycum. Tatia^. (...) etc. Hornius Hist. philos. l. 2. c.
2.
Plato, Homer, etc. borrowed many things from Moses: and he does industriously
prove the Noveltie of the Grecian Philosophy, out of Polemo, Apion, Ptolemaeus
Mendisius, Philocrates, and others. So Minucius in Octavius: The Philosophers,
says he, have imitated some shadow of interpolated Truth from the Divine
predictions of the Prophets. So Clemens Alexandrinus, in his exhortation to the
Gentiles, speaks thus: O Plato what ever good Laws are afforded thee of God,
etc. thou had from the Hebrews; and else where Strom. 1. he calls Plato the
Philosopher, who derived what he had from the Hebrews, and he speaks this
universally of the Philosophers, that before the coming of Christ, the
Philosophers took part of the truth from the Hebrew Prophets, though they
acknowledged not the same, but attributed it to themselves as their sentiments
or opinions; and thence some things they adulterated; and other things they did
by a needles diligence unlearnedly, yet as seeming wise, declare; but other
things they invented. Thus Clemens. Eusebius tells us, Eusebius.
that Pythagoras, and Plato translated the Learning of the Jews, and Egyptians
into Greek. The like Eusebius. praepar. l. 9. c. 1. The most Illustrious of the
Greeks, were not altogether ignorant of the Judaick Philosophy: some by their
Writings, seem to approve their manner of life, others followed their
Theology, Theodoret.
so far, as they were able. Thus again Eusebius. praepar. l. 10. c. 2. and
praefat. in lib. 5. The Grecians like Merchants fetched their Disciplines from
else where. So Theodoret l. 2. de Curand. Graec. affect. says that Anaxagoras,
Pythagoras, and Plato gathered many riddles, or dark sayings of God, from the
Egyptians, and Hebrews. The like is affirmed of Justin Martyr, Ambrose,
Augustine, and Jerome, as Justinianus in 1. Joh. 1.1. and Seldom de Jur. Not.
Hebr. l. 1. c. 1. have observed. And Johannes Grammaticus (called otherwise
Philoponus) speaks affirmatively to this point: Jo. Grammaticus.
so de mundi Creatione lib. 1. cap 2. page 4. he tells us, that Plato, in
expounding the production of the world by God, imitates Moses in many things.
The like he affirms de mundi creatione lib. 6. cap. 21. page 24^. what Moses,
says he, said of Man, that God made him after his own image, Plato translates
to all things in the world, whence he styled the world a sensible Image of the
intellectual God. But of this more in its place.

. 5. As for Modern Writers we have a cloud of witnesses, Testimonies from
modern Papists.
and those of the most Learned, and that both of Papists, and Protestants, who
have given assent and consent to this our conclusion, touching the traduction
of Grecian Philosophy from the Jewish Church, and Scriptures. Amongst the
Papists we might mention Brietius, in his Geographie. Mariana on Genes. 1. also
Ludovicus Vives upon August. de civ. Dei, and de veritate, etc. of whom else
where: we shall at present content our selves with the Testimony of one or two
of the most learned amongst them. August. Steuchus Eugubinus, De Peren.
Philosophia lib. 1. cap. 1. Aug. Steueq. Euguhinus.
treating of the Succession of Doctrine from the beginning of the world, begins
thus: As there is one Principle of all things, so also there has been one and
the same Science of him at all times, amongst all, as both Reason, and
Monuments of many Nations, and Letters testify. This Science springing partly
from the first origin of men, has been devolved through all Ages unto
Posterity, etc. Thence he proceeds to show the Modus, how this Philosophy was
derived from hand to hand, in all Ages. The most true Supputation of Times
proves, that Methusalem lived, and might converse with Adam, as Noah, with
Methusalem. Therefore Noah saw, and heard all things before the Flood. Moreover
before Noah died, Abraham was fifty years aged. Neither may we conceive, that
this most pious man, and his holy Seed would concele from Abraham (who they
foresaw would prove most holy, and the Head of the pious Nation) things of so
great Moment, and so worthy to be commemorated. Therefore from this most true
cause it is most equal, that the great Science of Divine and human Affairs
should be deduced unto following Ages greatly overcome with Barbarism, etc.
Thence having explicated how Philosophy was handed down even to Moses's time,
the same Eugubinus adds: Therefore that there has been one, and the same
Wisdom always in all men, we endeavor to persuade, not only by these reasons.
but also by those many, and great examples, whereby we behold some Vestigia of
the truth scattered throughout all Nations, which Moses in his books long since
held forth to be beheld as in a glass a far off. So in what follows he says,
That Sapience also, besides what the ancient Colonies brought with them, passed
from the Chaldeans to the Hebrews, except what Moses writ, which passed from
the Hebrews to the Egyptians, from these to the Grecians, from the Grecians to
the Romans. For Abraham was a Chaldean, in whose family the ancient Theology,
and the Traditions of the Fathers, whereof he was Heir (as it was most equal)
remained. All these things being retained by Noah, and his Sons, were seen and
heard by Abraham: he declared them to his Son, and Grandchild: from Jacob they
passed unto posterity. Whence also flowed the Piety, and Sapience of Job, who
in no regard came short of the Piety, and Sapience of the Hebrews. Can thou
conceit, that he, who was most ancient, even in Abraham's days, saw not Noah,
and heard him not discoursing? Hence the same Eugubinus cap. 2 having divided
Philosophy into 3 parts, the first conveyed by Succession from Adam to Moses;
the second corrupted by the Philosophers, the third restored by the Sacred
Scriptures: of this last he concludes thus: At last the third kind of
Philosophy shone forth, scattering by its Brightness all the darknesses of the
former, not containing it self in one place, but by its beams filling the
Universe, etc.

Justinianus.
Justinianus on the first Epistle of John c. 1. v. 1. having given us a large
account of the Jewish Traditions, scattered up and down amongst the Pagan
Philosophers, touching the Divine (...) or Word, concludes thus: Truly many
things have been taken up by the Philosophers, and Poets from Moses's Law,
which they depraved, changed, and wrested: as touching the Chaos, the Giants
War, the Flood; and many other things, as we learn out of Augustine de civ. dei
l. 8. c. 11. and lib. 18. c. 37. And it is likely that in the same manner they
corrupted those traditions, they had received touching the Divine (...), his
generation, and so taught, that those Persons differed in nature, which
(according to the word of God) differ only in Hypostasis, or manner of
subsisting, etc.

. 6. But none have given a more full Explication, and Demonstration of this our
Assertion, than the learned Protestants, The Testimony of Protestant Writers.
Melancthon. Serranus.
as well Divines as Philologists, of this last Age. Amongst whom we may mention
P. Melancthon in his Preface, and additions to Carrion. Serranus (that learned
Philologist, as well as Divine) in his Preface to, and Annotations on Plato
almost every where asserts our conclusion; as we shall have frequent occasion
to show. The like does Julius Scaliger, that great Philosopher, as well as
Critic; and Joseph Scaliger his Son more fully in his Notes on Esebius's
Chronicon, gives testimony to, Julius and Joseph Scaliger.
and proof of this Assertion. The same does learned Vossius in his excellent
Treatise of Idolatry; Vossius.
as also in that de Philosophorum sectis l. 2. c. 1, etc. as hereafter.
Heinsius has a Discourse professedly on this Subject. Heinsius.
But Learned Bochart (that rich Antiquarie, Bochart.
and Philologist) has given an incomparable advance, and light to this Notion,
from whom, I thankfully acknowledge, I have received great assistance in this
undertaking, both by personal conference with him, and also from his elaborate
Works; especially his Geographia Sacra. Grotius also (from whom I received the
first hints of this Assertion) does positively affirm the same; Grotius.
as on Mat. 24.38. but especially in his book de Veritate Religionis, as else
where. Hornius Hist. Philos. lib. 3. cap. 1. Hornius.
speaks categorically thus: The most famous of the Grecians deliver, that
Philosophy flowed from the Barbarians to the Grecians. Plato in Epinom.
Cratylo, Philibo. Manetho in Josephus against Apion. Whence they so frequently,
and so honorably mention, the Phenicians, Chaldeans, Egyptians, who were all
instructed by the Hebrews. Whence also it was so solemn a thing for the most
ancient Grecian Philosophers to travel into the Oriental parts. Whence sprang
the mutual commerces, and common studies betwixt the Grecians, and Egyptians.
Whence he concludes, that Philosophy was not borne but educated in Greece: for
the most ancient wise men of Greece brought Philosophy thither from the East,
etc. We have also the Testimony of Dioda^e, Amirault, and Daille, etc. of whom
in their place.

. 7. Testimonies of the English. Jackson.
To come to the Testimonies of our English Divines and learned men. Jackson of
the Authority of the Scriptures (last Edit. in Polio) page 27, 34, 47, 49, 54,
55, 56, 57, etc. largely proves this our Assertion, touching the Traduction of
Philosophy from the Scriptures, and Jewish Church. And withal gives account
of the manner, how it was traduced; of which else where. Learned and pious
Usher asserts the same of Pythagoras his Philosophy, Usher.
as it will appear in his Life, etc. Thus great Richardson, in the Exposition
on his Divinity Tables, Table 5. MSS. treating of the first Matter says, that
Aristotle received it from Plato, and he from the Egyptians, as these from the
Jews. Preston makes use of this Principle as a main Argument to prove the
Divine Original, Preston.
and Authority of the Scriptures, as before. Sir Walter Ralegh, Sir Walter
Ralegh.
in his History of the World (Part 1. Book 1. Chap. 6.. 7.) affirms
Categorically that the wiser of the ancient Heathens, viz. Pythagoras, Plato,
etc. had their opinions of God from the Jews, and Scripture; though they durst
not discover so much: as in what follows, of Platonic Philosophy. Owen in his
learned Discourse of Gentile Theology (which I must confess, Owen.
has given me much light, and confirmation herein) does frequently assert the
same Conclusion. The same is often, and strongly maintained by the Learned
Stillingfleet in his Origines Sacrae, Stillingfleet.
it being indeed one chief medium, he much insists on, to prove the Authority
of the Scriptures. We have also the Testimonies of Mede, Hammond, and Cudworth
for confirmation hereof; as good Essays, and Discourses on this subject, by
Duport on Homer, Bogan's Homerus Hebraizans, and Dickinson's Delphi
Phoenicizantes; etc. But amongst our English learned Men, none have given us
more ample Testimonies to confirm our assertion, than famous Seldom, Seldom.
in his elaborate book de Jure Not. Hebrae. lib. 1. cap. 2. where, says he,
Touching the famous custom of the ancient Philosophers before Christ, to
consult, and hear the Hebrews, we have many Testimonies, both of Jews
themselves, of Christian Fathers, and of Pagan Writers; which he cites at large
in what follows.

CHAP. II. Of Mythologick Philosophy its Traduction from the Jews.
Of Mythologick Philosophy in general, and 1. particularly of the Poetic, and
fabulous. How the Greeks disguised Oriental Traditions by Fables. Of the use
and abuse of Fables and Parables. 2. Of Symbolick or Enigmatick Philosophy,
and its traduction from the Jewish Types, Symbols, and Enigmes. 3. Of the
Metaphorick, and Allegorick mode of philosophi^ing by Plato, and its descent
originally from the Jews. Mat. 13.3. The Matter also of Mythologick Philosophy
from Gods sacred Word, and Works. The Causes of Mythologick Philosophy. 1.
Ignorance of the Hebrew. 2. Of the Matter of their Traditions, or Jewish
Mysteries. 3. Of the Form of Jewish Doctrines. 4. Of the Traditions. 2d Cause
was Admiration of the wonders of God brokenly reported to them. 3. Imitation
another cause, concerning which Plato has excellent Discourses touching the
Subject, Object, Effect, Uses, and Abuses of Imitation in Symbolick
Philosophy. 4. Curiosity, and affectation of Novelty Act. 17.21. 5. Pride, and
self advancement. 6. Inclination to Idolatry. 7. Carnal Policy to avoid the
peoples hatred. A general Conclusion that all Philosophy, even Aristotle's it
self, as to its Matter, was traduced from the Jewish Church, and Scriptures.

. 1. Of the Grecian Philosophy its traduction from the Jews.
THat the Grecian Philosophers received the choicest of their Philosophic
Contemplations from the Jewish Church, and Divine Revelation, we have already
endeavored some inartificial demonstration, as to the (...), thereof: we now
proceed to the (...), to demonstrate the same from the several causes from
whence; and wales by which the Grecians traduced their Philosophy from the
Jewish Church and Scriptures. And to make this good, we shall first run
thorough the sundry kinds and modes of Grecian Philosophy, and thence proceed
to their several Sects of Philosophers. The first great mode or way of the
Greeks philosophizing was Mythologick and Symbolick, of which we are now to
treat, with endeavors to demonstrate how, that both as to matter and form,
they traduced it from the Jewish Church.

. 2. That the first Grecian Philosophy was Mythologick and Symbolick, will be
easily granted by any versed in those Antiquities. Of Mythologick Philosophy
in general.
So Diodorus Siculus lib. 4. makes mention of (...), an ancient Mythologie,
which he also calls, (...), old fables; and (...) Mythick History. This
Aristotle, in the Proeme to his Metaphysics, calls Philomythie: for, says he,
a Philosopher is in some sort (...) a Philomyther, or Lover of fabulous
Traditions. Strabo lib. 11. makes mention of this ancient (...), as that which
gained little credit in the world. Which Proclus on Plato's Theology l. 1. c.
4. calls Symbolick Philosophy. But to speak distinctly and properly, we may
distinguish Mythologick Philosophy (or Philosophic Mythologie) into these
severals, 1. Mythologick strictly taken, or Parabolick. 2. Hieroglyphick,
Symbolick, or Enigmatick. 3. Metaphorick, and Allegorick: The difference
betwixt these several modes of philosophizing is this: The Mythologick (which
the Scripture calls the Parabolick) is the couching of Philosophic Principles,
and Mysteries under some fabulous narration, or feigned story: the Symbolick
is the wrapping up of Natural Principles, or Moral Precepts under certain
Symbols, Hieroglyphics, sensible Images, or obscure Enigmes and Riddles:
Metaphorick, and Allegorick is the expressing things, either under a naked
single Similitude, which belongs to Metaphors; or by a Series of Metaphors,
which belongs to Allegories, etc. see Diodate on Mat. 13.3.

Mythologick Philosophy strictly taken first seated amongst the Poets.
, 3. To begin with Mythologick Philosophy, strictly so taken, called, in
Scripture Phrasiologie, Parabolick, which was, as to order of time, the first,
taken up by the Grecian Poets, and after embraced by some of their
Philosophers. The chief Grecian Poets who traded in this kind of Mythick, or
Fabulous Philosophy, were 1. Orpheus; who is supposed to have been the most
Ancient of the Poets, and equal with their Gods; insomuch as he is said to have
sailed among the Argonats, with Hercules, and the Tyndarides; as Lactant. l. 1.
c. 5. They say he was a Thracian by birth; but his Philosophy he gained in
Egypt as Eusebius. l. 2. praep. c. 1. They report also, that he was very famous
for Music, wherein he so greatly excelled, as he mollified not only Men, but
the brute beasts also by his singing. But others give a more rational account
of this fable, namely, that congregating men, who were dispersed here and
there, and lived as beasts in the fields, he drew them to a more civil form of
life. so Horat. in Art Poetica. Sylvestres homines, sacer, interpresque Deorum,
Caedibus, and Victu faedo deterruit Orpheus,
Dictus ob hoc lenire Tigres, rapidosque leones.
There were Contemporaries with Orpheus, Musaeus, Arion, and Amphion. Of
Amphion it is said, that having received an Harp from the Muses, he fitted his
verses, composed with great suavitie so exactly thereto, as that the stones ran
(...) of their own accord, etc. Which Thucydides lib. 1. thus unriddles:
Orpheus and Amphion a little before the Trojan War, drew men out of the Wood,
unto Humanity, or a more civil conversation. By which it appears, that
Orpheus's Phhilosophie was, as to the Matter of it, chiefly Ethick, and
Theologick. Thus of Orpheus himself. Orpheus's followers writ (...) Poems
according to Orpheus's Doctrine, which were partly Moral, partly Theologick;
but wholly Symbolick, or Fabulous, so Proclus in Theol. Plat. l. 1. c. 4.
(...), The Orphicks delivered their Philosophy by Symbols or Fables.

2. Homer also was a great Inventor, and Propagator of this Mythologick
Philosophy. So Democritus (...), etc. Homer having obtained a nature inspired
by a Divine Afflatus, or Spirit, framed a beautiful Structure of diverse verses.
Plutarch l. 2. de Homero, shows, how the seeds of all Arts, Physics,
Medicine, Politics, Ethics, Eloquence, Military Discipline, etc. are to be
found in Homer, Alcidamus, a noble and ancient Orator, calls Homer's Odyssea,
(...) a good glass of human life. These Poemes of Homer were in great
estimation with many of the latter Philosophers, who received much of their
Philosophy thence. So Zeno, the Head of the Stoic Sect, writ five books of
Homerick Questions: Yet some of them were not so well pleased with Homers mode
of philosophizing, in as much as it had so many Fables, and so much obscurity
mixed with it. Thence Plato in his Alcibiades, concludes (...). Novices in
Philosophy ought not to fall upon Homers Poems, least they should fancy this
Hero writ fables. The Egyptians say, that Homer was in Egypt: others suppose
him to have been born in Egypt: and that he imbibed there his choicest Notions,
from the Jewish Doctrine originally, if not immediately, we have proved Part 1.
B. 3. C. 1.. 6. of Homer. 3. Hesiod philosophized much in Oeconomicks, as also
in Natural Philosophy; as of the first Chaos, etc. We find this character of
him in Velleius lib. 1. Hesiod lived about 120. years after Homer. He was very
famous for his elegant Wit, and the most soft sweetness of his Verses. He was
most desirous of ease and quiet, etc. see more of him, and the Traduction of
his Philosophic Poems from the Jewish Church, Part 1. B. 3. C. 1.. 7. of
Hesiod. 4. Phocylides, Theognes, Museus, and Pythagoras writ much in Moral
Philosophy. 5. Empedocles, Nicander, Aratus philosophized in Naturals. As 6.
Solon and Tirtaeus in Politics. But all the ancient Poesy was fabulous, and
obscure, so Maximus Tyrius orat. 7. (...), because all Poesy does obscurely
hint a thing.

How these Greek Poets disguise the Traditions which originally came from
Scriptures.
. 4. These ancient fabulous Greek Poets having received from Egypt, and else
where, many broken Traditions, touching the several Names, and Works of God,
the Origin of the World, with other Mysteries, wrapped up in the bosom of the
Scriptures, and Jewish Church, they made it their business to disguise these
oriental Traditions, by clothing them with a new Grecian dress, of many
fabulous narrations; with which they were so disfigured, as that they could
never recover their old face. Thus Jackson on the Scriptures folio 29.
continually, says he, whilst we compare ancient Poets, or Stories, with the
book of Genesis, and other Volumnes of sacred Antiquity; these sacred books
give us the pattern of the waking thoughts of ancient times. And the Heathen
Poems, with other fragments of Ethnic Writings (not so ancient as the former)
contain the Dreams, and Fancies, which succeeding Ages, by hearsay, and broken
reports, had conceived concerning the same or like matters. For any judicious
man from the continual, and serious observation of this Register of truth, may
find out the Original at least, of all the Principal Heads, or Common Places of
Poetic Fictions, or Ancient Traditions, which cannot be imagined, they should
ever have come into any man's fancy, unles from the imitation of some Historick
Truth, or the impulsion of real events stirring up admiration. Thus Jackson.

The use and abuse of Mythologick Philosophy.
. 5. This Mythologick Philosophy begun by the Poets, and after taken up by the
most Ancient Philosophers, had it not been mixed with so many ridiculous, and
Idolatrous Fables, might have been of much use in those first Ages, even
amongst the Heathens, as well as in the Jewish Church, whence it received its
origination. For under these sensible Forms, and Images (suited to that infant
state of the world) were contained many lively examples of, and strong
incentives unto, Virtue: Hence Basil says of Homer (...), etc. all Homers
Poesy is but the commendation of Virtue, etc. Of the same use were Esep's
Fables, and the Fables of Philostratus. Only the Elder Poets of Greece had such
unworthy Fables of their Gods, as also so much obscurity in their Traditions of
Natural Experiments, and Moral Precepts, as that the Wiser Philosophers, who
followed, thought it most expedient to reject this mode of philosophizing, and
to begin upon a new foundation, namely, some more immediate Traditions from the
Eastern parts, with which also they mixed some Fabulous, or Symbolick conceits
of their own.

.6. After the Mythologick, followed the Symbolick, or Enigmatick mode of
philophizing amongst the Grecian Philosophers, Symbolick Philosophy from the
Jewish Types, Enigmes, etc.
especially those of the Italick Sect, Pythagoras, etc. who, though they
rejected the multitude of obscure and absurd fables, taken up by the Elder
Poets; yet, were they not without their Symbols, Enigmes, and Emblemes, or
Corporeal Images, which are but branches of Mythologie considered in its
general Idea. Such were the Enigmes, and Fables so common among the Ancients,
whereof we have a collection extant ascribed to Esop, which yet were not (at
least) originally his, as Quintil. lib. 5. cap. 11. These Fables (which albeit
they received not their origin from Esop; (for Hesiod seems to have been their
first Author) yet are they celebrated chiefly under his name) are wont to lead
the minds of rustic, and unskilful persons, who are more easily taken with
things feigned, and finding a pleasure in them, do more easily assent, and
consent to them. Dius in the Phenician History relates that Solomon proposed
Enigmes to the King of Tire, which could not be solved, but produced many
concertations; till at length he found Abdemon a Tyrian young man, who solved
many of them Josephus Ant. 5. c. 2. We read also of Amasis an Egyptian King,
who disputed by Enigmes with the Ethiopian King. Also in the Oriental parts it
was a received custom among the Nobles, having staked down their wager, to
contend by Enigmes or Riddles; and he that could not solve what was proposed,
lost his wager. Which custom Plutarch, in Convivio Sapient. mentions; and we
have some Vestigia of it, in the History of Sampson, and Solomon: Whence even
in the Sacred Scripture we find the name (...) Enigmes, attributed to such
Philosophic Placits, of which of old the most Learned among the wise men often
disputed, as Hornius Hist. Philos. l. 7. c 6. This mode of philosophizing
Pythagoras principally addicted himself unto. So Porphyrie, Erat adhuc alia
species Mythicae Philosophiae, and ea uti etiam ex sacris apparet, praesertim
libro judicum, omnium antiquissima. Nam fabulae artificiose compositae rudibus
popu is proponebantur, quae sub imagine brutorum, aut aliarum rerum
instituendae Vitae rationem ostenderent. Quae fabulae postea collectae uni
A^sopo, quia is maxim excelluit, adscribi coeperunt. Hornius Hist. Philos. l.
3. c. 7.
and Iamblichus attributed unto him (...), a Symbolick mode of teaching, or as
Proclus in Theol. Plat. l. 1. c. 4. observes in general of the Pythagoreans,
(...). The Pythagoreans study to deliver Divine things by Images, i. e. by
corporeal Images; Emblemes, and short Enigmatick Symbols, or Sayings, whereby
they shadowed forth (...) and (...) the Affections and Morals of the Soul.
Neither did these Pythagoreans only express their moral precepts thus, but
also couched their most sacred mysteries both of God and Nature under these,
and such like figures, numbers, and enigmatical propositions, which they all
founded on these Principles: (...), sensible Forms are but Imitates, or Images
of Intellectuals: and (...), man is the most imitating creature. That
Pythagoras traduced these his Symbols (if not immediately, yet) originally from
the Jewish Church, we need no way doubt. So Clemens Alexandrinus l. 1. (...),
the old mode of philosophizing was Hebraick and Enigmatick. This way of
philosophizing by Enigmes and Problemes was common among the Jews in the time
of the Judges, as Hornius Hist. Philos. l. 2. c. 13. observes, They were
exercised, says he, now and then in the solution of hard Problemes, such were
those which Sampson in his Nuptials proposed. It is called (...), which you may
translate either an Enigme, or Problem: of which see more what precedes B. 1.
C. 2.. 7. Such also were Salomon's Proverbs, for the most part, and all the
Jewish Types, which indeed were but Symbols, or corporeal Images of things
spiritual. Or if we will not grant, that Pythagoras received his Symbols
immediately from the Jews, yet we may without danger conclude he had them from
the Egyptian Hieroglyphics: as hereafter.

Metaphorick and Allegorick Philosophy from the Jews.
. 7. Another mode of philosophizing amongst the Grecians was Metaphorick, and
Allegorick; which also is a Species or kind of Mythologick Symbolick
Philosophy. For, as Aristotle in his Rhetoric observes (...), a Metaphor is
but an Image, or shadow of a thing; And an Allegory is but a continued
metaphor, or taking the figure of a true History, but in a metaphorick sense,
to represent things moral or spiritual; Taautus Theologiae suae mysterta non
nisi per allegorias tradebat: test Sanchoniathone, Eusebius. l. 1. Praep. c. 7.
whereby it is differenced from a Parable or Fable, which is but a feigned
story, to represent something moral; as also from a Symbol and Enigme which is
more short, and obscure; yet do they all accord in the general Idea or Notion
of Mythologie. Now this Metaphorick Allegorick mode of philosophizing, was
chiefly embraced by Plato, who conceled the most of his more sublime
Traditions, and contemplations under Metaphorick, and Allegorick Shadows, and
Figures, with which he likewise mixed many Fables, and Parables. So in his (...)
or Dialogue of Love (which seems to be an imitation of Salomon's Song) we find
many Allegorick Figures; as that of his (...) (which is conceived to be but a
Symbolick Tradition of Adam and Eve, and their Creation) etc. And that Plato
received this Allegorick mede of philosophizing from the Jewish Church,
Serranus (in his Preface to Plato) makes to be the common persuasion of all
Learned Christians, of which more in the story of Plato's Philosophy. That
the Spirit of God makes great use of Parables, Symbols, Enigmes, Metaphors, and
Allegories for the unfolding of Heavenly Mysteries, any, that acquaints himself
with the Scriptures, cannot be ignorant, as Mat. 13.3. Mat. 13.3.
it is said, Christ spoke many things to them in Parables, etc. where Diodate
asserts, that this was a fashion of teaching used amongst the Jews, followed by
our Lord, and very profitable to make the truth to be understood, and to
insinuate the apprehension thereof into the mind of the Auditors, by a well
appropriated similitude, taken from a feigned story, etc. And as this
parabolick, symbolick mode of expressing heavenly Mysteries was so frequent
amongst the Jews, so we may, on good grounds, conclude, that the Grecian
Philosophers traduced their like mode of philosophizing, from this sacred
fountain originally, if not immediately.

. 8. Having demonstrated, The matter of Mythologick Philosophy from sacred
works, and truths.
how the Mythologick and Symbolick mode or form of philosophizing amongst the
Grecians was derived from the Jewish Church, their Parables, Types, Allegories,
etc. we now proceed to the matter of the Grecian Mythologick Philosophy, to
demonstrate its traduction from the Jewish Church and Scriptural Traditions.
And to make this evident, we must recollect (what has been often hinted) that the
Elder Poets (as well as Philosophers) had generally recourse to Egypt, and
Phaenicia, for the matter also, as well as for the form, or mode of their
Philosophic Mythologie. So Diodorus Siculus bibl. l. 1. tells us, that the
Poets, Orpheus, Musaeus, Melampus, and Homer, and the Philosophers afterward,
Pythagoras, Plato, etc. had gained most of their Wisdom out of Egypt. And
Carrion, in his Chronicon lib. 2. touching the ancient Learning of the Jews;
says, that men write, that Linus brought Learning from Phaenicia into Greece:
for the ancient Learning of Greece was some part of the Law touching Morals,
known partly by Nature, partly by Tradition from the Fathers, as also the
inquisition of herbs, and remedies, the consideration of the Stars, and the
description of the year; and in these Sciences he ( Linus) received the
chiefest part, from the Phenicians, and Egyptians, etc. The same he affirms
afterward of Orpheus, Homer, Hesiod; as also of Thales, and Pythagoras. Now
this being granted, it is not difficult to conceive how these first
Mythologists gained the chief materials of their Philomythie, or Symbolick
Philosophy. For here it was, in Egypt, and Phenicia, that these Grecian
Philomythists got the skill of coining Wonders, and Fables in imitation of, and
by Tradition from the wonders of Creation, and Providence mentioned in the
sacred Scriptures, and vouchsafed to the Jewish Church. For the report of Gods
miraculous works in creating the World, and governing of it, especially his
miraculous preservation of the Jewish Church, being by tradition, soon
communicated to the Phenicians, and Egyptians, who were next neighbors to the
Jews; hence the Grecians derived the principal heads, or first lines of their
Philosophic Philomythie; wherein, although by successive artificial imitation,
the variety grew greater, and the resemblance of Divine truth less, yet there
still remained some characters, and footsteps of those Divine truths, and
sacred Oracles, from whence they originally were traduced; as Jackson on the
Script. fol. 57.

The causes of Mythologick Philosophy. 1. Ignorance.
. 9. This Demonstration touching the Traduction of Mythologick Philosophy,
both as to Form, and Matter, from the Jewish Church, will be more evident, if
we shall take a more particular view of the causes of it, which were very many,
and great; as 1. Ignorance was a pregnant, and great cause of all that Mythick
Philosophy, which gained so much upon the Grecians, as well as on the
Egyptians, and Phenicians. For when these dark, and purblind Heathens had
received any broken Traditions touching the glorious Works, Wonders, Mysteries,
and Truths of God reveled unto, and in his Church (the seat of his glorious
presence) they being not able to apprehend, much less to comprehend the same,
grew vain in their imaginations, and turned the glory of God into a Lie, by
mixing their own Fables with those fragments of Divine Revelation, which, by
imperfect Tradition, were delivered over to them. Thus were their foolish
hearts darkened, as Romans 1.21. 1. Ignorance of the Hebrew Idiome.
Now this their Ignorance of these Divine Mysteries was much greatned, 1. from
want of skill in the Hebrew Tongue, and Idiome; whence they gave words of
ambiguous Interpretation a sense far differing from what was intended: also
some words they understood in a literal, and proper sense, which, according to
their genuine mind, and sense, Genesis 46.26. 2. Ignorance of the matter of their
traditions.
ought to be taken improperly; of which many instances might be given, as that
of Genesis 46.26. whence Bacchus was feigned to be born out of Jupiters thigh,
etc. 2. Another thing, which greatly fed, and nourished the Ignorance of these
Mythologick Philosophers, was the sublimitie and greatness of the Matters,
concerning which they philosophized. So great was the confidence, or rather
ignorance, of these first Grecian Sophists, as that they durst adventure to
philosophize on the deepest Mysteries of the Jewish Religion; which being not
able, in any measure, to apprehend, they turned them into mere Fables. This
might be largly exemplified in all parts of their Philosophy: as, 1. In their
Theology; whence came their mythologick contemplations of their Gods. Jao,
Adonis, Saturn, Jupiter, 1. In Theology.
etc. but from Hebrew Traditions of the true God, etc? Whence the Platonic
(...), Trinity, but from some imperfect Scripture Traditions? whence Plato's
(...), but from that essential name of God Exodus 3.14? as Austin long since
observed: whence his (...), and (...), but from the Scripture Relation of
Christ, if not Genesis 1.1. yet Prove. 8. where he is called Wisdom? hence also
that Poetic Fiction of Minerva the Goddess of Wisdom being produced out of
Jupiters head: whence also Plato's Fable of the (...), or (...), but from Genesis
1.2. The Spirit of God moving on the Waters? whence also the original of their
Demons, and Demon worship, but from some broken Traditions touching the Jewish
Messiah, his Nature, and Offices? as elsewhere. 2. 2. In Natural Philosophy.
And as those fabulous Grecians were ignorant of the sublimer matters of the
Jewish Religion, so also did they discover much Ignorance in Natural things;
concerning which they had received some traditions. As Plato, having had some
broken relation of Eve her being taken out of Adam's side, coined from hence,
his (...). Lastly whence all those Poetic and Fabulous Narrations of the first
Chaos, the Golden Age, etc. but from corrupt traditions from Genesis 1, etc? 3. 3.
Ignorance of the Jewish form, or mode of Doctrine.
Another spermatick principle, which bred, or Root, that nourished this Grecian
Ignorance, and consequently their Mythologick Philosophy, was the peculiar
mode, and hidden form, under wdich the Jewish Mysteries were couched. For God
condescending to the Childish capacity of that Infant Church, clothed the
sublime Mysteries of Salvation with terrene habits, sensible forms, and Typick
shadows, or shapes, which the carnal Jews themselves could not understand; much
less could those blind Heathens, who received only some broken traditions of
them, penetrate into their Spiritual sense, and marrow; whence they turned all
into Fables. All Types, Symbols, and Parables, though never so lively Images of
things Spiritual, to those, who have Senses spiritually exercised in Converse
with them, are yet but Riddles, and dark sayings to such, as have not a
capacity to dive into their Spiritual import: whence Christ is said Mat.
13.13. Mat. 13.13. 4. Ignorance from the imperfection of Jewish traditions.
to speak in Parables to the obstinate Jews, that so they might not understand.
4. The last thing I shall name, as that, which added to their Ignorance, and
thence increased their Philosophic Philomythie, was the imperfection of those
traditions which originally descended from the Jewish Church. For as Rivers the
farther they are from the Fountain, the less they have of its original
purity, and favor; or as it is fabled of Argos's ship, that through long
absence it passed under so many emendations, and alterations, as that at last
there was no piece left of the old bulk: The like usage did these Jewish
traditions find amongst those fabulous Grecians. For they passing from one Age
to another, through the various Imaginations, Inclinations, Humors, and
Interests of men, received such strange alterations, and disfigurations, as
that it was at last difficult to find any certain piece, or footsteps of the
original Tradition. This is well observed by Learned Seldom de Jure Not.
Hebrae. lib. 1. c. 2. fol 26. Neither, says he, is it a wonder, that we find
not in the writings of the Greek Philosophers more express footsteps of the
Jewish Doctrine, yea that there is scarce any thing occurring in them, which
retains the pure nature of the Hebrew original: for the Sects of Barbarick
Philosophers were so mixed in the Greek Sciences, as also the Greek Philosophy
it self torn into so many pieces, and fractions, as that it was wholly
disguised, etc.

2. Admiration the cause of all Mythologick Philosophy.
. 10. A second cause (or prolifick root) of Mythologick Philosophy was
Admiration, and this indeed follows naturally upon the former: for what is
admiration, but the Souls contemplation of some novel, and rare matter,
proposed to it, with desire to know the cause? or as others describe it, the
state and disposition of the Soul toward things, that are new, and rare, and
strange, of which we can give no reason: for wise men wonder not, because they
see a reason, and have a comprehension of things. I hence Plutarch in his book
(...), says of Pythagoras, that he affirmed of himself, that he gained this by
Philosophy, not to admire any thing: for Philosophy takes away wonderment,
and admiration, which flows from Ignorance. So Aristotle Eth. l. 1. c. 3.
(...)^ He, that is conscious of his own ignorance, admires what seems above
him. Now this being the genuine notion, and Idea of Admiration, to contemplate
overmuch things above our capacities, especially if they are strange and rare;
hence we may easily gather, how soon those Grecian Mythologick Philosophers
fell in love with the contemplation of those wonderful Experiments, and Issues
of Divine Creation, and Providence, which were handed over to them by some
broken Traditions. We have already showed, how Egypt, and Phaenicia with other
parts bordering on the Jewish Territories, had received many imperfect
fragments, or broken Traditions touching God his Names, Attributes, and Works
both of Creation, and Providence; especially of the wonders he wrought for his
Church in Egypt, at the Red Sea, in the Wilderness, and after they came to
Ganaan: also that they had some, though very obscure, notices of the Messiah,
and his work of Redemption, etc. Now the Grecians traveling into those
Oriental parts, to acquaint themselves with these hidden Mysteries, and
Wonders, at first fell into a great Admiration of them, and anon set themselves
to philosophize upon them in a mythologick mode, according to the fashion of
th^se first Ages, Oriental parts. And this kind of Admiration was a genuine,
yea the main, cause of all Philosophy, both Mythologick, and Simple, as is
confessed by the chiefest Philosophers, Plato, and Aristotle; so Plato in his
Thaeetetus informs us; that this is the great Affection of a Philosopher to
wonder, neither had Philosophy any other origin but this: the like Aristotle
in his lib. 11. Metaphys. cap. 2. (...), etc. by reason of admiration men both
now, and in times past began to philosophize. Aristotle's account how admiration
was tbe cause of all Philosophy, especially Mythologick.
But Aristotle, in the Pro^me to his Metaphysics, gives us a full and
excellent account of the mode, or manner how all Philosophy, especially
Mythologick, sprang from Admiration; which because it is so much to our
purpose, I shall first give it at large: (...). Both now, and in old times men
began to philosophize from admiration; at first indeed admiring the more easy
wonders, thence proceeding by little and little, they began to doubt of greater
matters, as concerning the Origin of the Universe, etc. wherefore also a
Philomyther ( or Mythologist) is in some sense a Philosopher, for [(...)] a
fable is composed of things wonderful, wherein we have an admirable account: 1.
How all Philosophy sprang from admiration, first of the lesser works, and
wonders of Providence [perhaps he means the wonders which God wrought in Egypt,
the Wilderness, Canaan, and Babylon, which were of latter date, and so yet fresh
in their memories]. 2. Then says he, they proceeded by little and little to
doubt of greater Matters, a^ of the original of the Universe, etc. Namely of
the Creation of the World out of no preexistent Matter; of the first Chaos; of
man's first Production, and state in Innocence; of the Fall; of Noah's Flood,
which they call Deucalions, etc. All which particulars are largely
philosophized upon by Plato, in his Timaeus, of the Origin of the Universe. 3.
Aristotle concludes, that every Philomythist, or Lover of Fables, is in some
sense a Philosopher; for a fable is made of wonders. That is, as Jackson on the
Scriptures ( fol. 34.47. and elsewhere) well observes, All the principal heads
of Mythologick Philosophy, entertained by the elder Poets, and Philosophers,
came not into their fancies by mere accident, but from the impulsion of real
events, and wonders of God, which being delivered to them by tradition
(originally from the Jews) stirred up Admiration in them. For the traditions of
God's miracles being far spread, when Greece began to philosophize, they could
not but admire the Wisdom, Power, and Majesty of God, that shone so greatly
therein, which yet being no way able, for want of Divine Revelation, to
apprehend, they turned all into Fables, and vain Philosophy.

3. Imitation a cause of Mythologick Philosophy.
. 11. A third Mother root, or cause of Mythologick Philosophy was Imitation;
which indeed was the great sovereign principle that ruled and governed those
Infant Ages, but its influence appeared in nothing more powerful, and
particular, than in the Philomythie, and Symbolick Philosophy of the first
Poets and Philosophers; who having had some broken Relations of the great Works
of God in Creating* and Governing the World, were not only taken up in the
contemplation, and admiration of them; but also grew ambitious of coining the
like; which by an artificial kind of Imitation they were dexterous in, as
Strabo observes, and Jackson on the Scriptures fol. 49. From this vicinitie of
true wonders in Jury, or thereabouts, were the Medes, Persians, and Syrians so
much addicted to fabulous narrations, and coining of Wonders. And Greece, as it
received artificial Learning first from Asia, so did it drink in this humor
with it. For the traditions of Gods Miracles in Jury, and the Regions about it,
having been far spread when Greece began first to tattle in artificial
Learning, the Grecians, as Children in true Antiquity ( as the Egyptian Priest
told Solon) were apt to counterfeit the form of ancient truths, and misapply
it to unseemly matters, or purposes, as Children will be doing in homlier
stuff, which they see their Elders do better in. Finally the same humor, which
yet reigns amongst men, might possess most of them: There is no famous event
which falls out though it be but a notable jest) but in a short time is
ascribed to a great many more, than have affinity with it. In like manner did
the reports of sundry events, which either fell out only in Jury, or upon
occasion of Gods people, fly about the world, some with cut, and mangled, but
most usually with enlarged artificial wings; as if the same had been acted
every where, or the like invented on every occasion. And fol. 57. he concludes,
that the principal, or first heads of the Grecian invention were derived, for
most part, from the Hebrews; although, by successive artificial imitation,
their variety grew greater, and their resemblance of Divine truth less. Thus
Dr Jackson. And that the main, if not the whole, of Mythologick, and Symbolick
Philosophy was but a (...), or reflexe Image of Jewish Mysteries, and
Discipline, traduced by Artificial Imitation, has been sufficiently proved by
what was mentioned touching the matter, and form of Mythologick Philosophy:
Namely, as to its form: Whence sprang the Egyptian Hieroglyphics; the
Phenician, and Grecian (...), or Fables; Pythagoras's Symbols; and Plato's
Allegories; but from the Jewish Types, Allegories, Enigmes, and Parables? and
both the one, and the other founded upon that great Oriental Maxim, (...).
Then if we consider the matter of Symbolick Philosophy, it seems plainly to be
taken up by traducti^n from, and in imitation of, some Divine work, or truth.
Whence can we imagine that Pythagoras should receive his Institutes, and
Ceremonies of Purifications, Washings, White Vestments, Sacrifices, with his
(...) or School* wherein were (...) perfect, as well as novices; but from the
Jewish Ceremonies and Schools, which he affected, to the utmost of his skill,
to imitate? whence he was styled (...) the Jewish Imitator, or Ape. And as for
Plato, Johan. Grammaticus de Creat. Mundi l. 1. c 2. tells us plainly, Plato's
great skill in imitation both as to the practice, and Theory thereof.
that he imitated Moses in his exposition of the World's Origin, as in many
other things. And indeed none of the ancient Philosophers was better skilled in
this kind of artificial Imitation than Plato; who had a luxuriant, pregnant
Fancy (which is the proper seat of Imitation) and a great dexterity, backed
with much affection, yea ambition, to imitate the Eastern, particularly the
Jewish, Wisdom. Neither was he only versed in the Practick part of this Art,
but also in the Theory. For we find in his Works (and no where else, that I
know of) excellent discourses professedly treating of Imitation, 1. its
subject, which he makes to be the Fantasy, that (...), or (...). Touching the
power of the imagination in order to imitation, see Les Conferences par les
Beaux esprits Tom. 1. Confer. 5. de la ressemblance: 2. its object, which he
calls (...), and (...) i. e. se^sible Forms, or Images, representing some thing
Moral, or Spiritual: 3. its effect, which he makes to be a shadowy dark truth.
For, says Plato Reipub. lib. 6. (...), etc. an Imitator is but a Coiner of
Idols, or Images: and these Images, he calls (...), Shadows of Truth; whence he
adds, that imitation [(...)] is but (...), an imperfect representation of
Truth; wherefore he advises those, who would study with advantage the
Symbolick Philosophy (which he, and others before him had taught) not to
fasten on the Fables, Allegories, or Symbolick Images, wherewith Truth was
clothed, but rather to attend unto the Truth it self couched under these
Images, Shadows, or imperfect notices: 4. whence he lays down the great
Benefits of Imitation in Natural, and Moral Philosophy, for the coloring, and
shadowing forth of Truth; as also in Oeconomicks, and Politics: Examples and
Patterns being the most powerful, because visible precepts: lastly he shows
the sad abuse of it, by the fabulous Poets, in their feigned St^rie^, or
Romances, and blasphemous Figments of their Gods; which gives us a clear
Demonstration, what a mighty influence Imitation had upon the Grecanick
Philosophy; Symbolick, and what followed: of which see more Plato Reipub. lib.
6. also lib. 10. and Serranus thereon.

4. Curiosity and affectation of Novelty.
. 12. 4. Another Seminal Principle, which had an influential Causality on this
Mythologick, Symbolick Philosophy, was the Itch of Curiosity, or an eager
inquisitive humor innate in those first Grecian Philosophers, which made them
restles in their Inquisitions after some Knowledge, touching the first
Principles of things, and the Supreme Universal First Cause. This indeed was
one first moving impulsive Cause of all Philosophy, whence it received its
name (...), and so it is defined by Plato, (...), etc. an Appetition of Wisdom.
For the Oriental parts, Phenicia, and Egypt (which bordered on Judea) having
first had some tastes of the Knowledge of God, the first Cause, his Names,
Perfections, and Works, both of Creation, and Providence, by some imperfect
Traditions from the Jews; this awakened the inquisitive Grecians (who always
labored under an itch of curiosity, even unto Paul's time, Act. 17.21. Some new
thing.
as it appears Acts 17.21.) to make farther Search into these dark Mysteries
concerning which they had received some very broken, and imperfect notices.
This inquisitive curious humor put Thales, Pythagoras, Solon, and Plato, with
the Poets before them, upon their travels into the Oriental parts, to get more
exact information touching the first principles of Wisdom.

. 13. 5. Another Master vein, 5. Pride and self advancement.
which fed the Grecian Mythologick Philosophy, was Pride, in appropriating
that to themselves which was done by, or belonged unto, others; thus did they
appropriate the chief of God's names to their own Gods, Jupiter, Jao, Adonis,
etc. so in like manner Noah's Flood was attributed to Deucalion, with multitudes
of the like Instances; and to make these their assumings authentic, they
disguised the traditions, they received in the Oriental parts, with many
Fables, and Symbols, thereby to make them pass for their own.

6. 6. Inclination to Idolatry.
Another fountain of their Philomythick Philosophy was the natural propension,
and inclination of their hearts to Idolatry. Hence sprang the Grecian
Polytheism, Hellenism, and much of their vain Philosophy, for their
imaginations being vain, and their foolish hearts darkened by Idolatrous
opinions, and persuasions; hence they convert all those imperfect Traditions,
they had received, touching the true God, Romans 1.
and his Works, into fabulous narrations, which they appropiate unto their
false Gods, etc.

7. 7. Carnal policy to avoid the peoples envy and hatred.
We might also mention the Carnal Policy of the first Greek Philosophers, as
another spring of their Mythologie. For seeing the people too much resolved to
maintain these fabulous Gods, the Poets had commended to them, they conceived
it their wisest course, to darken those traditions, they had received touching
the true God, his Unity, Nature, and Works, by Fables, Symbols, and Allegories;
thereby to avoid the envy, and hatred of the people. And thus much indeed Plato
seems ingenuously to confess: for, says he, to assert many Gods is without
show of reason. Only we embrace them being impelled thereto, though without
shadow of reason, by the Authority of our Fathers, and the severity, of Laws,
etc. Plato Timaeo. A general conclusion that all Philosophy, even Aristotle's,
as to us matter, was traduced from the Jewish Church.
It seems he had not so much courage as his Master Socrates, who
notwithstanding these Obstacles declared himself plainly enough in the case.

. 14. By all that has been mentioned touching the Matter, Form, and Causes of
Mythologick, or Symbolick Philosophy, I conceive we have given (so far as our
Matter will bear it) a sufficient demonstration of its traduction originally
from the Jewish Church, and Scripture Revelation: And what has been affirmed of
Mythologick Philosophy, and its Causes in particular, may also be applied to
all the Grecian Philosophy in general; which, as it is evident, had the same
Causes; namely Ignorance, Admiration, Imitation, Curiosity, Pride, etc.
Moreover it i^ evident that all the first Philosophers, Thales, Pherecides,
Pythagoras, Socrates, and Plato, did more or less exercise themselves in this
Mythologick, Symbolick mode of philosophizing. Aristotle was the first, who
rejected this fabulous Symbolick manner of philosophizing, and clothed
Philosophy in a more native, and simple dress, the materials of whose
Philosophy were notwithstanding taken up from Plato his Master, and the more
ancient Symbolick Philosophers. So that what has been said of Symbolick
Philosophy will serve also to demonstrate that Aristotle's more simple
Philosophy, as to the Matter of it, was derived originally from the Jewish
Church.

CHAP. III. Of the Ionick Philosophy by Thales, and its Jewish Original.
Of the first distinction of Philosophers, into the Ionick, and Italick Sects.
Both the Ionicks, and Italicks derived their Philosophy by Tradition,
immediately from the Egyptians, and Phenicians; but originally from the Jews.
Thales of Phenician extract, the first that brought Philosophy into Greece:
his Philosophy traduced originally from the Jews. His Natural Philosophy
plain. His great Principle, that Water is the first Matter of the Universe,
derived immediately from Sanchoniathon his (...) and (...), which descended
originally from Genesis 1.2. His other principles of Physiologie, viz. touching
the Worlds production by God, by its Beauty; and the precedence of the Night
before the Day from Genesis 1.5. Thales's Astronomy; his Invention of the
Cynosure from the Phenicians; his Calculation of the Year from the Egyptians:
his Geometry, and Arithmetic. Thales's Divine Philosophy, or Natural
Theology from the Jews. His Demons thence also. His Scholars, and Successors,
etc. Anaximander, Anaximenes, Anaxagoras, Empedocles, Heraclitus, Democritus,
Hippocrates.

. 1. HAving discoursed at large of Philosophy in general, The chief heads of
the Ionick and Italick Philosophy from Egyptians, Phenicians and Jews.
especially of Symbolick, and its Traduction from the Jewish Church, and
Scriptures, we now proceed to the several Sects of Greek Philosophers, and
therein to demonstrate, that the chief Heads (at least) of each Sect, traduced
their philosophic notions, and contemplations from some Scriptural, or Jewish
Tradition. As for the several Sects of Grecian Philosophers; there were at
first but few, but in after times they grew very numerous. Varro in August. de
Civit. Dei l. 19. c. 1. tells us, that in his time, there were found in the
Books of Philosophers, no less than 288. different opinions (which made so
many different Sects) concerning the chiefest Good. For that Doctrine was, at
that time, the touchstone, whereby the different Sects of Philosophers were
distinguished. Themistius acquaints us, that there came under his examen, near
300 several Sects. The first, and most Ancient Division of the Greek
Philosophers was into the Ionick, and Italick Sects: Succedunt Ionici illi, qui
primi sectae nomen dedere. Nam alias certum est nullibi antiquiores Philosophos
quam in Ionia suisse. Horaius Hist. Philos. l. 3. c. 12.
as for the Eleaticks (which Vossius adds as a third Sect) they were but a
branch of the Italicks. Now touching the chief Heads, and first Founders of
these two Sects, we have this good general Account in Carion's Chronicon l. 2.
of the Studies of Learning in Greece. The first Doctors, says he, in Greece
were the Poets. Thence other Doctors sprang up, who embraced all Arts:
Arithmetic, Geometry, Astronomy, Physics, and Medicine. Part of these
Sciences the ancient Jones (as it is likely) received from their Parents,
Japhet, and Javan. But yet as for Arithmetic, Geometry, Astronomy, and
Medicine, the Egyptians, and Phenicians were more skilled herein. By
conversation with whom Thales, and Pythagoras being instructed (about the time
of Craesus and Cyrus) by the example of their Ancestors raised up the Study of
these Sciences in Europe; and taught them familiarly in the Schools of their
Disciples. From these two then arose two Kinds of Philosophy: Of this first
division of the Greek Philosophers into the Ionick and Italick Sects, see
August. de civit. Dei lib. 8 cap. 2. with Lud. Vives thereon.
the Ionick from Thales, which was less obscure, and mostly Natural The
Italick from Pythagoras, which was more obscure, and full of Enigmes, etc. And
that these two Founders of the Ionick, and Italick Sects received the first
Principles of their Philosophy by tradition, rather than from any natural
improvement, or Theories of their own, we have a good Demonstrative account in
Stillingfleet Orig. Sacrae Book 3. Chap 2. Sect. 2. which is worth our
transcribing. It is a matter of some inquiry (says he) whether the first
principles of Philosophy amongst the Greeks, were not rather some traditional
things conveyed to them from others, than any certain Theories, which they
had formed from their own Experiments, and Observations. The former is to me
far the more probable, on many accounts, but chiefly on this; that the first
principles of the two Founders of the two chief Sects of Philosophers, viz. the
Ionick, and Italick, did come so near to that, which we have the greatest
reason to believe to have been the most certain account of the Origin of the
World. For this opinion of Thales, viz. that Water was the first Matter, seems
to have been part of that universal Tradition which was continued in the World,
concerning the first Principles. This I suppose is evident; that those
Philosophers of Greece, who conversed most abroad in the world, did speak far
more agreeably to the true account of things, than such, who only endeavored by
their own Wits to improve, or correct those principles which were delivered by
their other Philosophers. Which I impute not so much to their converse with the
Mosaic Writings, as to that universal Tradition of the first Ages of the
World, which was preserved far better amongst the Phenicians, Egyptians, and
Chaldeans, than among the Greeks. For Greece from its beginning shined with a
borrowed Light, etc. Thus Stillingfleet. Wherein he fully grants, and proves,
that the first principles of the Ionick, and Italick Philosophy were received
by Tradition: only he seems to dissent from such, who derive their Tradition
from Moses's Writings, or the Jewish Church; rather inclining to believe, that
the Tradition was universal from Noah's Sons, etc. which, if we grant, will not
overthrow our Hypothesis, that the Grecian Philosophy descended by tradition
from the Church (for Noah's family was the Church) of God. Yet I conceive (with
submission) that (as it has been already proved) the Egyptians, and Phenicians
(if not the Chaldeans) received their traditions of the Creation, etc, not from
their Ancestors, Cham, and his Posterity; but from Moses's Writings, and the
Jewish Church: and I think we shall hereafter give most probable (if not
certain) conjectures, that the chief principles of Thales, and Pythagoras their
Philosophy were traduced from the Writings of Moses, or the Jewish Church. Yea
Mr. Stillingfleet himself, in what follows in this same Section 3. gives us
this ingenuous Concession. I will not deny but that Pythagoras might have had
converse with the Jews, who it is most probable was in Chaldea after the
Captivity, etc.

. 2. Of Thales his extract from Phaenicia. Multi tamea Thalem non Milesium, sed
I hoenicem fuisse putant, t^s^e Eusebius. lib. 10. P^aep. cap. 2. Hornius Histor.
Philos. l. 3. c. 12.
But to begin with Thales the Head of the Ionick Philosophy who was born at
Miletus, the chief City of Ionia in the 31 Olymp. as Laertius informs us out
of Apollodorus: yet others make him to be not a Milesian, but Phenician by
birth. Pliny l. 2. says, that he lived in the time of Alyattis; and Cicero
lib. 1. de Divin. tells us, that he lived under Astyages: both of which
Relations agree; in as much as these two Kings waged war, each against other:
as V^ssius de Philosoph. Sectis l. 2. c. 5. Hyginus, in his Poetico
Astronomico, treating of the lesser Bear, speaks thus: Thales, who made
diligent search into these things, and first called this [lesser Bear.] Arctos,
was by nation a Phenician, as Herodotus says. Which well agrees with these
words of Herodotus Halicarnassensis (...)^ This was the opinion of Thales the
Mil^sia^, by his Ancestors a Phenician: i. e. he was born at Miletus, but his
Ancestors were Phenicians. So Vossius de Hist. Graec. l. 3. That Thales was of
a Phenician extract, is also affirmed by Diogenes Laertius, and Suidas. So in
like manner Vossius de Philosoph. Sect. lib. 2. cap. 1. 28. Thales also, says
he, who founded the Ionick Philosophy, drew his original from the Phenicians:
Whether he traveled from Phenicia to Miletus, with his Father N^leus, and
there was made a Citizen, as according to Laertius, some would have it; or that
he were born at Miletus, but of Phenician Parentage, as others rather incline.
By which it is evident, that he was of a Phenician Extract; Thales quoque
sapien^iae amore sa^cius, in orientem abiit, ibique Aegyptiis sacerdotibus
familiariter adhaesit. Laert. lib. 1.
whence he had no small advantages fully to inform himself in the Phenician,
and Jewish Philosophy. Some say that Thales traveled into Phanicia, and
brought thence his Knowledge of Astronomy, particularly his observations of
the Cynosura, or the lesser Bear, as Pliny lib. 5. c. 17. That Thales
traveled into Asia, and Egypt, to inform himself in the Oriental Wisdom, he
himself affirms in his Epistle to Pherecydes.

. 3. Thales his Wisdom and Philosophy.
That the Grecian Philosophy owes its original to Thales is generally
confessed. For he, traveling into the Oriental parts, first brought into
Greece Natural Philosophy, and the Mathematics, Geometry, Arithmetic,
Astronomy, and Astrology. Whereupon he had that swelling Title of (...) i. e.
wise man, conferred on him. The seven wise men, and their Philosophy.
About which time the same title was bestowed on six others, for their more
than ordinary Skill in Moral Philosophy, and Politics, viz. on Chilo Chilo
the Lacedaemonian, Pittacus the Mitylenian, Bias the Prienean^ Cleobulus the
Lindian, Periander the Corinthian, and Solon the Athenian; who with Thales made
up the seven wise men of Greece, of whom see Diogenes Laertius. The Wisdom of
these (...), was for the most part Moral, tending to the Government of Human
Conversation, which they wrapped up in certain short Aphorisms, or Sentences,
as it appears out of Quintil. l. 5. c. 11. The Precepts of those seven men, may
we not esteem them as certain Rules of Life? For the Art of Disputing obtained
not as yet: but couching their Placits, under a few round words, they commended
them as so many Religious Mysteries. Which at first began to be called (...),
because they contained the Sentences of Wise Men touching the Precepts of Life,
and Manners. The like Eusebius. 10. praepar. cap. 2. These Sentences, that they
might have the greater Authority, and seem to be derived from God, rather than
from men, were ascribed to no certain Author. Whence that famous Sentence
(...), was attributed by some to Chilo, Lud. Vives, in Aug. Civ. Dei l. 8. c.
2. says, that Thales was the first in Greece, that began to philosophize of
things natural, being born Olympiade 35. as Laertius.
by others to Thales. Concerning Thales, Apuleius 18. Flor. gives this
honorable Character. Thales the Milesian, of those seven wise men mentioned,
will easily be granted to have the preeminence. For he was the first Inventor
of Geometry amongst the Greeks, and the most certain finder out of the nature
of things, and the most skilful Contemplator of the Stars; by small lines he
found out the greatest things, the Circumferences of Times, the Flatus, or
blowings of winds, the Meatus or small passages of the Stars, the miraculous
Sounds of Thunders, the oblique Courses of the Stars, the Annual Returns, or
Solstices of the Sun, the Increases of the New Moon, as the Decreases of the
Old, and the Obstacles which cause the Eclipse. He truly, in his old Age,
found a Divine account of the Sun; how often ( i. e. by how many degrees) the
Sun, by its magnitude, did measure the Circle it passed thorough: thus
Apulcius: see more in August. de Civ. Dei l. 8. c. 2 and Lud. Vives.

Thales's Natural Philosophy from the Phenicians immediately, but originally
from the Scripture relation of the Creation.
. 4. Now to come to the particulars of Thales's Philosophy, thereby to
demonstrate, that the main thereof was traduced immediately from the Phenicians,
and Egyptians, but originally from the Jewish Church. The chief of Thales's
Philosophy was Natural (which the Greeks called Physic) and that not obscure
(as Aristotle's) but plain, and familar. Hence Thales's Followers in the Ionick
Schole were in a peculiar manner styled (...) Naturalists, because quitting the
mode of philosophizing in use among the other Wise Men, which was chiefly
Ethick; as also that in the Italick Sch^le which was Theologick, they wholly
busied themselves in the Contemplation of things sensible and natural. In
brief; Thales his Natural Philosophy was indeed no other than a Natural
History of the Origin of the Universe, or (as Divines phrase it) of the
Creation of the World, which, as we have sufficient reason to judge, he
received from the Phenician Sophists, Sanchoniathon, and Mochus, their
Physiologie, which originally was derived from Moses's Writings, and the Jewish
Church. And to make the Demonstration hereof firm, we must consider that in
Thales's time, when Philosophy began to take place in Greece, the main (...),
or first great principle of Natural Philosophy, then in question, was touching
the first matter of the Universe. For that the World had a beginning; and that
this beginning was from God, all the Philosophers, till Aristotle, generally
asserted. So that this being a (...), or a thing taken for granted; Thales's
great prinicple, that Water was the first matter of all things, immediately
from Sanchoniathon's Philosophy, but originally from, Genesis 1.2.
the great Inquiry was, about the first matter, out of which the World was
formed. Concerning which Thales delivers his Judgment, that Water was the
first Matter of all things. So Tullie de not. Deorum lib. 1. c. 25. says that
Thales affirmed Water to be the Beginning of things, and that God out of Water
framed all things. So Diogenes Laertius of Thales. Thus Steuch. Eugub. de
peren. Philos. l. 7. c. 12. Thence Thales the Milesian, according to the
Theology of Orpheus, and the Egyptians, pronounced, that Water was the
principle of all things. And according to the affirmation of Homer, this
opinion was delivered by other Grecians before Thales. Pherecydes also held the
same opinion, that Water was the first Matter of the World, which, as it is most
p^bable, was traduced immediately from Sanchoniathon's Physiologie; for in the
beginning of his Natural History (cited by Eusebius praepar. Evang. l. 10) he
says there was in the beginning of things a spirit of dark Air, which he calls
(...) an evening chaos, or darkness. And that Thales's (...), Water, Thales's
(...) the same with Sanchoniathon's (...).
was the same with Sanchoniathon's Chaos, we have the Testimony of Plutarch,
who produces the Authority of Hesiod touching his Chaos; and adds, that the
greater part of ancient Philosophers called water chaos, from diffusion (a
(...) sundo) which will farther appear, if we compare it with what follows in
Sanchoniathon: (...) and (...) i. e. slime, or a mixture of mud and water, the
same with Thales's water,
From the conversion of the Spirit with the chaos, there resulted (...), which
they call (...). This (...), (according to the Phenicians (...)) signifies
matter, which he interprets by (...) mud, or slime, or watery mistion, which
indeed was but the effect, or grosser part of that Water, which Thales makes to
be the material principle of all natural bodies. So Orpheus, speaking of the
first matter of the Universe says, (...) out of water slime was made. Which is
a full explication of what Thales understood by his (...), water; and the same
with Sanchoniathon's (...), or (...), i e. slime, or mixture of mud, and water.
And we have a good explication of the whole by the Scholiast, on these words of
Apollonius: (...) The Earth of slime was made; where the Scholiast affirms
that the Chaos, whereof all things were made, was Water, which settling became
Slime, and the Slime condensed into solid Earth. Thus we see how that Thales's
Water, which he makes the first material principle of all things, was indeed
the same with, or immediately derived from, Sanchoniathon's (...), and (...) i.
e. slime, or mixture of water and mud together, from which the (...) of Plato,
and Pythagoras, seems little to differ. Now that Sanch^niathon, and Thales, who
followed him, traduced these their sentiments of the first matter out of
Moses's History Genesis 1.2. That Sanchoniathon and Thales received these their
principles not by universal Tradition but originally from Genesis 1.2.
we have already demonstrated (Book 1. Chapter 3.. 13, 14, 15.) out of Learned
Bochart, and others. But because Learned Stillingfleet (as before. 1.) inclines
rather to believe, that these first Philosophers received these their
principles by universal Tradition from the first Ages, and not from the Jews,
or Mosaik Writings. I shall add farther. 1. The Confession of Sanchoniathon,
who said, that he received the materials of his Hist^rie, from Jerombalus the
Priest of the God Jao: who certainly was some Jewish Priest (as before Book 1.
Chapter 3.. 8.) 2. Sanchoniathon makes mention of Sydic, etc. which, without doubt,
he received from the Jews. 3. Numenius an ancient Philosopher cites for this
opinion of Thales, that water was the first matter, the very words of Moses
Genesis 1.2. The Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters; as Porphyrie de
Antro Nymph. Of which see Stanley on Thales. 4. That Thales received these
Traditions of the Creation from Moses's Writings is affirmed, and demonstrated
by Steuchus Eugubinus. de peren. Philosoph. l. 7. c. 12. where he shows how
Thales subcribed to Moses, in his notions of the Worlds Creation, as in what
follows,. 5. 5. Yea Stillingfleet himself, in the following Section ( Orig.
Sacr. Book 3. Chap. 2. Sect. 3.) has these very words: And thus we see, these 2
renowned Founders of the Ionick, and Italick Societies, both giving their
concurring testimony with Moses, as to the true Origin of the World, and not
at all differing from each other. Thales meant by his Water, the same with that
(...), or mixture of mud, and water, which Orpheus, etc. speak of, as the
principle of the Universe. And the Successors of Thales, Anaximander, and
Anaxagoras express themselves to that purpose, which is the same with the
Phenician (...), which some call (...), some mud, or slime, which they say was
(...). Thus we see, how Thales with the Phenicians, from whom he was derived
(as Laertius tells us) and Pythagoras with the Egyptians, and others concur with
Moses, not only in the Production of the World, but in the manner of it,
wherein is expressed a fluid matter, which was the material principle, as Genesis
1.2. upon the face of the waters: that is, all at first was but fluid matter,
etc. Thus Stillingfleet, which, I conceive, fully proves our Assertion; and
overthrows his foregoing Hypothesis. That Thales, etc. received not these
traditions from Moses's Writings, or the Jewish Church originally. 6. Vossius
de Philos. Sect. l. 2. c. 5.. 3. seems to refer this principle of Thales, that
water was the original of all things, to the words of Moses Genesis 1.2. upon the
face of the waters, which, says he, perhaps he learned from the Egyptians, and
they from the Jews: even so plainly asserting our conclusion: Yet I should
think it most probable, that Thales had it from the Phenicians, and they from
the Jews. 7. Lastly, Mariana in his Annotations on Genesis 1.1. assures us; that
from this place the Ancient Poets derived their chaos, and other like things.

5. Other principles of Phisiologie asserted by Thales.
Thales held also many other philosophic opinions touching the Worlds Origin,
and perfection, which seem to be but traditions originally taken from Moses's
History. 1. He held there was but one world, and that made by God the spirit,
out of the foresaid Water. The origin of the world by Gods spirit Genesis 1.2.
So Montaigne Essay l. 2. c. 12. Thales, qui le premier s'enquesta de tell
Matiere estima Dieu un esprit, qui sit d' ^au toutes chooses. This great
Fundamental Principle, that the world was made by God, was generally received,
and asserted by all the Philosophers before Aristotle, who was the first that
opposed it, because seemingly contradictory to his Phenomenon, or purblind
principles, as we are told by Plutarch de philosplacit. 2.1. and Johan. Gram.
de Creat. Mundi. 2. The beauty and perfection of all things. Genesis 1.13.
Thales held (as Diogen. Laert.) (...) That the world being God's workmanship,
was exceeding beautiful, or good, and perfect; as Genesis 1.31. This beauty or
perfection of the world, he made to consist in the admirable disposition, and
harmony, or order of every part, wherein he was followed by Pythagoras, who for
this reason called the world (...); and Plato, who says, that God (...), etc.
beautified, and orderly disposed every part of this Universe, with great
symetry, and proportion answerable to his own eternal Idea, or form, as in his
Timaeus, of which hereafter. That Thales received this contemplation from
Moses, is affirmed by Steuch. Eugub. De Peren. Philosophia l. 7. c. 2. To which
it is to be referred, that according to Laertius the same Thales pronounces:
(...), The world is most beautiful because the workmanship of God. Do not
thou think that he subscribeth to the Mosaic Theology? Moses says, In the
beginning God created. Graec. (...), made: which Thales expresses by the
substantive (...), designing thereby the same which Moses does by (...). 3.
Thence Thales asserted the world was Animate, or a Living Creature: which also
Plato held, calling the World (...) from Moses's words Genesis 1.2. supposing this
world to be animate, or vivified by the Spirit, or Providence of God called
(...). 4. Thales said, the night was elder than the day, according to the
Scripture Phrasiologie Genesis 1.5. Genesis 1.5.
Thus Steuch. Eugubinus, de peren. Phil. l. 7. c. 12. Thales being asked,
(...), what first existed night or day? The night, says he, was before any one
day. Thou may not judge that he conceived any thing else hereby, than what
Moses before delivered, and what the Latin Poet heard, from the same Grecians:
but Thales, who, according to Laertius, went to the Egyptian Priests, to be
instructed by them, had this passage from them. This circumstance of the
Creation was held also by Orpheus, and Hesiod, who (as Stanley affirms on
Thales) had it from the Phenicians: I suppose from Sanchoniathon's (...), which
in all likelihood was traduced from the Hebrew (...) Genesis 1.5. as Bochart Can.
l. 2 c. 2.

Thales's Matheticks.

1. Astronomy.


. 6. Thales was in like manner well instructed in the Mathematics, especially
in Astronomy, which he is supposed to have gained, partly from the Phenicians,
and partly from the Egyptians: From the Phenicians he received, as it is said,
the Invention of the Cynos^ra, or the Constellation of the lesser Bear, which
he first brought into Greece. For that the Phenicians were the first Inventors,
or observers of this Constellation, Vossius endeavors to make good, from the
word Cynosura, which he makes to be Phenician from (...) a collection of light,
that they were the first, that found out the use of this Constellation, to
sail by (which has been ever since of great advantage to Mariners in their
Navigations) I think, is generally granted. Yet it cannot be denied, but that
Thales received much emprovement, in his Astronomical Contemplations, from the
Egyptians. For he himself in his Epistle to Pherecydes confesses, that he
traveled into Egypt to confer with the Astronomers. This Journey of his into
Egypt is supposed to be the last he made; where having studied Philosophy, he
returned to Miletus. That Thales was the first that brought Astronomy into
Greece, we have the affirmation of Eudemus to confirm us. Laertius tells us,
Laertius l. 1.
that Thales was the first amongst the Grecians, who found out the calculation,
or distinction of the year into its seasons, calling the last day of every
month (...), the 30th day, which we have good ground to persuade our selves,
he learned in Egypt; for there it was first in use, according to Herodotus lib.
2. The Egyptians, says he, were the first, that found out the year,
distinguishing it into 12 months, this they gathered from the Stars. But I
think we have more probable conjectures, that the Egyptians received their
distinction of the seasons of the Year, from the Jewish Church their
Institutes, touching the Calculation of the Year, which I conceive were more
ancient, than those of the Egyptians. Thales's Geometry from Egypt, and his
Arithmetic from Phenicia.
Thales also brought out of Egypt the Science of Geometry, which took its
beginning there, from the constant occasions the yearly overflowing of Nile
gave them of renewing the bounds of their Fields: Proclus on Euclia. 2.4. As in
like manner he brought his skill in Arithmetic out of Phoenicia, which was
found out there, in order to their Traffic.

. 7. Thales also was the first of the Grecians, who made any Philosophic
Inquiries into the Nature, and Perfection of God. Thales the first of the
Grecians, that philosophized of God, his nature, etc.
It Is true Orpheus, Homer, Linus, and Hesiod had gotten from Egypt, and
Phaenicia, some cloudy, and very obscure traditions of God, which they made
much more dark, by the many fabulous, and unworthy narrations, they mixed with
them. But Thales delivered those traditions, he had received in the Oriental
parts, touching God, in a more Philosophic, naked, and simple mode. For as
Diogenes Laertius informs us, he held (...)^ That God was the most ancient of
beings, because without generation. 2. That the World was (...). The Work of
God. 3. He asserted that God by his immutable Decree, and Providence governes
the World (as Stobaeus) whence his opinion that the World was animated, i. e.
by the Spirit, or Providence of God acting therein; as Genesis 1.2. The Spirit,
etc. 4. Thales also (as Pythagoras, and Plato after him) held the Doctrine of
Demons (mentioned Psalm. 106.24. 1 Timothy 4.1.) which he asserted to be Spiritual
Natures, or Substances, and a kind of midling made Gods, betwixt the immortal
Gods, and mortal men: which traditions, some conceive, he had from Egypt: for
that the Egyptians held these Demons in the same manner, Iamblichus de myster.
Egypt. acquaints us. So Mr. Bochart, in a Sermon at Caen, affirmed, that
Joseph was reputed the first of these Egyptian Demons. But I should rather
think, that Thales had his Traditions of these Demons, from Phaenicia, where
they mostly abounded, under the common name of Baalim, from (...) Belus one of
the first Phaenician Kings, whence Jesabel, etc. and that the Phaenicians had
their Baalim from some broken tradition, and in imitation, of the Jewish
Messiah his Mediatorship, etc. as elsewhere. That Thales the first of all the
Grecian Philosophers, was of all the first, that treated Philosophically of
God, and heavenly things, we are assured by Tully; and so Minucius in Octavio
says, that Thales the Milesian was the first of all, that disputed of heavenly
things. Which Philosophic Traditions, we need no way doubt, came (though
immediately from the Egyptians, and Phenicians, yet) originally from the Jewish
Church.

Iamblichus de Vita Pythag. c. 12.
. 8 Amongst the Disciples of Thales, we may reckon firstly Pythagoras, the
Institutor of the Italick Sect, who, being but 18 years old, addressed himself
to Thales, at Miletus, from whom he received the first Rudiments of his
Philosophy, especially his Mathematics; with instructions to address himself
to Egypt, Of the Scholars and Successors of Thales, see more August. de civit.
Dei lib. 8. cap. 2. with Lud. Vives thereon.
for farther progress therein. But he that suceeded Thales in his Schole, was
Anaximander the Milesian, who in some things differed from his Master. For he
held an Infinity of first principles, yea of worlds, and Gods born, etc. as
Laertius in his Life, Plutarch de philos. placitis, Eusebius, etc. The
Successor to Anaximander was Anaximenes the Milesian, who dyed the same year
that Croesus was taken captive by Cyrus, as Laertius. Anaxagoras the
Clazomenian succeeded Anaximenes, whom Justin Martyr calls the Atheist,
following herein the Judgment of his adversaries, Cleon, etc. who thought him
so, because he denied the multiplicitie of their Gods. This Anaxagoras
translated the Schole from Asia to Athens; Vossius de Sect. Philos. l. 2. c. 5.
Sect. 6.
where he taught Socrates, Euripides, and Pericles: his Successor was Archelaus
the Athenian: as Vossius.

. 9 Among those of the Ionick Sect, Chrysyppus, Empedocles, Danaeus ad
enchirid. Laurent Hora. Hist. phil. l. 3. c. 12. Empedocles.
Heraclitus, Democritus, Protagoras, Polemon, Epaminondas, Hippocrates, are by
some reckoned. Empedocles was a person of a sharp Ingenie, but mighty greedy of
fame; for he affected not only Adoration while living, but after death also:
wherefore, that he might be thought to have his abode among the Gods, he cast
himself into the furnace of Etna. Heraclitus was of a great A^umen, Heraclitus.
but cloudy; Heraclitus sententiarum sua^^ nuhilus. Apul. de Mundo.
whence he is styled (...): He seems to have borrowed many things from the
Jews, as elsewhere. Democritus glories in this, that he learned many things
from the Barbarians, (by whom, Babylonem, etiam and Persas, and Egyptum, ut
disceret, pet^it Democritus. Hor. Hist. phil. l. 3. c. 12.
as we have often hinted, we are principally, if not only, to understand the
Jews) as Eusebius. praep. l. 10 c. 2. Out of Democritus's Schole proceeded
Protagoras, who turned ad (...), as also to make Sale of Philosophy for money,
which was of ill fame among the Ancients. Epaminondas, Epaminondas.
the Th^ban, is by Austin lib. 7. de civ. Dei, called the chief Philosopher,
and Emperor. But none gained a greater name among the Ionicks after Thales,
than Hippocrates; Hippocrates.
a person of a stupendous Acumen, Hippocrates non tantum omnia priscorum
Philosophorum ad unguem tenuit, sed and om^ium judicem egit, primus hic ipsis
Aegyptiis palmam praeripuit: qui medicinam cum philosophia ita junxit, ut
dubium sit, maiorne Philosophus, an Medicus suit. Certe cius placitis summa
semper autoritas, and quasi sacra fuit. Hornius Histor. philoso, h. lib. 3.
cap. 12.
and erudition. He it was, that first made that happy conjunction 'twixt
Philosophy, and Medicine. The manner how he attained unto his Medicinal
Science, they make to be this. There was in the Island of Cous, where he lived,
the Temple of Aesculapius, wherein were laid up the Cures of Diseases engraven
on tables; as also rare Monuments of Wisdom collected by former Ages: all these
Hippocrates transcribed, examined, and perfected, so that the praise not only
of the Restitution, but also of the Invention of Medicine is given to him.
Although these all are by some reckoned Ionicks, yet some of them may be
reduced to more particular Sects: as hereafter.

CHAP. IV. Pherecydes his Philosophy traduced from the Jews.
Pherecydes born at Syrus, was of Phenician original. The original of his
Philosophy from the Phenicians, and Jews. He was the first that writ
Philosophy in Prose: He yet retained the old Symbolick mod of Philosophizing:
His Natural Philosophy, and Astronomy: His Invention of the Heliotrope from
the Phenicians. His Theology was chiefly (...), which he received from the
Phenicians, as also the immortality of the Soul.

Pherecydes his original from Syrus.
. 1. HAving dispatched the Ionick Philosophy, as founded by Thales, we now come
to the first foundations of the Italick, began by Pherecydes; who, though he
had not a Schole in Italy, yet in as much as he was the Praeceptor of
Pythagoras, and led him the way to that Symbolick mode of Philosophizing, he
afterward taught in Italy; he may justly claim some commemoration amongst the
first founders of the Italick Sect. So Vossius de philosoph. sect. l. 2. c. 1..
29. calls Pherecydes the Author of the Italick Sect. This Pherecydes is by
Strabo lib. 10. called (...) (so Laertius, and Suidas) a Syrian, which is
differently understood by the Learned. For some make him to be a Syrian, i. e.
a Phenician: but others, and that upon more probable grounds, call him a Syrian
because born in the Island Syros, or Syrus, one of the Cyclades, those lesser
Islands in the Egean Sea, near Delus. So Apuleius, and Suidas; whence Cicero 1.
Tuscul. Quaest. calls him Syrus. This opinion I was confirmed in, by a
conference with learned Bochart; who also gave me the ground of the difference;
with this reconcilement, viz. Syra, or Syrus, where Pherecydes was borne,
received both its name, and people originally from the Phenicians, or Syrians
(Phenicia being a part of Syria) whence Pherecydes might justly be reputed a
Phenician, if we regard his Ancestors; or perhaps he might be so esteemed by
reason of his Philosophy, which he drew from the hidden Books of the
Phenicians, as Suidas: of which hereafter.

. 2 Pherecydes's fathers name was Badys, Pherecydes his father Babys, his
birth, etc.
as Diogenes Laertius l. 1. (...), or rather as Vossius will have it Babys: for
so Strabo, and Suidas write it, (...), or (...) with a (...). He was borne,
according to Suidas, in the 46th Olympiad, who also distinguishes him from
Pherecydes Lerius the Historian, who lived in the 75th Olympiad. So Vossius de
Histor. Graec. lib. 4. cap. 4. Some, says he, confound Pherecydes the
Historian, with Pherecydes the Physiologist, and Theologue: This latter was of
Syrus, one of the Cyclades, as Strabo lib. 2. Hesychius, and Suidas in (...).
Laertius makes this our Pherecydes, the Philosopher, to have flourished about
the 69th Olympiad. Others make him more ancient. Tzetzes, Chil. 2. Hist. 55.
says, that he lived in the time of the Rich Croesus, about the 59th Olympiad,
and that he was Praeceptor to Thales the Milesian. But this account has no
likelihood; for Thales seems, at least, contemporary to, if not more ancient
than Ph^recydes. Cicero 1. Tusc. quaest. says, he lived in the Reign of
Servius Tullius his Country man, etc. That Thales was more ancient than
Pherecydes, Vossius de philosoph. sect. l. 2. c. 6.. 1. proves from this, that
Thales, according to Laertius, dyed in Olympiad 58, whereas Pherecydes
flourished in Olympiad 60.

. 3. As for the original of Pherecydes's Philosophy, The original of
Pherecydes's Philosophy from the Phenicians, and Jews.
some say he heard Pittacus, so Laertius: others, that he had no Praeceptor,
but drew his Philosophy from the secret Books, and hidden Mysteries of the
Phenicians: so Suidas in the Life of Pherecydes, (...). The same goes, that he
was Praeceptor of Pythagoras, but he himself had no Instructor; but that he
exercised himself in the hidden Books of the Phenicians, which he was possessor
of. Thus Vossius de philosoph. sect. l. 2. c. 1.. 19. Pherecydes also the
Praeceptor of Pythagoras, who was contemporary to Thales, and the Author of the
Italick Sect, drew his Philosophy from the hidden Books of the Phenicians. Yea
some think him to be a Syrian, not from Syrus, one of the Cyclades, but from
Syria, a famous Country of Asia, whereof Phenicia is part. Yea Ambrose lib. 1.
Epist. 6. of Pherecydes speaks thus: seeing he drew his pedigree, as some
conceive, from the Jews, from their Discipline also he derived his Magisterial
Precepts. That he traduced his invention of the Heliotrope, and other parts of
his Philosophy, from the Phenicians will be hereafter evident.

Pherecydes the first that writ Philosophy in Prose.
. 4. Touching the mode or form of his Philosophy, it was delivered in Prose,
but symbolick, and mystical. That Pherecydes was the first that delivered his
Philosophy in Prose, we have co^curring Testimonies from the Ancients, Strabo
lib. 1. tells us that Cadmus, Pherecydes, and Hecataeus were the first that writ
in loose Oration, or Prose: and so Porphyrie, as Suidas testifies, made this
Pherecydes (...) the Author of loose Oration, The like Apuleius in Floridis;
Moreover, says he, Pherecydes, who sprang from the Island Syrus, was the first,
who rejected Verses, and attempted to write in words at large, loose Discourse,
and free Oration. The like Theopompus, Laertius, and Suidas affirm, that
Pherecydes was the first that treated of the Gods, and the Natures of things in
Prose, for the former Philosophers were Ports, etc.

His Philosophy Mythologick.
. 5. Notwithstanding Pherecydes rejected the ancient mode of delivering his
Philosophy in Poems, yet he still retained the old Mythologick, and Symbolick
mode of the Poets, in mixing many Fables with his Philosophy. So he himself
confesses in his Epistle to Thales, thus: Whatsoever the Theologist (speaking
of himself) says, you must understand otherwise; for I write in Fables. And
this is sufficiently evident from the Matter of Theology (which contained the
most of his Philosophy, and was written in 10 books) which, says Dr. Owen (in
his Theol. l. 1. c. 1.) was (...), or (...), symbolick, and cryptick, or
enigmatick (wherein he was followed by the Pythagoreans) whence he was styled
(...) the dark cloudy Divine, as anon.

Pherecydes's Natural Philosophy.
. 6. Pherecydes, as to Natural Philosophy, differed in some things from
Thales; yet he agreed with him in that great, and first principle, that Water
was the first Matter all things; which they both received from the Phenicians,
as these had it from Genesis 1.2. by some Jewish Tradition. His Astronomy, and
invention of the Heliotrope.
Pherecydes was very famous amongst the Ancients for his Astronomical Invention
of the Heliotrope: whereas yet he was not indeed the first Inventor, but only a
great Emprover of it, as great Bochart in a Conference informed me; Mar. 27,
1664.
viz. That this Astronomical Experiment was brought into Syra (or Syrus) where
Pherecydes lived, by the Phenicians, who had a Colony there (of which Homer
makes some mention:) and that Pherecydes only emproved this same invention of
the Heliotrope; the original pattern, as some conceive, was taken from the
Jews, or Asa's Dial. The said Bochart referred me, for more information herein,
unto his Canaan l. 1. c. 14. That Pherecydes was the first of the Grecians,
that found out the Eclipses, and periods of the Moon, Tzetzes Chil. 2. Hist.
55. gives us to understand: as Vossius.

. 7. But the main of Pherecydes's Philosophy was Theologick. Pherecydes's
Theology, or (...) from the Phenicians.
So Laertius out of Theopompus acquaints us, (...) he was the first amongst the
Grecians, who writ of Nature, and of the Gods. Whence he was styled (...), the
Theologist: which Title Pythagoras, and Plato also obtained. For amongst the
Greeks, who ever discoursed accurately of God, was styled the Theologist, and
their Science (...) Theology, as Arist. Metaph 3. Pherecydes is supposed to be
the first, that handled (...) Theologick Mysteries in Prose. This Theology of
his consisted in (...), or a description, and exposition of the Generation, and
Succession of the Gods. For the Grecians, after the introduction of Hellenism,
supposed all their Gods to be generated. This his (...), or Theology,
Pherecydes comprised in 10 books: enigmatick, and cloudy Discourses, full of
Fables, and Allegories; which Isidore, cited by Clemens Alexandrinus, supposed
to have been taken from the Prophecy of Cham: but its much more probable, he
traduced them from Sanchoniathon's Mythologick Theology, touching the Origin,
and Succession of the Gods: for it is the common opinion of Suidas, and others,
that he derived this his Mystical Theology from the abstruse, and dark books
of the Phenicians. Pherecydes, in the beginning of his book, affirms that
Musaeus the son of Eumolpus (...), was the first that made Poems of the
Generation of the Gods, which others ascribe to Orpheus, others to Homer.

. 8. Concerning Pherecydes his Books of (...), Pherecydes's ten books of (...).
etc. there passes an Epistle under his name written to Thales, which
Montaigne Essais livre 2. c. 12. gives thus. Pherecydes one of the Seven Wise
men (that is a mistake) writing to Thales, as he expired; I have, says he,
appointed my friends, after they have enterred me, to bring unto thee my
Writings: if they content thee, and the rest of the Wise men, publish them; if
not, suppress them. They contain not any thing certain, that gives me
satisfaction: so that I profess not to know the truth, nor to have attained to
it. I start many things, that I cannot discover, etc. Though it is likely this
Epistle is as fabulous, as the Matter of his Books; yet we may suppose it to be
Ancient; and so to give us some account, how much unacquainted these fabulous
Mythologists were with the materials of their own traditions. Touching this
mystical Theology of Pherecydes, see more in Diogenes Laertius of his Life,
Ger. Vossius de Hist. Graec. lib. 4. cap. 4. page 443. Edit. 2. Dr. Owen Theol.
lib. 1. c. 1. page 3, etc.

Pli^ opinion of the Souls immortality.
. 9. Though Pherecydes's Philosophic Theology was fabulous, and mystical,
yet, as it is generally conceived, he did clearly, and plainly assert the
Soul's Immortality. So Cicero lib. 1. Tusc. quaest. Pherecydes Sy^us was the
first that asserted the Souls of men to be immortal. Thus Tullie, Pherecydes
Pythagorae praeceptor fuit, multaque ^^tilissima, imprimis animarum (...),
Graecos primus ^do^uit. Hornius Hist. philos. l. 3. c. 12.
which Lactantius lib. 7. cap. 8. quotes. Also Austin Epist. 3. to Volusianus,
thus writes. What Idiot now, what abject woman is there, who believes not the
Immortality of the Soul, and a future Life after Death? which in old times
Pherecydes, first disputed for, amongst the Grecians, and Pythagoras the Samian
being much moved by the novity of this Dispute, was transformed from a Wrestler
into a Philosopher: so Montaigne Essais livr. 2. cap. 12. The opinion of the
Immortality of the Soul, Cicero says, was first introduced by Pherecydes; but
others attribute it to Thales. Who ever were the first traducer of this opinion
into Greece, we have sufficient reason to conclude it was originally traduced
from some Scripture, or Jewish Tradition.

CHAP. V. Of Pythagoras, and the Traduction of his Philosophy from the Jews.
Of the sundry Sects of Philosophers. Testimonies proving, that Pythagoras
traduced his Philosophy from the Jewish Church. The Story of Pythagoras's
Life. His extract from Phenicia. Pythagoras flourished about the 60. Olymp.
when the Jewish Garden was laid open to the Grecians. Pythagoras his Preceptors
in Greece, and how he was first converted from a Pugil, to a Philosopher. His
first travels into Phenicia, and conferences with the Successors of Mochus,
Phenician Priests, and Jews. His travels into Egypt, familiar conversation with
the Priests, as also with the Jews in Egypt: and the motives inclining him
thereto. Pythagoras's travels into Babylon, and converse with their Wise men,
as also with the Jews under Chaldean titles, Zabratus, etc. The advantages he
had for converse with the Jews, and their Writings from his skill in the
Egyptian, and Chaldee Tongues, etc. His Return to Samos, and Voyage to Cre^e.
Pythagoras's coming into Italy, and restoring many Cities to liberty, and
unity by means of his Scholars; by whom he gave Laws to Italy. His Character,
wherein appears his many eminent qualities, Natural, and acquired: his freedom
from undue passions: his moderation in use of Creatures, care for his health,
and husbanding his time: his aweful presence, and Severity, his contempt of
honors, and contentation.

.1. THe first Distribution of Philosophers into the Ionick, and Italick Sects,
has already passed under some general consideration; with endeavors to
demonstrate, that Thales, and Pherecydes, the two Heads of these first Sects,
received the main of their Philosophy by tradition originally from the J^wish
Church. But we now proceed to a more particular reflection, on the Italick Sect,
in regard to its more proper, and immediate Founder Pythagoras, who had his
Schole in Italy (that part which was called Magna Graecia) where he vented his
Phil^sophie, which consisted mostly of Jewish Mysteries, and Traditions, as it
will be evident by what follows. His Adherents were termed Pythagoreans, as
those who followed Plato's Philosophy Platonicks: whence also there sprang up
many other Sects of Philosophers, which gave occasion to a second Distribution
of Philosophers into their several Sects, as we have it excellently laid down
by Ammonius (not he, who was head of the Alexandrian Schole, but the Scholar of
Proclus) on Aristotle's Categories page 9. in these words. The 2. distribution
of Ph^losophers into Sects. 1. Pythagorea^s. 2. Platonicks. 3. Cyrenaicks. 4.
Megaricks. 5. Acad^micks. 6. Sce^ticks. 7. Stoics. 8. Cy^ic^s. 9. Epicurean^.
10. Perip^t^t^cks
(...)^ We must know that the Sects of Philosophers had a seven fold
Denomination; either from the Head of the Sect, as the Platonicks, and
Pythagoreans; or from the Heresiarchs Country, as the Cyrenaicks from
Aristippus, and the Megaricks from Euclid; or from the place, wherein they
taught, as the Academicks from Xenocrates, and the Stoics from Zeno the
Citiean; or from their Judgment in philosophizing, as the Scepticks; or from
their manner of life as the Cynicks, of whom Antisthenes was Head: or from the
End of their Philosophy, as the Voluptuous Epicureans: or from some Accident,
as the Peripateticks, from Aristotle's walking, etc. Thus Ammonius: of which
Sects we shall discourse in their order, beginning with the Pythagoreans.

Pythagoras's Philosophy traduced from the Jews, proved by Testimonies.
. 2. As for Pythagoras (the Heresiarch of the Pythagoreans, as also the chief
Founder of the Italick Sect) that he traduced the main, or choicest parts of
his Philosophy originally from the Jewish Church, and Scriptures, is a
persuasion generally received by the Learned, both ancient, and modern, as well
Pagans, as Jews and Christians. As for Pagan Testimonies, Of Pagans.
we have a famous Concession of Hermippus (quoted by Josephus lib. 1. against
Apion) a most ancient, and diligent Writer of Pythagoras's Life, who, in his
first book of Pythagoras, affirms plainly, that he did (...), translate many
of the Jewish Laws into his own Philosophy: and he gives a particular mention
of some Jewish opinions, which Pythagoras taught, viz. of the Soul, of
Purification, of Excommunication, etc. to which he subjoynes (...), and he was
an Imitator of the Jewish, and Thracian opinions. Diogenes Laertius also
affirms, that he went to the Hebrews, as hereafter. So Strabo, that he went
into Judea, and inhabited Mount Carmel, where the Priests showed Pythagoras's
Walks, even in his time. And Malchus (otherwise called Porphyrie) who writ also
the Life of Pythagoras, says that he went to the Arabians, Hebrews, and
Chaldeans, and that amongst the Chaldeans he had converse with Zabratus: whom
Seldom makes to be Ezekiel, as hereafter. Amongst the Jews we have the
Testimony of Aristobulus, Jews.
Aristobulus Pythagoram ex Mos^s lege multa didicesse non dissitetur. Clemens.
l. 1. Strom. Eusebius. praep. l. 9. c. 3. Joseph. l. 1. contra Apion.
a Jew of Egypt, who is supposed to have been the Master of Ptolemeus
Philometer mentioned in the Maccabees (2 Mac. 1.10.) who says expressly of
Pythagoras (as Clement Alexendrinus lib. 1. (...).) (or as others (...)) (...).
Pythagoras has translated many things from us, into his own Traditional Dogmes.
So also Josephus (contra Apion. l. 1.) speaking of Pythagoras, says, that he
was (...) not only well skilled in our Discipline, but also embraced many
things greedily. Amongst the Fathers, Fathers.
we have this Testimony of Origin (lib. 1. contra Celsum). (...) It Is said,
that Hermippus in the first of his Legislators reports, that Pythagoras
traduced his Philosophy from the Jews unto the Greeks; we have also concurring
Testimonies of Modern Learned. Modern Learned.
Thus Aug. Steuch. Eugub, de peren. phil. l. 2. c. 2. We have the Testimony of
all, that Pythagoras traveled into Egypt to hear their Priests: The like is
said of Solon, Eudoxus, Plato: Strabo writes, that in his time the Priests
could show their very Walks. It is reported, that Pythagoras brought his
Symbols from them, and that he was circumcised after the Egyptian (which we
must understand of the Jewish) manner. That he was in Judea, and that he dwelt
in Mount Carmel, is the report of Iamblichus; also that he traveled 22. years
in Egypt, embraced their manners, and the Institutes of the Egyptian Priests,
and desired Polycrates the Tyrant, that he would write to his friend Amasis
King of Egypt, that he might participate of their Discipline, etc. To Steuchus
Eugub. I subjoin our learned and pious Usher in his Annals fol. 151. It may be
proved (says he) that Pythagoras conversed with the Jews, at Babylon; for as
much as he transferred many of their Doctrines into his Philosophy, as
Hermippus declares in his first book of things concerning Pythagoras, cited by
Josephus, and in his first book of Law givers, cited by Origin; which is
likewise confirmed by Aristobulus the Jew (a Peripatetick) in his first book to
Philometer; who moreover was induced by the same reason to believe, that the
Books of Moses were translated into the Greek Tongue before the Persian Empire;
whereas it is much more probable that Pythagoras received that part of his
Learning from the Conversation he had with the Hebrews, thus Usher. Lud. Vives
in Aug. Civ. l. 8. c. 11.
Lud. Vives that learned Philologist supposes, that Pythagoras might have,
whilst in Egypt, conversation with Jeremy the Prophet: That he traduced many
things originally from Moses his Writings (as Plato after him) he affirms with
some confidence, in his notes on August. Civ. lib. 8. c. 11. Seldom de Jure
Not. Hebr. lib. 1. c. 6.. 5. proves this at large. Cassander in his Consult. on
Art. 21. asserts the same. Grotius on Mat. 10.29. says, that many of the
Hebrews held Gods Providence about men, but not about Beasts; which Pythagoras
may seem to have learned from the Hebrews, and to have taught the Grecians. And
in his Votum, page 124. he says, that Pythagoras lived amongst the Jews, as
Hermippus testifies; and that he drew many of his Symbols from the Jews he
affirms very positively, in his Annotations on Mat. 7.6. and Mat. 8.22. as
hereafter. Vossius de philos. sect. l. 2. c. 6.. 5. proves at large, that
Pythagoras owes much of his Philosophy to the Jews. And Mr. Stillingfleet
himself (the only learned man that I have met with seemingly contradicting our
Hypothesis) says I will not deny, but that Pythagoras might have had converse
with the Jews in Chaldea, etc. Orig. sacr. book 3. c. 2. sect. 2. But we shall
endeavor to make good our Assertion [that Pythagoras traduced the main
Principles of his Philosophy from the Jewish Church, and Scriptures
originally] from the ^rie of his Life, his Institutes, and Philosophy, both as
to Matter, and Form thereof.

Pythagoras's extract and original from the Phenicians.
. 3. We shall begin with the Story of Pythagoras's Life, who is said to be a
Samian; but whether he were born there, or elsewhere, is not certainly
determined. Cleanthes (as Porphyrie de Vita Pythag.) says, he was a Syrian of
the City of Tire in Ph^nicia (a part of Syria) whence making a Voyage to Samos
(before Ionia) for traffic, Pythagoras Mnesarchi sil^us, ut Apuleius Flo^id.
15. vel Demarati Samii, ut Justinus l. 20. vir suit ingenio acer, indust^ia
singulari^ promptus simul and admirabundus. Horn. Hist. philos l 3. c. 11.
at such time, as the Samians were much pressed with famine, he supplied them with
Corn; in acknowledgement whereof they made him free of their Country. Suidas
says, Pythagoras was a Samian by education, but a Tyrrhenian by Birth, brought
over young by his father to Sam^s. So Aristoxenus makes him to be a Tyrrhenian,
as Lud. Vives in August. Civ. l. 8. c. 2. and Grotius on Mat. 7.6. Many, says
he, make him to be a Tyrrhenian; others a Tyrian, etc. But the more general,
and approved opinion is that of Iamblichus (de vita Pythag. cap. 2.) that
Pythagoras's Father was a Samian, descended from Ancaeus, who first brought a
Colony into Samos; and that Pythagoras his Son was born at Sidon in Phenicia,
but educated at Samos. Which ever of these accounts we fix upon, Mnesarchus.
it is evident, Pythagoras had a very great affinity unto, and so advantage
from, the Phenicians, whereby to acquaint himself with the Jewish Learning, and
Mysteries.

Pythagoras flourished about the 60. Olympiad an^. 3360.
. 4. Pythagoras is supposed to have been borne about the 3. year of the 53.
Olympiad, and he flourished, as some think about, the time that Nebuchadnezar
besieged Jerusalem an. mundi. 3360. or according to Laertius, about the 60.
Olympiad. About which time the Jewish Garden, which had been before enclosed,
was thrown open, and many of the Plants thereof removed and set in foreign
parts; in Babylon, Egypt, Phenicia, etc. By which means Pythagoras and the rest
of the inquisitive Grecians had a mighty advantage to inform themselves in the
Jewish Wisdom, and Mysteries, touching God, his Names, and Attributes; the
Production, or Creation of the World, and its first principles, and all the
Jewish Ceremonies. That Pythagoras went to Phenicia, and thence into Egypt,
where he stayed 22. years, and afterward into Babylon, where he continued 12.
years, and had conversation with the Jews in those parts, I now proceed to make
evident.

. 5. Iamblichus (Vit. Pythag. cap. 2.) tells us, that Mnesarchus, Pythagoras's
Preceptors in Greece before his Travels.
the Father of Pythagoras, returning from Syria to Samus, brought up his Son in
many excellent Sciences, committing him sometimes to Creophilus, sometimes to
Pherecydes of Syrus. Diogenes Laertius says, that Pythagoras's Father dying,
he was committed by his Uncle Zoilus to Pherecydes the Syrian, etc. Augustine.
Epist. 3. Pythagoras how he was first changed from a Wrestler into a
Philosopher.
ad Volusianum says, That Pythagoras, hearing Ph^recydes disputing amongst the
Greeks of the immortality of the Soul, was so moved with the novity of this
Dispute, that he was changed from a Pugil, or Wrestler into a Philosopher. That
Pythagoras first was a Pugil, Laertius lib. 8. relates, as Vossius de
philosoph. sect. l. 2. c. 6.. 8. The same Laertius (in the Life of Anaximenes)
reckons Pythagoras amongst the Disciples of Thales. For (says he, out of
Anaximenes's Epistle to Pythagoras) Pythagoras, being from his youth greatly
inclined to an inquisition into Religious Rites, and Mysteries, addressed
himself to Thales at Miletus, as to one, that could most advance him in this
Enterprise. From Thales he received the first Elements of his Philosophy. So
also Iamblichus (de vita Pythag. lib. 1. c. 2.) tells us that Thales entertained
him very civilly, with admiration of his excellent naturals, which surpassed
other Youths; and after he had given him such instructions, as he could, in the
Mathematics, he advised him to have recourse to Egypt, there to converse with
the Priests of Memphis, especially those of Jupiter; from whom he himself had
obtained those pieces of Knowledge for which he was accounted Wise. Amongst
other things Thales advised him to improve his time well, by reason whereof he
abstained from Wine, and Flesh. See more Stanly on Thales. Whence we may
collect how Pythagoras came by the first rudiments of his philosophic
inclinations, and principles, namely from Thales, and Pherecydes; from the
former we may suppose he received his Natural Philosophy, and Mathematics;
from the latter his mystical and symbolick Theology, as also his notions of
the Souls Immortality, etc. which were derived originally from the Jewish
Nation, as before* Vossius de philos. l. 2. c. 6.. 9. says, that Pythagoras
heard in Greece, besides Pherecydes, Hermodamas, and Anaximander the
Physiologist. Pythagoras's traveling into Phenicia.


. 6. Pythagoras having learned of Thales to improve his time, and inure himself
to temperance, both as to the quantity, and quality of meats, whereby he
acquired an (...), a good habitude, and clearnes of mind, and an exact constant
health of Body, he resolves upon traveling into the Oriental parts; thereby to
inform himself touching the first principles of Wisdom, and sacred Mysteries.
And the first Voyage he made, was unto Sidon in Phenicia; whereunto he was
inclined, His conference with the successors of Mochus.
as well from a natural desire he had to the place, which he supposed to be his
own Native Country, as also that he might satisfy himself touching their
Mysteries, and Philosophy. Here he had conference with the Prophets,
Successors of Mochus the Physiologist, with the Phenician Priests, and others;
and was initiated in all the Mysteries of Byblus, and Tire, and sundry of the
chief sacred Institutions in other parts of Syria, not undergoing these things
out of superstition, but from his natural inclination and love to Wisdom, and
fear, lest any thing worthy to be known, which was preserved amongst them, in
the Mysteries of the Gods, might escape him. Thus Iamblichus c. 13. And with
Jews.
and Stanly out of him. That Pythagoras, whilst he was in Phenicia, had
conversation with some Jews, is not unlikely; for their own Country being
depopulated, many of them fled for refuge to their neighbors the Egyptians,
Phenicians, etc. Yea that Pythagoras visited Judea, is affirmed by Strabo, who
affirms that Pythagoras visited not only the Egyptians, Arabians, Chaldeans,
but also penetrated into Judea it self, and inhabited Mount Carmel, where the
Priests even in his time showed the Walks of Pythagoras. So Hornius Hist.
philos. l 3. c. 11. That Pythagoras, says he, penetrated into Judea it self is
affirmed by great Authors, though all agree not to it. However Iamblichus
openly informs us, that he had conference with the Successors of Mochus, who,
as has be^n already proved, had his Philosophy from the Jews.

His travels into Egypt and conversation with their Priests, etc. see more
chap. 7.. 2.
. 7. From Phenicia Pythagoras passed into Egypt, with recommendation from
Polycrates the Tyrant, to Amasis King of Egypt, who gave him Letters to the
Priests, to whom he had recourse. In the first place he went to those of
Heliopolis, who sent him to the Priests of Memphis: from Memphis he was sent to
Thebes, where he was permitted to acquaint himself with all their Learning,
which was never granted to any stranger before, as Porphyrie de Vita Pythag. p.
5. So Vossius de philos. sect. lib. 2. c. 2.. 2. Pythagoras (says he) was sent
by Thales into Egypt, Venit and ad Aegyptios Pythagoras, and Arabas, and
Chaldaeos, a quibus rationem insomniorum edidicit, vaticinioque, quod sit
thurc, primus usus est, and in Aegypto cum Sacerdotibus est versatus,
sapientia^que Aegyptiorum and sermonem didicit. Sic Porphyrius, Steuch. Eugub.
de peren. philos. l. 2. c. 2.
to confer with the Priests of Memphis, and Diospolis where he arrived in the
Reign of Semneserteus, as Pliny, or of Amasis, to whom he was recommended by
letters from Polycrates the Samian Tyrant, as Laertius: Plutarch says, he
heard Oenuphis the Heliopolite, etc. Diogenes says, whilst he lived with these
Priests, he was instituted, and informed in the Language, and Wisdom of the
Egyptians, and in their threefold kind of Writing, Epistolick, Hieroglyphick,
and Symbolick; of which see Clemens Alexandr. Strom. 5. as before. Laertius
also adds, that while he was in Egypt, he entered into the Egyptian Adyta,
(...), and was instituted in things unexpressible touching the Gods. Perhaps he
means the Tetracty, and the other Jewish Mysteries, in which Pythagoras was
instructed, of which hereafter. Clemens Alexandrinus (...). 1. says, he was
Disciple to Sonchedes, a chief Prophet, or Priest of the Egyptians; Diog.
Laertius says, that he learned the Egyptian Tongue. And Iamblichus (l. 1. c.
4.) says, that being thus acquainted with the Learning of the Egyptians, See
Stanly of Pythagoras chapter 4.
he gained the observations of many Ages; and, whilst he lived amongst them,
was admired, and beloved of the Prophets, and Priests, with whom he conversed;
by which means he gave himself exact information concerning persons, and
things; not omitting any person eminent a^ any time for Learning, or any kind
of Religious Rites; neither leaving any place unvisited, wherein he conceived,
he might find somewhat extraordinary. Now that Pythagoras had converse with the
Jews, is more than probable. Some incline to think he might have conference
with Jeremy. So Lud. Vives in Aug. de Civ l. 8. c. 11. tells us, that Jeremy
went with the Tribe of Juda, and Benjamin into Egypt, and dyed at Tanis; where
he was worshipped by the Natives, for a present remedy against the stinging of
Serpents. Eusebius places the beginning of Jeremy's Prophecy in the first
year of the 36. Olympiad. Then afterward making mention of sundry Platonic
Mysteries of God his infinite Essence, His conference with the Jews in Egypt.
and Idea's traduced from Exodus 3.14. (...) he concludes thus: Although I do no
way doubt, but that Pythagoras himself learned these Mysteries in Egypt from
the Sacred Volumnes; and the conference with Jeremy, The motives which might
enduce him to enquire into Jewish Mysteries.
rather agrees to him, than to Plato. Though it is possible, Jeremy might be
dead before Pythagoras came into Egypt. Yet we need no way doubt, but that his
fame was then living, which together with the great repute the Jewish Nation
had for ancient Wisdom, Records, and Mysteries, could not but prove a
prevailing motive, and quickening of Pythagoras's inquisitive humor, to make
some inquisition into the Jewish Records, Rites, Wisdom, and Mysteries,
contained in the sacred Volumnes, according to this positive affirmation of
Lud. Vives. And indeed how can we rationally imagine, that Pythagoras, who was
so greedy after oriental Traditions, Wisdom, and Mysteries; and so curious to
pry into every corner of Egypt (where he staid 22. years) to examine all
persons, and things, especially such as pretended to any ancient Records,
Religious Rites, or Mysteries; I say, how can we imagine, that he should pass
by those multitudes of Jews, he met with in Egypt, without enquiry into their
ancient Wisdom, and Records, which infinitely excelled those few broken
Traditions, and corrupt derivations, which the Egyptians had extracted from
their sacred Fountains? Yea Clemens Alexandrinus (...). 1. tells us, that
Pythagoras, to satisfy his curiosity in these his enquiries in Egypt,
suffered himself to be circumcised, and so learned things not usually
communicated, concerning the Gods, and their Mysteries. Now we know this Rite
of circumcision was proper to the Jews, not used by Egyptians.

Pythagoras's travels unto Babylon, etc.
. 8. Pythagoras, quitting Egypt, went to Babylon; of which Voyage Iamblichus l.
1. c. 4. gives this relation: that Cambyses having (in the 63. Olympiad)
conquered Egypt, Pythagoras was taken prisoner by him, See Stanly of Pythagoras
chapter 5.
and sent to Babylon, where he conversed with the most eminent amongst the
Chaldeans (I suppose the Zabii) as also with the Persian Magi, who entertained
him very courteously, and gave him insight into their more hidden Mysteries, and
Religious Rites of worship performed to their Gods, as also in the
Mathematics. Thus Vossius de philosoph. sect. l. 2. c. 6.. 4. treating of
Pythagoras, says, out of a desire to get Learning, he was conversant with the
Persian Magi, and with the Assyrians, or Chaldeans; as, besides others,
Laertius testifies, who says, that he was initiated in all the Grecian, and
Barbarian Mysteries; and that he learned the Egyptian Tongue, and thence had
conversation with the Chaldeans in Assyria, and the Magi in Persia. The same
Vossius says ( de philos. l. 2. c. 1.) that from the Chaldeans he learned
Astronomy. Laertius says, that he was most conversant with these Chaldeans.
Now that by these Chaldeans, with whom Pythagoras was so intimate, Pythagoras's
converse with Jews under the name of Chaldeans, Zabratus, etc.
we may justly understand inclusively (if not exclusively) the Jews, I think,
will be pretty clear, if we consider that the Jews having lost their own
visible state, and Nation, lived now under the Chaldean Government, and State;
and so might pass amongst the Grecians for Chaldeans. And this will be farther
evident, if we reflect on what is mentioned by Diogenes (cited by Porphyrie) of
the Chaldeans, with whom Pythagoras conversed in Babylon; amongst whom he
particularizeth one Zabratus, by whom he was cleansed from the defilements of
his Life, and informed in many things concerning Nature, and the first
principles of the Universe. This Zabratus (Seldom de Jure Not. Heb. l. 1. c.
2.) enclines to believe was Ezekiel: for he takes notice that Ezekiel, and
Pythagoras flourished about the same time, betwixt the 50. and 52. Olympiad.
The like is mentioned by Seldom Syntag. 2. de Diis Syris cap. 1. Truly the
most accurate Chronology teaches us, that Pythagoras, and Ezekiel flourished
together, between the L. and LII. Olympiads. Therefore the account of time
hinders not, but that Nazaratus (who is said to be Pythagoras's Master) should
be the same with Ezekiel. He also is the same with (...) Zabratus, who by
Malchus in the Life of Pythagoras is called his Master, etc. Godefred Wendelin
asserts, that Pythagoras derived his Tetractie from the Jews; and particularly
from Daniel, the chief of the Magi, who was then, when Pythagoras lived in
those parts, about 70. years old. So Seldom Syntag. 2. de Diis Syris cap. 1.
affirms, that Pythagoras had some rude notices of the (...), or Gods name
(...) Jehovah, which he called (...) Tetracte. That Pythagoras had conversation
with, and some traditions from, the Jews, whilst he was in Babylon appears
farther, by what Diogenes in his Treatise of incredible things beyond Thule
(quoted by Porphyrie page 8.) affirms of Pythagoras; that he went also to the
Hebrews, etc. That Pythagoras visited Egypt, and Babylon, at those very times,
when the Jews had their abode there, is affirmed by Eusebius lib. 10. praepar.
c. 2. They report, that Pythagoras was an Auditor, not only of Pherecydes
Syrius, but also of the Persian Magi, and of the Egyptian Divinators, at that
very time, when some of the Jews went to Babylon, and others of them to Egypt.
That there were a quantity, or great number of Jews in Babylon, when Pythagoras
was there, is most evident: for suppose we fix the time of his being in Babylon
after the Captivity of the Jews, and their Return to Judea; yet it is certain,
there were great numbers of them never returned, but continued in Babylon,
where they had 3. famous Schools, or Universities, Sora, Pompeditha, and
Neharda (as has been before observed) which we cannot conceive, that Pythagoras,
so curious an Inquisitor into Antiquity, would pass by, without observation
for 12. years space, for so long he continued in Babylon, according to
Iamblichus. That, The advantages he had for conversation with the Jews, from
his skill in the Egyptian and Chaldee tongues.
which gave Pythagoras the greatest advantage, and encouragement to converse
with the Jews in Babylon, was his skill in the Egyptian Tongue (as Diogenes,
and others assert) which indeed differed not in Substance, but only in Dialect,
from the Hebrew, and Chaldee, as we have endeavored to prove out of Bochart,
and others; so that we need not, with Aristobulus, suppose the Translation of
Moses's books into Greek before the Persian Monarchy; for Pythagoras being
skilled in the Egyptian, and, I suppose, also the Chaldean Tongue, having lived
in Chaldea 12. years, might without difficulty, read Moses's Writings, at least
have conversation, and conference with the Jews, who could, without doubt,
(having lived so long in Chaldea) speak the Chaldean Tongue, etc. That
Pythagoras really had conversation with the Jews at Babylon, and translated
many things out of their Doctrines into his Philosophy, has been already
proved by sundry Testimonies collected by Learned Usher, as also by the
concession of Stillingfleet; of which see. 2. of this Chapter.

His return to Samos, and departure thence.
. 9. Pythagoras having spent 12. years at Babylon, in conversation with the
Persian Magi, Chaldeans, and Jews, about the 56 year of his age he returned to
Samos, where he endeavored to instruct the Samians in that Symbolick mode of
philosophizing, he had learned in Egypt, and other oriental parts, but the
Samians, not affecting his obscure, and enigmatick Philosophy, did not give
him any great encouragement to continue long with them, as Iamblichus de vita
Pythag. l. 1. c. 5. Laertius informs us, that the occasion of his departure
from Sames, was the Tyranny it lay under by reason of Polycrates his
usurpation. So Vossius de phil. sect. l. 2. c. 6.. 1. That Pythagoras was a
great assertor of the peoples Liberties (as Plato) but an inveterate enemy of
Tyranny, will appear in its place.

His going to Crete and Sparta.
. 10. Iamblichus also ( cap. 5.) acquaints us, that, before his going into
Italy, he went to Crete to acquaint himself with the Laws of Minois, as also to
Sparta, to gain Knowledge in those of Lycurgus, which then had the Vogue for
great Legislators. Laertius tells us, while he was in Crete, he had conversation
with Epimenides, with whom he entered the Idean Cave. This Epimenides is by
Apuleius in 2. Florid, styled the famous Diviner, where also he adds, that
Pythagoras made use of one Leodamas the disciple of Creophilus for his Master;
but Laert. l. 8. and Suidas call him Hermodamas. Casaubon thinks, that he might
have heard Solon also, but Vossius gainsays it, Vossius de phil. sect. l. 2. c.
6. 4.

. 11. Pythagoras, quitting Greece, Pythagoras's coming into Italy, and
restoring those Cities to their liberty, and unity, by communicating good Laws,
etc.
went into Italy (that part which was called Magna Graecia) and first arrived
at Croto, where, by his graceful presence, Rhetorical Orations, and friendly
complaisance, he gained the affections of the Citizens, both Magistrates, and
others; as Iamblichus cap. 8. The same Iamblichus (cap. 6.) tells us, that, at
the first Speech he made in Croto, he attracted many followers, in so much that
in a short time he gained 600. Disciples. And that he had a general esteem
amongst the Romans, is evident by the Statue, they erected to him, at Rome; of
which Pliny lib. 34. cap. 6. thus speaks: I find Statues erected to
Pythagoras, and Alcibiades in the horns of the Comitium. see Vossius philos.
l. 2. c. 6.. 28. etc. And indeed no wonder, that the Italians had so great an
esteem for, and affection to Pythagoras: for he had been a great Instrument of
delivering them from Oppression, and Sedition amongst themselves, as also of
communicating to them Good Laws (which he had from the Jews) and such a
constitution of their Common Wealth, as tended most to the preservation of
Liberty, and Unity; the main pillars of any State. So Porphyrie in the Life
of Pythagoras, page 14. and Iamblichus out of him l. 1. c. 7. inform us, that
whatsoever Cities Pythagoras in his travels through Italy, and Cicilie found
in subjection one to another, he instilled into them, by his Disciples, a
principle of Liberty. Thus he freed Crotona, Sybaris, Catana, Rhegium, Himera,
Agrigentum, and other Cities where his Disciples prevailed. Yea indeed many of
the most eminent Rectors of the Italian common wealths proceeded from
Pythagoras's Schole, as Zaleucus, who gave Laws to the Locrians, and Charondas
the Catanaean, who gave Laws to the Thurii, with other Legislators, of whom see
Iamblichus l. 1. cap. 30. By means of which Pythagorean Laws, and Governors,
these Cities were a long time well governed. Pythagoras wholly took away
dissension. So Iamblichus. Some also say, that Numa Pompilius had his Laws from
Pythagoras; but of this more hereafter.

, 12. From Pythagoras's settlement, and Schole in Italy, the Italick Sect
received its denomination. That part of Italy, wherein Pythagoras taught, was
called Magna Graecia, which comprised Tarentum, Metapontus, Heraclea, Croto,
and the Thurii. Pythagoras having lived at Croto 20 years, dyed in the last
year of the 70. Olympiad, as Eusebius will have it. He had indeed an universal
esteem amongst all: Pythagoras's character by Iamblichus.
but a particular reverence from his Scholars, who, as long as he lived, were
wont to style him (...) the Theologue; but after his death they called him
(...) the man. Iamblichus de vita Pythag. l. 1. c. 2. His eminent qualities
both natural and acquired.
gives him this honorable character. Pythagoras (says he) after the death of
his Father, grew up in Wisdom, and Temperance, being even from his youth
generally honored by the most ancient. His graceful presence, and taking
Discourse drew all persons to him; in so much that many affirmed him to be the
son of some God. He being thus confirmed by the common vogue of all men
concerning him, by the education given him in his youth, and by his excellent
Naturals, made himself daily more deserving of these advantages; adorning
himself with Religious Exercises, natural Sciences, exemplary conversation, His
freedom from irregular passions.
stability of mind, grave deportment, and with an amiable imitable serenitie.
He was never transported by unlawful passion, laughter, emulation, contention,
or any other disorder. He lived like some good Genius comeing to converse in
Samos, whence he was styled the Samian Comet. His care of his health,
moderation in use of the Creature, and diligence in emproving time.
Iamblichus (chap. 13.) gives us a farther account of his Moderation in the use
of creature comforts, and refreshments; of his exact Wisdom, and diligence to
preserve a good habitude, and disposition of body, and mind: as also of his
great care in redeeming, and emproving his time. Pythagoras (says he) having
learned of Thales above all things to husband his time well, he did for that
reason abstain from Wine, and Flesh; having before abstained from eating much,
and accustomed himself to such meats, as were of more easy digestion; by
which means he acquired an habit of watchfulnes, serenity, and vivacity of
mind, and an equal continued health of body.

. 13. To give a brief Abstract of what Diogenes Laertius does more at large
relate touching Pythagoras. He was (says he) the first Institutor of the
Italick Sect; all the others were called Ionick from Thales. Pythagoras, when
young, was committed by his Uncle Zoilus to Pherecydes a Syrian. When he was
young, and most studious of Learning, he initiated himself in the Barbarian,
and Grecian Rites* and Mysteries. At length he went to Egypt, with commendatory
Letters from Polycrates, where he learned the Egyptian Tongue; but he was most
conversant with the Chaldeans, and the Magi. After that he went to Crete, where
he conversed with Epimenides. In Egypt he entered the Adytum, and was
instructed in the ineffable mysteries of the Gods. At his return to Samos,
finding his Country under Tyranny by Polycrates, he went to Croto in Italy:
where he gave Laws to the Italians; and was honored by his Scholars. His aweful
presence and rebukes.
He is reported to have been of a most awful majestic presence, which made so
deep an impression on such, as had conversation with him, that a young man
being severely rebuked by him, immediately hanged himself; whereupon Pythagoras
ever after forbore to reprove any: His contentation and contempt of honors.
thus Laertius. We have a good evidence of Pythagoras's contentation, and
contempt of wordly grandeur by his Epistle to Hiero, in answer to an invitation
he made him, to come and live with him. My life, says Pythagoras, is secure,
and quiet, but yours will no way suit with me: a moderate, and self denying
person needs not a Sicilian table. Pythagoras, wheresoever he comes, has all
things sufficient for the day; but to serve a Lord is heavy, and intolerable
for one unaccustomed to it. (...) self sufficiency is a great, and safe thing;
for it has none, that envyeth or conspires against it. Whence that life
seems to come nearest to God. Therefore write not to Pythagoras to live with
you: for Physicians will not fall sick, to bear their patients company. Stanlie
Life of Pythagoras chap. 22.

. 14. Apuleius Florid. 15. gives us this brief account of Pythagoras's Travels,
Instructors. and Philosophy: The common fame goes, that of his own accord he
sought after the Egyptian Sciences, and learnt there of the Priests the
incredible efficacies of their Ceremonies, the admirable changes of Numbers,
the most exact formules of Geometry: but his mind being not satiated with
these Siences, he thence goes to the Chaldeans, and hence to the Brachmanes,
and Gymnosophists. The Chaldees teach the Sideral Science, or Astronomy, the
stated ambitus of the wandering Stars, and the various effects of both in the
Genitures of men; also Medicine, etc. The Brachmanes also contribute much to
his Philosophy. Moreover Pythagoras embraced Pherecydes, who sprang out of the
Scyran Island, for his Master. It is said, that he studied Natural Philosophy
with Anaximander: also that he followed Epimenides of Crete, that famous
Prophet, and Poet, for Science sake: also Leodamas, the Disciple of Creophilus,
etc. To which we may add that of Justin Hist. lib. 20. He went first to Egypt,
then to Babylon to learn the motions of the Stars and the Origin of the
Universe. Whence returning he came to Crete, and Lacedemon, to understand the
Laws of Minos, and Lycurgus, at that time most famous. With which being
instructed he came to Croto, where, by his Authority, he reduced the people
fallen into Luxury, to the use of frugality. He enumerated the ruins of the
Cities, which had been destroyed by the pest of Luxury. He frequently taught
the Women apart from the Men, and the Children apart from their Parents. And he
gained thus much by his continual Disputation, that the Matrones laid aside
their golden garments, and other ornaments of their Dignity, accounting
Chastity, and not fine Clothes, to be the true ornaments of Matrones: Thus
Justin. Pythagoras, the more effectually to form, and shape the Manners of the
City, frequently explicated the practick part of Wisdom. Pythagoras leaving
Croto went to the Metapontines, who had him so greatly in admiration, as that
after his death, they made his house a Temple, and worshipped him as a God.
Justin lib. 20.

CHAP. VI. Pythagoras's College, and Discipline from the Jews.
Pythagoras's 2. Schools 1. common. 2. His private College, wherein were 1.
Novices, their examen, and probation. 2. (...), or Intrinsicks, Phil. 3.12, 15.
(...). 1. Tim. 3.6. (...). The Discipline of Pythagoras's College. Their
consociation founded on Virtue as Exodus 19.5, 6. set forth by Salt, from Lev.
2.13. Numb. 18.19. Covenant by Salt what? Luke 13.26. Ezra 4.14. Mark 9.49. Of
the Essenes, their Collegiate Life, and the Pythagoreans Symbolizing with them
in 16 Particulars. The Pythagoreans a sort of Separatists Gal. 2.9. Their
shunning worldly Pleasures, and Company: their Celibat, and Abstinenoes, as
Col. 2.16, 21, 22. 1. Tim. 4.3. Their Purifications and Festivals. Their white
Vestments from Eccles. 8. Their perpetual Silence, and their concealing
Mysteries. Their reverence toward their Elders. Their owning Providence, with
their Devotion. Their daily exercises, with morning premeditation, and night
examination. Their Constancy, with their excommunication Mat. 8.22.

. 1. HAving given the Story of Pythagoras's Life, and Travels, and some
account of his Conversation with Jews therein; we proceed to his Schole,
Institutes, and Discipline; wherein we doubt not, but to make discovery of many
Jewish Institutes, and traditions. Iamblichus, lib. 1. cap. 6. tells us, that
Pythagoras, upon his settlement at Croto in Italy, drew unto him, by his
persuasive Orations, many followers even unto the number of 600. persons, who
were by him won, not only to the embracing that Philosophy he professed; but
also to submit to his Rules of Discipline, and that Collegiate mode of life,
which he prescribed to them. For the more full understanding whereof, we must
know, that Pythagoras had two several Schools, and thence two sorts of
Disciples, as Porphyrie, Iamblichus, and Clem. Alexandr. have observed. For 1.
he had his Homocoeion or common Schole, for all; Pythagoras's 2. sold Schole
and Disciples. 1. His Homoco^ion, or common Schole where were his (...) hearers.
which Clemens Alexandrinus ((...). 1.) enterprets (...) Church, where all
sorts of hearers were admitted: where the Disciples that belonged to this
Schole were called (...), and (...) Auditors, or Pythagorites, these learned
only the chief Principles of Philosophy, without more exact explication. For
these being either of more dull capacities, or else engaged in civil affairs,
had not Abilities, or leisure to addict themselves wholly to Pythagoras, and
his Philosophy; wherefore he expounded to them only the (...) or naked Heads
of Philosophy. Among these common hearers there were of all sexes, ages, and
conditions: men, women, adult, youth. The Citizens, and men of Croto he
exhorted daily, and apart with a great splendour of Oration, to the study of
Virtue. The Matrons also, who were thence styled, Pythagoricae, he instructed
frequently, and apart in their duties, as also the children apart from their
parents, as Laert. lib. 8. and Hornius Hist. Philos. l. 7. c. 12.

2. Pythagoras also had his (...) coenobium, Pythagoras's College or Co^vent,
where were his (...) or genuines.
which Laertius calls (...) his Systeme; and Cassiodorus his College, as others
his Family, and the Disciples, that belonged to this Schole, or College, were
called (...) Genuine, as also (...) Mathematicians, because they being
generally young, of quick apprehensions, and as willing, as also able, to
devote themselves to the study of Philosophy, Pythagoras expounded to them not
only the (...), Habebat (Pythagoras) domi suae plurimos jutenes, quos ex
collatis opibus alebat; corumque conversatio (...) dicta est. Gellius l. 1. c.
9. quod omnia iis communia essent. Laert. lib. 8. Hora. Hist. Philos. l. 7. c.
12. In Pythagoras's College or Covent, 1 were his Novices or Probationers.
but also the (...), the Causes, and Reasons of things; why it was so, and so,
and why it could not be otherwise. These Mathematicians being of Pythagoras's
College, Covent, or Family, and by him instituted in the more full, and exact
Reasons of things, and deeper points of Philosophy, were only esteemed and
called genuine Pythagoreans: the former acoustiques, or common hearers, being
called only Pythagorites. To these two sorts of hearers Gellius l. 1. c. 4.
adds a third (...) of naturalists. Yea the Author of the Pythagorean life
adds more: of which see Photius cod. 249. Clemens Alexand. lib. 5 (...)
V^ssius de Philos. Sect. l. 2. c. 6.. 18. Stanly of Pythag. Discip. Chap. 1.

. 2 In Pythagoras's (...), Convent, College or Family there were also two sorts
of Disciples; some were only (...) Exoteriques, Novices or Probationers. Others
were (...), or (...) Intrinsiques, or Perfect. As for the Probationers or
novices, Pythagoras, to render them capable of Philosophy, prepared them by a
most severe Discipline, and made them pass a very strict examen. For
Pythagoras studied very much to know, and understand men; what every man's
Disposition was, what his natural capacity for Philosophy, and what his
inclinations thereto were: neither would he admit any into his College, or
Family, before he had made some Physiognomicall observations concerning the
man; If upon exact observation of all circumstances, he found the person to be
of good naturals, and of an awakened understanding, then he brought him under
an Examen touching his morals; whether he were of good manners, and had
affectionate inclinations to Philosophy, etc. The person thus examined, and
approved by Pythagoras, was admitted into his Society, or College as an
Exoterique, or Probationer; as Iamblichus cap. 20. and Stanly of Pythagoras's
Discipline chap 2.

. 3. Now that Pythagoras traduced this part of his Discipline, as also the
former relating to his Acoustiques, Pythagoras's ^mitting his Scholars after
examen etc. from the Jewish rite of admitting Proselites.
or Common auditors from the Jewish Church, seems very probable. For who knows
not, that the Jews had two sorts of Proselites? 1. Those of the Gates, i e.
such as lived within their gates, and partaked of some common privileges; unto
whom Pythagoras's common Disciples seem to answer: but secondly, there were
Proselites of the covenant, or of Righteousness, i e. such as were incorporate
into the Jewish Church, and so made partakers of all their privileges. Now in
the admission of these, Maimonides tells us, the Jews were very strict and
severe, as Ainsworth out of him on Genesis 17.12. [ Bought with money.] when a man
or woman comes to join a Proselyte, they make a diligent enquiry after such,
lest they come to get themselves under the Law, for some Riches, they should
receive, or for Dignity they should obtain, or for Fear. If he be a Man, they
enquire whether he have not set his affection on some Jewish woman; or a Woman
her affections on some Young man of Israel. If no such like occasion be found
in them, they make known to them the Weightinesse of the Yoke of the Law, etc.
to see if they will leave off. If they will take it upon them, and withdraw
not, and they see, that they come of love, then they receive them as its
written Ruth. 1.18. etc. Thus Ainsworth. By which we see, how near Pythagoras
comes to the Jews in his strict, and severe examen, as to the Admission of
Disciples, from whom we have some reason to persuade us, that he took the
whole Idea, or Platform of his Schole and College. Yea if we may believe
Clemens Alexandrinus ((...). 1.) Pythagoras himself was circumcised; and if so,
we may suppose he was admitted as a Proselyte, to partake of the Privileges,
and Mysteries of the Jewish Church. And Porphyrie (page 2.) tells us, that he
was cleansed from the pollutions of his life past by one Zabratus, who
according to S^lden was Ezekiel. Or if not a Proselyte of the Covenant; yet we
may with safety suppose him to be a Proselyte of the Gates; that is, one that
heard amongst them, and so acquainted himself with their Discipline, and
Mysteries, and affected an imitation thereof, particularly in this rite of
admitting his Disciples and Probationers.

. 4. Probationary Discipline, and Exercises.
Pythagoras appointed his Exoteriques under Probation many Exercises for the
purification of their minds, as also many Abstinences from wine, flesh, and
other meats obstructing the clearness of understanding, with many other
probationarie exercises: which probation or preparative Discipline they
underwent usually five years before they were admitted to be Intrinsiques, or
complete Pythagoreans. But the main Injunction, which Pythagoras laid on these
Exoteriques, or Novices, was their (...) quinquenniall, or 5 years silence. The
Pythagorean (...) or Silence.
The cause of which silence was to inure his Disciples to the right government
of their Tongues, which of all things is most difficult, and yet the most
useful, and necessary for Novices in any science. Thence Iamblichus lib. 1. c.
31. (...)* The Government of the Tongue is of all most difficult. So Apul.
Florid. 15. The first Founder of Philosophy first taught his Disciples to hold
their peace, Finis autem silentis bujus alius non erat, quam ut discentes
initio intra modestiae terminos se continentes discerent diligenter voci
praeceptoris auscul tare. Horn. Hist. Philos. l. 7. c. 12.
and his first mediation, in order to the procuring Wisdom, was to bridle the
Tongue, and keep our words within the wall of our teeth; for he forbad not
speech altogether, but loquacitie; requiring that they spoke more rarely, more
submissively, more modestly, which is a great virtue, though very difficult in
Scholars: according to that of Quintilian, Decl. 19. I think there is no
virtue more difficult, than that of Silence. This Pythagorean silence answers
that of Job chapter 6. v. 24. Teach me and I will hold my tongue. Others make the
reason of this silence to be that the soul, turning inward to her self, might
be diverted from external objects, and all irregular passions. Hence his
silence was termed (...), that is, (says Aulus Gellius lib. 1. c. 9.) (...),
or as Hesychius, and out of him Suidas from (...), containing within himself
his speech. This Probationary silence of these Novices, Laertius lib. 8. calls
(...) a quinquenniall silence. Laertius says, that the Pythagorean Novices
kept silence 5. years, only hearing Pythagoras's discourses, but not seeing
him, till they were fully approved, and then they became of his Family, which
he calls (...) systeme. So Servius on Virgil, Aen. 10. yet Aulus Gellius l. 1.
c. 9. informs us, that this (...) 5 years silence was not required of all,
but of some more, of some less; but none were enjoined less than two years
silence, as none more then five years. The like Apuleius in floridis tells us,
that some were silent for a lesser space, especially such as were more grave:
but those who were more prattling, were enjoined a quinquenniall silence. The
Pythagoreans for this their silence continued in great honor even to
Isocrates's time, who in his Busiris says, that men more admired the
Pythagoreans, who held their peace, than others, who had obtained the greatest
glory by speaking. Yea Pythagoras enjoined his Disciples some kind of
perpetual silence, for he taught 1. That we ought to be silent, or to speak
things better than Silence. 2. to comprehend many things in few words, not few
things in many words, whence Zeno blamed such as instead of being (...) lovers
of learning, were (...) lovers of words. 3. Pythagoras forbad his Scholars
declaring his mysteries to others. Those who after their five years preparative
Discipline, and Probation, appeared by their moderation, commendable
conversation, and other qualifications fit to participate of Pythagoras's more
secret Philosophy and Mysteries, were made Intrinsiques, being admitted to
hear Pythagoras within the screen, and to see him, and henceforward were
accounted (...) i. e. perfect, which privileges the former Probationers, or
Novices were not made partakers of. But if these Novices, after the time of
their Probation, were not judged worthy to be received to the condition of the
perfect, or complete members of Pythagoras's (...) or Covent, then were they
rejected, and a Coffin was made by the Disciples of Pythagoras, and placed in
their room, as a lively symbolique image of a person morally dead: so
Iamblichus cap. 17. and Grot. on Mat. 8.2. as Hammond on Luke 25.24. of which
hereafter in the Pythagorean Excommunication Par. 9.

. 5. That Pythagoras took the Idea, The Pythagorean distinction of Disciples
into Novices and perfect, from the Jews merely. Phil. 3.12.
and Platform of his probationary examen, Discipline, and preparative exercises
from the Jewish Church the Learned assure us; and that upon more than
conjecturall grounds. So Daille in his Sermon on Philip. 3.12. (...)] This term
[perfect] says he, is taken from those (viz. the Pythagoreans) amongst the
Pagans, who after many preparations and purifications rendered themselves
capable of the view, and participation of certain great Idololatrique
mysteries, which in those times were had in great veneration, etc. Now that
this mode of initiating Novices by such preparative exercises, after which they
became (...) or perfect, Phil. 3.15. (...) alludes to the Jewish (...) perfect.
does originally belong to the Jewish Church, the same Daille affirms on Phil.
3.15. Parfaits perfect. The ancient Greek Pagans had in their Religion certain
mysteries, and sacred ceremonies, to the view, and participation of which they
received not their Devoto's, till they had been prepared for the same by
diverse Disciplines, calling them perfect, who were admitted thereto, and
holding the others for Novices or Apprentices only -- But these words were
taken originally from the fashion of the Jewish Church, in the Schools whereof
there were diverse orders: some were more low, others more high, in which were
taught the most sublime mysteries: and this last part of their Theology was
called by a word, that signifies perfection, because they held it for the top
of their Discipline: and in like manner they, who had been instructed in this
their sublime Theology, were called The perfect (...). Thus likewise the
Levites (as some observe) had their quinquennial, or five years probation and
preparation, by preparative Exercises, before they entered upon their complete
office: whence we see what affinity there is betwixt Pythagoras's Probationers,
or Novices, 1 Timothy 3.6. (...), a Novice.
and those in the Jewish Church, and Schole. Paul also 1 Timothy 3.6. makes
mention of a (...), that is, a Novice in the Christian Church, which Oecumenius
enterprets (...), one newly initiated in the faith, a Catechumen, and
Theophilact (...), one newly baptized, and admitted into the Church, answering
to the Hebrew (...) (which the LXX. render Job. 14.9. (...)) and as we may
presume with allusion to the Novice in the Jewish Church. And this very custom
of initiating Novices by preparative Discipline the popish Monks, such as are
Regular, universally retain to this very day (both name and thing) in the
admitting persons into their Covents; which, we need no way doubt, they at
first took up in imitation of, and compliance with the Pagans, especially the
Pythagoreans, and the Jewish Church; as also their whole Monastique Life, and
Institutes, of which hereafter. Lastly, we should be perfect (...), and without
blemish; such were the Pythagorean (...); and Plato's Priest, whom he requires
to be (...), perfect and genuine.

The Discipline of Pythagoras's Schole and College.
6. We have spoken of Pythagoras's Disciples in common, as also of those who
belonged to his coenebium, or College, both his Novices, and perfect, with
their cognation to, and derivation from the Jewish Church, and Schools. We now
proceed to treat of the Discipline Pythagoras exercised amongst his Scholars,
especially those of his (...) or College, wherein we doubt not, but to discover
many remarkable, and evident footsteps of Jewish discipline, and Traditions,
whence we may suppose it was traduced.

The first thing considerable in the Discipline of Pythagoras's (...) or
College was the Confoederation, The confoederation or consociation in
Pythagoras's College founded in virtue.
League, or Covenant betwixt all those, who were Members thereof. For as we
have already proved, Pythagoras was very severe and strict in the admission of
Members into his Systeme or College. He judged, and that rightly, there could
be no fraternity and lasting friendship, but what was grounded on Likeness;
and no true proper Likeness, but what was founded in virtue, or resemblance of
God. Whence says Iamblichus of the Pythagoreans, Their study of friendship by
words and actions, had reference to some Divine temperament, and to union with
God, and to unity with the Divine soul. So Stanly of Pythag. Philos. chapter 2. By
which it is plain, that Pythagoras asserted both in Thesi, or Opinion, and in
Hypothesi, and Practice, that there could be no Consociation, or friendship
worthy of that name, but what was founded on Virtue, and Likeness to God. This
also was sufficiently couched under two of Pythagoras's Symbols according to
the explication of Iamblichus, as that Symbol 28. [ Lay not hold on every one
suddenly with your right hand] i. e. says Iamblichus, See Stanly of Pythag.
Symbols fol. 120.
give not your right hand, or draw not easily to you into your society persons
not initiated ((...)) i. e. such as have not been long tried by Doctrines and
Disciplines, nor are approved as worthy to participate, etc. Another of
Pythagoras's Symbols, whereby he signified to us, that Virtue, or Likeness to
God, was the only solid and genuine foundation of strict Friendship and
Society, was this, Symbol. 35. [ set down salt] that is, says Iamblichus
Justice, of which salt is an emblem. This also Plato (Pythagoras's imitator)
does much insist upon, especially in Lysis (this Lysis, whom Plato makes to be
the subject of this discourse of friendship, was Pythagoras's Scholar) (...) of
Friendship, proving first that (...) Likeness was the ground of all
Friendship. 2. Thence (...) etc. that good men only were alike, and Friends,
(...), that wicked men had no likeness, etc. Whence he concludes 3. (...),
there is no conjunction, or stable union amongst wicked men.

. 7. Now that Pythagoras took this Foundation, Constitution, Pythagoras's
College from the confoederation of the Jewish Church.
or Idea of his Cellege from the Jewish Church their holy confederation, I
think we have good conjectures, if not demonstrative Arguments to prove it.
For we know, the Jewish Church was by virtue of Gods Covenant, and gracious
presence with them a separate, select, peculiar, and holy people: Exodus 19.5.
-- and keep my covenant, then shall ye be a peculiar treasure to me above all
people, (...) signifies ones own proper good, Exodus 19.5, 6. peculiar
treasure.
which he loves, and keeps in store for himself, and for peculiar use: 1
Chr. 29 3. Here it is applied to Gods Church, and translated by the LXX. a
peculiar people, and St Peter expresses it by a word, that signifies a people
for peculiar possession 1 Pet. 2.9. [(...)] i. e. as Camero observes (...) for
(...) signifies primarily abundance, thence excellency, as choice, select
jewels, etc. Therefore God, though he were the Rector of all the earth, yet the
Jewish Church was his peculiar treasure, or possession, as the Diadem on the
head, or the seal on the hand: so Exodus 34.9. and take us for thine
inheritance (...) we find the same Psalm. 135.4. For the Lord has chosen Jacob
to himself, and Israel for his peculiar treasure (...) it is the same word
with Exodus 19.5. and so rendered (...) such a separate, peculiar, and holy
relation had the Jewish Church by virtue of Gods Covenant, and their own
stipulation unto God. In imitation whereof, we may safely conjecture,
Pythagoras framed his (...) Covent, or College, which was to him as a peculiar
Family, Pythagoras's Symbol of Salt as a sign of confoederation and covenant
from the Jewish use of this type.
or Church; and therefore look as Salt was of great use in the Jewish Church,
and Sacrifices, as that which did lively, though but Symbolically, represent
their holy friendship, and communion with God; so in like manner Pythagoras
makes great use of this same Symbol [ set down salt] to express the holy
Friendship and Communion there should be amongst his Colleagues. And that
Pythagoras's Symbol of Salt, by which he signified that Covenant, and
Friendship, which ought to be betwixt his Colleagues, had its first rise from
the parallel use of Salt in the Jewish Church, will I think appear very
probable, if we consult the Scriptures, where we find this Symbol mentioned, as
also its use amongst the Ancients. Levit. 2.13. Salt of the Covenant. Numb.
18.19. Covenant of Salt.
It is said Lev. 2.13. Thou shall not suffer the Salt of the Covenant of thy
God to be lacking; with all thine offerings thou shall offer salt. So Numb.
18.19. we read of a Covenant by Salt. The like 2. Chron. 13.5. where the salt,
that was cast upon all the Sacrifices, is called the Salt of the Covenant,
because the Covenant of God with his people was confirmed by Sacrifice, as
Psalm. 50.5. Gather my Saints together unto me, The Covenant by Salt the same
with the Covenant by Sacrifice.
those who have made a Covenant with me by Sacrifice. The original of which
Covenant by Sacrifice we find Genesis 15.9, 10. which was afterward imitated by
the Heathens in the confirmation of their solemn Covenants: so that this
Covenant by Salt is the same with the Covenant by Sacrifice, because these
Covenants by Sacrifice, both in the Jewish Church, and also amongst the Greeks,
were solemnized by Eating, and drinking the Sacrifices, whereunto Salt was
always a necessary appendix. For God by these feastings upon the Sacrifices,
wherein Salt was used, did confirm his Covenant with those, who did
participate of them; in as much as they did in some sort eat and drink with
God: as Luke 13.26. We have eaten and drunk in thy presence. Luk 13.26. Salt
used as a Symbol of Covenants and friendship.
i. e. we have eaten and drunk together with thee of thy Sacrifices, or at thy
Communion Table, for the ratifying our Covenant, and in token of our friendship
with thee. And, that Salt was always accounted by the Ancient Jews, as an
essential concurrent of their feasts, especially such as were for the
confirmation of Covenants, Love, and Friendship, appears by that common
proverb, (...) Every feast wherein is not some salt, is no feast. We have a
great instance, and proof of this Jewish custom to make use of Salt for the
confirmation of their Covenants, Ezra. 4.14.
in Ezra 4.14. where the original Chaldee (different from our version) runs
thus (...) because we have eaten of the Kings salt. i. e. because we have
engaged our selves in a Covenant of Friendship to him, by eating of his meat.
So that we see this Rite of making Covenants by Salt was fresh amongst the
Jews even then, when Pythagoras flourished, and lived amongst them in Chaldea.
Hence learned Cudworth (in his Discourse of the true notion of the Lords Supper
page 68.) having shown how Salt was used amongst the Ancients as a Symbol of
Covenants, and friendship, adds, Thus I understand that Symbol of Pythogoras
(...), to set down Salt for Friendship, and hospitality. -- Because Covenants
and reconciliations were made by eating, and drinking, where salt was always
used. Salt it self was accounted amongst the Ancients a Symbol of friendship,
(...) Salt, and the Table was used proverbially amongst the Greeks to express
friendship by: thence Origens quotation out of Archilochus (...), to
transgress the Salt and Table, was to violate the most sacred league of
Friendship. Aeschines in his Oration de perperam habita Legatione has a
passage very pertinent to this purpose, (...). For he says, that he ought
greatly to esteem the Salt, and common Table of the City. Thus Cudworth, etc.
By which we see how, and why the Ancients both Jews, and Greeks made Salt a
Symbol of their Covenants, and friendship. But yet I conceive there was
something more couched under this Symbol of Salt, than learned Cudworth has
taken notice of, which will give further illustration, and proof to our
Assertion, that Pythagoras traduced it from the Jewish Church. For God
instituting Salt, as a Symbol of his Covenant, to be eaten with the Sacrifices,
as Lev. 2.13. did thereby represent to the life that sanctity, or holiness,
Salt also used as a Symbol of Sanctity.
which he required, and expected from such, as entered into Covenant with him:
For who knows not, that Salt, as it gives a savor, and relish to meats, so its
chief use is to preserve from putrefaction: this explication Christ himself
gives of this Symbol, Mark 9.49, 50. Mark 9.49.
Every one shall be salted with fire, and every Sacrifice salted with Salt,
etc. Salted, i. e. purifyed, and preserved by Grace, as flesh by Salt: the like
Symbolique usage of Salt is given by Christ Mat. 5.13. Ye are the salt. So
Luke 14.34. Coloss. 4.6. seasoned etc. That this was a main use of Salt amongst
the Heathens, and that they traduced this usage from the Jewish Church, is
asserted and proved by Francis Valesius de Sacra Pholosophia, cap. 16. on
Levit. 2.13. It is a wonder (says he) that it was a solemn Rite, not only in
the Sacrifices of the true God, but also in those of the false gods, to use
salt, as you may understand by Pliny lib. 31. cap. 7. where discoursing of the
praises of Salt, he says, that its authority is much understood in Sacreds,
seeing no Sacrifices are performed without Salt. Whence I conjecture that this
custom was derived from the first Sacrifices of the infant world, which were
offered to the great God. And that it was thence derived into the Sacred Rites
of all the Gentiles: for we have much reason to judge, that those false
Ministers of Sacreds, received this custom from the true Priests, according to
the Devils institution, thereby to have the Divine Sacrifices offered to him.
Plato in his Dialogue of Natures says, that Salt is a body friendly to God,
which accords with this present text: for God requires every Sacrifice to be
seasoned with Salt, as that which was grateful and friendly to him. -- Namely
Salt seems to be a Symbol of Integrity, and Incorrupti^n, and thence of
Innocence. For Salt, as it is manifest by experience (and from Aristotle
Problemat. 26. Sect.) dries, and thence preserves things from Corruption.
Deservedly therefore is Salt made a Symbol of Justice, and so commanded in the
Sacrifices. To which belongs that Numb. 18.19. Its a covenant of salt for ever.
He calls it a covenant of Salt. i. e. a covenant of Sacrifices, etc. Here
Valetius seems to take in both notions: namely, as salt signifies an inviolable
covenant of friendship, and moreover Integrity and Holiness, both which are
couched under this borrowed Symbol of Salt, and both conveyed from the use of
Salt in the Church of God to the like usage of it amongst the Pythagoreans, and
other Heathens. And thus much indeed Pythagoras understood by this Symbol of
his (...), to place salt. i. e. says Iamblichus in his explication, as a sign
of Justice, Righteousness or Holiness. Thus also Diogenes explaines this
Symbol of Salt as preservative of meats, etc. For Pythagoras conceived there
could be no right consociation or friendship, but what was founded in virtue
(as before) and therefore was he so strict in the examen or trial of his
Probationers, and so severe in the whole Discipline of his College, which that
it all sprang from the Jewish Discipline, and his affectation thereof, will
farther appear by what follows.

Pythagoras drew the pattern of his Collegiate life from the Essenes.
. 9. As Pythagoras took the Idea or platform of his Systeme, and College from
the Jewish Church in general, that holy, and peculiar relation they had to God,
and to each other, by virtue of that mutual confederation or covenant betwixt
them and God. So I conceive he had a peculiar regard, in framing this his
College, to the particular Confoederation, or Monastique consociation of the
Essenes, with whom he does in the chief parts of his Collegiate Discipline
Symbolize, as it will appear, when we descend to particulars. Now here to make
the way to this demonstration clear, we are to consider the Rise, constitution,
and Discipline of these Essenes. As for the origination of their name they were
called (...) i. e. according to the Greeks (...), and according to our English
Dialect Pure. Now the Origination or Rise of these Essenes I conceive (by the
best conjectures I can make from Antiquity) to be in, or immediately after the
Babylonian Captivity, (though some make them later) and the occasion of their
separation, or consociation, seems this. Many of the carnal Jews defiling
themselves either by being too deeply plunged in Worldly Affairs, even to the
neglect of their Religion, or, which was worse, by sinful compliances with
their Idolatrous Lords, thereby to secure their carnal interests, these (...),
or Essenes to preserve themselves from these common pollutions separated, and
retired themselves from the crowd of worldly affairs into an holy solitude,
and private condition of life; The Discipline of the Essenes.
where entering into a strict confederation, or consociation, to lead together
a Collegiate devout life, they 1. shunned all carnal pleasures, which might
entice them from their Devotion. 2. They avoided all profane company, and
conformity to the world, as also all affectation of Secular dignity, applause
and honor. 2. They engaged in a strict fraternal communion amongst themselves,
professing a community of goods, etc. 4. They did in time of persecution, so
far as they were able, lead a Monastique life, forbearing marriage, etc. 5.
They were very abstemious and moderate in the use of creature comforts;
forbearing wine, drinking water, etc. 6. They had their Distinctive garments,
or white vestments. 7. They used Ceremonial purifications, according to their
Law; as also moral mortification of sin. 8. They enjoined silence on their
Novices, and were all studious for the right government of their speech, etc.
9. They forbad Oaths. 10. They had their Elders in great esteem. 11. They
acknowledged all things to be disposed by a particular overruling Providence.
12. They did in a peculiar manner devote themselves to the worship of God by
Prayers, and Sacrifices, especially of manimates. 13. They divided their Lives,
and Studies into two parts, 1. contemplative. 2. active: they spent their time
most in Action, besides what they employed in their Devotions; the principal
study they addicted themselves unto was Medicine: they gave themselves also to
gardening, and other labors of the hand. 14. They distributed the Day into
times for Prayer, for Reading, for Study, for labor with their hands, and for
natural Refreshments. 15. They endeavored much exactness in their Morals, to
lead an exemplary Life. 16. Such as proved Apostates, or Scandalous, they
excommunicated by the common consent of all the Fraternity, or Society. And to
conclude with the character of Viret. (in his interim page 122.) In sum their
Estate was in their first constitution an excellent Schole of Medicine, of
Doctrine, and of Examples of virtue: all things were done amongst them in good
order, and I think the first Christian Monks took their pattern from these
Essenes. But the later Monks have rather followed the example of the Sadduces,
and Pharisees. Thus Viret. Indeed the Sadduces, and Pharisees seem to be orders
of much later constitution, and but a spurious degenerate offspring of the
ancient devout (...) Essenes. For although they both affected the opinion and
esteem of eminent Saints, or Separatists (for so their name Pharisee imports)
yet all their pretended sanctity was but apparent hypocrisy, as far short of
the sanctity and devotion of the first (...) or Essenes, as the pretended
Popish mortifications of the later Monks comes short of the sanctity and
devotion of the first Christian (...), or Puritans. He that will see more of
these Jewish (...) or Essenes may consult Drusius de 3. sectis Judaeorum, etc.

The Pythagoreans imitation of the Essenes.
Having laid down the original of the Essenes, their Collegiate Constitution,
Order, and Discipline, I shall now proceed to show, how much the Pythagorean
College, or Systeme did Symbolize, and agree therewith: which will give a great
confirmation to our Hypothesis; that Pythagoras traduced the Idea of his
College, and its Discipline from the Jewish Church, etc.

1. The Pythagoreans great Separatists from all that were not of their Society.
1. The Pythagoreans, as the Essenes, separated themselves from the rest of men,
whom they accounted Profane; not at all regarding their Riches, Honors, or
Pleasures. Hence that great Law amongst them (...), to give the Right hand of
fellowship to none but to Pythagoreans: i. e. says Iamblichus, to have
communion with none, who are not initiated, or tried by Doctrines, and
Disciplines, etc. The same phrase was used in the Jewish Church, to denote
communion. So Paul speaks of the Right hand of fellowship given to him by
Peter, Gal. 2.9. See Chap. 9. Parag. 3.
James, and John. Gal. 2.9. according to the Jewish Dialect. And as the Jews
accounted all, that were not of their Church, as dogs, profane, without, etc.
So likewise the Pythagoreans, called all those, who were not of their Society
(...) or (...) not initiated; and (...) and (...), those without, profane, etc.
So Grotius on Mat. 7.6. Mat. 7.6.
[ cast not what is holy to dogs] observes this Symbolick mode was brought by
Pythagoras out of the Oriental parts. Yea Iamblichus tells us, that the
Pythagoreans excluded all, save their Parents, (...), from their conversation;
hence those verses touching Pythagoras. (...),
(...).
His Associates he esteemed equal to the blessed Gods: but as for others he
esteemed them not either in speech, or number; Iamblichus lib. 1. cap. 35. This
Pythagorean separation; and contempt of all others, but their own Colleagues,
gained them much envy, so that as some observe, they being once assembled in
their College, or the place where they were wont to meet, some ill-willers
accused them of a conspiracy against the City, which caused them to be almost
all massacred, of which see Vossius de Philos. sect. l. 2. c. 6. par. 26. This
is most probable, that the Pythagoreans were strict and severe separatists, as
the Essenes, and Jews before them.

2. The Pythagoreans, as well as the Essenes, shunned all carnal pleasures, all
mundane Honors, Riches, and Grandeur, 2. Their shunning worldly pleasures, etc.
affecting an (...) a mental self-sufficiencie. Thus Pythagoras in his Epistle
to Hiero (of which before chap. 5.) pretends to an (...), a self-sufficiencie,
which made him scorn the Honors, Pleasures, and Pomp of Hiero's court. Herein
the Pythagareans were followed by the morose Cynicks, who affected a great
aversation from all worldly pleasures, dignities, and conformities: as also by
the Stoics, who placed happiness in an (...) a self-sufficiencie, thence
Epictetus begins his Enchiridion with his (...), etc.

3. The Pythagoreans made not only a separation from the world, 3. Their strict
consociation and community of goods.
both persons and things; but also a strict Consociation, or Confoederation
amongst themselves; professing a community of goods, or enjoying all things in
common; wherein they did exactly imitate the Collegiate Discipline of the
Essenes. Thus Iamblichus (cap. 17.) Pythagoras, Inter Pythagoraeos col^batur
societ as inseparabilis, quod a communione appellabatur (...). Hunc morem (...)
apud Judaeos imitati sunt Essenes, qui omnia communia habebant. Horn. Hist.
Philos. l. 7. c. 12.
says he, appointed a Community of Estates, and constituted an inviolable
Confederacy, and Society as being that ancient way of consociation (perhaps
he means in the Jewish Church, which was most ancient) which is truly styled
(...) a Covent or College. This was agreeable to the Dogmes of Pythagoras (...),
all things ought to be common amongst Friends, And (...) Friendship is an
equality: whence his precept, Esteem nothing your own. So Diog. Laer. says,
the Pythagoreans put their estates in one common stock, etc. Thus Vossius de
Phil. Sect. l. 2. c. 6.. 25. The Pythagoreans, says he, maintained the
strictest conjunction amongst themselves; also a communion of Goods. But as for
the Friendships of other men, they no way esteemed them, albeit they abounded
with Riches, and Honors. And Plato proceeding upon the very same principles
with Pythagoras, viz: That all things must be common among friends, etc.
enjoynes a Community of all things in his Commonwealth: of which hereafter.

Their Celibate from the Essenes, or Jewish Priests.
4. As the Essenes, and devout Jews did, if they had ability, forbear marriage
in times of persecution, especially thereby to avoid many snares, and
encumbrances; so likewise the Pythagoreans, who did not only look on Celibate,
or single life as expedient for some times, and conditions; but enjoined it in
their sect, as a thing sacred, and holy. This learned Bochart. proves at large
in his excellent Treatise against Veron. part 3. chap. 25. sect. 4. Art. 1. (in
French page 1338.) where he shows, that the Injunction of celibat, or
Monastique life, was one great part of the doctrine of Demons (mentioned 1.
Tim. 4.1.3.) which, says he, was one of the superstitions Pythagoras brought
out of Egypt, when he returned into Greece. For (as Clem Alexandr. (...). l.
1.) he forbad marriage to those of his sect, and erected a Cloister of Virgins
(or Nuns) the charge of which he gave to his Daughter. Plato held the same
sentiment, and Heraclitus, and Democritus, and Zeno the Prince of the Stoiques,
who never touched a Woman. Thus Bochart. But it is possible, Pythagoras might
take up this his injunction of Celebat from the Jewish Priests, who at some
times were enjoined abstinence from Women. So Grotius on Colos. 2.21. having
shown how these Injunctions did not refer to the Jewish Law, but to some
Traditions of the Jews, and Dogmes of Philosophers, especially the
Pythagoreans, he concludes thus, This last phrase (...) handle not, refers to
separation from Women, which the Jewish Priests at some certain times were
enjoined, but the Pythagoreans always, etc. Hammond on 1. Tim. 4.3.
[forbidding to marry] shows, how the Gnostics received this part of their
character forbidding marriages, etc. from the Pythagorean Philosophers, as
Clemens Alexandr. Strom. lib. 3. etc. Pythagorean abstinences from Jews and
Essenes.


5. As the Essenes had their particular Rules for Abstinences from wine, etc.
And the Jews in general had their Abstinences from several meats, and at
several times. So also the Pythagoreans in imitation of them. Thus Jerome tells
us, that the Essenes abstained from flesh: whence some conceive Pythagoras
brought this superstition into Greece, as Horn. Hist. Phil. l. 7. c. 12. Thus
also Stanley of Pythagoras's Discipline, chapter 5. out of Iamblichus. Moreover
Pythagoras commanded his Disciples to abstain from all things, that had life,
and from certain other meats, which obstruct the clearness of understanding:
likewise from wine, also to eat, and sleep little. So Diogenes Laertius tells
us, that Pythagoras held things dedicated to God were holy, and so not to be
used for common uses: Col. 2.16. Pythagorean Praecepts.
thence that fishes were not to be eaten (...), etc. And Grotius on Col. 2.16
gives us a full account hereof, (...), in meat, or drink.] In one clause,
says Grotius, he comprehends both those, who Judaized, and Pythagorized. To
abstain from wine was not a perpetual Jewish Institute, but in some [persons
and Times] but amongst the Pythagoreans it was frequent. The Jews abstained
from some meats; the Pythagoreans from many more. Thus Grotius. The like he
adds on verse. 20. To the rudiments of the world, (...), says Grotius,
Rudiments, etc. every institution, Gal. 4.3.9. where you will see why they are
called rudiments of the world, namely because they were common to the Jews
with other Nations. There was nothing in these Rites proper to the Jews, etc.
The same he adds on verse. 21. (...)] Here is, Col. 2.21.22. Pythagoras's
Dogmes.
says Grotius, a (...), the note whereof the Syriack has placed here. For thus
these masters spoke. Tertullian against Marcion 5. denies that this belongs to
the Law of Moses. He seems to me to have used common words which should
comprehend both the Jews and Philosophers, especially the Pythagoreans. And
these first words (...), touch not, taste not, chiefly belong to meats: the
later (...) refer to Women, etc. So again, v. 22. (...)] This, says Grotius,
refers to the (...), v. 20. These things were invented by men, they came not
primarily from God. (...) precepts were such as were commanded by men's Laws:
(...), such things as were enjoined by the Pythagoreans, as before. Thus
likewise Hammond in his Paraph on 1. Tim. 4.3. 1. Tim. 4.3. Commanding to
abstain from meats.
Forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats affirms that the
Gnostics had these Doctrines from the Pythagorean Philosophers. And Mede in
his Apostacy of the latter times, on these words 1. Tim. 4.3. forbidding to
marry, etc. proves at large that these Monkish Abstinences were but imitations,
and branches of the Doctrines of Demons (mentioned v. 1.) brought into Greece
by Pythagoras, Plato, and other Philosophers.

6 Their purifications both Ceremonial and Moral.
6. The Jews in general, but more particularly the Essenes had their
Purifications, or Purgatories, both Ceremonial, and Moral. So in like manner
the Pythagoreans. Thus Iamblichus of Pythagoras. He said (quoth he) that purity
is acquired by expiations, and bathings, and sprinklings, etc. So Diogenes
Laertius in his life. Pythagoras, says he, held, that cleanesse is acquired by
expurgations, washings, and sprinklings, with separation from all that
defiles. And Justin Martyr. Apolog. 2. gives us this general assertion, that
all these washings, which the Heathens used in their sacreds, had their
original, though by a Diabolique imitation, from our Sacred Scriptures, etc.

7. Their observation of Festivals.
7. The Jews in general, and the Essenes in particular, were very exact in
their observation of their Festivals. So likewise were the Pythagoreans. For,
says Iamblichus, Pythagoras commanded that upon holy days we cut not our
hair, nor pair our nails: See Stanley of Pythag.'s Discipline, chap. 3. fol.
92.

8. Their white distinctive vestments from Eccles. 9.8. Let thy garments be
white.
8. Again the Pythagoreans, as well as the Jews and Essenes, had their white
distinctive vestments, or garments. So Iamblichus (cap. 20.) speaking of
Pythagoras's Disciples, says, They wear a white, and clean garment: So
Diogenes Laertius says, that Pythagoras held the Gods to be worshipped (...),
with a good conscience (so (...) is used by Plato) and white Vestment, etc. as
Eccles. 9.8. Let thy Vestment be always white, etc. Hence I suppose the
Pythagorean white. P. Virgil quaest. 4, de Inv. Rer. 7. supposes that the
Hebrews borrowed their white Garment from the Egyptians, whence also Pythagoras
received the same: for Herod. l. 2. acquaints us, that the Egyptian Priests
used a pure white Vestment, and rejected the Woollen, as profane. But it seems
evident, that both the Egyptians, and Pythagoreans traduced their white
Vestments from the Jews, who received them from sacred Institution.

9. As the Essenes, so the Pythagoreans enjoined silence, Their perpetual
silence, or conceling their mysteries from strangers.
and that not only on their Exotericks, or Novices; but also on their (...), or
Intrinsicks: for besides the five years silence which Pythagoras prescribed his
novices, he had another called (...) a continual silence, which properly
belonged to his perfect Disciples, who were enjoined secrecy, or concelement
of the Pythagorean mysteries from all those who were not of their society,
whom the Pythagoreans termed (...), uninitiated, profane, etc. therefore not
meet to have notice of their mysteries. Thus Iamblichus, speaking of the
Pythagoreans, says. That the Principal, and most mysterious of their Doctrines
they reserved amongst themselves unwritten, as not fit to be published, but to
be delivered by oral tradition to their Successors, as mysteries of the Gods.
To which that of Cicero lib. 1. de not. Deor. refers. Thou may not concele it
from me, as Pythagoras was wont to concele his mysteries from aliens. Thus
Vossius de Philos. sect. l. 2. c. 6.. 24. having spoken of the Pythagorean
quinquennial silence says, They had another silence, which was perpetual: by
which it was unlawful for the Pythagoreans to discourse (not amongst
themselves, but) with strangers of those mysteries, which they had received.
This indeed exactly answers the Jewish silence, or secrecy in conceling from
the Gentiles their mysteries. viz. the name Jehovah, which they (as it is said)
would always pronounce by the other more common name Adonai, thereby to
concele it, etc. For the Jews accounted the Gentiles, but as profane, and Dogs;
therefore not fit to be made partakers of their mysteries. To which Christ
seems to allude Mat. 7.6. give not what is holy to Dogs. Yea indeed the
Pythagoreans were not without some kind of silence amongst themselves, for they
esteemed the right government of our speech, one of the hardest, and therefore
best governments; as Iamblichus l. 1. cap. 31. Thence Pythagoras enjoined his
Disciples, 1. Perpetual silence, unless they could speak somewhat more
profitable than their silence. 2. When they did speak, to utter many things in
few words, nor few things in many words: For Pythagoras was a professed enemy
to tatling; thence that Symbol of his: Receive not a Swallow into your house,
i. e. says Vossius, admit not of tatlars. So Zeno, the Prince of the Stoics,
when he heard any talk much, was wont to say. That man's ears were fallen down
into his tongue. 3. Pythagoras enjoined his scholars not to speak rashly
without premeditation. 4. Not to discourse of Pythagorean mysteries without
Light: For, says Iamblichus, it is impossible to understand Pythagorean
Doctrines without Light. 5. Pythagoras required a particular silence, or right
ordering of speech in speaking of, or drawing near unto the Gods. So Iamblichus
on Pythagoras's Seventh Symbol. [Above all things govern your tongue in
following the Gods.] The first work of wisdom (says he) is to turn our speech
inward upon our selves (by meditation) for nothing does more perfect the soul,
than when a man turning inward upon himself follows the Gods. 6. And touching
the Pythagorean silence in general, Apuleius in floridis tells us, That the
first thing Pythagoras taught his Disciples, was to hold their peace; and the
first meditation of him who would be wise, should be for an universal bridling
of his tongue; and having clipped the wings of his words, which the Poets call
birds, to shut them up within the walls of his white teeth. 7. The
Pythagoreans, as the Essenes, forbad Oaths.

Their Revere^ce toward their Elders.
10. The Pythagoreans in imitation of the Essenes, and Jews, had their Elders in
great esteem. They never made mention of Pythagoras, without some note of
reverence, calling him (...) the Theologue etc. And (...) he said it, had with
Pythagoras's Disciples the same authority, as a first principle with other
Philosophers, or a Scriptural testimony with a Jew, and Christian. This is
observed by Laert. l. 8. Cicero l. 1. de. N. Deor. Quint. l. 11. c. 1. and
others; who tell us that Pythagoras's Authority answered all objections: for
when he spoke, he was esteemed as the Pythian oracle: so that the solemn
formule was (...): And it is not unlikely, but this title also he borrowed from
the Sacred Records: for (...), or thus says he, is a title given to God in
Scripture; as Hornius Hist. Philos. l. 7. c. 12. (...) an honorable appellation
is attributed not only to Profane, but also to Sacred Writers; so that it is
not given to any, but the most excellent, yea to God himself: for so He more
easily gained credit to his Doctrine, and Authority to Himself.

They own Fate.
11. The Pythagoreans, as the Essenes, acknowledged all things to be disposed by
a particular providence, which they called Fate.

Their Devotion.
12. The Jews, and particularly the Essenes, did in a peculiar manner,
especially in times of Persecution, and captivity, devote themselves to the
worship of God, by prayers, etc. in order whereto, they had their (...) praying
houses. So likewise the Pythagoreans were generally Devoto's, or much addicted
to devotion: of which hereafter.

13. The Pythagoreans, as the Essenes, divided their life, Their studies,
Contemplative, Active.
and studies into Contemplative, and Active. In their studies they much
addicted themselves to Medicine; in their bodily exercises to Gardening, etc.

14. The Pythagoreans, in imitation of the Essenes, distributed the day into
several parts, for Devotion, Study, Labor, etc. The Pythagorean daily
exercises, with their morning Premeditations, and evening Recollection of all.
So Iamblichus of Pythagoras cap. 20. Those who were taught by Pythagoras,
spent their morning walk alone, and in such places, where they might be most
retired, and free from disturbances. After their morning walk, they met
together in the Temple, or place of Devotion. After that, having spent some
time in their studies, they went to their morning Exercises. At Dinner they
used (mostly) bread and honey. Their afternoon they employed in Political
affairs. All the actions of the day they contrived in the morning before they
rose, and examined the same at night before they went to sleep. Pythagoraei
exercendae memoriae causa, singulis diebus quid egissent, quid legissent, quid
profecissent, in Vita, in Doctrina, vesperi commemorabant: benefacta laudem,
malefacta vituperium merebantur. Hornius. Hist. Philos. l. 7. c. 12.
A Pythagorean rose not out of his bed, before he had called to mind the
Actions of the day past, which recollection he performed in this manner. He
endeavored to call to mind what he had heard, or done in the first, second,
third place (and so in order) after his rising: And then after his going forth,
whom he met with first, whom next, etc. and what discourses he had with the
first, what with the second, etc. for he endeavored to keep a Diarie, Journal,
or memoires of all that happened throughout the day; and so to repeat every
thing in order as it happened. Thus they chiefly exercised their memories; for
they conceived nothing conduces more to knowledge, experience, and wisdom,
then to remember many things. He taught his Disciples to do nothing without
premeditation; nor any thing whereof they could not give a good account; but
that in the morning they should consider what they were to do; and at night
make a recollection thereof: so Porphyrie on the life of Pythag. page 26.
says, That Pythagoras advised his Scholars, to have regard chiefly to two
things. 1. The time of their going to bed. 2. The time of their rising: at each
of these to consider what actions are past, and what to come: of the past to
require from themselves an account; of the future to have a Providential
circumspection, and care. So Virgil ex Pythag. inter Epigr. Non prius in dulcem
declinat lumina somnum,
Omnia quam longi reputaverat acta diei;
Quae praetergressus, quid gestum in tempore, quid non:
See more Stanly, of Pythagoras's discipline cap. 9, 10.

Constancy, and against Apostacy.
15. The Pythagoreans, as the Essenes, affected a great constancy in their
principles, and morals: in order whereto they had many cautionary precepts
against Apostasy. So Iamblichus explaines that 15th. Symbol of Pythagoras.
[Travelling from home turn not back, for the Furies go back with you.] i. e.
says Iamblichus after you have applied your self to Philosophy, turn not
back, etc. Which also was a Proverbial Symbol amongst the Jews; to which our
Savior seems to allude, when he gives those cautions against Apostacy: viz.
Remember Lots Wife: and He that puts his hand to the Plow and looks back, etc.

Their Excommunication.
16. As the Essenes were severe in their Excommunication of Apostates, and
Scandalous persons, so the Pythagoreans. Thus Iamblichus cap. 17. Those, who
were cast out of Pythagoras's Schole, had (...), a coffin made by his
Disciples, placed in their room, as if they had been dead: for all, that were
about Pythagoras, spoke of them as dead; and when they met them, behaved
themselves toward them, as if they had been some other persons; for the men
themselves they said were dead, etc. That Pythagoras traduced this Symbolick
Emblem, of persons dead in sins, from the Jewish Church, is well observed, and
proved by Grotius on Mat. 8.22. Let the dead bury their dead: and Hammond (out
of him) on Luke 15.24. of which hereafter.

17. As the Pythagorean Novices had their probationarie year, or years; so the
Jewish Essenes. Thus Hornius Hist. Philos. l. 7. c. 15. The Essenes, who alone
are worthy the name of Philosophers among the Jews, did not presently admit
their Disciples, till after one year, (or more) they had probation of their
behavior, etc.

I have in these severals drawn the Parallel betwixt the Jewish Essenes and the
Pythagoreans: A general Parallel 'twixt the Essenes and Pythagoreans.
and for the farther conviction, that all this was not a mere figment of mine
own, without foundation, or prescript, see something of this Parallel in
Godwins Jewish Antiquities l. 1. c. 12. of the Essenes, whom he makes to
symbolize with the Pythagoreans. 1. In that both professed a Communion of
goods. 2. Both shunned pleasures. 3. Both wore White garments. 4. Both forbad
Oaths. 5. Both had their Elders in singular respect. 6. Both drank Water. 7.
Both asserted Fate. 8. Both enjoined silence, etc.

Now that the Pythagoreans derived these parts of their Discipline from the
Essenes, and Jews, will be further evident by what follows.

CHAP. VII. Of Pythagoras's Philosophy Natural, and Moral, etc.
The Original of Pythagoras's Philosophy, from the Jews, etc. 1. His
Mathematics. 1. Arithmetic. 2. Music. 3. Astronomy. 4. The earths Motion,
etc. 5. Geometry. 6. Weights, and Measures, from the Jews. 2. Pythagoras's
Physics. 1. Contemplative, The world's origin, its first Matter, Genesis 1.1, 2.
Its Form, Genesis 1.13. Fire the great active principle in all things, from Genesis
1.2. 2. Medicine from the Jews. 3. Pythagoras's Moral Philosophy. 1. Ethics,
Dogmatick, Preceptive, and Characteristick Ethick, Characters Jewish. Death a
Character of a wicked state, as Luke 15.24. Salt of Grace, etc. The Sum of
Pythagoras's Ethics in (...), and (...). 2. Pythagoras's Politics from
Moses's Polity: The Pythagoreans great Politicians. Their two great Maxims to
preserve 1. Liberty against Tyranny. 2. Unity against Faction.

1. HAving gone thorough the story of Pythagoras's life, as also the Discipline
of his Schole, and College, A distribution of Pythagorean Philosophy
we now proceed to his Philosophy; wherein we doubt not but to discover many
Jewish Traditions, and Footsteps. And to proceed methodically, we shall begin
with the matter of his Philosophy, and thence pass on to his Form, or mode of
Philosophizing; each whereof will afford us very strong Presumptions (though
not Physical demonstration) that he traduced both the one, and the other from
the Jewish sacred fountains. Some distribute Pythagoras's Philosophy into two
parts. Theologick, and Ethick: By Theology, they understand that, which we
usually call Physics, namely the knowledge of God, as the first cause of all
things. Thus Danaeus in cap. 9. August. ad Laurent. and Hornius Histor. Philos.
l. 3. c. 11. But we shall follow the usual Distribution thus. The matter, or
body of Pythagoras's Philosophy may be distributed into Natural, Moral, o^
Supernatural. 1. His Natural philosophy conteines, 1. His Physics, or Natural
philosophy properly so called. 2. His Mathematics. His Physics were either,
1. Contemplative, which was nothing else but the story of the Creation; or 2.
Active consisting in Medicine. 2. His Moral philosophy consisted, 1. in
Ethics, or moral precepts, 2. in Politics. 3. His Supernatural philosophy
was 1. Diabolick, or Magic divination. 2. Theologick, and Divine: Pythagoras
usually began with the Mathematick Sciences, as preparatives to the
contemplation of things more sublime: So Porphyrie in the life of Pythagoras
page 31. He is said to be the first, that changed the proud title of (...)
wisdom into (...) a Love of Wisdom as Austin. de civ. Dei l. 8. c. 2. They
report, that the name Philosophy sprung from Pythagoras, whereas before they
were called (...) wisemen, etc.

. 2. Now that Pythagoras traduced the main parts, if not the whole, of this his
Philosophy from the Jewish Church originally, may in the general be
demonstrated from what we find in Iamblichus, and other Historiographers,
concerning the original of Pythagoras's Philosophy. Pythagoras received part
of his Philosophy. 1. from Orpheus.
Iamblichus says, that Pythagoras drew his Philosophy, and the several parts
thereof, (...). 1. He says, That Pythagoras drew part of his Philosophy from
the Orphicks, i. e. Doctrines of Orpheus. So elsewhere, he tells us, That
Pythagoras derived much of his Theologick Science from Orpheus. That Orpheus's
Theology was symbolick, and mystical, much the same with that of Pythagoras,
we have already proved, out of Proclus in Theol. Plat. l. 1. c. 4. Also, that
Orpheus had his Theology originally from the Jews: which is farther evident by
that famous fragment of the Orpheick Doctrine in Justin Martyr; wherein we find
mention of Abraham, and the Mosaic tables, 2 part from Egypt.
or Decalogue. 2. Iamblichus informs us, That Pythagoras received part of his
Philosophy from the Egyptian Priests. The like he affirms lib. 1. cap. 5.
Pythagoras, says he, owes to the Egyptians (...), etc. his symbolick mode of
learning. So, Clemens Alexandrinus. 1. (...), It is storied that Pythagoras was
instructed by Sonchedes the Egyptian Arch-prophet. That the Egyptians had their
Philosophy from the Jews, we have before proved book 1. chap. 2. Besides we
have shown (book 2. chap. 5.. 7.8.) That Pythagoras, while in Egypt, had
immediate conversation with the Jews, (who resorted thither in great numbers)
by means of his skill in the Egyptian tongue, which was but a different
Dialect of the Hebrew, so that he was thereby capacitated to read, and enquire
into the Sacred Scriptures and Jewish books, without supposition of their
being translated into Greek, which was not till after times. 3. Iamblichus
acquaints us, 3 From the Chaldeans.
That Pythagoras received part of his Philosophy from the Chaldeans. Now that
Pythagoras had converse with the Jews, whilst in Chaldea, by means of his
skill in the Egyptian, and Chaldean tongues (which differed from the Hebrew
only in Dialect) yea that the Jews themselves, frequently past amongst the
Greeks, under the name of Chaldeans, because they lived under their government,
we have endeavored to prove in chap. 5.. 8. of this second Book. 4 From the
Thracians.
4. Iamblichus, together with Hermippus, tell us, That Pythagoras received part
of his Philosophy from the Thracians, so Josephus lib. 1. contra Apion. That
the Thracians had their Philosophy originally from the Jews has been proved
Book 1. chap. 5. parag. 7. 5. Porphyrie p. 4. acquaints us, That Pythagoras had
part of his Philosophy from the Phenicians, who had theirs from the Jews, as
before. 6. Porphyry page 8. and Clements Alexandrinus (...). 1. assure us, That
Pythagoras learned the most excellent parts of his Philosophy from the
Barbarians. That by these Barbarians must be understood the Jews, in the first,
and chiefest place, we have Testimonies of Justin Martyr, Clemens Alexandrinus,
Epiphanius, Nicephorus, and Serranus on Plato's, Cratylus fol. 426. 7. What
Pythagoras learned from his Preceptors, Thales and Pherecydes, owes its
original to the Jews, as before, chap. 3.4. of this second Book.

. 3. Pythagoras begins with the Mathematics.
Having given a general Demonstration touching the traduction of Pythagoras's
Philosophy from the Jews; we now proceed to its Particulars, and shall begin
according to Pythagoras's own method, with his Mathematics: So Porphyrie in
his Life, page 31. The Mind (says he) being purified by Disciplines, ought to
be applied to the most useful: These Pythagoras procured by certain methods,
and gradual mediums, bringing the mind by degrees to the contemplation of
Eternal, Incorporeal, Real Beings. To this end, he first used the Mathematics,
as degrees of preparation to the contemplation of things that are, etc. This
Pythagorean method of beginning with the Mathematick Sciences has been greatly
applauded by some of our New Philosophers (and that perhaps not without
sufficient grounds) as a method most proper for the fixing the Volatile vagrant
spirits of young Students, in their entrance on Philosophy. And this is much
practiced by the French Nobles, who study little else of Philosophy besides
the Mathematics.

Pythagoras first entered his Scholars in Arithmetic.
. 4. Amongst the Mathematick Sciences, Pythagoras firstly entered his Scholars
in Arithmetic, So Stobaeus in Ecl. Phys. lib. 1. c. 11. (...), Pythagoras
seems of all Sciences to have esteemed mostly of Arithmetic, and to have
brought it in use from Mercature; he compared all things to Numbers. That
Pythagoras made great use of Numbers, is apparent, in that he does
symbollically set forth, and describe his chiefest mysteries by numbers, as
hereafter. This part of his Mathematics Pythagoras learned from the
Phenicians, who by reason of their merchandising made much use of Arithmetic.

. 5. Pythagoras having laid a foundation in Arithmetic, proceeds to other
parts of the Mathematics, 2. His skill in Music.
especially to Music, of which also he made a very great symbolick use in all
other parts of his Philosophy: Pythagor^is certe moris f^it, and cum
evigilassent animos ad lyram excitare, quo essent ad agendum erectiores, and
cum somnum peterent, ad eandem lenire mentes, ut si quid fuisset turbidioru^
cogitationum, componerent. Quintil. l. 9. c. 4.
So Iamblichus de vita Pythag. cap. 29. (...), etc. Of the Sciences, they say,
the Pythagoreans did not a little esteem of Music, etc. Thus Apuleitus Florid.
15. and Quint. l. 1. c. 16. tell us, that Pythagoras was a great esteemer of,
and very well skilled in Music, which he commended to his Scholars daily. This
they practiced morning, and evening: in the morning after sleep to purge their
minds from stupor, and impure imaginations; at evening to allay their more
disturbed affections by this kind of Harmony, as Plut. de Iside. and Horn.
Hist. Phil. l. 7. Thence Pythagoras gives symbolical descriptions of the
Heavens, of the Soul, and of other of the mysteries by Harmony, etc. This his
Science of Music, I suppose he might receive from the Egyptians, who greatly
affected Music, or rather immediately from the Jews, who were the first, and
most skilful musicians; receiving their Music by Divine Institution, and
Inspiration, it being prescribed them by God, as a medium, or Ceremonial Rite
of his worship, and practiced by them in Moses's time, long before Orpheus, who
(next to their Idol god Apollo) was styled (...).

3. His skill in Astronomy.
. 6. Pythagoras also was skilled in Astronomy, or the Science of the stars,
which Porphyrie in his Life tells us, he received from the Chaldeans. That the
Chaldeans at first received this Science of Astronomy from the Patriarchs, See
Book 1. chap. 4. Paragr. 3. One great Astronominical Paradox, which the
Phythagoreans maintained was, The Earths motion.
That the Earth moved, and the Heavens stood still. This was also the opinion
of Aristarchus the Samian, who whether he were more ancient or latter then
Pythagoras, is not determined. This likewise was the opinion of Gleanthes the
Samian, Leucippus, Heraclides, and Ecphantus. That the Pythagoreans generally
affirmed, That the Earth was not immovable, but moved in a circle about the
fire: Plutarch in the life of Numa informs us. For they held, that Fire being
the most excellent of creatures, was placed in the midst of the world, which
moved round about it. They asserted moreover, That the Sun was composed of
Fire, etc. Which opinions, that they were from Jewish traditions, we shall
hereafter prove: Laertius acquaints us, that Philolaus the Pythagorean was the
first, who openly taught (...), The Earth moved in a circle. Cicero in his 4o
Academ. Qu^stion, attributes the same opinion to Hicetas the Syracusian.
Plutarch in Numa says, that Plato in his old age asserted the same. The like
is said of Seleucus. This Hypothesis of the Earths moving, has been since
revived by Cardinal Cusanus, lib. 2. c. 12. Doct. ignorant: but more
professedly defended by Nicol. Copernicus, who about the year 1540, writ a Book
concerning it, which is Dedicated to Pope Paul 3d. who was followed herein by
Joannes Keplerus, Mathematick Professor to Rudolphus, Matthias, and Ferdinand
the Emperors. Also by Christopher Rothmannus, Michael Maest^inus, David
Origanus, Mathematick Professors. Lately, Patricius Galilaeus, Hoscarius
Italians, with, William Gilbert, our English Physician, famous for his Book de
Magnete; wherein he asserts this Hypothesis, having all maintained the same
opinion: which albeit it was condemned by the Cardinals at Rome, Anno 1616, yet
is it still defended by many of the New Astronomers: Ticho Brahe, the famous
Danish Astronomer went a middle way: affirming, that both Earth, and Heavens
moved, though in a differing manner: See Vossius sect. Phil. l. 2. c. 6. s. 41.

. 7. Pythagoras was also skilled in Geometry, Geometry.
which I suppose he learned from Thales, or immediately from the Egyptians,
His Weights, and Measures of Jewish original.
who were the first, amongst the Nations, that practiced this Art. Diogenes
Laertius also tells us, that Pythagoras was the first, that brought Measures,
and Weights into Greece; which also belongs to the Mathematics; and as we have
good reason to judge, he received them from the Jewish Weights, and Measures.
To conclude this, as we began with Pythagoras's Mathematics in the general:
Iamblichus l. 1. c. 2. tells us, he was first initiated therein by Thales. And
Porphyrie in the Life of Pythagoras (page 4.) says, that the Mathematick
Sciences he learned from the Egyptians, Chaldeans, and Phenicians. Now that
these Nations received their first Rudiments from the Patriarchs, and Jews, has
been already proved.

Pythagoras's Physics.
. 8. Another branch of that Natural Philosophy, which Pythagoras professed was
that, which we properly call Physics, or Natural Philosophy: Whereof there
are two par^^. 1. Contemplative. 2. Active. As for Pythagoras's skill in
Contemplative Physics, or Natural Science, 1 Contemplative, which was the
History of the worlds origin
it was indeed nothing else but the History of the Creation, with some
Experimental Observations and Conclusions, which we need no way doubt was
traduced to him from the Jewish Church, and Sacred Fountains originally. For
Diogenes tells us, That Pythagoras whilst he was in Babylon, had familiar
conversation with one Zabratus, by whom he was cleansed from the Pollutions of
his life past, and learned this Science concerning Nature, and what are the
Principles of the Universe. That this Zabratus was a Jew, we have endeavored
to prove before, chap. 5.. 8. And whether we affirm that Pythagoras received his
History of Nature, and of the principles of the Universe, from his Masters,
Thales, and Pherecydes, or from the Egyptians, or Phenicians, yet that it came
originally from Moses's story of the Creation, I think will be pretty evident
from a consideration of Particulars.

1. The world made by God.
. 9. First Pythagoras held Positively that the World was made by God, and by
Him adorned with an excellent Order, Harmony and Beauty, as to all its parts,
whence He was the first that called it (...) from (...), to Adorn, or
Beautify, answerable to Genesis 1.31. Very good. Genesis 1.31.2. The first Matter,
Genesis 1.1, 2.
etc. 2. Pythagoras's (...), or first matter, was the same with that of Plato;
concerning which he treats so largely in his Tima^s, proving that it was (...),
etc. without Form etc. This Timaus the Locrian, whom Plato here brings in,
thus discoursing of the Origin of the Universe, its first Matter, etc. was
indeed a Pythagorean, from whom Plato borrowed much of his Natural Philosophy,
as Hieronymus in his Apology against Ruffinus assures us. And that Plato's
Timaeus, or discourse of the Origin of the Universe was traduced from the
first chap. of Genesis, and other parts of the Mosaic history, I conceive
will receive a strong probability, from what shall be laid down in the
original of Plato's Philosophy. At present let any but compare this (...) or
first Matter, asserted by Pythagoras, and Plato, with Sanchoniathons (...), or
slime, and Thales's (...) water, they will find all to answer exactly to
Moses's description of the first Matter, Genesis 1.1, 2. etc. 3. As for the Form
of the Universe, Pythagoras, Plato, and the foregoing Philosophers, dreamt not
of any such Form, as Aristotle invented to be educed out of the passive power
of the Matter: no; 3. The Form of the World, its Order, etc. Genesis 1.13.
all the Form they asserted, was the Harmony, Beauty Order, and Perfe^^ion
of the Universe, and all its parts, resulting from that Law of Nature, which
Divine Wisdom stamped on the Beings of all Things, together with that Divine
(...), or Providence, which Inspired, and Influenced the whole Creation;
Governing and Directing all things to their proper Offices, Functions, and
Ends, which they styled (...), the soul of the world. From this Order, Beauty,
or Perfection of things, the word Form had its original; for (...) comes from
(...) Beauty, by an easy transposition of ph into the place of m, on which
account Pythagoras called the World (...), as before. Yea Pythagoras made
Harmony the Form, and Soul of all things, as Genesis 1.3.

. 10. The main Active principle Fire.
But the main Active principle of all things in the Universe, according to the
Pythagorean Philosophy, was Fire. So Aristotle, lib. 2. de Coelo, cap. 13,
tells us, That the Pythagoreans placed Fire in the middle of the world, as that
which was the most excellent Principle, and preservative of all things: he
adds also that Fire was called (...) Jupiter's custody. This also was the
opinion of Numa Pompilius, as Plutarch in his Life affirms: whence it is
generally thought, that Numa had conversation with Pythagoras; but this cannot
be, because Numa was more ancient: only we may suppose they both had their
persuasion from the same original, namely the Mosaic Institutes, by the hands
of the Phenicians, or some other. The same Plutarch tells us, That Numa caused
the Temple of Vesta to be made round according to the Figure of the World, in
the midst whereof was placed the eternal Fire (preserved by the Vestal Nuns) as
a symbolick image of the Sun. That the main Ceremonies of this Temple were
instituted by some Pythagorean Prescript, in imitation of the Jewish Temples,
we shall endeavor hereafter to prove, both from the name Vesta, which comes
from the ^reek (...), and this from (...) Es Jah the Fire of Jehovah, according
to Lev. 6.12, 13. where the Priests are commanded to preserve the Fire on the
Altar, etc. as also from the Vestal Nuns, and Priests, etc. At present, it may
suffice to show, that the Pythagoreans had a great reverence of Fire, as that,
which being the most active, and noble principle of all things, diffuseth it
self thorough out the whole Universe; and therefore they placed its main seat
in the midst of the World, whence it might, as the Heart in man's body, shed
abroad its natural vivifick heat, and influences into all sublunarie bodies,
for their nourishment, and conservation. Plato speaks to the same purpose of a
Fire that diffuseth it self through the Universe, for the production of diverse
effects, which agrees exactly with the words of Moses, Genesis 1.2. according to
the interpretation of Beza, and Serranus out of him, on Plato's Timeus, fol.
10. The element of Fire, says Serranus, was nothing else, but that fiery
spirit, or efficacy, which is variously diffused, in the Symmetrie of the
Universe, for the nourishing and somenting all things according to their
respective natures. Which vivifick natural heat Moses, Genesis 1.2. Genesis 1.2.
calls the Spirit of God: and Plato (...), effective Fire. And whereas it is
said, this sacred Fire, which the Pythagoreans so much adored, was a Symbol of
the Sun; I suppose, this sprang from that common opinion amongst the Ancients
(especially the Chaldean Philosophers) that the Sun was a fiery body: which
how far it is consonant to truth, and Mosaic Tradition, we intend hereafter to
examine, when we come to the Philosophy of Plato; who also affirmed the same.
To conclude; This Pythagorean principle, That Fire is the great Active
principle of all things; was also held by Heraclitus the Founder of the
Heraclitian Sect, which was but a branch of the Pythagorean: Also Xenophanes
the Colophonian, the Founder of the Eleatick Sect (another branch of the
Pythagorean Sect) held the Sun consists of a collection of little Fires; etc.
Plato also held the Heavens to be Fire, as August. lib. 8. c. 11. which seems
most consonant to Scripture story; for (...) comes from (...), which signifies
both Light, and Fire: as also the Greek (...) signifies Fire, as well as Light;
so Mark. 14.54. of which more in Plato's Philosophy where (...) is defined
(...): The Stoics also made Fire the chief Principle of all things.

Pythagoras's Medicine.
. 11. Pythagoras and his followers were much versed in Medicine, or active
Physic. So Iamblichus (de vita Pythagorae cap. 20.) says, That amongst the
Sciences, which the Pythagoreans were versed in Medicine was one of the chief:
then he adds (...). The chiefest part of their Medicine consisted in an exact
Regiment, or right order of Diet. Where Iamblichus subjoynes many other
particulars of the Pythagorean Medicine. So Cornelius Celsus in Praefat.
amongst the famous Professors of Medicine reckons up Pythagoras for one, who
flourished under Cyrus, Cambyses, and Darius: as Laertius, Solinus, Eusebius,
and Vossiu^. That Pythagoras was very severe in his Prescripts, or Rules of
Diet, both to himself and his Followers, we have already shown: how that he
Prescribed to himself, and his Followers, Abstinence from all Meats, that might
too much heat the blood; as from Flesh, and Wine: also from such meats as did
load the stomach, and were not easily digested; likewise from such as were
obstructive, and bred ill humors; as Beans, etc. Lastly from all such meats
as might bring a (...), an ill habitude of body, or mind. For the great end,
and scope of all the Pythagorean Prescripts, and Abstinencies, was to preserve
an (...), a good Healthful Complexion of Body, and cleannes of Mind. As for
the original of Pythagoras's Medicinal skill, Apuleius tells us, That he
received it from the Chaldeans; i. e. as I concieve the Jews; who in
Pythagoras's time lived amongst, and were subject to the Chaldeans; and
therefore might well pass under their name; as before: Neither do we find any
considerable mention of the Chaldeans, their skill in Medicine; but that the
Jews were excellently versed therein, we have sufficient proof, both from what
is mentioned of Solomon, 1. Kings 4.3, 4. touching his skill in Plants, and
Animals, etc. Also by Eusebius, who says he was excellently skilled in
Medicine, and curing of Diseases, etc. (as book 1. cap. 1. par. 11.) Likewise
from what Cunaeus (de repub. Jud.) relates of the Jewish Physicians, that
belonged to the Temple for curing the sick Priests, and Levites. But amongst
the Jews none more famous for skill in Medicine than the Essenes, who had a
particular inclination, and devotion to this Study, whom the Pythagoreans
affected an imitation of, in this, as in other parts of their Discipline, as
before.

. 12. As Pythagoras was well skilled in Physics, Pythagoras's Moral
Philosophy.
or Natural Sciences, both Contemplative, and Active; so was he likewise no
less versed in Moral Philosophy; which according to the Third (...), or
Relation of men^ 1. To Themselves, or, 2. To their Families, or, 3. To the
Cities, or Commonwealths they live in, admits of a Threefold Distribution. 1.
Into Ethics, 2. Into Oeconomicks, 3. Into Politics. The Pythagoreans were
skilled in all these. 1. As for that part of Moral Philosophy, the Greeks call
(...), Ethics, 1. Ethics.
which concerns the right government of man's self, Pythagoras, and his
Adherents were much in the Study, and Practice thereof. Yea indeed Pythagoras
esteemed all Philosophy but Vain, which did not some way conduce to the
m^liorating, or bettering of a man's self. Thus Stobaeus Sermon. 80. brings in
Pythagoras thus Philosophizing: (...). That discourse of a Philosopher is Vain,
which cures not some passion of a man: For look as that Medicine is useless,
which frees not the body from diseases, so likewise Philosophy, which drives
not away evil from the soul. The Learned divide Ethics into 3 parts (...) 1.
1. Pythagorean Dogmes relating to Moral Philosophy.
1. (...), Dogmatick. 2. (...), Exhortative, or Preceptive. 3. (...),
Characteristical. Pythagoras, and his Disciples were versed in each of these.
Concerning the Dogmatick part of Ethics, the Pythagoreans laid down many
wholesome Principles relating to the Object, Subject, and End, etc. of Moral
Philosophy, viz^ That the Souls happiness lay only in God its chiefest Good:
That the proper Subject of Ethics was the Humane Soul, as capable of the
chiefest Good: That its chief End was to cure the Soul of its (...) its sick
diseased passions, and to bring it to an (...), or good healthie complexion,
which consisted in vittuous Dispositions, and Acts. These Dogmes, albeit they
were not Formally, and Methodically treated of, according to that accurate
Method of Definition, Division, etc. to which Aristotle reduced them, yet were
they all seminally, and virtually comprised in the Pythagorean Philosophy. And
particularly Pythagoras expressly asserted (...) etc. That virtue consisted in
Harmony; yea that all health of body, and mind, yea all good, yea God
himself, and so all things else consisted in Harmony, as Diogenes Laertius
informs us. Pythagoras farther taught his Scholars 3 Mediums, by which they
might become Masters of Philosophy, and better themselves: 1. By conversation
with the Gods. 2. By Well doing, for that is proper to God, and therein they
were imitators of God. 3. By Death, whence he affirmed, that the most
considerable of all things, is to instruct the Soul aright, touching Good and
Evil: and that men have perfect felicity in having a good Soul, as Iamblichus,
and Stanly out of him of Pythagoras's Philosophy, part. 3. chap. 1. fol. 83. 2
Their pathetick precepts, and exhortations to virtue.
And as the Pythagoreans held many useful Dogmes of Morality; so were they not
less versed in the Hortative, and Preceptive part of Ethics; as it appears by
the model of their Discipline before mentioned; as also from that great
Apothegme of Pythagoras, which he frequently inculcated on his Disciples, as
the sum of his Philosophy, viz. That in all things they should endeavor to
avoid excess, etc. of which hereafter.

. 13. But the chief part of the Pythagorean Ethics was Characteristical: for
Pythagoras taught morality mostly, Characteristical Ethics. A wicked state
represented by a Coffin, and Death. Virtutis studium litera Y. significabat
Lactant.
(...) by Ethick Characters; i. e. Lively descriptions of Virtues, and Vices,
by Symbols, Fables, Emblems, Images, or Signs, and Effects, answerable to
Aesops-Fables, Philostratus's- Fables, and also the Scriptural Types, and
Parables. Pythagoras also exhorted his Scholars to Virtue under that Symbolick
letter Y, as Lactant. l. 6. c. 3. which was thence called Pythagoras's Letter;
not that he was the first Inventor of it, as some conceive (for it was found
out 600 years before his time, by Palamedes) but because he was the first, that
applied it to this Mystical. sense, as Hornius Hist. Philos. l. 7. c. 12. Thus
Pythagoras expressed to the Life, the condition of a Debauched Profligate
Wretch, by his Symbol of a Coffin, which signified his being dead in sin,
exactly answerable to the Jewish, and Scriptural Phrasiologie; whence we need
no way doubt, but that Pythagoras borrowed this Symbolick Image. Thus the
Father of the Prodigal speaks, Luke 15.24. Luke 15.24.
[ This my Son was dead.] where Hammond (out of Grotius) observes, That this is
according to the ordinary Notion of Pythagoras, who for any, that had forsaken
his Schole, i. e. refused to live according to his Rules of Philosophy, had a
(...), an empty Coffin set in his place, to signify him to be morally dead.
This was a common Symbolick manner of speech amongst the Jews, to express a
wicked state of Spiritual, or moral death. So Philo defines this Moral death,
(...), when the soul is dead as to the life of Virtue, and lives only the life
of sin, as elsewhere, (...), wicked men are dead in their souls. And that this
Symbol was by Tradition from the Jews universally received amongst the Oriental
Barbarick Philosophers, and thence traduced into Greece, appears by what
follows, (...). For in the Barbarick Philosophy (which takes in also the
Jewish) they call men fallen from their Principles dead; as such also, who
subjugate their Minds to their Sensual passions. But more of this, when we come
to discourse of Pythagoras's Symbols. 2. Salt a Symbol of holy Communion.
2. Another Ethick Character, or Symbol, which Pythagoras used to express his
Moral Precepts by, was that (...), to set down Salt: by which he signified,
that Holy, and Intimate Communion, and Friendship, which ought to be amongst
all those of his Society. For Salt was used first in the Jewish Church, and
thence in the Pythagorean College, as a Symbol, 1. Of Confederation, or
Covenant, 2. Of Communion, and Friendship, 3. Of Sanctity, as we have proved
already, and shall give farther proof thereof. 3. Another Characteristical
Symbol, under which Pythagoras couched a reproof against Sloathful, or Prattling
Scholars was this. 3. The Swallow a Symbol of a s^loathful Student.
[ Receive not a Swallow into your house] i. e. says Iamblichus, Admit not a
sloathful person unto your Philosophy, which requires great industry, and
unwearied patience. The Swallow comes but in one season, and stays not long;
but sleeps a good part of the year. Others by Pythagoras's Swallow intend a
great pratler, or babbler. This Ethick Character against sloth, and vain
discourse, does Symbolize with many of Solomon's Proverbs, against sloathful
persons. 4. Under this Symbolick Character, 4. Against Passion. 5. (...).
[Turn away from thy self every edge.] Pythagoras exhorted men to the use of
prudence, rather then passion, as Iamblichus. 5. By this Symbol [ Stir not the
Fire with a sword] Pythagoras advised his Disciples not to provoke the passions
of Potent men; as Diogenes understands it; or not to provoke a man full of
Fire, and Anger, Diogen. is for Patience. 6. Against Covetuousnes. 7.
Fortitude. 8. Against distracting Cares 9. Justice. 10. Virtue expressed by
Harmony, Health, etc.
as Iamblichus. 6. Pythagoras's Ethick Character, or Symbol, by which he
dehorted men from Covetousnes, was this, [ Breed nothing that has crooked
Talons,] i. e. says Iamblichus, be not tenacious. 7. Pythagoras taught his
Disciples Patience, and Fortitude, etc. by this Symbol, [ Help to lay on a
burden, but not to take it off.] This says Iamblichus, teaches Fortitude,
etc. 8. Pythagoras taught his Scholars to avoid anxious heart-distracting cares
by this Symbolick Character, [ Eat not the heart.] i. e. Consume not thy heart
by cares, etc. answerable to that of Chirst, Mat. 6.27.31, 32.27. (...). 9.
Pythagoras exhorted men to Justice under that lively Symbol [ Pass not over
the ballance] This, says Iamblichus, commands to do justice, to observe
equality, etc. which agrees exactly to that Ethick Character, or Proverb, used
frequently by Solomon, as Prove. 11.1. A false balance is an abomination to the
Lord; but a just weight, etc. The like Prove. 16.11 Prove. 20.23.10. And lastly
Pythagoras to draw his Scholars to a cheerful embracing of Virtue, was wont to
give it many amiable, and lively characters under the Symbolick Images of
Bodily Health, Sanitie, and Beauty; but principally under the Symbol of
Musical Harmony; for what ever was excellent he compared to Harmony; which
suites very much with the Characters of Grace in Scripture, which styles it the
Beauty, Health, and Harmony of the Soul. But more of these Symbols hereafter.

. 14. We have now dispatched Pythagoras's Ethics, The sum of Pythag.'s
Ethics. (...).
which may be summed up in these two words, (...), i. e. forbear moral evils,
or the evils of action; and bear physical natural evils, or the evils of
passion: for all Ethics, or morals are comprehended under active, and passive
morality, or under Abstinence, and Tollerance. i. e. forbearing what is evil
in manners, and bearing (which implies doing also, as well as suffering) what
is evil to nature. Pythagoras's Politics.


. 15. Pythagoras taught not only Ethics, but also the two other parts of Moral
Philosophy; viz. Oeconomicks, which regard the Government of Families; and
Politics, which respect the Government of Cities, and Nations. This latter
Pythagoras, and his Followers, were greatly versed in: for it is said that
Pythagoras had his (...), book of Politics, which he composed, and gave to his
Scholars, as Laertius relates. Iamblichus says, That Pythagoras used to say,
that amongst Being's, nothing was pure, but every thing partaked of some other,
as Earth of Fire, etc. farther, That there was a friendship of all to^ards all,
answerable to that saying, man is (...) on which he grounded his Politics.
Iamblicus says also That men hold Pythagoras was the first Inventor of all
Politic Science. It Is true there were Lawgivers more ancient, as Minos of
Crete, and Lycurgus of Sparta, whose laws Pythagoras consulted (as Iamblichus
cap. 5, (but yet we read not (as I conceive) of any public Professor of the
Science of Politics more ancient than Pythagoras, The original of Pythag.'s
Politics from the Jewish and Mosaic Laws.
who made it a main design of his Travels, and Studies to inform himself,
touching the ancient Laws, and the best Maxims of Polity; this put him upon a
journie to Crete, to consult Minos's Laws; and upon another to Sparta to
inform himself in the Constitutions of Lycurgus. But amongst all the
Constitutions, Laws, and Maxims of Polity, he met with none afforded him
greater light, and assistance, for the framing his Body of Politics, than the
Mosaic Laws, and Politic Constitutions. And that Pythagoras did in truth
traduce the best of his Laws, and Principles of Polity from Moses's Laws, and
Polity, will be more evident hereafter, when we come to treat of the
traduction of all Humane Laws from the Divine Mosaical Law. At present take
only this proof hereof: It is well known, that Zaleucus, the great Founder of
the Locrian Laws, was Disciple to Pythagoras, from whom we may presume he
received the Body of his Polity, now that the Locrian Laws were many of them
of Jewish extract, and original, is evident. I shall only mention one, which
Aristotle in his Politics takes notice of, telling us, that the Locrenses were
forbid to sell their Ancestors possessions: which was plainly a Mosaic
institute. I might instance in the Roman 12 Tables, the Agrarian Laws, and
others, which, were traduced originally from the Mosaic Laws, by the hands of
Pythagoras, or some other.

The Pythagoreans greatly verst in Politics.
. 16. Pythagoras, as he had an high esteem of this Science of Politics, so it
was the last piece of Philosophy he acquainted his Disciples with; as Varro,
and out of him Augustine in his last Book de ordine. Iamblichus (cap. 20.) tells,
That the Pythagoreans employed their time after Dinner in Political affairs.
And that the chief Politicians of Italy proceeded from Pythagoras his Schole
we are assured by Iamblichus, (l. 1. c. 29.) and by Vossius, de philos. sect.
l. 2. c. 6.. 27. This, says he, was the great glory of Pythagoras, that in
Italy so many excellent Rectors of Commonwealths proceeded out of his Schole.
Amongst these the most famous were 1, Zalencus, who gave Laws to the Locrenses,
and is supposed to have been the first, who committed his Laws to writing. For
Strabo says of the Locrenses, That they are believed to be the first that
enjoyed written Laws. As for the Laws of Lycurgus, he forbad the writing of
them. 2. Also Charondas the Catanean another of Pythagoras's Disciples, who
gave Laws to the Thurii, etc.

The two main Pythagorean principles of Polity, were 1. For Liberty, 2.
against Faction.
. 17. The great Maxims of Polity, or Reasons of State, which Pythagoras
instilled into his Disciples, as the main Foundations of Human Polity, and
Government, were these Two: 1. The extirpation of Tyranny, and Preservation of
Liberty. 2. The Prevention, and removing of Dissentions: These Principles he
endeavored to put in Practice, where ever he came. So Porphyrie page 14, and
Iamblichus cap. ^. inform us. That whatsoever Cities Pythagoras in his travels
through Italy, and Sicilie found subjected one to the other, he instilled into
them Principles of Liberty by his Scholars, of whom he had some in every
City. Thus he freed Croto, Sybaris, Catana, Rhegium, Himera, Agrigentum, etc.
To whom he sent Laws by Charondas the Catanean, and Zaleucus the Locrian; by
means whereof they lasted a long time well governed. He wholly took away
dissension: for he did frequently utter his great Apothegme, Pythagoras's great
Apothegm.
(which was a kind of abstract of his Philosophy) That we ought to avoid with
our utmost endeavor, and to cut off even with Fire, and Sword, from the Body
Sickness; from the Soul Ignorance; from the Belly Luxury; from a City
Sedition; from a Family Discord; from all things Excess. Which Apothegme
comprehends the sum of all his Morals, both Ethics, Oeconomicks, and
Politics: of which see Stanly of Pythag. cap. 17.

CHAP. VIII. Pythagoras's Theology traduced from the Jewish Church.
Pythagoras's Theology the center of his Philosophy: his Tetractie from the
Hebrew (...). His (...) from Exodus 3.14. His Scriptural notions of Gods Unity,
Simplicity, etc. His Divine Ideas the same with the Scripture descriptions of
Gods Decrees; and founded on that Oriental Maxim, All things are one, and
many. Parmenides's opinion of Ideas. Timaeus ^oc^us of Ideas. His primarie Idea
the same with Gods Idea of things possible. His exemplar answers to God's
Decree of things future. Genesis 1.31. With Timaeus's Tradition thence. Of Gods
Creation, and Providence. Of Divine Worship against images, Exodus 20.4. That
God is to be worshipped according to his own Will. Their exactnes in Divine
Worship, Eccles. 5.1. Pythagoras's Damons, their Nature, and Office according
to Plato's description. Pythagoras's Aeones. His traditions of the Soul, its
Immortality, etc. His Metempsychosis. The Pythagorean Theology mystical, etc.

. 1. HAving finished Pythagoras's Philosophy, both Natural, and Moral; we now
proceed to his Supernatural, or Metaphysics, which is either Theologick, and
Divine; or Magic, and Diobolick: We shall begin with Pythagoras's Theology,
which indeed comprehended the best part of his Philosophy, and gave foundation
to Plato's (...) Natural Theology, Platoni disciplinam Pythagoricam diligenti
et magnifica opera instructam visam fuisse: eumque ab ipsis intellectualem
Philosophiae partem accepisse. Apuleius de Philos.
as also to Aristotle's (...) Metaphysics. That Plato received much of his
Natural Theology from this of Pythagoras is generally granted, and shall be
hereafter proved: our present work is to show, what Pythagoras's Theology was,
and how he traduced it from the Jews, and Scriptures. That Pythagoras received
the choicest of his Theologick contemplations immediately from the Jews, while
he was in Judea, Egypt, and Babylon, I conceive may be groundedly conjectured
by what has been before laid down, chap. 5.. 2. and 6. But supposing this be
denied, yet I suppose no one can rationally deny, that he received his
Theology from the Phenicians, Egyptians, Chaldeans, Pherecydes, and Orpheus,
who had theirs origionally from the Jews, as before. He is said to have a
particular affection for, and inclination unto Orpheus's Theology, whose
Philosophy, if we may believe Iamblichus, he had continually before his eyes.

Pythagoras. made Theology the Center of his Philosophy.
. 2. Pythagoras according to Iamblichus's relation ( chap. 29) made Theology,
or the Knowledge of God the first, most universal Being, to be the Center of
all his Philosophy; for, says he, Pythagoras, who first gave the name to
Philosophy, defined it ((...), Plato terms it (...)) a friendship, or love to
Wisdom. Wisdom is the knowledge of the truth of things that are (...). Things
that are, he called immaterials, eternals, and Sole Agents. Other things are
equivocally called such by participation with these; For Corporeals indeed are
not further then they depend upon incorporeals, Philosophy properly only (...).
etc. Hence Pythagoras defined Philosophy, The knowledge of things that are,
as things that are: again, the knowledge of things Divine, and Humane: also the
meditation of Death, daily endeavoring to free the soul from the Prison of the
body; Lastly he defined it the resemblance of God, etc. Which Definitions are
properly applicable to no part of Philosophy but Metaphysics, or Natural
Theology; August. Steuch. lib. 10. d^ Per^n. Philos. cap. 10.
whence Pythagoras judged the supreme end of all Philosophy to be the
contemplation, and knowledge of Unity: which Architas interprets, of the
Principles of all Principles; and Plutarch of the Intelligent, and Eternal
Nature: and Simplicius, of the Divine Majesty i. e. God. Hence we see the
reason why Pythagoras was by way of Eminency called (...), and his Philosophy
(...) Theology, namely because he treated chiefly of God, his Nature, and
Worship, and delivered (...), a Science of the worship of God; which is
properly the office of a Divine. So greatly was the Idea and persuasion of
Divinity impressed on his mind, as that without it he judged there could be
no true Philosophy. Yea Aristotle himself. 10 Metaph. cap. 6. and elsewhere
styles his Metaphysics (...) a Theologick Science. The Rabbis call the same
(...) the wisdom of the Deity. The Author lib. de Mundo says, (...). which
Cicero lib. 1. de Leg. expresses thus: A man by Philosophy, undertakes the
worship of the Gods, and pure Religion. By which it appears, the Ancients,
especially Pythagoras, made Knowledge, and Worship of God the chief part of
their Philosophy. Plato in his Definitions of Philosophy follows Pythagoras
(...), making its Object to be (...), that which truly is; also (...) Being it
self, or the most independent Being, etc. Yea Aristotle himself comes not much
behind in making the object of his Metaphysics to be (...), Ens or Being in
its universal latitude; and its Affections (...), Unity, (...) Truth, (...)
Bonitie, which Notions, I presume, he had from Plato, as he received the same
from Pythagoras, or from the Jews.

. 3. Pythagoras's Natural Theology, as to its Object or Matter, comprehended,
1. the Knowledge of God, his Names, Nature, Decrees, Providence, and Worship,
etc. 2. The knowledge of the Aeones, or Angels. 3. The knowledge of the
Demons. 4. The knowledge of Human Soul, etc. Concerning the knowledge of God,
his Names, Attributes, Acts, and Worship; we find manifest footsteps of
scriptural, and Jewish Traditions in Pythagoras's Theology. For First, as to
the Names of God; that Pythagoras received some broken tradition, touching that
Essentials Name, of God Jehovah, seems manifest. For this Name (...) being
sacred amongst the Jews, they endeavored, what they could, to concele it from
the Gentiles: whence instead of pronouncing of it, they called it (...),
Pythagoras's Tetractie from the Jewish (...).
the Four Lettered Name of God, and in imitation of the Jews, Pythagoras called
it (...) Tetractie. This Godefrid Wendelin in his Epistle to Erycius Puteanus
Dissertations of Pythagoras's Tetractie: where he shows, That the (...), or
Four Lettered Name of God, (...) was signified: Moreover, that Pythagoras
traduced this Tetractie from the Jews and particularly from the Prophet Daniel,
the Prince of the Magi, who was then, when Pythagoras visited Babylon, Haec
omnia funt nomin^ Naturae Divinae, (...), Vnitas, ipsum esse, ipsa Immobilitas
Steuch. E^g. Peren. Philos. l. 3. c. 7.

Pythagoras 's Metaphysick contemplations about Gods Essence from Mosaic
Descriptions of God.

Exodus 3.14. (...) genere tantum d^fferunt. Steuch. Eugub. Paren. Philos. Dico
^andem rem ab cis (scil. Philos.) nuncupatam (...) ipsum Ens, ipsam Infinitatem
Steuch. Eugub. Peren. Philos. lib. 3. c. 7. Jambl. c. 29.


about 70 years aged, as Vossius Philos. sect. l. 2. c. 6.. 5. That Pythagoras
had clear notices of the Name (...) Jah, which is but the contract of (...)
Jehovah, is evident from all his Metaphysick Contemplations about (...), Being,
truly Being, Self-Being, etc. as in wh^t follows.

. 4. Neither could Pythagoras content his Curious Inquisitive Humor with some
imperfect notices of Gods Name, but makes some farther Inquiries into his
Essence, or Nature, concerning which he gained his best notices, and
satisfaction from the Mosaic Descriptions of God. For the best discovery,
that ever was given of the Divine Essence, or Nature, is that, which God
himself gives, Exodus 3.14. I am, that I am, -- and I am has sent me. Which the
LXX renders (...).] As if he had said I am He that is. For the Greek (...) is a
Participle, which the Latins knew not how to express in one word better than by
calling it Ens, Being, which Caesar derived from Sum, I am, as potens from
Possum. It here signifies, That God alone is the First, Eternal, Infinite, most
Simple, most Necessary, most Absolute, most Independent, yea only, truly,
properly, and purely Being. For all Beings else have much of not-Being, or
nothing; yea much more of Nothing than of Something mixed with them: yea all
things else, if compared with God, they are but mere Metaphors, or Shadows of
his Being, or rather pure Nothings, or less than Nothings, as Esa. phraseth
it, Esa. 40.17. And Job speaks in the same Dialect frequently. Now that
Pythagoras traduced his Contemplations of God hence, is to me, and I think, to
any other that shall duly consider it, most apparent. For whence could
Pythagoras, and his followers Timaeus, Parmenides, and Plato out of them,
traduce their Metaphysick Contemplations of (...), Being, Self-Being,
Very-Being, etc. but from this Scriptural Definition of God. For we must
remember, that the Pythagoreans, and Platonicks from them, when they discourse
(...), etc. of Being, or that which is truly Being, they understand it of God,
the most Universal, Infinite, and only true Being: They accounted all derived,
temporal, lower Beings, but as Beings by accident, or to speak in Aristotle's
phrase, (...) Beings of, or from Being, they judged nothing (...), properly,
and truly Being, but what was (...) very Being, or self-Being: and
first-Being. Thus Steuch. Eugubinus de Peren. Philos. l. 4. c. 7. The Ancients
called God (...) Being it self, that which only, and principally exists, which
never was not, never shall cease to be. Other things sometimes have been, and
sometimes have not been. As therefore the Divinity is styled with an article
(...), Unity it self, and (...), Bonitie it self: so by a manner of eminence
it is called (...), Being it self. And because Being is ascribed principally to
God, it seems to denote, that he alone is Essence, and that he alone is; so
that in comparison of Him, other things exist not. By Three Testimonies it
appears, that the Divine Nature is Being it self, by the Testimony of the
Ancient Theology, by the Testimony of Plato, who is as it were the
Interpreter thereof, lastly by the Testimonies of the Heavenly Philosophy,
the mistress and guide of the other. For the Sacred Name Jehova, being as it
were, the Third person of the Verb Substantive future, Jod being turned into
Vau, (...), hence this most ancient name of God was translated to the Greeks;
(for (...) and (...) differ only in Gender.) Thence in what follows he adds It
is true, we may doubt, what Plato meant by his (...), unless we call to witness
the Superior Divines, and the heavenly Philosophy it self, with which Plato
differs not, save in the variation of the Gender, so that he who is styled in
the Sacred Scripture (...) ( Genesis 3.14.) Who am, is called by Plato (...),
Being. Which variation was duly made, for two causes, both because the Hebrews
have no Neuter Gender, and also because it seems more full to say, God is
Being it self, as that comprehends the whole plenitude of Existence, than to
say (...) Existing. For Names of the very Natures, or Essences, import more
than Derivatives from them: As Life signifies more than Vital. And God is
rightly expressed by the present, who is, because with him there is neither past,
nor to come, but the very Eternal Presence alone. Pythagoras, when he defines
Philosophy a Love to the Knowledge (...) of Beings.] By Beings, says
Iamblichus, he understood ((...)) sole, and self Agents, Immaterials, and
Eternals, other Beings indeed are not Beings, but yet are equivocally called
such by participation with these Eternals, Iamblichus cap. 29. So Plato in his
Parmenides (who was a Pythagorean) treating of (...), Being, and Unity, which
he makes the First Principle of all things, thereby understands God: so in his
Timaeus, Locrus (who was also a Pythagorean, from whom he received much of his
knowledge of God, and of the origin of the Universe, as hereafter) he says,
(...), Being is always, neither has it beginning. So again in his Timaeus
(edit. Stephan. fol. 37, 38.) he proves nothing properly is, but God the
Eternal Essence, to which, says he, we do very improperly attribute those
distinctions of time Was, and Shall be; for (...) is, properly, and truly,
only belongs to this Eternal Essence. These Contemplations, as it is supposed,
he received from this Timaeus the Locrian who was a Pythagorean; yet we need
not doubt, but that originally they were traduced from Exodus 3.14. for the
Greek participle (...) there used signifies properly the present time only, as
the Hebrew, excluding from God erat, and erit, was, and shall be, past, and
future; denoting that God only is, according to the description of the
Pythagoreans, and Platonicks. Phutarch says, (...). The true Being is Eternal,
Ingenerable, and Incorruptable, unto which no time ever brings mutation. Hence
in the Delphick Temple among other Rarities, which might please the greater
wits, there was engraven (...), which signifies* Thou art. And indeed of God
alone it can be truly said He is, without mutation. That Pythagoras did really
traduce these Metaphysick Notions of Gods Essence from Moses, see Lud. Vives on
Aug. Civit. l. 8. c. 11. where he concludes thus. I doubt not but Pythagoras
was taught these mysteries in Egypt, and that from the sacred Volumnes, of
which more hereafter.

Pythagoras 's Scriptural tradition of the unity of God.

Empedocles autem, et Parmenides, autore Aristotele, appellabant

Deum nomine Vnitatis: ergo idem est apud eos (...) ipsa Vnitas, er unum
Principium Steuch. Eugub. Peren. Philos. l. 3. c. 7.


. 5. Pythagoras seems to have had some Scriptural, or Jewish tradition touching
the Unity of Divine Essence. So Diogenes Laertius informs us, that Pythagoras
asserted, (...), Unity to be the principle of all things, from which proceeded
indefinite Dualitie, which was as matter subject to Unity, it is essential
cause. We have a good explication on this mystical Pythagorean Unity by
Learned Reuehlin in his explication of the Pythagorean Doctrine e Cabala lib.
2. The Divine Essence (says he) the preexistent Entitie, and Unity of
Existence, Substance, Essence, Nature, was by Pythagoras called (...), because
it is the Super-Essential Unity and Being, from which, and by which, and in
which, and through which, and to which all things are, and are ordered, and
persist, and are comprehended, and converted, etc. Thus also Parmenides (who
followed Pythagoras) herein is brought in by Plato Philosophizing on that old
axiom (...), One, and many, and Determined thus, That God as he was (...) i.
e. One Divine Essence, 1. Was not (...) Many. 2. That he was (...), Celebre est
dictum apud Platonicos (...) omninum rerumradix, and principium unitas Steuch.
Eugubinus de Peren. Philos. l. 3. c. 5.
One immutable Being. 3. That he was (...). One Eternal Being, etc. This also
Plato in his Philebus fol. 17. discourses of at large, showing how this (...)
was (...), and how these (...) were (...), i. e. How this one Divine Essence
was many, as to the Divine Idea's, or Decrees, and how the Divine Ideas were
one in the Divine Unity, and Essence, This Doctrine, says he, seems strange,
but yet the Gods, as they say, have thus delivered it to us, to learn, and to
teach it others, though some wise men now (perhaps he means his Scholar
Aristotle) teach otherwise, etc. By which he seems to confess that these
Contemplations of God's Unity came originally from the Jews, as hereafter.

. 6. Pythagoras seems also to have had some Jewish, Pythagoras's Jewish
Tradition of Gods Simplicity.
if not Scriptural tradition of God's Simplicity. This is apparent from
Iamblichus's interpretation of that great Fundamental Symbol of Pythagoras, [
Grave not the Image of God in a Ring] i. e. Philosophize, and above all things,
think that the Gods are incorporeal. This Symbol is beyond all others the
Seminary of the Pythagorean Doctrines. Think not, that the Gods use forms
that are Corporeal, neither that they are received into material substance
fettered to the body, as other animals. Thus Iamblichus on Symbol 24. Thus
also Plutarch in the Life of Numa Pompilius informs us, That the Pythagoreans
thought, the God's were Invisible, Incorruptible, and only Intelligible,
wherefore they forbad the Framing Images, or Forms of them. And Diogenes
Laertius gives us a pretty Romance of Hieroninus, who, says he, affirms,
that Pythagoras descending (...) into Hell, saw there Hesiods soul bound to a
Brazen pillar, (...) making a lamentable noise: and Homer's Soul hanging upon a
tree, and Serpents about, (...), for those things they feigned of the Gods,
which story, though but a Fiction, yet it is sufficient for our present
purpose, to show that Pythagoras was, according to the common Vogue, a
professed enemy to all those Mythologick, and Poetic Fictions of the Gods.
The same dislike we find in Plato against Homer for his monstrous fictions of
God. So also Parmenides, (who did much, Pythagorize) is brought in by Plato
discoursing of his (...), or one Divine Being. 1. As one that was neither the
whole, nor had he parts. 2. Neither had he beginning, nor end, therefore was 3.
Infinite, and without terms. 4. Without Figure either round, or straight. 5.
Neither in himself, nor in any thing else, nor any where, 6. Neither like, nor
dislike; neither equal, nor inequal, because without all terms, or
composition. So Plato Parmenide, page 136, and 140. Edit. Stephan. And Plato in
his Repub. says, God continues, (...), simply in the same Form etc. as
hereafter. We find the simplicity of the Divine Essence thus described,
according to the Pythagorean Doctrine, by Reuchlin, (and Stanly out of him,
cap. 3.) The Pythagoreans, says he, assert three worlds, the Supreme,
Intelligible, and the Sensible. The supreme world being that of the Deity, is
one, Divine continual constant Essence of Sempiternitie, poized as it were with
immovable weight; not unfitly termed (...), the all governing Throne. It is
not confined to genus, Place, Time, or Reason; but is the free unlimited
President over all these; infinitely supreme in place, power, possession,
excellence, above all Essence, Nature, Aevum, Age, etc. See Stanly, fol. 138.

Pythagoras's Divine Ideas the same with the Scriptural tradition of Gods
Decrees.
. 7. That Pythagoras received by tradition from the Jews, if not immediately
from the Scriptures, some notices, touching the Divine Idea's or Decrees (which
were the first original Archetype, or Universal exemplar of all things made)
seems very probable. Thus August. Stouch. Eugubinus, de Peren. Philos. l. 1.
c. 12. It is very observable, and worthy to be known, what Plutarch mentions,
that the Divine mind, and Ideas, (which Philo, and Plotinus taught) are the
same: and that his Wisdom, is the Nature and Substance of all Ideas: and that
the whole series of Ideas is the same with the immense Sapience of God. It is
also to be observed, that this Mind, was according to the Sentiment of all the
Philosophers, the Creator, because they attribute unto him Ideas as the
Origines of things. Whence it is manifest, that they thought, and spoke, what
they learned from the Barbarians. The first Barbarians were the Chaldeans,
Egyptians, and, whom we ought to set in the first place, the Hebrews, etc. That
Pythagoras asserted the Doctrine of Ideas before Plato, or Parmenides, is
evident, as Reuchlin in his explication of the Pythagorean Doctrine shows us,
that the Pythagoreans reduce all beings Subsistent, or Substant immediately to
Ideas. And to prove, that Pythagoras, and his followers, Parmenides, Timaeus
Locrus, and Plato by their original Ideas understood nothing else, but that
which our Divines call the Divine Ideas, or Decrees of God, it will be
necessary to examine a little their Doctrine of Ideas, its Original, etc. The
Foundation of the Pythagorean Ideas, that famous oriental tradition of (...).
The great foundation of all this Doctrine of Ideas was that famous Oriental
Tradition, (...). That all is one, and many. This Axiom Plato expounds at
large, out of Parmenides, and Timaeus Locrus the Pythagorean, showing how,
(...) was (...) and (...), One was many, and many one: which ctrine, says he,
we received from the Ancient Philosophers, (i. e. from Timaeus the Locrian, and
Parmenides immediately, but from Pythagoras originally) and they originally
from the Gods who taught them thus to Philosophize, and teach others. What
Plato's opinion of Ideas was, we shall reserve for its proper place; we are now
to treat only of the Pythagorean Doctrine concerning Ideas founded on this
great Axiom, That all is one, and many. This Pythagorean Principle Parmenides
(who was of the Eleatick sect, a branch of the Italick, and Pythagorean) much
Philosophized on, Parmenides his opinion of Ideas.
as the foundation of his Ideas. Him therefore we shall chiefly follow in the
explication of this ^ythagorean Doctrine, as we find his opinions explained by
Steuch. Eugubinus, by Ludovicus Vives, and Serranus. Steuchus Eugebinus, de
Peren. Philos. l. 3. c. 8. says, That the Unity, and Being was styled by the
Ancients, with a certain great and deep mystery, (...) the very Universe.
Aristotle in his first Book of the Principles of Philophie, delivers, that the
Ancients affirmed, (...), That one was all. Therefore they said, God was that
All. This in what follows he applies to Empedocles, Parmenides, etc. Lud. Vives
in August. civit. Dei l. 8. c. 1. gives us this general account of Parmenides's
(and so of Pythagoras's) (...) One, etc. There are not wanting some (says he)
who conceive that Parmenides himself in his Poems, in which he comprised his
Philosophy, affirming all things to be One, understood that One to be God; of
which number is Simplicius. Neither is it likely that Parmenides an acute, and
wise man could be ignorant of the Division, and Multiplicitie of things, which
in plain words he asserted in his Poems. For when he had versifyed much, and
enough on that One first Being. Hitherto says he of these true, and supreme
Beings; now of Mortals, and confused Beings, etc. But Serranus does more fully,
and clearly expound unto us this Doctrine of Parmenides touching Ideas (in
Plato's Parmenides fol. 124.) This says he, was the opinion of Parmenides
concerning Ideas. In the Universe of things there is nothing that happens
unadvisedly, or by chance; but all things depend on the force, and efficacy of
their Ideal causes. Of these Ideas he makes two sorts. 1. One he makes to be
(...), etc. Infinite, Immovable, Eternal, Simple, and Causative of all things.
This he calls the (...), The primarie Idea, which being (...), gives being and
virtue to all things. 2. As for the Secondarie Ideas, they are (...), Gods
works, or second natural causes depending on God. He denies therefore that any
thing happens (...) of it self, without the Divine mind influencing it. The
same Serranus (in Plato's Parmenides, fol. 130.) Parmenides, says he, teaches
(...), that all is One, and that this (...), One, is (...), the Archetype Idea,
and thence (...), That one is many, and many again one. Where he notes the
power, and force of the One in the Ideas, in which it is (...), The proper
form, or exemplar, and thence to know the nature of any intelligibles, we must
reduce them to the Unity of Idea. Thus Serranus of the original of these
Ideas. The plain mind of this dark Oriental Tradition is this; That the Divine
Essence, which in it self is but one; in respect of it is Divine Ideas, or
Decrees may be looked on as many; and thus one becomes many, and many one. Thus
Plato, and Serranus on him ( fol. 134.) explain Parmenides his Ideas.
Parmenides says (...), That God has the most accurate Knowledge; and that this
Knowledge he has by his Ideas; and that these Ideas arise not from us, ( i. e.
external objects) but from Himself, from his own Infinite Essence, (the glass
of all those Ideas which represent things Possible) and from his Sovereign,
Absolute will, (which is the glass wherein he contemplates the Ideas of things
Future) for otherwise, says Parmenides, (...), The Gods would not be our
Lords, neither would they know Humane affairs, should their Ideas or Knowledge
arise from us, and not from themselves. How Divinely does Parmenides here
Philosophize on the Absolute, Independent, Sovereign Ideas, or Decrees of God,
to the confusion of that great Jesuitical Idol of Scientia Media, which is the
(...) of all Pelagianisme: of which more when we come to Plato, etc.

. 8. Besides Parmenides, there were other Pythagoreans who Philosophized
largely on this Doctrine of Ideas: as Epicarmus, or Cous, and Timaeus Locrus,
both famous Philosophers of the Pythagorean Sect, from whom Plato, as it is
conceived, received much of his Philosophy touching Ideas. So Lud. Vives in
Aug. Civ. l. 8. c. 11. Alcimus, says he, in the Books which he writ to
Amynthas, teaches us, that Plato borrowed his Opinion of God being (...), and
(...), as also that of Ideas from the Books of Epicarmus, who was Cous a
Philosopher of the Pythagorean Sect most famous: Timaeus also the Locrian has
writ of Ideas in his Book of the Universe. But all these things, Plato being of
a more accurate Wit, and assisted with a deeper, and more Divine Doctrine, has
more largely, and clearly explained. Though I doubt not, but Pythagoras had
before learned these things from the Sacred Scriptures, etc. Timaeus Locrus his
opinion of Ideas.
As for Timaeus Locrus the Pythagorean, we have his opinion of Ideas laid down
at large by Plato in his Timaeus, or Dialogue of the Origin of the Universe,
which, I presume he calls Timaeus, because he received the main Principles, and
Materials of it from this Timaeus the Pythagorean. The sum of this Discourse
in Plato's Timaeus, about Ideas, may be reduced to this Scheme. The primarie
Idea of things possible seated in the Divine Essence.
God in the Production of the Universe acted as a skilful wise Artificer,
according to the Ideas of his own eternal Wisdom. These Ideas existing in the
mind of God, he makes to be (...), self-subsisting, or independent, eternal,
indivisible, immaterial, and simple. These first original Ideas seem to answer
to those Divine Ideas, which the Schools suppose in the Divine Essence, and
Power, which is the glass of things possible, the object of Gods simple
Intelligence. Besides this original simple Idea, Plato brings in Timaeus
discoursing of another kind of Idea, which he calls (...), and (...), The
secondarie Exemplar of things future, the same with Gods decrees.
an exemplar, or image, which he makes to be the first foetus, impress, or
offspring of the former original Idea. This Exemplar, or Image, as it is
conformed, and exactly answerable to the first original Idea; so likewise is it
a lively delineation or representation of the future work or thing to be made,
whence the Divine Agent, having got his Exemplar, proceeds to the production of
his work answerable thereunto. His words are these, The difference 'twixt (...)
and (...).
(...), where he distinguishes his Idea from his Exemplar, making the former
to be first, and productive of the latter. Unto this (...), or (...), Exemplar,
or Image, the Divine Idea's of things future, or the Decrees of God, which the
Schools suppose to be seated in the Will of God, the object of Gods Science of
Vision, seem to answer. Laertius says, that Plato makes (...) Idea, and
Exemplar Synonymous, I conceive he is mistaken. This (...), or (...), Exemplar,
or intelligible Image. Timaeus (Edit. Steph. fol. 30.) calls (...), etc. the
Animal, Living, Intelligible World, which is elsewhere called (...), the Ideal
World, the self Liver, the always Liver; and by the Pythagoreans it is
generally styled (...), intelligible World, which they place in the middle,
betwixt the Supreme World or the Divine Essence, and the Sensible World, or
Universe. This Exemplar Serranus (on the forecited place of Timaeus, fol. 30.)
makes to be that eternal Image, or Exemplar in the mind of God, delineated, or
drawn according to the Idea of his eternal Wisdom, according to which all
things are produced. Yea, thus Plato seems to express Timaeus's mind, fol. 29.
(...). If the World be beautiful, and it is Maker good, it is evident, that he
eyed some internal Exemplar, etc. So before ( Timaeus fol. 28. The goodness of
all things consists in their answering to their Original Exemplar in Gods
Decrees.
) Wherefore, says he, if he that undertakes to effect any thing, regards this
unvariable Exemplar (...), etc. it cannot be but that the work should be
exactly formed. Thus Timaeus the Pythagorean in Plato's words, which indeed
seems exactly to answer that of Moses, Genesis 1.31. and God saw every thing that
he made, and behold it was very good. So says Augustine (de Civit. Dei. l. 11.
c. 21.) on this place, hereby is understood God's approbation of his work made
according to Art, which is the wisdom of God. Yea Timaeus, according to Plato's
relation, (fol. 30. edit. Steph.) speaks more fully and openly the sense
(almost in the very words) of Moses, Genesis 1.31. Thus (...), etc. For God
willed, that all things should be good, and nothing bad, neither is it lawful,
says he, to suppose that God, who is best, should make the World but in the
best and most beautiful manner: then he concludes, fol. 37. Thus, after the
Father of the Universe had beheld his Workmanship, (...), the framed a visible
Image of the eternal invisible Gods, he recreated and reposed himself therein,
i. e. God was delighted in his own works, because they were exactly conformed
to, and so sensible Ideas, or visible Images of that eternal Exemplar, and
those invisible Ideas, or Decrees lodged in his own sovereign Will, and
Essence. Does not Plato here speak plainly, not only the mind of Timaeus, but
of Moses also? This is not mine own conjecture only, but Philoponus (otherwise
Johannes Grammaticus) also that great Christian Philosopher has long since
observed the same, in his Book of the Worlds Creation, lib. 7. c. 11, 12. Moses
therefore concluding the production of the World, says rightly ( Genesis 1.31.)
God saw, etc. Moreover Plato in this again imitating him, and showing how the
Universe was made by God, says, That the Father when he beheld this moveable
and living Image of the eternal Gods, which he had made, he rejoiced and
recreated himself, (...), so much the more when he considered, that it was made
according to that great Exemplar of his own Idea's, or Decrees. Thus
Philoponus, who was well skilled in the mind of Plato, as well as of Moses. But
of these things more in their place.

. 9. Pythagoras held Gods production of, Of Gods Creation and Providence.
and providence over all things. So Timaeus (in Plato fol. 12.) says, that God
(...), etc. adorned and disposed the World into the most perfect Form and
Order; whence it was by Pythagoras called (...), i. e. Order, and Beauty.
Diogenes tells us, Pythagoras asserted (...), etc. that Unity (by which he
understood God) was the principle of all things. He held also God only to be
(...), the animation and vivisick principle of all things; according to Genesis
1.2. And the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters: whence Pythagoras
defined God a mind, which communicates, and diffuseth himself through every
part of the Universe, from whom all Animals receive life, etc. which accords
with Plato's Anima mundi. He also called God one entire Being within himself,
in a complete Circle, i. e. shedding abroad the influential lines of his
Providence throughout the Universe. See Stanly of Pythagoras 's Philosophy,
chap. 3.
The Pythagorean Conception (as Iamblichus) touching the Providence of God in
general, was this, That we have need of such a Government, as we ought not in
any thing to contradict, which alone proceeds from the Deity, who deservedly
may challenge a sovereign Dominion over all. For man being, say the
Pythagoreans, shamefully variable, and fickle in his appetites, affections, and
other passions, needs such a Government, from which proceeds moderation, and
order. But Pythagoras affirmed the Gods to have a peculiar Providence toward
Men, such as were at Friendship with them. So Diogenes Laertius says,
Pythagoras held (...), That Men are ak^^ to the Gods, and therefore God has a
special Providence over us, as Genesis 1. 26. so says Iamblichus, Pythagoras
demonstrated there is a friendship of the Gods toward men, etc. Grotius on
Matthew. 10.29. tells us, that some of the Hebrews held Gods providence about
men, but not about beasts: which Pythagoras seems to have learned from them,
and to have taught the Grecians.

Pythagoras's Model of Divine Worship.
. 10. Hence Pythagoras was a great Devoto, or Advocate for God, his Worship,
and sacred Institutes. So Iamblichus tells us, That Pythagoras proposed, that
all things we resolve to do, should tend to the solemn acknowledgement of the
Divinity; that the whole of man's life should consist in the following God,
which is the ground of all Philosophy. For since there is a God (says he) we
must acknowledge it is in his power to do us good. Now all give good things to
such as they love, and delight in: therefore it is manifest that such things
are to be performed, in which God delights, from whom alone good is to be
sought for. The like foundation of Divine Worship Plato (who did in this point
greatly Pythagorize) asserts, of which in it is place. And as to the Mode of
Divine Worship, Pythagoras and his Adherents, give us many wholesome
Institutes, such as these.

1. Against all Images or visible forms in Worship.
1. That God being an Incorporeal, and Spiritual Being, should not be Worshipped
under any Corporeal Form, or Visible Likeness. Thus Plutarch in the Life of
Numa Pompilius, tells us, That Numa forbad the Romans to believe, that God had
any Form, or likeness of Beast, or Man, which is agreeable to the Pythagoreans,
who thought the Gods Invisible, Incorruptible, and Intelligible Beings only: so
that in these former times there was in Rome no Image of God, either painted,
or graven for 170 Years, etc. Some think that Numa had this Institute from
Pythagoras; but Ludo. Vives (on August. Civit. l. 7. c. 35.) refutes this;
showing, that Numa dyed many Years before Pythagoras was born. We may therefore
more fitly with Clemens Alexandr. (...). 1. and out of him Seldom (de Jure
Gent. Hebr. l. 1. c. 2.) affirm, That Numa received this by Tradition
originally from the Jews, though perhaps immediately from the Phenicians, who
frequented Italy in, and before his time. That Pythagoras had it immediately
from the Jews, and particularly from that great Moral Command, Exodus 20.4.
Thou shall not make any graven Image, etc. is most likely. Conformable whereto
is that great Pythagorean Symbol [Grave not the Image of God in a Ring] i. e.
says Iamblichus, Philosophize, and above all things conceive that the Gods are
incorporeal. This Symbol is (says he) above all other the Seminary of the
Pythagorick Doctrines, etc.

2. Hence Pythagoras instituted, 2. That God is to be worshipped by Rites of
his own appointing.
that God should be Worshipped with a pure mind; and such decent Ceremonies, as
were by him appointed. So Diogenes Laertius: Pythagoras, says he, held (...),
etc. That honors are to be performed to the Gods according to their own
appointment, with a white garment, and chaste body, and soul, which
purification is acquired by expurgations, washings, sprinklings, and separation
from what ever is unclean, etc. I know (...) is rendered by the Latin Version
cum laudibus, with praises; which agrees well enough with our present design:
but yet that it signifies in this place such a Worship, as was appointed by the
Gods, I gather by the like usage of the Word in Plato his Alcibiades, fol. 149.
where bringing in the Athenians complaining to Ammon their Oracle, that their
Enemies the Lacedaemonians, who offered few, or no Sacrifices, should prevail
against them, who offered such costly Sacrifices: The Oracle makes answer, that
the (...), the plain simple instituted worship of the Lacedaemonians, was more
acceptable to the Gods than all their pompous will worship. This we need not
doubt, but that Pythagoras learned from the Jews, as Plato also, who in his
(...), fol. 6. tells us, that all Divine Worship must be (...), i. e. says
Serranus, measured by the will, and good pleasure of God. And whereas
Pythagoras required his Followers to worship in a white Garment, that is
apparently a Jewish Rite, answerable to the Ephod. Such were also all those
^urifications, Washings, Sprinklings, and Separations from all unclean things,
which Pythagoras enjoined. This likewise is affirmed of Iamblichus, that
Pythagoras said Purity is acquired by Expiations, Bathings, Sprinklings,
Abstinences from the flesh of things, that dye of themselves, and viperous
Creatures, etc. which were all Jewish Ceremonies. Laertius also informs us,
that Pythagoras held things dedicated to God were holy, and not to be used for
common use: thence he forbad the eating of Fishes (...), in as much as they
were holy: for it was not meet that what was proper to the Gods should be
common to Men. Farther Vossius de Philos. sect. l. 2. c. 6.. 5. tells us, it
appears out of Clemens Alexandrinus, that Pythagoras was circumcised, etc.
which if true, gives us a great demonstration, that he was initiated in the
Jewish Ceremonies, which agrees with what was before mentioned out of Diogenes
Laertius, that Pythagoras, whilst he was in Babylon, was cleansed from the
Pollutions of his life past, by one Zabratus, who according to Seldom (de Gente
Hebr. l. 1. c. 2.) was Ezekiel. See more of this in chap. 6.. 6, 7, 8. of
Pythagoras's symbolizing with the Jews in Rites.

The Pythagorean exactnes in Divine Worship, from Eccles. 5.1.
3. Pythagoras required of his Disciples a very great exactnes, and solemnity
in the Worship of God. This is evident by many of his Symbols, and Iamblichus's
explication thereof. As Symbol 1. [ When you go to the Temple to Worship,
neither do, nor say any thing concerning life] i. e. says Iamblichus, Worship
the Deity after such a manner as is most pure, and immixed. He takes care, that
no worldly affairs insinuate into Divine Worship. So Symbol 2. [ If a Temple
lie in your way, go not in: No, though you pass by the very doors] i. e. says
Iamblichus, the Supreme Being ought to have the Principal Worship: but if any
Man does it upon the occasion of any other thing, he makes that the second,
which is the first, and chiefest of all; and by that means he subverts the
whole order of Worship. The most excellent Good ought not to be ranked in the
latter place, as inferior to humane Good. Again Symbol 3. [(...), Sacrifice and
Worship barefoot.] i. e. says Iamblichus, serve the Gods 1. decently, and
orderly. 2. Being free from fetters: this is to be observed not in the Body
only, but in the acts of the Soul also. Now that this Pythagorean exactnes in
Divine Worship had its original from the Jewish Church, is observed by Mr. Mede
(on Eccles. 5.1. of the reverence of Gods house, page 104.) where citing this
very Symbol of Pythagoras, [offer Sacrifice and Worship with thy shoes off.]
This, says he, alludes to the Jewish Custom of Discalceation, which was used
by the Jews in going to the Place of Worship, and from them derived to the
Gentiles, when they worshipped their Gods. We might add to these Pythagoras's
seventh Symbol, [ Above all things, govern your tongues following the Gods.]
i. e. says Iamblichus, nothing renders the mind so perfect, as when a Man in
following the Gods reflects in upon himself by serious Meditation. The whole of
which Symbolick Doctrine, touching the Worship of God, seems very correspondent
with Scripture Precepts, touching God's Worship; especially Eccles. 5.1.

Pythagoras's Demons, their nature, and office.
. 11. Another part of Pythagoras's Theology consisted in the knowledge, and
worship of the Demons. For the understanding whereof, we are to remember, that
as Augustine (de Civit. Dei, l. 6. c. 5.) has long since observed, out of
Varro, and Seneca; the Pagan (...) was threefold. A threefold Theology,
Mythick.
1. (...) Mythick. or fabulous, which was that of the Poets. 2. (...) Politic,
or Civil, which was (as is supposed) taken up, and imposed by their Lawgivers,
and Politicians, Politic, Natural.
and so followed by the Priests, and People in their worship. 3. (...) Natural
Theology, which the Philosophers taught, as that, which suited best with the
Light of Nature, and Principles of Reason, in distinction from the two former.
For the wiser of the Philosophers, Thales, Pythagoras, Plato, etc. utterly
rejected the fabulous Theology of the Poets: Neither did they generally
approve of that Politic Theology, which Statesmen had invented, and the
Priests with the People embraced, in order to the promoting their Politic
Interests. But these Philosophers, by what Oriental Jewish Tradition they had
received, together with the Improvements of their own Reason thereon, found out
a more Natural, and Rational kind of Theology; which was briefly this. They
held only one Supreme, Eternal Being, which they called God: This God the
Phenicians called Saturn, or Molech, from the Hebrew (...) King; but the
Grecians generally styled him Jupiter, from (...) the Father Jah, which was one
of God's names. Now this supreme God Jah the Father, Saturn, or Molech, was, as
they supposed, at such an infinite distance from poor Mortals, and Sinners, as
that there could be no approach to Him, or communications of good things from
Him, but by some Mediators, or midling Gods. These middle Gods, or Mediators,
were no other than their great Heroes, or Persons, who had been greatly famous
in their Age for some noble Exploits, or virtuous Acts, and after their Death
were by common consent Deifyed, or made Gods, and called by some from their
office Medioxumi, from the place of their main residence (which was supposed to
be in the Stars) Deastri, from their relation to the superior God, the lesser
Gods, the made Gods; from their knowledge of humane Affairs, (...), Demons;
also from their sovereigntie over Men, (...), Baalim Lords. Who was the first
of these Demons, is not determined: some think 'twas Joseph, whom the
Egyptians worshipped under the Symbolick names, and Images of Apis, Syrapis,
Hermes, etc. Others make Belus a Phenician King, the first of them; whence they
were by the Phenicians called Baalim: who ever was the first, it matters not,
so long as we have such probable conjectures, yea strong presumptions, that
their original Idea, or Exemplar, was conveyed by some imperfect Tradition
from the Jewish Messiah. This seems evident by that account we find of these
Demons in Plato, who discourses professedly, and at large concerning them, in
his Politicus; but more particularly in his Symposium, as also de legibus,
where 1. Touching their Natures, he terms them to be (...), etc. made Gods
visible Gods: Idols, and Images of the great God, who was Maker of all things.
Plato de Legib. 13. 2. Touching their Office, he says, they were (...), etc.
placed in the middle 'twixt the great God, and man, to be Mediators, or
Porters, for the conveighing the Sacrifices, and Prayers of men to the Gods; as
also for the transmitting gifts, and all good things from God to Men; together
with an Interpretation of the mind, will, and precepts of God to men: Whence
3ly, says he, by the mediation of these Demons there is a communion, and
friendship maintained betwixt God, and men, which otherwise could not be: so
Plato, Sympos. fol. 202, etc. 4. As to the dignity of these Demons, he makes
them (...), Co-rulers with the great God: so Plato, Politicus fol. 251. By all
which I think, it plainly appears, that these Demons had their original from
some Scriptural Tradition of the Messiah, unto whom Plato's Characters of them
seem fully to answer. That Pythagoras held these Demons, we are informed by
Diogenes Laertius, who tells us, that Next to the supreme God, Pythagoras, and
his followers placed Demons, and Hero's: see more of these Demons in Lud.
Vives, in August. Civ. Dei, lib. 8. cap. 14, etc.

Of the Aeones.
. 12. Another piece of the Pythagorean Theology, is that which treats of their
(...), Aeones, who were distinct from their Demons, and much the same with our
Scripture Angels, for they looked upon these Aeones, as Divine immortal Powers,
amongst whom there were diverse degrees; some inferior, some superior, who had
their (...), their conjunctions, and Genealogies, etc. These Aeones the
Gnostics (who much imitated the Pythagoreans) transmitted into their mystical
Divinity, applying them to the Angels: of which see more in our account of the
corruption of the Pythagorean Philosophy.

Of the Soul.
. 13. Another part of Pythagoras's Metaphysics concerned the humane Soul,
which (says Stobeus) Pythagoras defined a self-moving number: who held also,
that (...) was induced into the Soul from without, Pythag.'s Metempsychosis a
corrupt tradition of the Resurrection.
(...), i. e. by a Divine efficacy (so Plato understands this (...)) delibated
of the universal mind, whence also she became immortal. Diogenes Laertius
likewise acquaints us, that Pythagoras held (...), etc. that the Soul was
immortal, because that, whence it was derived, was immortal. And this some give
as the genuine import of Pythagoras's (...), Metempsychosis, which by some was
called (...), by others (...), by Laertius (...). This Metempsychosis, That
Pythagoras's Metempsychosis was Symbolical, see c. 9. paragr. 8.
or Transmigration of the Soul from one Body to another, was also asserted by
Plato, and, as it is supposed, taken up both by him and Pythagoras from some
broken Tradition they had received from the Jews, touching the Resurrection.
This is observed by Serranus in Plato, Repub. lib. 10. Plato, says he,
teaches us, that the Bodies of the Pious, should (...) be raised again to
life. And the Comment, or Invention of the [(...), and (...)] Transmigration of
Souls, was but a corrupt derivation from this Truth of the Resurrection. That
the Jews had the like persuasion touching the Transmigration of Souls, appears
from that of Herod, who thought that John Baptist's Soul revived in Christ.
That the Pharisees held this Opinion, is affirmed by Josephus, l. 18. Antiq. c.
2. and it is possible the more ancient Jews held the same, and Pythagoras from
them, though Vossius denies it. That Pythagoras's, and Plato's Metempsychosis,
or Transmigration of the humane Soul after death, was by them taken up, to
signify the Souls first infusion into, See more of this, Stanly cap. 7. fol.
145.
and thence by death separation from, and at the Resurrection reunion with the
Body, is asserted by John Reuchlin, Art. Cabal. l. 2. This is (says he) the
meaning of Pythagoras concerning his Metempsychosis, or Transmigration of Souls
after death, and their descension into life. Others thought the Soul educed out
of Matter: Pythagoras thought it infused by God into the Body, and therefore
before it, not in time, but in dignity, and purity: This infusion he termed
the descent of the Soul, etc. or if he meant historically, (...), the Soul
separate from the Body, may by the power of God be brought the same, into the
same body; whence he acknowledges God only to be (...), the animation of all
things. God infuseth the soul into every man, and being infused takes it away,
and being taken away restores it, when, and as often as he pleases. Thus he;
some understand this Pythagorean Metempsychosis, Symbolically, with relation to
the several passions, dispositions, and morals of men, as hereafter.

. 14. Lastly, To give a general Idea of Pythagoras's Theology; A general Idea
of Pythagoras's Theology.
we must know, that it was Mystical; much the same with that of Pherecydes his
Master; as also with that of Orpheus, from whom he borrowed much of it: who all
affected a mystical mode of Theologizing, partly from their own Ignorance,
being unacquainted with the true import, or meaning of those Jewish Traditions,
which were very imperfectly delivered to them; and partly from an affected
Singularity, they being unwilling that any should be acquainted with their
Mysteries, but such as were of their own Tribe, and Sect. This is the meaning
of many of Pythagoras's Symbols, whereby he strictly enjoined his Disciples not
to communicate his Mysteries to Strangers, and those without; as before from
Grot. Matthew. 7.6, etc. That Pythagoras, and his Adherents, were generally
sensible of their great Ignorance of Divine Mysteries, Pythagoreans acknowledge
their Ignorance.
appears by several of his Symbols, as that [ Look not in a Glass by
Candlelight.] i. e. says Iamblichu^, Philosophize, pursuing not the fantasies
of sense, which gives a kind of light to comprehensions, like a Candle, neither
natural, nor true, etc. This answers to Prove. 13.9. Thence another of his
Symbols runs thus, [ Discourse not of Pythagorean things without light.] i. e.
(says Iamblichu^) because it is impossible to understand Pythagorean Doctrines
without light. But that which was the foundation of all the Pythagorean
mystical Theology, and a great argument of their sense of Ignorance in Divine
things, was their credulous inquisitive humor, which inclined them to receive
every Tradition, though never so broken, or corrupt, touching Divine things.
This is fully expressed by that great Symbol of Pythagoras, viz. [Concerning
the Gods dis-believe nothing wonderful, nor yet concerning Divine things] This
(says Iamblichus) declares the superlative Excellence of God's instructing
us, and puts us in mind, that we ought not to estimate the Divine power by our
own Judgment: which Comment of Iamblichus, if applied to Divine Revelation, is
excellent, and excellently useful; the same with what the Scripture universally
teaches us; viz. that concerning God, and Divine things, we should dis-believe
nothing though never so wonderful, if we have a Divine word for it. But the
Pythagoreans stretched this excellent Scriptural Rule beyond the line of Divine
Revelation, even to the belief of every corrupt Oriental Tradition, as
hereafter.

Of Divinati^^.
. 15. We should now proceed to the black, and Satanick part of Pythagoras's
Metaphysics, or Supernatural Philosophy, namely his Magic, or Art of
Divination: But this we shall refer to Chap. 10. Touching the Vanity, or
corruptions of the Pythagorean Philosophy. Only in general: that this black
Art of Divination, wherein the Pythagoreans were greatly versed, had its
original from Satanick imitation of God's sacred Oracles, and the various ways
of his revealing himself in the Jewish Church, I think will be very evident,
when the parallel is drawn betwixt the one, and the other: For as God revealed
his Oracles by Dreams, and Visious; so the Devil's were frequently delivered in
the same manner. Of which more in its place.

CHAP. IX. Of Pythagoras's Symbols, and their Jewish Original, etc.
Pythagoras's Symbols from the Jews. 1. Give thy right hand to none but
Pythagoreans; as Gal. 2.9. Abstain from the dead, Matthew. 8.22. Set down Salt,
Lev. 2.13. Ethick Symbols Jewish. Pythagoras's Metempsychosis Symbolical, from
Dan. 4.32, 33. Pythagorean Abstinences from Jewish Symbols. Pythagorean Numbers
Symbolical. Pythagoras's Symbols of Divine Worship of Jewish extract;
particularly that Worship barefoot, from Exodus 3.5. Eccles. 5.1. Of
Pythagoras's Works, that he left nothing in Writing. The Pythagorean Sect,
their ruins. Pythagoras's Followers, and their Writings. Pythagorizing
Philosophers, ^lato, etc. The pride of the Pythagoreans, and all other Sects.

.1. HAving finished our Discourse touching the matter of the Pythagorean
Philosophy, we now proceed to its Form, or Mode, Pythagoras's mode of
Phil^sophizing Symbolick.
together with its Traduction from the Jewish Church. Porphyrie, in the Life of
Pythagoras, informs us, that he used a twofold Form, or manner of
Philosophizing: the one (...), which was more open, and easy: the other (...),
which was mystic, and obscure. Pythagoraei sapientiam (...) quibusdam, and
integumentis repraesentabant, quae ipsi Symbola appellant. In quibus ita
Philosophiae praecepta comprehens^ erant, ut vel ambitionis dissuasionem, et
otii sugam, vel pravorum sodalium declinationem contine^ent. Plut. l. d^ edu^.
Laert. l. 8. Hornius Hist. Philos. l. 7. c. 12.
The choicest parts of Pythagoras's Philosophy, especially his Theology, was
wrapped up, and expressed in a Symbolick Form, or Mode. Thus Iamblichus in the
Life of Pythagoras, l. 1. c. 29. Pythagoras (says he) used by short sentences
to express various significations to his Disciples, after a Symbolick Mode, as
Apollo by short enigmatick Oracles, vaticinated many abstruse things, and
Nature by little seeds exhibits difficult effects. the same Iamblichus, lib. 1.
cap. 5. Thus also Clemens Alexandrinus, 1. (...). attributes to Pythagoras
(...), a Symbolick Mode of teaching. So Justin Martyr, in his cohortation to
the Greeks, (...) Pythagoras the son of Mnesarchus, who delivered the Dogmes of
his Philosophy Mystically by Symbols, as the Historiographers of his Life
manifest.

Pythagoras's Symbols from (...) Jews.
. 2. That Pythagoras traduced this his Symbolick Form, or Mode of
Philosophizing originally from the Scriptures, or Jewish Church is not without
good grounds affirmed by the Learned, and will farther appear by inquiry into
particulars. We find a rational affirmation hereof in Learned John Reuchlin his
Explication of Pythagorick Doctrine, Artis Cabal. lib. 2. The way of teaching
(says he) by Symbols, and Silence (as other things) Pythagoras brought into
Greece, from the Hebrews, with whom it was the custom, that the Disciple being
to ask some sublime questions, should hold his peace, and being questioned
should only answer (...). Thus the Cabalists answer (...) the Wise said.
Moreover all the Pythagorick Philosophy, especially that, which concerns
Divine things, is mystically expressed by Enigmes, and Symbols, because 1. The
Ancients used to deliver Wisdom by Allegories: all their Philosophers, and
Poets are full of Riddles, avoiding by obscurity contempt. 2. It often happens
that abstruse things are best expressed by such short Enigmes. 3. As Generals
use watch-words to distinguish their own Soldiers, so the Pythagorean Symbols
were as distinctive marks of their Society. 4. They used Symbols also as
Memorial notes. For in treating of things Divine, and Humane, the vastness of
the subject require^ short Symbols, as conducing much to memory. So Stanly of
Pythag^ fol. 136. wherein we have a full account of the original of Symbols as
also of their proper use, both amongst the Jews, and also the Grecians. As for
the Jews it is evident, that God made use of this Form or Mode of teaching them
Heavenly, sublime Mysteries by terren^ Figures, Symbolick Images, Types, or
Shadows out of condescentio^ to their Infant State; which manner of teaching
continued even to our Saviors time, who delivered the chief of his Doctrine
concerning Heavenly Mysteries, under Earthly Parables, and Symbols, thereby to
render them more plain and familiar; as he himself signifies, John 3.12. If I
have told you Earthly things, etc. The Jewish Types, and Symbols were also as
distinctive marks of God's People, and Church, (...) a Symbol amongst the
ancients signified a Scar^, or other mark, whereby Soldiers were distinguished
from their ene^i^s: thus the (...) castles Creed was called ^ Symbol of Faith.
whereby they were distinguished from all the world besides, (so the Greek
(...) Symbol signifies a distinctive mark, or watchword) which I suppose made
Pythagoras the more ready to embrace the like garb, as that, which was of
Divine original, and so most honorable: The great Maxim, on which the
Pythagorean, as well as the Jewish Symbols were founded, was this, (...),
Things corporeal are imitates (or images) of spirituals. That Pythagoras
received this Symbolick mode of Philosophizing originally from the Jewish
Church, is farther confirmed by Serranus, who on Plato's Symposium speaks thus:
It was the manner of the Ancient Philosophers to shadow forth the truth by
Symbols. These Plato followed, as it appears by this disputation. And this mode
of Philosophizing was accurately framed by the Pythagoreans, the whole of whose
Philosophy was couched under the covert of Symbols, and Allegories, etc. But
more particularly Serranus in his Preface to Plato's Works, lays down this
general assertion, That it is the opinion of all Learned Christian Antiquity,
that this Symbolick manner of Philosophizing came originally from the Jewish
Learning, delivered by Moses, and the Prophets, though whether immediately, or
mediately by the Egyptians, is not determined. Clemens Alexandr. 1. (...).
enclines to the latter, namely that Pythagoras received his Symbols immediately
from the Egyptians, though originally from the Jews. We have the Testimony of
Grotius to the same purpose, on Mat. 7.6. and on Mat. 8.22.

. 3. The full proof of our assertion touching the Traduction of the Pythagorean
Symbols from the Jewish Church, An enumeration of Pythag. Symbols, which he
received from the Jews.
depends upon the consideration of particulars, and their parallel with Jewish
Symbols of like import. Pythagoras's Symbols related either to such, as were
aliens and strangers to his schole, and Philosophy, or to such, as were
within, and Disciples thereof. As for those, who were without, and Forreiners,
Pythagoras had many Symbols to express their state, and to prohibit his
Disciples conversation with them. For Pythagoras esteemed all that were not of
his College as profane, wicked, dogs, etc. whence that Symbol, 1 Symbol. Give
the right of fellowship to none but Pythagoreans. Gal. 2.9.
(...), To give the right hand of fellowship to none but Pythagoreans. Which
Symbol was plainly of Jewish extract. For amongst the Jews, to give the right
hand was an ordinary Symbol of Friendship, and Communion, as Gal. 2.9.
therefore they esteeming the Gentiles as Profane, and Unclean, would not salute
them with the right hand of fellowship, i. e. they would not have Communion or
Friendship with them. Hence also it followed, that the Pythagoreans forbad the
Revealing of their Mysteries to such Profane Dogs; which also was of Jewish
extract, as it appears by that Jewish Symbol, cited by St. Mat. 7.6. [(...):]
where Grotius observes, that amongst the Chaldeans, Hebrews, and Egyptians,
their ancient Professors of Wisdom, delivered their Precepts (...) in Symbols,
as Clemens Alexand. teaches us. Pythagoras brought this mode into Greece,
either from Egypt, where he lived some while, or from Syria, whence his Master
Pherecydes was, and as some think Pythagoras himself. For that he was a
Tyrrhenian many have affirmed: others say, he was a Tyrian. And indeed the
Tyrrhenians, as we have said, were originally Tyrians. But moreover he went to
the Jews, as many writers have reported. Thus Grotius. See more of this Symbol,
chap. 6. parag. 8.

To abstein from things dead Mat. 8.22. Numb. 6.6.
. 4. But the most livelie Symbol, which Pythagoras had to express the Wicked,
and Miserable state of profane sinners, was That (...), To abstein from things
Dead, or Mortal. By which Hierocles says, Pythagoras called off his Disciples
from things dead, or mortal. Iamblichus also tells us, that Pythagoras said
purity was acquired by absteining from things that dyed of themselves. This
Symbol, we need not doubt, was of a Jewish origination. For we know the Jews in
general were forbid to eat the flesh of any creature, that dyed of it self. And
particularly the High Priests, and the Nazarites were forbid to come near, or
touch a dead body, as Number. 6.6. Lev. 20. And the proper import of this divine
Symbol seems this; That Sacred, and Holy persons, are not to have Conversation,
or Communion with persons, or things spiritually deadly, or dead. That it was
common amongst the Jews to look upon wicked men as dead in sin, is evident from
what has been observed from Luke 15.24. ( chap. 7.. 13.) Thus also Philo (...),
Wicked men are dead in their souls. And that Pythagoras did really traduce his
Symbol, of absteining from the dead, from this Jewish Symbol is positively
affirmed by Grotius on Mat. 8.22. [ Let the dead bury the dead.] This also, as
other Symbols, Pythagoras drew from the Oriental Philosophy, who was (...), an
imitator of Jewish opinions, as Hermippus writes of him. For Pythagoras, (...),
went to the Hebrews, as Malchus (i. e. Porphyrie) writes out of Diogenes.
Whence it was the manner, that such who were expelled out of the Pythagorean
Schole, had (...) a Coffin made, and placed in their room, which we read was
executed on Hipparchus. Arrianus in Epictetum 4.5. (...). This Jewish, and
Pythagorean Symbol, of absteining from the dead, we find in the Books of
Chrysippus thus (...).

. 5. As Pythagoras had Symbols to represent the Spiritual death of Wicked men,
and the Duty of his Scholars, Salt a Symbol of Covenants, Friendship, and
Sanctity, according to the Jewish rite.
to separate from them. So likewise to represent the strict, and holy communion
which ought to be amongst his Colleagues, he made use of this lively Jewish
Symbol (...), set down Salt. We have already proved that Pythagoras traduced
this Symbol from the Jewish Church, ( chap. 6. parag. 6.) where it has been
shown, how Salt was by God's institution, a Symbol of their Holy Confederation,
and Communion with God, and amongst themselves, as Numb. 18.19. 2 Chronicles. 13.5.
etc. And to make this a little more evident, we must know (according to L'
Empereur of the Jewish Temple) the Jews had their Storehouses of Salt in, or
about, the Temple, for the seasoning of their Sacrifices. We find frequent
references in the New Testament to to this Symbol, as before; and Luke 14.34.
Lev. 2.13. And as in God's Sacrifices there was ever Salt to be used, so the
like was usually observed in Heathen Sacrifices, as appears by that of Pliny
The great authority of Salt is discovered by the Sacreds of the Ancients,
amongst whom there were no Sacreds performed without Salt. And that Salt was
used in those federal Sacrifices, as a Symbol of Friendship appears by that
Proverbial saying of Tullie, There must be many Bushels of Salt used before
there can be a full friendship completed. To the same purpose is that of the
Scholiast on Homer Iliad. 1. (...), because Salt is a Symbol of friendship.
Lastly that this Pythagorean Symbol of Salt implies farther an Holy
Confederation, or, according to the scripture Dialect, a Communion of Saints,
is manifest by Laertius's interpretation of this Symbol. Pythagoras, says he,
bid men make use of Salt (...), as a memoire of righteousness, for Salt
preserves all things. This was the proper signification of this Symbol of Salt
in the Jewish Church, unto which Christ alludes in Mark 9.49, 50. Mat. 5.13.
and we have sufficient evidence from what has been observed, that Pythagoras
traduced this his Symbol from the Jews, and used it in the same sense that they
did; namely to express that holy, and strickt confederation, and Friendship,
which ought to be amongst his Colleagues.

Symbols relating to the Form of Pythagoras's Philosophy.
. 6. Pythagoras had some Symbols relating to his Philosophy in general,
especially his Theology, it is mystical nature, and difficulty to be
understood, without some Interpreter, or Divine light: Such were those Symbols
forementioned. [Discourse not of Pythagorean things without Light.] [Looke not
into a Glass by Candle light.] [Concerning the Gods disbelieve nothing
wonderful.] all which, according to the Interpretation of Iamblichus, seems to
be of Jewish original, as has been observed ( chap. 8.. 14.) I shall add only
one more, which seems to be the Foundation of all Pythagoras's Symbols,
according to Laertius's interpretation, thus: (...), To have Tapestrie always
bound up, i. e. says Laertius (...), a man's speech should not be always
spoken out, so as to have the meaning, and form of it fully appear, but like
Tapestrie when rolled up, the Form, and Figure of it should be conceled. This
Pythagoras seems to have learnt from the Jews, who rolled up all their
mysteries under Symbolick Types, and Figures, as before.

Ethick Symbols.
. 7^ As to the Matter of Pythagoras's Philosophy, he had many Ethick
Characters, or Symbols of Morality, whereby he excited his Scholars to Virtue,
and discouraged them from Vice. Such as these, [ Receive not a Swallow, (i. e.
a sloathful person) into your house.] [Stir not the Fire with a Sword] i. e.
provoke not a wrathful, or potent person. [ Eat not the heart.] i. e. by
distracting cares. [ Pass not over the Balance.] i. e. do justice. Pythagoras
also called Virtue harmony, which is a symbolick image of its Beauty, Order,
Amiablenes, etc. as before chap. 7.. 13. There were other Ethick Symbols, by
which Pythagoras allured his Disciples to the embracing of Virtue, as that, [
Eat not the Brain.] i. e. says Iamblichus, destroy not your principal
instrument of Wisdom. Again, [ Sleep not at noon.] i. e. (according to
Iamblichus) Shut not your eyes against the light, when it is most manifest*
Farther, [ When it Thunders touch the earth.] i. e. (says Iamblichus When a
King is angry humble thy self. Again, [ Pluck not a Crown] i. e. Offend not the
King. Lastly Pythagoras said, [ Declining high ways, walk in path ways.] i.
e. (as Iamblichus will have it) Leave the popular course of life, and pursue
that, which is separate, and divine, answerable to that of Christ, Mat.
7.13.14. That all these Pythagorean Symbols have their parallel in the
Scriptures, and Jewish Doctrine, might with ease be proved.

. 8. Yea some make the Pythagorean Metempsychosis to be but a Symbolick Image,
or Ethick Character. Thus Velcurio in his Physics, Pythagoras's Metempsychosis
Symbolical of Morals etc.
lib. 4. cap. 38. I would think (says he) that Pythagoras's (...), and (...).
Metempsychosis, and Redintegration of the soul, did belong to the Variable
morals, Affections, and Habits of the Soul. For as a man is variously affected,
or moralized, so he acts the part of a Lion, of a Bear, of a Wolf, etc.
according to the variety of his conditions. Thus is Ovid's Metamorphosis
referred to Morals. Yea Plutarch gave this Interpretation of Pythagoras's
Metempsychosis, and out of him the French Montaigne Essaies livre 2. chap. 11.
Pythagoras emprunta la Metempsychose etc. That is in English, Pythagoras
borrowed his Metempsychosis from the Egyptians, but since it has been received
by other Nations, and particularly by our Druides. The Religion of our ancient
Gauls supposed the Soul to be Immortal, and thence, that it never ceased to
move from one body to another. If it had been Valiant, it moved to the body
of a Lion: if it had been Voluptuous, it then creeped into that of a Swine: if
Timorous, into that of an Heart, etc. And the Interpretation, which Plutarch
gives to this Error, is very apposite: for he says, that it was not the Cat,
or the Ox (for example) that the Egyptians adored, but some images of Divine
powers which they conceived to lodge in these beasts, as in the Ox they adored
Divine patience, and Usefulness, as in the Cat vivacitie, etc. Thus Flutarch,
and Montaigne. That the Egyptians were the first, that taught this Doctrine of
Metempsychosis, is affirmed by Herodotus in Enterpe. Where he adds, That the
Greeks (meaning the Pythagoreans) first received it from Egypt, though they
delivered it as their own dogme: So Vossius de Philos. sect. lib. 2. cap. 6..
3. That Pythagoras took up this Metempsychosis only as an Ethick Symbol, is the
judgment of John Reuchlin Artis Cabalist. lib. 2. where he tells us, That
Pythagoras in affirming that the Soul of a Timorous person went into a woman,
and of a Cruel man into a Lion, and of a Libidinous man into a Sow, and of a
Vain, Light person, into a Bird, as of a Sloathful person into a Fish,, from
their resemblance in manners; he did not speak thus, as if he thought so, but
only to affrighten the vulgar sort, by such kind of Fables, from Vice, as we
were wont to affright Children by Bugbears. That the Egyptians (from whom
Pythagoras is said to have received this Symbol) understood their
Metempsychosis in a Symbolick, Hieroglyphick sense, seems very probable: and
that they traduced it originally from the Jewish Church, appears as likely. For
that the Pharisees asserted this Metempsychosis, is affirmed by Josephus de
Bello Jud. lib. 2. cap, 8. And we may presume the Jews before them held the
same. Yea some, and that not without probable conjectures, make the whole
story of Nebuchadnezzar's being Transformed into a Peast, etc. Dan. 4.32, 33.
to be Symbolical of his Brutish life, separate from humane society. For that
he was not really transformed into a Beast, is most likely. And hence it is
supposed, this Egyptian Pythagorean Metempsychosis had its original, even from
Nebuchadnezzar's Symbolical Transformation into a Beast: and that which gives
this conjecture the more likelihood; Nebuchadnezzars Metempchosysis, Dan. 4.32,
33. The rise of the Pythagoreans.
is that this Transformation of Nebuchadnezzar into a Brutish condition was but
just before, if not at the very same time, that Pythagoras lived at Babylon.
For whether it were in Ezechiel's time, as Seldom, or in Daniel's time, as
Wendelin (of Pythagoras's Tetractie) that Pythagoras was in Babylon, yet it
could not be long after this Metamorphosis, or, as we may truly style it,
Metempsychosis of Nebuchadnezzars. Neither can we imagine that Pythagoras, who
was so curious an Inquisitor into all the works of Divine Providence, should
let pass this stupendous, and amazing Providence of God on Nebuchadnezzar
(which made all the Empire ring of it) without observation. Why therefore may
we not conclude, that both Pythagoras, and the Egyptians derived their
Symbolical Metempsychosis from this Metempsychosis, or Transmigration of
Nebuchadnezzar into the Symbolick Form of a Beast. Or, if we had rather, we
may suppose Pythagoras's Metempsychosis to be a Symbolick image of the Souls
Divine Original, and Infusion into the body by God, as also of it is Separation
by death, Reunion at the Resurrection, The Pythagorean Abstinence from Flesh
Symbolical in imitation of the Jews.
and immortal estate: so Plato, Serr^nus, and Reuchlin seem to incline, as
before, chap. 8. parag. 13.

. 9. We have also good conjectures to persuade us, that Pythagoras's precepts
touching Abstinence from Flesh were muchly Symbolical, and that his followers
did not abstein from all kinds, or all parts of Flesh, but only from such as
were of Sacred use, or of Symbolical signification, answerable to the Jewish
Abstinences. For first, That Pythagoras himself absteined not wholly from
Flesh, we have for it the Testimony of Aristoxenus the Musician, Disciple of
Aristotle, quoted by Gellius lib. 4. cap. 11. That Pythagoras (says he) did
eat of young Pigges, and tender Goats is affirmed by Aristoxenus, which he
seems to have learnt from Xenophilus the Pythagorean, his familiar, and from
some others more ancient, who lived not much distant from Pythagoras. And that
Pythagoras ate of Animals, Alexis the Poet teaches in the Comedy of
Pythagoras's Life. Thus Gellius, who, in what follows, relates, that Aristotle
affirms, the Pythagoreans absteined not from all Flesh, but only from some
parts, namely the Heart, Brain, etc. which were of Symbolick use. And Porphyrie
in his first Book of Abstinence from Animals, says, (...) etc. They say, that
the Pythagoreans themselves absteined not from all Flesh, when they sacrificed.
So Athenaeus lib. 7. says, That the Pythagoreans eat but moderately of some
flesh, and some they sacrifice, but of Fishes they taste not, etc. and he gives
a Symbolick reason why they eat not of Fishes (...). For silence, which they
esteem as Divine. Diogenes Laertius gives the like Symbolick account of their
absteining from Fishes. And we need not doubt, but that the main of their
Symbolick Abstinences from Flesh, and Fish, had it is original from the Jewish
Symbolick Abstinences from things unclean, etc. Though we may not deny, but
that Pythagoras, and his Followers were very abstemious as to Flesh, upon a
Medicinal, and Natural account, thereby to keep their mind, and body, in (...)
a good Habitude, and disposition of Health, as before.

. 10. Abstinence from Beans Symbolical.
The like Symbolick account some give of Pythagoras's precept for Abstinence
from Beans; the which we find mentioned in Clemens Alexandrinus, lib. 3. (...).
in this verse (...), It is an equal crime to eat a Bean, as to eat the heads of
Parents. This Lucian brings in Pythagoras asserting in Hell, and Chrysostom in
his 1. Homil. on the Gospel of St. John, attributes the same to Pythagoras.
Gellius, lib. 4. chap. 11. cites a Verse, which is supposed to be one of
Empedocles's (who was a Pythagorean, and Auditor of Pythagoras) to the same
purpose (...) (...), Pythagoras (...) suis dicebat and a venere illicita
abstinendum docebat. (...) enim notabant vasa seminaria sive testiculos. Horn.
l. 7. c. 12.
O ye miserable wretches touch not Beans with your hand. Yet some think this
Pythagorean prohibition against eating Beans, ought to be understood
Symbollically, and Enigmatically only; in as much, as some of great authority
affirm, that Pythagoras himself absteined not from Beans. Thus Aristoxenus the
Musician in his Book of Pythagoras, as Gellius lib. 4. cap. 11. and Voss. de
Philos. l. 2. c. 6.. 39. Others by (...) understand the Testicles, and so by
Pythagoras's (...), conceive the illicite use of Venerie to be forbid; as
Hornius Hist. Philos. l. 7. c. 12. It Is possible it was both Physical, and
Symbolical, as the former of these.

Symbols of things Divine. Numbers Symbols of God, etc.
. 11. As Pythagoras had many Ethick Symbols to express his moral Precepts by;
so also his Theologick Mysteries were in a more particular manner couched
under, and expressed by Enigmatick, Symbolick Images, especially by Numbers,
and Figures, which, as he conceited, had an Analogy, and consent with all
things: Whence he expressed Apollo by Unity, Diana by the number Two, Minerva
by the number Seven; and Plato in his Timaeus seems to imitate him. That
Pythagoras expressed God by Unity, appears by that of Laertius, (...), etc.
Unity is the Principle of all things. Whence the Pythagoreans accounted the
number of Two accursed, because it was the first departure from Unity. And the
reason why Pythagoras expressed God by Unity, is given us by Reuchlin (Art.
Cabal. lib. 2.) thus, The Divine mind, the receptacle of Principles, Pythagoras
Symbollically calls Number, saying, Number is the principle of all things. So
Plutarch, de Philosoph. Placit. By Number Pythagoras understands the mind; a
very proper Symbol: for in Incorporeals nothing more Divine, than the mind; in
Abstractions, number is most simple: thus he. All this was couched under that
great Pythagorean Maxim, (...), one and many; of which before.

Pythagoras's Symbols of Divine Worship of Jewish extract.
. 12. The Symbols, whereby Pythagoras expressed that Spiritual Divine Worship
due to God, were such as these [ Grave not the Image of God in a Ring] i. e.
worship not graven Images. Again, [ When you go to the Temple-worship, neither
do, nor say any thing concerning this life.] i. e. let not the world mix with
your hearts, etc. of which see Chap. 8.. 10. And more particularly that great
Pythagorean Symbol, (...), [ Sacrifice, and Worship bare-foot] which was but an
imitation of the Jewish Custom of Discalceation, when they went to worship; as
Mede on Eccles. 5.1. or else it is possible Pythagoras might derive this Symbol
immediately from God's command to Moses Exodus 3.5. Put off thy shoes from off
thy feet, etc. For Pythagoras (as we have before observed, Chap. 5.. 8.) having
acquired the Egyptian, and as we may presume the Chaldean Languages, was
thereby enabled not only to converse with the Jews, but also to read the sacred
Scriptures in their Original, the Egyptian, and Chaldean Tongues differing only
in some Dialect from the Hebrew. And this may serve us as a Key to this whole
Discourse touching Pythagoras's traduction of his Philosophy, both Matter, and
Form from the Scriptures, and Jewish Church: Namely, his skill in the Oriental
Languages, especially the Egyptian, and Chaldee, which gave him an huge
advantage for his more thorough searching into the Sacred Oracles, and Jewish
Doctrines.

. 13. Having discoursed of Pythagoras's Philosophy, Pythagoras's Works,
whether he left any thing in Writing.
both as to Matter, and Form, its traduction from the Jewish Church: before we
shut up this Chapter, we shall a little touch on his Works, and Disciples,
which gave foundation to most of the following Sects, and their Philosophy.
Touching Pythagoras's Works, it is a great controversy amongst the Learned,
whether Pythagoras left any thing in Writing. Laertius makes mention of three
Pieces of Pythagoras: his (...). Heraclides in Sotion's Epitome, attributes
more to Pythagoras, as Laertius affirms, who also upbraids those, as Fools,
who think that Pythagoras left no Works behind him, whom he confutes out of
Heraclitus the Physiologist, who quotes some things out of Pythagoras's Works.
Yet Augustine (lib. 1. De Consensu Evangelist. cap. 7.) denies that Pythagoras
left any Writing behind him. Cedrenus makes mention of an History compiled by
Pythagoras, touching the War betwixt Cyrus, and the Samians his Countrymen,
but this is rejected by Vossius, de Histor. Graec. l. 4. As for the (...), the
Golden Verses which pass under Pythagoras's name, Laertius assures us, that
they were not made by him, but by Lysis the Pythagorean. (...), etc. As for the
Golden Verses which pass under the name of Pythagoras, they are Lysis's a
Pythagorean of Tarantum. This also is affirmed by others. We have an excellent
Comment on these Golden Verses of Lysis, by Hierocles, who though a Stoic, yet
exactly expresses the mind of the Pythagoreans. That Pythagoras indeed left
nothing in Writing behind him, is also asserted by Lucian, (...), Divine
Pythagoras vouchsafed not to leave behind him any part of his Doctrine in
Writing. So Josephus, lib. 2. Ant. (...). There is no Writing of Pythagoras
owned; of which see Vossius, de Histor. Graec. lib. 4. page 435. As for
Pythagoras's Symbols, which contained the choicest part of his Philosophy,
there have been Collections, with Interpretations made of them by many;
particularly by Laertius in his Life; by Iamblichus; by Plutarch; and amongst
Modern Writers, by Erasmus in the beginning of his Chiliads; especially by
Lilius Gyraldus, who has written an accurate Treatise of Pythagoras's Symbols.
Touching Pythagoras's Philosophy, Eusebius on Hierocles tells us, that
Philolaus had committed his chiefest Dogmes to Writing. It Is said also, that
Aristotle, Androcydes, Antiphanes, Alexander, Didymus, and Mederatus Gaditanus,
writ professedly of Pythagoras's Philosophy: but the most that we have now
extant of it, is in the Historiographers of Pythagoras's Life, Diogenes
Laertius, Porphyrie, and Iamblichus, besides what is mentioned by Cicero, and
Plutarch. That Aristotle writ a Book, (...); as also another, (...), is
affirmed by Laertius. Porphyrie, in the Life of Plotinus, tells us, that
Plotinus did more clearly explicate the Principles of the Pythagorick
Philosophy, as well as of the Platonic. Of which see more, Vossius de Philos.
l. 2. c. 6.. 12, 44.

The Pythagorean Sect destroyed, and why. Hornius Philos. Hist. l. 3. c. 11.
. 14. As for Pythagoras's Schole, and Disciples, there succeeded him, Theano
his Wife, and Telauges with Menaxarchus, his Sons, as Eusebius. lib. 10. praepar.
cap. 3. There flourished of his Disciples, Ocellus, Architas, Philolaus,
Parmenides. Ocellus was the glory of Italy: whose Book, (...), full of
ancient mysterious erudition, is yet extant: out of which Aristotle borrowed
not a little. Architas the Tarentine was also one of the most ancient
Philosophers of Italy. 'Twas he, who by Mechanic Art, made the volatile or
slying wooden Dove, as Gellius, lib. 10. cap. 12. Parmenides is said to spend
18 whole years in a Rock, feeding his mind with Logic Contemplations. As for
Philolaus, of what great repute he was, is evident by the esteem Plato had of
him, who purchased his Books at 10000 Denaries; as Gellius, lib. 10. c. 17.
Diogenes says, that his College continued for nineteen Generations. Yet
Moderatus Gaditanus says, that the Pythagorick Sect was extinguished for the
obscurity of their Philosophy. Justin. lib. 20. tells us, that 300
Pythagoreans being under a strict Confederation, and Separate Life, were
accused of a secret Conjuration against the City, and thence, when they were
met in their College, 60 of them were destroyed, and the rest banished.
Porphyrie, and Iamblichus mention the same, and say, that there sled only two,
Archippus, and Lysis the Preceptor of Epaminondas. And Iamblichus adds, that
when the Innocence of the Pythagoreans appeared to others of the City, they
stoned those who destroyed the Pythagoreans. We find both these reasons joined
together by Carrion, in his Chronicon, l. 2. The Italick Philosophy, says he,
being obscure, and full of Enigmes, and the Pythagoreans having their private
Meetings, and peculiar Rites, they were destroyed upon suspicion of the
Tyrants, etc.

. 15. Although Pythagoras left nothing in Writing behind him, Pythagoras's
Followers, and their Writings.
yet what his Philosophy was, may be gathered by those of his Sect, who
followed, of whom we have many things extant. As Hippodamus the Thurian his
Tract of Felicity. Euryphamus of Life. Hipparchus of the minde's Tranquillity.
Archytas of a good Man, and of the Doctrine of Morality. Theagis of Virtues.
Clinias of the causes of Virtue. Crito of Prudence, and Felicity: with Polus
of Justice. Besides, we have Lysis's Golden Verses, who slying to Thebes, was
Preceptor to Epaminondas the most famous of his Age. We must reckon also
amongst the Pythagoreans, Epicarmus, otherwise Cous, who for his repute amongst
the Philosophers, was esteemed as the Sun amongst the Stars. He writ of Being,
of Ideas, and of the nature of Things. Also Timaeus the Locrian was a
Pythagorean, who writ a Book of the Universe, of Ideas, etc. as Lud. Viv. in
Aug. l. 8. cap. 11. We may add to these the two great Lawgivers, Zaleuchus
who gave Laws to the Locrians; and Charondas to the Thurians: both
Pythagoreans. Lastly, Sextus the Pythagorick Philosopher, who writ an
Enchiridion of Sentences, which Ruffinus translated into Latin.

. 16. There were other Philosophers, who did very much Pythagorize, although
they were not altogether Pythagoreans. Pythagorizing Philosophers.
Of this number was Parmenides of the Eleatick Sect, who did Pythagorize in the
Doctrine of Ideas, for which he was so eminent, though some make Parmenides a
more complete Pythagorean, as before. 14. Also Empeodocles the Agrigentine
Disciple of Pythagoras, and Parmenides wh^ Symbolized with Pythagoras in the
Doctrine of the Metempsychosis, the prohibition of Beans, etc. and is by
Laertius supposed to be the first Inventor of Rhetoric. But amongst the
differing Sects, there was none that did Pythagorize more then Plato,
especially in Divine matters, as Aristotle, and Laertius have observed. Yea the
choicest of his Metaphysick Contemplations seem to be traduced from Pythagoras,
and his Followers; besides what he brought out of Egypt. Plato's (...), etc.
his Ideas, his Discourse of the Universe, his Metempsychosis, and Demons, were
all asserted by the Pythagoreans. Yea many of the Hellenistick Jews did greatly
Pythagorize, as Philo Judaeus the Alexandrine, who (says Eusebius. Hist. l. 2. c.
4.) (...), greatly burning with love of Platonic, and Pythagorick Philosophy,
etc.

The Pride of the Pythagoreans, and all other Philosophers.
, 17. Lastly, Albeit the Pythagoreans were thus famous for Judaick mysterious
Wisdom, and many Moral, as well as Natural Accomplishments, yet were they not
exempted from Boasting, and Pride, which was indeed a Vice most Epidemick, and
as it were Congenial among all the Philosophers; but in a more particular
manner among the Pythagoreans: so Hornius, Hist. Philos. l. 3. c. 11. The
manners of the Pythagoreans were not free from boasting: They were all (...),
such as abounded in the sense and commendation of their own Excellences, and
boasting even almost to the degree of immodestie, and impudence, as great
Heinsius ad Horat. has rightly observed. Thus indeed does proud Nature delight
to walk in the sparks of its own fire. And although many of these old
Philosophers, could, by the strength of their own Lights, and Heats, together
with some common elevations, and raisures of Spirit (peradventure from a more
than ordinary, though not special, and saving assistance of the Spirit)
abandon many grosser Vices; yet were they all deeply immersed in that miserable
cursed Abyss of Spiritual pride; so that all their Natural, Moral, and
Philosophic Seize, did feed, nourish, strengthen, and render more
inveterate this hell-bred pest of their Hearts: Yea, those of them that seemed
most modest, as the Academicks, who professed they knew nothing; and the
Cynicks who greatly decried, both in words, and habits, the pride of others,
yet even these abounded with notorious, and visible pride. So connatural, and
morally essential to corrupt Nature is this envenomed root, fountain, and
plague of Spiritual pride, especially where there is any Natural, Moral, or
Philosophic Excellence to feed the same: whence Austin rightly judged all
these Philosophic Virtues to be but splendid Sins.

CHAP. X. Of the Elatick Philosophy, etc.
Of the Eleatick Sect, and its first Institutor Xenophanes. Of Parmenides, and
Zeno the first Inventor of Logic. Leucippus his Dogmes of Atoms, and
Democritus's emproving the same. Democritus's skill in Physics, Medicine,
Ethics, Mathematics, and all the Liberal Sciences, with Mechanic Arts. His
Travels, and Conversation with Egyptians, Chaldees, Jews, etc. Of the
Heraclitians, Epicureans, and Scepticks.

. 1. THe Pythagorick Sect, termed Italick, included under it the Eleatick, the
Heraclitian, the Epicurean, and the Sceptick. The Eleatick Sect had for its
first Founder Xenophanes the Colophonian; The Eleatick Sect.
but its denomination, and name, it had from (...), Elea, or Velia, a Town of
the Lucans in Magna Graecia, of which Parmenides, Zeno, and Leucippus were; who
being eminent persons of this Sect, from them the Sect it self was termed
Eleatick. Thus Cicero, lib. 4. Acad. Qu^st. I find that Xenophanes was the
Prince of this Noble Discipline: him Parmenides, and Zeno followed; from them
this Sect was termed Eleatick, etc.

. 2. Xenophanes lived about the time of Hieron King of Sicily, Xenophanes the
Founder of the Eleatick Sect.
and of Epicharmus the Poet; namely, about the LX Olympiad. Some affirm, that
he had no Praeceptor; others say, he heard Boto the Athenian, or Archelaus the
Master of Socrates: or as others, Parmeniscus, and Orestades, Pythagoreans. He
approved not fully of the Ionick, or Italick Sect, but delivered many Dogmes
contrary both to Thales, and Pythagoras: Yet his Disciples Parmenides, and
Zeno, did in many things Pythagorize, and the whole Sect is reckoned but a
Branch of the Italick, or Pythagorick Sect. Xenophanes writ his Philosophy in
Verse; yet was he a professed Enemy to the Mythologick Philosophy of the
Poets. For he writ against Homer, and Hesiod, and derided them for uttering
such Fables of the Gods. He held, First, all things to be incomprehensible,
wherein he agreed with the Scepticks. Secondly, That God is one, Incorporeal,
Eternal Being, having nothing common with Men, yet all-seeing, all-hearing,
all-wise, etc. Thirdly, He held also the Soul to be of a Spiritual Nature.
Fourthly, That the Sun consists of a collection of little Fires, etc. see more
of his Dogmes in Sextus the Philosopher, and Athenaeus.

Parmenides's Philosophy.
. 3. Parmenides was the Disciple of Xenophanes, who yet differed from his
Master in some things; and in many things Pythagorized. For he held only two
Elements, Fire, and Earth, whereof the former he made to be the Active, the
latter the Passive, or Material principle of all things. By the Fire Vossius
supposes he meant the Sun, and Stars, which have an Active Influence on all
Generations, wherein he symbolized with the Pythagoreans, who held Fire to be
the active, productive cause of all things; and that the Sun and Stars were of
a Fiery Nature, as before, chap. 7.. 10. Parmenides asserted also, that the
first Principle of all things is One, and that this One is immovable, and that
this One is all: which assertion was the foundation of all his Dogmes
concerning Ideas, for which he was so famous: the sum whereof was this,
(...), that all is one, and many: which Principles, and Opinions were evidently
Pythagorean, and originally Scriptural; as before, chap. 8.. 7. That Parmenides
by his (...) one, meant God, is affirmed by Simplicius, and others, as Lud.
Viv. in Aug. Civ. l. 8. c. 11. His Philosophy was delivered in Verse, yet not
Mythick, etc.

Zeno the Eleatick.
. 4. Zeno the Eleatick was Disciple of Parmenides, but originally of Tarsis, or
according to others of Sidon, as Suidas: whence we may presume, he could not
but have some Traditions or Notices of the Jewish Mysteries. Logic invented by
Zeno the Eleatick, Vossius Hist. Graec. l. 4. c. 2. p. 437.
This Zeno is said to be the first that Invented Logic: So Aristotle in
Sophista, and Laertius in Zeno the Eleatick; so Galen, or Aetius in his Book
(...), tells us, (...), Zeno the Eleatick is reported to be the first Author of
Contentions, or Dialectick Philosophy: Yet others make Euclid the Megarick,
(Scholar to Socrates, and first Institutor of the Megarick Sect) to be the
Author of Eristick, or Dialectick Philosophy: But the Reconcilement is easy.
For although Parmenides, and his Scholar Zeno the Eleatick, were the first who
brought up Dialectick, or Logic Disputations; yet Euclid, who (as Diogenes
reports) was much versed in Parmenides's Books, might much improve the same,
and commend it to those of his Sect: so Voss. de Phil. l. 2. c. 11. Parag. 3.

. 5. Next follows Leucippus Disciple of Zeno the Eleatick, Leucippus his Dogmes
of Atoms.
whom some make to be an Eleatick, others a Milesian, others an Abderite. He is
said to be the first amongst the Grecians, that asserted Atoms to be the first
principles of all things. So Laertius in Leucippus (...). Leucippus first laid
down Atoms as the Principles, etc. where Laertius more fully explains this
Doctrine. Thus also Galen, or Aetius (...), having spoken of Zeno the Eleatick,
adds (...). Of this man Leucippus the Abderite being hearer, first conceived
the Invention of Atoms. Clemens Alexandrinus calls him a Milesian, and says,
that he placed, as first Principles, (...). Epiphanes, says he, was (...).
Lactantius lib. 3. Institut. makes him the first that dreamt of Atoms, from
whom Democritus received them, as Epicurus from him. Yet Aristotle, lib. 1. de
Generat. says, that Empedocles (Disciple of Pythagoras, and Parmenides) held
the same Opinion of Atoms. The same is affirmed by Plutarch. de Placit. Phil.
l. 1. c. 24. Laertius also tells us, that Anaxagoras asserted the same. And
it is probable that Pythagoras, and Parmenides (Empedocles's Preceptors) held
Atoms to be the first Principles: which Dogmes they received (as we may
presume) from Mochus the great Phenician Phisiologist, who was the first among
the Pagan Philosophers, that asserted this Doctrine of Atoms, which he
received by Tradition from Moses's story of the Creation, as before, Book 1.
chap. 3. parag. 18.

. 6. Democritus's Opinion of Atoms.
Democritus the Abderite (as to Physics) Disciple of Lencippus, followed him
in this Doctrine of Atoms: for he held, there was an infinity of Atoms
scattered up, and down the Vacuum (which the Phenicians called Chaos) which
being coagmentated, or semented together, were the material Principle of all
Bodies, yea of the humane Soul; and that all Motion was caused by these Atoms:
to which he ascribed three Properties. First, Magnitude, though the least, yet
some. Secondly, Figure, which was various, and infinite. Thirdly, Pondus, or
impetus, which caused their swift Motion, Lud. Vives in August. Civit. l. 11.
c. 5. gives this account of these Dogmes. Democritus, says he, affirmed, that
the first Principles of Nature were little Bodies flying up, and down through
the immense Vacuum, which had Figure, and Magnitude, yet were indivisible;
wherefore he called them Atoms, (...). Epicurus followed him, who added to
them Pondus, weight (or impetus, (...)) Thus these small individuous Bodies,
being endowed with various Figures, or Forms, Magnitudes, and Pondus's
extremely diverse, as also by a fortuitous agitation tossed up and down through
the immense Vacuum, were by various chances mixed together, and coagmentated
into infinite Worlds, produced, increased, and destroyed, without any certain
Cause, or Counsel. Thus Lud. Vives. Of which more hereafter in Epicurus.

Democritus's skill in Natural Philosophy, Experiments, and Medicine.
. 7. Democritus writ also, according to Suidas, (...), of the greater World its
Government, etc. (but this Piece Theophrastus ascribes to Leucippus) Likewise
(...), a Tract of the nature of the World. Laertius adds, amongst the genuine
Works of Democritus, (...), his little Government of the World. He had an
excellent skill in the Experimental part of Natural Philosophy. Plin. lib. 21.
c. 11. says, he left behind him many things of Plants. Petronius Arbiter,
says of him, That he drew forth the Juices of all Herbs; neither was the
virtue of Stones hid from him. That he was an excellent Anatomist, appears by
Hippocrates's Character of him, who being sent for by Democritus's Friends to
cure him of a Frenetick Distemper, which they fancied him, by reason of his
continual Smiling, to labor under: Hippocrates found him busied in the
Anatomizing of Animals, and skilful therein, so that ever after they contracted
an intimate Friendship, and correspondence by Letters. Democritus was exactly
skilled in Medicine also, wherein he writ (...), an order for Diet, and Cures.
For which skill Democritus is greatly extolled by Celsus, lib. 2. cap. 5. what
his opinions were see Laertius, Sextus Empericus, but principally Stobaeus in
his Physics.

. 8. Democritus was in like manner skilled in Ethics; wherein he made the end
of humane life to be (...) Tranquillity, which he called (...), or (...), a
good, perpetual state of things, (...), See Hesychius, and Suidas in (...), yea
Democritus seems to be well skilled in the whole Encyclopaedia, or body of
Philosophy. Laertius says, he was accounted in Philosophy (...), as having
joined together, (...), Physics, Ethics, Mathematics, the Circle of the
Liberal Sciences, and all Mechanics. He was a great Traveller in the Oriental
parts; He went to Babylon, and there conversed with the Chaldeans (and as it is
likely, also with the Jews, who were called Chaldeans) as Aelian. Var. Hist.
lib. 4. c. 20. from whom he learned Theology, and Astrology. He is said to
have written a book (...) of the sacred letters in Babylon (perhaps from Jewish
traditions) and another called (...), as Laertius. He was also in Egypt, whence
he had his Geometry, and as we may suppose, many Jewish traditions also,
especially concerning Solomon's experimental Philosophy, wherein Democritus
excelled. He flourished about the LXXV. Olympiad; and was contemporarie with
Socrates.

. 9. There were other branches of the Italick, or Pythagorick Sect; as the
Heraclitian instituted by Heraclitus an Ephesian, Branches of the Italick sect.
The Heraclitian.
a person of a great spirit, who flourished about the 69 Olympiad, and was
famous for his skill in Natural Philosophy, from whom Plato is said to have
derived his Physics. He in some things Pythagorized, especially in that great
Pythagorean Principle, That Fire is the Principle of all things. They reckon
also as branches of the Pythagorick Sect, the Epicurean, The Epicurean
which sprang immediately from the Eleatick: and so originally from the
Italick: as likewise the Sceptick, The Sceptick.
which had its foundation in the Eleatick Schole from (...) the contentious
dialectick disputations of Parmenides, and Zeno, which were taken up, in the
old Academie, instituted by Plato, and called therein (...), Probationarie, or
Problematick Disputations; wherein the Matter being only things dubious, they
disputed pro, and con. as they listed. Which way of dubious Disputation, was so
well improved in the New Academies, and by Pyrrho, and his followers, as that
they came to deny that any thing was certain, or knowable; whence they are
called (...). But of these in their places.

BOOK III. Wherein more briefly of Socratick, more largly of Platonic
Philosophy.
CHAP. I. Of Socratick Philosophy, its Original, etc.
Socrates brought in Moral Philosophy, and why: His Metaphysics from the
Scriptures, viz. That Virtue and Knowledge of God comes by Divine infusion: His
Demon, etc. Socrates's Philosophy how far Contemplative: All true Philosophy
Active: His Morality, particularly his endeavors to strip men of vain
conceits touching their own knowledge, and to reduce them to the Knowledge of
themselves. The Form of Socrates's Philosophy was partly Rhetorical by
Ironie, partly Dialectical, by Introduction, and Interrogation, according to
the Jewish mode of Disputing, Mark. 8.11. Luke 11.53. Socrates's Death, and
Character: the many Sects, that sprang from his Schole, and their differences
about the chiefest Good, etc.

. 1. HAving discoursed at large of the Italick Philosophy founded by
Pythagoras, and its ^raduction from the Divine Oracles: We now return to the
Ionick, and its Advances under Socrates, and by his Scholars, Plato, etc. We
have before in the Story of Thales, shown how he, who was the Founder of the
Ionick Sect, traduced the Choicest parts of his Philosophy from the Jewish
Church. We are now to demonstrate, what emprovment the Ionick Philosophy
received from the said Jewish Philosophy, and Sacred Oracles. The Ionick
Schole (as we before hinted) was Transplanted from Ionia in Asia, Vossius de
Philos. Sect. part. 2. cap. 5. paragr. 7. Lud. Viv. Aug. Civ. l. 8. c. 2.
unto Athens by Anaxagoras. as Vossius will have it; or by his Successor
Archelaus, as Ludovicus Vives. Socrates was Scholar to both: First to
Anaxagoras, and after his departure from Athens to Archelaus, who was called
the Physiologist, or Naturalist, because he (as all his Predecessors of the
Ionick Schole) wholly addicted himself to Natural Philosophy.

Socrates the Author of Moral Philosophy.
. 2. But Socrates, being disgusted at the vain Ph^losophizings of these proud
daring Naturalists, considers how he might reduce Philosophy to a more
Practical usage. For observing what small advantage Contemplative Philosophy
brought to Human Life, he reduced her to a more Active Science; and so pared
off in every Science what he conceived less useful,, Galenus initio libri de
Sectis Philos. S^crati inventionem Ethicae, et Logicae tribuit. Hornius Hist.
Phil. l. 3. c. 13.
valuing Speculation no farther, than it conduced to Action. Thus Cicero Acad.
Quaest. 1. Socrates (says he) seems to me, as it is manifest to all, to be the
First, that called off Philosophy from occult things, and such as were
involved, in Nature, in which all the foregoing Philosophers were Versed, and
to reduce her to common Life, that so men might enquire about Virtue, and Vice,
and altogether of things Good, and Evil. As for Celestial bodies, he judged
them altogether above the knowledge of Nature, or if they might be never so
well known, yet did they no way conduce to our well living. Thus Cicero. We
find the like account in August. Civit. Dei lib. 8. cap. 3. Of Socrates's
Philosophy. Socrates (says he) therefore was the first, who is mentioned to
have turned the whole of Philosophy, for the correcting, and composing of
manners: whereas before him all employed their chiefest endeavors in Physics,
i. e. in natural Enquiries. Thus we see, that Socrates was the first, who
rejecting Astronomical, and Physic Contemplations, brought in Moral
Philosophy into the Schools: whence he is said to call down Philosophy from
Heaven to Earth.

Why Socrates applied himself wh^lly to Morality.
. 3. August. also ( de Civ. l. 8. c. 3.) enquires into the reasons, which might
enduce Socrates to reject the Speculative Disquisitions, which were then most
in vogue, and to turn his Philosophizing wholly to Morality. And he concludes
that it is not clear, whether it proceeded from an irksome sense he had of the
obscurity, and uncertaintie, which attended such Natural Philosophizings: or
(as some more favorably judge) whether it were, that he judged men not fit to
meddle with such sublime Mysteries, before they had gotten minds purified, and
clarified from terrene affections, etc. So Lactant. lib. 3. I grant (says he)
that Socrates was a little more discreet than the rest, who fancyed, they could
comprehend the Nature of things by their Ingenie, wherein I conceive them to be
not only foolish, but impious, in that they dare thurst in their curious eyes
into the secrets of that Celestial Providence: yea I count them much more
wicked, who seek to profane the secrets of the World, and this Heavenly
Temple, by their impious disputes, than he that would endeavor to enter into
the Temple of Vesta, or Ceres, etc. Put the genuine account seems this; that
Socrates having enquired into all kinds of Philosophy then in vogue, he found
little of certainty, and less of usefulnes therein; whereupon he made it his
design to reduce speculation to practice, etc. The like inducement drew Padre
Paul that Venetian Reformer to quit speculative Philosophy, and turn to
Morality, as it is well observed by the Author of his Life (English, page 69.)
About that time (says he) Father Paul changed the quality of his studies
(excepting Ecclesiastical, and Profane Stories) to the study of Moral
Philosophy. Peradventure that which is written of Socrates is no singular, or
voluntary Act, but is, as it were natural to all those understandings, which
have any thing of transendent, who, after they have made a discovery of what
they can arrive to upon Universalities, transport themselves totally to
Morality; which study (as to inferior things) is the only speculation of
Humanity. This arises either from a desire more intense to better it self, or
from some incomprehensibilitie, or from a solid judgment of the vanity of
Sciences, etc.

. 4. Though Socrates addicted himself chiefly to Morality, yet was he not
without skill in other parts of Philosophy, and Learning. Socrates a^
Universal Scholar.
Plato in his Epistles Attributes some parts of Natural Philosophy to
Socrates. Xenephon his Scholar (as also Cicero) affirms, that he was excellent
in all kind of Learning, as well in Wisdom, Acutenes, Socrates junior adhuc
incredibili cupiditate naturalis Scientiae arsit, uti de se apud Platonem, lib.
de anima testarur: Senior factus came Philosophiae partem, ut dubiam, incertam,
inutilem, prorsus repudia^it. Hornius Hist. Phil. l. 3. c. 13.
Politenes, and Subtlety; as in ^loquence, Variety, and Copiousnes: to
whatsoever piece of Learning he addicted himself; he was without exception
Prince of all. So much also is expressed in that answer, which the Oracle made
to him, who enquired who was the wisest m^n? (...), Of all men Socrates is the
wisest, said the Oracle. He made man the entire subject of his Philosophy.
For, according to the twofold (...), or regard of man, 1. To Divine
Contemplation, or, 2. To Human Conversation, he divided his Philosophy into
Metaphysick or Contemplative, and Moral or Active. Socrates's Metaphysics.
1. As to his Metaphysics, or Divine Contemplations, he took it for granted,
whilst man was subject to, and under the impression of corporeal Images,
sensible Forms, and terrene Affections, he was not rightly disposed for Divine
Contemplation, which required a mind defecated, and separated from corporeal
Phantasmes, and Passions. This some give as the reason, why in his Philosophic
Institutes he so much addicted himself to morality; because he found his
Scholars not capable of those more sublime Metaphysick Contemplations,
therefore he endeavored to prepare them for the same by Moral Institutes. This
he made the chief subject of his last Philosophic Lecture to his Scholars,
after he had taken his Poison, immediately before his Death, as we find it
related at large by Plato in his Phaedo; where he gives us Socrates's Dying
Philosophizings touching the souls immortality, and separate state; and
particularly, that none could rightly Philosophize of these Divine Mysteries,
but such as had their souls stripped of, and abstracted from all Corporeal
images, impresses, and affections: for 'till the soul was loose from the prison
of the body it could not be free for the Contemplation of God etc. Whence he
defines Philosophy a mediation of death i. e. of the separation of the soul
and body, in which state the soul being purged from those corporeal dregs, by
which it was contaminated, whilst confined to the body, it is rendered capable
of contemplating God, and Divine things. For (says he) it is great impiety to
suppose that the Most Pure Divine Truth, and Being, will be touched by an
impure mind. Thence he judged, that the Friends of God knew more of him, and
his Divine Mysteries, than impure souls, who followed not God. And Plato in his
Cratylus brings him in affirming, that only Good men were Wise, and skilful in
Divine Mysteries, etc. So August. de civit. Dei l. 8. c. 3. giving a reason,
why Socrates Philosophized so much on Morality, he says, Socrates would not,
that minds clogged with terrene passions, should extend themselves to
contemplate Divine things, which he conceived could not be comprehended but by
a refined judgment: and therefore he thought men should be very intent on
getting a reformed Life, that the mind being exonerated of its depressing
Lusts, might by a natural vigor, lift up it self to Eternals, and by that
purity of Intelligence contemplate the Nature of that Eternal, Incommutable
Light, where the causes of all created Natures live in stabilitie, etc. Thus
August. Whereby we are informed, why Socrates was so sparing in communicating
his Divine Contemplations to his Scholars: though it seems to me very evident
by what I find ascribed to him by Plato, that of all the Grecian Philosophers (
Pythagoras not excepted) Scocrates had as (if not more) clear Notions as any
touching God, his Nature, Unity, Socrates hi^ Metaphysick Contemplations from
Scripture traditions.
and other sacred Mysteries, which he could never have attained unto, but by
some borrowed Tradition originally Jewish, or Scriptural. Particularly Socrates
asserted. 1. The Spiritual, Infinite, Eternal Nature of God, and his Unity,
which was the great Article, for which he suffered a kind of Martyrdom. 2. The
cor^uption of Humane Nature, or (...) etc. 3. A Native blindness, in which all
men were inveloped etc. 4. That Virtue was not teachable, and acquitable by
Nature, or Art, but the product of Divine inspiration. 4. That Virtue comes
from God.
Thus Plato in Meno. fol. 89. brings in Socrates thus discoursing (...) etc.
Having therefore often sought if there were any Praeceptors of Virtue, after
all my endeavors I could find none: so, fol. 99. (...). Virtue is neither
teachable, neither gained by science. Then he brings in Socrates concluding
more positively, thus, (...). Virtue then is neither from Nature, nor
Teachable; but it comes by a divine inspiration, without the concurrence of
humane understanding in those to whom it is communicated, etc. Thus Plato. Yea
he adds (in the same fol. 99.) That God uses the most unskilful instruments,
in communicating this Grace to men, etc. 5. When also Socrates asserted, That
all true knowledge of God came by Divine Infusion. So Plato in his Alcibiad.
fol. 124. 5. That all true knowledge of God is by Divine infusion.
brings in Socrates thus bespeaking Alcibiades, We have need of a Common
Council, by what means we may become best. Neither do I affirm this only of
thee, Alcibiades, that thou want Discipline, but that I my self, mostly need
it. Neither do I at all differ from thee, this one thing being excepted; that
my Tutor, namely God is better, and Wiser than thine, viz. Pericles. So again
Plato Alcibiad. fol. 135. brings in Socrates thus Dialogizing with Alcibiades.
Socrates: Do thou know by wh^^ me^ns thou may avoid this inordinate motion
of thy mind? Alcibiades: Yes: Soc. How? Alcib. If thou will Socrates. Socrat.
Thou speak not rightly Alcibiades. Alcib. How then must I speak? Socrat.
(...), If God will, etc. Again, Plato in his Theaet. fol. 151. brings in
Socrates alluring Theaetetus (a young man of an happy ingenie) to his
Philosophy: in order whereto he affirms, that he was (...) i. e. endowed with
a Midwifes faculty to draw forth the conceptions of men's minds. But withal he
adds that God alone was the Efficient, and he only a Midwife employed by God,
(...), Socrates's Daemo^.
God has compelled me to play the Midwife, but forbad me to generate. and fol.
210. he expressly says, I and my Mother received this Midwifes faculty from
God, etc. 6. Hence Socrates pretended to have a familiar Demon always
attending, and inspiring of him. So Plato Theagnes. 128. brings in Socrates
thus discoursing, (...), etc. There is by Divine Grace a Demon, which has
follo^ed me from my Childhood. This Demon, is a voice, which signifies to me
what I must do, yet it does not compel me to do every thing: But if any of my
friends communicate somewhat to me, and that voice d^hort me me from the same,
Socrates utebatur Daemone (...) sive domestico, and familiari; ex cujus
pr^scripto omnia agebat: de quo integro libro de Deo Socratis Madaurensis agit.
Hornius i Hist. Phil. l. 3. c. 13.
it also suffers me not to do it, etc. So it is said of Socrates that when one
of his Scholars offered him Money for instructing him, he refused it, saying,
his Demon would not permit it. And Plato in his Symposion, brings in Socrates
discoursing at large of this Demon, his Office, etc. And Serranus in Plato's
Apology for Socrates tells us, That Socrates called his Divine Inspiration
(...), a Demon, a Voice, and a Sign. And by the assistance of this tutelar
Demon Socrates affirmed, that he instituted his whole life even from his
childhood. Wh^t this Demon was, whether a good, or bad Angel (whereof the
latter is most probable) it concerns us not to debate: only this is evident
from the whole, that Socrates acknowledged a necessity of a supernatural,
Divine, assistance for instruction, and direction etc. 7. Socrates
acknowledges a necessity of some Divine Purgatory, or purgation to expel all
noxious humors from the soul: So Plato Charmides 154. Socrates artificially
feignes himself (says he) a Physician; and testifies, that his Medicament
would be ineffectual unless there preceed some (...), preparatorie Pill, or
enchantment, by the words whereof the disease may be driven out. This he
illustrates by an excellent similitude drawn from Medicine, which teaches that
general purgatives are to precede particulars: (...), etc. So again fol 157. he
adds (...). Socrates said, that the soul was to be purged by certain Epoda's,
or preparatories, and these Epoda's were Good, and Divine words. 8. Socrates
seems to have some imperfect notices of Faith, and Prayer, 8. Of faith, and
Prayer.
according to the Scriptures notion thereof. So Plato Epinom. fol. 980. (...),
etc. Trust on the Gods, and pray unto them, that meet apprehensions of the
nature of the Gods may come into thy mind. 9. Lastly that Socrates had very
clear apprehensions of the soul's immortality, 9. Of the Soul it is
immortality, etc.
and it is separate state, will be evident to any, that views his dying
discourse of this Theme, as related by Plato in his Phaedo. By all which laid
together it is evident: that Socrates had very Metaphysical contemplations of
Divine Mysteries, and that originally from the Jewish Church,

. 5 Though Socrates was not without sublime, Socrates's Active Moral
Philosophy how far contemplative.
and deep contemplations of Divine things, yet the most of his Philosophical
discourses in his Schole concerned Morals, and that for the reasons before
mentioned. So August. Civit. l. 8. c. 4. In as much as the study of wisdom
consists in Contemplation, and Action, Socrates is said to excel most, in
Active Philosophy, whereas Pythagoras, insisted more upon Contemplative, etc.
Not but that Socrates spent much time in Contemplation, as well as Pythagoras,
for so Plato lib. 7. de Repub. brings in Adimantus thus speaking unto Socrates,
Thou have consumed thy whole life in nothing else but Speculation; etc. Only
herein lay the difference: Socrates made all his Contemplations subservient
unto Action, and valued not speculative sciences farther then they conduced to
practice: for he made Man the whole subject of his philosophy. So Plato in his
Apology for Socrates, tells us, how much time he spent in Contemplative
Inquisitions; but only so far, as they referred to Action: whereas Pythagoras,
and so Plato in many of their inquiries made Truth the ultimate Object or End
of their Contemplation, or Motion. Now it is well known, that the specific
differrence betwixt Contemplative, and Active Philosophy arises not so much
from their different Acts, as Objects, and Effects; for Active Philosophy
supposes some Contemplation of Truth, as well as Contemplative; only in the
latter, Truth is the ultimate Object, and sole Effect; whereas the former
considers Truth only as influential on Practice, according to that ancient
determination, (...). Practick Philosophy is effective of Virtue, but
Theoretick of Truth. Thus we see how Socrates's Philosophy may be termed
Active, though not exclusive of Contemplation. Namely as it is not only
speculative, and apprehensive of Truth, but also practick, and causative of
Virtue: wherein he was followed by the Cynicks, and Stoics, All Philosophy
ought to determine in Virtue and Action.
who acknowledged a Fraternity, as being both descended from Socrates's
schole, and herein agreed with him in making the chief end of Philosophy to be
(...), To live according to Virtue. So Plato, who according to universal
consent, received his Morals from Socrates, follows his Master therein, telling
us, that Philosophy is the way to true Felicity, which has chiefly these two
Offices, to Contemplate God, and to sever the mind from Corporeal Phantasmes.
So again Plato in his Euthydemus tells us, that Use in things holds the
principal place, and the possession of any thing, and therefore of science it
self, which without the use thereof, is vain: So that if there could be a
science, which should give us Immortality, yet were it of no value, if we
understood not how to use it: whence he concludes (...), Wisdom therefore
always makes men to live happily. Again he says, That he deserves very ill of
Philosophy, who lives not Philosophically. i. e. according to the precepts of
Philosophy. And elsewhere he give us this principally as the spirits of all
his Philosophy, To Philosophize is to know, to love, and to imitate God. Yea
Aristotle his scholar who abounds in speculation, does yet herein symbolize
with him, and Socrates his Master: affirming that he alone is a true
Philosopher, who lives Philosophically: So Arist. Eth. l. 2. c. 4. (...). Many
do not these things, but flying to their reason they think to Philosophize,
and so to be virtuous, doing like to sick men, who hear their Physician
diligently, but yet do nothing of what he prescribes. As therefore these
playing thus the Physicians, will never cure the body, so the other, thus
Philosophizing, will never cure the soul. But the Stoics (as it has been
already hinted) follow Socrates (...), foot by foot reducing all Philosphie to
Morality. So Epictetus bid his Disciples Not to tell the world they were
Philosophers by words, but by deeds: to act as Philosophers, As (says he)
(...) etc. The sheep do not bring their grass to the shepherd to show how much
they eat, but digesting their food within, they bring forth a good Fleece, and
Milk. And so do you; don't teach men, how they ought to eat, but eat as you
ought, etc. So Seneca Epist. 75. He is not blessed, who knows these things,
but who does them. Epist. 94. What else is Philosophy, but a law of Life? The
like Seneca Epist. 90. Wisdom sets deeper, neither does she teach the hands,
but is the Mistress of Minds: she is a Queen, and Governess, Arts serve, but
wisdom governs the life, Seneca Epist. 117. The mind is wont to delight,
rather then to heal it self, and to make Philosophy a Recreation, whereas it
ought to be a Remedy. etc. To which we may add that of Plutarch de placit.
philos. l. 1. It behooves (says he) a man (truly wise and) blessed (...), To be
not only Theoretick of Beings, but also practick of things wanting as to
well-being. By all which we see what a general reception this active, and moral
Philosophy, which Socrates first brought into the Schools, found amongst all
the following Sects, especially the Stoics. That Socrates reduced the whole of
his Philosophy to an (...) Virtuous operation, is evident, Socrates's
Morality.
by what is mentioned of him in Stobaus Sermon. 1. fol. 29. (...). Some one
asking Him (i. e. Socrates) what seemed to him the best instruction? He
answered Eupraxie, or Well-doing -- For he said they were best, and most
grateful to God in husbandry, who transacted their husbandry affairs well;
In Physics, who acted as good Physicians; In Politics, who dispatched the
Politic concerns well. But he, that does nothing well, said he, is neither
profitable, nor ( Theophiles) grateful to God. Thus Stobaeus, who also in what
follows, sermon. 1. fol. 29.) tells us out of Xenophon, lib. 2. de Secrat. that
Socrates made this his practice wheresoever he came to do Good, etc. (...).
Thus Socrates was in every affair, and according to every respect useful,
wherefore nothing was more beneficial than to have conversation with Socrates,
and conference with him in every place, and matter: for he profited those, who
conversed with him, no less in recreation, than in serious studies, and
conferences: Thus Stobaeus. So Plutarch acquaints us, that Socrates taught not
only in the Chair, but even in his recreations, in his eating, in the Field, in
the Market, finally, when he was in Prison; thus he made every place a Schole
of Virtue, etc. As for the severals of Socrates's Moral Philosophy, we have no
exact account thereof, because he left nothing in Writing; only we may look
upon most of Plato's Moral Philosophizings as extracts (though with some
flourishes, and intermixtures of his own) of Socrates's Principles; for it is a
received opinion amongst the Ancients, that Plato owes the original of his
Moral Philosophy to Socrates, as Augustine. etc. But yet we shall give one or
two particulars of Socrates's Morals, etc.

1 His Institutes against self conceitednes, and flaterie, with advice to
study our selves.
1. He made it a great part of his design to strip men of their affected
conceited opinions of their own wisdom. He seemed to have some kind of feeling
sense, how apt men are to be their own flatterers, to abound in the sense of
their own parts and sufficiencies, and therefore he lays this as the first
principle, and foundation of all Philosophy Know thy self: So Plato (Alcibiad.
24) brings in Socrates advising Alcibiades to the study of himself thus:
(...). But believe me, and the Delphick Oracle, Know thy self. He tells us (
fol. 134) that they who know not themselves, know nothing of their own goods,
or ills, nor of any such thing, that belonged to them, yea that they knew
nothing of other affairs; and therefore could never make good Politicians, or
Governors of Families. He also affirms, that all sin proceeds from a conceited
ignorance, which makes men presume they know, what indeed they are ignorant of.
He shows how many have erred from the best Mark, because they trusted to their
own opinion; whereas those, who are conscious of their ignorance, will commit
themselves to the teaching of others. He says this is the best Modesty, and
Wisdom (...), to know a man's self. He gives us the root of this
Self-knowledge, namely the knowledge of God, etc. He also informs us touching
its true Object, and Act: viz. that it is a reflex knowledge of the soul, its
Habits, Acts, etc. And the more effectually to convince Alcibiades of his (...)
and proud arrogance, Socrates draws a parallel 'twixt him, and the Persian
Monarchs thereby to show him how inconsiderable he was: so Plato Alcibiades,
fol. 102.

2. 2. For the government of the tongue.
Socrates gave many excellent precepts for the government of the Tongue as
Stobaeus Sermon. 3.44. (...) to be a lover of hearing, more than a lover of
speaking. Again (...), Seal thy words with silence, and thy silence with
opportunity, wherein he Pythagorized. Lastly, albeit Socrates gave many
excellent Moral Institutes, yet was he greatly defective both as to Principles,
and Practice: as hereafter.

. 6. As for Socrates's Mode, or Form of Philosophizing, Socrates's mode, or
form of Philosophizing, Natural, and familiar.
it was in the general suitable to his matter, natural, familiar, and plain,
not artificial. He suited his Form to his Matter, according to the method of
Nature, not his Matter to his Form, as the schools now do. For the matter of
his Philosophy being chiefly Moral, he fitted his form thereto. In
particular, the Socratick Mode, or Form of Philosophizing was Twofold, 1.
Rhetorical, or Suasive, 2. Dialectick, or Persuasive. 1. As to Socrates's
Rhetorical mode of Philosophizing, 1. His Rhetoric mode Ironical.
it was by Ironie: and indeed his whole life was but a kind of Ironie, or
dissimulation, whence he was called (...) i. e. One that acts the part of a
Fool, though most Wise. Cicero (de orat. 2.) tells us That Socrates exceeded
all men in this Ironical dissimulation, mixing a sweet Urbanitie, and
pleasantnes with his discourses: so Stobaeus says, that his Jests were
instructive. 2. As for Socrates's Dialectical Demonstrative, and Persuasive
Mode of Philosophizing, it was also Natural, 2. His Dialectick by Induction,
which consisted of Interrogations.
and Familiar, not Artificial, as that in Aristotle's schole. In brief,
Socrates's natural Logic consisted in Induction; which Cicero [de Iuvent. 1.)
defines a Discourse, that gains assent to things doubtful, by the assent which
is yielded to things not doubtful. Lud. Vives (in Aug. Civ. l. 8. c. 7.)
acquaints us, that this Socratick Induction is of all most powerful; which none
used more happily than Socrates; whence Quintilian commends it to his Orator;
whence also Plato borrowed his Mode of Dialogizing, etc. This kind of reasoning
Socrates affected, because he would not himself use any arguments of
persuasion, but rather work somewhat out of what was granted. This is
discursive Induction Socrates formed into, and expressed by Interrogations, as
it is evident to any, that shall consider his discourses in Plato. So Hornbeeck
summa Controvers. page 56. Always (says Hornbeck) approved the Socratick mode
of Disputing, wherein, by continued, and pressing interrogations, and answers,
the truth at last is so certainly gathered, and concluded, that it easily gains
an assent from all; which as elsewhere, so especially in Plato's Hippia he
observes, etc. Socrates made use of this kind of Argumentation by
Interrogations, thereby to draw forth the conclusion he aimed to prove, even
from the gradual concessions of his opponents: for he was wont to say he knew
nothing himself, only like a barren Midwife he was endowed with a particular
gift for the assisting others to bring forth their own conceptions. So Plato
Theaet. fol. 210. (...), These Dialectical interrogations of Jewish original.
This Midwifes Art, I, and my Mother received from God, etc. In these
Dialogizing disputes Socrates attributed more to his opponents, detracting from
himself, for he pretended still to know nothing, and therefore refused to take
Money of his Scholars. Thence Aristotle, 2 Elench. Sophist. cap. 8. says. That
Socrates always interrogated, but never replied, because he professed he knew
nothing. This Natural and familiar mode of reasoning by questions and answers
used in Socrates's Schole seems an exact imitation of, and derivation from the
Jewish mode of Disputation. So Mark 8.11. It Is said the Pharisees came forth,
and began to question with him, etc. it is so in the Greek (...) to dispute with
him by questions: So Grotius on this place: The ancient manner of Disputing,
says he, was by Interrogations. But more expressly Luke 11.53. It Is said the
Scribes, and Pharisees began to urge him vehemently, (...), i. e. by
Interrogations, unto which they required an extemporary answer, so it follows,
and to provoke him to speak of many things, (...). This word (says Grotius)
was taken from the Schools, where the Masters were wont to set the riper
Scholars to pose the younger by Interrogations, whence in the New Testament the
words (...), and (...) usually signify to dispute, i. e. by Dialogues, or
questions, and answers, which was the mode of disputing in the Jewish Schools,
and thence traduced unto the Grecian, and continued amongst them till Aristotle
reduced this natural Logic to an Artificial way of Syllogizirg in Mode and
Figure, of which more hereafter, in Plato's mode of Philosophizing. In these
disputations of Socrates, he intends more the drawing forth, and revincing the
opinion of his Opponent, than the delivering and establishing of his own. For
he conceived it not his concern, who affirmed he knew nothing, to assert any
thing, as he himself declares in Plato's Theaetetus. And this his modest
suspension, or conceling his own opinion, laid the Foundation of those
differing Sects, which sprang from him; especially of the Academical (...), or
suspension: of which hereafter. Howbeit Socrates's modesty would not permit
him to assert, and confirm his own (...), or Hypotheses, yet was he very bold,
and Ironical in refuting the proud assumings of such as pretended they knew all
things. So August. de Civit. l. 8. c. 3. It is apparent (says he) that
Socrates did in his very Moral questions, whereto he seems wholly to addict
himself, either by his confessed ignorance, or dissembled knowledge, with an
admirable pleasantnes, and most acute urbanitie agitate, and overturne the
folly of unlearned persons, who thought they knew somewhat, etc. All these
Philosophic Contemplations of Socrates laid together, sufficiently argue their
original to be Divine, and Sacred. Yea Justin Martyr, and other of the Fathers,
conceived, that he lived (...), and that he did (...) in part acknowledge
Christ. So Justin Martyr Apol. ad Senate. and Anton. Hornius Hist. Eccles. l. 3.
c. 13. It Is possible that Socrates's Demon might be no other, than the Divine
(...), or Spirit of God.

. 7. This fervor of Socrates mixed with an Ironical facetiousnes in overturning
the proud conceited ignorance of some, The occasion and instruments of his
Death.
who fancyed they knew all things, is supposed to give the occasion of his
condemnation, and death. So August. de Civit. l. 8. c. 3.) in what follows
says, that from these endeavors of Socrates to discover the folly of these
ignorant Sophists, enmities being stirred up, he was by a calumnious
crimination condemned, and punished with death, etc. Plato in his Apology for
Socrates affirms, that these odiums, and feudes befell Socrates by reason of
his disputations against these proud Sophists. The same Laertius: There were
three, that accused Socrates Anytus, Melitus, and Lycon the Orator, who was the
Actor; whereas Anytus defended the rout of Artificers, and the rest of the
Athenians, whom Socrates often derided; and Melitus defended the Poets, when
Socrates had condemned, and judged to be expelled the City. The main crime
they accuse him of was his denying a multiplicitie of Gods etc. for which he
was condemned by 281 suffrages. Immediately before his death, after he had
taken the poison, he makes a learned, and undaunted discourse about the
immortality of the Soul, and its state in separation from the body etc. and
when he felt the pains of Death growing upon him, he takes his leave of his
Scholars, Tandem cum nonnullorum odia in se concitasset, accusatus quod
corrumperet javentutem, et novas superstitiones induceret ad cicutae
forbitionem condemnatus est Socrates. Quint. l. 4. c. 4. Apul. 10. miles.
Hornius, Hist. Phil. l. 3. c. 13. Socrates 's Character.
enjoining them to go, and Sacrifice a Cock to Esculapius the Daemon-god of
Medicine, as a thankful acknowledgement for so sweet, and noble a death: of
which see Plato's Phaedo about the end; also his, and Xenophon's Apologies for
Socrates, with Diogenes Laertius, where we find Socrates pleading, that his
Enemies overwhelmed him not with Crimes, but envy only, etc. And the Athenians
were so greatly affected with the injury done to Socrates, that a little after
they caused all their Schools to be shut, and punished Melitus with death,
Anytus with banishment, erecting a brazen Statue to Socrates, as Austin: and
Ludov. Vives in Aug. Civit. l. 8. c. 2. gives him this great Character. This is
that Socrates of whom nothing can be sufficiently said for his Dignity, who,
as it is manifest, was the wisest of all the Gentiles, and came nearest of all
to the Christian Wisdom: He was borne at Athens, Sophroniscus being his Father,
etc. He was a Man temperate, chaste, just, modest, patient of injuries; not
greedy of riches, pleasures, no nor yet of glory, for it is certain he writ
nothing. He was the first, who whilst others professed to know all things,
professed himself to know nothing. Thus Lud. Vives. To which may be added that
of Hornius, Socrates erat vir acutus, festivus, laborem tolerans, non tam
praeceptis quam exemplo docens: quem, and Lactantius caeteris non paulo
cordatiorem fuisse concedit. Socrates was eminent for his Acumen, Eloquence,
Diligence, Instructing, as well by his Example as Precepts; and such as
Lactantius also acknowledges to have far surpast others (Heathen Philosophers)
for Wisdom, Horn. Hist. Phil. lib. 3. cap. 13. Yet some say, Socrates was not
exempted from that great Gentile uncleannes, which the wisest and best of those
Gentile Philosophers were guilty of, mentioned Romans 1.21, 27. as elsewhere.

Of Socrates's Scholars, and their different persuasions about Morals, the
chiefest Good, etc. whence they fell into diverse Sects.
. 8. Though Socrates writ nothing himself, yet his Disputes were committed to
Writing by his Scholars: amongst whom Xenophon was the first, and most
punctual; for Plato uses a great liberty in interlining his own Sentiments
with his Masters Dogmes. And albeit Socrates confined himself to Morals, and in
his Philosophizings thereon used a plain method, yet after his death, his
Scholars fell into several Factions, and Sects, which sprang from their
differing Apprehensions about the chiefest Good, and the chiefest Evil. So
Austin (Civit. l. 8. c. 3.) Therefore Socrates by reason of his so great Fame,
both living, and dead, left behind him many Sectator^ of his Philosophy, whose
Eristick study was to be versed in the Controversies of Moral Questions,
wherein the chiefest Good consisted? which not evidently appearing in
Socrates's Disputes, whilst he started, and asserted, and destroyed every
thing, every one formed such a chief Good, as seemed most pleasing to him. Thus
had these Socraticks differing persuasions about this last end; some placing
the chiefest Good in Pleasures, as Aristippus; some in Virtue, as Antisthenes,
etc. Indeed all the Sects of the Ionick Philosophy, seem to owe their Original
to Socrates's Schole, especially the Cyreniack, Cynick, Eleatick, Megarick,
Academick, Platonic, Stoic.

1. Of Socrates's Scholars, Xenophon, Xenophon.
and Aeschinus, the Socratick clave fast to their Master, without founding a
new Sect.

2. Aristippus the Cyrenian, Aristippus Founder of the Cyreniack^
another of Socrates's Scholars founded the Cyreniack Sect, whose main
Principle was, that the chiefest Good lay in Pleasure, whence the whole Sect
was called (...), as the Epicureans after them.

3. Antisthenes another of Socrates's Scholars, Antisthenes of the Cynicks, and
Stoics.
founded the Cynick Sect. His chief Position was, that Virtue was the chiefest
Good, (...), wherein he was followed by Zeno his Scholar, who was the Founder
of the Stoic Sect, which as to Morals held a great communion with the Cynicks,
and they both with Socrates, etc.

4. Another of Socrates's Scholars was Euclid the Megarick, Euclid of the
Megaricks.
whose Followers were thence called Megaricks, and afterward Eristicks; and by
some Dialecticks, because they exercised themselves chiefly in Dialectick
Questions, which humor Euclid sucked in, not from Socrates, but Parmenides, and
Zeno the Eleatick.

5. Phaedo of Elia, another of Socrates's Scholars, Phaedo of the Eleaticks.
established the Eleatick Sect. He writ many of Socrates's Elegant Speeches.

6. But the most renowned of all Socrates's Scholars, was Plato, Plato of the
Academicks.
that famous Founder of the old Academie, whence the new Academicks descended;
as the Platonists: as it follows.

CHAP. II. Of the Platonic Philosophy, its traduction from the Jews.
That Plato borrowed his Philosophy from the Jews, proved by the universal
consent, 1. of Pagans. Plato's own Confessions, that he received his choicest
Principles from the Barb^ri^ns, Phenicians, and Syrians, i. e. the Jews.
Plato's (...), and (...), some Jewish Traditions: His Traditions of the Divine
Ideas, Providence, Immortality of the Soul, and Origin of the Universe from
the Jews. The Testimony of Numenius. 2. The Testimonies of Jews, Aristobulus,
Josephus. 3. Testimonies of Christians. 1. More ancient, as Clem. Alexandrinus,
Just. Martyr, Jo. Grammaticus, Ambrose, Austin. 2. Modern, Lud. Vives, Seldom,
Jackson, Cudworth, Stillingfleet, and Hornius.

. 1. HAving given some cursorie account of the Socratick Philosophy, That
Plato borrowed the choicest of his Notions from the Jews, proved by Testimonies
of Heathens. 1. Plato himself.
we now proceed to the Platonic (the main Branch of the Socratick) to
demonstrate its traduction from the Jewish Divine Oracles. And herein we shall
take up the same method we laid down in our Discourse of Pythagorick
Philosophy; namely, first, to give that, which the Schools term (...), a
Demonstration that ' it is so; and then to proceed to the (...), the several
Causes, Methods, and ways by which Plato traduced his Philosophy from the
Jewish Church, and Oracles. As for the first Branch of our Demonstration, to
prove the quod sit, that Plato indeed borrowed the choicest parts of his
Philosophy from the Jews, and sacred Scriptures; we shall endeavor to make it
good by an universal consent, or Testimony, which though but (as they phrase it)
an inartificial Argument, yet will it prove strong, and binding as to our
present design: For we shall produce Testimonies from all parties, both Pagans,
Jews, and Christians, and those most able and faithful Recorders of, and
Searchers into Antiquity: so that there will not be place left for doubting;
so far as such an humane Faith will reach; that parties so diametrically
opposite in their inclinations, persuasions, humors, principles, spirits, and
interests, should universally conspire to impose a cheat, and falsitie, on all
their posterity in a matter concerning which they had sufficient advantages to
satisfy themselves, and their posterities. That Grecian Philosophy in general
was traduced from the Jewish Church, we proved by universal consent, Book 2.
Chap. 1. which might serve as to our particular case. But we shall now give you
some particular Testimonies to prove, that Plato derived his Philosophy from
the Jews, and Scriptures. And amongst those from Pagans, we shall begin with
some Confessions dropped from Plato's own Pen, which seem to give some grounded
evidence, if not full conviction to our Conclusion.

1. Plato confesses ingeniously, that he, 2. Plato acknowledges his choicest
Traditions to be from the Barbarians, by whom he means the Jews.
together with the rest of the Grecians, received their choicest Traditions,
and Learning, from certain Barbarians more ancient than themselves. So in his
Cratylus, fol. 426. ( edit. Steph.) Plato acknowledges, That the first
Institution of Letters was from the Gods, by certain Barbarians, etc. so in his
Epinom. Plato says, What the Greeks received, (...), they put into a better
mode, that is, they clothed in a Greek fashion, thereby to disguise it. That
by Barbarians can be meant no other than the Hebrews, we have endeavored to
prove out of Justin Martyr, Testatus Plato Graecos a Barbaris didicisse, sed ab
eis accepta meliora fecisse. Steuch. Eugubinus de Pere^. Philos. l. 2. c. 2.
Clemens Alexandrinus, Epiphanius, Nicephorus, and Serranus, before Part. 1.
Book 1. Chap. 2. This is farther evident by what we find in Tatianus (contra
Graecos Oration.) thus translated. It becomes not you, O Grecians, to prosecute
the Barbarians with so much enmity, and to be so invidious against their
Placits: For what is there of Study among you, which drew not its Origin from
the Barbarians, etc. Then having largely explicated the chief parts of the
Grecian Learning, he proceeds to demonstrate, that the Mosaic Wisdom, which he
calls Barbarick, was most ancient. Therefore, says he, I have bid adieu to the
vain Glory of the Romans, to the frigid Eloquence of the Athenians, and their
contentious Studies: and have embraced our Barbarick Philosophy, which how it
is more ancient than your Disciplines, I now proceed to explicate. This he
demonstrates very accurately, by evincing, that Moses was more ancient than
Berosus, who writ the Chaldean Annals, yea then Cadmus, etc. whence he
concludes thus. Hence it appears, that Moses was more ancient than those
ancient Heroes: and it is but equal, that we give credit to the elder, rather
than to the Grecians, who drew their Dogmes, not rightly understood, from the
others Fountain. For many of the Grecian Sophists, being induced by a certain
Curiosity, endeavored to deprave, and pervert whatever they learned from
Moses, or the like wise Men; which they did partly, that they might make that
their own, which they drew from others; partly, that under a feigned
Composition of Speech, conceling what they understood not, they might corrupt
the Truth by their Comments. Thus Tatianus.

Plato's Syrian, and Phenician Fables Jewish.
2. Plato makes mention of certain (...), and (...), Syrian, and Phenician
Fables, which he calls (...), ineffable, etc. So Plato (de repub. l. 3. fol.
414.) tells us, of a Phenician Fable touching the Fraternity of all men made
out of the Earth, etc. where Serranus observes, that this Fable is but a
foot-step of the Primitive Truth, touching the formation of Adam out of the
Earth, and that by the name of the Phenician Doctrine is noted the Jewish. So
Plato in his Symposium, speaks of a Phenician Fable touching the (...), or man,
and woman conjoined; which Cudworth, with others, makes to be but a Jewish
Tradition of Eves formation out of Adam: Yea, the Jews themselves had this
Cabbalistick Fable of an Androgynon common amongst them, as Grotius has
observed on 1 Timothy 3.4. as before. And Hammond, on Matthew. 15.22. tells us in
express terms, that when the Heathens speak of the Original of their
Literature from the Phenicians, they mean the Hebrews. Bochart (Phaleg. l. 4.
c. 34.) tells us, that Herodotus calls the Jews Phenicians. So Xenophon tells
us, the Jews were called Syrians, as before, Part 1. Book 1. Chap. ^. Parag. 9.

Plato's ancicient Traditions Jewish.
3. Plato makes mention of a (...), an ancient Discourse, o^ Tradition, which he
elsewhere calls (...), a Divine Word, o^ Tradition, received from the Ancients
who lived near the Gods, etc. which cannot be understood of any more probably,
then of some Jewish Traditions, as appears by particulars.

Plato's Tradition of the Ancients.
1. Plato in his Philebus, fol. 17. confesses, that The knowledge of the
((...), etc.) one infinite Being was from the Gods, who communicated this
knowledge to us by a certain Prometheus, together with a bright Fire: and then
he adds, (...), etc. This Story of One, and many is a Tradition, which the
Ancients, who were better, and dwelt nearer the Gods than we, transmitted to
us, etc. This Tradition of (...). One, and many was Originally traduced from
the Jewish Church, and the Scripture account of God; the Unity of his Essence,
and the Plurality of his Decrees, which Pythagoras first brought into Greece,
and after him Parmenides assumed the same, as the foundation of his Metaphysick
Philosophizings about the Divine Ideas: as before, Part. 1. B. 1. C. 2.. 6.

2. Plato, de leg. l. 3. makes mention of a (...), Plato's ancient Tradition.
an Ancient Tradition, which affirmed God to be the beginning, the end, and
middle of all things, etc. This Plutarch calls (...), the old Faith; which
surely could be nothing else, but the old Jewish Tradition, which they had
received touching God's Creation of, and Providence over all things. Thus
Steuchus Eugubinus, de Peren. Philos. l. 2. c. 2. Justin Martyr conceives,
that where you find in Plato, or other Philosophers, mention of (...), the
Ancient Fame, they meant it of Moses. The like Plato in his Philebus affirms,
that all wise Men grant, (...), that the Divine mind is to us King both of
Heaven, and Earth; neither does any thing happen fortuitously. This (...) he
elsewhere calls the Soul of the World, informing, and governing all things, as
the Soul the Body: which the Learned suppose to be but a Tradition, from Genesis
1.2. The Spirit, etc.

3. Plato, in his Phaedo (fol. 85. Plato's Divine Word.
) treating of the immortality of the Soul, confesses, that the safest, and
most certain way to prove it, was (...), by some Divine Word, or Tradition. Now
what this Divine Word should be, if not some Jewish, or Scriptural Tradition,
cannot be imagined. This Divine Word he elsewhere calls (...), a Traditional
Knowledge, etc. Of which see more, Part 1. Book 1. Chap. 2.. 5.

4. Plato in his Timaeus, fol. 29. Plato's probable Tradition, or Fable.
being about to treat of the Origin of the Universe, lays down this
preliminarie Conclusion: It is just that both I, who discourse, and you, that
judge, should remember, that we have but humane nature, and therefore receiving
(...), the probable Fable, or Mythologick Tradition, it is meet, that we enquire
no farther into them. That this probable Fable was some Jewish, or Scriptural
Tradition of the Origin of the Universe, will be sufficiently evident, when we
come to prove, that all Plato's Philosophizings, touching the Origin of the
Universe, were but Traditions from Moses's description of the Creation.

5. Plato in his Politicus, fol. 272. Plato's Fable of the Golden Age.
gives us a large account of Adam's state of Innocence, under the Symbolick
Image of Saturn's Golden Age: he tells us, the Fruits of the Earth grew of
their own accord, without labor; that Men were naked, and had conference with
the Beasts. And then he concludes, But these things we must omit, (...), until
there appear to us some fit Interpreter. Serranus on these Words, fol. 251.
tells us, that Plato acknowledges, he received this Narration from elsewhere,
in that he calls it (...), a Fable; for the unfolding whereof, he expected a
fit Interpreter. Wherefore he signifies, that the truth hereof was delivered to
him by Tradition from the Primitive Times, etc. And I think it will appear very
evident to any, that considers the whole Story, that Plato refers to some
Jewish Records, or Traditions, whence he traduced these his Notions about the
Golden Age. So in like manner Plato in his Symposium, describes the fall of Man
under the Fable of Porus, Why Plato conceled the Jewish name and Traditions.
etc. And I conceive, wherever we find Plato making mention of any Barbarick,
Egyptian, or Phenician Fables handed over to him from the Ancients, especially
if they relate unto any Scripture Narration, we may safely conclude, that by
these Ancients he meant the Jewish Church, or Patriarchs, whose names he
conceled; as also clothed those Jewish Traditions with a Grecian Mythologick
habit, thereby to avoid that odium, which lay upon the Jewish Nation; as also
to gratify the curiosity of the Fabulous Greeks, and render himself more
esteemed amongst them. That this was the reason why Plato disguised his Jewish
Traditions, and conceled the names of the Jews, whence they came, is asserted
by Origin against Celsus, lib. 4. of which hereafter. Thus Sir Walter Raleigh,
Hist. Part. 1. B. 1. C. 6.. 7. But whether it were out of the same vanity,
which possessed all those Learned Philosophers, and Poets, that Plato also
published not under the right Authors names those things, which he had read in
the Scriptures; or fearing the severitie of the Areopagites, and the example of
his Master Socrates, by them put to death by Poison, I cannot judge. Justin
Martyr (as it seems) ascribes it wholly to Plato's fear, whose Words are
these: Plato fearing the Areopagites, thought it not safe for him among the
Athenians to make mention of Moses, that he taught there is but one God. But
for that Divinity, which he has written in Timaeo, he discoursed, and taught
the same of God (says Justin Martyr) which Moses did.

6. Yea farther Plato seems to use the very same expressions (though in another
Tongue, that Moses does in his Description of God: For whereas Moses describes
God, Exodus 3.14. I AM, Plato terms him, (...), etc. which differs only in
Gender, not really from Moses's description. Whence the Learned, both Modern,
and Ancient have concluded, that Plato drew this Notion of God out of Mose^. So
Justin Martyr, and Ludovicus Vives after him; as also Raleigh, Hist. Part. 1.
B. 1. C. 6.. 7. For where it pleased God, by his Angel to answer Moses, Ego sum
existens, which is, I AM; and existens misi^ me ad vos, I AM has sent me unto
you, herein did Plato, says Justin Martyr, no otherwise differ, than that
Moses used the Word [ Qui] and Plato the Word [ Quod] Moses enim qui existit
(inquit) Plato quod existit. For Moses says, He who is: Plato, That which is,
etc.

7. To these tacit acknowledgements of Plato, we may add the full Testimony
of Numenius the Pythagorean Philosopher, Numeni^s.
quoted by Clem: Alexandrinus, lib. 1. (...). But Numenius the Pythagorean
Philosopher plainly Writes: What is Plato, but Moses Atticizing.

. 2. Amongst the Jews we have the testimony of Aristobulus, Testimonies of
Jews. Aristobulus.
who flourished about 200 years after Plato, cited by Clemens Alexand. (...).
(as also by Eusebius Praep. Evang. l. 9. c. 6.) where he brings in Aristobulus
thus speaking of Plato (...). He followed our Law, or Institution, and
diligently inspected, or searched into all those things mentioned therein. The
same is mentioned by Ludov. Vives in Aug. Civ. l. 8. c. 11. Aristobulus the Jew
to Philometor lib. 1, as Eusebius cites him, says, that Plato in many things
followed our Law; for he seems in many things to have diligently examined every
particular. For Moses's books were translated before Alexander, and before the
Persian Empire, whence this Philosopher, as well as Pythagoras, received many
things. Thus Ludov. Vives. I am not ignorant, that his opinion about the
translation of Moses's books into Greek before the Persian Empire, is rejected
by some Learned men, therefore I shall not lay much stresse on it, yet why may
we not assert with Eusebius, that Plato (as Pythagoras) might have a sight of
Moses's writings (not as translated into Grerk, but) by reason of his skill in
the Oriental Languages, especially the Egyptian, which was but a Dialect of the
Hebrew, as has been before mentioned Book 2. chapter 5.. 8. of Pythagoras, of which
more hereafter. To this testimony of Aristobulus is consonant that of Josephus
the Jew, Josephus.
as Seldom de jure Not. Hebr. l. 1. c. 2.

Testimonies of Christians more Ancient, and Modern. Clemens Alexandr.
. 3. To these Testimonies of Pagans, and Jews, we may add many of the learned
Christians, both Ancient, and Modern. As for the Ancients Clemens Alexandrinus
does once, and again inculcate, that Plato derived his Philosophy from the
Jews, so (...). 1.5. and he expressly calls him (...) the Hebrew Philosopher:
and in many places he does affirm this, That the Greek Philosophers generally
were Thieves, (...). That they took the choicest of their Dogmes from Moses,
and the Prophets without thankful acknowledgement. So Justin Martyr Apol. 2.
Just. Martyr.
(and after him Theodoret) assimeth that Plato (...) drew many things from the
Hebrew Rivulets; yea, and that whatsoever he said devoutly of God, or of his
Worship, he stole from the Hebraick Philosophy. The same Johannes Philoponus
frequently asserts. Jo: Grammaticus.
So of the Creation of the world, l. 6. c. 21. page 249. he tells us, that what
Moses affirmed of man, that he was made after the Image of God, Plato
transferred to the whole visible world, calling it (...) a visible image of the
invisible God. The like he mentions lib. 7. c. 11, 12, where he shows, how
Plato imitated Moses, Genesis 1.31. in bringing in God rejoicing, and recreating
himself in the works of his hands, as very good, etc. Eusebius lib. 2. praep.
Evang. conceives, that Plato learned from the Mosaic doctrine, both the
Transmutation of the world, and the Resurrection, and the last Judgment, etc.
Amongst the Latin Ancients Ambrose gives a full Testimony hereto, Ambrose.
who affirms, that Plato for Learning's sake took a journie into Egypt to
inform himself touching the things done, and written by Moses, the Oracles of
the Law, and the sayings of the Prophets, etc. of which see Seldom de Jure Not.
l. 1. c. 2. But amongst all the Ancients, none speaks more fully to this, than
Augustine de Civit. Dei lib. 8. cap. 11. Augustine*
Some says he, joined to us in the grace of Christ, wonder when they hear, and
read, that Plato conceived such things of God, which they acknowledged are most
congruous to the truth of our Religion. Whence some have thought, that he, when
he went into Egypt, heard the Prophet Jeremie, or that he read in his
peregrination the Prophetic Scriptures, whose opinion I have laid down in some
of my Books: But the account of times being diligently computed according to
the Chronick history, it appears, that Plato was born almost 100 years after
Jeremy prophesied; wherefore Plato in that his pergrination could neither see
Jeremy, who dyed so long before, nor yet read the same Scriptures, which were
not as yet translated into the Greek Tongue: unless peradventure in as much as
he was of a sharp judgment, he by an Interpreter learned, as the Egyptian
mysteries, so the sacred Scriptures, not that he did by writing translate them,
as Ptolomy by the LXX, but by conference he understood what they contained, so
far as his capacity would reach. That which enclines us to this persuasion,
is, that the book of Genesis begins ( chap. 1. v. 1.) In the beginning God made
Heaven and Earth etc. which Plato in his Timaeus also declares. God says he,
in that work, first joined Earth, and Fire. For it is manifest that by Fire he
understands the Heaven: Thence those two middle Elements, which by their
interposition join together with these extremes, he calls Water, and Air;
whence it is thought he understood this from what is written, Genesis 1.2. The
Spirit of God moved upon the Waters. For he little attending in what manner the
Scripture was wont to style the Spirit of God, and because the Air is called a
Spirit, he thought that the Four Elements were mentioned in that place. Again,
in that Plato says a Philosopher is a lover of God, nothing is more manifest
in the sacred Scriptures. And especially that which has almost brought me fully
to assent that Plato was not without those sacred books, when it is said to
Moses (Exodus 3.14.) I am that I am. He that is has sent me, etc. This Plato
vehemently held, and diligently commended, etc. Thus August. By which it is
evident, what a full conviction he had of the truth of our conclusion. As for
the particulars, of these Platonic notions, we shall hereafter, we hope,
examine them, and prove that they were traduced from the sacred scriptures. As
for Modern Christians, we have the most learned of these last Ages of this
persuasion, that Plato derived the choicest of his Contemplations, both
Physical, and Metaphysical from the sacred scriptures, and Jewish Church. So
Lud. Vives on this text of August. Civ. l. 8. c. 11. Justin Martyr (says he)
in paraclesi ad Gentos, and Eusebius. in praeparat. evang.; and Theocritus of the
Greek affections write, that Plato translated many things out of the Hebrew
books into his own. Hence Numenius the Philosopher said, what is Plato, but
Moses Atticizing? etc. The same is affirmed by Steuchus Eugubinus on Plato's
Timaeus, and Seldom de jure Nature. Hebr. l. 1. c. 2. Where he proves our
conclusion at large. Thus Luther, Tom. 1. Genes. 1. a. in cap. 1. Plato, says
he, while he was in Egypt Collected as it were some sparks out of the Speeches
of the Fathers, and Prophets, therefore he comes nearer (than Aristotle) as to
the Origin of the Universe, etc, Also Dr. Jackson of the Scriptures fol. 55.
speaks thus. That Plato had either read, or been instructed by some, who had
read the books of Moses, will easily appear, etc. The like we find asserted by
Cudworth in his Discourse of Union with Christ page 22. Cudworth.
I cannot (says he) consent with Eusebius, that Plato had seen Moses his
works, but that he certainly received by Tradition many things, Stillingfleet.
when he was in Egypt, or some other of those Oriental parts bordering upon the
Jews, etc. But Sir Walter Raleigh. Hist. of the World part 1. Book 1. c. 6.. 7.
speaks more Categorically thus. As for Plato, though he dissembled in some
things, for fear of the Inquisition of the Areopagites, yet Saint Augustine
has already answered for him as before, Et mirifice iis delectatus est, quae
de uno Deo tradita fuerant, And he was greatly delighted in the Doctrine of one
God, says Justin Martyr. Now howsoever Lactantius pleased to reprehend Plato,
because (says he) Plato sought knowledge from the Egyptians, and the
Chaldeans, neglecting the Jews, and the Books of Moses; Eusebius, Cyrillus, and
Origin find reason to believe the contrary, thinking that from thence he took
the grounds of all by him written of God, or savouring of Divinity: the same
opinion had Saint Ambrose of Pythagoras. Thus Stillingfleet Orig. Sacr. Book 3.
chap. 3. page 502. The Platonists of Alexandria (says he) stole their choicest
Notions out of the Scriptures, but would not acknowledge it: which was the
grand artifice of their Master Plato, who doubtless by means of his abode, and
acquaintance in Egypt, about the time when the Jews began to flock thither, had
more certain knowledge of many truths of grand importance concerning the
Deity, the nature of the Soul, the Origin of the World, then many other Greek
Philosophers had; but yet therein lay his great fault, that he wrapped up, and
disguised his Notions in such a fabulous, and ambiguous manner, that partly it
might be less known, from whence he had them, and that they might find better
entertainment amongst the Greeks, than they were ever like to do in their
plain, and Native dress, which Plato himself seems to intimate, when he says,
that what the Greeks received from the Barbarians, they put into a better
fashion, i. e. they disguised it by a Greek habit, that it might never be
suspected for a Forreigner, etc. The Testimonies of Origin, and Vossius, see.
4. of this next Chapter.

I shall conclude this Argument, with a pregnant Testimony of Hornius Hist.
Philos. l. 3. c. 14. It was an ancient opinion, and now very much inveterated,
that Plato drew many things out of Moses, and inserted them into his Writings.
For Numenius of greatest Authority amongst the Pythagoreans, says that Plato
stole out of Moses's Writings, whatsoever he has of God, and the Universe. To
whom the more sage Fathe^s giving heed, hence it came to pass, that the
Platonic Philosophy was of highest Authority among them. For it was the
common vogue, that it differed little from Moses. Yea Caelius Rhod. l. 16. cap.
65. thinks, that Plato differs little from Christ's Placits. And Eusebius lib.
13. praep. c. 1. writes, that the Platonic Philosophy was as it were
translated out of the Hebrew tongue into Greek. Justin Martyr, in Apol. ad
Anton. will needs show, that Plato borrowed, whatever has any verisimilitude,
or shadow of truth, from the sacred Scriptures. The same Eusebius attempts in
his book against the Philosophers. Thus Hornius. As for the manner how Plato
transferred his Jewish Traditions from Hebrew into Greek I shall show in the
following Chapter,. 4. etc.

CHAP. III. Of Plato's Life, and Travels for Oriental Traditions.
Plato's Original, and Instruction under Socrates: his travels into Italy, to
acquaint himself with the Pythagorean Philosophy, which he was instructed in
by Archytas the Tarentine, Timaeus the Locrian, Epicarmus, etc. Plato's travels
into Egypt where he informed himself in the Jewish Wisdom, and Mysteries, viz.
touching the Origin of the Universe, the Immortality of the Soul, the Fall;
also concerning God, his Nature, Ideas, Providence, etc. That Plato might
receive information from the Jews, and Jewish Oracles, whilst in Egypt, by
reason of his skill in the Egyptian tongue, or by some Interpreter. What
emprovement Plato received as to Jewish Traditions from the Phenicians, their
Theology, and Philosophy, etc. Plato's Academie, his Character, and Works.

The History of Plato's life.
. 1. WE have in the foregoing Chapter by inartificial Demonstration, or
Testimonies proved, that Plato traduced the choicest of his Contemplations from
the Jewish Church, and Scriptures. We now proceed to the (...); to demonstrate
the same from the causes, means, and ways by which Plato gained these Jewish
traditions. For the clearing whereof we shall give some brief historical
relation of Plato's Life, Praeceptors, and Travels, whereby it will be
manifest, what advantages he had to acquaint himself with the Jewish
Philosophy, and Mysteries. Austin de Civit. l. 8. c. 4. gives us this good,
though short account hereof. But amongst the Disciples of Socrates, Plato
indeed, who altogether obscured the rest, deservedly shines with most excelling
glory. Who being an Athenian of a good family, and of an admirable ingenie,
far excelled his Condisciples: yet counting his own capacity, and endeavors,
with the emprov^ment of Socrates's Instructions insufficient for the perfecting
of Philosophy, he traveled far, and near, wherever the fame of gaining any
noble Science led him. Therefore in Egypt he learned whatever was greatly
esteemed, and taught there; and thence coming into those parts of Italy where
the fame of the Pythagoreans was celebrated, he learned there the whole of
Italick Philosophy, which then flourished, having heard the most eminent of
the Doctors thereof, etc. Thus Austin, wherein he gives us a full relation of
Plato's travels, though he differs somewhat from Laertius, and others, as to
method, etc. as hereafter we shall consider this general story in it is
severals.

Plato's original.
. 2. Plato was born at Athens in the 88th. Olympiad (as Ludov. Vives in August.
l. 8. cap. 4.) Apuleius l. 1. de Dogm. Plat. tells us, That Plato was so
Surnamed from the large habitude of his body (which was the common opinion)
for he was at first called Aristocles, though some think, he was called Plato
from the amplitude of his Speech, and Eloquence. His Parents were Arist. and
Perictione, his Fathers stock related to Codrus the last King of Athens, his
Mothers to Solon, that famous Athenian Legislator, whence Plato (as I take it
in his Timaeus ^peaking of Solon, calls him his Kinsman, etc. Plato's first
Praeceptor was Socrates with whom it is said he lived Eight years, His
institution under Socrates
in which time he committed the substance of Socrates's discourses to writing,
but with great mixture, and addition of his own; which gave much offense to
Xenophon his condisciple, who in an Epistle to Aeschines Socraticus (mentioned
by Eusebius Praepar. Evang. l. 24.) upbraids Plato for corrupting Socrates's
Philosophy by Pythagorean, Barbarick, Egyptian, and his own intermixtures. And
Diogenes lib. 3. writes, that there was little friendship, but much emulation
'twixt Plato, and Xenophon. For they both writ their Symposium, their Apology
for Socrates, and their Moral Commentaries. Plato in his books of Laws says,
that Xenophon's (...) was fictitious. Though they both greatly extol Socrates,
yet they make little mention each of other. From Socrates it was, that Plato
received the chiefest of his Morals, as it is generally confessed; and shall be
hereafter mentioned. After Socrates's death Plato applied himself to Cratylus,
the Diciple of Heraclitus, from whom we may presume he received good
instructions, for he makes him the chief subject of one of his Dialogues. Plato
primitus Heracliti secta imbutus, postea vero Socratis Disciplinae traditus,
Clarissimus omnium Philosophorum evasit. Plato being first of all of the
Heraclitian Sect, and afterward determining to be of the Socratick Discipline,
became the most famous of all the Philosophers. Apul. l. 1. de Philos. Plato
afterward addresses himself to Hermogenes, who followed Parmenides's
Philosophy, from whom we may suppose he borrowed many of his Metaphysick
Contemplations about Divine Ideas, of which he discourses at large in his
Dialogue called Parmenides. After these Plato had recourse to Euclid the
founder of the Megarick Sect: whence he went to Cyrene to be instructed by
Theodorus the Mathematician, etc.

3. Plato having a natural affection, Platos's travels into Magna Graecia and
instructions from the Pythagoreans.
and strong inclination unto the Pythagorick Philosophy, as that which carried
with it most of Divine Mysteries, and therefore suited best with his luxuriant
Fancy, he travels into Italy, that part which was called Magna Graecia,
where Pythagoras had Philosophized, and left behind him many Admirers, and
Sectators of his Discipline. Amongst these Pythagoreans Plato heard at Tarentum
Archytas the Elder, and Euritus. Plato Pythagoricae, praeter caeteras omnes
disciplinae particeps est. Eus. contra Hieroc.
Amongst the Locrians he heard Timaeus the Locrian, from whom he is supposed to
have borrowed many of his traditions touching the Origin of the Universe, its
parts, etc. So Ludov. Vives on Aust. in Civ. lib. 8. c. 11. Speaking of Plato's
Timaeus, says he, called this book so, because Timaeus the Locrian is induced
disputing of the Universe, whom he heard in Italy, who also writ in the Dorick
tongue of the Universe, from which Book Plato borrowed many things. Thus Ludov.
Vives. Yea indeed Plato's very Dialect in his Timaeus is Dorick, (differing
from his other Dialogues) which argues, that not only the matter, but also the
very words, and style were taken from Timaeus his Book of the Universe. So also
Jerome in his Apology against Ruffinus tells us, that Plato was instructed in
the Pythagorean Learning by Archytas the Tarentine, and Timaeus the Lorian.
Farther, at Croto Plato heard Philolaus the Pythagorean. Besides, Plato
received light, and instruction from other Pythagorean Authors, namely, Lysis
the Pythagorean, whom he makes the subject of his Dialogue called (...): also
from the Books of Epicarmus, alias Cous that famous Pythagorean Philosopher. So
Lud. Vives in Austin Civ. l. 8. c. 11. Alcinus (says he) in his books, he writ
to Amynthas teaches, that Plato borrowed his opinion of Ideas out of the Books
of Epicarmus, who was Cous a Philosopher of the Pythagorean Sect, whom in times
past they make to excel others of the Learned, as the Sun amongst the Stars,
and the Sea amongst the Rivers: He writ of the Nature of things, etc. From
Plato's great affectation, and imitation of the Pythagorean Philosophy it came
to pass that in the writings of the Ancients, the Names of Platonists, and
Pythagoreans are often confounded. So Eusebius lib. 14. Praecep. ca. considering
Plato himself in himself, we call him a Pythagorean. The like Apuleius Flor.
15. Plato differing little, or nothing from this Sect does Pythagorize. And the
same Apuleius lib. 1. de Philos. gives this account of Plato's diverting from
the Socratick Philosophy to the Pythagorean. When Socrates had bid farewell to
Human affairs, Plato deflected from the Socraticks, whose affairs were then
doubtful, to the Pythagoreans, seeking what proficience he might gain among
them. And he went twice into Italy, where he heard the Pythagoreans Euritus,
and Archytas the Senior. Thus Hornius Hist. Phil. l. 3. c. 14. And that Plato
indeed greatly valued Pythagorean writing, is evident by what Laertius relates,
namely that three Pythagoreans Books cost him no less than One Hundred Attick
Pounds, i. e. 3000. Karoles; for an Attick pound consists of 20 Karoles, as
Vossius de Philos. Sect. cap. 12.. 3. As for the time of Plato's abode in
Italy, Cicero in Catone writes, that Plato came to Tarentum when L. Aemilius,
and Ap. Claudius were Consuls: though according to Livie this account will not
hold. Now that the Pythagorick Philosophy was traduced from the Jewish Oracles
we have before sufficiently proved, Book 2. chap. 5.. 2.

. 4. But the greatest advantage, Plato's travels into Egypt, where he informed
himself in the Jewish wisdom.
that Plato had to inform himself in the Jewish wisdom, and mysteries, was his
travels into Egypt, which Laertius makes to have been after his departure from
Italy, though Austin in what was before cited, supposes him to have traveled
from Egypt into Italy: Others reconcile both, by affirming that Plato went
first unto Italy, thence into Egypt, from whence he returned back again into
Italy. Plato non contentus disciplinis quas praestare poterant Athenae, non
Pythagoraeorum, ad quos in Italiam navigaverat, Aegypti quoque Sacerdotes
adiit, atque erou^ arcana perdidicit. Quincil. lib. 1. cap. 19. Plato not
satisfied with what Learning Athens could afford, nor yet with that of the
Pythagoreans, to whom he had made a Voyage into Italy; had recourse also to
the Priests of Egypt, and became thoroughly acquainted with their Mysteries,
Thus Quintil. But the account of Laertius seems most probable, (which Vossius
adheres unto) who supposes, that Plato's last Voyage was into Egypt, wherein
he was accompanied with Euripides, or, as Vossius, with Eudoxus, where he had
13 years conversation with the Egyptian Priests, as Strabo lib. 17. Cicero
tells us, that Plato's design in Traveling to Egypt, was to inform himself in
Arithmetic, and the Celestial Speculations of the Barbarians, etc. That under
this notion of the Barbarians must be understood, if not exclusively, yet,
inclusively, Quae ejus p^regrinatio omnium celeberr^ms fuit. Nam in Aegypto
Praecipuum Sacerdotem Sech ^^phim Heliopolitanum, ut Conuphim, Eudoxus audivit
Hornius Hist. Phil. l. 3. c. 14.
the Jews, is a common received persuasion of the Learned, both Ancient, and
Modern, as Justin Martyr, Clemens Alexandrinus, Origin, Epiphanius, Serranus,
etc. And this is most certain, that about the time of Plato's abode in Egypt,
there were great numbers of the Jews who resorted thither, and we may no way
doubt, that he, who had such an unsatiable thirst after Oriental Traditions,
and Mysteries for the satisfying whereof he left no Persons, Places, or Records
unexamined, would let pass such a considerable party of men, as the Jews
were, who pretended unto, and that upon good grounds, the most ancient Records,
Traditions, and Mysteries. Surely we cannot rationally judge, that Plato's
curiosity, or humor so greedy after mysterious wisdom would neglect so great
opportunity, as he had for the instructing himself in the Jewish Wisdom,
whilst he was in Egypt. Besides, we have before, ( Book 1. Chap. 3.) proved,
that the choicest parts of the Egyptian Philosophy, were of Jewish extract; so
that what Plato gained here, may well be reckoned to be of Jewish Original.
Plato whilst in Egypt learned from the Jewish Doctrine.

1. The Origin of the Universe.


This will be farther evident, if we take a view of some particular Collections
which Plato made whilst he was in Egypt. We are told. 1. (Epist. Socrat. 26.)
that Plato having taken a view of the chief parts of Egypt, at last settled
himself in the Province of Sais, where he was instructed by the Wise men,
touching their Opinions of the Universe, whether it had a beginning? etc. Now
that all Plato's Traditions about the Origin of the Universe were of Jewish
Origination, we shall hereafter prove. 2. Pausanias affirms, that Plato
learned also from these Wise men of Sais, the immortality of the Soul, etc.
which was evidently a derivation from the Jewish Oracles. 3. Origin (against
Celsus, lib. 4. page 189.) conceives, that Plato, by converse with the Jews in
Egypt, received some notices of Adam's fall, which in his Symposiacks, he
Symbolically sets forth under the Fable of Porus (i. e. Adam) his being Drunk
with Nectar, and going into Jupiters Garden, (i. e. Paradise) etc. This he
conceives more probable, because of Plato's manner, (...), to hide his great
Phaenomena's, or Dogmes, under the Figure of some Fable by reason of the
vulgar. And in what follows, he makes mention of Plato's Artifice in
discoloring, and disguising those Traditions he received from the Jews, lest
by owning them, as the Authors of his Learning, he should disgust the Fabulous
Greeks, who had no respect for the Jews, etc. 4. Yea, indeed the chiefest part,
if not the whole of those Divine Mysteries touching God, his perfection, and
unity; his Divine Ideas, and Providence; also concerning the Universe, its
Origin from God, its formation, and animation by the Spirit of God, which he
calls Anima Mundi: in like manner, touching the Soul, its Nature, Perfection,
in Innocence, and corruption by the fall, and such like Divine Traditions,
which Plato pretends to have learned from the Egyptians, etc. are plainly
Jewish, as hereafter. Plutarch de Iside, and Osiride, tells us, that Plato,
whilst in Egypt, (...), is said to have heard Chonuphis the Memphite. Clemens
Alexandrinus says, that he did (...), use for his Praeceptor Sechnuphis the
Egyptian, perhaps the same with Plutarch's Chonuphis, and both one and the other
refers to some Jewish Master he found in Egypt, Austin lib. 2. de doct. makes
mention of Plato's converse with Jeremie, the Jewish Prophet in Egypt, where he
went with the Tribe of Juda, and Benjamin, etc. but this Opinion he in his de
Civit. l. 8. c. 11. refutes, for that Jeremie dyed before the Persian Empire
began, whereas Plato's being in Egypt, was about the end of the Persian Empire.
How Plato might receive information from the Jewish Records whilst in Egypt.
Yet we need no way doubt, but that the memory of Jeremie, who was so famous a
Prophet, and had foretold such great events of Providence, even the destruction
of his own People, etc. could not but remain very fresh and illustrious, even
to Plato's time: especially if that story prove true, that Jeremie being
buried under a heap of stones at Tanis in Egypt, was worshipped by the
Inhabitants for a present remedy they found at his Sepulcher against the
biting of Serpents. Eusebius refers the beginning of Jeremies Prophecy to the
36th Olympiad; and Plato's birth to the 88th Olympiad: so that we may better,
with Lud. Vives, suppose Pythagoras whilst in Egypt, to have had conference
with Jeremie, as before. Yet may we safely conjecture, that Plato, whilst in
Egypt, received some notices of Jeremie his Fame, and Prophecy, which might
engage him to inquire thereinto, as also into the Mosaic Books. So Learned
Vossius, de Philos. sect. par. 2. cap. 2.. 3. having shown the invaliditie of
that Opinion touching Plato's personal Conference with Jeremie, adds thus:
Plato might notwithstanding read Moses, if there were any Version of him before
that Translation of the LXX: of which we have elsewhere debated. And although
this might not be, yet it is granted, he might have conference with the
Hebrews, and be taught by them; which is made very likely by that Agreement
there is of Plato with Moses in many things: whence that of Numenius the
Philosopher, (...)? Thus Vossius.

1. We shall not insist upon any Version of Moses's Books into Greek as ancient
as Plato, though Lud. Vives asserts it, as before, Plato's skill in the
Egyptian Language, gave him advantage to read the Jewish Records.
chap. 2.. 2. yet may we, and that upon warrantable grounds, suppose, that
Plato, (as Pythagoras before him) had some sight of, and capacity to read
Moses's Books, with Jeremie's Prophecy, etc. not by means of any Greek
Version, but by virtue of the skill he had in the Egyptian Language, which
differed from the Hebrew only in some Dialect, as has been before once, and
again asserted, and proved. Neither can we well imagine, that Plato, who is
said to have continued in Egypt 13 Years, could be unacquainted with the
Egyptian Language: who knows not, but that a Scholar when he Travels for
Learning, the first thing he does, is to get the Language of the Country?
Thus, as we before observed, Pythagoras did in his Travels into Egypt, and
Chaldea; and this we need no way doubt, Plato made his first business after his
coming into Egypt. 2. Yea, it seems to me somewhat probable, that Plato wanted
not skill in the Hebrew Tongue: For in his Cratylus, where he gives us the
Origination of many Greek Words, he says such, and such came from the
Barbarians, implying (as before) the Jews. Amongst many others, he mentions
these, (...), which signifies darkness, and is evidently derived from the
Hebrew (...) Genesis 1.2, 5. for so Plato uses the Greek (...) to express the
Chaos by. The like he says of (...), which came from the Hebrew (...)
exploration: and (...), from the Heb. (...), etc. as Serranus in his Preface to
Plato's Cratylus. Now how could Plato so exactly know, that these, with other
Greek words, were of Barbarian, or Hebrew origination, if he had not some skill
in the Hebrew Tongue. This is the Opinion of Augustine, de Civit. Dei, l. 8. c.
18. where he shows, that Plato, while he was in Egypt, learned the Hebrew
Tongue. But this is refuted by some, as Hornius, Hist. Phil. l. 3. c. 14. 3.
Farther, there is very great ground to think, that Plato had skill in the
Phenician Tongue, by those many Fables, and Traditions he quotes thence. Now
the Phenician Tongue was evidently the same for substance with the Hebrew, as
before. That Plato drew much of his Philosophy from the Phenicians, is the
Opinion of Scaliger, Exer. 61. sect 3. and of Serranus, according to the
Citation of Hornius, Hist. Philos. l. 3. c. 14. Joh. Serranus will have it,
that Plato spoke many things, which he understood not, drawn out of the
Theology, and Commentaries of the Phenicians, which seems most probable to me.
For as to the Phenicians, they were (...), given to Mercature, familiar to the
Greeks: also they sent several Colonies into various parts of the World.
Nothing hinders therefore, but that Plato might attain to a more intimate
Knowledge of their Theology. Now the Phenicians had many things common with
the Hebrews, etc. see more of this, Book 1. Chap. 3,. 19. That Pythagoras was
rendered capable of understanding the sacred Scriptures, by reason of his skill
in the Egyptian Language, see Book 2. Chap. 5.. 8. which is also applicable to
Plato; or else, if this may seem to bold, because a novel Assertion, 4. We may
with Austin, and other Learned, both Ancient, and Modern, groundedly conclude,
that Plato, whilst he was in Egypt (amongst those many Jews who had recourse
thither) learned by an Interpreter, or by personal Converse with the Jews, many
of their Divine Doctrines, and Mysteries, though he understood not the genuine
import thereof: as in the foregoing Chap.. 3. This is the Opinion of Learned
Serranus, in his Preface to Plato, Truly (says he) Plato, while he was in
Egypt, might have conference with the Jews, who were there in great numbers
after their dissipation, and transmigration, etc. Though he conceives, that
Plato could not read the Scriptures in his own Greek Idiome, into which they
were not Translated, till after Alexander's time: of which more hereafter.

. 5. Plato's Collections from the Phenician Theology, and Philosophy.
Though we find no express mention of Plato's Traveling to Phaeniciae, yet
that he visited that Country also, either in his Travels to, or from Egypt,
seems very probable. For the Phenicians being every way well furnished with
Jewish Traditions, and Mysteries, we cannot conceive that Plato, who was so
great an Admirer thereof, would let pass such an opportunity for satisfying
his Curiosity therein: At least, that he had some view of Traditions from the
Phenician Philosophy, and Theology, seems more then probable from Plato's own
Confessions; for he often makes mention of a (...), and (...), a Syrian, and
Phenician Fable or Tradition, which he calls (...), ineffable, because he
neither understood, nor could express the mind thereof. These Syrian, or
Phenician Fables, which Plato gathered out of the Phenician Theology, I have
before proved to be of Jewish extract, and therefore unintelligible by the
wisest Heathens; and thence it is no wonder, that Plato calls them ineffable
Fables. Indeed, the most of his Jewish Traditions, which he gleaned up in those
Oriental parts, especially such as referred to the Jewish Mysteries, and Divine
Worship, were to him (...), ineffable, and unintelligible, and therefore he
calls them, (...), Fables: for (...), according to its Philosophic notion,
signifies some Philosophic Mystery traduced from the Ancients, the reasons
whereof were conceled, or hidden; and because the first Philosophers,
especially Pythagoras, and Plato, were great admirers of these Oriental (...)
Fables, they are called by Aristotle, (...), Philomythists, Lovers of Fables,
or Mystical Traditions, which Aristotle rejected, because his Reason could not
comprehend them. These Phenician Fables Plato much studied, and recreated his
curious humor withal, which gives us some ground to conjecture, that he was
not without skill in the Phenician Tongue, and so by consequence in the Hebrew,
which differs only in some Dialect therefrom. That Plato took many things out
of the Phenician Theology, which he himself understood not, is an assertion of
the learned Julius Scaliger, Exercit. 61. I suppose he means out of the
Theology of Sanchoniathon, and Mochus the Physiologist, wherein he follows the
steps of Pythagoras; as before, Book 2. Some tell us, that Plato had designed a
journey to visit the Persian Magi, and Chaldeans (as Pythagoras before him did)
but was prevented by the War, which happened betwixt the Grecians, and
Persians. By all which it is most evident, what an infinite thirst Plato had
after Oriental Wisdom, and Traditions originally Jewish: also, what an huge
advantage he had for the gratifying his Curiosity herein, first, by his
Travels into Italy, and conversation with Pythagoreans there; and thence into
Egypt, and as we may presume into Phaenicia also, where he met with many Jews,
and Jewish Records, or Traditions touching Divine Mysteries, which he greedily
embraced, without any real understanding of their genuine import and sense,
whence he turned the glory of God into a Fable, as he calls his Traditions: or
as the Scripture terms them, a lie, Romans 1.25. who changed the truth of God
into a lie. We have a brief Synopsis of Plato's Travels, and peregrinations,
given us by Hornius, Hist. Philos. l. 3. c. 14. out of Madaurensis, thus: Plato
went to Theodorus Cyrenes to learn Geometry; and he went so far as Egypt to
fetch Astrology, as also to learn the Rites of the Prophets. He came again
into Italy, and followed Euritus, Plato 's Academie. Academia a Cad ^o nome^
accepit non ab Academo: Erat Aedificiu^ nobile, amplu^, amaenum, multis
arboribus consitum, umbram praebentibus, Hornius Hist. Philos. l. 7. c. 3.
and Archytas the Pythagoreans. He had also bent his mind toward the Indians,
and Magi, had not the Asiatick Wars hindered him. He also went some time into
Sicilie, to understand the cause of Aetna's Fire, and to learn their Laws

. 6. Plato having collected what stock he could of Oriental Wisdom, and Jewish
Traditions, he returns home laden (as a Be with thyme) to Greece, where he
institutes his Schole in a Village near Athens, called (...), Academie, which
was, as Laertius tells us, a woody, and marshy place, and so very unhealthie;
in former times possessed by one Ecademus an Hero, who after his death became
a Demon, for Eupolis Comicus calls him a God. Plutarch in his Chesew, tells
us, that this Ecademus was the first who made discovery of Castor, and Pollux,
of Helena stolen away by Theseus, Mortuo ( Plato ^) summus ac pene Divinus
honor a Discipulis habitus. Singulis annis ejus memoriam tanquam Herois
celebrabant, test Eusebio, l. 10. praep. c. 1. Horn. Hist. Philos. l. 3. c. 14.
whence the Lacedaemonians had him always in great honor. From him this Place
was called first (...), as Laertius, Hesychius, and Stephanus in (...); whence
afterward, by the change of a Letter, it was called (...), Academie (though
Hornius derives it from Cadmus.) Here Plato sounded his Schole, which after the
new Academie was raised, received the style of the old Academie, as hereafter.
Laertius writes, that Plato was honorably Buried in this Academie, and that
Mithridates King of Pontus, when Athens came under his Jurisdiction, dedicated
Plato's Image to the Muses in this place. And Aelian, lib. 3. says, That the
ancient Philosophers so reverenced this place, as that they counted it not
lawful to laugh here, because they would have it kept pure from all dissolution
of mind. There were at Athens besides the Academie, other Schools, the Lyceum,
Prytaneum, Canopum, Stoa, Tempe, Cynosarges, etc. as Lud. Vives, in August.
Civit.. l. 8. c. 12. Athens was indeed the Eye of Greece, thence called by
Euripides, (...), the Greece of Greece; by Diadorus, (...); by Thucidides,
(...); by Strabo, (...), etc.

. 7. As for Plato's Character, we find him greatly, Plato' s character.
Philosophoru^ quis dubitet Platonem esse praecipu^^ sive acumine disserendi,
sive Eloquentiae facultate divina qu^da^ and Homerica? Fabius, l. 10. c. ^.
and I think too greatly extolled by some: Lud. Vives in Aug. Civit. l. 8. c.
4. says of Plato, that many have written his Life, and famous Acts: many place
him for his Wisdom and Morals, above all humane elevation; but truly I would
count them so far short in their Estimation, and love of him, as that if I were
not assured they were greatly addicted to him, I would suspect they envyed his
praises. He is deceived in my ^pinion, whosoever he be, that counts Plato not
something more than a Man, or truly not of the best and rarest so^t of Men.
Thus Lud. Vives. So again, in Aug. Civi^. l. 22. c. 28. There are three things
(says he) which gained not only Greece, but the whole World to Plato; namely,
his Integrity of Life, his Holy P^ecepts, and his Eloquence. Seneca, Epist.
44. gives Plato this concise Character, Platonem non accepit nobilem
Philosophia, sed fecit. Philosophy found not Plato noble, but made him so.
Eusebius lib. 10. praep. c. 3. says, that Plato excelled all that went before
him in Philosophy, also in Eloquence, and in Prudence. The usual Title they
gave him, was the Divine, which was the highest Honor. Others there are, who
depresse him as much. But it is most certain, Plato was a Person of vast
Naturals: he had a Spirit sublime, penetrant, and comprehensive, even to
marvel: a Phancie most luxuriant, and pregnant; a Conception ready, and vivid;
a Discourse mature, yet weighty; a Reason harmonious, and masculine; a Pen
polite, and flourishing. In brief, his Natural Capacity seems clothed with
many eminent Qualities, seemingly opposite with great Lights and heats, force
and stabilitie, moderation and promptitude, extention and profoundnes, etc. Yet
was he not, as to Morals, without great Blemishes, which stained all the Glory
of his Intellectuals. Pride, which is the Philosophers Original Sin, had a
great predominancie on his Spirit: whence Antisthenes, seeing a Vessel wherein
Plato's Vomit lay, said, I see Plato 's bile here, but I see not his pride;
meaning, that his pride stuck too close to him to be vomited up. So Diogenes
the Cynick coming into Plato's Schole, tramples upon his Bed, saying, here I
trample on Plato 's vainglory etc. He seemed also addicted to covetousnes,
which he is accused of for receiving 80 talents from King Dionysius (contrary
to the practice of his Master Socrates) which occasioned that question (...)
whether a wise man should study gain? etc.

Plato's Works.
. 8. Touching Plato's works they are common, and well known. There are ten
Dialogues in which the whole of his Philosophy is thought to be comprehended.
In which we must distinguish bewixt Plato's proper opinion, and the opinion of
others. His own he lays down in the person of Socrates, Timaeus etc. other
men's opinions he lays down in the person of Gorgias, Protagoras etc. Amongst
these Dialogues some are Logical, as his Gorgias, and Eutydemus. Some are
Ethical, as his Memnon, Eutyphro, Philebus, Crito: some are Political, as his
Laws, and Commonwealth: some are Physical, as his Timaeus: some are
Metaphysical, as his Parmenides, and Sophista, which yet are not without
somewhat of Logic. His Epistles are by some thought spurious. The Platonic
Definitions, adjoined to his Works, are supposed to be compiled by his
Successor Pseusippus: of which hereafter.

CHAP. IV. Of the Academicks, and New Platonicks of Alexandria.
The difference 'twixt the Old, and New Academicks, as to their (...). Plato's
(...) limited to matters only doubtful. Whether Plato Dogmatized? The New
Academies, and their (...), and (...). The difference betwixt the New
Academicks, and the Scepticks, etc. The Original of the New Platonists, and
their famous Schole at Alexandria. Of Potamon, Ammonius, Plutarch, and Philo
the Jew. Of the great Ammonius, the head of the sacred Succession at
Alexandria. How he borrowed the choicest of his Platonic Notions from the
Scriptures, and the advantages he had for such a design. Of Plotinus,
Porphyrie, Iamblichus, Syrianus, Proclus, Johannes Grammaticus. These New
Platonists chose out the best of all Sects, and were thence called Electicks.
The general design of these New Platonists to reform Philosophy. Ammonius the
head of these Reforming Platonists. The defects of this Platonic Reformation,
with its evil Effects. 1. In delivering Scriptural Mysteries, as the (...),
etc. under a conceled Form of Platonic Traditions. 2. Too great Idolizing
Platonic Philosophy more particularly. The sad Effects of this Platonic
Reformation. 1. As to the strengthening of Paganism. 2. As to the corrupting of
Christianity.

. 1. HAving given some relation of Plato's Travels, Of the old Academie, and
its difference from the new in point of Suspension.
and the various ways by which he informed himself touching the Jewish Wisdom,
and Mysteries; we now proceed to his Schole, Disciples, and Successors, and the
ways by which they gained further information in the Jewish Doctrine, and
Institutes. The Schole where Plato Philosophized, was, (as we have observed)
styled (...), the Academie; whence his Sect was called Academicks: amongst whom
there was a considerable difference, which arose from the firmnes of their
Assent, or Suspension, as to the truth of things. The Original of this
difference was laid in Socrates's Schole, who out of his modesty, pretending
to know nothing, would not in matters dubio^ assert any thing peremptorily, but
left his Scholars to dispute pro or contra, as they listed. This Problematick
mode of Philosophizing, was followed by Plato in his Academie; yet with a
considerable difference from the New Academicks. For in Plato's Academie they
affected not an universal (...), suspension, but limited the same to things
disputable, and dubious. Plato (and the Old Academists) held (...). That Being
was always one and the same without generation, and that therefore it was truly
(...), knowable. In which rank he placed all notions of God, of happiness, of
the other Life, wherein there is a discrimination of good from evil Men. Of
these matters Plato allowed not a liberty of Disputing pro and contra; but
either lays them down peremptorily as certain, and indubitable Principles, or
else from infallible Principles proves the same infallibly, whence he draws
down true and eternal Conclusions. But as for things natural, and sensible,
wherein there was little Certainty, or Evidence, he takes, and allows his
Scholars a Latitude of asserting, and denying things; which laid the foundation
of the Academick (...), or suspension. And that Plato made this difference
betwixt assent to things certain, and things dubious, is evident from his
distinction, (...), of Opinionative, and Demonstrative Character. He held, that
all things were not to be believed, not all things to be disbelieved; but that
things certain were certainly to be believed, and things dubious to be left
(...), undetermined; wherein he allowed (...), a Problematick Liberty of
disputing pro or contra. This gives us a good decision of that great question
amongst the Ancients: Whether Plato D^gmatized?
Whether Plato Dogmatized? By (...) they mean to impose a Dogme, as (...), to
impose a Law: in which sense it is used, Col. 2.20. where it signifies not only
a Dogme decreed, but the Decree it self, and its imposition. Laertius lib. 3.
gives us a good solution hereof. (...), those things Plato comprehended, he
asserts; those things which are false, he refuted; and about those things which
are uncertain, he suspended. We find much the same mentioned by Sextus
Empericus the Sceptick, cap. 31. Some says he) hold Plato to be Dogmatick:
others conceive him to be Aporematick, or suspensive: others think him in some
things Dogmatick, in some things Aporematick: For in his Gymnastick Discourses,
where Socrates is brought in disputing with the Sophists, they affirm, he has
a Gymnastick, or Aporematick Character; but when he declares his own opinion,
he is Dogmatick, etc. We have this more particularly expressed by Diogenes
Laertius lib. 3. where he distinguishes betwixt what Plato asserted as true;
and what he left uncertain by the persons whom he brings in disputing (...),
etc. Concerning the things, which he asserted, he produced his opinion by four
persons, Socrates, Timaeus, his Aethenian Host, and his Eleatick Host. But in
the refuting of falsehood he introduces Trasymachus, Callicles, Polus, Gorgias,
and Protagaras: add moreover Hippias, and Euthydemus, etc. By all which we
see, how far the Academick (...) suspension was allowed in the Old Aecademie
instituted by Plato, who was succeeded therein by Speusippus his Sister
Potona's son, who taught in the Academie 8 years, but for Hire, contrary to
the practice of Socrates, and Plato, for which he was upbraided. This
Speusippus is supposed to be the compiler of the Platonic Definitions
subjoyned to, and (as I gather by comparing them) abstracted from Plato's
Works. After Speusippus succeeded Xenocrates the Chalcedonian, who was of a
dull wit, wherefore Laertius tells, that Plato should say, Xenocrates wanted
Spurs, but Aeristotle a bridle. Unto Xenocrates succeeded Polemo, who was
followed by his Disciples Crates the Aethenian, and Crantor, who is said to be
the first, that Commented on Plato: so Proclus in Timaeus l. 1. (...). And thus
far continued the Old Aecademists, who insisting on Plato's steps, neither
asserted, not denied all things; but what they comprehended, they affirmed, and
what they found uncertain, they left so, without any peremptory definition.

. 2. After Crantor succeeded Arcesilaus, The New Academicks, and their (...),
or (...), with it is original.
or (as the Latins) Arcesilas who founded the second Academie, wherein they
maintained an universal (...) incomprehension, and suspension. The ground,
which Arcesilas proceeds upon to defend his (...), or cohibition of assent, was
indeed originally laid in Socrates's Schole, and therefore he makes use of
Socrates's Authority to defend himself, who affirmed he knew nothing, that so
by this his modest concession, he might refute the immodest, and proud
assumings of his Adversaries, who pretended to know all things. So Lud. Vives
in August. de Civit. lib. 8. cap. 12. This (says he) is the old Academie which
by Polemon the disciple of Xenocrates was delivered over to Arcesilas, who
essayed to reduce the mode of disputing to the Socratick manner, to affirm
nothing himself, but to confute what others maintained: which was called the
New Academie; whence the name Academick was appropriated to Arcesilas, etc. It
cannot be denied, but that Socrates (and Plato after him) especially in his
Gymnastick disputes used, and allowed a (...) a probationarie mode of diputing,
for, and against both parts; but yet his design was not to introduce an
universal suspension in things certain, but only to beat out Truth in things
uncertain. For it is most certain that Socrates, and Plato both asserted, and
determined many things, whence they are generally accounted Dogmatick, though
in things doubtful they used to suspend, and allow a Liberty, as before. But
now these New Academicks Arcesilas, and his adherents asserted, that all things
were (...) incomprehensible, and therefore, that there was no room for a firm
assent, but that we ought (...) to suspend in all things; wherein they differed
greatly from the old Academicks instituted by Plato: though it must be still
confessed, they received their original from them, as it is well observed by
Serranus in his Preface to Plato. There is no doubt, says he, but that the
(...), and dubitations of the New Academicks were (...), and corruptions of the
old opinion, etc. This Old Opinion he elsewhere acquaints us withal, showing
how it was the mode in Plato's Academie, in matters sensible, such as were only
probable, and doubtful, to give, and take a Liberty of disputing for either
part, the Affirmative, or Negative, so that the Position was still left (...)
undetermined, whence by these, and such like Quodlibetick Disputes, or Sceptick
Questionings of every thing, men at last began to believe nothing: for nothing
is more natural, says Jansenius, than for men from Peripateticks (i. e.
contentious disputers) to become Academicks. This is but that one Doctors
Opinion.
But that which superadded much strength to this Academick (...), or
suspension, was the (...) Eristick Logic, founded in the Eleatick Schole, and
assumed by the New Academicks, of which before. Unto Arcesilas succeeded Laeys
his Disciple, who had for his successors, Telecles, Evander, and Hegesippus,
the last of this second Academie. For Carneades the Cyrenean, who succeeded, is
made the Institutor of a Third Academie, which differed from the Second
Instituted by Arcesilas in two Points: 1. In that Carneades, acknowledged
something true and something falls, only he affirmed there was not in us a
(...), or skill to difference the truth from falsehood. 2. Carneades though he
asserted an (...) and (...), yet he denied not, but somewhat was probable, or
not. Others there be, who add a Fourth, and Fifth Academie. We have a good
account of all in Sextus Empiricus Pyrrhon. Hypotyp. lib. 1. cap. 33. There
were Academies, as they say, more than Three. The first, and most Ancient of
Plato: the second, and middle of Arcesilas: the third, and new of Carneades,
and Clitomachus. There are who add a fourth of Philo, and Charmidas, and a
fifth of Antiochus, etc. As for Philo's Academie, it came near the old, in that
it allowed a Wise man to Opine or Entertain some opinions, which Carneades
denied. And Antiochus Philo's hearer, who lived about Cicero's time, seemed
wholly to restore the old Academie save only in this, that as to the (...), or
faculty of Judging, he inclined to the Stoics. But these four last Academies
are usually comprised all under the style of the New Academie (though some came
nearer to, and some were more remote from the old) which some confound with the
Scepticks: but Sextus Empiricus (cap. 13.) gives us this difference. The
difference 'twixt the New Academicks, and Scepticks.
Those of the New Academies (says he) though they affirm all things are
Incomprehensible, yet they differ from the Scepticks, perhaps in saying, that
all things are Incomprehensible; for they assert this: but the Scepticks admit
it possible, that they may be Comprehended. We differ also from the New
Academie as to what belongs to the end. They use in the course of life what is
credible: we following Laws, Customs, and Natural affections, live without
engaging our opinion, etc.

. 3. After various transformations of the Academie, The original of the New
Platonicks, and their chief Seat, or Schole at Alexandria
those who adhered to Plato's Dogmes, rejected the name of Academicks, and
espoused that of Platonicks, so that the style of Academicks was confined to
the Sectators of Arcesilas, who maintained (...), and (...), an
Incomprehension, and Suspension: thus Lud. Vives on August. Civ. l. 8. c. 12.
Arcesilas who attained to bring in the Socratick mode of disputing, to affirm
nothing, but to refute the affirmations of others, Arcesilas recte aliorum
sustulit disciplinas, sed non recte fundavit suam -- Quid ergo promovit
Arc^silas nisi quod confectis omnibus Philosophis seipsu^ quoque eodem mucrone
confixit? Gladium igitur habebat, non scutum. Lact. de Ira Dei l. 3. c. 3.4.
constituted the New Academie. Hence they, who illustrated things, and asserted
certain Dogmes which they conceived to be the opinions of Plato, these were
called Platonicks, not Academicks; for I conceive, the name Academick stuck too
fast in the Schole of Arcesilas: thus Lud. Vives. The first revivings of the
old Academie, or Platonic Philosophy seems to owe it is original to the famous
Schole of Alexandria in Egypt, instituted by Ptolomaeus Philadelphus, who out
of his great zeal for the advancing of Learning, caused the Egyptian Wisdom,
which had been before confined to the Egyptian Priests, and Language, to be
translated into the Greek tongue, to which he added the Greek version of the
sacred Scriptures, commonly called the LXX, which rendered this Schole of
Alexandria most renowned. He also called hither Learned Men from all parts, as
well Jews, as Grecians, erected a famous Library; searched far and near for
Learned Records to adorn the same withal, and instituted Colleges for the
encouragement of the Learned Professors, and Students. This same design was
carried on by his Son Euergetes, who gave great encouragement to the Jews, and
others to resort hither, to this famous Schole of Alexandria which proved the
most flourishing, that ever was before or since, especially for Platonic
Philosophy, which revived, and flourished here for many generations, as has
been before observed, Book 1. chap. 3.. 10, 11. of this second part.

Potamon. Ammonius. Plutarch. and Philo Judaeus.
. 4. The first famous Platonist (according to what observation we have made)
that flourished in this Schole of Aelexandria was Potamon, who lived in the
times of Caesar Aeugustus, and Tiberius; as Laertius in his Preface: So Suidas
(...) 'Potamon the Alexandrine Philosopher, who was before, and after
Aeugustus, etc. The same Suidas tells us that he left behind him (...), a
Commentary on Plato's books of Commonwealth; and we may presume he writ other
pieces, though he has nothing extant at present. To Potamon, we may add
Ammonius (not the famous Master of Origin, and Plotinus but) the famous Master
of Plutarch, who lived in the time of Nero, and Vespasian. Yea Plutarch
himself, who had his education in this Schole of Alexandria, and flourished
under Domitian, was not only famous for Philologie, and History, but also for
Philosophy, and principally the Platonic, as appears by his Writings, etc. To
whom we may subjoyn Philo the Jew, who was of this Schole of Alexandria and
drencht in Platonic Philosophy, as it appears by his works: So Lud. Vives in
August. Civ. lib. 17. cap. 20. This book (says he speaking of that Apocryphous
Book called the Wisdom of Solomon) is thought to have been composed by Philo
the Alexandrine Jew, who lived in the times of the Apostles, and was a Friend
to them, and was so much adorned with the Greek speech and Eloquence, as that
the Greeks said of him (...), either Philo does Platonize, or Plato does
Philonize.

. 5. Ammonius the Platonist.
But Platonic Philosophy never flourished more than under Ammonius, that
famous head (...) of the sacred succession of this Schole of Alexandria,
continued by Origin, Herennius, and ^lotinus, etc. This Ammonius is supposed to
be different from Ammonius the Praeceptor of Plutarch, as well as from Ammonius
the Monk, Disciple of Proclus, and Interpreter of Aristotle, as Vossius de
philos. sect. cap. 21.. 6. There was a great Controversy betwixt the Learned
Christians, and the latter Platonists, whether this great Ammonius dyed a
Pagan, or Christian. Eusebius Eccles. Hist. l. 6. c. 19. and Jerome. assure us
he was a Christian, though Porphyrie denies the same. Thus much is generally
confessed, that he borrowed the choicest of his Contemplations from the sacred
Scriptures, which he mixed with his Platonic Philosophizings. And indeed he had
a mighty advantage to inform himself, not only in the sacred Scriptures, His
borrowing the choicest of his Notions from Scripture.
of the Old Testament translated by the LXX, but also in the New Testament
Records, and Doctrines propagated by the Disciples, and Apostles of Christ. For
without doubt Philo, that learned Jew bred up in this Schole of Alexandria (and
as Lud. Vives tells us, a friend to the Apostles) with the rest of the Jews
there, could not but have a full relation of Christ, his Acts, and Doctrine.
Besides there was in this Town of Alexandria a famous Christian Church, and
Schole settled by Mark the Evangelist, and continued by Panthenus, Clemens
Alexandrinus, etc. whose Doctrine, Discipline, and sacred Mysteries, we cannot
conceive such a person as Ammonius would let pass unexamined. Yea farther, so
glorious, and ravishing were the first dawnings of Gospel light, which brought
such glad tidings of Salvation to Mankind, as that not only the Jews, but also
some sober minded, inquisitive Gentiles rejoiced in this Light for a season
(according to that Observation John 5.35.) who yet never had a through work of
Conversion on their hearts: amongst this number we may reckon Seneca (whom some
think to have had conference by Paper with Paul) Epictetus, Pliny the younger
(who Apologized unto Trajan in the behalf of the Christians) and this famous
Ammonius of Alexandria with some others. Yea I see no reason to the contrary,
but that we may allow these, and some other unprejudiced Noble Gentiles, as
well as the unbelieving Jews, to have had some common irradiations, and
illuminations of the Spirit over and above that objective Light, and Revelation
of the Gospel, which shone so brightly round about them. He that shall read the
Works of Seneca, Epictetus, Hierocles, and these latter Platonists of
Alexand^ia, who had the glorious beams of Gospel Light waiting on them, will
find their Philosophizings about Divine Mysteries to be of a much higher
Elevation, and Raisure, than any of their Predecessors; which we may impute not
only to the objective Revelation of Gospel light externally communicated to
them, but also to some internal subjective, though but common, and transient
irradiation of the Spirit, which usually attends in some degree the external
Revelation of the Gospel, especially at the first publication thereof in any
place. That it was thus with many carnal Jews at the first publication of the
Gospel by John, and Christ, is most evident: and why may we not affirm the
same of many Gentiles, who being of more raised, and generous spirits, could
not but make some inquisition into those stupendous Miracles, and Reports,
touching Christ, and that Redemption brought to light by him; which Enquiries
of theirs, being attended with some Common Light, and Heat of the Spirit,
raised their Spirits, and Philosophic Contemplations to some higher Elevation,
than what their Predecessors attained unto. And that which might animate the
latter Platonists to such Enquiries, into those Divine, and Sacred Mysteries,
was their correspondence, and agreement with the choicest of their Master
Plato's Contemplations, who treated much (though without understanding rightly
the matters he treated of) concerning (...), etc. The very Being, Self-Being,
Word, Mind, Idea of the choicest Good, Soul of the World, Chaos, etc. And the
latter Platonists Ammonius, etc. finding these their Masters Notions so fully,
and clearly explicated in sacred Revelations, both of the Law, and Gospel; this
made them more affectionately inquisitive thereinto, and after their curious
inquisitions, finding a great Symbolization, and Harmony betwixt many of their
Platonic Principles, and the Divine Scriptures, they made what use they could
of the Latter to Reform, Refine, and Strengthen the Former. This design was
first set on foot by Ammonius the chief of that Sacred Succession, who if he
were not a real Christian, yet he seems to have had, with Agrippa, some almost
persuasions, and affectionate inclinations to the Christian Religion; the
Principles whereof he does incorporate so far as he durst with his Philosophic
Notions, with endeavors to infuse the same into his Scholars, Origin,
Herennius Plotinus, with the rest. Some conceive that Ammonius imparted those
more divine Mysteries, which he collected out of Sacred Revelations into his
Platonic Philosophizings, with an adjuration of Secrecy to his Scholars. How
far this design of Ammonius to reform Platonic Philosophy by mixing Divine
Revelations therewith took place, and what emprovement Platonisme received
hence, together with the poisonous influences it has had on the the Christian
faith, we shall hereafter show. What we have already mentioned suffices to
prove, that Platonic Philosophy received a mighty elevation, and advance in
this Schole of Alexandria under Ammonius, by virtue of his affectionate
searches into, and Collections from the Sacred Scriptures, attended with some
common illuminations, though perhaps without any saving light of Life from the
Spirit of God. Whence also his Scholars, Origin, Herennius, and Plotinus
together with their Successors in this sacred Schole of Alexandria, Porphyrie,
Iamblichus, etc. received their choicer, and more sublime contemplations,
albeit they concele the same, pretending, these more refined Notions to have
been derived to them from the Pythagorean, and Platonic source; whereas they
were indeed no other than derivations from the sacred fountain of Divine
Revelation, communicated by the hands of Ammonius the chief of that Sacred
Succession, as they call it.

. 6. To Ammonius Succeeded Plotinus, Of Plotinus his Character.
born at Lycop^lis a City of Egypt, and instituted in the Platonic
Philosophy at Alexandria under Ammonius. He left behind him, besides other
things, 54 Books divided into Enneades, which though obscure, In Plotino
privatum quicquam non est quod admireris, qui se undique praebet admirandum,
quem de D^vinis divine, de Humanis humane long super hominem docta sermonis
obliquitate loquentem sudantes Platonici vix intelligunt, Pic. Mirandul. in
Apol. 90. these.
and cloudie according to the Platonic mode, yet are they esteemed the most
exactest model of Platonic Philosophy extant: so Aeugust. de Civit. l. 9. c.
10. Truly Plotinus who lived near to the times of our memory, is extolled for
his understanding Plato more excellently than others, etc. So again, Austin lib.
3. Acad. writes, that Plato seemed to be revived in Plotinus. Thus was he
Plato's most refined, and lucid Mouth in Philosophy, and abstracting the
Clouds of error, Macrobius makes him the Prince of Platonic Philosophers, next
Plato, as Lud. Vives in Aug. Civ. lib. 9. cap. 10. Plotinus had for his
Disciples Amelius, and Porphyrie. He lived under the Emperors Galienus, and
Probus. His Life is writ by his Disciple Porphyrie, and premised to his works.
Porphyrie gives him this Character. Who, says he, expounded the principles of
Pythagorick, and Platonic Philosophy, more clearly, as it seems, than all
that went before him: neither do the Writings of Numenius, Cronius, Moderatus,
and Thrasyllus come near unto the accurate diligence of Plotinus, etc.

Of Porphyrie.
. 7. Porphyrie Disciple first of Plotinus, and then of Amelius, was Born at
Tire, and according to the Language of the Tyrians was called Malchus after his
Fathers name, which signifies a Prince, or King: so Suidas: (...). Porphyrie
was properly called Basileus. He was a Tyrian Philosopher, Disciple of Amelius
the Scholar of Plotinus, but the Master of Iamblichus. He lived in the times of
Aurelianus, and reached even to the times of Diocletian the Emperor. Suidas
here rightly translates Porphyrie's Phenician name Malchus (...) a King, for so
in the Hebrew, (from which the Phenecian Language differs only in some Dialect)
(...) signifies, as Vossius. Yea Porphyrie himself in the Life of Plotinus
gives us the reason, why he was called a King. Amelius, says he Dedicated his
Book to me, and in the Inscription named me (...) King: for that was my Name:
and in the Language of my country I was called Malchus, by which Name my
Father was also called. And Malchus translated into Greek signifies a King:
thus he. Eunapius in the Life of Porphyrie gives us an account, how his name
came to be changed. (...), etc. According to the Syrian tongue, he was first
called Malchus, which word signifies a King, but afterward Longinus named him
(...), Porphyrie. He was called Porphyrie, from Purple, which is the color of
Kings, as Vossius; or perhaps because Purple was the great Commodity which
Tire afforded. Austin de Civit. Dei hints, That this Porphyrie was first a
Christian, but afterward apostatized, and a bitter Enemy of the Christians.
He was a great admirer of Apollonius, Tyanaeus, that Pythagorean Sorcerer, and
endeavors to make him equal in point of Miracles unto Christ; wherein he was
refuted by Eusebius. Ludov. Vives in August. lib. 8. cap. 12. does thus
Characterize him. Porphyrie was a person of an unsound body, and mind, of a
judgment unconstant, and of an hatred sharp, and cruel, even unto madness. He
had notwithstanding the name of a great Philosopher, or Sophist, as well as
Historian. He writ the Lives of the Philosophers, whereof there is extant only
the Life of Pythagoras, which was at first published under the Name (...),
which Book Cyril cites against Julian, and ascribes to Porphyrie. Concerning
Porphyrie see more largely Lucas Ho^stenius, and Vossius de Histor. Gracis lib.
2. cap. 16. Edit. 2. page 244.

. 8. After Porphyrie, succeeded Iamblichus his Disciple, Iamblichus.
who was born at Chalcis in Syria, and flourished in the times of Constantine
the Great, and his Sons; as also in Julian's time: He was, Lud. Vives, on Aug.
de Civi^. l. 8. c. 12.
says Lud. Vives* of a better natural Disposition, and Manners, than his
Master Porphyrie. Vossius calls him a Platonic Philosopher, though Lud. Vives
says (according to Jerome) he was not so much a Platonic, Voss. de script.
Graec. lib. 2. c. 10. p. 208.
as a Pythagorean: Yet he confesses, that as to Divine matters, all the
Platonists did Pythagorize. There are extant two of his Protreptick Orations
for Philosophy; also his History of Pythagoras's Life, wherein he follows his
Master Porphyrie, (...); out of whose Book he transcribes many things with very
little, if any alteration of the words. There are three Epistles of Julian the
Apostate to Iamblichus yet extant, which argues a Friendship betwixt them, and
it is likely the same continued even whilst Julian made some profession of the
Christian Religion. Suidas tells us out of Damascius, that Isidorus esteemed
Iamblichus the most excellent of Writers after Plato. We have Iamblichus's Life
described by Eunapius, also by Vossius, Hist. Graec. l. 2. c. 10. p. 208.
August. de Civit. l. 8. c. 12. says, that amongst the Platonists the Grecians,
Plotinus, Iamblichus, and Porphyrie, were greatly noble, etc.

. 9. Syrianus Alexandrinus, Syrianus.
Fellow-Citizen, and Sectator of Iamblichus, follows next in this Sacred
succession of Platonic Philosophers. He lived about the Year, 470. and writ
four Books on Plato's Commonwealth; also on all Homer, with other things, as
Suidas relates. Isidorus the Philosopher had a great esteem for him, who after
Plato, next to Iamblichus, places Syrianus his Sectator as the most excellent
of Writers. So Suidas out of Damascius.

. 10. Proclus Lysius, Disciple of Syrianus, succeeded him in this famous
Platonic Schole. This Proclus flourished about the Year 500. Proclus his
succession.
as it is evident, though some, upon a great mistake, make him to have lived
almost 300 Years before. Suidas calls him, (...), the Platonic Philosopher. He
was usually called (...) Diadochus, (...), by reason of his succession in the
Platonic Schole. He writ many things; as ten Books of the Agreement betwixt
Orpheus, Pythagoras, and Plato in Oracles; also six Books of Platonic
Philosophy, which are yet extant: likewise a Commentary on Plato's Timaeus,
and on his Books of Commonwealth, yet extant also; with other Pieces lost, of
which Suidas makes mention. Proclus's Life was writ by his Scholar, and
successor Marinus, who tells us, that he had some taste of Aristotle's
Philosophy from Olympiodorus, which he cursorily ran thorough in two Years
space. The same Marinus tells us also, that he was accurately skilled in
Grammar, History, and Poesy, in the Mathematics perfect, and well versed in
Platonic Philosophy. His Mode in Philosophizing is cloudie, and obscure; as
that of Plotinus, and the rest of the New Platonists: He endeavors, according
to the Symbolick mystical manner of Platonists, to reduce all things to their
(...), Trinities. He took (as Vossius thinks) the occasion of heaping up so
many Trinities, from Plato's lib. 2. de Repub. where he treats of those three
Types of God, Bonitie, Immutabilitie, (or Unity) and Verity. Whence Aristotle
also received his three affections of Eus, Bonitie, Unity, and Verity. This
Proclus was a bitter enemy to the Christians, and the first after Porphyrie,
that turned his Pen dipped in Gall against the Christians. He is answered by that
great Christian Philosopher, See Suidas.
Johannes Grammaticus, as hereafter. Proclus in his Platonic Theology, lib.
1. cap. 1. gives us some account of this Sacred Succession in this Platonizing
Theologick Schole; how that after many Ages, Plotinus the Egyptian succeeded
therein, who was followed by Amelius, and Porphyrie his Disciples; as also
these by Iamblichus, and Theodorus their Successors, etc.

Johan. Grammaticus.
. 11. We may not omit here the mention of Johannes Grammaticus, alias
Philoponus, that famous Christian Philosopher, who, though the most of his
Works extant are Commentaries on Aristotle's Text, yet it is evident, that his
Spirit was deep drencht in Platonic Philosophy, especially as it was refined
by Ammonius that famous Head of the sacred succession at Alexandria: For so the
Title of his Commentaries runs, Extracts out of Ammonius, etc. Indeed most of
those Greek Philosophers, who take Aristotle's Text for their subject; namely,
Porphyrie, Proclus, with his Scholar Ammonius, and Simplicius, were in their
Spirits Platonists. For Aristotle came not in to be Master in the Schole, till
Abenroes, and the rest of the Arabians advanced him in Plato's Chair. Such was
this Johannes Grammaticus, who for his unwearied Studies, was called (...),
Philoponus. He follows exactly the Design of Clemens Alexandrinus, Origin,
Eusebius, and more particularly of the great Ammonius (whom he owns as the
source of his Philosophy) in endeavoring to prove, that Plato borrowed his
choicest Notions touching the Origin of the World, etc. out of Moses, and the
Prophets: he gives sundry Instances herein, as that of Plato's calling the
World a visible Image of the invisible God, which, says he, was but a mistaken
Tradition of Genesis 1.27. Also he makes Plato's Discourse of God's beholding the
Works of his hands as very perfect, and rejoicing therein, etc. to be taken
from Genesis 1.31. This Johannes Grammaticus, in his excellent Treatise of the
Soul (proaem. ad Arist. de anima) endeavors to prove, that Aristotle asserted
God to be the first Mover, and Cause of all things, etc. Also he proves out of
Aristotle's Canons touching the Soul, its immaterialitie, spiritualitie in
operation, and immortality, etc. Proaem. fol. 6. etc. In his choice Piece of
the Creation, he proves the World's Origin by God out of Plato, etc. And
whereas Proclus endeavors to reconcile Plato with Aristotle, showing how
Plato, when he treats of the World's Origin, meant it not as to time, but
Causalitie, etc. This Learned Philoponus writes two Books against Proclus,
confuting these his false Impositions on Plato, etc.

. 12. To the forementioned Greek Platonists, we may add Maximus Tyrius,
Maximus Tyrius.
who flourished in the time of Commodus the Emperor, as Suidas, and was well
versed in Platonic Philosophy, as it appears by his Writings, wherein we have
many of Plato's choicest Notions delivered to us more clearly, and nakedly,
than in other Platonists of greater vogue.

. 13. Neither must we let pass Alcinous, Alcinous.
another Greek Platonist, who has left us a short Abstract of Platonic
Philosophy, on which Jacobus Carpentarius, that Claromontane Professor (an
inveterate Enemy of Ramus, and, as it is said, the Original of his being
Massacred) has given us a good Commentary. In what Age this Alcinous lived,
it is not certain. Eusebius de Praeparat. Evang. lib. 11. cites a good part of
this Alcinous's Epitome, under the name of Didymus: whence it is conjectured,
that Didymus Alexandrinus was the Author of this Book; or that he transcribed
that place quoted by Eusebius out of Alcinous: so Vossius de Philos. sect. cap.
16.. 5.

. 14. Amongst the Latin Platonists, we may reckon Apuleius, Apuleius.
whose Book de Dogmate Platonis, is yet extant, August. de Civit. Dei, l. 8. c.
12. tells us, that Apuleius the African Platonist, grew very famous in both
Tongues, etc. Augustine often quotes him, and makes much use of his Notions, and
Testimony to confirm the Christian Religion. To him we may add Chalcidius,
Chalcidias.
another Latin Platonist, whose Commentary on Plato's Timaeus is yet extant.
Neither should we forget Marsilius Ficinus, Mars. Ficinus.
who though but a Modern Author, and Roman Catholic, yet deserves praise for
his elaborate Studies, and endeavors to explicate Platonic Philosophy,
especially for his Treatise de Immortalitate Animae, of the Soul's
Immortality, which he proves by strong convictive Arguments, wherein he takes
occasion to illustrate the chief Points of Plato's Philosophy.

These New Platonists called Electicks, because they chose out the best of all
Sects.
. 15. Thus we see how the Old Academie or Platonic Philosophy was revived by
the New Platonists, especially those of the Sacred Succession in the Schole of
Alexandria, where the Platonic Philosophy was mostly in vogue, though not
exclusively, as to the other Sects. For we must know these New Platonists did
not, at least the most of them, wholly devote themselves to Plato, so as to
exclude all other Sects; but made it their business to choose what they found
excellent in any other Sect: whence they were called, (...), an Elective Sect;
also (...), Electicks, because, says Suidas, (...), They chose out their
Placites from every Sect. Thence Festus Pompeius calls them Miscelliones.
Potamon Alexandrinus is said to be the first of this Sect. So Diogenes Laertius
in his Preface, There is, says he, of late an Elective Sect, introduced by
Potamon Alexandrinus, who chose what he pleased out of every Sect. Sotion,
Seneca's Preceptor, was of this Sect, who, though he past under the name of a
Stoic, yet was he a great Admirer of Pythagoras, etc. as Seneca, Epist. 58. I
am not ashamed to confess, what a love of Pythagoras Sotion infused into me,
says seneca, who was also of this Sect. The like may be said of Hierocles, who
though mostly Stoic, yet was he a great esteemer of Pythagorean Philosophy,
as appears by his Commentary on Lysis's Golden Verses, which pass under the
name of Pythagoras. Ammonius, Plutarch's Master, is said to be of this Elective
Sect. That Plotinus affected an universal mixture of all Philosophy, is
evident, partly by what was before mentioned,. 6. how he mixed Platonic, and
Pythagorick Philosophy, etc. as also by what is mentioned of him by Porphyrie
in his Life, That he mixed in his Writings the secret Dogmes of the Stoics,
and Peripateticks. So Iamblichus mixeth Pythagorean, and Platonic Philosophy.
Porphyrie, Proclus, Johannes Grammaticus, and Symplicius, mix Platonic, and
Aristotelian Philosophy. And it is an Assertion generally owned by the
Learned, that all those New Platonists of this Alexandrine Schole, did, as to
Theology, Pythagorize; wherein they did no more than their Master Plato: for
Proclus spends ten Books in drawing a parallel betwixt Plato, Pythagoras, and
Orpheus, as to Divine Oracles, etc. This Elective Sect of Philosophers, is
mostly approved by Clemens Alexandrinus, lib. 1. (...). I call Philosophy not
the Stoic, neither the Platonic, or the Epicurean, and Aristotelick, but
whatever is said to be taken from each of these Sects rightly, teaching
righteousness with pious Science, this altogether selected, I call Philosophy.
Origin also seems to have been of this same persuasion: And that, which made
these generous Spirits to keep themselves disengaged from any particular Sect,
was their (...), love to Truth, commended so much by Plato. So Ammonius on
Arist. Categor. page 4. (...). It was Plato's Speech: Socrates truly is dear,
but truth is dearer to us: And elsewhere, we must regard Socrates in some
things, but Truth much more. Thence Porphyrie in the Life of Pythagoras, tells
us, (...), that Truth only can make men near to God. So Iamblichus, expressing
the mind of the Pythagoreans, says, that next to God, Truth is to be
worshipped, which alone makes men next to God. Yet in as much as they thought
Truth was no where so fully, so lively represented to them, as in Plato's
Works, they judged it their interest, and honor to be (...), Philoplatonists;
wherefore they usually pass under the name of the New Platonists, though
indeed their Principles were not so clung, but that they could embrace Truth,
where ever they found it amongst any of the other Sects; especially the
Pythagoreans, with whom they ever held an intimate Fraternity, or
Consociation. See more of this Elective Sect in Vossius de Philos. sect. cap.
21.

. 16. The general design of these New Platonists to reform Philosophy.
What has been mentioned gives us some discovery of the general Design of
these New Platonists; which was not to espouse any particular Sect so far as to
exclude all the rest, but to make an universal Inquisition into all Opinions,
which carried a show of Wisdom. This Noble Design, had it been as nobly managed
as they pretended, without prejudice, and private affection, it had led them
into higher discoveries of Truth, than ever they attained unto. For they had
the greatest Advantages that might be (as before. 5.) to inform themselves
fully touching the great Doctrines, and Mysteries of Sacred Philosophy, or
Wisdom, that shone so brightly in the Christian Churches: but this was too
glorious, and dazzling an object, for their carnal and weak minds to gaze long
upon: only some of the more Noble, and Ingenuous of that Sacred Succession at
Alexandria, seemed pretty willing to be dis-abused from some of those grosser
Conceptions they had sucked in together with their Platonic Infusions: in
order whereto, after inquiry made in the Sanctuary of Sacred Scriptures, they
find a necessity of Reformation. The head of these Reforming Platonists was
that great Ammonius, Master of Plotinus, and Origin, who if he were not really,
and altogether a Christian, yet certainly he had a great kindness for those of
the Profession, and a particular affection for their Sacred Oracles; which put
him not only upon the study of the same, but also on this great design of
Collecting what he could out of these Holy Scriptures, and incorporating, or
contempering the same Collections with the Systeme, or Body of his Platonic
Philosophizings. And certainly these endeavors of his could not but give a
great sublimation, refinement, and advance to Platonic Philosophy, though all
proved but a bitter, yea poisonous root of those dangerous Errors, and
Apostacies, which have ever since befell the Churches of Christ; besides the
advantages, which those of that Alexandrine Succession, who continued Pagans,
got hence to refine, and strengthen Paganism. The evidence both of the one,
and the other, will follow upon some particular reflections on this Platonic
Reformation.

The defects of this Platonic Reformation begun by Ammonius.
. 17. First, Ammonius the great Promoter of this Platonic Reformation, if he
were really a Christian (as Eusebius, and Jerome affirm him to be) was in this
greatly blameable.

1. That he durst not make open Profession of the Christian Religion, which he
believed to be the true. But more particularly,

2. For bringing the Sacred Scriptures into one, and the same contemperament,
or composition with Platonic Philosophy, whereby the former was greatly
adulterated, though the latter received a great emprovement. This Tertullian
takes special notice of, with complaints, that such stripped Christianity of her
mantle, to cloth Philosophy therewithal; or plundered Divine Truth, to
maintain, and enrich Philosophy; with such like Expressions.

3. But Ammonius was yet farther blameable, in that he following Plato's steps,
conceled, at least from his Pagan Disciples, and Successors, the Sacred
Fountain, and Original from whence he derived his more sublime, and choicer
Notions, which he delivered over unto them as Platonic Derivations; whereas
they indeed owed their Original to the Divine Scriptures. It Is possible, his
design in thus conceling the Sacred source of his Philosophizings, if it
proceeded not from carnal fear, might be pretty tolerable, though the effects
of it were very sad. For hereby, First, Many of those more sublime, and
mysterious Revelations, which he got from the Sacred Scriptures, 1. In
Conceleing the Original of these Scriptural Notions.
and foisted into his Philosophy, passed for Platonic Contemplations. In this
series, I presume, we may rank the Platonic (...), Trinity, on which Plotinus
his Scholar, and Proclus after him, spend such Mystical, and sublime
Discourses. It Is confessed, that Plato gave some foundation for such an
imaginary Trinity: for he makes mention of, (...): The Father, the Word, or
Mind, and the Universal Spirit, or Soul. Also in his Rep. l. 2. he speaks of
Bonitie, Immutabilitie, and Virtue, as before; which Mystical Contemplations I
have elsewhere proved were traduced to him originally from the Jewish Church.
But yet I cannot remember, that I ever met with, in any part of Plato's Works,
any particular express mention of a (...), Trinity, in such a sense as
Plotinus, and the rest of the New Platonists Philosophize thereon; and
therefore we have ground sufficient to conclude, that this Platonic Trinity
was traduced to these latter Platonists, not from Plato, but from Ammonius
their more immediate Master, who had it from the Sacred Scriptures; though
conceling the same, and finding some imaginary Conceptions thereof in Plato,
he delivers it over to his Disciples as a Platonic Tradition. The like may be
said of many other of those more refined, and raised Notions, which we find
amongst the New Platonists, which were communicated to them by Ammonius under
the form of Platonic Derivations, though they were Originally Christian
Traditions. 2. 2. The too great extolling of Platonic Philosophy.
Whence followed another general Evil of this Concelement, which Ammonius made
touching the Sacred Fountain of his choicest Notions; namely, hereby Platonic
Philosophy, being clothed in the beautiful dress of Divine Revelations, and
Mysteries, grows more desirable in the eyes, not only of Pagans, but also of
some carnal Christians, than her Mistress the Divine Scriptures, clothed only
in her own naked garb of Gospel simplicity. And in truth, this Idolizing
humor of crying up Platonic Philosophy, and making it equal to, if not above
the Scripture, did not only diffuse it self amongst the Pagan Platonists, but
had too great influence on many of those whom we count Christian Fathers,
especially Origin; and does continue to this very day among many Platonists,
who finding many excellent Notions amongst those Alexandrine Platonists,
Plotinus, etc. and some affinity betwixt their Philosophic Contemplations,
and Scripture Revelations, are very apt, at least in their inward esteem, to
equalize, if not prefer their Platonic Philosophy to the Sacred Scriptures,
as it has been excellently well observed by Learned Stilling fleet, Origin
Sacr. Book 3. Chap. 3.. 13.

Particular Evils, that followed upon that Platonic Reformation. 1. As to
Pagans.
. 18. We have shown what are the general Evils, that attended this Platonic
Reformation, begun by Ammonius in the Schole of Alexandria: we shall proceed to
Particulars, with endeavors to demonstrate what sad Effects this mixture of
Divine Revelation, with Platonic Philosophy, had both on Pagans, and
Christians. First, as for Pagans, Plotinus, Amelius, Porphyrie, Iamblichus,
Hierocles, Syrianus, Proclus, Marinus, Damascius, and the rest of that Sacred
Succession in the Schole of Alexandria, all the use they make of this Platonic
Reformation begun by Ammonius, is, First to enhance, and greaten the value of
Platonic Philosophy. 2. To cast the greater slur, and contempt on the
Christian Religion, and Scriptures, as wanting those Flourishes which their
Philosophy was adorned withal. 3. Following Ammonius's steps, they pick out
of the Christian Faith what ever might suit with their Platonic
Contemplations, or any way serve their turns: and to concele their stealth,
they artificially disguise their stolen Notions, by wrapping them up in a
cloudie Symbolick Form, after the Platonic mode; as also by professing
inveterate prejudices against, and opposition to the Christian Religion. 4. But
the worst use they made of this their Platonic Reformation, was thereby to
refine, and reform their (...). Natural Theology, commended to them by
Pythagoras, and Plato; especially their (...), or Demon Worship. For these New
Platonists of the Alexandrine Schole, observing upon daily contests with the
Christians, many things in their Natural Theology grossly absurd, and
contradictorie to the remainders of Natures Light, they endeavor to remove
these prejudices by some gradual refinement, or partial reformation of their
Daemon-Worship, which carried in it the Spirit of their Natural Theology.
Hence they contract the infinity of their fictitious Gods unto a small number;
asserting but one supreme God, whom they make to be the Sun; which seemed to
them the most glorious Being, and that which influenced all lower affairs, as
it appears by Julian's Oration to the Sun. As for all other Gods, they esteemed
them no other, than the Papists do their Saints, Demons, or Mediators betwixt
them, and the Supreme God, etc. Thus they pare off many luxuriant branches,
which their Natural worship had in the course of time produced, and reduce it
to a more natural, and as they conceive, rational account, and all this by
virtue of that Platonic Reformation begun by Ammonius, etc.

. 19. Neither did the noxious influences of this Platonic Reformation seize on
Paganism only, but also on the whole body, The sad effect. of this Platonich
Reformation in the Christian Churches.
yea (may we not say) on the vitals of Christianity. For Origin, Scholar to
this famous Ammonius, though a professed Christian, yet he follows his
Master's steps, in mixing Platonic Philosophy, and the Doctrines of the
Gospel together, hoping thereby to gain credit to the Christian Religion,
though indeed it proved only the sophistication thereof, and an effectual door
to let in all the great errors, and Antichristian Abominations, which have
layen in the bosom of the Church ever since. For so long as the Christian
Religion kept her self in her own native beauty, and virgin Simplicity, she
was not troubled, with these great errors, which befell her upon this cursed
mixture of Platonic Philosophy with Christianity. Had these Christian
Platonists Origin, and his followers, made it their design to reduce their
Platonic Notions unto, and reform them by Scriptures, they might have proved
useful; but on the contrary they rather affected to reduce the Scriptures, and
make them stoop to Plato's Dogmes, and Schole, which proved a mighty honor,
and emprovement to Platonisme, but a reproach, and corruption to Christianisme,
of which see Stillingfleet's Orig. Sac. book 3. c. 3. sect. 13. The full
demonstration hereof is a main subject of the following book, where we
endeavor to prove, First that the great corruptions amongst the Fathers, had
their original from this Platonic Schole at Alexandria, as Book 5. chap. 5.
sect. 8. 2. That Samosetanus received his poison from Plotinus's
Philosophizings in this Schole about the (...), as Arrius his. Book 5. chap. 5.
sect. 9. 3. That all Pelagianisme had it is rise from this Schole. Book. 5. c.
5.. 10. 4. That all Antichristianisme received it is rise from this Schole, as
c. 6. 1. Monastic Life, and Institutes, as chap. 6.. 1.15. 2. All their
Mystical Theology Ib. 3. All Antichrists (...), Demon, or Saint-worship.
chap. 6.. 4, etc. 4. All Popish Abstinences, Satisfactions, Merits, etc. chap.
6.. 16. 5. Purgatory. chap. 6.. 17. 6. All Papal Hierarchy had it is
foundation here. chap. 6.. 18. By all which we see, what cursed fruits followed
this un-Christian design, of drawing the Christian Religion into one Systeme
with Platonic Philosophy.

CHAP. V. Plato's Pythagorick, and Socratick mode of Philosophizing, with the
Original of both from the Jewish Church.
Plato's Pythagorick, and Symbolick mode of Philosophizing: The advantages of
Symbols, as well for the illustration of truth, as for the delighting of
fancy, and fixing the memory. The regular use of Symbols, not so much for
pleasure, as truth. Plato's Symbolick mode of Philosophizing from the Jews. How
far Plato affected the Socratick mode of Philosophizing, with his differen^e
therefrom. 1. Plato was more Dogmatick than Socrates. 2. Plato's mode of
Dialogizing was more Symbolick, and Metaphorick than that of Socrates. Plato's
mode of Philosophizing by Dialogues of Jewish original. Luke 5.21.22. (...)
Luke 6.8. (...). Luke 11.35. (...), to dispute by Questions. Luke 22.68 (...)
if I propose any Arguments, etc.

. 1. HAving given some Historical account of the Platonists, both Old, and New,
with the particular advantages they had to acquaint themselves with Jewish, and
Christian Mysteries, we now proceed to the Essential parts of Platonic
Philosophy, and their traduction from the sacred Scriptures. Plato's Symbolick
mode of Philosophizing.
First, as for the Form, or Mode of Plato's Philosophizings, it is partly
Pythagorick, or Symbolick; partly Socratick, with somewhat peculiar, and proper
to himself: Of each distinctly. 1. That Plato abounded much in the Pythagorick,
or Symbolick mode of Philosophizing, is evident to any, that is verst in his
Philosophy. So Vossius de philos. sect. cap. 12.. 16.. Plato according to the
Pythagorean mode, very often abounds in Symbolick Philosophy. The like Cael.
Rodig. lib. 9. cap. 12. He is no Platonist, who thinks that Plato must not be
understood Allegorically, unless he will with Aristotle triumph over Plato 's
words, and not regard his profound sense. So Serranus on Plato's (...)
symposium, or Dialogue of Love. It was (says he) the mode of the Ancient
Philosophers to represent Truth by certain (...) Symbols, and hidden Images.
That Plato followed these, is put beyond doubt by this his Symposiack
Disputation, in which he makes express mention of Hesiod, and Homer, with whom
we find the first true rudiments of Ancient Philosophy. And truly this mode of
Philosophizing was accurately polished by the Pythagoreans, the whole of whose
Philosophy was wrapped up in the covert of Symbols, or Allegories. The like he
mentions in his Preface to Plato, where he also gives us the advantages of this
Symbolick mode of Philosophizing. It was (says he) the Ancient manner of
Philosophers, to set forth Truth by Symbolick Images. That Plato followed this
custom is no way to be doubted, whilst he discourses of Learning received
from them. Neither are there wanting reasons which incline unto such a method
of teaching: For (...), such a Symbolick Image of things, is exceeding
efficatious to strike men's minds, who are greatly moved with such Images. For
seeing the truth of things lies wrapped up in much obscurity, we more
compendiously, and safely arrive unto it by such Corporeal gradations; she
lying couched under these shadows, does more powerfully insinuate into men's
minds. Neither is there wanting pleasure (the guide, and promotor of
Disquisition) in such Symbolick studies, and indagations. These Corporeal
Images, and designations of things by their Notes, do very much conduce in
like manner to Memory, which being excited by the Novitie, Beauty, and matter
of admiration which it finds in these Symbols, receives a more deep, firm, and
constant impression of these things wrapped up therein. The like he mentions
again in Plato's Symposium, fol. 167. showing how this (...), or Image-coyning
Philosophy, leads men gradually, and sweetly, yet most powerfully toward the
contemplation of the (...) First Being, etc. And indeed Plato himself gives us
the best account of the many excellent advantages, How Symbolick Philosophy
ought to be regulated.
which accrue by this Symbolick imitation, if duly regulated, and managed: so
Plato Phaedr. fol. 229. tells us, that under the covert of his Fables, Ttuth
lay wrapped up, and therefore we must not acquiesce in the Symbol, or Fable, but
make inquiry after that truth, which lay hid under it. So in his Repub. 6.
fol. 510. Plato, admonishes us so to read his (...), or Allegorick Images, as
not to terminate in the Images themselves, but to penetrate unto the things
couched under, and represented by these Symbolick Images. But more fully in his
Repub. 10. fol. 598, etc. he acquaints us that this his ^ymbolick imitation did
only represent the Image, or Shadow of the thing which is far remote from the
truth, as a Limner gives the Picture of a man; and therefore he, that would get
the true knowledge of the thing, must not acquiesce in the Symbolick Image, but
search after the thing it self. The same he inculcates often; as in his de
Legib. 2. fol. 669. where he lays down, and insists much upon, this general
Principle, that in such Symbolick Imitations, Truth, not pleasure, or delight
must be the measure of our disquisitions, etc. (...), All Imitation must be
judged not by pleasure, or opinion, but by Truth. So in his de Legib. 5. as
elsewhere, etc.

Plato's Symbolick mode of Philosophizing from the Jews.
. 2. That Plato, as Pythagoras before him, traduced this Symbolick mode of
Philosophizing from the Jewish Church originally, is a general presumpion of
the Learned. So Serranus, in his Preface to Plato's Images, adds: All which
Plato uttered not from himself, or his own humane reason, but from the more
happy doctrine of Moses, and of the Prophets, etc. And more particularly he
concludes thus; That Plato drew these Symbols from the doctrine of the Jews, i.
e. from Moses, and the Prophets, all Antiquity of Christian Doctors has
judged. But that he absteined industriously from nameing the Jews, because
their name was odious among other Nations. Although he sometimes makes mention
(...), and (...) of a Syrian, and Phenician fable, or (...) of an ineffectual
Mystery, to show, that he designed not the Egyptians only, but also their
neighbors the Jews. Truly Plato might, when he was in Egypt, have
conversation with the Jews, of whom there were great numbers in Egypt after
their dissipation, and transmigration-. Lastly, whereas in those (...)
ineffable Mysteries he recites, there lies some footsteps of truth mixed with
many trifles, who would not judge, he derived them immediately from the
Egyptians rather than from the Jewish Monuments? But that the Egyptians
retained many things received by tradition from the Patriarchs, Moses's most
ancient History demonstrates. Neither is it to be doubted, but that they drew
many things also from the clear fountains of the Sacred Bible, which yet they
Contaminated with their own muddie mixtures. Hence Plato acquired the name of
the Allegorick Philosopher, because he used that peculiar way of teaching by
(...) Symbols, or (...) Idols, and from their more abstruse doctrine asserts
many Paradoxes. Thus Serranus: wherein he fully grants, that Plato's Symbolick
mode of Philosophizing came originally from the Jews, though immediately from
the Egyptians. And the reason he gives, why Plato could not derive them
immediately from the Jews, is because the Scriptures were not translated into
Greek 'till after Alexander's time. But this being granted (which Lud. Vives
denies) why might not Plato by reason of his skill in the Egyptian, and
Phenician tongues understand the Scriptures, as well as the Egyptians? or else
might he not understand them by an Interpreter, as Austin seems to grant, as
before chap. 3.. 4. That Plato, as Pythagoras, received this Symbolick mode of
Philosophizing from the Oriental parts, is well observed by Cudworth, Union of
Christ page 28. The Oriental Nations were wont to couch their greatest
Mysteries, and pieces of Wisdom, which they conveyed by tradition one to the
other, in the covert of some Fables, and thence Pythagoras, and Plato afterward
brought that manner of Philosophizing into Europe, etc. And the same Cudworth
elsewhere gives some particular Fables, which Plato traduced from the Jews, as
that of his Androgynon, or Conjunction of man and woman, as one flesh, which he
makes to be but an imitation of Eve's being taken out of Adam's side, and
joined to him in Marriage, etc. Yea Serranus is inclined to think that Plato's
whole (...), or Love Dialogue, was but an imitation of Solomons's Song. So
Serranus on Plato's Symposium fol. 176. Hence (says he) as the holy Writer
had his Epithalamium, namely his Canticles, so Plato his (...), or Love
Dialogue, not that I would seem willing to compare Plato's (...), Love Songs
with Sacred (...), or Love Songs, but I am only willing to show, that this
manner of Teaching things otherwise true, and certain by Symbols, and
Mysteries, was not unusual, etc. See more of this Symbolick mode of
Philosophizing, and it is traduction from the Jewish Church, Book 2. chap. 9..
2. touching Pythagoras's Symbolick Philosophy, etc. Only there lay this
difference betwixt Pythagoras and Plato, as to their use of Symbols.
Pythagoras's Symbols were for the most part Enigmatical, answerable to the
Egyptian Hierogliphicks, and the Jewish Enigmes, or Riddles: But Plato's
Symbols are not so Enigmatick, and obscure as those of Pythagoras; but only
Metaphorick, and Allegorick, answerable to the Jewish Types, and Parables. See
more of this difference Book 2. chap. 2.. 6, 7.

Plato affects the Socratick mode of Philosophizing yet with some superaddition
of his own.
. 3. Plato abounds also much, yea mostly in the Socratick mode of
Philosophizing. So August. de Civit. l. 8. c. 4. And because Plato loved his
Master Socrates with such a singular affection, he brings him in speaking
almost in all his Discourses: yea those very things, which he had learnt from
others, or had acquired by his own intelligence, he tempers with, or wraps up
under his Master Socrates's Ironick mode, etc. Thus Austin; and more
particularly, some few lines after he adds; And seeing he affects an
observation of his Master Socrates's known mode of dissembling his own
knowledge, and opinion, because this manner pleased him so much, hence it comes
to pass, that it is very difficult to perceive Plato's opinion even concerning
the most Weighty matters. Touching Socrates's Dissimulation in conceleing his
own sentiments, without positive affirmation, or Negation, under pretense of
knowing nothing, thereby to draw forth (in an inductive way) and to confute the
opinions of his oponents, see what precedeth touching the Socratick
Philosophy, chap. 1.. 6.

Wherein Plato differed from Socrates, as to his mode of Philosophizing.
This Mode of Discourse Plato very much affected, as it appears in his
Dialogues, where he brings in Socrates discoursing after his o^n form, yet not
without a considerable difference from, or superaddition to his Masters Method:
For first Socrates in his own Schole very seldom, or never asserts any thing
Dogmatically; but under a modest pretension of ignorance he conceles his own
judgment, with endeavors to evince, and confirm the Hypotheses he designs to
prove from the concessions of his Opponents, 1 Socrates was more Aporematick,
but Plato more Dogmatick.
which he draws forth by a powerful Induction. Hence Arcesilas the founder of
the New Academie defends his (...), and (...) by the Authority of Socrates, as
before chap. 4.. 2. But now Plato, though he allowed in many natural, and
abstruse Questions, an (...), or suspension, and thence (...) a probationarie
mode of disputing pro, and con. yet he greatly asserted some things, and
strongly proved others, as necessarily true; whence the New Academicks, and the
Scepticks ever reputed Plato, and his Successors of the old Academie, as
Dogmatists, as before chap. 4.. 1, 2. Yea Ammonius on Aristot. Categor. tells
us, that Plato himself confuted this Sceptick (...) as that, which was most
irrational, and absurd: Plato's mode of Philosophizing different from Socrates
i^ point of Symbols, and Allegories.
of which else where. Secondly, Socrates's mode of Philosophizing was more
plain, and familiar. It Is true, it had much of Ironie mixed with it, especially
as to moral conversation, yet it did not render it cloudie, and obscure. But
now Plato, though he imitates his Master in Dialogizing, yet he mixeth
therewith so many dark Symbols and Poetic Metaphors, as that he seems to act
the part of a Poet, or Orator, rather than of a Philosopher. It Is confessed, such
Poetic, and Metaphorick flourishes, wherewith Plato's Dialogues so much
abound, are extreme useful to illustrate, and brighten Truth, yet it cannot be
denied but that Aristotle's Syllogistick, naked, and closer mode of Disputing
more conduces to the Conviction, and Demonstration of Truth. Whence that old
saying, Plato Teaches, and Aristotle Proves. Hence also the Greeks usually
styled Plato (...), Divine, and Aristotle (...), a Demon. And they say, if
Jupiter had been minded to discourse in Greek, he would have used Plato's
tongue; so eloquently, and floridly is he conceived to have Philosophized. Yet
learned Vossius de philos. sect. cap. 12.. 15. gives him this dash. Mean while
(says he) the discourse of Plato is less proper for Philosophy, For he fails
in this ( some (...) must pardon me) that he much delights in Metaphors, and
those not beseeming, but presumptuous, and altogether Poetical, whereas a
discourse more proper, or Metaphors more received, and common, agree better
with Philosophy, etc. But to give a just Character of Plato's mode of
Philosophizing. It Is evident, he had a most prodigious, and luxuriant Fancy,
which could not confine it self to the severe Rules of artificial Logic, and
method; neither indeed was it the mode, or fashion of those times to dispute in
Mode, and Figure; for this Form of Syllogizing owes it is original to his
Scholar Aristotle, that great artificial Methodist. Before Aristotle, the great
Logicians were those of the Eleatick Schole, Zeno the Eleatick, and his
successors, whose mode of Disputing was by Dialogues, or Interrogations, and
Answers, as it is evident by the Dialogues, which Zeno the Eleatick writ. This
mode of Disputing was followed by Plato (who derived much of his Logic from
the Eleatick Schole) only to render his Philosophy more Beautiful, and
grateful, he clotheth her after the Oriental fashion, with many Metaphorick
Images, and Symbolick shaddows. For that this Symbolick way of Philosophizing
was most in fashion amongst all the Oriental Philosophers, especially the Jews,
Egyptians, and Phenicians has been before proved. This garb Plato (as
Pythagoras) most affected, as that, which suited best with his (...), Pregnant
Mimetick Phancie, which greatly recreated it self in those Jewish Mysteries, he
had gleaned up in his Oriental travels, but not thoroughly understanding the
same, he wraps them up under Symbolick, and Metaphorick shadows, thereby to
render them more intelligible, and delightful. That, which made Aristotle
reject this Symbolick mode of Philosophizing, was the humor of rejecting all
Oriental Jewish Traditions, which his discursive reason could not comprehend.
To conclude, we have a full, though but brief Character of Plato's Philosophic
mode given us by Jerome. lib. 1. advers. Jovin. where he styles Plato's works
Divine, Profound, yet not easily to be understood by Raw, young wits, etc.
Though Plato's Mythologick, Symbolick, and Allegorick Images render his Notions
to such, as do not understand them, more cloudie, and dark; yet when they are
understood, they give a very beautiful gloss, or amiable face unto Truth:
answerable to Christ's Parables, which to the unbelieving Jews were but
Riddles, yet as he explained them to his own Disciples, they were very lively,
and significant.

This Platonic mode of reasoning by Dialogues of Jewish origin.
. 4. That this Socratick, Platonic mode of Philosophizing by Dialogues, or
Interrogations, and Answers was exactly the same with, and, as we may presume,
originally from the Jewish mode of Ratiocination, is evident by what footsteps
we find hereof in the sacred Scriptures, where we find the words (...), and
(...) frequently used to express the Jewish mode of Disputation: so Luke 5. 21.
Luke (who was exactly skilled in the Greek Dialect) expresses the Scribes, and
Pharisees their disputings against Christ by (...) to Dialogize, or to reason
by Interrogations, and Answers. So again v. 22. It Is said that Jesus knowing
their (...) Reasonings by Dialogues, he said (...), why do you Dialogize, or
reason by Dialogues, etc. The like we find Luke 6.8. He knew that thoughts
(...), their reasonings, or conferences, etc. We might produce Multitudes of
Scriptures of the same import, which clearly discover, that the Jewish mode of
Disputing was by Dialogues, or by Interrogations, and Answers. This is farther
confirmed, not only from the import of words, but also from the thing it self.
For we find those Disputes which were betwixt Christ, and the Jewish Doctors,
to be carried on by way of Dialogue, or conference, by questions, and replies.
So in that famous Disputation betwixt Christ, and the Pharisees, Luke 11.53.
it is said the Scribes and Pharisees began to urge him vehemently, (...), i. e.
to urge him vehemently for an extemporarie reply to their interrogations.
Thence it follows [ and to provoke him to speak.] (...). This word, says
Grotius, is one of those wherein Luke discovers his intimate skill in the
Greek: for (...) is a word evidently taken from the Schools, where the Masters
mere wont to place their riper Disciples over the younger, that so the former
might pose the latter by Interrogations, which was styled (...), and (...).
Therefore Luke does Learnedly use this word to show, that the Pharisees used
all endeavors to draw from Christ's Mouth many replies. The Syriack does
rightly express the sense by a word that signifies to Ensnare, and the Arabic
by a word that imports to make one Dispute. What they designed thereby is
evident by what follows, verse 54. Laying wait for him, and seeking to catch
((...)) something out of his mouth. By which it is apparent, this their dispute
was managed by Interrogations. So again Luke 22.68. says Christ, If I ask you,
etc, [(...)] which Grotius renders [ If I propose any argument] For (adds he)
the Hebrews, as well as the Greeks, were wont to dispute by Interrogations. But
more of this, when we come to Plato's Logic.

CHAP. VI. The several Distributions of Platonic Philosophy.
Platonic Philosophy, as to it is Matter distributed into 1. Pythagorick. 2.
Heraclitick. 3. Socratick. 2. Into Contemplative, and Active. 3. Into Moral,
Natural, and Rational. 4. Into Theoretick, and Practick. This distribution
suits not with Plato's Philosophy. 5. The Adequate division of Platonic
Philosophy, 1. Into Organical, which is Logic, and 2. Essential, which is 1.
Natural, wherein is comprised 1. Physics, both Contemplative, and Active, and
2. Mathematics. 2. Moral, which is either Ethick, Oeconomick, or 3. Politic.
3. Supernatural, or Theologick.

The distribution of Platonic Philosophy as to its Matter into 1.
Pythagorick. 2. Heraclitick. 3. Socratick.

. 1. HAving discoursed of Plato's Form, or Mode of Philosophizing; we now
proceed to the Matter of his Philosophy, with it is traduction from the Jewish
Church, and sacred Scriptures. Plato's Philosophy, as to it is Matter in
general, admits of sundry distributions. 1. As to it is Original, it was
reduced by the Ancients unto the Pythagorick, Heraclitick, and Socratick. So
Laertius in the Life of Plato, (...). He mixed the Discourses, or Reasons of
the Heracliticks, Pythagoricks, and Socraticks. For in sensibles he follows
Heraclitus, in Intelligibles Pythagoras in Politics, Socrates. 1. 1. Plato as
to Theologicks Pythagorizeth.
That Plato collected the choicest materials of his Philosophy, especially of
his Theology, out of the Pythagorean, has been before demonstrated chap. 3.
sect. 3. where we have shown, how he was instructed by Archytas the Tarentine,
Timaeus the Locrian, Epicarmus, and other Pythagoreans, whilst he had his ^bo^e
in Italy; besides the Instructions he gained from Pythagorean Books. Aristotle
in his Metaph. lib. 1. cap. 6. styles the Platonic Philosophy, (...), in many
things conformable to the Pythagoreans. And Lud. Vives tells us, that the
Platonists, as to Theologicks, do generally Pythagorize. More particularly;
Plato Symbolizeth with, and therefore seems to have derived from Pythagoras
these following Notions: namely, 1. That God is (...), etc. according to his
description, Genesis 3.14. 2. That God is (...), Unity, etc. 3. That God is
(...), One, and many; One in Divine Essence, and many as to his Divine Ideas,
or Decrees. 4. That all things are made, Governed, and Ordered by God. 5. Plato
fallows Pythagoras exactly, as to the constitution of Divine Worship, and its
Regulation by the Divine Will, and Rites, against all Images, Superstition, or
Will Worship. 6. Plato Symbolizeth with Pythagoras in Demons, and
Daemon-worship. 7. Plato held also with Pythagoras the Soul's Immortality,
Metempsychosis, with other opinions, of which see Book 2. chap. 8. Now that all
these Pythagorick Principles were of Jewish origination has been sufficiently
proved. 2. As to Sensibles Plato is said to follow Heraclitus, whose
Philosophy, as we may presume, he sucked in from Cratylus, 2. Plato as to
Sensibles follows Heraclit.
Heraclitus's Disciple, whom Plato after Socrates's death heard. The maine
Principles, that Plato imbibed from the Heraclitick Philosophy, referred to
the first Principles of the Universe, especially touching Fire, which
Heraclitus made to be the first great principle of all things: wherein Plato
very far Symbolized with him, asserting, that the Heavens were Fire; of which
hereafter. Now that Heraclitus was (according to Aristotle's Character of those
Ancient Philosophers) (...), one that greatly affected, and admired Oriental,
Jewish Traditions, touching the first Origin of the Universe, is evident by
what Plutarch in the Life of Coriolanus reports of him; where, having
discoursed of Gods Omnipotency, and man 's Incredulity thereof, he adds
(...), Many of the Divine operations, or traditions, according to Heraclitus,
fly from our notice by reason of unbelief. By which it seems evident, that
Heraclitus had some notices of, and great reverence for the Oriental Jewish
Traditions, which I suppose he received, if not immediately from these Oriental
parts, or persons, from the Pythagoreans; for he was but a branch of the
Italick Sect, with whom he Symbolized in many principles, especially in that of
Fire to be the great principle of all things: as before chap. 7. sect. 10.3.
Laertius tells us, that as to Politics, 3. As to Morals Plato follows Socrates.
Plato followed his Master Socrates. Apuleius de dogm. Plat. adds, that Plato
received not only Moral, but also Rational Philosophy from Socrates's
fountain. Yea Plato himself in his Dialogues, attributes unto Socrates some of
his Natural Philosophy. By which it is evident, that this Distribution of
Plato's Philosophy is not to be taken strictly, but (...): for it is evident,
that he received also from the Pythagoreans not only Theologick, but also some
Politic, and Natural Principles, as his Community from the Pythagorean
Schole; his Notions about the Origin of the Universe from Timaeus Locrus, of
which more hereafter. Yea in all these, both Sensibles, Intelligibles, and
Morals, Plato received much emprovement from Egypt, etc. as before.

2. Division of Platonic Philosophy into Contemplative and Active.
. 2. A Second Distribution of Platonic Philosophy is into Contemplative, and
Active: so Austin de Civit. Dei. lib. 8. cap. 4. Therefore (says he) seeing
the study of Wisdom consists in Action, and Contemplation, hence one part
thereof may be said to be Active, the other Contemplative, whereof the Active
appertains to the government of Life, i. e. the institution of Manners, but the
Contemplative to the inspection of Natures causes, and the most sincere Truth.
Socrates is reported to have excelled in the Active, but Pythagoras to have
insisted, so far as his Intelligence would reach, on the Contemplative. Thence
Plato joining both together, is commended for having perfected Philosophy:
thus Austin. Indeed this Division of Philosophy into Contemplative, and
Active, seems to have had it is foundation in the Jewish Schools under their
Babylonian transmigration, especially amongst the Essenes, who seem to bave
been the first, that addicted themselves to Monastic life (occasioned from
their persecution) which drew on this distribution of their life into Active,
and Contemplative, whence Pythagoras traduced the same; as before Book 2. chap.
6.. 7.8. Though we must confess that none of the Ancients treat so fully, and
distinctly of Contemplative, and Active Philosophy as Plato. So in his de
Repub. 2. he distributes Discipline into (...) Gymnastick, or Active, and (...)
Music, whereby he expresses Contemplative Sciences. Under the Gymnastick, or
Active Discipline he rangeth such virtues, as conduce to practice, or
morality; as Temperance, Fortitude, Justice, etc. Unto Music, or
Contemplative Discipline he reduces the (...) Musical Theoretick virtues,
which consist (...) in Contemplation; and the Queen of all he makes to be
Religion, whence he calls the Contemplation (...) of the Idea of the chiefest
good, (...), the highest Discipline, etc. Philo Judaus that great Platonist
discourses at large partly on Jewish, partly on Platonic principles, touching
Contemplative, and Active Philosophy: Aristotle also seems to approve of the
same distribution, though under different terms of (...), Practick, and
Theoretick Philosophy. The Original of this distinction came from the
different products, and objects of the one, and other, according to that famous
Maxim, (...). Practick philosophy is effective of Virtue, but Theoretick of
Truth. As for the subdivisions of this distribution, they are comprehended in
what follows.

. 3. But the chief Distribution of Platonic Philosophy in regard of it is
matter, is into Moral, Natural, and Rational: Plato's 3d distribution into
Moral, Natural, and Rational.
which also comprehends the foregoing, of Contemplative, and Active: so Austin
de Civit. lib. 8. cap. 4. Having spoken of Contemplative, and Active
Philosophy. Thence (says he) Plato by joining both together, is said to have
perfected Philosophy, which he distributes into three parts; One Moral, which
chiefly consists in action, another Natural, which is deputed to contemplation,
and a third Rational, whereby Truth is differenced from falsehood; which though
it be uncessary both for Contemplation, and Action, yet Contemplation chiefly
appropriates to her self the consideration of Truth, wherefore this threefold
partition of Philosophy is not contrary to the foregoing, whereby it is
distinguished into Contemplative, and Active: This division of Jewish extract.
thus Austin. That this partition of Platonic Philosophy was of Jewish
origination, is affirmed by Eusebius, l. praeparat. Evang. where he tells us,
That this Section of Plato's Philosophy had it is derivation from the Hebrews;
for the proof whereof, he brings the opinion of Atticus a Philosopher, who
opens this division more fully, and shows how Plato connected all the parts of
Philosophy into one body, which lay before dispersed, like Pentheus's
Members. For Thales, and his Disciples addicted themselves wholly to Physics:
the Six other Wise men to Ethics, Zeno the Eleatick, and all his adherents, to
Logic. Plato collected all these together, and brought forth to men a
Philosophy not broken, but entire, and absolute. Whereunto accords Aristotle
himself, lib. philos. Laertius in Plato. Philosophy in times past was employed
only about Physics: Socrates came, and added Ethics; Plato added a third part
to Philosophy, namely Logic, whereby he gave a full consummation thereto.
Apuleius (in Dogmate Platonis) speaking of Plato, says, wherefore he exactly
enquired into the inventions of Parmenides, and Zeno: thus he filled his Books
with whatever was singular, and admirable, so that he was the first, who
connected a threefold Philosophy, and showed that these parts, so mutually
necessary each to other, did not only not differ amongst themselves, but also
afforded mutual assistance each to other. Thus he; as Lud. Vives in Aug. Civ.
l. 8. c. 4. after him. This distribution of Plato's Philosophy seems very
natural, and comprehensive of all parts of Philosophy, as it is easy to
demonstrate: for Natural Philosophy takes in Physics, and Mathematics, (or
else we may reduce the Mathematics to Rational Philosophy) Moral Philosophy
comprehends Ethics, Oeconomicks, and Politics, Rational Philosophy according
to Plato takes in, not only Logic, but Metaphysics, or the Contemplation of
the first truth, and principle, etc.

Ammonius's distribution of Philosophy into Organick, Theoretick, and Practick.
. 4. Ammonius (the Disciple of Proclus) in his Comment on Aristotle's
Categories page 11. distributes Philosophy in general into Organick, and
Essential, or Principal. By Organick Philosophy, he understands Logic, or (as
he styles it from the principal part) Demonstration, which he calls (...),, a
Diacritick, or discretive Organ, whereby Truth is severed from Falsehood in
Contemplatives, and Good from Evil in Actives, As for the Essential, or
principal Members of Philosophy, he divides it first into (...), Theoretick,
or Contemplative; and Practick, or Active. Theoretick Philosophy he makes to
be that, which regards Truth, and Falsehood; Practick that which considers Good,
and Evil. 1. Theoretick Philosophy he subdivides into Physiologick, which is
the Contemplation of Sensibles, not in their Individuals, but as they lie in
their abstract specific Idea, or univocal common nature, and principles. 2
Mathematick, which is the Contemplation of Sensibles in their Quantity
chiefly, and as abstracted from their Materialitie. 3. Theologick, which is the
Contemplation of Beings Metaphysical, and purely abstracted from all
Corporeitie, and Matter. 2. As for Practick, or Active Philosophy; he
subdivides it into, 1. Ethics, which respects men in their single capacities,
The imperfection of this distribution as to Plato's notion of Philosophy.
or personal Morals. 2. Oeconomicks, which respects men's Morals, as in Family
consociation, or capacity. 3. Politics, which considers men under City, or
National confederation. This Distribution of Philosophy, though it seem more
Comprehensive, and Artificial, yet it suits not so well with Plato's
Philosophy, as the forementioned, but seems rather to be calculated for
Aristotle's method as hereafter. For Plato though he makes use of this
Distribution of Philosophy into Contemplative, and Active, yet he seems to
make these members, thus distributed to be as Disparates only, not as
diametrically opposites, i. e. he makes Contemplation though different from,
yet not opposite unto Action. Yea following the design of his Master Socrates
(of which before chap. 1.. 5.) he reduces all Contemplative Sciences unto a
subordination, and subserviencie unto Active: he accounts no speculation
regular, but what ends in practice; no Contemplation legitimate, but what ends
in the admiration, affection, and imitation of God: whence he calls the
knowledge of God, (...), the supreme Discipline, and his Logic he styles the
Introduction of the Soul, from it is night ignorance to the knowledge of the
first Being, as Repub. 7. Hence also he makes the end of his Philosophy to be
(...) assimilation to God, so far as it is possible: This he makes the Form,
Spirit, Soul, and Measure of his Philosophy, which ought to inform, and
influence all matters, parts, and things, as the Soul the Body. So Ammonius in
Arist. Cat. page 7. (...). The Matter of Philosophy is things, but the end is
assimilation to God. By which it is evident, that the common distribution of
Philosophy into Theoretick, and Practick, as understood by Aristotle, and the
Schools for a division of the whole into opposite parts, is no way agreeable to
Plato's Philosophy, who following Socrates herein, makes Contemplative
Philosophy subservient unto Active, especially to Divine affection, and
assimilation to God. And thus indeed Grotius in Epist. 16. ad Gallos page 39.
giving his advice about the study of Philosophy, adds this caution: Whereas
Philosophy is divided into Contemplative, and Active, you ought chiefly to
study the latter; and the former no farther than it subserves this latter. The
common Instrument of both is Logic, with which you are to begin, etc. A Golden
Rule indeed for young students.

. 5. Having laid down these Four Distributions of Philosophy, The Distribution
of Platonic Philosophy.
we shall take up the Fifth, which seems most Platonic, and native, as the
frame of this discourse, yet not without some addition from the ^est, so far as
it may conduce to our more methodical procedure. For whereas Plato seems to
reduce the contemplation of God, etc. to Dialoctick, or Rational Philosophy,
we shall give it a distinct place of it is own, confining rational Philosophy
unto Logic. And so Platonic Philosophy may be distributed into Organick, or
Rational, and Essential, or Real. 1. Organick Philosophy is Logic, 1. Logic.
which Plato calls (...) Dialoctick (from (...) to dialogize, which was his
mode of disputing) and sometimes (...), the manuduction of the Soul, as also
(...) a way, or method, with other such expressions; which supposes it to be a
rational organ, or Key to all other parts of Philosophy, whence it is rightly
styled by Aristotle (...), and (...), a Logic, Diacritick, or discretive
organ. 2. As for Essential, or Real Philosophy, it may be according to Plato's
mind, distributed into Natural, Moral, and Supernatural.

2. Natural Philosophy.
. 6. As for Natural Philosophy, it either regards things Natural, as Natural,
under that reduplication, or mode of consideration; or else it regards things
natural, as abstracted from their naturalitie, materialitie, or sensibilitie,
with respect only to their Quantity. 1. Natural Philosophy, that considers
things Natural as natural, i. e. under that reduplication (...), or mode of
considering, it may be subdivided into Contemplative, 1. Philosophy, 1.
Contemplative.
and Active. 1. Contemplative Natural Philosophy is commonly styled in the
Schools Physics, or Physiologie (from the Greek (...) Nature) whereof they
constitute two parts, one General, which treates of Natural Bodies in general,
their first Principles, Affections, Generations, and Corruptions* another
particular; which discourses of particulars, as 1. touching the Heavens. 2.
The Inferior World. 3. The Meteors. 4. Inanimates, as Minerals, etc. 5.
Animates, or Vegetables, which have a growing Life, but no sense, as Plants,
etc. 6. Animals, which have not only growth, but also Sense, and Motion, though
without Reason. 7. The Rational Soul, and humane Body, their nature, parts,
affections, and operations. There are the particulars which come under
Contemplation in Physiologie. Though Plato seems to make the main of his
Physics to be no other than a Natural History of the Creation, or Origin of
the Universe, as it appears by his Timaeus, which is the seat of his
Physiological Philosophizings. As for the Humane Soul, that is reduced to his
Metaphysics, or Supernatural Philosophy. Active, 2. Active.
or Operative Natural Philosophy (which is the end of Contemplative) refers
either to Plants, and Animals, and thence is styled (...) Agriculture, etc. or
else to the Humane body, and so it is styled Medicine, whereof Plato does much
Philosophize. 2. Natural Philosophy, as it considers Naturals, under an
Abstraction from their Naturalitie, and Materialitie, with respect only to
their Quantity, is commonly styled (...), Mathematics, which regard, 1.
either the corporeitie, Dimensions, and Figures of Bodies, and so it is called
(...), Geometry, from the measuring of Grounds at first in Egypt: 2. or the
description of Countries and Places, and so it is named (...), Geographie: 3. or
the account of Numbers, and so it is (...), Arithmetic: 4. or the Situations,
Constellations, Motions, Conjunctions, Influences, and Effects of Celestial
Bodies; and so they call it Astronomy, or Astrology. 5. Optics, which
regards Vision. 6. Music, which refers to sounds. 7. Navigation. 8. Tacticks,
or Military Discipline. 9. Architecture, with other Mathematick Sciences:
Plato studied the Mathematics under Euclid, and Theodorus, etc.

. 7. Moral Philosophy respects Men: Moral Philosophy.
1. in their individual, personal capacity, in relation to their Morals, and
so it is termed (...), Ethics: or 2. it considers Men in their Family-
relation, and thence it is styled (...), Oeconomicks: or 3. it refers to Men's
Politic capacity, as under civil combination, and confederation, and so they
call it (...), Politics. Plato discourses of each, but most largely of
Politics.

. 8. As for Supernatural Philosophy, commonly called Metaphysics, Plato's
Metaphysics.
or Natural Theology, Plato abounds mostly herein. 1. He treats very
Metaphysically of God, whom he terms, 1. (...), etc. according to Exodus 3.14.
2. He asserts also the Unity, Simplicity, and Immutabilitie of God. 3. He
proves likewise the Eternity of God from this, that he was the first Principle
of all things. 4. He demonstrates the All-sufficiencie of God from his being
(...). 5. Whence also he styles God, (...), Superessential; and (...),
Infinite. 6. Hence also he demonstrates the Incomprehensibilitie, and
Omnipresence of God. 7. He also clearly proves the Holiness, Justice, and
Faithfulness of God. 8. He makes some mention of God's Omnipotency, as also
of his Goodness, etc. 9. He treats very largely, and Metaphysically of the
Divine Ideas, and Decrees of God, with his prevision of all things resulting
thence. 10. He discourses very Divinely of God's production of, and Providence
over all things; as also of his particular regard to good Men. 2. Plato seems
to have had very great notices of Religion, and Divine worship, according to
the Scripture notion. He positively affirms, 1. That the Divine Will* and
Pleasure, is the only rule and measure of Divine Worship. 2. Hence that an
(...), or Worshipping of God accordingly is more acceptable to God than all the
pompous inventions of Men, whereby the superstitious ( Heathen) endeavored to
pacify the angry Deity. 3. That none can worship God aright but the pure, and
holy. So in his Book de Legibus, Parmen. etc. 3. Plato Philosophizeth very
Metaphysically of the humane Soul, its resemblance to God, immaterialitie,
infinite capacity, immortality, and perfection: likewise of its faculties,
offices, objects, acts, etc. 4. Plato in like manner seems to discourse, though
imperfectly, and under Symbolick Images, of the state of Innocence; the fall
of Adam; the restoration of Mankind by Demon Mediators; the infusion of
Divine knowledge, and Grace, against Freewill, etc. 5. Yea, Plato seems to give
some hints of the Divine Scriptures, which he expresses by Divine Oracles,
Enthusiasmes, Traditions. 6. Lastly, Plato is supposed also to discourse of the
last Judgment, and future state, which he expresses under Symbols.

CHAP. VII. General Ideas of Platonic Philosophy, and Philosophers.
Plato's Ideas of Natural Philosophy. 1. Its Genus (...). 2. The object 1.
Complex Science. 1. Intelligence, 2. Science, 3. Faith, 4. Imitation. 2 Simple.
3. The Act (...). 4. The End, Truth. 2. Of Moral Philosophy. 1. Its Genus,
(...), which connotes Prudence: wherein consider, its Objects, Offices, and
Acts, which are, 1. (...), 2. (...) Dexterity, (...) Sagacitie, (...), 3.
(...). 2. The subject of Moral Prudence, (...), and particularly the
Conscience: Plato's (...), Law of Conscience. 1. In the (...), which is a seat
of Principles. 2. In Syneidesis, which is a reflective Light, and springs from
(...), sensation. 3. The Rule of Moral Prudence is (...), which is either
subjective, or objective, (...), what Romans 2.14, 15. James ^.8. 3. Plato's Idea
of Divine Philosophy, in the contemplation of God, etc. which he styles, 1.
(...), 2. (...), 3. (...), 4. (...): which is, 1. The supreme, 2. most
ravishing, 3. genuine, 4. affective, 5. transformative. Characters of a
Philosopher. 1. (...), 2. good institution, 3. (...), 4. devotion to
Philosophy, 5. Liberal. 6. Music, etc.

. 1. BEfore we enter upon the Severals of Platonic Philosophy, we shall give
some general Characters of Philosophy, and Philosophers, according to what we
find laid down in Plato. Philosophy, according to Plato's mind, has not one
and the same Idea, but may be distributed according to its object into Natural,
Moral, and Divine. The Idea of Natural Philosophy, Plato's Idea of Natural
Philosophy*
is thus given us in the Platonic Definitions: (...). Philosophy is the
appetition of the Science of Beings always the same, Theoretick (or
contemplative) of Truth, as Truth. In which Definition we find as
Considerables, a Generick Notion, an object, a Specific Act, and a Term, or
End. 1. The Generick notion of Philosophy is Appetition.
The Generick notion of Philosophy is an appetition, etc. and so much the very
Notion (...) imports; as also that other Term (...), whereby Plato expresses
it. This Plato in his Parmen. styles a Divine impetus, or impulse, toward the
study of Sciences, (...)^ There is a beautiful, and Divine impulse, by which
men are impelled toward reasonings. This (...), appetition, is well defined by
Simplicius, in Epict. cap. 1. (...), the extension of the Soul toward its
object desired; which, as applied to our present purpose, implies the natural
inclination of the mind to knowledge. For the mind, as it is observed, has it is
(...), extension, or inclination to its object, as well as the Will: Yea, as
Aquinas notes, every Form has some inclination appendent to it; and by how
much the more perfect the Form is, by so much the more impetuous, and strong
is the inclination: whence the mind, which is a Rational Form, must needs have
a very strong impulse, or inclination to its object, which is the knowledge of
things.

. 2. The object of this appetition appendent to Philosophy, Knowledge of
things, object of the inclination of the mind, knowledge of things invariable.
is [ the Science, or knowledge of things always the same] wherein we have
somewhat complex, or notional; and somewhat simple, and real. The complex
notional object of Philosophy, and its appetition, is expressed in that notion
(...), of Science, or Knowledge. Now the Sciences, which Philosophy is
conversant about, are either contemplative, or active. So Plato acquaints us,
that the mind's (...), chiefest incorruptible beauty consists (...), in
Theorie, and Practice, Theoretick, or contemplative Sciences are such, as
properly refer to Truth: whereof Plato, de Repub. 6. fol. 511. gives us these
four Species, (...). And take from me these four affections in the Soul: give
to Intelligence the supreme place: the second to Discourse or Science (properly
so termed) the third to Faith: and the last to Imitation. 1. The first piece of
Knowledge Plato here mentions, is Intelligence, which in the Platonic
Definitions is defined (...), 1. Intelligence the knowledge of first Principles.
the beginning of Science, i. e. (as Aristotle interprets his Master's mind)
The Knowledge of first Principles: These first Principles are called by Plato,
(...), Hypotheses, which he makes to be certain indemonstrable Principles, on
which Sciences are founded: So in Platon: desini^. (...). An Hypothesis is an
indemonstrable Principle, or the sum of an argument, i. e. it is a first
Principle, which gives evidence to all following Conclusions, but receives
evidence from none, being in its self most evident, 2. Discourse, or Science
demonstrative.
etc. 2. Next after (...), according to Plato's order, follows (...),
Discourse, or Science, properly so called, which he thus describes, de Repub.
6. fol. 510. (...), etc. Science is that, which proceeds from simple
Principles, etc. Plato here makes Science, or Discourse, to be (...),
Demonstrative Philosophy, which proceeds from firm, and immobile Principles,
to the first (...), indemonstrable principle, which no way depends on the
foregoing Hypotheses, etc. This is well explained by Johan. Grammaticus, in
Arist. Anim. proaem. (...). Discourse is a progress from Principles to
Conclusions, whence the very name, (...), q. d. (...), passing through the
understanding. Then he gives us the office of this Discourse, (...). By this
Discourse our Soul is raised up to the contemplation of In^ligibles, which is
the Souls perfection. 3. Next to (...), Plato adds (...), Faith, ^ Faith
which is an assent to a Conclusion upon the Testimony, and Authority of some
person; whereby it is differenced from the foregoing Science, which is an
Assent to a Conclusion, as grounded on some certain immobile Principles. 4.
Lastly, after Faith follows (...), fantastic* Imagination (which elsewhere
Plato calls (...), Imitation) which is nothing else, 4. Imitation.
but the lively representation of notions, or things, by sensible Forms,
visible Images, or any other Symbolick shadows, whereof Plato discourses at
large in his de Repub. 6.510, etc. also de Legib. 2. fol. 669, etc. as
elsewhere. But so much for the complex Object of Natural Philosophy. 2. As for
its simple real Object, The simple Object.
it is expressed under the notion [(...)] of things always the same: whereby we
must understand, 1. That Philosophy is employed not only about the shadows of
things, but about the things themselves. This Plato every where inculcates;
namely, that the Object of true Philosophy, is (...), that which truly is:
wherefore he styles those, who are verst only, (...), about that, which is not,
or the shadows of things, (...), false Philosophers. 2. Whereas these real
Beings, as the object of Philosophy are said to be [always the same.] Hereby
we must understand them as existing in their specific Nature, not as
subsisting in their Individuals, for so they are variable.

. 3. Having finished the Generick Notion, 3. The Specific Act. Theoretick, or
Contemplative.
and Object of Philosophy, we now proceed to its Specific Act, expressed
under the notion [(...)] Theoretick, or Contemplative: (...), to contemplate,
according to its native origination, imports steadfastly to behold. Plato
discourses very much of Contemplation, which he makes to be the proper Motion,
as Truth is the proper food of the Soul: so in his de Repub. 2. he divides
Disciplines into (...), Gymnastick, or Active; and (...), Musical, or
Contemplative. These Musical Disciplines, he calls (...), Theoretick, whereof
he makes Religion the head; whence he affirms, that the Contemplation (...),
of the chiefest Idea of Good is (...), the supreme Discipline. Again he tells
us, that God is the first Beauty, the Contemplation whereof makes us, (...),
friends to God. Yea, he says, that by Contemplation a man makes God familiar
to, and in-dwelling in him. And lastly, he says, the best Exemplar of
Contemplation is in Heaven. As for the Qualities of this Contemplation, it must
be according to Plato's Doctrine, and mind. 1. Congenial, and Natural, not
forced, or strained: whence he styles a Philosopher, (...), The Qualities of
his Contemplation.
one akin to Truth: for (says he) as there is in our Eyes a congenial kind of
cognation, or similitude to the Light, which renders the Contemplation thereof
very pleasing; so 'twixt the Mind, and Truth, etc. 2. This Contemplation of
Truth must be distinct, and evident: so in his Rep. 6. fol. 504. Plato tells
us, that a dark adumbration of things may not suffice, but there must be a
perfect (...), or exact Form, and Image of the thing impressed on the mind. 3.
This Contemplation must be firm, and steadfast. This follows upon the former:
for what is pleasing, and distinct, is not soon worn off. Thence, says Plato,
Rep. 4. (...), a Science forced upon the Soul is no way permanent. Hence also
in his Meno, fol. 98. Plato makes this difference 'twixt Scientifick, and
Opinionative Contemplation; that the former is fixed, and permanent, whereas
the later is only fluid, and transient. Fourthly, This Contemplation must be
intuitive, and not only abstractive, i. e. a true Philosopher contemplates the
things themselves in their proper existences, not only their abstract Species,
Forms, or Images.

4. The Term, or effect of Philosophers Truth.
. 4. As for the term, end, and effect of this Contemplation, it is Truth, as
Truth [(...)] under that reduplication whereby it is differenced from active
Philosophy, which also contemplateth Truth, yet not as Truth, but as conducing
to Action. That the great scope and design of Philosophy is to discover, and
contemplate Truth, is evident from the whole of Plato's Philosophizings. So in
his de Repub. 6. fol. 490. Plato tells us, (...), by Truth the mind truly
lives, and is nourished: whence he calls Philosophy, (...), a love of Truth;
and a Philosopher (...), a friend and kinsman of Truth: also he makes this the
main office of a Philosopher, (...), to serve Truth. Hence also Plato Timaeus,
fol. 9. calls (...), a Philomathist, or Philosopher, one that burns with
impetuous desire after Truth, having this petty god indwelling in him, which
renders him happy. Whence he concludes, (...). The universal Medicine of every
thing is only this, to render to all their proper foods, and motions: the
proper food and motion of the soul, whereby it most resembles the Divine Being,
is the contemplation of Truth, etc. This (adds he) we lost in our Head (I
suppose he means Adam) but we have it restored by Intelligence, or Divine
Wisdom, (...), according to our old nature. Yea Plato (de Repub. 5. fol. 475.
affirms, that those only are true Philosophers, who are versed about the
contemplation of the highest Truth, (...). Thence he makes the mind to labor
under an infinite thirst after Truth, which is never satisfied till it arrive
to the contemplation (...), of very Being, or the supreme Truth: as in his
Phaedr. fol. 251. and in his Sympos. fol. 206, etc. Thus much for the
Definition of Philosophy, as it regards natural contemplative Sciences.

. 5. We find another Idea of Philosophy, as it relates to Morals, The Idea of
Moral Philosophy.
and active Sciences in the Platonic Definitions, fol. 414. thus (...),
Philosophy is a prudent, or studious consideration of the Soul according to
right reason: wherein we may consider. 1. The Genus. 2. The Subject. 3. The
Measure, or Rule.

1. The Genus in this Platonic Definition of Moral Philosophy, 1. Its Genus.
Moral Prudence.
is (...), which signifies a prudent Inspection, studious Consideration, or
sollicitous Care, commonly styled by Plato, (...), Prudence, or Moral Wisdom,
which we have thus copiously described in the Platonic Definitions: (...)^
Prudence is a faculty of it self effective of humane happiness. Wherein we
have, 1. The Specific reason, Prudence what?
whereby it is differenced from Contemplative Science, expressed by that notion
Effective. 2. Its Vltimate End, which is to make men happy. Again, Prudence is
defined in the same Platonic Definitions, (...), a Science of Good, and Evil.
Again, (...), a Disposition whereby we judge what is to be done, and what is not
to be done. In all which Definitions laid together, we have these Considerables.

1. The Vltimate End, and supreme object of moral Prudence, Its Objects.
or Philosophy, namely humane Happiness, which is the measure of all moral
Acts, and the first thing treated of in moral Philosophy, according to that of
Aquinas: The end of moral Virtues, is the chief principle of Prudence, as Luke
10.41.

2. We have here the intermediate Objects of moral Prudence, which are in
general all Agibles, or Practicables; that is, 1. Singulars. 2. Things present.
3. Things in our power. 4. Things good, or evil. 5. The subjects of good, and
evil; the Affections.

Its Offices.
3. Here is also considerable the proper Exercises, or Offices of Prudence,
which are according to Plato (in his Charm.) 1. (...), to do what belongs unto
us. 2. (...), to understand a man's self. 3. (...), to use all things well, i.
e. with respect to our supreme end. 4. Rightly to distinguish 'twixt good and
evil. 5. To conserve the rectitude of the will. 6. To moderate the Affections.
7. To govern the whole Life.

The parts of Prudence.
4. This moral Prudence may be considered in its Integrals, which are according
to the Platonic account three; (...). 1. (...), Providence, 1. (...),
Providence.
which in the Platonic Definitions, fol. 414. is thus described, (...).
Providence is a preparation (or provision) for somewhat future: which implies,
1. An universal Comprehension of all Circumstances, means, difficulties,
encouragements, which may make for, or against our End. 2. Serious consultation
about, and prudent determination of what is to be done. 3. Prudent precaution
of what may impede, etc. this is termed (...), caution, according to that of
the Stoics, (...), a wise man ought never to fear, but always to use caution,
etc. 2. Another part of moral Prudence, is (...), a dexterity, 2. (...),
Dexterity.
or sagacitie in judging things, which in the Platonic Definitions, fol. 413.
is thus defined, (...), facility of judgment is a connate ability of
reasoning, or discerning. And Plato, de Repub. 4. fol. 428. says, (...),
facility of judgment is certainly some kind of Science, etc. This
perspicacitie of finding out things, Plato makes to be an excellent kind of
Prudence, or a natural Invention, which directs the Reason to find out things
wrapped up in Nature: which he elsewhere calls a sagacitie of Nature: so in his
Epino. fol. 976. There remains (says Plato) a mavelous faculty, whereby we
easily, and expeditely learn any thing; and having learnt it, can faithfully
commend it to memory, and, as occasion serves, by an happy celeritie recall
it, which some call Wisdom, others good Nature; but others, (...), a sagacitie
of Nature. (...), Sagacitie.
This (...), or natural sagacitie, Plato makes to be the same with his (...),
good nature: So Plato, Defin fol 412. (...) (...), Sagacitie is a natural
generositie of mind, whereby a person is enabled happily to conjecture what
ought to be done: again it is styled (...), an acumen of Judgment. This Natural
Sagacitie, Plato Repub. 2. fol. 376. makes very essential to a Magistrate, in
order to his more exact judging of persons, and things, and final decision of
Controversies. Solomon we know was endowed with this Natural sagacitie, even to
admiration; which discovered it self in the decision of that arduous case
between the two Harlots, 1 Kings 3.23, 24, etc. as also in resolving the Queen
of Sheba's Questions, 2 Chronicles. 9 1. which kind of sagacitie Politicians call
King-Craft. This Natural sagacitie is elsewhere styled (...), a facility of
Judgment, which in the Platon. Definit. fol. 414. is defined (...), (...).
a good judgment apprehensive of what is most eligible. Again, this Natural
sagacitie passes sometimes under the notion of (...), which is defined (
Platon. Defin. fol. 412.) (...), an habit elective of what is best. One great
office of this Natural sagacitie, consists in the knowledge of Men their
several Humors, Inclinations, Designs, Interests, and Combinations, etc. 3.
Another part of Moral Prudence is Experience, which Plato calls (...), (...),
Experience, its use as to the production of Prudence.
and makes very essential to a true Philosopher. So Plato, Rep. 9. fol. 582.
(...), The experienced person, endowed with Prudence, is the only true
Philosopher: then he adds, (...). Thence (in the same Book, Rep. 9.) he joins
Prudence, and Experience together with reason, which he makes the best Judges
of humane Affairs, (...), We rightly judge by Experience joined with Prudence,
and Reason. And Plato in his Gorgias gives us the reason, why Experience is so
essential to Prudence, (...), Experience makes our life to pass away according
to rules of Art, whereas inexperience makes us live casually. Then again;
(...), There are many Arts experimentally found out among men, from several
Experiments, etc. And because Experimental Prudence is gained by sense, and
sensible observation: thence Plato Timaeus, fol. 103. defines it a subtlety
of sense, or good sensation of the Soul, (...), Experience is indeed the main
Seminary of humane Prudence. 1. In that it furnishes us with the choicest
Observations of past and present times, whereby we are capacitated to make some
prudent conjecture of what is likely to succeed. 2. Experience draws down
general Rules, and Precepts of Wisdom, to particular, and proper use. 3.
Experience gives men a more inward feeling, and lively apprehension of
themselves, and others. Thence Plato makes this self-knowledge the highest
piece of Prudence, which he calls (...), a good sensation. 4. Experience does
much greaten, and add to the quantity of our knowledge, by furnishing the
mind with fresh Observations; whence Plato brings in Solon speaking thus
((...)) (...), The longer I live, the more I know, and teach. 5. Experience
adds not only to the quantity, but also to the quality of our knowledge, by
rendering it more clear, and distinct. For experience reduces particular
Observations in themselves confused unto a regular Series, and Order, whence
general Rules are framed, which makes our knowledge more distinct, and certain.
6. Experience greatly fixes, and confirms our Notions of things.

2. The subject of Moral Prudence the Soul, and particularly the Conscience.
. 6. Having finished the Generick Notion, (...), which connotes Moral Prudence,
we now proceed to the subject thereof, expressed in the Platonic Definition by
(...), the Soul: for indeed Moral Prudence moves, and influenceth the whole
Soul, and therefore it is not unjustly seated therein; though the proper seat
thereof be the Practick Judgment, which Divines term Conscience, which is as
a Petty God, or God's Vicegerent, and Vicar in the Soul, to command, or
threaten; to accuse, or excuse; to justify, or condemn. This Vicarious Divine
office of Conscience, Plato seems to have had some Traditional Notices of,
whence he terms Conscience (...), Fame, and makes it to be a kind of Demon,
or Petty God in Men. So Plato, de Leg. 8. (...). This Law of Fame partakes of
a mavelous faculty, seeing no one durst to breath otherwise, than according
to the Dictates of her Law. Serranus here acquaints us, Plato's (...),
Conscience's Law.
that Plato calls (...), his Law of Fame, that Imperial power of Conscience
well known to all; which comprehends those common Principles, that God is to be
feared, etc. This Law of Conscience he says is unwritten, yet notwithstanding
there is in all Men's minds, (...), a Sacred Law, whose force, and efficacy
tames every Soul, and compels it by few to obey positive Laws. From the
authority of this Law it is, as the Philosopher teaches, that Men come to
understand the difference of good, and evil. Again Serranus adds, Our
Philosopher calls this Divine Law of Conscience, (...), the Law of Fame; and
says, that it is connate in all Men, it being a Science that teaches the
difference of good, and evil; and the conservator, and vindictor of all Laws;
and the (...), or Praecursor of that most excellent Chorus of Virtues: whose
admirable faculties, and actions, slow from no other Fountain, then the sparks
of this (...), etc. This Law, or Light of Conscience is twofold.

1. Habitual, which is called in the Schools (...), Synteresis.

2. Actual, which is termed (...), Syneidesis.

1. The Synteresis, or habitual Light of Conscience, 1. Synteresis, or habit of
principles
is defined in the Schools a natural habit of active Principles. For as
speculative Reason discourses of Speculatives, so Practick Reason of
Practicks: as therefore there are naturally implanted in us certain speculative
Principles, which appertain to Intelligence, so also are there certain active
Principles, which belong to that natural habit of Conscience, called (...),
Synteresis, as Aquinas, Part. 1. Q. 79. And this habitual Light, or Law of
Conscience, is the same with Plato's (...), a Law of fame, which is elsewhere
by him termed (...), Right reason, as anon. 2. The Actual Light, 2. The
Syneidesis, self reflection.
or Law of Conscience called by the Ancients (...), is Conscience strictly
taken. So So Aquinas part 1. Quaest.. 79. Art. 13. Conscience taken properly is
not a power, but an Act, whereby we apply our Science to what we undertake;
which application is followed by Testification, or Ligation, or Excusation, and
Accusation. By which it appears, that the proper office of this Syneidesis is
self reflection, whence follows accusation, or excusation, etc. as Romans 2.15.
And because this Reflexive Light of Conscience does necessarily suppose inward
sense, hence it is often called (...) sensation, also (...) synesis, or sensate
judgment: So Aquinas, Synesis, or sensate judgment imports a right judgment
about particular operables. So Plato in his Th^aet. makes all true Science to
be a kind of Sensation, (...); and more particularly (in his Timaeus fol. 103)
he calls (...) Prudence (...) a good sensation: which exactly answers to the
Scripture Phraseologie, which sets forth this reflexive act of Conscience by
(...), as Phil. 1.^. (...): and thence Heb. 5.14. we read of (...), etc. The
life of the new Creature, as well as of the old,, consists in these
self-reflective Acts of Conscience which spring from inward sense, and feeling.
And Plato in his Alcibiad. fol. 133, 134. tells us That he, that reflects upon
himself, his own Soul, and Wisdom, thereby becomes as it were omniscient;
whereas they, who know not themselves, know not what is good, or evil for them,
nor yet what belongs to themselves, or to other men: such therefore can never
make good Politicians, or Oeconomicans, etc. In brief; Self-reflexions, or our
actions upon our selves, are of all the highest, and noblest, and those by
which we live, and work as men, and perfect that part of the Soul called
Conscience, which directs all we do according to Right Reason, etc. Thus much
for the Subject of Prudence.

The Rule of Prudence, (...) Right Reason.
. 7. As for the Measure, or rule of Moral Prudence, we find it expressed in the
forementioned Platonic definition under this notion [(...)] according to right
Reason. This Platonic (...) (which is asserted in like manner by the Stoics,
and others) right Reason is the same with the Light, or Law of Nature, which is
twofold. 1. Subjective. 2. Objective.

Right Reason is 1. Subjective.
1. As for Subjective Right reason, Light, or Law of Nature, it is no other,
than those common Principles of Morality seated in that part of Conscience,
which they call Synteresis, of which in the foregoing. 6. This seminary of
engrafted active notions, or moral Principles is styled by the Stoics (...)
the Common Law, also (...) right Reason, against which, say they, nothing is to
be done; As Diog. Laert. in Zeno. it is termed by Plato (...), the Law of Being:
so Plato Minos fol. 315. [(...)] where says Serranus, by this appellation
(...), Plato understands the Eternal law of Nature, which amidst the various
laws of Nations, and their vic^ssitudes continues uniforme, and the same; and
thence is truly termed (...) Being; therefore he calls it (...) the right
Reason of the Eternal Law: and because our actions are to be measured by the
Rule of these common notions, therefore Plato names this Law (...), the Royal
Law. So again, Serranus in Plato de Legib. 8. The (...) delineation of this
Eternal Law is this. There is in the minds of all, as soon as they are borne, a
certain (...) Sacred Law.

2. He, that consecrates this law in his mind as a certain sacred, is thereby
furnished with an excellent remedy aganst the insolence, and impotence of
human lusts, as it was said of the Tyrant (...) (...). These Active principles,
contained in this internal law of conscience, are generally styled (...) common
notions: (...).
they were named by Zeno (...), Comprehensions, because they comprehended the
first seeds, or principles of knowledge. Cicero tells us, that Epicurus called
them (...), Anticipations (as he translates the word) because they supposed a
Previous formation of things in the soul. The Stoics used the same term
likewise. Chrysippus defined this natural law, or conservatorie of common
principles, a natural Intelligence of those things, which universally are.
Cicero styles these common notions, Inchoate Intelligences, of which see Lud.
Vives in August. Civ. lib. 8. cap. 7. The Scripture also styles these Common
principles fixed in Conscience, a Law; so Romans 2.14, 15. where the Gentiles are
said to be a Law to themselves, etc. And indeed these common seeds of natural
light are a private Law, which God has deeply engraven on men's Consciences, and
is universally extensive unto all, though with a latitude of degrees; it being
in some more, in some less, but in all in great measure obliterated, and
defaced since the fall. It is also by Divines generally termed the Light, or
Law of Nature, because it slows in, and with, and from Human Nature, either
immediately, or mediately.

2. As for the Objective (...), 2. The Object. (...) Law of Nature.
Right Reason (which Plato seems to have had some traditional notices of) it
contains those broken traditions of the Moral Law, which were scattered up and
down amongst the Gentiles. That Plato had received some fragments of Gods Law;
and that by his (...), Right Reason, he does import the same, seems very
probable, both from that expression in his Minos fol. 315. (...), the Law of
Being, i. e. of the first Being, as he usually styles God: as also from that
other expression of his, Minos 317 (...) This Right Reason is the Royal Law, i.
e. Gods Divine Law, which is so styled Jam. 2 8. In this sense Right Reason may
be said (as the Schools will have it) to give (...) esse morale, or morality
to human Acts: so Stobaeus de Virtu Sera. fol. 9. (...): Virtue is a
conformity according to Right Reason, and Sin is a transgression against Right
Reason. Where by Right Reason we must understand not the subjective light, or
Law of Conscience, which is imperfect, but the objective light of Nature
comprised in the Moral Law. In this sense we must understand that Principle in
the Schools, that Right reason gives the esse morale to moral Beings. Thus much
for the Platonic Definition of Philosophy relating to Morals.

3. Plato's Divine Philosophy in the contemplation, affection, imitation, of
God.
. 8. But if we will have the Genius, and Spirit of Plato's Philosophy, it
seems evidently resolved into the Contemplation, Affection, and Imitation of
God: for says Plato to Philosophize, is to know, to love, to imitate God. This
affectionate active knowledge of God Plato calls (...) the Idea of the chiefest
Good, also (...), the supreme Science: and more particularly he styles it
(...), the genuine Philosophy, which he thus describes, Plato Repub. 7. fol.
521. (...), The traduction of the soul from a kind of twilight (or natural
darkness) to the true knowledge of the first Being (or God.) This genuine
Divine Philosophy Plato supposes to be affective, effective, and
transformative of the Soul into the image of God, which renders men (...)
Theophilos, or friends to God, and so it is opposed to the (...), Je^ne, empty
Speculations, as also to the (...) twilight Philosophy of the (...). This
Divine Philosophy Plato sometimes styles (...) Dialectick, because it does by
a Divine kind of Ratiocination, (...).
or Discourse reason men out of their dreaming ideas, or apprehensions into
clear discoveries of God: So in his Book de Repub. 7. fol. 521. Plato tells,
that those, who are bound in the chains of their native ignorance, contemplate
only the shadows of things, whereas his Dialectick is a Science, that leads men
from their night dreaming knowledge, to the contemplation of the First Being.
Again, Plato sometimes terms this his Divine Philosophy, (...) Intelligence.
(...).
So in his Book de Repub. 7. fol. 513. he makes (...) Intelligence, to be the
supreme Science, which is conversant (...), about the First Being, and (...)
namely from firm, and eternal principles, (...) having banished the Ministry
(...) of Idols, it quits not it is contemplation, until (...) it graspe by its
Intelligence the chiefest Good. Serranus on this place observes, that Plato
makes (...) Intelligence (...) the most perfect, and supreme Science, which is
conversant (...), about Being it self, and all other Arts, even (...) Science
it self, are but (...) subservient thereto. Hence Definit. Platon. fol. 513.
(...) Intelligence is the Principle of Science. Again, sometimes Plato makes his
Divine Philosophy the same with (...) Prudence; so Plato Repub. 7. (...).
(...). This Art of Prudence has of all the most Divine nature, which never
loses it is efficacy. But the most proper notion, whereby Plato expresses his
Divine Philophie, is (...) Wisdom, which in the general is thus defined. (...).
Defin. Plato (...), Wisdom is an indemonstrable Science: again, (...), a
Science of things always the same, and Lastly it is desined (...), a Theoretick
Science of the causes of Beings, i. e. of God. And Plato treating of the One
Infinite Being, tells us, (...), etc. He that once has tasted of this one
Infinite Being, having got a Treasury of Sapience, is filled with joy. Hence
also de Rep. 5. fol. 475. Plato defines a Philosopher (...), one that thirsts
after Sapience, i. e. adds he, not of any particular, but of Universal
Sapience, which he makes chiefly to consist in the Contemplation of God, which
(says he Phileb. 16.) gives light, and evidence to all other Arts, and
Sciences. Again, (...).
Plato terms his Divine Philosophy (...), the knowledge of the First Being,
i. e. God, as he explains it, Thaeet. 176. (...), The knowledge of this first
Being God is Sapience, and Virtue, etc. And he gives this reason why true
Philosophy is most conversant about God, (...), as very Being, because (...),
that which always is, is always most knowable; and therefore adds he, they
who contemplate (...) Many Beauties, but not this first Beauty, or supreme
Being, they can be said only (...), to dream about all things, but to know
nothing; whereas a true Philosopher contemplates (...), the first Being, (...)
not by opinion only, as other Arts, (...) but essentially; that his Soul may be
converted to, yea transformed into (...) the Idea of chiefest good. This Divine
Wisdom, This Divine Philosophy is 1. The Supreme Science.
consisting in the contemplation of God, Plato calls, 1. (...), the supreme
Science. 2. Again, (...), the best of all Exstacies. 3. Farther he calls it
(...), that genuine law, which leads the Soul to true Felicity. 4. Again, 2.
Affective and sweet.
Plato Repub. 9. fol. 586 acquaints us, that this contemplation of God brings
(...), etc. the proper, best, and truest pleasures. 5. Lastly he affirms, that
this Divine Philosophy makes men not only (...) Theophilos, lovers of God, but
also one, and the same Idea with God so Rep. 6. (...) The Philosopher
contemplating on this Divine Beauty, becomes, so far as man is capable,
Divine, and Beautiful. And then he adds, (...), he becomes an imitator of, and
alike to those things Divine. whence Ammonius in Arist. Categ. page 7. (...)
The matter of Philosophy is things, but the end is assimilation to God.

Plato's Characters of a true Philosopher.
. 9. Having given some general account of Platonic Philosophy, in regard of
its Natural, Moral, and Divine Idea's; we now proceed to Plato's Character of a
True Philosopher, his Qualities, and Offices.

1. Philosopher. must be (...).
1. Plato requires, that a Philosopher have (...), a good natural ingenie, which
in the Platonic Definitions is thus defined (...), Good nature is a quickness
in learning: again, (...) a natural virtue, which is also styled (...), a
facility in learning, which is defined thus (...). So Plato Rep. 6. fol. 486.
tells us, that a Philosopher must not be (...), un^ but prompt to learn. This
good natural ingenie, or promptitude of nature to learn, Plato makes to consist
in a natural acumen, or sagacitie of judgment, and a good memory. So Plato
Epino. fol. 976. There remains an admirable faculty, which some call (...)
nature, others (...) Sapience, which consists in this, that a man learns with
facility and expedition, faithfully committing to memory what he has learned,
and as occasion serves recalling it again with an happy promptitude; all which
some call wisdom, some nature, others (...) Sagacitie of nature. This (...),
sagacitie is defined, defin Plat. (...), a good nature of Soul, etc. also
(...), an acumen of judgment. And touching the pregnancie of memory requisite
to a Philosopher, Plato tells us, Repub. 6. fol. 547. (...).

2. Plato requires in a Philosopher good Institution. So de Repub. 6. reckoning
up the causes whence Philosophy comes to be corrupted, 2. Well instituted.
he mentions this as the maine, viz. evil Institution of youth For (says he)
by how much the more generous their naturals are, by so much the worse
Philosophers are they, if ill instituted, (...), may we not therefore say that
the best natured Souls by reason of ill institution become most wicked?

3. Plato will have his Philosopher to be (...) Philalethes, 3. A lover of
Truth.
a lover of truth. So Rep. 6. fol. 485. This (says he) is the nature of
Philosophers, that they hate falsehood, but love Truth (...). And it being
natural to him that loves, to love all that is (...) akin, and proper to what
he loves; and because nothing is more proper to wisdom than Truth, it is
therefore impossible, that the same should be (...), a Philosopher and yet a
lover of falsehood. (...). He therefore, who will be a true Philosopher, ought
even from his youth greatly to thirst after all truth. And Plato in what
precedes Rep. 6. fol. 484. limits this love of Truth to such Truths as are
invariable, (...). True Philosophers are conversant about things always the
same. i. e. about first truths. whence Plato makes his (...) Philalethia to
consist not in any lower Acts, or Contemplations, but (...). in Contemplating
very Being, and the first Beauty. Thence, says he, they who contemplate
beautiful Pictures, and shadows of truth, but delight not in Beauty, and Truth
it self, such are (...) lovers of opinion, (...) lovers of pleasure, and (...)
Pseudophilosophers, not true Philosophers.

4. Plato requires in a Philosopher, that he devote himself to the study of
Philosophy, so Rep. 6. fol. 485. 4. Wholly devoted to Philosophy.
(...). He that wholly gives up himself to discipline, and is conversant about
the pure pleasures of the soul, being abstracted from corporeal pleasures, he
is truly a Philosopher, etc.

5. Another Character of a Philosopher is, that he be not covetous, etc. so
Plato Rep. 6. fol. 485. 5. Not Covetous.
(...), for adds he, when the affections are vehemently carried to one thing,
they are more infirm in other.

6. Plato will have his Philosopher to be of a Noble, not Sordid, Servile
disposition: so Rep. 6. fol. 486. 6. Nobly di^posed.
(...), Servilitie, and Sordidness is contrary to the Soul, that would
contemplate, etc.

7. Courageous.
7. Plato requires in a Philosopher Courage; that he be not timorous, or fearful
of Death, etc. so de Rep. 6. fol. 486. (...). Therefore this Philosopher must
not count death terrible; for a timorous, and servile nature never, as it
seems, partakes of true Philosophy, whence Philosophy is made a Contemplation
of Death.

8. Not Morose.
8. Plato in the same place requires that a Philosopher be not morose
unsociable, unjust, etc. (...), etc.

9. Of an Harmonious Nature.
9. Plato will have his Philosopher to be a good Musician, of a Musical,
Harmonious nature, thereby to allure men to the contemplation of the first
Being, etc. so Rep. 6. fol. 486. (...). He must not be of an Immusical,
in^e^ent nature, and he gives the reason because (...), Truth is akin to
^mmetrie; whence he concludes, (...). We seek for one, that is harmonious, and
compleasant to win others to the contemplation of the first being. This he
explaines more fully in his Timeus, fol. 104. where he makes Philosophy to be
the Music, and Harmony of the soul, appointed by God for its emendation,
which sweetly compels the irrational part to obey the rational, so that the
affection; neither move, nor stand still, but according to the dictates of
reason, whence follows a Divine Chorus of Philosophy, and Virtues. Hence
(...), the soul's traction, etc.

10. Virtuous.
10. Lastly, Plato makes this an essential Character of a Philosopher, that he
be Virtuous: so de Repub. 6. fol. 489, etc. Plato examining the ground, why
Philosophy proved so useless, and even ^nxious, resolves all into some
defect, not of Philosophy, but of the Philosopher. Wherefore fol. 490. Plato
requires, that a Philosopher be pious, and good: (...), Truth must first lead
the way, which the Philosopher must follow step by step, till he arrive to
goodness: for he that is vain, and futile can never be partaker of true
Philosophy. Whence he adds; that every one, who is (...) a true Philosopher,
must affectionately aspire to the knowledge of the first Being; neither must he
acquiesce in mere opinions, but with a courageous mind pursue truth it self;
neither must he desist from such a famous enterprise, until he has arrived to
the same, etc. Whence he concludes: (...). Truth leading the way, we cannot
conceive, that the Chorus of evils will follow, but wholesome regular manners,
etc. And fol. 492. he makes Virtue requisite to true Philosophy (...) ( sc.
(...)) (...). Whence he concludes, fol. 494. that there are very few, who are
conversant in Philosophy, as they ought.

CHAP. VIII. Of Plato's Logic, and it is derivation from the Jews.
Plato's form of Logic consisting in Dialogues: their use in the Eleatick
Schole, but their original use amongst the Jews. Scripture Logic in
Dialogizing, as in Job, the Prophets, Mark 8.11. Luke 22.68. Romans 11.1. Luke
11.53, 54. Logic an Organ, or key to all Sciences. Plato's Logic precepts. 1.
A Logicia^ must be grave, and moderate, not contentious. Contentious Disputes
the cause of Scepticisme. 2. The Matter of Disputes must be weighty. 3. To lay
down good principles. 4. To proceed Methodically from particulars to generals,
etc. 5. To illustrate by examples. 6. To distinguish duly 'twixt Truth, and
falsehood. 7. To State will the affirmative. 8. Not to expect more exactness,
than matters will bear. 9. To keep the Judgment free. 10. To make Reason, not
Authority the measure of Truth. 11. Modesty, and Candor in Disputes. 12. In
refuting Errors to reduce to absurdity. 13. To show the rise of Error.
Alcinous of Plato's Logic.

. 1. Plato's mode, or Form of Logic consisting in Dialogues.
Philosophy may be considered in it is Essential constitutive particulars; or
else in its introductorie universal Organ^ The Introductorie universal organ,
or key to all Philosophy is Logic; which Plato makes much use of in all his
Philosophizings, though not according to the mode, as now it is in use in our
Schools. For Plato imitating his master Socrates; and those of the Eleatick
Schole, Parmenides, and Zeno (who are supposed to be the first Inventors of
Logic) affect a natural, plain, and familiar mode of Disputing by Dialogues,
or Interrogations, and Responsions, much like the Scriptural, and Jewish way of
Disputation. That the Mode, or Form of Disputing in Plato's Academie, was not
by way of Syllogism (which Aristotle brought in) but by Interrogations, and
Answers, is apparent to any versed in Plato's Philosophy, which is wrapped up in
Dialogues beginning with (...), or such like Interrogations. This is farther
evident from the Origination of the name (...) (which Plato uses for the most
part, if not altogether, to express Logic by) Dialectick, which is apparently
derived from (...), the primarie notation whereof is to Confer, or Dispute by
Dialogues, or Colloquies. Thus Alexander (...), Dialectick makes discourses
consisting of Interrogations, and Responses: for from these it wholly derived
it is name. So Laertius l. 3. says, That a Dialogue is an Oration composed of
Interrogation, and Responsion, concerning matters relating to Philosophy, or
Republic Affairs.

The original of this Dialogizing mode, from the Eleatick Schole of Zeno.
As for the Original of this Dialogizing Mode, it is not certainly determined
whence Plato had it. Some say he himself was the Author of it; others derive it
from Zeno the Eleatick, others from others. So Lud. Vives on August. Civit. Dei
lib. 8. cap. 7. There are some, who refer this kind of Dialectick oration to
Plato, as the Inventor thereof; as Favorinus: others to Alexamenus Teius, as
Aristotle: there are not wanting some, who refer it to Zeno the Eleatick. Truly
it is evident, that Plato polished, and adorned this mode of Dialogizing (or
arguing by Dialogues) which he fills with all kind of neatnesses, and learning,
wherein if the artificial formules of Dialectick (or Logic) are not delivered,
yet all the precepts of this Art are really expressed, as also the method, how
to use them. Plato gives us Demonstration in his Timaeus: the specimens of
Sophistry are delivered in his Eutydemus; whence Aristotle translated not a
few of his Sophistick Elenches, or Fallacies: Plato's Socratick Induction is of
all most potent, etc. Thus Lud. Vives: wherein he gives us a good account of
Plato's Logic, and its original; which as it seems most probable, was by him,
or by his Master Socrates derived immediately from the Eleatick Schole, from
Parmenides, and Zeno: for the same Lud. Vives (in August. Civit. Dei lib. 8.
cap. 4.) tells us, that Plato diligently examined the Inventions of Parmenides,
and Zeno the Eleaticks. And Aristotle in Sophista, as also Laertius in Zeno
acquaints us, that Logic was first found out by Zeno the Eleatick. So Vossius
de Histor. Graec. lib. 4. cap. 2. again, Vossius de Philosoph. Sect. lib. 2.
cap. 11.. 2, 3. And Hornius who succeeded him in his Professorship, agrees with
him in his Opinion hereabout: Plato primus Dialogos introduxit non quod ipse
primus invenerit, (ante eum enim Zeno scripsit) sed quod expoliverit. Hornius
Histor. Philos. l. 7. c. 8. Dialogues are said to have been first introduced by
Plato, not as if he had been the first Inventor of them (for Zeno writ in that
way before him) but because he very much polished, and perfected that way of
Arguing: to this purpose Hornius. But whence ever Plato derived this
Dialogizing mode of Logic, that it came originally from the Jewish Church, and
Sacred Scriptures, we shall endeavor to demonstrate both by Artificial, and
Inartificial arguments.

. 2. First, Suppose we grant, that Plato, Plato's Dialogizing Logic originally
from the Jews.
and Socrates received this form of Dialogizing Logic from Parmenides, or
Zeno the Eleatick; yet that these had their choicest notions from the Jews, we
have before, in our discourse of the Eleatick Philosophy, endeavored to prove:
and particularly that Zeno the Eleatick (who is supposed to be the Inventor of
Dialectick Logic) was originally of Tarsis, or as others of Sidon, and so a
Phenician, and borderer on the Jews, etc.

2. But to come to Plato's own confession: In his Thaeetetus, fol. 210. Plato
brings in Socrates stiling this Art of disputing by Dialogues a playing the
Midwife: The true way of teaching (says he) is by apt Interrogations, and
Answers to bring forth the faetus, i. e. the sense of our minds into light:
which is in regard of Discipline a commodious (...), obstetrication, or doing
the office of a Midwife. This art of playing the Midwife, or Dialectick Logic,
Socrates (in the same place confesses) that he received from God, his words
are, (...), This Midwife art I, and my Mother received from God. i. e. the true
God of Israel (of whom he seems to have had some notices) by some Jewish
Tradition, as we may presume.

The Scripture mode of disputing by Dialogues.
3. That this Platonic mode of Disputing by dialogues, or interrogations, and
answers, exactly answers to (and therefore as we may justly presume was derived
from) the Jewish mode of disputing, will be more than probable to such, as
shall consider such disputes as are mentioned in Scripture. We find in the book
of Job (one of the most ancient pieces of Scripture) several Disputes 'twixt
Job, and his Friends carried on in a Dialectick mode, by questions, and
answers. So in like manner, in the Prophets, God (condescending to the Jewish
manner of reasoning) frequently argues, and debates matters with his people in
a way of dialogue, or interrogation, etc. Yea this manner of disputing, or
debating matters, continued amongst the Jews 'till our Savior's time, as
appears by his Disputes with the Jewish Doctors, Scribes, and Pharisees, as
also their reasonings with him, which were for the most part, if not
altogether, managed by questions, and answers; not by Syllogismes. So Mark
8.11. The Pharisees are said to dispute with Chri^: where Grotius on (...)
observes, that the most ancient mode of Disputation was by Interrogations. Thus
in like manner on Luke 22.68. Grotius renders (...), [ if I shall propose any
arguments.] for adds he, the Hebrews, no less th^n the Grecians were wont to
dispute by Interrogations. So again, on Romans 11.1. He with whom Paul disputes
proposes a question, to which Paul a^swers, etc. as Grotius. So on Luke 11.53,
54. Grotius observes, that the wo^d (...) is taken from the Schools, and
signifies to pose by questions, etc. as before in Socrates's mode of
Philosophizing.

Lastly, That the Ancients generally, before Aristotle, disputed by
Interrogations is evident by what is observed by Aristotle in his Sophistick
Elenches, where he makes mention of a Fallacy amongst the Ancients called a
Fallacy of many Interrogations. By all which it manifestly appears, that the
mode of disputing amongst the An^ients, particularly in Plato's Schole, was by
Interrogations, and Responsions, conformable unto, and therefore, as we may
justly presume* in derivation from the Jews their mode of ^ialogizing. Thus was
Logic amongst the Ancients clothed in a more natural, familiar, simple dress,
suitable to things, without those cloudie Niceties, and dark crabbed Terms,
which serve only to breed needless, and endless contentions, as it has been
well observed by Jackson on the Scripture, fol. 57. as all the principal heads
of the Grecian invention were derived for the most part from the Hebrews;
although by successive artificial imitation, their variety grows greater, and
their resemblance of Divine Truth less, so likewise were Logical conceits
first clothed like Natures Children, etc. Thus much for the Form of Plato's
Logic, and it is cognation with that in use amongst the Jews.

. 3. We shall proceed to make a more particular distinct inquisition into
Plato's Logic, which he makes to be a key, Logic a Key, Organ, or Method for
the disquisition of Truth.
or induction to all Philosophy: so in Repub. lib. 7. fol. 518. Plato calls
his Dialectick (...), an introductorie Art. So again fol. 532. he calls it
(...), the way to other Sciences: and fol. 533. he styles it a method, wherein
by certain steps we at last ascend to the highest principles. Whence Plato
makes his Dialectick but a gradation to his Metaphysics, and therefore he often
confounds them, and mixeth them together in his Discourses. So in his
Pa^menides, and Sophista he mixeth (...), his Metaphysics, and Dialectick
discourses together, as it is well observed by Lud. Vives ^n August. Civit. lib.
8. cap. 4o. And herein Plato is follo^ed by his Scholar Aristotle, who calls
his Logic also (...), an Organ, or Instrument for the discovery of other
Sciences; only with this difference, whereas Aristotle seems to make Logic an
organ, but no part of Philosophy, Plato (...) it to be both. So Ammonius on
Aristotle's Categor. page 8 (...). Amongst the ancient Philosophers, some made
Logic to be a part of Philosophy as the whole Chorus of the Stoa: others made
it an Organ, as all those of the Paripatum: but Plato makes Logic both a part,
and organ of Philosophy, etc. The Ancients were wont to distribute their
Sciences into three parts, (...), the Dogme, or Principle, the Method, the
Praxis. The Method of all Sciences belongs to Logic, for so Aristotle, as well
as Plato defines Logic (...), a Method for the right disposing of every
Problem proposed: only Aristotle calls this Method (...) Syllogistick, whereas
Plato makes it to be Dialectick. So then we may according to Plato's mind,
define Logic, an organ, means, way, or method for the disquisition, and
finding out of the Truth. This fully agrees with the definition Plato gives of
a good Logician. Plat. Repub. 7 fol. 537. (...) Thou call a Logician him who
penetrates the essence of things. For a Logician is a very accurate Inquisitor,
or Inspector. This being the nature of Logic, and office of a Logician to make
a serious Inquisition into the nature of things, in order to the disquisition
of Truth, we shall endeavor to pick up such Methodical precepts, and Rules as
lie scattered here and there in Plato's Philosophy, and seem to comprize the
chief of his Logic, Plato's Logic Precepts for the disquisition of Truth. 1.
A Logician must be of ripe age, Grave, Moderate, not vain glorious, or
contentious.
or Method for the finding out of Truth.

. 4. First, as to the qualification of Logicians, and their regular procedure
in Logical studies, and debates. Plato requires, that a Logician be of a
mature, and ripe judgment, moderate, and calm as to his passions, modest,
candid, and ingenuous in all his disputes; not vain glorious, not contentious,
but grave, and moderate in the whole of his deportment. Thus Plato de Repub. 7.
( fol. 539. Edit. Stephan.) That the miserable issue of vain contention may be
avoided, be it provided that no one under 30 years of age shall taste of
Dialectick Ratiocination; and then not without great caution, and
circumspection. Thus Plato; who in what follows gives his reason of such his
Institute: Because young men, when engaged in Dialetick disputes do rather
aim at Victory, and vain glory, than the discovery of Truth; and thence
abusing this Art of Logic unto needless contradictions (...), using it
always for contradiction, they like young Puppies often overcome, and are often
overcome again, so long 'till at last they come to believe nothing at all. But
(adds Plato) your grave person of mature judgment (...) etc. would not
willingly be partaker of this madness, because in his disputing he seeks
rather Truth, than Victory, or Glory, which is the proper effect of Childish
Contentious Disputes. Again he adds (...), The Ancient Person is more moderate,
or regular, and so adorneth his Province with gravitie, candor, and moderation,
etc.

How far the old Academie was guilty of contentious Disputes, which gave rise
to the new Academick (...).
Albeit Plato is thus severe against Contentious wrangling Logic, yet it cannot
be denied, but that there were, at least after his death, many vexatious
questions, and contentious disputes in his Old Academie, which laid the
foundation of that (...), or suspension of judgment in the New Academie. For
we must remember there was allowed by Plato in his Academie, (...), a
peirastick, or probational mode of disputing: the Laws whereof allowed, that in
some dubious points it was free for any to dispute pro, or contra, for, or
against the position, and at last to leave it (...), undefin'd, See more of
this Academick (...) in what precedes of Plato's Academie.
or undetermined. And that which gave an occasion to this Sceptick mode of
disputing was this, that although Plato held some things certain, and
infallibly true, which ought to be certainly assented to, as the Existence of
God etc. yet he held also many other points, especially in Physics, to be very
dubious, and uncertain, wherein he presumed there might be a Liberty granted
of disputing pro, or contra, without prejudice to Truth: whence sprang many
contentious disputes, which at last determined in the New Academick (...)
suspension, or disbelief of every thing. So Serranus in his Preface to Plato:
It is no way to be doubted, but that the (...), and dubitations of the New
Academicks were the (...), and corruptions of the old opinion: for Plato in
some Arguments disputes both ways, etc. And indeed nothing is more natural
than that from disputes, and contentions pro, and contra, if not well managed,
Assent to Truth should be much weakened. This contentious kind of Logic made
the Stoics, and Cynicks ('twixt whom there was a great (...), or
symbolization) reject rational, and natural Philosophy, because it was man's
(...), and chief end, (...) to live virtuously, as Diog. Laertius.

. 5. Secondly, Another Logic Precept laid down by Plato, is this; That the
matter of Logical discussions be weighty, and useful, 2. R. The matter of
Logic debates must be momentous and useful.
not frivolous, or unnecessarie: So in his Phaedrus fol. 277. Plato compares a
Logician to a skilful Seedsman, who sows such Dialectick artificial notions,
and discourses, as will bring forth the best fruit for use and advantage. This
is the more diligently to be heeded, because in Dialectick Debates nothing is
more easy to be found, than an occasion of disputing about Chimera's, etc.
This Rule follows on the foregoing, and therefore needs not farther
illustration.

3. A Third Rule given by Plato, 3. Rule for the laying good foundation
Principles.
in order to a Logical disquisition of Truth is that we be sure to lay down
sound, and substantial Principles, as the foundation of all following
discourse, and conclusions. Thus Plato in his Philebus, being about to dispute,
he will have them first lay down by common consent some few foundation
Principles: His own words are fol. 20. these, (...), Let us lay down a few
confessed principles before us: and then adds the reason (...), Principles
fairly granted are immovable. So again Plato in Cratylus fol. 436. (...), every
man ought about the first Principle of any undertaking to discourse much, and
to consider much whether it be rightly laid or not. This is of great moment,
because according to that measure of strength, or weakness which is in the
Principles, such will be the strength, or weakness of the Conclusions. Whence
that old maxim quoted by Aristotle, The Principle is half the whole. i. e. Lay
a good Principle, and your work is half done. The first Principle gives light
to all following Principles, but receives none from them.

4. R. A methodical procedure from particulars to generals, from part to the
whole.
4. Rule for Dialectick discourse is this, That there be a methodick procedure
from certain plain Hypotheses, or evident concessions, to those things, which
are more general, obscure, and of an higher contemplation. Thus Plato Repub. 7.
fol. 533. (...), where Plato makes Logic to be nothing else than a Method,
whereby we proceed from some certain, and plain Hypotheses, by certain medium's
or assents, to the highest, and first Principle, or Truth. This Method which
Plato commends, whereby we proceed from the particular to the general, from the
effect, to the cause, and from the end to the beginning, is usually styled in
the Schools Analytick method, whereof (as it is said) Plato was the first
Inventor. Certainly such a procedure from effects to their causes, and from
particulars to generals must be of great use for the discovery of Truth. For
there is nothing can be rightly known, 'till the first causes, whence it
sprang, be made manifest. Particulars receive strength and certainty from
generals, out of which they grow, and generals receive light, and evidence from
particulars. In all parts of knowledge things most general are most firm, on
which the certainty of particulars depends. See les conferences par beaux
Esprits. Tom. 1. Conf. 1. This also is commended by Ammonius in Arist. Categ.
page 13. (...), He that will exactly understand the nature of the whole, must
exactly consider its parts.

5. R. The use of Examples.
5. Rule. Plato prescribes the use of Examples, and clear illustrations, as
necessary in Logic discourse for the evidencing of Truth. So in his Politicus
fol. 277. It is very hard (says he) to demonstrate any thing, that is great,
or transcendent without Examples: for every ones knowledge seems to be but
dreaming: we are indeed ignorant of every thing. And Serranus on this place
Comments thus, Plato wills, that in our inquisitions into the natures of things
more obscure, we place before our understanding (...), or (...), the exemplars,
and adumbrations of things more known, thereby to make our investigation more
facile, and speedy. Therefore in searching into the natures of great things we
are to make use of the examples of the least things. Neither was this Plato's
advice only, but his practice also. For none of the Ancients (yea may not we
say of the Moderns also?) may be compared with him as to the use of proper, and
accurate examples, and instances for the illustration of Truth. Whence that
Proverbial speech, Plato teaches, Aristotle proves:

. 6. Rule for Logical disquisitions is this; 6. R. To distinguish rightly
'twixt Truth, and Falsehood.
'To distinguish well betwixt Truth, and Falsehood. So Plato in his Gorgias,
fol. 507 tells us, that we must be exceeding exact in severing Truth from
Falsehood; for the better performing whereof, he acquaints us ( Repub. 7. fol.
537.) that a Logician must be (...) an accurate Inquisitor: and elsewhere he
lays down this as requisite for one, that would exactly difference Truth from
Falsehood, that he have Sagacitie, good Disposition, and liberty of Judgment.
Calvin tells us, this is the best method for avoiding Error, to consider well
the danger imminent on both sides. And Beza in the life of Calvin gives him
this Character: That amongst other excellent graces these Two shined most
brightly in him; viz. 1. A singular vivacitie to discover where the difficulty
of matters lay: and 2. A mavelous dexterity to couch his responses without
losing one word.

7. Rule, In order to the right distinguishing 'twixt Truth and Falsehood, it is
necessary to state the affirmative well in some Theses, 7. R. To state well
the Affirmative, and Truth.
or Suppositions. So Plato tells us, it is but one and the same labor (...), to
establish the Truth, and revince the Error: So again, in his Sophist. Plato
acquaints us, that he who will understand (...), the Negative, must well
understand (...), the Affirmative. And the reason is evident: Because no
Negative has in it self the cause of it is Truth, but it is so by the Truth of
the Affirmative; neither was there ever any proposition false, but because some
other was true: nor can the falsitie of the one be known, but by the Truth of
the other.

8. Rule. In the Definition, or Description of things we may not expect more
certainty, or exactnes than the matter affords, 8. R. We may not expect more
exactnes than the matter will afford
or requires. So Plato (in Critias, fol. 107.) When Painters (says he)
endeavor to Limne forth to us Divine things, we find our selves abundantly
satisfied, if they express but some small image of those things. So Arist.
Ethick. lib. 1. cap. 3. (...), It is the office of a learner to seek after so
much exactnes in every kind, as the nature of the thing admits. For (adds he)
you must not put an Orator to demonstrate by Logic, or a Mathematician to
persuade by Oratorie, etc. in Divinis, and maximis minimum investigare maximum
est, In great, and Divine matters to find out the least apex of Truth is of
greatest moment: as Plato. It is a Ridiculous superstition (says Cunaeus) to
be always sollicitous about definitions: for some things will not admit them.

9. R. Liberty of judgment.
9. Rule. In the examination of things there must be used Liberty of judgment,
without partiality or prejudice: So Plato de Repub. 6. fol. 494, Truth is
acquired by none (...), but such as, give themselves up as slaves to be
possessed thereby. Hence that great saying; it becomes a searcher after Truth
(...), to sacrifice to Truth, not to be enslaved to an opinion. Whence
Aristotle gives this good Character of a true Philosopher, That he must yield
himself up a captive to Truth, (...), to the extirpation of his own Phenomenon.
Liberty (says Cunaeus) is an inestimable treasure, which some make to be the
Soul of a true ^udgment. Indifferency of judgment (says Mede) without
prejudice is sufficient to discover much Truth with little diligence, and
without much Learning. but the misery is, the world loves to be deceived,
rather than to be taught; adds another: and yet another, Cujus animo semel
sedet pervicax opinio, definit res vere discernere, he, whose mind is
prepossest with a pertinacious Opinion, cease to be in a Capacity for
discerning of Truth.

10. R. Reason more to be valued than Authority.
10. Whence it follows, that the Authority of Persons is not so much to be
valued, as the weight of their Reasons: So Plato Phaed. 91. brings in Socrates
advising his friends Simia, and Cebes, not to give credit to him with the loss
of Truth. But do ye (says Socrates) give credit to me only thus far, as to be
sure ye make very much account of Truth, Non inventionum acumen, sed reru^
ponde^a am^mus.
but very little of Socrates. Again, Plato tells us, that a man is soon deceived
by Authority of others: there is but one good Authority, and that is of
Reason.

11. Disputes must be managed with Modesty, Candor, 11. R. Modesty, Candor,
and Moderation to be used in Disputes.
and Moderation. So Plato Protag. fol. 337. They must debate things with an
amicable familiarity: the opinions, and reasons of Adversaries must be related
bona fide: neither (...), must they rail, etc. There must be modesty used,
which Plato defines thus, (...), a voluntary yielding to what is best.

12. For refuting Errors Plato gives this Rule ( Hippias, fol. 362. 12. R. Of
the manner of confuting Errors, See Hoonrb. Sum. Controv. p. 30, 31.54.56.13. R.
) This is a commodious way of refelling Sophisters, to reduce them to absurd
Consequences, whence the falsitie of their Antecedents will appear.

13. To which add this. In confuting Errors, we must show (...), the first
rise, and spring of the Error.

. 7. If any one expects, or desires a more artificial account of Plato's
Dialectick, the best, that I have met with, Plato's Dialectick according to
Alcinous, cap. 5.
is that of Alcinous (a great Platonic Philosopher) in his Institution to
Plato's Doctrine, where having ( cap. 3.) distributed Philosophy (according to
Plato's mind) into Contemplative, Active, and Rational; and ( cap. 4.)
explicated the foundation of Dialectick which has it is seat in Nature, he
proceeds ( cap. 5.) to discourse of the proper Elements of Dialectick, which he
reduces to these 5. heads; Definition, Division, Analysis, or Method,
Induction, The Elements of Dialectick 5
or Dijudication, and Ratiocination. In the Elements of Dialectick (says
Alcinous) this was principally Plato's sentiment; that Firstly the nature of
every thing should be considered, and then it is Accidents. What the Nature of
every thing is, he searches out either from Superiors, by Division, and
Definition: or from Inferiors, by Analysis, or resolution. As for Accidents,
which inhere in Essences, he seeks them out, either from the Contents by
Induction, or from the Continents by Ratiocination. So that Dialectick Reasons
are deservedly comprehended under Division, Definition, Analysis, Dijudication,
and Raciocination. Division it is either the Distribution of the Genus into
it is Species, Division.
or the Section of the whole into it is parts, or the partition of the word into
it is significates. Again, Division is either of the Accidents into their
Subjects, or of the Subjects into their Accidents. The Division of Genus into
it is Species is useful for the finding out the Nature of every thing, which
belongs to Definition. Definition.
Now Definition springs from Division thus. The Genus of the thing to be
Defined must be taken, as Animal of Homo. Hence this Genus must be divided by
it is next difference, 'till we descend to the Species. And then by adding the
next difference to the Genus, the Definition of the Species is constituted, as
Homo est Animal Rationale. Analysis has Three Species: Analysis.
the one whereby we ascend from Sensibles to first Intelligibles: another
whereby we proceed from Demonstrates, and Sub-demonstrates to first
Propositions, which want a Medium: the Third whereby we pass from a
Supposition to those Principles, which are taken for granted, without a
Supposition. The First kind of Analysis is thus exemplified: as when we pass
from the beauty of the Body to that of the Mind: from this, to that which
appears in men's Morals, or conversations; and from this to that, which shines
in Politic constitutions, and Administrations: from which at last we arrive to
that immense Ocean of the first Beauty. See the other Two Species of Analysis
in Alcinous.

Induction of judgment.
. 8. Thence Alcinous proceeds to Induction which (says he) is a rational
procedure from Like to Like, or from Singulars to Vniversals. This is most
advantageous to excite Notions implanted by Nature herself. Proposition
Affirmative, or Negative, Universal, or Particular.
As for that piece of Oration which we call Proposition, it has Two Species:
the one is Affirmation, the other is Negation. In Affirmations, and Negations
some are Universal, as All evil is base, etc. some are Particular, as Some
pleasure is not good. Of Propositions some are Categorical, some Hypothetical,
or conditionate. The Art of Ratiocination is used by Plato in Arguing,
Ratiocination.
and Demonstrating. He Argues, and Confutes what is false by Interrogations:
but he Demonstrates by teaching what is true. Ratiocination is an Oration in
which some Propositions being laid down a conclusion by force of those
Propositions is drawn. Of Ratiocinations some are Categorical, some are
Hypothetical, some Mixed, which have a complexion of both. Plato uses
Demonstrative Ratiocinations in those Dialogues, wherein he explicates his own
opinion: but against Sophisters, and young men he makes use of probable
arguments: and against those, who were properly contentious, he uses Eristick
argumentation; as against Euthydemus, and Hippias. As for Categorical
Ratiocination (which has Three Figures) Plato Interrogates in each Figure. As
in the First Figure thus, Ratiocination Categorick.
(in Alcibiades) Just things are they not beautiful? and beautiful things, are
they not good? therefore are not just things good? So in the ^econd, and Third
Figure Plato Interrogates in his Parmenides, etc. Touching Hypothetical
Ratiocinations, Hypothetick.
we find many delivered by Plato, though by Interrogations, especially, in his
Parmenides. He also gives some hints of Mixed Ratiocination -- If we look for
some account of Sophismes, Mixed.
and Fallacies, we shall find it in Plato's Euthydemus. Also he has given us
some adumbration of the Ten Categories in his Parmenides, Categories.
as in like manner in his Dialogues. He has comprehended the universal Form of
Notation in his Cratylus. Notation.
And truly this man was admirably perfect in defi^ing, and dividing: which
declares that he had the chiefest force, or spirit of Dialectick. In his
Cratylus he queries, whether names signify from Nature, or from Institution?
And he determines, that what is right in names comes from Institution, yet not
casually, but so as such Institution must be consentaneous to the nature of the
thing it self. For the rectitude of names is nothing else but an Institution
convenient to the Nature of the things. This also belongs to Logic to use
names aright: Thus Alcinous. Albeit we may allow this learned Platonist, that
some vestigia of these several parts of Dialectick are to be found in Plato's
writings, yet it is most certain, that Plato never intended to deliver over to
posterity any such artificial mode, or form of Logic. All that he designs
is, to give us some general Canons for a more methodical Inquisition into the
nature of things, and for regular Disputation, or Ratiocination. The first,
that gave us an artificial Systeme of Logic separate from the Praexis, was
Aristotle (as hereafter) Plato affected a more natural, familiar, and simple
method of Ratiocination (as before) yea so far is he from delivering any exact
artificial form of Logic, as that he confounds his Dialectick with
Metaphysics, and other contemplations (as else where) Yet as to the Praxis of
Dialectick, Plato abounds with accurate Definitions, and Divisions: also he
gives an excellent Idea of Analytick method, whereof he is said to be the first
Inventor. And as to Dijudication, and Argumentation, he seems very potent in
the use of the Socratick Induction. And all this with much harmony,
simplicity, and plainness, without that Artifice which Aristotle introduced.
Amongst our Modern Writers, no one seems to have made a better emprovement of
Plato's Dialectick Precepts, and Praxis, than Peter Ramus, who (notwithstanding
the contumelies cast upon him by his bloody Adversary Carpenter) seems to
have had a thorough insight into Plato's mind, and to have reduced his
principles to the best method for the Disquisition of Truth. The Abstract of
his Logic we intend to give, when we come to Treat of Aristotle's Logic.

CHAP. IX. Of Plato's Physics, and their Traduction from Sacred Story.
Plato's Story of the Origin of the Universe, from Genesis 1.1. etc. Plato
asserted the Eternity of the world, only in regard to Divine Idea's. Plato
own's God as the first efficient, according to Genesis 1.1. Gods Ideal
efficiencie.. Plato's intelligible World. God's energetick efficiencie. Of
Plato's Universal Spirit, or Spirit of the Universe, from ^en. 1.2. [Spirit.]
It Is various regards. The body of the Universe, and its first matter, from
Genesis 1.2. The Parallel 'twixt Moses, and Plato's first matter in Six
particulars. Of the Four Elements which immediately constitute the Universe,
and their traduction from Moses. Genesis 1.1. with it is analysis. Plato's Form of
the Universe consists in Harmony, and Order. Plato's (...) of the Universe. 1.
Perfection, from Genesis 1.31. How Plato calls the Universe the Image of God, from
Genesis 1.27. 2. The Unity of the Universe. 3. Finitenes. 4. Figure, Round. 5.
Color. 6. Time. 7. Mobilitie. 8. Generations. 9. Duration, etc. 2. Of the
Parts of the Universe 1. Angels. 2. The Heavens their substance: Fire, or Air,
or Water. That the Sun, and Stars are fire, from Genesis 1.3. (...) signifies
Fire, as well as Light. Arguments proving the Sun to be Fire. Of Light, and
Darkness. 3. Of the inferior world, Wind, Air, Water. Genesis 1.9. Meteors, etc.
Of Active Physics, Plants, Animals, etc. Of man's Original, and Formation
according to the Image of God, Genesis 1.26.27. Of the humane Soul, it is Original,
Nature, ^apacitie, Jmmortalitie, Perfection, and Faculties; the Understanding,
etc. Medicinal Canons. 1. (...). 1. For conservation of health. 1. The causes
of diseases. 2. The exercises of Nature. 3. Rules for Diet. 2. (...), or
curative Medicine, with Plato's Canons, and Character of a Physician.

. 1. Plato's Physics, a story of the worlds Origin.
The first great piece of Philosophy in vogue amongst the Ancient Grecians,
especially such as were of the Ionick sect, was Physics, or Physiologie,
commonly called Natural Philosophy. For Thales and his Successors wholly
busied themselves in Natural Inquisitions, and Disputes. Though Socrates
perceiving the vanity of such Physiologick speculations, wholly addicts
himself to Morals; Plato affecting an universal perfection in Philosophy joins
both Contemplatives, and Actives together. And thence his Physics may be
distributed into Contemplative, and Active. Plato's Contemplative Physic, or
Physiologie is nothing else, but a Natural History, or Historical account of
Nature, i. e. the Universe, it is Origin, Principles, Constitution, Affections,
and parts; of all which he discourses most amply, and Philosophically in his
Timaeus (the chief seat of his Physiologick Philosophisings) and that in
imitation of, and by tradition from Moses's Historical Narration of the
Creation, as we no way doubt it will manifestly appear by these following
Demonstrations, as well artificial, as inartificial.

. 2. That Plato derived his Physiologick Philosophizings, That Plato had his
Story concerning the Origin of the Universe from Moses's History of the
Creation Genesis 1.
touching the Worlds Origin, etc. from Moses's History of the Creati^n seem
very probable by his own confession: for in Timaeus, fol. 29. being about to
treat of the Worlds Origin etc. he makes this Prologue, It is meet (says he)
that we remember that both I who discourse, and ye, who judge (...), That we
have human nature, so that having received some probable Fable, or Tradition
concerning these things, it becomes us not to enquire farther. Here Plato
acknowledges, that concerning the Origin of the Universe, all the Notices
they had were but some probable Fables, or Traditions; which without all
peradventure were derived to them, if not immediately, yet originally from the
Sacred History. This is farther confirmed by what we find in Johannes
Grammaticus, alias Philoponus, of the Worlds Creat. lib. 1. cap. 2. page 4. It
is no wonder (says he) that Moses, who was most ancient being about to draw
men to the knowledge of God, institutes a discourse touching the Creation of
the World, in this manner. (...), whereas Plato discoursing concerning the
production of the Universe by God, imitates him in this, as also in many other
things, etc. Thus Philoponus: who frequently inculcates the same, as hereafter.
Thus also Ludovicus Vives, de Ves rita^e fid. page 157. The Genesis, or
production of the world (says he) is so described by Moses, that thence the
greatest wits have both admired the profunditie thereof, and also embraced the
truth of the Narration. The Pythagoreans, and their follower Plato in his
Timaeus have imitated that Mosaic Description of the Worlds procreation,
sometimes almost in the same words. So in like manner that great French Divine
Mestrezat in his excellent Treatise de la virtue, de la foy on Heb. 11.3. [
Through faith we understand that the worlds were made] observes thus, Those
extravagancies of the Philosophers, even of the principal of them, Aristotle,
and the Stoics concerning an eternal first matter, give us sufficiently to
understand, that they, who have spoken more Orthodoxly of the Creation, as
Plato did, took what they knew thereof from those rays, which Divine
Revelation had scattered in the world, by the Children of Noah, or by Abraham,
and his posterity, amongst the Syrians, and Egyptians. Thus Mestrezat; where
he also gives us some artificial Dem^^stration of the (...), or manner how
Plato received these his traditions of the Worlds Origin from Sacred
Revelation; to which we may add those Notices Plato received hereof from the
Pythagoreans; especially Timaeus the Locrian, who writ of the Origin of the
Universe; from whom we need no way doubt, Plato received many of his
Philosophic traditions delivered in his Timaeus, as before chap. 3.. 3. Now
the Pythagoreans were generally (...)* affecters of Oriental, Jewish
traditions. The same may be said for such Physiologick traditions, as Plato
derived from Heraclitus, who was also (...), as before chap. 6.. 1. Yea it is
not without probability, that Plato might have a sight of Moses's own
History, and read the same by virtue of his skill in the Egyptian, or
Phenician tongue, or at least that he might understand the same by an
Enterpreter as before, chap. 3.. 4. That Plato's Physiologick discourses
touching the Universe, it is Principles, Affections, and Parts, were really
deductions from, and imitations of Moses's History of the Creation, will more
evidently appear from the following enumeration, and explication of
particulars, and the parallel 'twixt the one and the other resulting thence.

Plato follows Moses, Genesis 1.1 in asserting the Worlds beginning.
. 3. First that Plato followed Moses, Genesis 1.1. [ In the Beginning] in
asserting the beginning of the World, etc. is most evident to any that reads
his Timaeus, fol. 28. etc. where he, (according to the Socratick mode of
disputing by Interrogations) puts this question, whether the World had (...) a
beginning of Genesis, or creation, yea or no? To which he reply's that the
World (...) was made; and he gives the reason thereof, (...), for it is
Visible, tangible, and Corporeal. And he afterward says more Categorically,
that the World was made by God, etc. And that this was Plato's mind is evident
by Aristotle (who knew well his masters sense in this particular) his warm
disputes against him, for the Eternity of matter. I am not ignorant, that many
of the New Platonists, namely Plotinus, Porphyrie, Iamblichus, Apuleius,
Alcinous, and more particularly Taurus, and Proclus in their Commentaries on
Plato's Timaeus, did all endeavor to prove with Aristotle, an Eternity of
Matter, thereby to disprove the Christians History of the Creation. And being
urged with these, and such like express quotations out of Plato for the
Origin of the Universe; they reply, that when Plato discourses of the Worlds
(...) Genesis, or beginning, he meant it not of a Principle of Duration, but of
causalitie. So that the world though eternal, might be said to be from God by
Emanation, as light from the Sun. Thus they endeavor to reconcile Plato with
Aristotle, for the defense of the worlds Eternity, wherein they are learnedly
refuted by Johannes Grammaticus in his defense for the Christians against
Proclus; as also in his Book of the Worlds Creation. And whereas Vossius de
Philosoph. sect. c. 12.. 7. blames Plato for asserting, that the World was made
by God out of a coeternal matter, it seems evident, that Plato by his Eternal
Matter, or World understands only that eternal (...) Exemplar, Idea, or
Platform in the Divine Decrees, How Plato affirms the world to be eternal.
which he calls (...), the intelligible world, which he opposes to the (...),
sensible. So in his Timaeus, fol. 97. Plato tells us, that this Sensible
Universe was created according to the pattern of the Intelligible, as time
according to the exemplar of Eternity. By which it is evident that he calls the
world eternal only (...) according to some proportion, or relation to the
Divine exemplar, or Decrees, not absolutely, and simply, as hereafter. Yea it
seems evident by Aristotle's own confession, that all the Philosophers before
him held the world to have had a beginning; his words are, (...), they all say,
that it was made. Johannes Grammaticus of the Creation peremptorily asserts,
that all the Philosophers before Aristotle held the beginning, and framing of
all things to be from God. Mr. Bochart asserted the same in a Sermon at Caen,
March 2. 1664. That which made Aristotle oppose this generally received
tradition was his Philosophic humor of opposing every thing, that would not
lie level with his Reason.

God the first cause of all.
. 4. Hence Plato asserted God to be the first Effector, Composer, or Creator of
the Universe, according to Moses's description, Genesis 1, 1. God Created. So in
his Timaeus, fol. 28. (...). We say, that whatever is made, must necessarily
have some cause: but here lies the difficulty to find out, who this Creator,
and Father of the Universe is; and having found him out, to discover him to
vulgar capacities, is altogether impossible. So in his Sophista, fol. 215. he
says, that natural things could not spring up of themselves, but that they
were (...), The products of Gods efficiencie, whence he makes God to be (...),
the most Sovereign cause, and (...), the cause of causes. But to treat somewhat
more distinctly of this Divine Efficiencie; which according to Plato's mind may
be distributed into Ideal, or immanent, and executive, (...) ^^a^sient. As for

Gods Ideal Efficiencie.
1. Gods Ideal efficiencie, it is well known, that none treats more professedly,
and fully thereof then Plato. I shall not enter into a discourse of Platonic
Idea's in general, because they properly appertain to Metaphysics, and are
therefore more amply treated or by Plato in his Parmenides, which is the seat
of his Metaphysick Philosophizings. I shall at present discourse of these
Idea's, only as they relate unto Divine Efficiencie, exerting it self in the
worlds Creation, according to what I find of them in Plato's Timaeus, where he
discourses more particularly of these Idea's, as they are the great exemplar,
according to which God framed the Universe. So Plato in his Timaeus, fol. 49.
Having discoursed of the Universe, he distributes it thus: (...), There are two
sorts of Worlds; one that has the form of a Paradeigme, or Exemplar, which is
an intelligible subject, and always the same in Being. But the second, which
is the imitate of the exemplar had a Genesis, or beginning, and is visible:
where it is evident, Plato distinguishes the Intelligible world, which he calls
the exemplar subsisting in the Divine mind, Of Plato's Intelligible World.
from the sensible, which is but the imitate of the former. And it seems
evident that Plato by his (...) Intelligible World, which he here calls (...)
an Exemplar, as else where (...), the Ideal, self-living, alwaies-living world
(I say by these he) meant no other, than that Divine Idea, Image, or Exemplar
inherent in the Divine Essence, according to which the whole Universe was
delineated, and fashioned. For the more full understanding whereof, take these
propositions.

1. Plato supposes, that God, who is the most wise Agent, acted not rashly,
but as a skilful Artificer, had (...) some most beautiful End, or Design, which
was the measure, rule, or square in this great work of Creating the World.

2. Hence the infinite Wisdom of God, which the Schools call His Simple
Intelligence, having a full comprehension of all possible means, which might
any way conduce to the promotion of Divine Glory, the supreme end of this
undertaking, and the Divine Sovereign Will, or Pleasure Decreeing what it
judged most expedient in order hereto, seems to pass according to Plato's mind,
under the Form, or Notion of Divine Ideas, which he makes to be (...),
immaterial, Eternal, Immixed, and the original Prototype of the Universe.

3. These original Idea's which comprehend the Divine Wisdom, The Difference
'twixt Plato's Ideas, and Exemplar.
and Decrees, Plato makes to be productive of a Secondarie Idea (yet still
immanent in the Divine Essence) which he calls sometimes (...), an Exemplar,
sometimes (...), an Image. The original Idea he supposes to be (...), the
self-subsistent, indivisible, and eternal efficient of the Second Idea, or
Exemplar, which he makes to be the more immediate Delineation, or Image of the
whole work. For thus his words run, (...), making use of this Exemplar he
frames the Idea, and Power, i. e. the sensible World. So that it is evident he
distinguishes his original Idea from his Exemplar, making the forme^ to be
first more Noble, and Causative of the l^tter: this seems to be much the same
with that, which the Schools call Gods Science of Vision, whereby he
contemplates things Future, which is the result of his Decrees, and so
differing from his Simple Intelligence, whereby he contemplates things
Possible. I find all this excellently explicated to us by Learned Serranus in
his Comment on Plato's Timaeus, fol. 12. whence, says he, the first, and (...)
Sovereign cause of this whole work, which existed in the Divine mind, was his
supreme End. For the effecting this end, there was an Idea, i. e. an Eternal
Decree: This Idea delineated to it self (...), an Exemplar of the future work,
which was various according to the variety of the work. Or else we may, if we
please refer this Original Idea of Plato to Gods Simple Intelligence, and his
Exemplar to Gods Science of Vision, of which see Book 2. chap. 8.. 8. of
Pythagorick Idea's. This gives us a more full account what Plato meant by his
Intelligible, Ideal, and Eternal World, which he so styled analogically only
with relation to Divine Decrees. The foundation of these Divine Idea's Plato
seems to have taken from Moses, Genesis 1.31. And God saw every thing, that he had
made, and behold it was very good.] i. e. answerable to his own Divine
Exemplar, or Platform. Plato in his Timaeus, fol. 37. speaks almost in Moses's
words, thus. After the Father of the Universe had beheld his workmanship, the
framed image of the Eternal Gods, he recreated himself, and rejoiced therein.
That Plato herein imitated Moses, see Joannes Grammaticus of Creation, lib. 7.
cap. 11, 12. of which more hereafter. This gives to understand how unjustly
Aristotle, and his followers, have with so great heat contended against Plato's
Universal Idea's, as though they were but Brainsick figments, no where
existing, but in Plato's vain imagination: whereas it seems evident that Plato
by these Universal Idea's, understood no other (though more darkly) than what
our Divines generally understand by the Universal Idea's inherent in the mind
of God as the Exemplar of all things created. Thus much for Gods Ideal
Efficiencie.

Gods Energetick Efformative Efficiencie.
2. As for Gods Executive, or Productive Efficiencie; according to Plato's
Philosophizing, he is in general styled (...), the supreme Fabricator,
Perfecter, and Essentializer of things. The notions, by which Plato sets forth
this Divine Efficiencie, are these, (...), He adorned, ordered, figured,
constituted, framed all things, etc. And more particularly as to the mode, or
manner how God framed all things, we are told (...), every thing was
Essentialized by certain Prolifick, or Efformative words. This seems exactly to
answer to that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 33.6. By the word of the Lord were the
Heavens made, and all the Host of them by the breath of his Mouth: which the
Author to the Hebrews, chap. 11.3. more fully explains [ The worlds were framed
by the Word of God] i. e. Gods Fiat, or word was the Seminal prolifick
principle of all beings, as Genesis 1.3. So the Stoics reducing the whole of the
Universe to two principles (...) the efficient, and (...) the matter: as to the
former, they say (...), this being the Spermatick, or Seminal Word of the
Universe, which forms, and shapes it, as the Seed the Faetus. Which suits well
with the Scripture account hereof: or else we may reduce this (...) Spermatick
Word, which the Platonists, and Stoics speak so much of, to Christ, who is by
Solomon styled Wisdom, Prove. 8.27, 28. and by John 1.1. (...). The Essential
word, and made Coeffector with God the Father in the Creation of the Universe,
though the former seems more adequate to the Platonic mind.

. 5. We may reduce also to the foregoing Divine Efficiencie, Of Plato's Anima
Mundi or Universal Spirit.
that which Plato styles (...) the soul of the Universe, or the Universal
spirit, which is so much spoken of, but as little understood in the Schools.
For the full understanding whereof, we must remember that Plato, according to
his Allegorick humor, fancies the Universe to be (...) a living, and
intelligent creature, composed of body, and soul. As for the body of the
Universe, what he means thereby is evident, for he calls it (...) the visible,
Nunquam futurus est Platonicus, qui allegorice Platonem non putat
intelligendum: nisi forte Aristotelico more in Platonis verba, non in sensum
opertum, and profundiorem figna infer velit. Cael. Rhodig. l. 9. c. 12.
and tractable matter. All the difficulty lies in stating what he intends by
the soul of the World. For the understanding whereof we are to remember (which
is a general Clavis to Plato's Philosophy) that Plato affected an Allegorick
mode of Philosophizing; wherefore his sense is more to be attended, than his
words, as Caelius Rhodig. l. 9. c. 40. has well observed. And this discovers
the great injustice of Aristotle, and his Adherents in their Disputes against
Plato in that quarelling with, and triumphing over his words, they regard not
his sense, or mind wrapped up under those Symbolick, and Metaphorick Notions.
Thus here when Plato Philosophizeth of the soul of the Universe, or the
Universal spirit, that animates this Universe, no^ minding his hidden sense
they cavil against his Notion, as if he did indeed make the Universe a Monstre.
But to come to the right understanding of this Notion: We shall endeavor to
draw forth Plato's mind in these Propositions.

1. The original, and primarie notion, Plato's Universal Spirit exactly answers
to the Spirit's Efformative Virtue, Genesis 1.2. Moved, etc.
or mind of Plato's (...) Universal spirit, or soul of the Universe, seems to
be but a broken Tradition from Genesis 1.2. And the Spirit of God moved upon the
face of the Waters; and so an imperfect reference to the third person in the
Trinity, whom Moses makes to be the more immediate fomenter, and influencer of
all things. Hence the Platonists in their (...), Trinity, make (...) their
Universal spirit to be the third (...), or person. That Plato by his Spirit of
the Universe, or Universal spirit, meant the Spirit of God, or God, is evident
by his description thereof in his de Legib. lib. 10. fol. 896. (...), The Soul,
or Spirit of all things is most ancient, and the principle of motion, and of
all good: this Soul also is the cause of all things, honest, and evil, of all
things just, and unjust; and of all contraries. This is a full description of
the spirit's operation, and influx on all things both good and evil materially
considered. But Plato discourses more fully, and particularly concerning this
Universal Divine Spirit, his Prolifick Seminal Efformation of the Universe in
what precedes, fol. 395. (...). The Soul or Spirit perme^ting, and enhabiting
all things, etc. Plato here proves, that God is the Soul of the World, from the
Analogy, or Proportion he bears to the living Soul. For look as the Sensitive
Soul conveyed from the Pa^ent, together with, and in the Seed, does by its
Prolifick Efformative Virtue form, and shape the faetus, till it be perfected:
So God, whom he here styles the Universal soul permeating, and enhabiting all
things, is the (...), and (as before) (...), and (...), the first fashi^ner, or
the Efformative, and Spermatick principle of the Universe. Or look as the
humane spirit, though precedent to, and no way depending on the body, is
notwithstanding (...) (as Aristotle phraseth it) the perfection, or perfective
principle of the man; so Plato's Universal Spirit, or Spirit of the Universe,
though it be precedent to, and independent on the said Universe, yet is it
(...) the Efformative, and perfective principle thereof. This Plato's
indwelling soul of the Universe is the same with that (...), Plastic,
Efformative, Power, Spirit, or Principle, which our Chemists take to be the
Universal spirit, informing all things. And that all these Platonic ^otions of
this Soul, or Spirit of the Universe were but broken traditions derived
originally from Genesis 1.2. The Spirit of God moved, etc. will I think, be
evident to any, that shall consider, how parallel they are. For whereas it is
said Genesis 1.2. the Spirit moved; some will have the Hebrew (...) to imply such
a motion, or agitation as carries with it an Efformative fomentation, like to
that of a Broodie Hen, fomenting her Eggs; The Spirit of God as it were (to
speak with Reverence) set abrood upon the Waters, till it be Hat^hed, and
brought forth the Universe. To which Plato's Spermatick, Efformativs spirit of
the Universe exactly answers, as also to that Psalm. 33.6. By the breath of his
mouth^ Hebrew (...), by the Spirit of his Mouth. Neither is this only a Novel
Observation: for Ludovicus Vives, who was well veri^ in Plato, is fully of this
persuasion, as he lays it down in his Comment on August. Civit. lib. 10. cap.
23. If we will (says he) more exactly follow Plato, its easy to defend, that
the Soul of the world is that spirit which moved upon the Waters, Genesis 1.2.
which they seem to make imparting life, and essence to all things through the
mass of the Universe. Thus he; who gives us a good explication of Plato's
(...), etc.

2. Plato's Universal spirit refers to the spirit's preservation, and
Providence.
Plato's Soul of the Universe seems to refer sometimes to the Divine Spirit,
his Providential influence on, and concurse with all things. This indeed
follows upon, and differs not really from the foregoing notion of Plato's
Universal spirit. For look as the spirit of God was the first Fomenter, Framer,
and Perfectioner of the Universe, so does he still continue the supreme
Governor, Orderer, and Influencer of it, and of all its motions, etc. Parallel
hereto does Plato make his Universal spirit to be not only the first Composer,
but also the Disposer, and Orderer of the Universe, and all its Motions: so in
his de Legib. lib. 10. fol. 897. (...); It Is manifest, that we must confess,
the supreme soul provides for the whole world, and acts it, etc. This is
another reason, why Plato styles the Universe a living Creature, as he himself
acquaints us in his Timaeus, fol. 30. (...), we ought to say, that this world
is truly a Living, and Intelligent Creature, because it comes under the
Providence of God. Hence Plato styles this Universal Divine spirit, (...), for
that he does most wisely, and methodically dispose, and order all Providential
occurrences, and natural affairs. So in his Phileb. (...). All wise men agree
that (...) the Divine mind is King to us, both of Heaven and Earth. So again
Phaedo, fol. 97. (...): And we judge, if it be so, that the Divine Mind
adorning adorneth all things, and places every thing in the best form, and
station that may be, which is more briefly, yet fully, in the Platonic
Definitions thus, (...), The Divine Mind is that, which adornes, and is the
cause of all things: we have all this fully expressed by the Stoics according
to the relation of Laertius in Zeno, thus, (...); The world is enhabited by the
(...), Divine Mind, and Providence; the Mind dispensing, administrating, or
ordering every part thereof, as the Soul in you, which is a full Explication of
Plato's Universal spirit, and does exactly answer to the Scripture's relation
of the Spirit of God, his preservation of, and providence over all things, as
Psalm. 104.30. Thou sendest forth thy spirit, etc. So that we need no way doubt,
but that Plato traduced this second Notion of his Universal spirit from the
Sacred fountain.

3. Plato' Soul of the world taken for its Harmony, and Order.
3. Plato seems also sometimes under the Notion of his Universal spirit, or
Soul, to comprehend that Universal Symmetrie, Harmony, Order, Beauty, and
Form^ which appears in the Universe. So in his Timaeus, fol. 32. (...), etc.
The body of the Universe is framed by proportion, and friendship of the Four
Elements, etc. where he makes (...), analogy, or (...) symmetrie, the bond of
Union, Universal spirit, or form by which all the parts of the Universe, in
themselves opposite, and contrary, by a friendly kind of discord are
conjoined, and agree together. This piece of Plato's Universal Spirit is but
the result of the former. For the Spirit of God having at first framed, and
still ordering the Universe, and all its parts according to Eternal Wisdom,
Law, and Contrivement, hence flows the most exact Order, Beauty, and Harmony,
of all parts (though never so contrary) mutually conspiring, and moving
according to that Law of Nature impressed upon their beings, and the particular
conduct, or disposition of the Divine Providence to their appointed ends; so
that Plato here puts the Effect for the Cause, namely Order for the Divine
Spirit who is the great (...), Orderer, Collector, and Conjoyner of all these
parts in the Universe. But of this more, when we come to Plato's Form of the
Universe.

4. Plato's ignifick virtue how far it may be ^ited the Universal spirit.
4. Some by Plato's Universal Spirit understand that Ignifick virtue, or
Vivifick natural heat, which in the first Creation was infused into the Chaos,
and afterward diffused through every part of the Universe for the fomenting,
and nourishing thereof. This say they, Plato calls (...), Fire, or an Ignifick
Spirit, which fashioneth diverse Effects, which Moses calls the Spirit of God,
Gen, 1.2. Thus Beza, and out of him Serranus on Plato's Timaeus, fol. 10. But
though Plato seems to own such a prolifick fire, or ignifick spirit diffused
through the Universe, yet his Universal spirit, or chief Soul of the Universe
seems distinct here-from, as much as the cause from its effect. Of this more
hereafter.

. 6. Having endeavored to explicate Plato's Universal Spirit, The Body of the
Universe, and its original matter.
or the Spirit of the Universe, we are now to proceed to its body, and
material Principle. The proper body of the Universe, according to the mind of
Plato, is composed of the Four Elements, Fire, Water, Earth, Air: but the
original matter of these Elements he makes to be the Chaos, which being first
in order of Nature, and existence, ought firstly to be discoursed of. It was a
(...), or principle universally granted by all the Ancient Philosophers before
Aristotle, that the Universe had an origin; and that this Origin was from
God: So that the great (...), or question was, what the material principle, or
first matter of the Universe was? We find the several persuasions touching this
matter distinctly, though concisely, given us by Clemens Romanus Recognitionum
lib 8o Pythagoras said, that the Elements, or principles of all things were
Numbers; Callistratus Qualities; Alcmaeon Contrarieties; Anaximandrus
Immensitie; Anaxagoras Similarie of parts; Epicurus Atoms; Diodorus (...), i.
e. Impartibles, or Indivisibles; Asclepias (...), which we call Tumors, or
Elations; Geometers Fines, i. e. Bounds; Democritus Idea's; Thales Water;
Parmenides Earth; Plato Fire, Water, Air, Earth; Aristotle also a fifth
Element, which he named (...), Unnameable. Thus Vossius de Philos. part. 1.
cap. 5.. 13. Although this relation needs some emendation, yet it is the best I
have met with in this kind, and therefore it must pass. Only as to Plato, we
must know, that though he made the Four Elements before named, the complete
body, yet he made them not the first original matter of the Universe. For
Plato in his Timaeus describes his (...), or first matter thus: It is, says
he, (...), or (...), The Genus, or Species out of which every thing is
composed; and he expressly says that it is neither Fire, nor Water, nor Earth,
nor Air, but the Common Mother, and Nurse of all these, which effuseth its
seed, and virtue (...), Watrie, Fiery, and receptive of the forms of Air, and
Earth. And indeed this Plato's (...) first matter, or (...), Chaos seems
exactly the same with, and we need no way doubt but was originally traduced
from that of Moses, Genesis 1.2. And the Earth was without form, and void. Thus
Richardson in the Exposition on his Divinity Tables, Table 5. MSS. Materia]
This the Philosophers did find, The Parallel 'twixt Moses and Plato in
description of the First Matter of the Universe.
stumbling upon it, but mistaking it very much. Aristotle had it from Plato; he
had it from the Egyptians, they from the Jews. This will easily appear by
parallelizing the affections of the one and the other: which we shall endeavor
in these following Propositions.

1. In it is Creation.
1. Moses makes Divine Creation the original of his First Matter, or Chaos, Genesis
1.1. So does Plato, as before,. 4. answerable to that of Hesiod, (...), First
of all the Chaos was made, That Peripatetick dream of an Eternal first matter
never came into Plato's head, though some impute it to him, as before. 3.

1. Moses's (...) the same with Plato's (...).
2. Moses calls his First Matter, Genesis 1.2. (...) without form, which P. Fagius
renders out of Kimchi (...), the very same word, which Plato uses to express
his First Matter by; and little different in sound, but less, or nothing at
all, in sense from Sanchoniathon's (...), slime, which Philo Byblius styles
(...), as Great Bochart conceives from the Phenician, and Hebrew (...) Mod,
which signifies Matter, as before, Book 1. chap. 3.. 13, 14. Aquila on Deuteronomy.
32.10. renders this (...) by (...) confused, or without order, and Plato
describes his first matter by the same word, calling it (...), confused, (...),
namely because it was without any substantial form, order, or perfection: yea
Plato expressly styles his first matter (...), without form, as Moses. Hence
those Peripatetick descriptions of this first matter, that it is nec quid, nec
quale, nec quantum, indefinite, and inform, yet capable of any form, which
have caused so much dispute in the Schools.

Moses's (...) the origin of Plato's (...).
3. Moses makes his First Matter to be Genesis 1.2. (...) and void, whence some
conceive, that Plato with the rest of the Greeks traduced their (...): for by
an usual change of into, (...) is turned into (...), which Bochart makes the
original of (...), Chaos. But if we cannot argue fully from the Names, yet as
to Things we may draw an exact Parallel 'twixt Moses, and Plato as to this
particular. For Plato, as well as Moses, makes his first Matter to be void of
any Form, or perfect principles, but yet the Seminary, or Mass, out of which
all things were framed: So Plato tells us, that this Chaos was (...), The
receptacle, and as it were the nurse of all generations, though it were nothing
perfectly. So again in the same Timaeus he acquaints us, that it was (...),
again, (...), i.e. that it was a kind of anomalous thing, not clothed with
Essence, yea little better than nothing, yet the common subject out of which
all things were formed. In sum, this first matter is according to Plato
styled (...), The Seat, Receptacle, Mother, and Nurse of the Universe,
proportionable to that of Sanchoniathon (quoted by Eusebius) who treating of
the Chaos, says, Eusebius. l. 1. c. 10.
(...), out of this came all the seed of the Creation; and the Generation of
the whole. So Plato in his Timaeus, fol. 95. says (...). Matter is as the
Female, and Mother, and Nurse; but the Form, is as the Male, and Father of the
Universe. Thus we see how Plato in imitation of Moses describes the first
matter as void of all substantial form, and perfection; yet the seed, and
receptacle of all things. Hence also we learn, whence Aristotle had his
Physical Privation, which he makes one of his Principles necessarily antecedent
to the production of Bodies. Hence also he calls his first matter a passive
power, or Principle void of all forms, but inclinable to, or receptive of any
form. These Peripatetick notions, which make so great noise in our Schools,
were evidently but fragments of Plato's Mosaic traditions.

4. Moses describes his First Matter, or Confused Mass to be, Plato 's (...)
from Moses, Genesis 1.25.
Genesis 1.2. Darkness, etc. Hence Plato, in imitation of him, styles his first
Matter (...), tenebrous, obscurity. The like we find mentioned in Hesiod, and
by him applied to the Chaos, (...). From the Chaos sprang the Erebo, and the
dark night. And indeed both Plato, and Hesiod seem to have traduced this
affection of the Chaos from Sanchoniathon, who calls it (...) the tenebrous
Chaos, which Learned Bochart supposes to bave been in the Phenician tongue (in
which Sanchoniathon writ) (...), Evening darkness, which he proves was taken
from Genesis 1.2. but the word (...) from Genesis 1.5. (...), and it was Eber, or
Evening: this (says he) Varro thus imitates; Erebo creata fuscis crinibus nox
te invoco: So Bochart Can. lib. 2. cap. 2. fol. 783.

5. Genesis 1.2. Face of the deep.
5. Whereas Moses says Genesis 1.2. [Darkness was upon the face of deep] Plato
also seems to comprehend the same under his (...), or first matter, which, as
we have before mentioned, is the same with Sanchoniathon's (...) waterie
mistion, or slime: so Orpheus (...), Hilus, or slime was made out of water.
This slime, or fluid watrie matter the seed of all Creatures, is the same with
Thales's (...), water, which he made the first principle, or matter of all
things: and all but broken traditions of Moses's description, Genesis 1.2. as we
have proved at large, Book 2. chap. 3.. 4.

6. Genesis 1.2. Moved on the face of the waters.
6. Lastly, Moses says, Genesis 1.2. [The Spirit of God moved upon the face of the
Waters] i. e. The Spirit of God by a Divine fomentation, agitation, or motion
on this fluid matter, commonly called the Chaos, formed, and shaped every
Creature, and brought it to that form, and perfection as was appointed for it,
by the Sovereign Eternal Idea, Wisdom, and Pleasure. And does not Plato also
give us a description hereof much to the same purpose? when he says as in his
Timaeus, (...), that is (as some render it) by an importune motion fluctuating,
and not quiescing. This Divine fomentation, and agitation of the spirit on this
fluid matter in order to the formation of every Creature, is by Sanchoniathon
styled (...), the spirit of dark air, or a blustering wind. To conclude; Plato
in his Timaeus tells us, that God out of this first matter (...), disorderly,
and irregularly indigested, (...), beautified, ordered, and configured, or
formed the Universe. Yea he undertakes to expound the mode, or method, which
the Divine Spirit took in thus fashioning, and reducing every Creature to it is
proper Form. The matter, says he, of all things being subtracted, the mind
of the Divine Opisicer by a prudent kind of persuasion compelled the same,
which otherwise was tenebrous, fluid, inordinate, and inform, to pass into
light, and order, etc. of which see Serranus on Plato's Timaeus, fol. 12. By
all which laid together, I think it is very probable, that Plato traduced these
his Physiologick Philosophisings touching the First Matter, or Material
Principle of the Universe, The body of the Universe, and its constitutive
parts the 4. Elemen.
if not immediately, yet originally, from Moses's description of the Creation,
Genesis 1.2.

. 7. Having dispatched the Original, and First Matter of the Universe, we now
proceed to it is complete Body, which Plato styles (...) the visible, and
tangible. This body of the world he makes to consist of the four Elements,
Fire, Water, Air, Earth conjoined together by a friendly proportion, or
harmony. So in his Timaeus, fol. 32. says Plato (...) [ sc. (...)] (...). By
these, and of these Four Elements the body of the Universe is composed with an
harmonious proportionable friendship, etc. Yea Plato undertaketh to give us
some account of the necessity, and mutual combination of these four Elements.
1. He tells us, that the Earth is the most ponderous, least mobile, and the
most impertransmutable of all the Elements, and therefore the basis of the
rest. So in his Timaeus, fol. 98. (...). The earth is most ponderous, and
leastly mobile, and a body impertransmutable into others, by reason of its
being incommunicable, etc. Then he adds, (...). Fire, by reason of its
tenuitie, penetrates through every thing: Air through every thing save Fire:
Water through the Earth: by means whereof all things being filled there is
nothing left vacuous. Whence Plato in the same Timaeus, fol. 99. concludes
(...), Of these Elements God composed the world, which is tangible by reason of
the Earth; but visible by Fire; which two extremes are connected together by
Air, and Water, with Proportion, that excellent bond. Tullie interprets Plato's
words thus. It Is necessary, that the world should be corporeal, and visible,
as also touchable: Moreover Fire penetrates all things, and nothing can be
touched, which wants a solid basis. Now nothing is solid but what partakes of
Earth: wherefore God being about to make the world, first joined Fire, and
Earth together, etc. Lud. Vives in August. Civit. lib. 8. cap. 11. gives us
Plato's mind touching the Combination, and Proportion betwixt these Elements
thus. To make a coherence 'twixt Earth, and Fire there is necessarily required
a Bond; wherefore they needed two other Elements, which of themselves, and of
the other Elements, they connected, might make up one Composite, or Body. Such
are Air, and Water, 'twixt Fire, and Earth. For the same Analogy, or
Proportion that Water has to Earth, Air has to Fire: the same also Water, and
Air have amongst themselves; which as ^onds do so copulate the extreme
Elements, Earth, and Fire, that by the almost imperceptible variations of
Nature, either ascendent, or descendent, there may be supposed to be one body,
which waxes hard in Earth, or is rarifyed in Fire. Plato also makes each of
these Four Elements to have various ^pecies, and properties. So Timaeus, fol.
99. he says (...), etc. Fire has flame, light, and splendour, by reason of the
inequality of the Triangles which are in each of these. Air is partly pure and
dry, partly humid, and cloudie. Water also is either fluid, or congeled, as
Snow, Hail, Ice. Humor is either fluid, or compact: Fluid as Honey, Oil:
Compact, as Pitch, Wax. Compact humor, is either fusile, as Gold, Silver,
Brass, Tin, Led, Iron; or fragile, as Sulphur, Bitumen, Nitre, Salt, Alume,
and [(...)] Stones Homogeneous. Also in the same Timaeus, fol. 99. Plato
acquaints us that heat has (...), a disgregative faculty of the most tenuous
parts, but (...), frigid is constrictive, and complicative of the Pores. Lastly
Plato informs us that the more Noble parts of the Universe, as the Sun, etc.
are composed of Fire, of which hereafter.

Plato received this distribution of the body of the Universe into 4. Elements
from Moses, Genesis 1.1. etc.
. 8. That Plato received this distribution of the Universe it is body composed
of the 4. Elements from the Jewish Church, and particularly from Moses's
description of the Creation, Genesis 1.1. etc. is acknowledged, both by Ancient,
and Modern Writers. So Austin de Civit. Dei, lib. 8. cap. 11. Plato (says he)
in his Timaeus affirms, that God in the first Creation, first joined Fire, and
earth together. It Is manifest that he gives to Fire the place of Heaven.
Therefore this opinion has similitude with that, which is said Genesis 1.1. that
In the Beginning God made Heaven, and Earth. Thence those two middle Elements
by the interposure whereof these extremes are copulated, he calls Water, and
Air: whereby he is conceived to understand what is written, Genesis 1.2. And the
Spirit of God moved upon the Waters. For little heeding in what manner the
Scripture styled the Spirit of God, because the Air is also called a Spirit, he
imagined the Four Elements might he commemorated in that Place. Thus Austin.
That Moses in this Genesis 1.1, 2. describes the Creation of the Four Elements,
and that Plato speaks conformable thereto, is affirmed by learned Serranus in
his Notes on Plato his Timaeus, fol. 10. thus. This is the common opinion of
our Divines, that Moses in verse 1. of Genesis 1. teaches, that the first matter
was created by God: and that in verse 2. he describes the same by certain
Notes. Serranus his Analysis of Genesis 1.1, 2. out of Beza.
Yet as to the genuine, and plain interpretation of this place, the opinion of
Theodore Beza my most Reverend Parent and Praeceptor does mostly please me, who
supposes, that Moses in this place does not treat of the first matter, but
simply teaches, that the Four Elements, viz. Earth, Water, Fire, Air, were in
their order Created of God: and he gives these Reasons of this his opinion:
First that Moses was wont so to propose things Physical, that he might wholly
accommodate his speech to the Vulgar Capacity: neither does he treat of them
subtily, but (...) sensibly, that they might be more comprehended by the ruder
sort; wherefore the plain, and true sense of this place seemed to him this. In
verse 1. Moses proposes after this manner, a sum of the whole History of
the Worlds Creation, and that in an Analytick order, which truly is a form of
Demonstration most apt for the teaching of Sciences. Moses therefore teaches
(...) summarily, that in the beginning God created the Heaven, and the Earth,
i.e. Genesis 1.1. When yet nothing existed God created this Universe, and what
ever is comprehended in its compass: which according to the common manner of
speech is understood by the terms of Heaven, and Earth. Moses having laid this
summary Substratum of his whole discourse, he then proceeds to pursue each part
thereof, and Firstly to treat of the Elements: because they are the basis of
the Universe, and the Matter which the Vulgar might comprehend as being
discovered by certain effects. Therefore he affirms that Moses in verse 2.
teaches the Creation of the Elements Earth, Water, Fire: but the Creation of
the Air in verse 6. These Elements he describes as Created (...) by
themselves, before their entering into the composition of Animants. Thus
therefore Moses explains those first bodies, as that he first treats of the
Earth; affirming that the Earth was inform, etc. Therefore there was not yet
extant any certain Disposition of things; neither was there any certain form
in that tenebrous Mass of the Elements: which notwithstanding God conserved by
an infused natural heat, which was as it were the Seminary of all things, and
nothing else but the Element of Fire. For the Element of Fire in this first
Creation was nothing else but that ignifick force, and efficacy, which is
variously diffused in the symmetry of the Universe for the fomenting, and
nourishing of things according to their nature. This Natural, and Vivifick heat
dispersed in things after their mode, even in Animants themselves, is by Moses
properly called the Spirit of God, Genesis 1.2. Truly Plato calls this Natural
heat (...), i. e. the Opificer of various effects. Thus, says Beza, Moses
shows, how the Earth, Water, Fire, were Elements Created by God the first day.
That therefore the Air was Created the second day, which Moses calls (...)
Expansion. Truly Plato makes mention of (...) expansion, as I conceive, in the
same sense; which word is well accommodated to express the nature of the Air
which is most liquid, and expansive, etc. thus Serranus. Which accurate
Analysis of the first Creation, though it has something novel, and disputable,
yet it gives us a good account of the Cognation betwixt Moses, and Plato, in
their description of the first Elements, which constitute the Systeme or body
of the Universe.

. 9. As Plato makes the body of the Universe to be composed of the Four
Elements, The Form of the Universe, its Harmony, Order, and Beauty.
so also the Form thereof, according to his persuasion, is no other than the
(...), Analogy, and Symmetrie, or harmonious contexture, and friendly
conjuncture of these Elements, whence results the Order, Beauty, and
Perfection of the Universe. So in his Timaeus, fol. 32. Plato says, that the
Body of the Universe is constituted (...), by the Friendship, and Analogy
'twixt these Elements, etc. Plato here in pursuit of his former Allegory
supposes, the Universe to be (...) a living intelligent thing consisting of
body and soul: the Body he calls (...), the visible, and tractable part, or
the Elements themselves; but the Soul he styles (...), that Analogy, and
Symmetrie by which things in themselves contrary are friendly; and by a kind
of agreeable discord conjoined together in the mass of the Universe. This
Harmony, Proportion, and Consent, which is found amongst the parts of the
Universe, Plato makes to be the effect of the Divine Spirit, his Disposition,
and Providence, which is by him on the same account, but in a more eminent
manner styled (...), the Soul of the World (as before. 5.) But here we are to
take notice, that Plato make a twofold Form of the Universe, the first
Intelligible, inhering in the Divine mind: the second Sensible, infused into
singulars consisting in their proportion, order, etc. So in his Timaeus, fol.
49. (...). Plato here asserts a Twofold Form of the Universe; the One
Intelligible, which is that Idea, or Paradeigme subsisting in the Divine mind
proportionable whereto all things were framed: the other, Sensible, consisting
in that Proportion, Harmony, and Order, which God has put into every Creature,
and their mutual combinations. This he more fully expresses in the same
Timaeus, fol. 69. (...). These Elements lying confusedly together, God inspired
into each of them, both in regard to themselves, and to other things a
Symmetrie, so that they are so far as it is possible Analogous, and Symmetrous.
These Platonic notions of the Form of the Universe seem very proportionable
unto, and therefore but derivations from Genesis 1.31. where it is said, that God
saw all things that they were good, i. e. Harmonious, and proportionable
amongst themselves, as also exactly proportionable to their Divine Idea, and
Exemplar. So Austin de Civ. Dei, lib. 12. cap. 5. All Natures, says he,
because they are, therefore also have they their Measure, Beauty, or Form,
and a certain peace amongst themselves, wherefore also they are good, etc.
Hence the Ancients made Love to be the bond of the Universe, namely because
it is Perfection, and Goodness proceeded from the Harmony Order, and Beauty of
the parts. All which is fully comprehended under Plato's Form of the Universe,
whereby he understood no other, than the Harmony, Beauty, Order, and
Perfection of the Universe, and its parts, though never so contrary amongst
themselves, answerable to Genesis 1.31. which is also Essentially couched under
the notion of Form: for (...), by an easy transposition of ph, and m, is the
same with (...), which signifies Beauty, etc. Plato never dreamed of that
essential Form which Aristotle introduced as educible out of the passive power
of the first matter, etc. No; he conforming himself to Moses's style by Form
understands nothing but that Beauty, Perfection, and Goodness, which was in
things resulting from their Order, Proportion, and Harmony amongst themselves;
as also from their conformity to the Divine Exemplar, and original Idea. The
Affections of the Universe


. 10. Having discoursed of the Principles of Natural bodies, both Effective,
and Constitutive; we now proceed to their Adjuncts, or Affections, which
essentially, and naturally flow from their Principles And the first great
(...), or Affection which Plato attributes to the Universe, and it is parts, is
Perfection, 1. Perfection.
So in his Timaeus, fol. 32. discoursing of the (...), Affections of the
Universe he says, (...) The first is that the whole Universe, because it is an
animal greatly perfect, consists of perfect parts. This Perfection of the
Universe he had before given some intimation of under the notion of Goodness:
So Timaeus, fol. 30. (...). God would, that all things should be good, and
nothing evil: For 'twas never, neither is it now lawful for him, who is the
best Good, to make any thing but what is most beautiful, and perfect. Plato
here shows, how God of the first confused matter, and Elements efformed a
most Beautiful World; the words he expresses this by is (...), he beautified,
adorned the world; whence 'twas called by the Ancients (...). Again he saie^
(...), he shaped, configured, or conformed the Universe, i. e. made it
conformable to the Eternal, and most perfect Exemplar of his own Decrees:
whence we read 1. Cor. 7.31. of (...), the Scene, Figure, or Form of this
World. Farther, Plato says, that God did (...) accurately dispose, order, or
methodize the Universe, placing each part in it is proper place, and rank,
(...), reducing every Creature from that Ataxie, or disorder it lay under in
the confused Chaos, unto an admirable order, and goodness, which he elsewhere
styles (...), the good order, or right disposition of every thing. Lastly, he
says, that God (...) constituted, or gathered into one Systeme each part of
the Creation: whence Aristotle (his Scholar following his Master herein)
defines the World (...) etc. a Systeme, or ordinate compages of natural bodies,
etc. By all these expressions Plato sets forth to the life the incomparable
Structure, and admirable perfection of the Universe, as it came forth of the
hands of God, and that exactly conformable unto, and, as we have reason enough
to judge, by traduction from Moses's description thereof, Genesis 1.31. And God
saw every thing, that he had made, and behold it was very good: i. e. most
perfect. Indeed Plato gives us an excellent comment on these words of Moses,
wherein we have Moses his sense fully, and that almost in his own words laid
open to us: So in his Timaeus, fol. 37. Therefore (says Plato) after the
Father of the Universe had animadverted, or considered his work [(...)] the
made image of the Eternal Gods (or Trinity) he rejoiced, and recreated himself
therein. Thus Plato, who does here, as the Learned conclude, speak by tradition
from Moses. So Jo. Grammaticus Of Creation, lib. 7. cap. 11, 12. Rightly
therefore does that great Moses concluding the Creation of the world say Genesis
1.31. And God saw every thing, etc. And Plato here again does imitate him, who
speaking of Gods making the Universe, says, that when the Father beheld this
Mobile Animal, the image of the Eternal Gods, which he had begotten, he
rejoiced, and was recreated. (...)] and by so much the more, when he considered
that it was made exactly conformable to it is Paradeigme, or Eternal exemplar.
Thus Jo. Grammaticus touching the parallel betwixt Moses, and Plato. Austin de
Civit. Dei. lib. 11. cap. 21. enterprets Moses in the same manner, that Plato
does. In that (says he) it is said Genesis 1.31. God saw all things that they were
good. We must understand the approbation of his work made according to Art,
which is the Wisdom of God, etc. God's seeing all things to be Good implies
their Conformity to that Original Idea, or Eternal Platform of Divine
Wisdom, and Decrees: Whence also Plato styles the Universe a visible image of
the invisible God; namely by reason of it is exact conformity to it is Original
Form, or Idea in Divine Decrees: So in his Timaeus, fol. 92. (...) [others,
(...)] (...). Taking Animals both Mortal, and Immortal, and commixing them
together, this world, thus constituted, becomes a Visible Animal comprehending
things Visible, a Sensible image of the Intelligible God the greatest, and
best, and most beautiful, and most perfect, etc. Plato here calls the Universe
a Sensible Image of the Intelligible God, in that it was made exactly
conformable to Gods Eternal Exemplar, which in his Timaeus, fol. 69. he calls
(...) the Intelligible Form, or Exemplar, as elsewhere (...) the Intelligible
Ideal World: according to which Exemplar, or Platform he reaches this
sensible world was made, whence it became a reflex image thereof, and so a
sensible image of the insensible Deity: Or else we may refer this Platonic
description of the Universe to Moses's Character of Man, Genesis 1.27. And God
created him in his own Image, etc. So Johan: Grammaticus of the Worlds
Creation, lib. 6. cap. 21. page 249. (...), etc. whereas Moses spoke properly
of Man, that he was made after the Image of God, and according to his likeness:
Plato translates this to all things in the World. Thus Philoponus. And indeed
it is evident, that Plato comprehends under his notion of the Universe, as
well Rationals, as Sensibles; and therefore from Man its more noble part he
styles the whole, the Image of God according to, and in derivation from Moses's
description, Genesis 1.27. We may take it either way, and yet no way doubt, but
that Plato had this, as the former Notions touching the perfection, goodness,
order, beauty, and exact proportion, or conformity of the Universe, from the
Mosaic description. This perfection of the Universe Plato makes to be the
immediate product, and first issue of its formal constitution; namely, the
result of that friendly proportion, sweet harmony, and beautiful order, which
is between all the parts of the Universe, though in themselves never so
disagreeing. This is fully expounded by Austin, (who did mostly Platonize) de
Civit. lib. 11. c. 18. the Antitheta, or opposites (says he) are accounted
most decent in the ornaments of Elocution: as therefore those Contraries do
give a beauty to Speeches, so the Beauty of the Universe is composed of a
certain Eloquence not of Words, but of Things resulting from the opposition of
Contraries. Thus much for the perfection of the Universe.

2. Affecti^n of the Universe is its Unity.
. 11. The second (...), or affection, which Plato gives the Universe, is
Unity: So in his Timaeus, fol. 33. having discoursed of its perfection, he
adds (...). To these we may add that it is one. So in his Parmenides, fol.
144. Plato having distinguished (...) one, into infinite, and finite: As for
finite unity, he makes it to be a proper affection of his sensible Idea,
whereby he means the Universe. And the reason he gives why the Universe should
be one, is this; because (...), the singulars contained therein are all
determinately reduced to their proper Class. Aristotle also asserted the same.

3. Finitenes.
3. Another (...), or affection, which Plato gives the Universe is Finitenes; so
in his Parmenides, fol. 145. having spoken of his sensible Idea, and its
Unity, he adds (...) (...). Must not one be universally finite; or must not
the parts be comprehended of the whole? Yes certainly. Therefore what is
comprehended must be finite: (though infinite in multitude) and because finite,
therefore it has extremes: If it be a whole, it must have a beginning, and
middle, and end, etc. Thus also Aristotle, etc.

4. Thence follows another affection of the Universe, 4. The Universe has a
Figure round.
which Plato calls Figure. So in his forecited Parmenides, fol. 145. (...).
And this one being such, must also partake of Figure. And in his Timaeus, fol.
33. he speaks more particularly, and fully, thus, (...), etc. And he has given
to it ( i. e. the Universe) a Figure most becoming, and most congenial. For it
is meet, that he should shape it into such a Form, or Figure, as might
comprehend all other Figures. For which c^use the World is made (...), round,
so that its whole circum^^rence is touched with Rays equally distant from the
Center: (...). This being the most perfect, and most like to it self, of all
Figures. Thus Plato, wherein he fully informs us touching the Worlds
Rotunditie, and the reasons thereof: namely, because it ought to comprehend all
Animals. Now a round Figure is, (says he) of all 1. most capacious, and
perfect, 2. most like to it self, or uniforme: 3. most content with it self,
and without need of other. Aristotle also follows him, in asserting the Worlds
Rotunditie.

5. Another (...), or attribute, which Plato gives natural Bodies, is Color, 5.
Color.
which in his Timaeus, fol. 67. he thus describes, (...). We call Colors a
flame, diffusing it self from particular Bodies, having parts symmetrous to the
sense. By Flame he means Light, which he elsewhere terms a Flame: and so Plato
is herein followed by the New Philosophers, who make Colors to be nothing but
the various mixture of Light, and Darkness. He does farther in his Timaeus,
fol. 101. give some distribution of Colors, with their proper effects, thus,
(...). White Color disgregates the sight, whereas black does congregate it. To
which the Peripateticks assent, etc.

6. Time, another Affection of Bodies.
6. Plato also makes Time another special property, or Affection of the
Universe, and all natural Bodies. So in his Parmenides, fol. 151. treating of
the Universe under the notion of (...), One, he says, (...), etc. One partakes
of Time, and it is younger, and elder than it self; and than other things, and
it is, and it was, etc. His meaning is, that all natural Bodies admit of
variations, and differences of time, etc. And in his Timaeus, fol. 13. he
describes time to be (...), a moveable Image of Eternity. Again, (...), the
definition, or boundarie of day, and night. So again in his Timaeus, fol. 97. he
says, (...), etc. God has framed Time together with the World: for it is an
Image of the ingenerable time called Eternity: for look as this Universe is
created according to the exemplar of the Intelligible Ideal World, so is this
Time composed in some sort according to the exemplar of Eternity. Thus Plato.
Lastly, as to the formal measure, and product of Time, we find a good
description thereof in the Platonic Definitions, fol. 411. thus, (...), Time
is the motion of the Sun, and the measure of motion; which agrees well with
Moses's description in Genesis 1.14 for seasons, and for days, and years, etc.

7. Mobilitie.
7. Hence follows another Affection, which Plato attributes to the Universe, and
natural Bodies, namely Mobilitie. So in his Parmenides, fol. 145. (...). Thus
therefore is it not necessary, that One ( i. e. the Universe) be capable both
of Motion, and Rest, etc. Herein also Aristotle follows him, making Motion, and
Rest, affections of natural Bodies.

8. Generation.
8. Hence also follows Generation, which may be ranked amongst the Affections,
which Plato gives to natural Bodies, and is thus described, Platon. definit.
fol. 411. (...). Generation is a motion to Essence. Again it is called, (...), a
participation of Essence, etc.

9. Daration.
9. Whence lastly follows Duration, which Plato makes another (...), or
affection of the Universe. So in his Timaeus, fol. 32. having spoken of the
Worlds perfection, and unity, he adds, (...). It must also continue without
old age, and sickness, etc. He persues his Allegory, wherein he styles the
World a Living Creature, which (says he) must continue in youthful vigor, and
healthie. His meaning is, that though Individuals, and Singulars decay daily,
yet the Species, and whole of the Universe is continued durable, and vigorous,
by means of successive generations. For they are Individuals only, not the
Species, that dye: thus according to Aristotle's Maxim, the Corruption of one
is but the Generation of another. Thus much of the affections of the Universe.

. 12. The parts of Physiologie are either General, or Particular: Second part
of Physiologie, of the parts of the Universe.
the General part of Physiologie treats of the first Principles, and Affections
of Nature, which we have dispatched. Physiologie in particular discourses of
the Severals, or Particulars of the Universe, which make up the whole of
Nature. Now of these in their order, so far as they come under Plato's
Philosophizings. 1. The Creation of the Angels.
And here we may begin with Angelick Beings, who are called the firstborn Sons
of God, and are indeed the most noble Pieces of the Universe, which Plato makes
the first fruits of Gods Creation. So Lud. Vives, in August. Civit. Dei, lib.
11. c. 9. The Greek Divines (says he) will, that Spiritual Beings precede
Corporeal, and that the great Parent of the Universe used them, i. e. Angels,
as Ministers for the procreation of other things: which Opinion Plato follows
in his Origin of the Universe. So Sanchoniathon sets forth the Creation of the
Angels under the (...) Contemplators of the Heavens. Whence also Aristotle's
conceit of the Heavens being moved by Intelligences, seems to have had its
origination. All which Contemplations about Angelick natures, and their
production, seem to have been but corrupt Derivations from Job 38.7. When the
morning Stars sang together, etc. But, because the Discourse of Angels belongs
not properly to Physics, but to Metaphysics, we shall engage no farther on it
at present. 2. The Creation of the Heavens, their matter Fire.
To descend therefore to the material, and more natural parts of the Universe:
and first to the Heavens, which Plato in his Timaeus, fol. 36. describes after
his Metaphorick mode, thus, (...). The Body of the Heavens is visible, but the
Soul of these Intelligences partakes of invisible reason, and harmony. Thus
Plato: whence, I presume, Aristotle derived his Celestial Intelligences, which
he presumed to be the first movers of the Celestial Spheres. But as to the
Matter, and Nature of the Heavens what Plato's Opinion was, is somewhat
difficult to conjecture. Austin affirms peremptorily, that Plato made the
Heavens to be of an ignifick, or fiery nature, and that herein he followed
Moses, Genesis 1.1. So Aust. de Civit. Dei, lib. 8. c. 11. Plato in his Timaeus
affirms, (says he) that God in the first Creation joined the Earth, and Fire
together. It Is manifest that he attributes to Fire the place of Heaven. This
Opinion therefore has some similitude with what is said Genesis 1.1. In the
beginning God made heaven, and earth. Thus Austin. And Ludo. Vives on these
Words adds, that Plato thought the Heavens to be fiery, (though the Stars to
be composed of the four Elements, because they seemed more solid) Not that the
Heavens were of the same nature with our Culinarie fire, for he supposes there
are several sorts of Fire. So Lud. Vives. And indeed that these Celestial
Bodies (at least the more lightsome, and glorious, namely the Sun, etc.) are of
an ignite, or fiery nature, seems probable from the very origination of the
name (...), Heaven, which is apparently derived from the Hebrew (...) Our, or
Ur, which signifies both Light, and Fire, as hereafter. I am not ignorant, that
some make the Heavens to be of a fluid, waterie (as others of an aerial)
nature. So Paulus Fagius on Genesis 1. tells us, that amongst the Hebrews the
Heaven is called from its extension, (...) the Firmament, and from its Waterie
matter, (...) Waters there, which he also gathers from Genesis 1.6. a Firmament in
the midst of the Waters, etc. But this being granted, that the Firmament is of
a waterie, or fluid matter see Wendeline, de Coelo; (which is also the Opinion
of some New Philosophers) yet it follows not hence, but that the Sun, and
those other more lightsome, and glorious Celestial Bodies; may be composed of a
fiery substance; which seems to have been the Opinion of the Jews, whence
Plato, and other of the Greeks derived the same, and that on these
Probabilities.

That the Sun and Stars are Fire, Genesis 1.3. (...), Fire as well as Light.
1. That the Sun, and Stars are composed of Fire, appears first from the very
Text, Genesis 1.3. Let there be Light: where the Hebrew (...) Our, whereby the Sun
is expressed, Job 31.26. signifies as well Fire, as Light. This we have proved
at large out of Richardson, and others, in our former part of Philologie, Book
3. C. 3.. 9. So Amesius, in his Medulla Theol. lib. 1. cap. 8. These. 50.
treating of the Creation of this Light, says that Light, namely lightsome
Fire, was made out of the most subtle part of this Mass taken up, etc, So
Grotius in his Annotations on 2 Pet. 3.7. The Fire (says he) was not in that
first humid Mass, but afterward created by God, which Moses calls Light,
because Light, and Heat are one, and the same. Out of this Light compacted were
the Stars composed, whence they diffuse Fires upon the Earth, whence also Fires
are generated under the Earth. From these Celestial, and subterraneous Fires
meeting together, shall that great, and last fatal conflagration of the World
arise, as the former Deluge from the conjunction of the Celestial Waters with
those of the deep. Caecilius in Minutius Foelix affirms, that these Fires
threaten conflagration to the whole World, yea to the Stars themselves. Thus
Grotius, who in what precedes, tells us, that besides the Sibylles, Sophocles,
Seneca, and Lucanus; the Astrologers (particularly Copernicus, Revolut. lib. 3.
cap. 16.) have observed the same, and that from the daily appropinquation, or
nearer approaches of the Sun toward the Earth. Indeed I find this to have been
the firm persuasion of the Pythagoreans, as before in the Pythagorean
Philosophy, Chapter 7.. 10. Heraclitus also received the same by Tradition from
the Pythagoreans, affirming, that the World, as it was made of Fire, so it
should again (...), be burnt by fire. It was the common persuasion of the
Platonists, that the more noble parts of the Universe, namely the Sun, and
Stars, were Celestial Fires; whence also they asserted the last conflagration
of the World by fire, which they called (...). Plato's own Words are, (...). In
a short time there shall be a destruction of all things on the Earth by much
fire. The Stoics held the same, calling it (...). And Grotius in the
forecited place, on 2 Pet. 3.7. says, That these Traditions came originally
from the Jews. For there is mention made hereof in the Book called Cedrus
Libani, that as God in times past let loose the reins to the Waters, so he
shall again to the Fire, etc. But to return to our Argument.

2. That the Hebrew (...) Genesis 1.3. Genesis 1.3. (...), the same with Ur, Genesis
11.28.
may be rendered Fire as well as Light, is evident from the use of the word else
where. So in Genesis 11.28, 31. we read of Vr of the Chaldees, which is of the
same origination, and signification: this place being (as it is conceived by the
Learned) called Vr, from their Sacred Fire [(...)] worshipped here, as a Symbol
of the Sun: of which see more of the Chaldee Philosophy, Book 1. Chap. 4.. 6.
Hence also we may add.

(...), Fire, the same with (...), Genesis 1.3.
3. That the Greek (...), which signifies Fire, owes its origination to the
Hebrew (...) Vr; for cast away only p, and (...) (or as it was perhaps at first
(...)) is the same with (...). And indeed, I find Plato making use of the Word
(...) promiscuously to express Light as well Fire by; so in his Timaeus he
says, the World was (...), visible, or lightsome by fire, or light: and in
what follows he expressly says, that (...), Fire has flame, and light, and
splendour, which is every way as applicable to the Celestial, as Terrestrial
Fires; especially if that be true which some New Philosophers, and those of
greatest repute, affirm, that Light is but a flame, etc. yea indeed Plato
calls the Sun in express terms (...), Fire (as hereafter.)

4. The Greek (...), Heaven, seems also to owe its derivation to the Hebrew
(...) Our, whence (...), as before.

5. Whereas it is said Psalm. 104.2. God covered himself with Light, (...), it is
elsewhere expressed by Fire.

6. But to argue not only from Names, but from the thing it self, we find
frequent mention in Scripture of Fire coming down from Heaven. So in the
burning of Sodom, but more particularly in that saying of the Disciples, Luke
9.54. That we command fire from heaven: which though it implie a Miracle, yet
it argues they conceived the heavens to be the proper seat of fire, the like
Revel. 20.6. fire out of heaven. It seems to have been a fixed opinion amongst
the Jews, that the heavens were the Seat of fire.

7. Yea, Mark 14.54. Fire is expressly termed (...), which properly signifies
Light of the Sun, whereby it seems evident that Mark, with the rest of the Jews
(as well as the ancient Grecians) judged Fire, and Light equipollent, or
convertible, and therefore promiscuously used those terms.

8. Farther the Scripture, and Hebrews call the Sun (...) which properly
signifies Fire, whence we read, Lev. 26.30. of (...) which properly denotes
those Hearths whereon these Idolaters preserved their Sacred Fire as a Symbol
of the Sun, which they worshipped after the Zabian mode: whence the Greek
(...), and the Latin Caminus, a Chimney, or Hearth: as before, Book 1. cap. 4..
8.

9. That Plato held the Sun to be a Celestial Fire is evident from his
Definitions (Collected by his Successor) where we find the Sun thus defined,
(...), etc. The Sun is an Heavenly Fire. So also Xenophanes (the Founder of the
Eleatick sect) held the Sun to be a collection of little Fires: the like was
asserted by Heraclitus, who both had these traditions from the Pythagoreans, as
these derived them from the Jews, according to Grotius, etc. Neither are there
wanting some of great vogue amongst the New Philosophers, who defend this
Platonic persuasion; that the Sun is Fire, etc. So Dr. Willis in his Treatise
de Febribus says, Light seems nothing else but a flame kindled into a greater
dimension, etc. And Comenius in his Physics makes the first Light, Genesis 1.3.
to be no other than Fire.

10. That the Sun, and the Stars are of a fiery nature was the common
persuasion of the Ancient Philosophers, so Stobaeus Eclog. Phys. lib. 1. cap.
25. gives us a large account, touching the Ignite nature of the Stars. He
says, (...), Thales supposed the Stars to be Terrene, but Ignite. And he adds
the same of Empedocles, (...), Empedocles also held the Stars to be Ignite,
etc. Empedocles also affirmed that the Heaven was compacted of Air, and Fire,
i. e. Air in regard of the Firmament, and of Fire, as to the Celestial Lights,
as Stobaeus Eclog. Phys. p. 52, 53. (...), etc. The like is said of
Anaximander, (...), Anaximander said, that the Stars were Globes of Air full of
Fire, breathing out flames on one side; and that the Sun was seated in the
supreme place; The same is said of Parmenides, and Heraclitus, (...), etc. And
Posidonius defined a Star (...), a Body Divine, Ethereous, Splendid, and
Ignite, etc. But more particularly touching the Ignite Nature of the Sun,
Anaximenes affirmed (...), that the Sun is Ignite, or Fiery. Anaxagoras,
(...), that the Sun was an Ignite Iron, or Stone. The same was affirmed by
Democritus. Zeno also held, (...), that the Sun, and Moon, and each of the
Stars were an Intelligent, Wise, and Ignite Fire. The like Chrysippus asserted.
Neither was this the persuasion only of the Wiser Philosophers, but also of
many of the Ancient Greek Poets; Euripides, in Phaenissis says, (...)
(...)
And Homer though he says not positively that the Sun is Fire, yet he makes it
to be of like nature, as Stobaus Eclog. Phys. fol. 57.

11. Thus also Shepherd in his parable of the Ten Virgins, chap. 8.. 2. It is
(says he) a question whether the beams of the Sun are Fire which some
demonstrate thus. Take a Glass, and gather together the beams and it burns:
and indeed this argument from the Ignifick virtue of Beams contracted in a
Burning-glasse gives us a great probability of the Ignite nature of the Sun:
at least, it may suffice to balance all the seeming probabilities of other
opinions. Neither may we expect in matters of this nature more than
conjectures, and probabilities. But to return to, and conclude this with Plato;
he frequently calls Light, Of Light, and Darkness, Genesis 1.5.
Fire. So in his de Repub. 6. speaking of the Natural Cognation which is 'twixt
the Eye and Light, he adds, that when the Eye comes into darkness it loses,
or falls from (...), it is cognate Fire, Light. Hence Night is defined in the
Platonic definitions thus, (...), Night is darkness, contrary to the day: the
privation of the Sun. As also Light is defined (...). Light is contrary to
darkness, which answers unto Moses's description, Genesis 1.5. And God called the
Light Day, and Darkness Night.

Of the Lower World.
. 13. As for Plato's sentiments touching this Lower World I find little therein
but what is common, and therefore not worthy of any particular remark, only he
seems somewhat to differ from the commonly received opinion about the Nature of
the Wind, Wind.
which in the Platonic Definitions, fol. 411. is thus described, (...). The
Wind is a motion of the Air round about the Earth. As for the Air, Air.
Serranus (on Plato's Timaeus, fol. 10.) supposes, that Plato made it the same
with Moses's (...) Firmament, Genesis 1.6. which he expressed by (...), a word
most proper to express the Nature of the Air by, which is most liquid, and
expansive. Plato's contemplations about the Waters, Water.
and Sea, with those miraculous bounds given thereto by Divine Providence, I no
way doubt, had their original from the Sacred Story* This we find well set
forth by Paulus Fagius on Genesis 1.9. (...) Let the Waters be gathered. The
Ancients (says he) have derived this word from the Noun (...) which signifies
a Perpendicule, Square, or Rule used by Masons, etc. As if God should have said
Let the Waters be gathered together unto one certain place, as by Measure, and
Rule, according to the manner of Architects, who in the building of Houses, to
the intent that they may bring the parts to a close, and firm consistence, and
uniformitie, measure all by their Perpendicule, or Directorie. Therefore Moses
seems not without great Emphasis to make use of this word, thereby to express
the Infinite power of God, whereby he compels that fluid, and boundless
Element, possessing the whole superficies of the Earth, even as it were by a
Measure, or Rule into one place. This the Scripture alludes unto Job. 26.10. He
has compassed the Waters with bounds, etc. Psalm. 104.5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Thou have
set a bound. Psalm. 33.7. He gathers the Waters as an he^p, etc. so Job 12.15.
Behold he withholdeth the Waters, etc. which certainly is matter of infinite
admiration, that an Element so ponderous, and boundless, should be confined
against its proper Nature, within such exact bounds, and measures. Farther what
Plato's apprehensions were about Exhalations, such as received some accidental
impression, or Form, are commonly called Meteors, Of Meteors.
namely concerning Comets, Thunder, Lightening, Clouds, Rain, Snow, Hail
Earthquakes, etc. is uncertain; yet we need no way doubt he might have (if he
had not) the best information, he could expect, concerning these Mysteries of
Nature, from Job, or Solomon, or such like Jewish Philosophers.

. 14. Another, and indeed the most Noble, Of Active Physiologie touching
Plants, and Animals.
because most experimental, part of Physiologie, or Natural Philosophy
regards Plants and Animals, wherein Plato seems to have had very good
skill, which we have reason enough to induce us to believe he received, by
tradition from the Jewish Church, especially from Solomon's Writings. For its
very evident by Sacred Relation, that Solomon was the prime, and best
Philosopher, after Adam's fall, that engaged in those Philosophic
contemplations, as before in the Jewish Philosophy, book ^. chap. 1.. 11. And
I think it is also evident that the choicest parts of Democritus's Natural
Experiments: of Hippocrates's Medicinal Aphorisms, and Observations; together
with Plato's Physiologick Experiments: Aristotle's History of Animals, and
Theophrastus his Scholar's of Plants, owe their original, and first Idea's to
Solomon his Natural Experiments, and Philosophizings on Plants, Animals, and
Humane Nature. And because this is the most noble, and useful part of Natural
Philosophy, we shall endeavor to produce some of the choicer Experiments,
Observations, and Principles laid down by Plato, with others, for the
Conservation of Humane Nature in health, and vigor; which indeed is the main
end, and emprovement of Physiologie commonly called Physic, or Medicine: But
before we engage herein we shall give some Historical account of Man's Original,
and that according to Plato's traditions originally Jewish.

Of Man's Original and Formation according to the Image of God.
. 15. The Chiefest, though last part of Natural Philosophy respects Man his
two constitutive parts, Body, and Soul. Plato Philosophizeth on both, and that
as well apart, as in Composition, and Conjunction. As for the Original of Man,
Plato tells us in positive terms, That he made Man after the Image of God. So
in his lib. 7. de Legib. Plato says, (...), Man is a kind of imitation of God,
and his masterpiece. So in his Timaeus what he mentions in general of the
whole Universe, he, without doubt, more properly understood of Man, namely that
he was (...), the best, and greatest image of the intelligible God, which
description of Man, without all peradventure, was originally traduced from Genesis
1.26. Let us make man after our Image, etc. v. 27. Yea Plato seems to have had
some Scriptural notices of Adam's first Creation, and Eves formation out of his
side; which in his Symposiack Dialogue he expresses under his Cabalistick
(...), or Man woman, which answers unto Genesis 2.21, 22, 23. Yea farther Plato
seems to have had very considerable hints, and traductions touching Adams
happy state in Innocence, which he describes under his Mythologick Cabale of
the Golden Age, and Saturne's Reign therein: thus in his Politicus, fol. 272.
where he says our First Parents lived in the Golden Age partaking of the
fruits of the Earth without toil, or labor, or Apparel, having conference with
the beasts, etc. All which were but Fables, or traditions he had received from
the Ancients, whereby he means the Jews, or their neighbors the Phenicians,
etc. For so Sanchoniathon expresses the Creation of mankind to be, (...), i.
e. says Bochart according to the Phenician, and Hebrew expression, (...)
Col-ri-jah the breath of Gods mouth, as it is expressly ment^oned Genesis 1.7.
breath of life. As Plato had these great traditions or notices touching man's
Creation, and happy Estate in general, so particularly touching the Soul of
man its Divine original, immaterial, infinite capacity, activitie,
immortality, and perfection. As to the souls Divine original, etc. he says in
his Phaedrus, fol. 245 (...), etc. the Soul is ingenerable, immortal and
living, etc. because it is a self-moving principle. In his Phaedo, he calls the
soul (...), immortal. In his lib. 10. de Repub. he says, the soul is (...)
incomposite, or simple; and in his Epinom* he calls it, (...) incorporeal. As
to the souls capacity, Plato proves in h^^ Phaedo, fol. 79. That it was
infinite, or boundles^, never satisfied with any thing but the first Truth, and
chiefest good. The soul, says he, contends toward that which is ^ure, and
always the same, and most akin unto it: so in his Protag. fol 322. he makes
the soul to be nearly allied to God, the like in his Phaedo fol. 80. Plato
says, It becomes the body to serve, but the soul to rule, because it is most
like unto the Divine, Immortal, Intelligible, most uniform and first Being; he
also proves the immortality of the soul, from its 1. incorruptibilitie, 2.
solicitude, 3. innate appetite, 4. uniform self motion, 5. connate Idea of
God. Thus Plato in his Phaedo fol. 55.81. speaking of the souls disunion with,
The Souls perfection.
and dislodging from the body, says, That it returns to that original (...)
idea to which it is akin, i. e. to God, as elsewhere. Hence Plato concludes the
dignity and perfection of the soul; so in his Phaedo fol. 55. he gathers up
this conclusion, That the soul is (...), akin and homogeneous, or alike in
nature to God, and that it does in a sober sense participate of a
self-goodness, and self-beautie with God. So again fol. 56. he says, That the
soul being allied to God, becomes (...), a partner of the Divine Nature, whence
it is, in its manner, and according to its capacity, as God, (...),
incomposite, infinite, incorruptible, immortal; and thence de Leg. 5. fol. 726.
Plato concludes, that of all possessions next to God, the soul is (...) most
Divine and peculiar: Plato gives us also a good account of the Faculties of the
Rational Soul: 1. The understanding.
he treats accurately of the humane understanding, which he styles our (...)
Demon, whereby we are elevated from earth, to an heavenly alliance and
conversation. He makes the mind to be (...), a plant of the supreme Being, not
earthly but heavenly. The proper object of the mind Plato makes to be Truth,
which he calls the life, and food of the mind: so de Repub. 6. fol. 490. (...),
by truth the mind truly lives, and is nourished. As for the manner, how truth
is conveyed to the understanding, Plato tells us, it is by assimilation, i. e.
there are certain Ideas, images, or notions impressed upon the understanding,
conformable to those natural Ideas, which exist in the things themselves which
we know. He gives us also a particular account of the several sorts of
knowledge. 1. (...) Wisdom is by him defined (...) a knowledge of Beings
Eternal, etc. 2. Intelligence is a knowledge of first principles. 3. Science is
(...) a demonstrative knowledge. 4. Opinion is intermedious 'twixt Science, and
Ignorance; or a conjectural assent. 5. Imitation is an image-framing Art. 6.
Faith is an assent grounded on Authority, etc. 7. (...), Prudence is a power
effective of happiness, ^he parts whereof are (...). 8. Conscience he styles
(...) Fame. 9. (...) Art is (...), etc. 2. Plato also discourses of the Will
which Definit. Platon. fol. 413. The will.
is thus defined: (...). a rational desire, etc. That these Platonic
contemplations about the Soul, its original, immortality, etc. were derived
originally from the Scriptures, or Jewish Church, Plato's notions about the
Soul from Scripture.
seems probable by Plato's own words in his Phaedo fol. 85. where having proved
the Souls immortality by many demonstrative arguments, he concludes (...),
that we might proceed herein by a more firm and Divine word: what this more
firm and Divine word should be, if not sacred Divine Scriptures traduced to
him, we cannot imagine. Thus Plato received these, and such like divine
contemplations, touching the Soul, by some Oriental tradition derived
originally from the sacred Fountain, as he himself seems to acknowledge; and I
conceive it cannot rationally be denied; or if it should, 'twill not be
difficult to prove the same in its proper place, when we come to treat of
Plato's Metaphysics, whereunto these speculations about the Soul, its
original, etc. belong.

Physical Aphorisms for the conservation of man's body in health.
. 16. Having given these brief touches of man's original, and main constitutive
part, his soul; its nature, etc. we now proceed to the humane bodies, to lay
down such physic or medicinal Aphorisms and praescripts, as are given us by
Plato and others, for the conservation thereof in an (...), a good temperament,
and habitude of health and vigor. That the Ancients reduced Medicine to
Physics or Natural Philosophy, is evident both from name, and thing.
Hippocrates the great Master of Medicinal Wisdom, styles Medicine (...) the
natural Science. And indeed there seems such an essential connection 'twixt
Medicine and Natural Philosophy, as that they cannot without violence offered
to both, be disjoined each from other, which Aristotle and others acknowledge.
Whence it is, that those great Philosophers, Plato, Aristotle, and
Theophrastus, with others, mix so many Medicinal Aphorisms with their Natural
Philosophizings. Hence also, says Apuleius in Apol. Let men cease to wonder,
if the Philosophers have in their very Doctrine, discoursed of the causes and
remedies of diseases. To speak a little of Medicine in General; which is
usually described a practick Art of conserving, or restoring health; whence it
is distributed by some into (...), and (...), others add to these parts (...):
but I should rather close with that common distribution of Medicine in^o (...)
conservative, and (...) curative. As for Prophylactick, or conservative
Medicine, we have many excellent Praescripts and Rules given us by Plato,
Hippocrates, and others, for the right management and improvement thereof. The
advantages of a good habitude of body.
Plato informs us, that an (...), a good habitude and Crasis of body, is
extremely advantageous for the due motions and exercises, both of body and
soul: So in his Timaeus fol. 88. he tells us, (...), There is one preservation
to both: for neither is the soul moved without the body, nor yet the body
without the soul. So again in his Timaeus fol. 103. Plato assures us, That the
beginnings of all evils, are from inordinate Pleasures, Griefs, Desires, and
Fears, which are kindled from the ill habitude and temperature of the body,
(...), etc. the ill Crases of the body produce these, etc. but to descend to
particulars.

1. One Rule given us for the conservation of health, 1. The causes of diseases
to be avoided. 1. Disproportion of first qualities.
is to consider well, and diligently, to avoid the causes of diseases. Plato in
his Timaeus, fol. 102. tells us, what are the principal causes of all diseases.
First, says he, The primarie and principal cause of all diseases is (...), an
assymmetrie or disproportion of the first qualities; namely, if they are either
redundant, or defective: This others term (...), etc.

2. Hence follows another cause of diseases, which Plato calls, The mutations,
or alterations of the blood, 2. Alterations
by reason of some corruption, or preternatural fermentation: for hence, says
he, springs bile, and pituite or phlegm, as all other sick humors.

3. The last cause of diseases he here mentions, is (...), an Ataxie, 3. Ataxie
of humors.
or disorder of humors; namely, when choler or bile, phlegm or melancholy,
admit any extravasasion, or flowing forth from their proper seats, into any
other parts of the body, where fixing their seat, they cause a solution, and
dissolution. To these causes of diseases, mentioned by Plato, we may add
others, as

4. That of Hippocrates, Aphorism. 51. (...), all excess is destructive to
nature. This regards all excesses in repletions, or evacuations; sleep, or
watchings, etc.

5. Sudden mutations are apt to produce diseases. This is im^lyed in that Canon
of Hippocrates, Aphoris. 51. Sect. 2. Nature makes no sudden changes, and every
sudden change is dangerous.

6. Another cause of diseases, is an ill stomach, or concoction, according to
that Canon, an error in the first concoction, is never cured in the rest.

Cruditie the Mother of diseases.
7. Whence also follows another pregnant cause of diseases, namely cruditie,
according to that great Aphorism, Cruditie is the Mother of all diseases. For
indeed almost all diseases, under which men labor, ordinarily spring from
repletion, and indigestion; when more food is taken in than nature requires, or
the stomach can digest: Yea, Physicians say, That a Plethora, or full estate of
body, even though it be without impurity of blood, is dangerous as to health,
because nature, if weak, cannot weild it. But they make cruditie the seminary
of all diseases. For, say they, health consists in two things. 1. In the due
proportion of the humors, as well in quantity as quality. 2. In a certain
spongious habitude of the whole body free from all obstructions, that so the
spirits and blood, may have a free circulation throughout all parts. Now
cruditie obstructs both of these.

8. Hence follows Obstruction, which is reputed another seminal parent, or
cause of Diseases; especially if the obstruction be seated in any principal
part, as the head, heart, liver, spleen; whence flow Convulsions, Apoplexies,
and Epilepsies, if the obstruction be in the head, Jandise, if in the liver,
etc.

9. Catarrhes also are judged another fountain of diseases, etc.

10. A dislocation, or solution of parts, tends much to the impairment and
affliction of the whole: according to that Physical Canon; all grief arises
from the solution of the Continuum.

11. Lastly, the weakness of any part tends greatly to the decay of the
whole: for as Physicians observe the stronger parts thrust their superfluities
on the weaker. Thus much for the causes of Diseases.

. 17. Nature is to be maintained in her due offices and motions.

Natura est morborum medicatrix: medicus naturae minister eamque recte agentem
imitari debet Sennert. med.

1 Excretion.


A second great Prophylactick Canon for the conservation of health, is this, To
maintain nature in her due functions, exercises, and operations. This is laid
down by Plato in his Timaeus fol. 90. where he tells us, that Medicine chiefly
consists in this, (...), to render all their due operations. This is more fully
expressed by Hippocrates 6. Epid. Comm. 5. Tit. 1. (...), Natures are the
Physicians of diseases: whence Physicians are stued the Ministers of Nature, id
est, to assist her in the exerting her proper offices, and exercises; which are
these.

1. One great and proper exercise of Nature, is a natural excretion of humors,
which is usually accomplished by perfective fermentation, or ebullition of the
blood, whereby the excrementitious parts are severed, and the whole mass of
blood purified: besides natural fl^xes of the haemorrhoides, and haemorrhages,
etc.

2. Another great office, or exercise of Nature is Perspiration, 2 Perspiration
(insensible, or sensible) which requires a spongious habitude of body, free
from all obstructions. And indeed no one can duly apprehend the sovereign
influence natural perspiration has, for the conservation of health, as also for
the expelling all noxious humors and malignant vapors. That which assists
nature herein, is the keeping the body under exercises, and motion in the open
air, whereby the pores are kept open, etc.

3. Another office of Nature, is to keep the spirits, 3 Spirits.
both natural, vital, and animal, in their due vigor, activity, and exercises.
For it is well known, that the spirits are the great fabricators, and opificers
of whatever is transacted in the body. Now the spirits are fed, and conserved
by a regular commixture of radical moisture, and congenial heat: for bodies
frigid, have but a jejune and slender spirit; whereas things moderately hot,
are spirituous. Also things grateful to the spirits, do most foment and improve
them.

4. Another exercise of Nature, consists in the due evacuation of excrements,
which requires that the body be soluble, and laxe, not costive; for costiveness
of body breeds many diseases, etc.

5. Another office of Nature, is to keep the body, and all parts thereof
permeable, which is necessary, in order to a due circulation of the blood.
Been vivere est, been aspirare, respirare, and perspirare.


6. Another office of Nature, is to keep the Lungs in their due crasis and
exercise; whence that Canon, to live well, is to breath well.

. 18. A third Canon for the conservation of health regards the Non-naturalls,
as they call them, namely Aliment, Air, Exercise, etc.

Rules for Aliment.
1. As for Aliment or food, Plato (as Pythagoras before him) lays much stresse
on a good regiment, or government in diet. Plato seems to make the whole of
Medicine to consist in allowing (...) proper or due food. For the ordering
whereof he tells us: 1. that by how much the more simple diet is by so much the
better: so in his de Repub. 3. fol. 404. he says (...) diet must be (...)
simple, not of differing sorts. So again he says (...) simple diet, and
Exercise are of great moment, as to the conservation of health.

2. In the ordering of diet there must be due regard had both to the quantity
and quality thereof, for says Plato, many diseases, which are instigated, and
provoked by Medicaments, are cured by orderly diet.

Been vivere est been ingerere, digerere; and egerere.
3. In all alimentation, and nutrition there is required a due attraction,
concoction, and Extrusion. For all aliment moving from the center to the
circumference, requires a regular course in all these regards, Especially as to
the first, viz. concoction; for as Sir Francis Bacon observes, the head (which
is the source of animal spirits) is under the tuition of the stomach having a
great Sympathy there with, and all crudities have their rise usually from too
much repletion. Secondly, as for Air, and Exercise they greatly conduce to the
conservation of health.

. 19. 2 Plato also discourses well of Therapeutick Physic in these
particulars. Therapeutick Physic.
1 He makes a Physician to be but (...) a Minister of Nature to assist her in
her proper offices, and operations. 2 Hence also he asserts that (...) Medicine
by how much the more simple, and Connatural it it is, by so much the better and
more commodious: For those are the best Medicaments, which work with, not
against Nature; we are religiously to observe the footsteps of Nature. And
therefore mild Catharticks, which relieve, are more eligible than violent. 3.
Hence adds Plato ( Timaeus 89.) (...). The best purgation is by Gymnastick
exercise. 4. Hence also in the same Timaeus fol. 89. Plato adds that Purgation
by pharmaceutick, or purgative medicaments is only then Expedient, when
necessary, (...) (...). Diseases are not to be irritated by Pharmaceutick
medicaments, unless they are very dangerous; for all constitution of diseases
is somewhat like to nature. So Hippocrates Sect. 2. Aphorism. 50. diseases
contracted by long custom are often better kept, than cured. 5. Whence also
follows another excellent prescript of Plato wherein he Praefers a good diet,
and exact regiment of the diseased, before all Cathartick or purgative
medicaments. So in his Timaeus fol. 89. If any (says Plato) shall contend to
hasten the cure of diseases before they have had their fatal course, there
usually follows of small, great, and of few, many diseases: (...). Wherefore
all such diseases must be gently corrected by diet, neither must an infest ill
be instigated or Exasperated by purging medicaments. Thus Plato. Hence that of
Seneca. In diseases nothing more dangerous, and pernicious then an unseasonable
Medicine.

6. But Plato's great and main Canon, which takes in the sum both of his
Prophylactick, and Therapeutick medicine is laid down in his Timaeus fol. 90.
thus (...) all medicine for every disease is one, to render to every one his
proper diet, and motions. Hippocrates in his Aphorisms expresses this
medicinal canon thus, (...), healthful exercise, moderation of diet, activity
of labors. This great Physic Canon of Plato and Hippocrates is comprehensive
of all other medicinal Rules: but particularly of these. 1. That the best
purgation is by exercitation, or natural motion. 2. That simple medicaments
(which we call kitchen Physic) are best. 3. That strong, and violent
catharticks or purging medicaments are seldom or never to be used, but in
cases of absolute necessity. 4. That diseases acquired by repletion or
fullness are to be cured by evacuation. Hippocrates. Sect. 2. Aphor. 22. i. e.
by fasting, perspiration, Sweating, etc. All this is comprised in the advice of
Sir Theodore Myron a great French Physician on his deathbed to a Noble friend
who demanded his advice for the preservation of health, to whom he replied Be
moderate in your diet, use much Exercise, and but little Physic.

. 20. The character of a good Physician.
Lastly because the cure of the patient depends much on the quality of the
Physician, we shall give a brief character of an able, faithful physician, and
that according to Plato's mind, with others.

1. Plato requires in a Physician great skill both speculative, and
Experimental: and the reason hereof, he gives us in his Gorgias fol. 464. Some
(says he) seem to have an (...) good habitude of body, who indeed have not.
Which infirmity none (...), but a skillful experienced Physician can discern.
He also Supposes a great measure of skill as requisite to sever noxious
humors from what are good: so in his lib. 8. de repub. fol, 567. (...).
Physicians purging out what is worst leave what is best behind.

2. Besides habitual Skill Plato requires an actual application of the same to
particular cases with an universal circumspection, and inspection into all
accidents though never so inconsiderable: so in his de Legib. lib. 10. fol.
902. what (says he) when a Physician is both able and willing to cure the
whole body; if he only considers greater matters, but neglects smaller, will
there be an happy success of that cure? No, etc. This rule of Plato regards
not only skill but also faithfulness, and diligence, which implies. 1. That
Physicians use not unknown remedies, when known and approved are a^ hand; which
is too common amongst many, thereby to make new experiments, or for some other
ill end. 2. That Physicians may not cure one disease by causing a greater,
which is too frequent. 3. That Physicians are to endeavor the removal of the
cause, and not only the curing of a symptom of the disease: not to imitate him
who in an hectic body endeavored to cure the itch. 4. A faithful Physician
will endeavor to cure a disease, not to defer it only: as many.

3. Another quality eminently requisite in a good Physician is meekness,
tenderness, and condescension to the patients condition. So Seneca speaking of
a good Physician says, that he will not refuse the most servile offices, nor
yet be moved at the impatience of his patient for his good, i. e. he will not
make his own humor or will, but his patients good the measure of his practice.

4. Lastly; every man of judgment, and experience might be his own best
Physician would he heed it; for there are but 3 things made essentially
requisite to a good Physician, that is, 1. Judgment 2. Institution. 3*
Experience, etc.

CHAP. X. A brief Abstract of Plato's Moral, and Metaphysical Philosophy.
I. Plato's Moral Philosophy: I. Ethics; where 1. of the chiefest Good; 2. of
Virtue; 3. of Sin; 4. of the Affections, and their Moderation; particularly the
Affection of Love; the Virtue of Justice. II. Plato's Oeconomicks; where
touching Imitation, Education. III. Plato's Politics; where 1. of right
Constitution, and Administration; 2. Laws, the Rule of such Administration; 3.
Magistrates, the Instruments of Administration according to Laws. II. Plato's
Metaphysics; 1. of God, and his Essence; 2. his Attributes; 1. Unity; 2.
Simplicity; 3. Immutabilitie; 4. Eternity; 5. Omnipresence; 6. Justice; 7.
Veracitie; 8. Purity; 9. Bounty; 10. Omniscience; 11. Incomprehensibilitie;
12. the Divine Will the Cause of all things. 2. the Humane Soul, its Original,
Immaterialitie, Capacity, Immortality, etc.

. 1. HAving dispatched Plato's Rational, and Natural Philosophy; Plato's Moral
and Metaphysick Philosophy.
we should now proceed to that which is Moral, and Supernatural; wherein indeed
his excellence seems to consist. But upon Reflection, considering that this
undertakement would swell this discourse before us, beyond the bounds of an
History, and especially make this third Book big, and bulkie, much beyond the
proportion of the rest: I have waved it at present, though not without some
thoughts of reassuming the same, in an intended Systeme of sound Philosophy.
Only for the present take this abstract Idea of Plato's Moral, and Supernatural
Philosophy. As for his Moral Philosophy, it may, according to the different
(...), or regard it has to its object, be distributed into (1) Ethick, which
respects personal Gubernation and Morals. (2) Oeconomick, which regards the
Regiment of Families. (3) Politic, which comprehends the Government of Cities
and Nations.

1 Plato's Ethics. 1. Of the chiefest good.
As for Plato's Ethics, we find in him excellent Contemplations and Discourses
(1) of the chiefest Good, which he styles (1) (...), altogether true. (Rep. 9.)
i. e. most real* substanti^l, and so^^. (2) (...), most proper, Rep. 9. (3)
(...), self-sufficient (4) (...), ^^mply good. (5) (...), the cause of all good
(6) (...), the most necessary good. (7. (...), the supreme idea of all good.
(8) (...), Infinite. (9) (...), eternal, and mo^ living. (10) (...), uniform.
(11) (...), pure, immixed, without sorrow. (12) (...), opp^r^unc. (13) (...),
the Divine, and god-like good. All which contemplation of the chiefest Good,
are applicable to none but God: neither may we presume, that Plato could
receive them any way, save only by some scriptural Tradition of God.

2. Of Virtue.
. 2. Plato Philosophizeth very morally of Virtue, its Divine Infusion, Nature,
and Excellency. (1) Touching the Divine Infusion of Virtue, Plato Meno (...),
fol. 99. proves at large that Virtue came not by Institution, but (...), by a
Divine Infusion; which he proves from this, that God often uses the most
unkilful instruments in the production of Virtue. (2) As for the Nature of
Virtue, Plato styles it (...), the Harmony of the s^ul; also (...), the Music
of the soul: And again, (...), the symmetrie, and good order of the soul,
whereby every faculty keeps its due place and motion: whence (3) follows the
Excellence of Virtue; which Plato places in this; that it gives Health,
Amplitude, Liberty, Nobility, Firmitude, and perfection unto the humane So^l.

8. Of Sin.
. 3. Plato Philosophizeth very notably of Sin, both ingenite, and acquisite. He
makes sin to be (...), an excess, or transgression of the Law: also (...), an
acting against right reason: whence he makes it to be (...), (as Epinom. fol
978.) an irrational, confused, irregular motion, etc. And particularly, of
irregular inordinate pleasures, he proves, Repub. 9. That they are the greatest
Tyrants; for the more indulgent the mind is to them, the more tyrannick, and
insolent they are.

4. Of the Affections, their Temperance and Moderation.
. 4. Plato discourses even to admiration, of that Temperance, and moderation,
which ought to be in the Affections, and sensitive appetite. He makes
Temperance to consist chiefly in (...), a certain Symphonie, and Harmony of
the Affections, as Rep. 4. whence he makes the temperate man to be (...),
stronger than himself: whereas the intemperate man is (...), weaker and worse
than himself, i. e. than his sensitive, animal part.

. 5. Plato Philosophizeth very Divinely of Love, Particularly of Love.
its sovereign Throne in, and Influence on the Soul, together with its proper
Acts. This he discourses of at large in his (...), which is wholly sper^ in
the Explication of this sovereign Affection. And more particularly, Plato has
admirable discourses of Amity, or Friendship as in his Lysis; where he
professedly sets himself to Philosophize on this Theme, which the Title of this
Dialogism styled, (...), of friendship, plainly enough imports.

. 6. Lastly, Plato discourses most accurately of Justice, Of Justice*
in its Universal Idea and Notion; especially in his Repub. 4. where he
explicates its nature, and influence in all affairs. So again in his de Leg.
12. We find many other great Ethick contemplation^, and characters, as in other
his Dialogues.

. 7. As for Plato's Oeconomicks, Plato's Oeconomicks.
he philosophizeth incomparably of Imitation; which he makes to be the most
efficacious principle of paternal Government. So in his de Leg. 5. as else
where, he demonstrates, that the best institution of youth is by example, and
conversation. He treats also of Education more largely in his Repub. 4.7. De
Leg. 1, 5, 7.

. 8. But that which renders Plato most famous as to Morals, Plato's Politics.
is his Politic discourses, which may be reduced to these three Heads, 1. Such
as relate to the constitution, and due Administration of a Republic. 2. Such
as treat of Laws both humane and Divine. 3. Such as give us the Character of a
good Magistrate, to administer according to such Laws. Of each of these he
philosophizeth at large in his Books de Republica, and de Legibus, etc.

. 9. Touching Plato's Metaphysics, or Supernatural Philosophy, Plato's
Metaphysics.
we are not without great notices thereof, 1 He seems to have had great
notions, or rather Traditions (originally Judaick) of Gods Essence, 1. Of God,
his Essence, and 2. Attributes. 1. Unity.
as described, Exodus 3.14. whom, in imitation of Moses, he styles (...), etc.
2. His Attributes, and 1. his Unity; that there is one, and but one true God:
he demonstrates at large against the Atheists, and Polytheists of his Age, in
his de Repub. 10. fol. 886. and that (1) From the nature of Visibles, and the
most harmonious variety of Times. (2) From Universal Consent. (3) From Motion,
and the first Motor, (4) From the Soul of the Universe, or the providence of
God Inspiring, and animating all things, fol. 895. 1. From that great innate
Idea of God in the soul, 899, etc. 2. Plato discourses very Divinely of the
simplicity of God, Of God's Simplicity.
whom he makes to be (...), without mixture, and (...), to remain simple in his
own form. 3. He av^wedly owns Gods Immutabilitie. Gods Immutabilitie.
So in his Parmenides, (...), the one first Being is immobile, and the same.
Again he says, that God is (...), etc. 4. Plato also demonstrates the
Eternity of God. God's Eternity.
So Timaeo fol. 27. (...), that which is always the same, can have no
beginning. The same he insists on in his Phaedrus. 5. Plato Parmen. 1, 8.
proves the omnipresence of God, God's Omnipresence.
from his Simplicity, and immensitie: for that which has no bounds, cannot be
confined. 6. Plato vindicates the Justice of God. God's Justice.
Parmen. 134. With God there is the most exact Government, etc. So de Leg. 3.
He says, That Justice follows God, as the vindicator of his Law, so de Leg.
10. 7. He philosophizeth also accurately of God's Fidelity and Veracitie; Of
God's Veracitie.
he says, God is (...), Truth it self, and (...), the first Truth. 8. He
greatly defends the purity of God, God's Purity.
Rep. 2. (...), etc. God can do no Evil, neither is he the Author of Evil. 9.
God's Benignity.

God's Omniscience.

God's incomprehensibilitie God's Will the cause of all things.


He makes mention of the Benignity of God, (...), is not God good? etc. 10. He
mentions also the Omniscience of God, and demonstrates the same at large,
Parmen. fol. 134. etc. where he treats at large of Divine Ideas; as also in his
Timaeus. 11. He discourses also of God's incomprehensibilitie, Parmen. 134.
(...), etc. 12. He makes God's will to be the Original, Universal, Sovereign,
and first cause of all things, as also of their futurition, Repub. 6. (...),
etc. 13. Farther Plato treats largely, and accurately of the providence of God,
of Religion, of the purity and simplicity of divine Worship, etc. Lastly,
Plato philosophizeth very sublimely of the Human Soul, 2. Of the Human Soul.
its divine origination, immaterialitie, infinite capacity, immortality,
perfection, and Activity. These, with many other Metaphysick contemplations,
Plato philosophizeth much of, which greatly demonstrate his acquaintance with,
and derivations from Judaick Traditions, as it may hereafter farther appear.

BOOK IV. Of Peripatetick, Cynick, Stoic, Sceptick, and Epicurean Philosophy.
CHAP. I. Of Aristotelick, or Peripatetick Philosophy, it is Traduction from
the Jews.
The traduction of Aristotle's Philosophy from the Jews, proved 1. By
Testimonies of Aristobulus, Clearchus, Clemens, Eusebius, Steuch. Eugub.
Seldom. 2. By rational Arguments; 1. Aristotle's converse with Jews, or, 2.
with their books; 3. his chief notions from Plato. 1. His Physics: touching
the first matter from Genesis 1.2. Gods being the first mover: the souls
spirituality. 2. His Metaphysics, object. Adequate ens, Principal God; Gods
providence, and the Souls separate state, why Aristotle rejected some
Traditions of Plato. His Ethics, and Politics Jewish. Aristotle's Life, and
Character; his Parallel with Plato. His Doctrines Acroatick, and Exoterick. His
Works, which genuine, etc. His Successor Theophrastus. His Interpreters,
Aphrodiseus, etc. The Arabian Commentators followed by the Scholemen. The
general idea of Aristotle's Philosophy, and particularly; 1. Of Aristotle's
Logic. 2. His Ethics. 1. of man's happiness, both objective and formal. 2. of
the principles of humane Acts. 1. of the practick Judgment, or Prudence. 2. of
Volition. 3. of Consultation. 4. Of Election. 3. Of Voluntariness and Liberty,
their identitie and combination with voluntary intrinsic necessity, etc. 4.
Of Moral Good or Virtue, its genus, habit; its form, mediocritie; its rule,
(...), or the Law of Nature; its definition, etc. Of Sin, its (...) anomie,
etc. 3. His Physics. 4. His Metaphysics.

The Traduction of Aristotle's Philosophy from the Jews proved, 1. By
Testimonies of Aristobulus.
. 1. NExt to the Platonic, we shall mention the Peripatetick, or Aristotelick
Philosophy, which received no small advantage, and improvement, from the
Jewish Church, and Scripture; as we may both from Autoritative, and Rational
Arguments justly conclude. As for Autorities, we have first that of
Arist^bulus, a sectator of Aristotle's Philosophy, mentioned by Clemens
Alexandr. (...). 5. who brings in Aristobulus affirming, that Aristotle (...),
depended much upon Moses's Law, and the other Prophets. So again, Clemens
Alexandrinus (...). 1. and Eusebius Praep. Evang. lib 9. Make mention of one
Clearchus Solens^s, Of Clearchus
a Disciple of Aristotle's, who testifies, that he saw a certain Jew, with
whom Aristotle had conversation. Eusebius's words are these, (...), etc.
Clearchus a Peripatetick Philosopher, in his first Book of Sleep, etc. In what
follows Eusebius, (quoting Clearchus's own words) shows us, That whilst
Aristotle lived in the maritime Regions of Asia, amongst other Students of
Philosophy, there associated himself to him a certain studious Inquisitive
Jew, who conversing familiarly with Aristotle, and his Disciples, (...), (which
according to Clearchus's relation, are Aristotle's words) he communicated more
than he received. Then Eusebius adds: Honored Clemens makes mention also
hereof in (...)* 1. concerning which, he thus speaks: (...). Clearchus the
Peripatetick, says he, knew a certain Jew, who had conversation with
Aristotle. Thus Eusebius. Praep. l. 9. f. 240. Edit. Paris 1544. August. Steuch.
Eugub. abounds much in this argument; Aug. Steuch. Eugubinus.
Namely, that the best parts of Aristotle's Philosophy were derived originally
from the Mosaic Theology. Thus de Perenni Philosoph. lib. 4. cap. 1.
Eugubinus gives us Aristotle's confession, That there was one God, who
overraled not only heavenly Motions, but also the whole world, answerable to
Moses's Theology. The same he confirms cap. 7.8.9. The like he proves of the
Divine Beatitude, consisting in contemplation, as cap. 11.12.19. But more
particularly cap. 20. he demonstrates, how Aristotle confessing, that God
created man and woman for the preservation of mankind, marvellously accorded
with Moses herein. For Aristotle in Oeconomicis, de Conjugio, showing how
necessary Marriage is, says, (...), It was thus provided by the Divinity
itsel^, or God, that there should be a Nature both of Male and Female for
communion. Whence Eugubinus collects, That as Moses says, He created them male
and female: so thou hear Aristotle in this place (which is a wonder) saying,
That the Divinity provided that there should be Male and Female for communion,
to the intent that Nature, which cannot subsist in one Individual, might be
propagated by the succession of species: Thou shall see therefore in Aristotle,
and wonder at the same, the same Theology which is in Moses, touching the
creation of man, etc. Thus Eugubinus; who lib. 9. cap. 7. thoroughout
Demonstrates more fully, That Aristotle marvellously accorded with the Mosaic
Theology, touching man's creation by God, the formation of the body, the
difference of Sex, and the Infusion of the Soul from without. And in what
follows cap. 8.9. He proves that Aristotle conceived the same, touching the
immortality of the Soul. To which we may add the Testimony of Seldom, (de Jure
Not. Gent. Hebraeor. lib. 1. cap. 2. fol 14.15.) where, having cited the
Authority of Aristobulus, for Aristotle's traducing much of his Philosophy
from the Jews, he adds: And certainly there is yet extant an old comment of
some Hebrews, affirming, That Aristotle being about to die, instructed his
Disciples touching the immortality of the Soul, also of its punishment, and
reward, according as he had been taught by the peculiar Posterity of Shem, id
est, by the Jews: al^o that having been admonished by Simeon the Just (High
Priest) he changed his old Opinions, in all points, wherein he had formerly
held against the Law, and Doctrine of the Hebrews, and was transformed into
another man. MSS: in the Library at Oxford. But albeit there is no ground, why
we should believe these Figments; yet hence it is sufficiently evident, that
there prevailed an opinion even amongst the Hebrews themsel^es, of a singular
communion, and commerce 'twixt them and the ancient Greek Philosophers, as to
the Traduction, and Reception of Sciences, whereunto the Christian Fathers,
Clemens Alexandrinus, Justin, Theodoret, Ambrose, and others, are Consonous.
Thus Seldom; who fol. 23. adds more of like import.

Rational Arguments. 1. From Aristotle's converse with Jews.
. 2. But to come to some rational conjectures, whence we may with great
probability conclude, that Aristotle's Philosophy, as to its purer, and more
Orthodox parts, was very much traduced from the Jewish Church, and Scriptures.
If that prove true, which was even now mentioned, that Aristotle was in Asia,
yea in Syria, and Judea, (as we may presume with Alexander) then we may easily
be satisfied, how he came to acquaint himself with the Jewish Learning, and
Records. For if Aristotle attended Alexander unto Phenicia, and Judea, we
cannot rationally conceive he would let pass such a people as the Jews were, so
renowned for ancient Records and Wisdom, without acquainting himself with their
Principles and Doctrine, especially they being those, from whom his Master
Plato received his choicest contemplations. 2. Alexander's procuring him all
Oriental Books.
2. But on supposition, that Aristotle was not in Judea with Alexander, yet
it is credibly said, that Alexander furnished him with all the choicest Books
(yea, whole Libraries) that he could meet with in his Eastern Expedition:
amongst which, we may rationally conjecture the Jewish Records, and Books were
not omitted: especially if that be true, which Josephus mentions of Alexander's
coming to Jerusalem, and vouchsafing particular honors and favors to the
Jewish Nation, 3. Aristotle's Philosophy from Plato.
etc. But 3. This is certain, that Aristotle received the more choice parts of
his Philosophy from his Master Plato, as we could easily demonstrate, by
multitudes of particulars, both in his Physics, Metaphysics, Ethics, and
Politics, wherein Aristotle follows Plato in many of his choicer Notions,
(...), though he clothes them in his own Method. Now that Plato received his
Philosophy, both matter and form, for the chiefest part, from the Jews, and
sacred Scriptures, has been proved in the former Book.

. 4. But to give a more full Demonstration of the Traduction of Aristotle's
Philosophy from the Jewish Church, and Scriptures originally, we shall give
some brief touches on some of the more principal materials thereof. As 1.
whence sprang the choicer parts of Aristotle's Physics, 1. Aristotle's
Physics from Plato, and both from Genesis 1.2. etc. Aristotle's first matter.
but from some Traditions imparted to him by his Master Plato. Thus Aristotle's
notions about the first matter of all things, and its affections are evidently
nothing else but some broken fragments of those Traditions, which Plato had
received originally from the Jewish Church, touching the first Chaos, or rude
Mass, out of which all things were at first created, as Genesis 1, 2. Hence it was
that Aristotle styles his first matter Inform, yet capable of any form;
indeterminate, and indigested, a mere passive power, etc. which are notions
exactly conform to the Mosaic description, Genesis 1.2. as we have before
demonstrated. The same may be said for Aristotle's two other principles,
privation and Form, Aristotle's first mover from Plato's description of God.
of which we have before treated in Plato's Physics. Again Aristotle in his
Physics lib. 1. cap. 1* 2.3.6.7. as lib. 8. cap. 6.7.10. is very copious in
his Philoso^hizings on the first Mover; proving, that he is immovable, one
eternal indivisible Being, void of all quantity, etc. wherein he exactly
follows Plato, and the Scripture Revelation of God, as Joh. Grammaticus in
Aristot. de anima. As to the humane Soul, (which takes up a good part of
Physics) Diogenes Laertius, in the life of Aristotle, assures us, that he held
with Plato, (...), that the soul was spiritual, Of the Soul its spirituality
etc. The same is mentioned by Johan Grammaticus in his Preface to Arist. de
Anima. This Plato received originally from the Jewish Church, as we have before
proved, etc. Farther Aristotle seems to have had some Notices of the Soul's
creation and infusion by God. Aristoteles mirifice consentit cum Theologia
Mosaica, hominem a Deo conditum, formatumque corpus, datamque sexus varietatem*
animam autem exterius inspiratam. Steuch. Eugubin. de Peren. Philos. l. 9. c. 7
Thus Steuch. Eugubinus de Pereu* Philosoph. lib. 4. cap. 24. As Moses said,
God breathed into his Nostrils the breath of life, Genesis 2.7. So Aristotle, in
libris de Generat. Animal. says, that the mind came (...) from without. So
Aristot. de Anima, having proved that it is imp^ssible that the sensitive Soul
should come from without, because it is contained in the seed: he concludes of
the mind. (...), It remains that the mind alone be infused from without, and
that it alone be Divine, whose operation communicates not with corporeous
action. Whence the same Aristotle calls the mind (...), most ^kin to God. Yea,
de Anima, lib. 1* text. 4. He makes the soul, (...), to be impatible, and
im^^ixt, i. e. simple and incorruptible. So text 7. he says, (...), but the
mind is separable from the body, i e. incorporeous. See more Part. 1. B. 3. c.
7.. 6. Yea, why may we not safely conjecture, that Aristotle received the chief
Ideas of his History of Animals (which is his Masterpiece) from Solomon's
Books, which he writ of the Nature of Animals? 2. 2. Aristotle's Metaphysics
from Plato.
But we pass on to Aristotle's Metaphysics, which indeed seem nothing else but
some fragments, or miscellaneous collections he had gathered up out of Plato's
Philosophy. For the chief object of his Metaphysics, he makes to be (...),
etc. ens quatenus ens; which is the proper notion whereby Plato (as Pythagoras
before him) expressed God, Principal object of Metaphysics from Exodus 3.14.
traduced originally from Exodus 3.14. as we have fully proved before in
Pythagoras's Metaphysics, chap. 8.. 4. The simple affections of this (...)
Ens, Being, Aristotle makes to be Unity, Verity, and Bonity, The Affections of
Ens, Unity, Verity, and Bonitie.
which are the Affections, which Plato attributes unto God, and that in
imitation of Jewish and sacred Tradition as before. B. 2. C. 8.. 4.5. Farther,
that Aristotle had much knowledge of God, his spiritual Nature, and Providence,
and that from his Master Plato's Philosophizings, Aristotle's knowledge of God.
we are informed by Diogen^s Laertius in his Life; where he tells us, that
Aristotle conformable to Plato, defined God thus, (...), God is a spirit. He
also tells us, Touching Aristotle's Notions of God, and their conformity to
Moses. See Steuch. Eugubinus de Peren. Philos. l. 4. c. 1.7.8.9. etc.
that Aristotle held Gods Providence to reach (...), even to Celestials, (...),
and that he was immovable, b^t ordered earthly affairs, according to that
sympathy, or congr^ence they had to Celestials. Another piece of Metaphysics
regards the Soul in its separate State, whereof some think Aristotle had some
notices. So Sir Kenelm Digby, in his discourse of the Soul, fol. 431. first
Edit. Eng.) If we (says he) had Aristotle's Book, which he wrote of the Soul,
upon the Death of his Friend Eudemus, it is very likely we should there see his
evident assertion of her immortality, The Soul separated.
etc. This some gather also from that passage, which is said to drop from him
whilst he lay a dying, viz. O Being of Beings have mercy on me. A rational
account why Aristotle rejected some of the more sublime, and Mystic Traditions
of Plato.
But to speak what seems to be the truth in this matter: Though Aristotle was
ready to entertain such notions of God, and his Providence, as were agreeable
to the model of his Reason, yet such as depended purely on Tradition he
rejected, as not agreeable to a Philosopher. Hence, whereas Plato (as
Pythagoras, and all the Philosophers before Aristotle) held the production of
the first matter by God; he asserted an Eternity of Matter: and whereas Plato
asserted that all things were made conformable to the exemplar of Divine Ideas,
or Decrees; Aristotle not fully comprehending what Plato imperfectly received,
and imparted, touching those Divine Ideas, utterly expungeth them out of his
Philosophy. This therefore seems to be the genuine reason why Aristotle
embraced not more readily those greater, and more Divine mysteries of Jewish
Wisdom, as well as his Master Plato, and Pythagoras; because they were matters
of pure belief, above the reach of his natural Reason. Plato, as Pythagoras,
conversing much in the Oriental parts, and (as we have endeavored to prove)
with many Jews in Egypt, etc. They much recreated themselves with any ancient
Records, Traditions, or Reports of Divine matters, though never so mysterious,
and above their capacities: But Aristotle giving himself up wholly to the
government of his Reason, he confined himself to such Tradit^ons, as would suit
therewith, rejecting all other, which his corrupt Reason could not comprehend,
or reduce to demonstration. And he himself seems to give this as a reason, why
he discoursed no more of things future, and Divine; because (says he, Eth.
lib. 1. cap. 10.) (...), what is future, is to us uncertain. He so much
idolized his own Reason (which was indeed very Masculine and Nervous) as that
he slighted all Traditions, which carried not with them evidence, and Notices
of their Truth. (This made him either wholly to reject, or else miserably to
adulterate the more sublime, and Divine of Plato's Traditions). But 3. 3.
Aristotle'^ Ethics.
As to Aristotle's Ethics, there seems to be more evident Characters of their
Traduction from the sacred Jewish fountain originally, if not immediately, for
all the Characters, he gives ( Ethic. lib. 1. cap. 1.2. etc.) of the chiefest
good, are the same, which Plato lays down: so also his Character of
Friendship, Justice, Temperance, and other Virtues, are for the main (though
not in the same method) derived from Plato, and we need not doubt, but
originally from some sacred Author, Solomon, or some other. 4. As for
Aristotle's Politics, 4. His Politics from the Jews.
great part of them seem to have much cognat^on with the Jewish Institutes, and
we may rationally conjecture, had their derivation thence: So Cunaeus (de
Repub. Hebr. p. 21.) tells us, That Aristotle in his Books of Politics,
recites certain Edicts, composed by the most ancient Legislators, which are
very like to the Mosaic In^titutes. For Oxylus, King of the El^ans, forbids
his Subjects to Morgage their Fields for money And the Locrenses were forbid to
sell the possessions of their Ancestors, etc. And in our former discourse of
Philologi^, touching the Original of Pagan Laws, we have proved their
Traduction from the Institutes of Moses, etc.

. 4. Aristotle's Life.
But to proceed to somewhat a more general account of Aristotle, his Life, and
Philosophy, which peradventure may add some strength to our particular
Hypothesis. Aristotle was born at Stagira, (belonging sometimes to Thracia, but
at Aristotle's birth under the Macedonian Empire) his Parents were Nicomachus,
and Phaestis, according to that Greek Hexameter (...). This Nicomachus was
Physician to King Amyntas, who was Father to Philip, and Grandfather to
Alexander the Great. Aristotle in memory of his Father, called his Son
Nicomachus, to whom he writes his Ethics, which were thence called his
Nicomachia, to difference them from his Eudemia, and Magna Moralia. For
Aristotle left three sorts of Ethics, as Vossius. Albeit Cicero doubts,
whether these Ethics were not writ by Nicomachus himself: that this Nicomachus
writ Books of Ethick^, is the affirmation of Suidas. Aristotle in the
sevent^enth year of his age went to Plato, whom he heard twenty years. After
Plato's death, which was in the first year of 108 Olympiad (Speusippus his
Nephew succeeding in the Academy) Aristotle went to Hermias the Eunuch, King of
Artana of Mysia, with whom he lived three years. After the death of Hermias,
upon the request of Philip, Aristotle came to Macedon, where having lived eight
years with Alexander, he returned to Athens; And the Academic being
praepossessed by Xenocrates, Aristotle made choice of the Lyceum (a place in
the Suburbs of Athens, Peripatetici a (...) nominati sectae suae conditorem and
caput agnoscunt Aristotelem, qui in Xysto seu horto ambulationi accommodato
docebat. Laert. lib. 5. Hornius Hist. Phil. l. 3. c. 15
built by Pericles for the exercising of Soldiers) where he taught
Philosophy, walking constantly every day 'till the hour of Anointing, whence
his Sect was called Peripatetick. Thus Laertius. So also Hesychius in
Aristotle: (...) The Peripatetick Philosophy was so termed from Aristotle, who
began it in the Peripatum, or Ambulatorie. So Cicero Academ. 1. Those who were
with Aristotle, were called Peripateticks, because they dispated walking in the
Lyceum. Aristotle taught Philosophy in the Lyceum twelve years. But after the
death of Alexander, who upheld him, some of his Emplators conspiring against
his Life, he left Athens, and went to Chalcis. He lived after the death of
Plato 26 years, and died 63 years aged: Whereof see more in Laertius of his
life, etc.

Aristotle's Character.
. 5. As for Aristotle's Character, we find him greatly applauded by the
Ancients for his Universal skill in Sciences. Plato himself (who is sometimes
invective against Aristotle) styles him (...), the Intellect of his Schole; as
also (...), the Philosopher of Truth. Laertius lib. 5. says, That he was a
person of great Study, and incredible Invention. It is said also, That he was
the first that collected the dispersed members of Philosophy into one body,
and Systeme: he prescribed in his Logic a certain form of Argumentation: he
perfected Ethics begun by Socrates: of Physics he discoursed so accurately,
as that he left all, even Plato himself behind him: he bestowed most profitable
endeavors in searching into the History of Animals, of which he writ almost
50 Volumns: as Pliny lib. 8. cap. 16. Quintil. lib. 12. cap. 11. and Hornius
Hist. Philos. lib. 3. cap. 15. Quintilian lib. 10. cap. 1. makes this
honorable mention of him: Why should I mention Aristotle? whom I doubt,
whether I should account more famous for his knowledge of things, or for his
copiousness of writing, or for his s^avitie of speech, or for his Acumen of
Invention, or for his variety of Works. Pliny styles him the Co^yphaeus in all
Sciences. Arnobius lib. 3. advers. Gent. tells us, That Aristotle was a person
of an excellent ingenie, and surpassing in Doctrine: Nay, is bold to style him,
One of an Universal knowledge; yea, the measure or end of humane understanding.
Hieronymus in Reg. Monach cap. 11. says, Aristotle was the Prince of the Wise
men, a Prodigy, and the grand Miracle in all Nature, who seems to have had
infused into him whatever the humane ingenie was naturally capable of. And in
cap. 3. Ionae, he attests, that there were certain honorarie pieces of brass
money, stamped on the one side with Aristotle's Image, and on the other, with
this Inscription, Naturae Miraculum, the Miracle of Nature, as Hornius Hist.
Philos. lib. 3, cap. 15. See a more ample Character of Aristotle's glory, that
he was too invective, and invidious against such as differed from him, and not
so candid in relating their opinion, as he ought to have been. This is evident
from his smister treating Democritus, Parmemdes, yea, and his own Master Plato,
who felt the strokes of his censorious Rod, whence Laertius brings in Plato,
complaining against Aristotle, that he was like a young Colt, that kicked
against its Dam, etc. Indeed we have a just, and exact Character of Aristotle,
in Cas^ speculo Moral. Quaest. lib. 1. cap. 6. I conceive (says he) Aristotle
to be in refuting others a Camel, in Philosophizing the Prince of all. I call
him a Camel in refuting, because he strikes them with the heels of Envy, from
whose dugs he sucked the Nectar of Philosophy. In Philosophizing, I call him a
Prince, because he discourses so of the secrets of Nature, as none more
acutely, he demonstrates so, as none more accurately; he defends so, as none
more stoutly. Wherefore, as in ref^ting others, he is scarcely to be saluted:
so in his demonstrating of things, I would have him to be embraced with both
arms. If he refels (if I mistake not) he does either change the word, or invert
the sense, or feign a new one: and as Hercules with the Pygmeys, so Aristotle
with a shadow, contends de lana caprina.

A comparison 'twixt Plato, and Aristotle.
. 6. If we consider Aristotle, comparatively with Plato, we shall find the
learned very differing in their comparisons 'twixt the one, and the other. Some
there are, who place Aristotle in many degrees of Preeminence above Plato, as
the Scholemen universally do: Others there are, who give the Precedence to
Plato, as some Fathers did. But if any degree of comparison be lawful, I think
that of Ludovicus Vives is most agreeable, who gives them each, though in
different regards, a preeminence over the other. So Lud. Vives in August. Civ.
lib. 8. cap. 12. The Greeks style Plato (...), the Divine, Aristotle (...), the
Demon, or Intelligent. Aristotle, I had almost said, excels Plato in the
Science of Rhetoric, 1. As to Rhetoric.
albeit Plato, Plato omnium Philosophorum praecipuus ubere^, amplam, uno verbo
Ulys^eam oratione^ affectabat. Horn. Hist. Phil. l. 7. c. 14.
without peradventure, surpasses Aristotle in the exercitation and use
thereof. For Aristotle always loved brevity, both of things, and sentences:
therefore his great care was to admit of no supervacaneous word, Plato said,
that Xenocrates wanted spurs, but Aristotle his condisciple a bridle, etc. As
for Plato's Eloquence, it is thus characterized by Quintilian, lib. 10. cap 1.
Plato was invested with a kind of Divine, and Homerick faculty of Orating: He
swells much beyond Prose, and that which the Greeks call Pedester Oration; so
that he seems to me to be inspired not with the ingenie of a man, but with a
certain Delphick Oracle. Aristotle used an elegant Oration, but acc^rate,
nervous, strict, and next to an obscure mode of speech as Horn. Hi^t. Phil. lib
7. cap. 14 If we compare Aristotle and Plato in point of Logic, 2 As to Logic.
and method of Philosophizing, it is evident that Plato's Logic, or me^hod of
Rat^^cination, was more plain and familiar, mixed with many elegant
illustrations and examples whereas Aristotle's method was more artificial, and
accurate, consisting of more exact definitions, divisions, and demonstrations.
Whence that Famous saying, Plato teaches, Aristotle proves. Thus Keck. Tract.
2. praecogn. Logic. cap. 2. God has honored the Peripatetick Sect only with
this glory, that what Plato, and others handled, and delivered confusedly, and
imperfectly, without Method, and order, under the shadows of Metaphors, and
Fables, the same things Aristotle first delivered unto mankind, under the form
of a dext'rous Method well regulated, and whose parts are full, and complete.
But if we compare them in regard of Metaphysics, and divine contemplations,
its evident, yea, 3. As to Metaphysics.
confessed, that Aristotle was far inferior to Plato herein: And the reason is
as apparent; for Plato delighting himself much in Jewish Traditions, which he
had imbibed partly from the Pythagorean Philosophy, and partly by means of his
own personal conversation in the Oriental parts, he thereby obtained great
notices of Divine Mysteries, especially of such as related to the origin of
the Universe, the spiritual nature, and perfection of God, the Immortality of
the Soul etc. But Aristotle, as Simplicius observes of him, confining himself
to the sphere of his own Reason, would needs examine Divine matters by Nature,
and admit nothing but what was grounded on Natures Light, or rather on his own
corrupt Reason. Whence he rejected all such Oriental Traditions, as would not
stoop to his proud Ratiocination, Aristotle 's Doctrines either Acroatick or
Exoterick.

Aristoteles horis matutinis legebat ea, quae subtilioris erant indaginis, sive
(...); a meridie Exotericis dabat operam. Gell. l. 20. c. 4. Hornius hist.
Phil. l. 7. c. 4.


as before.

. 7. Aristotle's Philosophizings were (as it is presumed) by himself distributed
into (...) or (...), Acroaticks, or Acroamaticks, and (...) Exotericks* his
Acroatick Doctrines he taught in the morning wa^king in the Lyceum, whereunto
he admitted none but the choicer wits, or genuine Disciples whence 'twas termed
(...); the Exotericks he taught in the evening, whence it was called (...):
these were more common. His Acroaticks contain his more subtle Philosophy
namely his Physics, and Logic Disceptations: his Exotericks comprehend his
more vulgar Philosophizings, and other Discourses; as his Politics, Ethics,
Rhetoric, and such like. Thus Gellius, lib. 20. cap. 4. Aristotle' (...) were
those his Comments, which conduced to Rhetoric meditatations, the Faculty of
wrangling, and the knowledge of Politics. His (...) were those, in which more
remote, and subtle Philosophy, was agitated, and which appertained to Physic
Contemplations, and Dialectick Disceptations. His Acroamaticks he read in the
morning to h^s more ripe and choice Wits, but Exotericks promiscuously without
choice: whence the former were called (...) and (...); also (...), as the
latter (...)* according to Horn. Hi^t. Philos. lib 7. cap. 9. Lucian in his
Dialogue inscribed (...), divides Aristotle's Writings into (...) Exotericks,
and Esotericks; whereof the latter are the same with his Acroaticks, which
Amm^nius (in Aristotelis Categ.) says, were so called, (...) because he
therein discoursed with his genuine and proper Disciples. These Acroaticks, he
farther acquaints us, were (...), delivered in his own person, namely (...). In
which he teaches in his own proper person, his own Phenomenon, the which he
endeavors to prove by the most exquisite arguments, beyond vulgar Capacities.
Plutarch in the life of Alexander tells us, that the Peripateticks called these
more Mystic, and weighty Doctrines (...) Acroamatick, and Epoptick: namely in
allusion, unto the Eleusinian Sacreds; wherein those who were initiated were
for the first four years called (...) My^ticks: who stood on the threshold
before the Sacrarie, Illud non est praetermittendum, circa Aristotelis tempora,
Grammaticam, quae vocatur Methodica. Philosoph^ae adjunctam esse. Horn. Hist.
Phil. l. 3. c. 15.
but in the fifth year they had the privilege of being admitted into the inner
Sacracy, there to contemplate the hidden Sacreds, whence they were styled (...)
contemplators. So in like manner the Secrets of Philosophy which Aristotle
delivered to his genuine Disciples were termed (...) Epopticks. As for
Aristotle's Exotericks, we have them thus explicated by Clemens Alexandr.
(...). His Dialogicks are such, as he writes not in his own person, but, as
Plato, induces other persons speaking; which are also called Exotericks
because they were written for the benefit of the vulgar sort. See Vossius de
Philos. Sect. cap. 17.. 9.

Aristotle's works what genuine, what not?
. 8. By what has been mentioned of Aristotle's Dialogicks as also by Laertius's
Catalogue of his Works, we may judge how many of his books have perished. For
amongst all Aristotle's Works we fi^d none written in a Dialogick Style, though
it be generally confessed, he writ many Dialogues: so Cicero to Lentulus says,
that he had polished his 3 books of an Orator in a Dialogick Strain, after the
Aristotelick mode. Such also were Aristotle's Sophista, and Menexenus, which
treated of Morals, and are mentioned by Laertius; likewise his Nerithus, and
Gryllus which treated of the Oratorian Art: also his Eudemus or Dialogue of the
Soul. All Which Dialogick Discourses, referred by Cicero, and others to
Aristotle's (...) Exotericks are not now to be found. Yet we may not conclude
with Caelio Eurio the Second, that there remain extant only three genuine
pieces of Aristotle, viz his History of Animals, his book of the World, and
his Rhetoric to Alexander: For there are many other pieces of Aristotle, which
carry with them evident notices of his spirit; as his book (...), also his
(...), both the one and the other; his books (...), and those of the Soul, etc.
Yet it is very probable, that the book of the Universe, reckoned amongst
Aristotle's Works, was not his, because it has too orthodox sentiments of God,
his Providence, and Gubernation, which Aristotle seems not to approve of. Also
that other piece of Rhetoric to Alexander, mentioned by Caelio Curio, is
supposed not to be Aristotle's but Anaxamines Lampsacenus's who also was master
to Alexander the Great, as Vossius de Philosoph. Sect. cap. 17.. 13.

. 9. Aristotele's books how conveyed to posterity.
Aristotle dying left his Library of books to Theophrastus his successor:
Theophrastus leaves them to Neleus who was also Disciple of Aristotle, as
Laertius tells us. Neleus sells them to Ptolomaeus Philadelphus, who
transferred them into his Alexandrine Library, as Athenaeus lib. 1. Thus Is.
Casaubon. in Athen. lib. 1. cap. 2. Aristotle's Library was first possessed by
Theophrastus: whence it by Testament descended to Neleus. The story is known
out of Strabo, Plutarch, Diogenes. You may learn out of Strabo, how true it is,
that Ptolomie bought the books of this Philosopher from Neleus, or his
posterity, etc. Thus Casaubon. we have the words of Strabo lib. 13. (...).
Aristotle was the first, that we know of, who collected books, and taught the
Kings of Egypt to erect a Library. That Aristotle was a great affector of
books, appears by an observation of Gellius lib. 3. cap. 17. who tells us,
Hornius Histor. Phil. l. 3. c. 15.
that Aristotle paid 3 Attick talents for some few books of Speusippus the
Philosopher, etc. What is said of Ptolemie's buying Aristotele's books of
Neleus some understand of his Library only: For those books, which Aristotle
writ himself, it is reported, that Neleus retained them for himself, and
transmitted them to his posterity, who being not learned kept them under keys,
without use. Hence Strabo calls them (...), books locked up. Yea, it is said,
that they, fearing least the Kings of Pergamus (who erected a great Library,
which was afterward by Cleopatra's means transferred to Alexandria) should
take them away, hid them long under ground, which brought no small damage to
these Books; for hereby they grew moldy, worm-eaten, moth eaten, etc. After
this Apellico Teius buys them, who being as Atheneas characterizeth him (...),
rather than (...).
more bookish then learned, causes these worm-eaten books of Aristotle to be
transcribed and made public, but without judgment, or fidelity. After his
death Sylla (about 200. years after Aristotle's death) possessing Athens, takes
these Books, and sends them to Rome (as Plutarch in Sylla) where Tyrannio
Grammaticus, a great Student in Aristotle, obtained from the Keeper of the
Library, the use of them. And the Bookselle^s got these books transcribed, but
by unmeet Librarians, and such as would not so much as compare their
Transcripts with the Original Exemplar. Whence Aristotle's Books received
farther detriment. Plutarch. in Sylla.
This Tyrannio delivered over these Books to And^onicus Rhod^us, who was the
first that took care for the more exact transcribing of Aristotle's Books into
many Exemplars* in order to the publication of them. Thence men began to
dispute more about Acroaticks, whereas in the foregoing time, even from the
decease of Theophrastus (by reason of the scarcity of Aristotle's choicest
pieces) they were wont to dispute only about Exotericks probably, etc. As
Vossius de Philosoph. Sect. cap. 17.. 11. Though indeed to speak the truth,
Aristotle came not to be in so general repute till Alexander Aphrod seus began
to enterpret him; Aristotle 's Successors, Theophrastus, etc. Apud Theophrastum
graviter elaborata est Philosophia. Pic. Mirandul. in Apol. 90. These.
as hereafter.

. 10. Aristotle's Successor was Theophrastus Eresius, who was first called
Tyrtamus, but afterward, by reason of his (as they phrased it) Divine
Eloquence, was by his Master Aristotle named Theophrastus. Thus Strabo lib. 13.
(...). Theophrastus was first called Tyrtamus; for Aristotle first called him
Theophrastus, both to avoid the asperity of his former name, as also to
signify the excellence of his eloquence: for Aristotle made all his disciples
eloquent, but Theophrastus most eloquent. See the same in Diogenes Laertius,
Hesychius Illustris, and Suidas. Theophrastus being a person greatly esteemed
for his Learning, and Eloquence, had a huge confluence of Disciples, at least
Auditors, to the number of 2000, as Laertius, and Hesychius. He does in some
things differ from his Master Aristotle: as in Meteors, touching the efficient
cause of the Rains; also concerning the cause of the Oblique Winds, the matter
of hot and dry Exhalations, the original of the saltness of the Sea, etc.
Theophrastus seems to write of some things more exactly than Aristotle; as of
other things, which are not mentioned by Aristotle. He has excellent Physic
discourses of Plants, of the Winds, of Fire, besides many choice Moral
characters. The greatness of his worth, is sufficiently discovered in
Aristotle's choice of him for his ^uccessor. For Gellius lib. 13. cap. 5. tells
us, That Aristotle about the time of his departure, being demanded whom he
would have for his Successor, whether Theophrastus Lesbius, or E^demus Rhodius?
commanded them to bring him two sorts of Wi^e, the Rhodi^^, and Lesbian; and
having tasted of both, he replye^ the Rhodian wine was very good, but the
Lesbian was sweeter: by which lepid, and pleasant answer, he discovered his
pre^^^ on of Lesbius Theophrastus, before Eudemus Rhodius. The Auditors of
Theophrastus were Strato Lampsacenus, and Demetrius Phalereus. Strato was
succeeded by Lycon Troadensis, Lycon by Aristo Ceius, Aristo by Critolaus
Phasilites, Critolaus by Diodorus, and he by Neleus.

. 11. Amongst the Commentators on Aristotle, Alexander Aphrodiseus the chief
commentator on Aristotle.
Alexander Aphrodiseus has the precellence given him by the Learned, and that
both for his Antiquity, th^re being none of Aristotle's Enterpreters more
ancient (save Herminus, whose Commentaries are all, except a few fragments,
lost) as also for his intimate acquaintance with Aristotle's mind, and firm
adherence thereto. For as for the other Commentators, they either take part
with Plato, wherein he differs from Aristotle, as Simplicius; or else they
endeavor to reconcile Aristotle with Plato, as Ammonito, etc. whereas
Alexander Aphrosideus follows Aristotle (...), and defends him stoutly against
the Stoics, and other Sects. Whence it was, that Plotinus was wont for the
understanding of Aristotle, to consult Alexander, as Porphyrie in his Life: and
the Greeks call him, (...), the great Enterpreter. Cyril also against Julian,
styles him the Lover of Aristotle, and the most diligent, and most acute of all
the Philosophers. Whence also the Arabian Commentators, Averroes, Avicenna,
etc. make most use of him in their Illustrations, and Commentaries on
Aristotle: Yea, to give him his just praise, Aristotle came not upon the Stage
to be Master of the Schools, till this Alexander, by his learned Commentaries,
advanced him into the Chair, as it is well observed by Lud. Vives in August.
Civit. lib. 8. cap. 10. From the times of Plato and Aristotle, even to
Alexander Aprodiseus, who lived under the Emperors, Severus, and his Son (about
210 years after Christ) Aristotle was named, rather than read, or understood by
the Learned. This Alexander was the first that attempted to enucleate, and
enterpret Aristotle, who greatly promoted others in their Studies of, and
Inquisitions into Aristotle. Yet all this while Plato continued more frequent
in the hands, and more understood by the minds of men. But here we must know,
that many of those Commentaries, that pass under Alexander's name, are
spurious. His genuine Comments are on Aristotle's Meteors, etc.

Greek Commentators.
. 12. There were also amongst the Greeks others, who Commented on Aristotle: as
(not to mention Porphyrie his (...) on Aristotle, because he was a Platonist)
1. Themistius Surnamed by reason of his Eloquence, Themistius.
Euphrades: who lived in the times of Constance, Jovinian, Valens, and
Valentinian the Emperors, to whom he dedicated several Orations yet extant (
Augustine calls him his Master) 2. Olympiodorus the Alexandrian Philosopher,
Olympiodorus.
who flourished about the year 480, and was, according to Suidas, Praeceptor to
Proclus Lycius, Proclus.
and Auditor to Syrianus, etc. 3. Proclus Lycius Surnamed (...), who succeeded
in the Platonic Schole, and was (as Porphyrie before him) a bitter Writer
against the Christians. 4. Johannes Grammaticus Surnamed Philoponus, Philoponus.
who answered Proclus, and was a great propugnator of the Christian Religion,
as well as an excellent Commentator on Aristotle. 5. Ammonius* Ammonius.
who was a Disciple of Proclus Lycius, and a clear Commentator on Aristotle,
though he does often Platonize. 6. Simplicius, Simplicius.
who flourished under Justinian the Emperor, and was very invective against
Johannes Grammaticus, yet an excellent Interpreter of Aristotle, albeit he does
Platonize. We find a good, though concise character of these Commentators on
Aristotle in Pici Mirandulani Apologia 90. Philosophy among the Grecians
remains very beautiful and chaste; She is in Simplicius very rich, and copious;
in Themistius elegant, and compendious; in Alexander, constant and learned; in
Theophrastus greatly elaborate; in Ammonius clear, and gracious.

. 13. After the Grecians followed the Arabian Commentators on Aristotle;
Arabians.
amongst whom the principal place is given to Aven-rois, or Averroes, Averroes,
etc.
who flourished in Spa^n, an. 650. and had undoubtedly proved a better
Commentator on Aristotle, had he been better acquainted with the Greek Tongue.
He was also a Famous Physician, as well as Philosopher, but no friend to the
Christians; yet have the Scholemen made his Comments on Aristotle, Which are
followed by the Schole-men.
the foundation of all their Schole-Divinity. Hornius Histor. Philosoph. lib.
5. cap. 10. gives us this account of these Arabian Commentators on Aristotle.
We will begin with Avicenna, who attained unto so much by his labor, that he
alone may carry the bell among Aristotle's Commentators: neither does any seem
to reach the mind of the Philosopher, as Avicenna, whom his diligent translator
Andr. Alpagus calls Ebeusina. He was so addicted to Aristotle, that many relate
he got all his Metaphysics by heart. He had for his Contemporarie Averroes the
Arabian, who lived at Corduba in Spain, and had great contests with Avicenna,
and albeit both professed themselves Sectators of Aristotle, yet they thought
nothing true, which each other affirmed. Averroes writ of many parts of
Aristotle, and that with so great an acumen, that he has obtained the repute
of the most learned Interpreter, and the title of Commentator, (...). From whom
the latter Scholemen have borrowed many things. That the Scholemen extracted
the most of their Philosophic notions and distinctions (which they make the
foundation of their Scholastic Theology) not immediately out of Aristotle,
but out of the Arabians, Averroes, Avicenna, etc. his Commentators, is evident
to any that acquaints himself with the original of Schole Divinity, which began
in the Parisian Schools about the twelfth and thirteen Centuries, by Albertus
Magnus, Thomas Aquinas, Scotus, etc. amongst whom Averroes was greatly in
repute. Est Arabica gens, uti patrii soli, ita and linguae suae amans. Igitur
cum incidissent in scripta Aristotelis Graeca, jam pene apud ipsos Graecos
ignota, caeperunt inde qu^dam, mox pleraque vertere in Patriam linguam.
Hornius. Hist. Philos. l. 5. c. 10.
Verulam in his Novum Organum speaks truly; that these Schole-men, besides
their reduction of Theology into an order, and form of Art, have over and
above caused Aristotle's Eristick, and spinous Philosophy to have been, more
than it ought, incorporated into the body of Religion. And in all Aristotle's
name is pretended, albeit they rather follow his corrupt Interpreters and
Commentators. For the Arabians, from whom the Schole-men drew all their
subtilties being wholly ignorant of the Greek, and well nigh of the Latin, were
fain to make use of Versions very short of, and in many points quite differing
from the original sense of Aristotle, etc.

. 14. Having given this general Idea of Aristotle his Life, and successors, we
shall now treat somewhat more distinctly and particularly of his Philosophy,
according to that reduction and account we find thereof in Ammonius, Jo.
Grammaticus, and others. Ammonius in Arisiot. Categor. page 6. treating of
Aristotle saie^ (...). A general Idea of Aristotle 's Philosophy.
Thus Ammonius which we may English thus. This Aristotle was in his Morals
exact even to an hyberbole; In Philosophy he exceeded humane Measures, leaving
no part thereof untouched, but adding much thereto from his own sagacitie, he
reformed the whole of Philosophy, for he added unto Logic by differencing, or
separating the Canons from the things, as also by framing Demonstrative Method.
For those, who preceded him, knew how to demonstrate, but how to frame
Demonstrations they knew not; as it is with those, who cannot make shoes, yet
can use them when made. To Physics he added the fifth Essence. As for
Theology, albeit he added nothing thereto, yet left he nothing unattempted
therein. For he knew not terrestial things only, as some conceit, but also
supernaturals, as it appears by his fifth book of Physic Acroaticks, where he
says that the first Cause is not moveable either by it self, or by Accident:
whence he demonstrates that the Divine Being is neither a body, nor passible.
This last expression of Ammonius, touching Aristotle's owning God to be the
first immobile cause of all things, is confirmed, and explicated more fully by
Johannes Grammaticus in his Proaem. in Aristot. de Anima fol 10. as hereafter.

. 15. The end of Aristotle 's Philosophy the knowledge of God.
Hence Ammonius makes this the supreme end of Aristotle's Philosophy to lead
men to the knowledge of the first cause, God, etc. so Ammon. in Arist. Categor.
page 11. treating of Aristotle's Philosophy he demands (...); what is the
supreme end of Aristotle's Philosophy. To which he replies (...), we say, that
the end of his philosophy is to know the principle of all things, the
productive cause of all things, which is always the same; for he demonstrates
that the principle of all things is incorporeal, by which all things are
produced. Thence Ammonius demands (...); what are the means that conduce us to
this end? to which he answers (...). We say the means conducing to this end is
the doctrine or knowledge of things existing in time and mutation: for by these
things, together with the Mathematics, we lead our selves into the knowledge
of the first cause of all things.

16. Aristotle 's mode of Philosophizing simple.
Thence Ammonius passes on to discourse of Aristotle's mode of Philosophizing.
page 12. (...), etc. The form of Aristotle's writings is every way exact as to
phrase. For the Philosopher ever avoids Rhetorical flourishes, and wholly
endeavors to set forth the nature of things only. Aristotle being resolved to
reduce Philosophy to rules of Art, and reason, utterly rejects that
Mythologick, Symbolick mode of Philosophizing, which his Predecessors Thales,
Pher^cydes, Pythagoras, and Plato had introduced; confining himself to a more
succinct, and accurate method. Whence also he rejects all those more obscure
Jewish Traditions, which Pythagoras, and Plato so much delighted themselves in,
with resolution to admit nothing but what he could make stoop to evident
reason, or clear Testimony. So in his Ethics lib. 2. cap. 2. (...), we ought
in matters doubtful to use clear testimonies: whereby he cuts off all those
obscure, and broken Traditions, which his predecessors admired, and together
with their traditions their Symbolick mode of Philosophizing also.

The Character of a genuine Auditor.
. 17. The same Ammonius gives us ( page 12.) a good character of such, as are
genuine Auditors, and Expositors of Aristotle (...). The genuine Auditors of
Aristotle ought by how much the more obscure the things spoken are, by so much
the more earnestly to contend, and search into the depth thereof. An Auditor
ought to be just; of a good natural capacity for ratiocination; virtuous in
his Discourses; Exact in his morals; The Character of a good Expositor.
and in all things very well adorned. Thus Ammonius, who proceeds to give his
character of a good Expositor of Aristotle: (...). He, that will expound the
things spoken by Aristotle, must not through too favorable inclination,
undertake to commend things ill spoken, and receive them as from a Tripos or
Oracle; neither must he receive things good in an ill manner, after the
Sceptick mode; but as to the things spoken he must carry himself as a Judge
without Passion; and first of all he must explicate the mind of the Ancient,
and expound their proper sentiment: afterward he must bring his own judgment
concerning the same.

The Distribution of Aristotle 's Philosophy.
. 18. But to come to the Distribution of Aristotle's Philosophy; which
Ammonius in Arist. Categ. page 11. gives us thus: (...). Philosophy is divided
into two parts, Theoretick, and Practick. As for Theoretick, that is such,
wherein he inquires concerni^g Truth, and Falsehood: Practicks are such,
wherein he considers concerning Good, and Evil. And because there is a great
dispute amongst men touching Good, and Evil, as also touching Truth, and
falsehood; it seemed good to him ( viz. Aristotle) to give us a Diacritick or
Discretive Instrument to measure these things by, which is Demonstration. Now
Demonstration is nothing else but a demonstrative Syllogism. For as the
Carpenter uses his Rule as an Instrument, whereby to discern what timber is
crooked, and what straight, and as a Builder uses his Square, to discover what
walls are right, what not: so Philosophers, make use of Demonstration as a Rule,
whereby to discern things. Ammonius having thus distributed Philosophy into
its general parts, Theoretick and Practick, and laid down the Universal
Instrument of both, which is Logical Demonstration, he thence proceeds to
distribute these Generals into their Severals thus (...). They distribute
Theoreticks into Physiologicks, Mathematics, and Theologicks. As for his
Theologicks, they are such, as he writ after his Physic Exercitations, which
he undertook after his Physics, because it is proper to Theology to teach
things above Nature (whence his Theologicks are termed Metaphysics) and these
Natural Sciences are accordingly called Physics. Mathematics are of a middle
nature being in some regard separate from matter, and in some regard
inseparate. As for Practicks, they are distributed into Ethics, Oeconomicks,
and Politics. Thus of the Parts of Philosophy.

. 19. Having gone through the general Distribution of Aristotle's Philosophy,
it may not be amiss to touch a little on the Severals, and such observables
therein, as may deserve a more particular remark. We shall begin with
Aristotle's Logic, Aristotle 's Logic and it 's distribution by Ammonius.
which he makes to be (...) a Discretive or differencing Organ to all the parts
of Philosophy; so Ammonius in Arist. Categ. page 8. The Stoics, says he,
make Logic a part of Philosophy, whereas all those of the Peripate make it an
Organ, etc. Aristotle in stiling his Logic an Organ, means nothing else, but
that it is a method, or a key to all Sciences: so Ammonius in Arist. Categ.
page 13. (...). Dialectick as Aristotle defines it, is a Syllogistick way of
Procedure about whatever Problem proposed, from probable Topics. What Ammonius
here appropriates to Dialectick, which the Peripateticks make but a Part of
Logic, is equally applicable to the whole thereof. But we have a more full,
though concise, account of Aristotle's Logic given us by Ammonius in Arist.
Categor. page 15.16.17. Which, because the Book is very rarely to be found, and
the Author scarcely known to young Students, we may not deem it lost labor to
give them his own words, which are as follow (...). As the carpenter uses his
Rule, and the Mason his Squares to distinguish what is right, and what is not:
so the Philosopher uses Demonstration for distinguishing of Truth, and
Falsehood, Good, and Evil. Now Demonstration is a Scientifick Syllogism. But
it is impossible to treat hereof, unless we first declare what a Syllogism
is; neither can we understand, what a Syllogism is, unless we learn, what a
proposition is: For Propositions are certain words; and of these words a
Syllogism is but a collection. So that it is impossible to know, what a
Syllogism is, without understanding propositions: for of these it is composed.
So neither is the Proposition to be understood without understanding the names,
and words of which every discourse consists. Neither are the Names, and words
without simple voices: for each of these is a Significative voice. It is
therefore necessary in the first place to treat of simple voices; of which
Aristotle discourses in the Categories. Thence of names and words, and
propositions, as in Aristotle's book of Interpretation. After this of Syllogism
simply considered, as in his first Analyticks: then of Demonstration, as in his
latter Analyticks. Now the order of this Disposition is manifest from the
scope: for things simple ought to precede things compound: and the Doctrine of
the Categories is of all most simple, because as it is said, it treats of simple
voices, signifying simple things, by means of simple notions intervening. Thus
Ammonius of Aristotle's Logic.

. 20. We may reduce the whole to this Scheme. A Scheme of Logic.
Logic may be considered, eith^r in regard of its object, or formal parts. As
for the object of Logic, it is either material, or formal: The material object
of Logic, is (...), every Intelligible, which is either simple, or complexe.
The simple object of Logic, are all those Notions, both first, and second,
treated of by Aristotle in his Praedicaments, and by Porphyrie in his
Praedicabiles. The Complexe object of Logic is composed either of simple
notions, and terms, as a Proposition, or of Propositions as a Syllogism. As
for the formal object of Logic, or the mode under which it considers all
Intelligibles, it is as they are means to direct the understanding in the
disquisition of Truth, whence result the formal parts of Logic, The parts of
Logic.
which may be reduced to these four general Organs. 1. Definition, which takes
away the obscurity of our simple apprehension, by directing the understanding
to penetrate into the essences and natures of things. 2. Division, which
removes that (...), or confusion, which our compound understanding labors
under, by reducing all things to their proper Genus, species, and formal
differences, etc. 3. Syllogism, which clears the (...), or discurs^ve
Intellect from those errors, and hesitations, which remain thereon. 4. Method,
which directs and facilitates the understanding in all the foregoing parts; and
therefore it is made by some of the Ancients to comprehend all Logic, etc. So
Aristotle: it is not our work to discourse accuratelie on these parts of Logic.
It may suffice to give some glances, and that not from Aristotle's Organ (where
he discourses professedly of these Logic Instruments) but from other of his
Works, especially his Rhetoric, wherein we find some oblique reflections
hereon. And to begin first with Definition; Aristotle Rhetor. lib. 2. cap. 13.
( page 218.) tells us in general; (...), what is not defined, is fallacious,
and in his Ethics, lib. 1. cap. 7. (...), etc. They must take care, that they
define accurately, for this has a great influence on what follows. 2. The like
Ammonius (in Arist. Categor. page 13.) teaches us, as to Division. (...). He
that will exactly understand the nature of the whole, must exactly examine it is
parts by division, etc. As for Syllogism, Aphrod^seus tells us, that Aristotle
was the first, that reduced Syllogismes to mode, and figure, etc. But that
which we shall chiefly fix our eye upon, is Aristotle's method; whereof we have
some general account in his Rhetor. lib. 3. cap. 13. page 217. (...). A
discourse has two parts; first it is necessary to declare the matter, of which
we discourse; and then we must demonstrate the same. Thus Explication, and
Demon^tration seem to take in the whole of method, according to Aristotle. 2.
As for the kinds of method, we have an account thereof given by Aristotle in
his Ethics lib. 1. cap. 4. (...). Discourses begun from Principles, differ
from such as tend to Principles. By discourses begun from Principles, he
denotes Synthetick method, which begins with Principles: by discourses tending
to principles he intends Analytick method, which proceeds from the end to
Principles. This he seems to explain more fully in his Ethic. lib 3. cap. 5.
(...), What is last in the Analysis, is first in the Genesis; i. e. the
Principle, which is first in the Synthetick method, is last in the Analytick.
Thus for the kinds of method. 3. As for the Principles of a discourse,
Aristotle tells us, Eth. lib. 1. cap. 4. (...): We must begin with Principles
most known, which are twofold, either in regard of us, or simply. By things
more known, in regard of us, he means such as we know by the effect, more
obscurely: by things more known simply, he understands such as are known from
their causes, which give a more distinct knowledge. 4. As to our methodical
procedure in the handling of any Theme Aristotle (in his Eth. lib. 1.) gives us
this good Canon, (...). We ought in the first place to give an Hypothesis, or
obscure adumbration of the thing, and then a more lively delineation. His
meaning is, that when we treat of a point of great moment, we may not presently
fall upon the thing it self, but by little and little prepare the minds of the
Auditors, thereby to render them more capable to attend unto, and receive the
head of the matter. Hence in points of great moment, he allows of a Proeme, so
Arist. Rhetor. lib. 3. cap. 14. page 220. (...). The most necessary and proper
work of a Proeme is this, to discover the end of a discouse: wherefore, if the
matter be evident, or small, there is no need of a Proeme. 5. But one of the
best rules, that I have observed in Aristotle, in order to a Methodical
procedure in the handling of any point, is that in Ethic. lib. 1. cap. 7.
(...). We may not expect the like exactness in all matters.
We must remember that in all things we may not seek after the same exactness;
but in every thing we must content our selves with such a method, as the
subject matter will bear. Neither may we in like manner search after the cause
in all things, but in some things it may suffice, that we well demonstrate
(...), that the thing is so; as in first principles; for the (...) is first,
and a Principle, and of Principles, some are discovered by Induction, some by
sense, some by some other usage and way, etc. This golden Rule strikes at the
bold assumings of those, who expect the like certainty, and fullness of
demonstration in all subjects, though never so sublime. It gives also a sharp
rebuke to Scholemen, who generally bring all matters to their form; whereas
Aristotle here (as nature) teaches us to suit our form, or method to our
matter. 6. But then Aristotle proceeds to another Canon, Eth. lib. 1. cap. 7.
(...). And we must take diligent care* that we define exactly: For accurate
definitions give an huge advantage to what follows. This beginning therefore
being well laid, it seems more than half of the whole work, and there is by it
a great discovery made of the things we inquire into.

21. If any expect a more full Scheme of Aristotle's Logic, the best, at least
most useful, I meet with, is that of Ramus, who, albeit he does in many things
oppose Aristotle, yet he seems to have done it not without grounds, but with
design to render Aristotle's Logic more useful. This will appear by the
following Scheme of Ramus's Logic. As Grammar (says Ramus) has two parts, The
parts of Dialectick. 1. Invention. Ram. Logic. lib. 1.
Etymology, which treats of single words, and Syntaxis, which is of words
conjoined: so Logic consists of two parts, Invention, and Judgment. 1.
Invention is a part of Logic which instructs us in the mode of finding out
Arguments. An Argument is that, which is affected, or assumed to argue somewhat
by, which is Artificial, or Inartificial. An Artificial Argument is that, which
argues from it self; which is either first, or secondarie; an Inartificial
argument is that, 2. Judgment. Ram. Logic. lib. 2. cap. 1.
which argues from Authority. 2. Judgment is the second part of Logic, which
consists in the right disposement of Arguments, in order to a right judgment of
things: for every thing is judged by a certain Rule of d^sposition, whence
judgment, and disposition pass for the same. And as Invention treats of single
Arguments, so Judgment of conjoynd. Now judgment is either Axiomatick, 1.
Axiomatick Judgment. Cap. 2.
or Dianoetick. 1. Axiomatick Judgment is the disposition of an Argument with
an Argument, whereby we judge, that something is, or is not; which by the
Latins is called an Enuntiate, Pronuntiate, Effate. 2 Hence follows
Dianoetick judgment. 2. Dianoetick, or discursive judgment, which is,

1. Syllogism, therein is,

1. The Antecedent, wherein is,

1. A proposition.

2. An Assumtion.


(...) discourse consists in the deducing one Ax^ome from another, which is
either Syllogism, or Method. Syllogism is (...), a discourse, wherein the
Question is so disposed with the Argument, as that the Ante^edent being rightly
placed, the conclusion necessarily follows. For when the Axiom is dubious, the
Question is put, and to confirm the same, we make use of an Argument, which is
collated with the Question. The Antecedent of a Syllogism has two parts; a
Proposition, and Assumption. The Proposition is the first part of the
Antecedent, wherein (at least) the consequent of the Question is disposed with
the Argument. The Assumption is the second part of the Antecedent, 2. The
consequent, or Conclusion. Cap. 9.
which is assumed out of the proposition. The consequent of a Syllogism, is
that part which comprehends the Question* and concludes the same; whence it is
called the Conclusion. If any part of the Syllogism be wanting, it is called an
Enthymeme. A Syllogism is either simple, or Compound, etc. Cap. 10.
Method is (...) a Discourse composed of various homogeneous Axioms proposed
according to the evidence of their Nature whence the convenience of all amongst
themselves is judged, Method c. 17.
and comprehended in memory. And look, as in an Axiom Truth and Falsehood is
regarded, and in a Syllogism the Consequence and inconsequence: so in Method
it is considered, that what is more clear does precede, and what is more
obscure follows; so that Order, and Confusion is wholly the object of this
judgment: as Aristotle. By how much the more general any Rule is, by so much
the more it ought to precede. The most general Rule must be first, Cap. 18.
because it is first in regard of Light, and knowledge. Whence the most general
Definition must be first, and then the Distribution must follow; which if it be
various; the partition into Integral parts must precede, and then the Division
into the species must follow. The Perfect Definition consists of Essential
causes, namely of the Genus, and Form. Thus Ramus of Logic.

. 22. Having finished Aristotle's Logic, Aristotle's Ethics.
we now Proceed to his Ethics; the first part of Practick Philosophy; wherein
making use of an Analytick Method he begins with man's chief end, or happiness:
1. of human Happiness.
so Arist. Eth. lib. 1. cap. 1. (...), etc. Every soul desires some chief good,
or last end, etc. Aristotle makes two chief parts of Human happiness,
Objective, and Formal. 1. Objective. Characters of the chiefest good which must
be
He begins with man's Objective happiness, and proves first, that there is one
chiefest Good, and then gives some Characters of this chiefest Good, which may
be all reduced to these several particulars. 1 Aristotle makes the chiefest
good to be that, which is most Ancient, or the first principal of all things.
1. The first principle.
So in his Rhetor. lib. 1. cap. 7. treating of the degrees of goodness he
says (...). That which is the principle of all things is better than that,
which is not the principle. 2. 2. The last End.
He places the chiefest Good in the last End of all things. Thus Arist.
Rhetor. lib. 1. cap. 7. (...). And the End is always better than that, which
is not the End: for this is always for another's sake, whereas that is for its
own sake. So again he tells u^ (...). That which is nearest the end is best. 3.
Hence it follows, that the Chiefest Good is that, 3. desireabl^ for it self.
which is desired for it self. So Aristotle in his Rhetor. lib. 1. cap. 7.
defines the chiefest good, thus (...) (...). The chiefest good is that which is
desired for it self, and for whose sake we desire all other things. Then he
adds (...) what is most desirable for it self, is bent. This he stile^ in
what follows the Last End. (...) the End is that, for whose sake we desire
other things. 4. Hence it follows, that the chiefest good is simply, 4. Simply
good.
absolutely, and necessarily good. (...) Arist. lib. 5. cap. 2. Thence
Aristotle in his Eth. lib. 1. cap. 7. says, that it is (...) simply, and of it
self desirable. 5. Whence he makes the Chiefest Good to be the measure, and
Standard of all good. 5. The measure of all good.
Thus Arist. Ethic. lib 1. cap. 9. (...). Of other Goods some exist
necessarily, but others are only naturally subservient to Happiness. This
necessarily follows upon the former. For what is the Last End, and desirable
for it self, must necessarily be the measure of all other goods, which are
desirable only Servato ordine sinis. 6. Whence he makes the Chiefe^t Good, to
be our most proper and connatural Good. 6. Most proper, and connatural.
So Arist. Eth. lib. 1. cap. 5. (...) the chiefest good is proper. And in his
Rhetor. lib. 1. cap. 7. Aristotle making a comparison 'twixt lesser and greater
goods, says, (...) that which is connatural, and proper is more Eligible, then
that, which is adventitious. 7. The chiefest Good must be (...) communicative,
7. Most communicative.
and diffusive to all. Thence Aristotle adds Rhetor. lib. 1 cap. 7. (...)
Those things are best, which are most useful in our greatest need; as in old
age, and Sickness. Arist. Eth. lib. 1. cap. 1 (...) that is the chiefest good
which all desire. The Chiefest good though it be proper to every one, yet is
common, and diffusive to all: community with propriety is peculiar to the
chiefest Good, that is best which all need, and all may have Universal
diffusiveness with Propriety speaks the object Universally good, as God is. 8.
That is the best Good, which is most Rare, 8. Most rare.
and Choice: So Aristot. Rhet. lib. 1. cap. 7. (...) that which is more rare is
better than that, which is more common, for its possession is better because of
the difficulty in attaining it. 9. The chiefest Good, albeit it be rare, yet it
must be possible: 9. Possible.
So Arist. Rhetor. lib. 1, cap. 7. (...) that, which is possible, is better
than that, which is impossible. 10. In Degrees of Goodness that is best, which
is the most Real, 10. Real.
Substantial Good. So Arist. Rhetor. lib. 1. cap. 7. (...). Those things, which
are really good, are better than things which are so in opinion only. Again he
adds (...). 11. 11. Most permanent.
That is the choicest good, which is most immobile, stable, and durable. So
Arist. Eth. lib. 1. cap. 5. (...), the chiefest good is immobile. Again in his
Rhetor. lib. 1. cap. 7. (...). Things, that are more durable, are better than
things less durable; and things more firm, than things less firm, etc. In the
series of good things, that is best, which is most Influential, and Effective
of Good. 12. Most effective of Good.
So Arist. lib. 1. cap. 7. (...): that, which effects the greatest good, is
best; and then (...). 13. Aristotle says that is our chiefest good, which
admits of no excess in the enjoyment thereof. 13. Which admits no excess.
So Rhet. lib. 1. cap. 7. (...)* that, which admits of no excess, must needs
be our chiefest good. Then he adds (...), that which may have somewhat more
than it ought, that is evil. His meaning is, we can never exceed in the
enjoyment of the chiefest good, though we may in others. 14. Aristotle's main
Character of the chiefest Good, is, that it be perfect, and self-sufficient.
14. Self-sufficient, and perfect.
So Arist. Eth. lib. 1. cap. 7. (...), that which is best, is perfect, and
simply desirable; that is perfect, which is desirable for it self. So again,
(...), that, which is perfect, seems self-sufficient. Farther he says, this
chiefest good, (...), i^ in nothing defective, (...), for whatsoever is added,
is but superfluous. Again he says, this only enjoyed, makes the man happy. So
in his Rhetor. lib. 1. cap. 7. (...). That is best, which least needs one or
other things; for this is most self-sufficient. So Arist. Eth. lib. 1. cap. 7.
(...); we call that self-sufficient which alone renders the life eligible, and
defective in nothing. This Plato calls (...), a sufficient Good, (which he
makes God to be) calling his chiefest good (...): a good connatural, uniform,
infinite, eternal, ever-being, and everliving, opportune, pure, immixed, and
without sorrow. Yea, he says, this his chiefest Good, is (...), the very
Divine, and Godhead Good, (...), the supreme beautiae, (...), the only shining
beauty, (...), very-self-good, etc.

Of Man's formal happiness.
. 23. As for Ari^totle's notions of formal happiness, he tells us first, that
it is the gift of God. So Arist. Eth. lib. 1. cap. 9. (...). 1. Its original
from God.
If the Gods vouchsafe any other gift to men, it is c^ns^^taneous to reason,
that happiness should be a gift of God, and especially because it is the
highest of humane perfections: And he gives a farther reason hereof in what
follows, (...). To ascribe the greatest, and most beautiful gift to fortune, is
no way rational. Having given this general account of the original of humane
happiness we now proceed to Aristotle's specific Idea of man's Formal
happiness, which is thus defined by him, 2. Its formal Idea, or definition.
Ethic. l. 1. c. 7. (...). Beatitude is the operation of the rational Soul,
according to the best virtue in a perfect life. In which definition there are
four considerables. 1. The formal nature of humane happiness, which consists in
Operation. 2. The proper subject of this operation, which is the rational Soul.
3. The qualification of this subject, which is perfect Virtue. 4. The state
wherein this happiness is to be enjoyed, 1. The formal reason of formal
happiness in operation.
that is a perfect life. 1. The formal reason of man's formal happiness, is by
Aristotle placed in (...) energie, or operation. This Aristotle proves at
large in his following Chapter, Ethic. lib. 1. cap. 8. (...). The goods of the
Soul w^ style the highest, and most sovereigne, which are the Souls operations,
and energies. This he explains more fully in what follows in the same
Chapter. (...). To live well, and to act well, makes an happy man: for a good
life is commonly styled Eupraxie, or good action. Thence he proceeds to
demonstrate that Beatitude, consists not in an habit, but action* (...), etc.
There is a vast difference 'twixt having that which is best in possession, or
use, in habit, or operation; for a good, so long as it exists in habit only, is
never perfected, as it appears in him that sleeps, but it is the exercise,
that perfects, etc. Then he adds, Eth. lib. 1. cap. 10. That these Actions
proceeding from Virtue, are proper to happiness, as hereafter. This is well
explicated by Stobaeus de virtute Sermon. 1. fol. 12. (...): Beatitude consists
not in the possession of Virtue, but in the exercise thereof; for he that has
sight does not always see. So the Schools tell us, that every Form is
perfected by its Act; and every Faculty and Habit is ordained to its Act, as
to its perfection. So Arist. Eth. lib. 3. cap. 7. (...). All things are
perfected by operation: the more active things are the more perfect. Whence
again Arist. Eth. lib. 1. cap. 8. tells us, that virtuous actions are of
themselves sweet, and (...) self-sufficient; as in its place. 2. As for the
proper subject of this operation, 2. The proper subject, the whole Soul.
Aristotle tells us, it is (...), the rational soul. Thence in his Eth. l. 1. c.
9. (...): It seems we may not style an Ox, or Horse, or any other Animal
happy; the reason is, because they are merely passive, not active in their
reduction to their la^t end. The two main acts of the soul, which formalize
humane happiness, are Vision, and Fruition. The Schools place formal happiness
chiefly in the Vision of the mind etc. 3. The qualification of the Soul, and
its operation, in order to humane happiness, 3. The qualification of the Soul,
and its act Virtue.
is expressed under that notion (...), according to the best Virtue. This is
excellently explicated by Aristotle, Eth. l. 1. c. 10. (...)* Operations
according to Virtue, are proper to beatitude; but the contrary (Vicious)
actions to the contrary, (Misery) and then he adds the Reason, (...). The
reason he gives, 4. The state of humane happiness is a perfect life, which
connotes perfection.
is because these Virtuous actions are more stable, and sweet so that a good
man is truly (...), immovable, etc. This is farther evident by what follows.
4. As for the state of humane happiness, it is said to be (...), in a perfect
life. This connotes perfection both extensive, intensive, and protensive. 1.
formal happiness in a perfect state denotes perfection extensive, i. e. of
parts, 1. Extensive, or of parts.
or kinds; a perfect exemption from all evil, with a perfect enjoyment of all
good. Thence Arist. Eth. lib. 1. cap. 9. (...). Neither can a child be happy,
because he cannot by reason of his age practice such things. This is more fully
explicated in definit. Platon. fol. 412. (...). Beatitude is a good composed of
all goods. Again it is defined (...), a faculty self-sufficient to live well.
2. This perfect life denotes a perfection Intensive, or of degrees, 2.
Intensive, or of degrees.
i. e. every part of this happy life, is in its highest degree of perfection,
without the least mixture of any degree of misery. So Arist. Eth. lib. 1. cap
12. (...): Beatitude is of things precious, and perfect: for we all undertake
every thing in order hereto; and that, which is the principle, and cause of all
good, we account precious and Divine. Thence in the Platonic Definit. fol.
412. Beatitude is defined (...), a perfection according to virtue, a
self-sufficient provision of life, etc. 3. This perfect life imports also a
perfection protensive, or of duration. 3. Protensive, or of duration.
So Arist. Eth, lib. 1. cap. 10. (...). An happy man is not variable, or
easily changeable. For he cannot easily be removed from his Beatitude. So
again, (...), etc. A blessed man is not so for a short time only, but for a
long and perfect time. Farther he says, (...), etc. a blessed man can never
become miserable. Thus much for Aristotle's definition of humane happiness,
which he himself, Ethic. lib. 1. cap. 7. thus explains: (...). Humane happiness
is the operation of the Soul, according to the best, and most perfect virtue:
also in a perfect life; for one swallow makes not a summer. These his
contemplations about humane happiness, agree to no state of life, but that of
the glorified Saints, which yet Aristotle seems to have had no belief of, at
least he seems (...) to haesitate touching this future state of the Soul, as
it is evident from what he lays down, Eth. lib. 1. cap. 10. where teaching that
men should endeavor to live thus happily here, and die, according to reason;
he gives this as a reason (...) (...), because what is future is to us very
obscure, but Beatitude is always the end, and always perfect. Aristotle
dreamed of enjoying this happiness here, but Plato seems to refer it to the
souls future state.

. 24. Having done with Aristotle's first Ethick-head, The principles of humane
Acts.
touching humane happiness, we now proceed to his Philosophizings about the
internal principles of humane Acts, which may be reduced to these four
particulars: 1. Universal prudence, or practick knowledge in general. 1.
Practick knowledge.
2. Volition. 3. Consultation. 4. Election: Of each of which in the^r order,
and place. The first great principle of humane Acts laid down by Aristotle, is
universal prudence, or practick knowledge in general. So Arist. Eth. lib. 1.
cap. 3. (...). It is very profitable for such, as would manage their
affections, and actions, according to reason, to know what belongs to these
things: and Aristotle farther informs us, that this knowledge of things
practick, must be not only speculative, and apprehensive, but also practick,
and causative, whence says he, Eth. lib. 2. cap. 4. (...). Many there are, who
do not these things, yet flying to their reason, they would needs seem to
philosophize, and so to approve themselves virtuous. These act just like some
sick people, who diligently hearken to their Physicians, but follow nothing of
what they prescribe. As therefore those, who thus use the Physicians, never
cure their bodies: so these who thus Philosophize, never cure their Souls.
Hence that of Ammonius (in Arist. Categ. page 15.) (...), the end of
contemplation, is the beginning of practice; and Plutarch. lib. 1. de Placit.
Philos. tells us, that a blessed man ought (...); To have not only a Theoretick
knowledge of beings, but also a Practick of what is needful. For speculative
reason is only apprehensive of things, but practick is causative; according to
that Philosophic distinction, (...). Practick Philosophy is effective of
Virtue, but Theoretick of Truth only. This practick knowledge is so termed, not
because it immediately acts, but because it is directive to action. Aristotle
makes this practick dictate of the understanding to be a kind of practick (...)
discourse, which he supposes to precede either actually, or virtually every
Act of the w^ll: as for example, he that will be happy must act virtuously: I
would be happy, ergo. Therefore says Aristotle Incontinent persons have
knowledge only in the habit, not actually discursive: for albeit they assent to
the major, which is universal; yet there is some defect in their assent to the
minor, and thence they assent not practically to the conclusion, etc. This
practick discourse, or knowledge, which necessarily precedes the wills motion,
is in the general styled (...), Prudence, which in the Platonic Definitions,
is thus defined, (...). Prudence is a Science effective of Beatitude. So Plato
Meno. fol. 88. (...). Prudence conducting effects the duties of the soul, but
folly the ills. We have a good account of this Moral Prudence, and its
influence given by Alexand. Aphrodiseus (the chiefest of Ari^totle's
Commentators) as Stobaeus de Virtut. Ser. 1. fol. 17. (...). Seeing moral
virtue is effective of such things, as are determined by prudence, and right
reason, it is necessar^e, that he who has prudence, has also moral Virtue: for
it is the office of Prudence to enquire by what means it is possible to attain
a right Intention, which to determine, is the office of moral Virtue: for it is
the virtue of the elective faculty. And this is the difference 'twixt moral
prudence, and craft. Prudence searches out, what things are most conducing to
a right Intention, whereas craft relates to any, though false, etc. Aphrodiseus
gives us here (besides other characters) a full Idea of the proper office of
moral Prudence, which is to direct the Intent^on of the Will as to its end,
which follows.

Of Volition, or the will strictly taken.
. 25. The next principle of humane action is (...), Volition, or Will, strictly
so termed, which properly refers to the end, and so it is differenced from (...)
Election, which respects the means. So Arist. Eth. lib 3. cap. 5. (...):
Volition rather respects the end, whereas Election respects the means conducing
to the end. So Plato in Gorg. (...), that is willed for the sake of which men
act; whereby he intends the end. We have a more large explication of the
difference 'twixt Volition, and Election, given by Joh. Grammaticus in Arist.
de Anima Proaem. fol. 3. (...). The Gno^tick, or knowing faculties of Rationals
being distributed, the practick are Volition, and Election. And Volition is
only of what is good (i. e. the end) but Election inclines both ways (i. e. to
good, or ev^l as means) Again, Volition belongs to the Rational Soul as such;
whereas Election has some commixture with the irrational. The end, the proper
object of Volition.
By all which it is evident, that Volition is an Act of the Will, whereby it is
extended, or carried forth to its object, beloved for it self, without respect
to a farther end: so that the end, which is amiable for, and of it self, is the
alone proper object of Volition. Yea, Aristotle makes this extension of the
Will toward its last end to be connatural, or as he terms it, Physical;
whereas its extension toward the means by Election, is with indifference. So
Arist. Eth. lib. 3. c. 7. (...). Where Lambinus on this notion [(...)] thus
Comments. We must know that in practicks, the end has the place of the
principle; because on it depends the necessary formation of all such things,
as belong to the action. Therefore as in Mathematics there are certain
indemonstrable principles laid as the basis of all Demonstration: so in
practicks, the end is fixed as a principle supposed not to be deliberated
about; for a principle as well in practicks, as speculatives, admits not of
Demonstration, but of supposition only. So again, Arist. Eth* lib. 3. cap. 5.
(...). The desire of the end is not elective, but natural, etc i. e. the
Appetite of every thing does naturally tend to some end connatural thereto,
which is the measure of all things conducing thereto So Arist. Eth lib. 3 cap.
10. (...). Every thing is measured by its end. But Aristotle Eth. lib. 1. cap.
2. speaks more fully thus (...). The end is of things practick, which we will
for it self, but other things for it. Neither do we choose all things for some
other (without some term) for so there would be an infinite progress. It is
manifest therefore, that this end is the Good, yea the best Good. Wherefore the
knowledge hereof has great influence on the life: and as Archers, who have the
mark in their eye; we do hereby obtain, what is most needful. So again,
Aristotle Eth. lib. 3. cap. 7. (...), a virtuous man is naturally carried
toward his end, but toward other things voluntarily, or indifferently: then
he adds, (...), such as every man is, such is his end. Whence that Maxim in
the Schools, as the form is in Naturals, such is the end in Morals, By all
which it is apparent, what the proper object of this Volition is, namely the
end, to which it naturally extends it self, as the measure of all its acts, and
lower ends. Hence also 2. we gather, that this (...), or volition of the will,
is not distinct from that Act of the Will, which the Schools call Intention.
For they make Intention to be an efficacious willing of the end, together with
the means conducing thereto: which is formally, or at least virtually denoted
in (...), Volition, according to that common rule in Logic. He, that
effectually wills the end, wills also the means. It Is true, there is an
imperfect velleitie, or faint Volition, which respects the end, without means;
but a complete Volition comprehends both. I know the Schools make Volition, and
Intention, different Acts; and the former to relate to the end simply
considered, but the latter to the end in connection with the means. But I find
no ground for this distinction in Aristotle, or Nature. 3. Hence also we may
farther collect, that the end is first in Intention, though last in Execution;
and therefore ought to be greatly heeded, and made the measure, or square of
all. So Ammonius in Arist. Categ. page 12. (...). He that is ignorant of his
mark, or end, is like a blind man, that shoots at random; and he does in vain
consider all things tending to his end. But the consideration of an useful end
gives much diligence, and alacrity* For every one, that will undertake any
design ought first to learn its usefulness, etc.

3. (...) consultation.
. 26. We now proceed to the third principle of humane acts, called by Aristotle
(...) consultation, which respects the means, and so is distinguished from
(...) Prudence, or the practick Judgment in general, which respects both end,
and means; and primarilie the end, and the means only in the second place. This
Consultation is styled sometimes by Aristotle, but often by Plato (...),
Counsel, which Plato in Cratyl^ deduceth from (...), a ca^ting, so Lambinus in
Arist. Eth. l. 3. c. 5 (...), a Metaphor taken from Archers, who are said to
cast, or shoot their Arrow toward the scope, they aim at. This Consultation is
styled in the Platon. ^^finit. fol. 413. (...), good advice, which is defined
(...), a connate virtue of reasoning. Again it is termed (...), Consultation,
which is defined (...), an exhortation to another, before he acts, how he ought
to act. But there is no definition, that suits better with the nature of
Consultation, than that Definit. Platon. fol. 414. (...), Consultation is a
consideration of things future, so far as expedient, i. e. for our end. For a
wise man first proposes, and wills his end, and then makes use of
Consultation, as an instrument to find out means expedient for this end. We are
to take diligent heed, that things pass not suddenly from Imagination into
Resolution, Affection, and Action, without asking advice of the judgment, and
serious consultation. A wise man, when he has made a judgment about his end,
weighs exactly all, Quod inconsul to fecimus, consulto revocamus.
that follows from such a Judgment, as also all the Antecedents, that lead to
the obtaining of it. What men unadvisedly undertake, they advisedly recall.
Consultation ought to be the door to all great resolutions, and undertakings.
This Consultation is thus defined by Arist. Rhetor. lib. 1. cap. 9. (...). It
is a virtue of the discursive faculty, whereby men are enabled to consult of
good, and evil, in reference to happiness. But the proper Seat of this
discourse about Consultation, is Aristotle's Ethic. lib. 3. cap. 5. where he
discourses at large of the Object, Acts, The Object of Consultation.
and Effects of Consultation. As to its Object, he lays down these Rules to
judge it by. 1. Consultat^^n is not of things speculative, but of practick. So
Art. 21. (...). Consultation is not about the first Elements of Sciences, etc.
The same he adds Art. 27. (...). Especially it is not about Arts, or Sciences.
Yea, he says expressly (...), Consultation is about practicks. 2. Consultation
is not of things impossible, but of things in our power. So Art. 48. (...), if
the thing be possible, men undertake it; and more expressly Art. 13. (...), we
consult of Practicks in our power. This he explains more fully in his
Rhetoric, page 10. (...). We consult about things, which appear to happen
either way, not of impossibility, etc. ^. Consultation is not about the end,
but the means, so Arist. Eth. lib. 3. cap. 5. (...). We consult not of ends,
but of things conducing to their ends: for Physicians consult not whether they
shall cure, but taking their end for granted, they consult how, and by what
means to cure. So Art. 57. (...), etc. Consultation is about things to be done
by us: Now our actions have respect to some end, wherefore the end comes not
under consultation, but the means. 4. Consultation is not about an infinite,
but finite number of means. So Art. 4. (...). No man consults of things
infinite, because unmeasurable. 5. Consultation is of things permanent, not of
things in continual motion, so Art. 7. (...). We consult not of things in
perpetual motion. The reason is, because such fluid things cannot be brought
under any regular order, or subserviencie to our end, etc. 6. Consultation is
of things contingent, not of necessaries. So Art. 29. (...). Consultation is of
things doubtful, contingent, and indefinite: For such the means usually are;
whereas the end is definite, necessary, and more evident, etc. 7. Yet
Consultation is not of things fortuitous, or casual, but of things in our
power, which come under the conduct of humane Prudence. So Art. 9. (...). We
consult not about the things of fortune, as touching the invention of a
treasure, etc. 9. Amongst the means, the main work of Consultation is to find
out such as are most conducible to the end. So Art. 39. (...). If the means be
many, the best are to be chosen out. This supposes an universal comprehension
of, and inspection into all the means; according to that of Stobaeus, (...),
consider the whole: for qui ad pauea respicit facile pronunciat, he that
considers, but a few things rashly determines. 9. Consultation supposes a
methodical procedure from one to another 'till we come to the first cause: So
Art. 40. (...), etc. The first cause is first in intention, but last in
execution. 10 If the things we consult about, be arduous, and difficult,
Aristotle requires consultation with others: So Art. 30. (...). In great
matters we must take unto us Counselors, distrusting our selves as not
sufficient to penetrate, or d^ve into the things. Thus much for the object. 2.
As for the subject of Consultation Aristotle (Eth. lib. 3. cap. 5. Art. 2. 2.
The Subject of Consultation.
) tells us, that none are fit to consult, but he (...), who has his wits about
him; whence he excludes fools, and mad men from this work. And upon the same
account in his Rhetor. lib. 2. cap. 14. he excludes young men from any
competent ability for consultation, because first they have great passions. 2.
and are very unconstant. 3. and have strong wills. 4. also too credulous, and
not cautelous, for want of experience of evils. But (adds he) old men, having
virtues contrary to those vices of young men, viz. suspension of judgment,
caution, experience, and command of passions, etc. are most fit for
consultation. 3. As to the Act of Consultation, 3. The Act of Consultation.
Aristotle (Eth. lib. 3. cap. 5. Art. 42.) thus differenceth it from
disquisition: (...). Every Disquisition is not Consultation, as it appears by
the Mathematick Disquisitions; but every Consultation is a Disquisition: wh^re
he makes Disquisition more generick, and Consultation to be a practick
Disquisition, or Inquisition into means conducing to our end. 4. The main
effect of Consultation, is Election, as it follows.

. 27. Consultation being finished* Election, which is the proper effect thereof,
begins. So Arist. Eth lib 3. cap. 5. Art. 68. 4 Of Election. first its
difference from Consultation, and Volition.
(...). The thing consulted a^ out, and elected, is the same: for that which is
prejudged by consultation, is elected. For every one cease to enquire, how he
shall act when reduced to his first principle, etc. As for the difference
'twixt Election, and Volition, we have it in Arist. Eth. lib. 3. cap. 7. (...)*
etc. The thing willed is the end, but things consulted about, and elected, are
the means referring to the end, etc. So Arist. Eth. lib. 3. cap. 4. Art. 27.
(...). Volition is of the end, but Election of the means referring to the end.
By which we see, that the proper object of Election is the means, 2. Its object
the means.
not the end. 2. Aristotle tells us, that Election is not of Impossibles, but
of things in our power. So Eth. lib 3. cap. 4. Art. (...). Election is not of
things impossible: whereby he distinguishes it from imperfect Volition, or
Velleitie, which may be of things impossible. So again Art. 31. (...). It seems
most likely, that Election is of things in our power. 3. 3. The Subject of
Election the rational Will.
As for the subject, or seat of Election, it belongs to the rational Appetite:
thence says Aristotle, Eth. lib. 3. cap. 4. Art. 9. Election is not (...), of
irrational appetites; whence it is differenced from Concupiscence, which belongs
to the Irrational appetite. So Art. 13. (...). Concupiscence is contrary to
Election, because it is common to Irrationals, as well as to Rationals, whereas
Election is proper to Rationals. So that the proper seat of Election is the
Will; whence Aristotle makes it inclusive of Voluntary* though it be not sully
extensive thereto: Ethic. lib. 3. cap. 4. (...). Election seems to be
Voluntary, though with some difference 4. Hence follows the Act of Election,
4. The Act of Election. 1. It Is rational.
which according to Aristotle, Eth. lib. 3. cap. 5. is (...), a consulted, or
judicious appetition. Thence Arist. Eth. lib. 3. cap. 4. Art. 32. (...).
Election is not a mere opinion, or imagination; and more fully Art. 53. (...).
Election proceeds from reason, and discourse. Neither is it sufficient, that
this act of Election be rational, but it must also be determined, and fixed; 2.
Fixed, and determined.
whereby the object of Election seems somewhat differenced from that of
Consultation, which leaves the determination of the object to Election: So
Arist. Eth. lib. 3. cap. 5. Art. 63. (...). The thing consulted, and elected,
is the same, but the thing elected is more determinate, or fixed: for what is
judged by consultation is elected, and so fixed. Lambinus here on this notion,
(...), comments thus, (...) signifies to determine, and define: when we
consult, we have as yet nothing certain, or determined: but the end of
Consultation, is a definite, certain Election. As therefore in Theoreticks,
Aphorisms are said to be certain determinate conclusions, or sentences, whose
truth is both by reason, and long experience evident (as Hippocrates's
Aphorisms) so in Practicks* Aphorisms may be styled Counsels drawn forth
after long consultat^on. Thus Lambinus, who yet has not fully hit the mind of
Aristotle, who by Aphorism understands the object, or means determined by
Election. Whence Aristotle tells us, that it is not a mere fluid volition, or
Vel^^itie, that will make a vit^ous man virtuous, but there must be a
dete^mined Will, or Election of all means, etc. Arist. Eth. lib. 3. cap. 5.
Art. 43. (...). If an unrighteous person have some imperfect velleitie of
righteousn^sse, he does not presently cease to be wicked, and become righteous:
as a sick man is not presently healed, so soon as he is wills it, etc. 5. Hence
we may collect with Aristotle, 5. Its difficulty.
that it is very difficult to make a right Election. So Arist. Eth. lib. 2.
cap* 1. (...). It is very difficult to judge, what is to be chosen before
another thing, and what is to be preferred before another: and yet it is more
difficult to cleave to what we know is best. 6. 6. Its effect as to Virtue.
Albeit it be very difficult to make a right Election, yet when it is made, it
has a Sovereigne influence on Virtue: So Arist. Eth. lib. 3. cap 4. (...). It
follows, that we pass on to Election, which seems to be most proper to Virtue,
and that whereby moral actions are mostly measured, etc. 7. Hence we come to
the definition of Election, 7. Its d^finition.
which is thus laid down by Ari^totle, Eth. lib. 3. cap. 5. Art. 68. (...).
Election is a consulted, or judicious appetition or things in our power. And he
^dde^ this as the reason, (...), for from consulting, judging, we choose
according to that Consultation made. This Election is term^d by the Platonic
(...), Heresy, which Platon. Definit. fol. 413. is defined thus, (...),
Election is a right Probation. Approbation.
Under Election is comprised Consent, (albeit the Schools distinguish them)
whence follows Use, and Fruition. Consent, and use of the means, are called by
the Platonicks (...), alacrity, which Platon definit. fol. 413. is defined
(...), A discovery of a practick Election, etc. 2 Cor. 8.11. (...), v. 17.
(...), v. 19. (...).

Of Voluntarinesse, and Liberty.
. 28. Having go^e through the principles of human Acts, we now proceed to their
main essential Attribute, or adjunct, which is Voluntarinesse, or Liberty; we
make Voluntarinesse, and Liberty the same; because we find no rational ground
either in Aristotle, or Nature, to distinguish them; for every human Act that
is voluntary, is also free; and every Act that is free, is likewise
Voluntary. Farther, they both partake of one, and the same Essential Idea, or
Definition. Thence Aristotle, Eth. lib. 3. cap. 1. Art. ^0. (...). The
definition of Voluntary.
Those things are said to be Voluntary, whose principle is in him, that does
them, who has a (radical) power of acting, or not acting. This definition of
voluntary is the same, which the Schools give to Liberty. But we have a more
adequate, and proper definition of Voluntary, given by Arist. Eth. lib. 3.
cap. 3. (...). Voluntary seems to be that, which has its principle in him that
acts it, who also understands the particulars of what he acts. This
definition of Voluntary seems to connote nothing but a rational
spontaneitie, which is the same with humane Liberty. Hence Ari^totle, Eth.
lib. 3. cap. 1. makes Involuntarie Acts the same with forced, or not free: Art.
5. (...). Involuntarie acts seem to be such, as are done by force* or
ignorance. A forced act is that whose principle is Extrinsick, it being such,
whereto he that suffers, or acts, confers nothing. Here Aristotle makes
Involuntarie the same with forced, or not free; and forced or not free, that
which has not its principle in its self: whence it necessarily follows, 1. That
Voluntarinesse is the same with Liberty. 2. That Voluntarinesse, and Liberty
exclude not all kind of necessity, but only such as is coactive. 3. That
Voluntarinesse, and Liberty, include no more in their essent al Idea, but a
rational spontaneitie. This is farther evident by Plato's Ideas of
Voluntarines, and Liberty. Platon. defin. fol. 415. (...), etc. Voluntary is
that which moves it self according to judgment, etc. which is the same with the
following definition of what is free, (...), That is free, which acts from it
self. This rational Spont^neitie, or Liberty, is styled by Plato sometimes
(...)* Soul-duction; sometimes (...), self-service, as also (...), self-action.
Thus also Liberty is defined by the Stoics, Laert. in Zeno (...). Liberty is
a power of self-action. Whence the Greek Fathers, Basil, etc. call free will
(...), self-power, and the Scripture uses a word of the like import, (...),
self-Election, 2 Cor. 8.27. This self-moving power, which is alone essential to
Voluntarinesse, or Liberty, is expressed by Arist. Eth. lib. 3. cap. 8. under
this notion, (...). That is in our power which we use, so or so, for which we
are said to be voluntary, or free. This (...), which he makes only Essential
to Liberty, and Voluntarinesse, is excellently well expressed by Epictetus,
and Simplicius, on him: Epict. Ench. cap. 1. (...). The things in our power are
the conception, impetus, appetition, and extension (of the Soul) and in one
word, all our acts. Simplicius here speaks forth Aristotle's mind, as well as
Epictetus's fully thus. (...), etc. He says those things are in our power, of
which we are Masters, and of which we have power. Such are the internal motions
of the Soul, proceeding from our own judgment, and Election. So again, (...).
When the Soul acts according to its own nature, then it is moved freely, and
voluntarily, internally from it self; and from this (spontaneitie) (...), what
is free, may be well defined. Thus Simplicious, who makes here all the natural
acts of the Soul to be free. 2. This freedom to consist in a rational
spontaneitie, or voluntary motion of the soul. Hence he proves at large in
what follows ( p 23.24. Edit. Salmas.) that all Necessity is not contrary to
Liberty, Coactive necessity alone excludes Liberty.
but only that, which is Extrinsick, Coactive and Compulsive, (...) (...).
Therefore we are to say, that there is a twofold necessity, one contrary to
Liberty, another consistent therewith. Wherefore external necessity destroys
Liberty (for no one externally compelled, is said to do, or not to do any
thing freely) but all internal necessity, necessitating to act according to
their own nature, this does the more preserve Liberty. For a self-moved,
according to the nature of a self-moved, is necessarily moved by it self:
neither is it for this (said to be) moved by another; for the necessity is not
external, but complicated with the nature of the self-moved, yea preservative
thereof, and conducing to its proper operations. Thus Simplicius, who gives us
here an excellent description of humane Liberty, and its Combination with
internal voluntary necessity, which, if well understood, and embraced, would
put an end to all those Scholastic clamours of the Pelagians and Jesuits,
against God's necessitating, determining, efficacious concurse, which puts only
an internal voluntary, not external coactive necessity on the will; and
therefore is no way destructive to its Liberty. But then Simplicius proceeds
to demonstrate, that a Liberty of Contrariety (as the Schools term it) or an
Indifferency to this, or that, is not essential to humane Liberty. Liberty
of contrariety, or Indifferency not Essential to Free Will.
Take his own words: (...). Neither must we needs say, that in all things
free will* and Liberty supposes a power of acting contraries: for Souls,
which allwa^es adhere to good, and choose good, have both Free Will, and
Election (for Election is not forced) of that good, without Ind^fferencie to
the contrary, etc. By which he fully proves, that actual Ind^fferencie is not
Essential to Liberty. Thence he proceeds to prove, that Liberty is essential
to the will, Liberty essential to the will.
and an unseparable adjunct of every vital humane Act. So page 28. (...).
Wherefore they, that destroy Liberty destroy the natural extension and
constitution of the Soul, etc. So that nothing destroys Liberty, but what
destroys the natural inclination, or Voluntarinesse of an human act. This is
farther evident by the following definition he gives of a free act. Simp. in
Epict. cap. 2. page 34. (...). That is free, which has the self-power, and
dominion of its own exercise. This he farther explains in the same page thus:
(...). It is manifest, that the things in our power are our proper acts: and
things not in our power, but in the power of others, are other men's acts.
Whence it apparently follows; 1. That every human act of the Soul is in the
Soul's own power, and so free, albeit it be necessarily predetermin'd, and
act^ated by God's Efficacious concurse. 2. That this Liberty of human acts
implies nothing more as essential thereto, but a Rational spontaneitie, or
voluntary self-motion We have insisted the more largely on these notions of
Simplicius about human Liberty and its identitie with Voluntarinesse; because
he seems, of all Aristotle's commentators the best to understand his mind.
Farther that Aristotle's (...), that which is in our power, whereby he
expresses Liberty, imports no more than voluntarinesse, or Rational
spontaneitie, is evident from that excellent determination of Greg. Ariminensis
in Sent. lib. 1. Did. 17. Q. 1. That an action be in the power of an Agent, it
is not necessary, that every principle be the form of the Agent: for then no
act of the will, whether good, or evil, would be in its power; because God is
the productive principle of every act. Therefore I say, that there is nothing
more required to bespeak an action to be in the power of the Agent, Est in
potestate naturali, quod cum volumus sacimus. August.
than that the action flow from his own will. So also Austin: That is in our
power which willing, we do. The contemperation, and consistence of God's
Efficacious necessitating concurse with human Liberty is excellently set forth
by Plutarch, in the life of Coriolanus fol. 193. thus. But in wondrous, God's
necessitating concurse destroys not Liberty.
and extraordinary things, which are done by secret inspirations, and motions.
Homer. [(...)] Does not make God to take away human Election, and Liberty, but
to move it, and then he adds (...). In which God makes not the action
involuntarie, but opens the way to the will, and adds thereto courage, and
success. For (adds he) either we must say, that the Gods meddle not with the
causes, and beginnings of our actions, or else, that they have no other way to
help, and further men by. Thus Plutarch. And whereas it is object^d that thus to
ascribe unto God a predetermining, particular immediate Influence upon, God's
predetermining concurse to the wil's (...) makes h^ not the Author of sin.
and Concurse with the will, to every ^ct thereof, is to make him the Author of
Sin, etc. Plato Repub. 10. gives us a good solution to this objection, in
saying. (...) ^ll blamable Ca^salitie belongs to the particular Agen^, which
ch^^seth (...) God is a blameless cause. Again, (...). In all Evils, God works
what is righteous, and good only. This is more fully explicated by Simplicius
in Epict. Enchir. cap. 1.24. (...). God is no way the cause of sin: for he
being in himself good, Acts the Soul in sinning only according to its own
nature (i. e. voluntarily) out of the riches of his goodness: but he do^s not
concur to its sin otherwise, than as the Soul it self wills it. His meaning
is, that God concurreth to sin, only as the Universal cause of Goodness; so
that God's Concurse thereto does not at all hinder, but that the Soul
voluntarily chooses it. Neither is the quality of the effect to be ascribed
to the Universal cause, but to the particular, which is the alone Moral, and
therefore culpable cause of Sin: whereas God 's Universal causalitie thereto is
only Physical, or natural, and therefore not morally Evil. That the Souls
Voluntary agencie is sufficient to render its act Morally good, or Evil
(albeit we allow God a predetermining Influence, and Concurse thereto) is
evident from that of Aristotle Ethic. lib. 3. cap. 3. (...) in things
voluntario praises, and dispraises have place, i. e. in virtues, and vices: so
again Eth. lib. 3. cap. 7. (...). Virtue is voluntary, and sin nothing less is
likewise voluntary. Whereby it is evident, that Aristotle requires nothing more
on the part of the Soul to render its acts Morally good, or Evil, but that
they be voluntary.

. 29. Having dispatched Aristotle's contemplations about the Wil's
Voluntarinesse, and Liberty, which is the Essential adjunct of every humane
act; Touching the morality of human acts.
we now proceed to his speculations about the Morality of humane Acts, or
their mora clonstitution as good, or Evil. This morality of human acts in
general according to Aristotle, has for its foundation, or basis (...), a
voluntary free agent (as before) but the chief measures thereof are, 1. the
End: so Aristotle Ethic. lib. 3. cap. 10. (...) every thing is defined or
measured by its end, i. e. the End has the same place in morals as the form in
Naturals, or as the first principles in speculatives. 2. Not only the End, but
also the Law of Nature, (which Aristotle styles Right reason) has an essential
influence on the morality of human Acts: according to which they are
denominated morally good, or Evil: for by conformity thereto they become
morally good, and by difformitie morally Evil: so Arist. Eth. lib. 3. cap. 8.
styles a Virtuous act, (...). That which moves according to the disposition, or
order of Right reason, etc. We shall begin with Aristotle's notions about
things, and Acts morally good, which he styles Virtues, 1. Of Moral good or
virtue.
whereof we have this general account in his Rhetor. lib. 1. cap. 9. (...).
Virtue is, as it seems, a power conquisitive, and preservative of goods: also a
power well-productive of many, and great matters, yea of all things, about all.
But this definition of virtue being too general, and that which agrees as well
to Natural, as moral Virtues, we proceed to that, which is more special. The
great seat of Aristo^e discourse about moral virtue is his Ethics lib. 2. cap.
3.4.5.6. cap. 3. he gives us this general Idea of Ethick or moral virtue (...).
It is supposed therefore, that virtue is such, as being conversant about
pleasures, and griefs, is productive of that which is best. But sin is the
contrary. Aristotle Eth. l^b. 2. cap. 4. b^gins to discourse more distinctly
of moral virtue, and its Genus, whether it be a Power, Affection, or Habit of
the Soul, (...). Seeing there are in the Soul these three; Affections, Powers,
Habits; which of these must virtue be? so Plutar de Virtut Mor. (...). There
are these three in the Soul, a Faculty, an Affection, and an Habit: A Faculty
is the Principle, and matter of an Affection; an Affection is the motion of a
Faculty; an Habit is the strength, and conformity of a faculty gained by
custom. Arist^ demonstrates. 1. That Virtue cannot be an Affection, or
Passion; 1. Virtues are not Passions.
because Affections are good or bad only from good or bad Habits (...). Our
passions are well, or ill disposed from those Habits, which possess them:
therefore our Passions are in themselves capable neither of virtues, nor of
vices: whence it follows, that virtues, and vices, are habits. 2. He
demonstrates that Virtues are not Passions; because they are Elections, (...).
Virtues are certain Elections; or at least not without Election. 3. He
demonstrates the same from the different motions of Passion, and Virtue (...).
To these we may add, that we are not said to be moved, but to be disposed
according to Virtues, or vices: but we are said to be moved according to
passions. Lambinus on this text of Arist. Eth. lib. 2 cap. 4. [(...)] Comments
thus. Every thing so far as it is moved, so far it is said (pati) to suffer.
Thence amongst the Greeks our Affections are called (...), Passions; and so are
opposed (...), to practice. For the very (...) Affection, which is moved, is
moved by External objects: and the Passive power, as it is moveable, is called
(...). But in the Action of Virtue* albeit External objects concur, yet a good
man is not absolutely moved by them, as in the Affections, but according to the
dictate of right reason. Therefore in the Affections the principle moving is
External* and the principle moved internal viz (...). But in Virtues the object
is External, which of it self has no efficacy, but as it is admitted by right
reason. The principle moved is (...), the passive power: but the prinple
Acting, and moving, is some good habit or Virtue. And for this cause we are
said (...) not to be moved (for we consider not (...) the passive power in
virtues, but by Accident) but we are said (...) to be disposed by Virtues, i.
e. we are in some sort so framed, 2. Virtue not a power.
that we may with facility act Virtuously. 2. Hence Aristotle proceeds to
prove, that Virtue is not a power (...). For the same reasons also virtues may
not be said to be powers: for we are not said to be good, or Evil simply
because we have a power of suffering: neither are we praised, or dispraised.
Again we are said to have a power by nature, but we cannot be said to be good,
or Evil by nature: Lambinus on this says, that (...) powers are here called
(...) affective or passive qual^ties, i. e. qualities, wherein there is a
certain affective efficacy. 3. Aristotle having proved, that virtue is neither
a passion, nor a power, he there proceeds to prove, that it is an Habit. 3.
Virtue an habit.
Thus Ethic. lib. 2. cap. 5. (...). We are to say therefore, that all virtue
does perfect, and well habituate the subject, whereof it is a virtue; as also
render its work good: as the Virtue of the eyes renders the eye good, as
likewise its work. Hence he concludes (...). If so; then humane virtue must be
an habit by which a man is made good, and by which also he makes his work good.
What an habit is, What an habit is.
and what is its difference from (...) a Disposition, we may learn more fully
out of Aristotle's Commentators, Ammonius, and others. Ammonius in his Comment
on Aristotle's Categories makes (...) an habit to be (...) more lasting, and
more permanent than a disposition or (...) a disposition becoming by length of
time, connatural, or implanted. Galen makes an habit to be (...) a lasting, and
hardly d^ssoluble disposition. So Philo (...). Qu^nt^lian terms an habit a
firm facility, i. e. an habit is deeply radicated in its subject, whereby
it is enabled to act with more facility. Aristotle Eth. lib 4. cap. 4. says,
(...). An habit is defined by its act, and object. Again Eth lib. 5. cap. 1.
(...). Often times a contrary habit is known by its contrary, often times also
habits are known by their Subjects From which Aristotelick notions about habits
we learn. 1. That an habit in Morals has much the same place, and influence as
a form in Naturals. For by how much the more noble* and perfect the habit is,
by so much the more noble, and perfect will the subject, and faculty, which it
informs, be. 2. That every habit (as a natural form) is ordained for, and
perfected by its proper Act. 3. That the Nature of an habit is very congruous
to, or agreeable with the nature of its object; whence that determination in
the Schools: That Habits are known by their subjects, the mode of their
in-being, their objects, and their Acts.

The formal nature of Virtue in Mediocritie.
. 30. Aristotle having discoursed of the generick nature of Virtue, and proved*
that it is not a passion, or power, but an habit; he thence proceeds to
discourse of its Formal nature, or reason, which he places in mediocritie; so
Arist. Eth. l. 2. c. 5. (...). Virtue is employed about the affections, and
actions, wherein the excess is sinful, and the defect also blameable: but the
mean is praised, and held Right. Therefore Virtue is a Mediocritie aiming at
the mean, or middle. This Mediocritie of Virtue Aristotle (Eth. lib. 2. cap.
5.) applies to, and makes the measure of not only the matter of our actions,
but also every circumstance. His words are (...). This mediocritie of Virtue
directs when we ought, and in what, and with whom, and for whose sake, and how
we must act, etc. Whence he conlcudes, that sin being multiforme, and various
is very easily committed; but Virtue by reason of its mediocritie being
uniforme is very di^ficult, (...). One may err many ways (for sin has a kind
of infinity, whereas good is bounded) but what is right is Simple, or
uniforme. Wherefore it is easy to err, but difficult to hit the right, for
it is easy to err from the mark, but difficult to hit it. The like Aristot.
Mag. Moral. lib. 1. cap. 25. (...). Virtue is uniforme, but Vice is multiforme.
That this uniformitie, or mediocritie is Essential to Virtue, and that which
gives its formal constitution, Aristotle Eth. l^b. 2. cap. 6. demonstrates by
comparing it with A^t. For (says he) if excess, and defect do corrupt, but
Mediocritie conserve the perfection of Arts, must not moral Virtue which is
more excellent than any Art (...) collime, How Virtue consists in Mediocritie.
or aim at the Mean, as at its mark? But for the more full Explication of this
mediocritie, we are told, that Virtue may be considered either (...), in regard
of its Essence; and so it is (...) a Mean 'twixt defect, and excess, which are
the extremes: or else Virtue may be considered in regard of its perfection
(...), as it is good, and best, and so it is an extreme, which admits of no
Excess: for Virtue can never be too good, or perfect, as Ari^t. Eth. lib. 2.
cap. 6. where we have also the matter, which this mediocritie refers unto,
namely (...), or Affections, and (...), our actions; in all which there is
(...) Excess, defect, and equality. Now the mediocritie of Virtue consists in
the latter viz. in observing that equality, or proportion, which is due to all
our affections, and actions, to render them morally good. Whence this
Equality, uniformitie, or mediocritie due to our actions, and affections, is
styled (...) a symmetrie; as Eth. lib. 2. cap. 3. we find all this excellently
explicated to us by Stob^eus Sermon. 1. of Virtue, (...). Virtue is an habit,
that keeps a decorum; a decorum is that, which becomes us, and it is both an
extreme, and a medium, or mean: an extreme, as it admits neither of ablation,
nor addition, but a medium or middle as it is betwixt excess, and defect.
Whence he concludes against the Stoics (...). The mediocritie of Virtue
harmony.
We may not therefore cut off the affections of the Soul, but harmonize them
according to the decorum, and measure of reason. Hence, else where he says
(...) that the Mean is be^. This symmetrie, or mediocritie of Virtue is styled
by Pythagoras, Harmony. So Laertius tells us, that Pythagoras held (...) Virtue
to be Harmony; yea that all things consisted of harmony. So Polus the
Pythagorean in his definition of Justice (...). Justice is the Harmony, and
peace of the whole Soul with uniformitie; as Stob. Sermon. 9. which is thus
explicated by Plato, Protag. 3. fol. 326. (...) the whole life of man should be
composed of Uniformity, and good harmon^e. Whence ^e calls Virtue the Music of
the Soul, (...)* and Temperance he styles (...) the harmony of the affections;
and Justice (...) a consent of Virtues: and he gives this general Idea of Vice,
and Virtue Phaedo (...). Vice is a disharmonie, but Virtue an harmony. This
harmony, or mediocritie of Virtue he makes to be also (...), a good order, and
(...), a Symmetrie: yea he makes the Virtue, not only of the Soul, but also of
the body and of every thing else to consist (...) in order, and rectitude;
whence he supposes Eutax^e, symmetrie, and harmon^e to be the form of the
Universe; Socrates also expressed this mediocritie of Virtue by harmony as
Stobaeus Ser. 3. (...). The life being like a musical Instrument harmonized, by
intension and remission becomes sweet. So again (...). The harmonized life is
most pleasant. These several Ideas of Virtue are all comprehended under, and
expressed by Aristotle's (...) Mediocritie, which implies the Eutaxie,
Symmetrie, Vniform^tie, and harmon^e of Virtuous affections, and acts: or if we
would have all these notions of Virtue resolved into one, we may take that of
Plato calling it (...) rectitude. For indeed the harmon^e or mediocritie of
Virtue is nothing else, but a rectitude of principles, and acts. This seems
fully expressed by Aristotle Eth. lib. 4. cap. 5. (...)^ all rectitude is from
Virtue, and all Virtue implies a Rectitude as 'twill appear by and by.

The measure or rule of this mediocritie is Right Reason, or the Law of Nature.
. 31. As Aristotle places the form, and essence of Virtue in the mediocritie,
or Rectitude of principles, and Acts; so the formal measure or Rule, by which
this mediocritie, and Rectitude must be regulated, he makes to be Right Reason,
or the Law of Nature. For every Act is denominated good, from its conformity
to the Law of nature both in matter, End, measures, and all circum^tances. So
Arist. Eth. lib. 3. cap. 8. speaking of Virtue and its mediocritie says; (...)
and so as right reason dictates, or regulates. So again Eth. lib. 4. cap. 3.
(...). Virtue is not only consentaneous to right reason, but also an habit
measured by, and conjoined with Right reason. So Stobaeus Sermon. 1. de Virtut.
(...). Virtue is a Syntaxe, or regular disposition according to right Reason.
So again Arist. Eth. lib. 2. cap. 2. (...). Whereby it is evident, Aristotle
makes Right Reason the measure of Virtue, and its mediocritie: So Amyraldus in
his Theses Salmuriens^s expounds Aristotle's (...); (...) est unicum (...)
Virtutis.
Right Reason (says he) is the only ((...)) Criterion of Virtue's mediocritie.
So Parker These. 22. (...) Right Reason (as it is the same with the Law of
Nature) gives the form to a moral act. But now all the difficulty is to state
what Aristotle meant by his (...) Right Reason. For the clearing whereof, we
are to know, that Aristotle took up this notion from his Master Plato, who by
Right Reason understood the Law of Nature, as we have proved in Plato's
Philosophy, Chap. 7.. 6. Whence this Right Reason is by him styled the Royal
Law. So Plato Minos fol. 317. (...) Right Reason is the Royal Law, i. e. The
Law of Nature, which received a new edition by Moses, called the Moral Law, (i.
e. as it is the measure of moral good, and Evil) whereof Plato received many
notices, and traditions: as else where. This Right Reason is styled by the
Stoics the common Law. So Diog. Laert. in Zeno says, that the Stoics held
nothing should be done, but what was agreeable to the Common Law, which is
Right Reason: (...). The Common Law, which is Right Reason, yea Aristotle
himself seems to Enterpret his Right Reason so, as that it can be understood of
nothing more properly, than of the Law of Nature Common to all men: So Arist.
Rhetor. lib. 1. cap. 14. (...). etc. There is a twofold Law, one private,
another common. The Common Law is that, which is according to Nature, for it is
that, whereby all men learn by Nature, what is just, and what is unjust,
without any particular consociation, or covenant amongst themselves. Thus
Aristotle: wherein he distinguishes the private Laws of particular Nations, or
Societies from the Common Law of Nature, which he makes the measure of Moral
good, and Evil. This Common Law of Nature Aristotle makes the Source of all
private Laws; and that which gives check unto them when in Excess, or defect:
so Arist. Eth. lib. 2. cap. 25. (...), all private Laws need to be corrected by
the Universal Law. Whence this Law of Nature is made the same with (...) the
Law of Equity, which is to give check to all private constitutions. And that
Aristotle's (...) Right Reason is the same with his (...) Common Law of Nature,
it is evident by the definition he gives of Justice, or Righteousness. Arist.
Rbet. lib. 1. cap. 9. (...). Justice or Righteousness is a Virtue, by which
every one has what is his own, and as the Law dictates to them, who are subject
to it. Whereby he makes the Law the measure of what is Righteous. So in his
Eth. lib. 5. cap. 2. (...) (...) a just man is he, that lives by Law, and
Equity, i. e. according to that Law of Equity, or Nature, which is common to
all. Whence Aristotle Rhet. lib. 3. cap. 17. (...) the Law is the standard, or
measure in all Judicial proceedings, i. e. all moral good, and Evil is measured
by some Law of Nature Common to all, as civil good* and Evil by civil private
Laws. Thence Aristotle Ethic. lib. 5. cap. 2. says, (...). That is just
therefore, which is according to Law, and Equity. What Aristotle attributes to
Justice is by a paritie of reason applicable to all moral good, or virtue. By
all which it is evident, that Aristotle's (...) Right Reason (which he makes the
measure of moral good and Evil) is the same with his (...) Common Law of
Nature, which gives the form, and measure to Common Justice, and all other
moral Virtues. Whence that of Plato Repub. 9. (...); that is greatly distant
from Right reason, which is distant from Law, and order. Hence again Plato,
Gorg. 504. tells us. That as health, beauty and other Virtues of the body
proceed from the regular order or exact temperament thereof; so the health,
beauty, and other virtues of the Soul from its regularitie (...), whence the
Soul's actions are regular, and beautiful. Such is Righteousness, Temperance,
etc. So that we may conclude that it is not any subjective Right Reason, or
Light of Nature, which is the measure of moral good, and Evil; but an objective
Right reason, or the Common Law of Nature, which is the same with God's Law
called Moral, because it gives Form and measure to all moral good. So that
Aristotle's Right reason, which he makes the measure (...) of the rectitude,
and mediocritie of Virtue, must be resolved into God's moral Law (which is but
a new promulgation of the Law of Nature) as the alone adequate Rule, and
measure of all moral good and Evil. Thence the perfection, or defect of all
goodness, or Virtue must be measured by its access, and conformity to, or
recesse and difformitie from this first moral Rule, or Law: for moral goodness
being nothing else, but a relation or conformity to the Rule of morality, it
necessarily follows, that every moral being is so far morally good, or Evil, as
it conformes to, or difformes from this moral Rule, or Law. And albeit the
least declen^ion, or aberration from this moral Law will denominate an humane
act morally Evil; yet there is required a perfect concurrence of all causes,
or an entire conformity to this Rule, to bespeak an act morally good:
according to that approved maxim in the Schools (founded on the light of
nature, Bonum ex causis integris malum ex quoliber defectu.
and general consent) Good requires all its causes, but Evil springs from every
defect. Hence also it follows, that this moral Law must necessarily be most
perfect: For otherwise it cannot be the first measure or Rule of moral
goodness, according to that of Plato (...). A defective measure is not a
measure: for what is imperfect cannot measure any thing. This perfection of the
natural, or moral Law consists in two things. 1. In the perfection of its
End. Plat. Legib. 1. (...), etc. All Laws must tend to the best End. 2. In its
amplitude or Extention to all objects: a^l Lawgiver, says Plato, must regard
all virtue as Psalm. 119.96.

. 32. Having gone thorough all the causes of moral virtue; The Idea o^
definition of moral Virtue.
which are first its subject (...) a voluntary Agent, and Act. 2 its Genus,
which is (...) an habit. 8. Its Form, which is (...) mediocritie, or (...)
Rectitude. 4 the Rule, and measure of this Form, which is (...) Right Reason,
called (...), the Common Law of Nature; it is easy hence to form a Definition
of moral Virtue, which Aristotle has done to our hands. Arist. Eth. l. 2. c. 6.
(...). Virtue is an Elective habit consisting in mediocritie of things relating
to us, defined by reason, and so as a wise man defines. In which definition are
these observables, 1. The Genus whis is (...) an habit not (...) a power, not
(...) a passion. 2. The specific difference, which is (...) Elective; whereby
moral habits, or Virtues are distinguished from Intellectual Arts, and
Sciences, which are also habits. 3. Here is the subject matter, or object of
moral virtue expressed by (...) what relates to us, or is in our power, which
is the same with (...), what is voluntary. 4. Here is the Form of Virtue,
which consists (...) in mediocritie or re^^itude* 5. Here is the formal measure
of this mediocritie, expressed by (...) which is the same with (...) ^ight
^eason; (as before) We find the same repeated more particularly though not so
exactly, by Aristotle Eth. lib. 3. cap. 3. (...) (...). We have said of
Virtues, that they are mediocrities; and that they are habits, and that they
are of themselves desirable; and that they are of things in our power and
voluntary; and so as right reason prescribes Wherein we have all the several
ingredients of Virtue enumerated. We find a definition of Virtue much the same
for substance given by Plato Meno. (...). Virtue is an habit of the Soul, by
the concurrence of the natural power, working that which is best, according to
reason, and tending to the best End. 1. Virtue consists of the best End and
best work.
From these Essential Ideas of Virtue we may draw these conclusions. 1. That
true Virtue requires not only a good work, or matter, but the best End, which
must inform this matter, as the Soul the body. 2. Hence also it follows, that
all Virtues have one and the same uniforme, 2. All Virtues have one and the
same Idea.
harmonious, simple Idea; in that they proceed all from the same divine habits,
or principles, and tend to the same divine End. Thus Aristotle Eth. lib. 2.
cap. 6. (...). Good men act simply and uniformelie, but wicked men variously.
Whence he adds (...). For sin is infinite, but good is definite, and uniforme.
So Plato Protag. fol 379. (...). Virtue is one, but its parts are
Righteousness, temperance, and holiness. So Plato Rep. 4. fol. 445. (...) to
me the face of Virtue seems to be one; whence virtue is styled by him (...),
Concent, and (...) symmetrie, and (...) harmony. Whence also the Stoics held
(...) all virtues are equal, or alike.

What Vice is.
. 33. Having given a full Idea of Virtue, and that according to Aristotle's
mind, we need not spend time in extracting his Idea of Vice or sin: for he
himself acquaints us Ethic. lib. 5. cap. 1. (...) a contrary habit is known by
its contrary. As in Logic the affirmative being well stated, the negative is
easily discovered; so in Morals, virtue being well explicated, the Idea or
face of vice is soon unmasked. Thus as virtue requires an integrity of causes,
and full concurrence of all circumstances: so Aristotle tells us, that vice
proceeds from any defect of either moral cause, or circumstance, as Ethic. lib.
3. cap. 10. Art. 5. (...). Vices arise either when men do what they ought not,
or as they ought not, or when they ought not, or the like, i. e. when there is
any defect in matter, or form and manner, or time, or such like. Again,
Aristot. Eth. lib. 2. cap. 5. tells us, as good is bounded by mediocritie, and
Right Reason, and therefore uniforme; so Evil, is boundless and infinite
(...). Sin is various; for Evil is infinite. Again, wh^^eas he defines Virtue a
mediocritie (...), according to Right Reason; he tells us Eth. lib. 1. cap. 13.
that Vice is (...), somewhat besides, or beyond Reason. So Stobaeus Ser. 1.
(...) Sin is a transgression besides right reason. Farther, Aristotle in his
Eth. lib. 5. tells us, that (...). Just is lawful, and equal, but unjust,
illegal, and unequal; according to the Scriptural definition of sin, (...) sin
is an Illegalitie, or a transgression of the Law. This Aristotle Eth. lib. 5.
cap. 2. calls (...) a transgression of the Law. So Art. 7. (...) an unjust man
therefore seems to be a transgressor of the Law. The like Art. 13. (...) what
is unjust is a transgressing of the Law, and unequal. Yea Ari^^otle concludes
Art. 24. (...). This Transgre^^ion of the Law comprehends all injustice, and is
common to all iniquity. The like Aristotle lays down in his Rhetor. lib. 1.
cap. 9. where, having defined Righteousness to be a Virtue according to Law,
he says (...). Unrighteousness is that, whereby we invade other men's rights,
against Law. So Arist. Rhet. lib. 1. cap. 10. (...) to act unjustly is
Voluntarily to hurt against law And in his Eth. lib. 2. cap. 1. he says
(...). The Will of every Lawgiver is such as that they, who act not according
to it, sin. Thus also sin is styled by his master Plato (...) Ataxie, (...)
asymmetrie, (...) Pleonexie, or Exorbitancie, opposite to the Eutaxie,
symmetrie, and mediocritie of Virtue. So Plato (...), Vice is an Exorbitancie,
or intemperate Excess: a metaphor taken from the su^^rabundance of any humor
in the body called (...). Thence defin. Plat. fol. 416. (...) Sin is a
practice against right reason. So Again, (...) injustice is an habit,
overlooking or neglecting Laws. Whence sin also is held by Plato (...), etc.
But thus much for Aristotle's Ethics in general.

Aristotle 's Physics.
. 34. We now proceed to Aristotle's Physics, wherein he asserts, and
demonstrates 1. God's universal Concurse the first mover in all motions; 1. Of
God 's universal causalitie as the first mover.
so Johan. Grammat. in Arist. de Anima proaem fol. 10. (...). Aristotle in his
Physics about the End, disputing of Motion, and in quiring into its cause,
elevated himself to the first cause, and priple of motion. And he said, that
the first mover ought to be immobile: for if he also should be moved, the
things moved would not continue in motion, as if there were things always
mobile, it necessarily follows, that their mobile would be immobile. Thence
Aristotle extolling the first mover, that he was incorporeous, eternal, and
omnipotent says, that on such a principle depends the heaven and world. For it
behooves a perfect Physiologist, after he has handled the natural causes, not
to rest in these, but to ascend to the separate or supernatural: thus Aristotle
has done in his book of Generation, and Corruption. The same is mentioned by
Ammon^us in Arist. Categ. as before. 14. see Simplicius in his comment. on
Arist. Phys. lib. 8. 2. That the Soul is incorporeous and immortal.
large here about. 2. Aristotle asserts also in his Physics the immortality,
and immaterialitie of the humane Soul. So Joh. Gramm. in Arist. de anima proaem
fol. 7. Aristotle, says he, delivered a Canon proving the Soul to be immortal.
The Canon is this (...). We ought, says he, by the operation to judge of the
Essence, because every Essence has an operation suited to it. Again another
Canon is this every Essence, that has an operation separate from the body,
must of necessity be separate from the body; For otherwise the effect will be
more noble than the cause Then he proves the minor, that the Soul has
operations separate from, and independent on the body, as the contemplation of
God, it self, and other spiritual objects. And Diogenes in Aristotle says,
that Aristotle held (...) that the Soul is incorporeous.

. 35. As for Aristotle's Metaphysics, Aristotle's Metaphysics.
Ammonius styles them his Theologicks. So Ammon in Arist. Categ. page 11.
Aristotle's Theolologicks are those he writ after his Physic Exercitation,
which he calls Metaphysics, because it is proper to Theology to treat of
things above Nature. Hence Aristotle's Metaphysics pass in the Schools under
the splendid title of Natural Theology, though indeed it contains nothing, but
a few fragments, he procured from his master Plato, and the more ancient
Philosophers (who traded much in Jewish traditions) touching God, his Unity,
Verity, Bonitie, etc. also the Angels (which Aristotle calls Intelligen^es) and
of the Soul in its separate state, concerning which Aristotle sometimes seems
(...) to hesitate; saying (...) as before. 3. But to come to the generick
nature of Aristotle's Metaphysics, which he makes to be Sapience, whereof he
discourses at large in the Proeme to his Metaphysics as it is well observed by
Stobaeus, Sermon. 3. Aristotle's metaphysics called by him the first
Philosophy, or Theology.
of Wisdom (...). 'Twas Aristotle's custom to call the same Science, both
Wisdom and the first Philosophy, and Metaphysics, and Theology. Then (
Aristotle adds) (...), A character of Aristotle's Sapience the object whereof
is.

1. Things most universal.

2. Things most difficult.

3. The first causes.

4. Sapience is desirable for it self.

5. Sapience is architectonick and Principal.


etc. First we conceive a wise man knows all things so far as it is possible yet
so, as that he has not a particular (but only universal) knowledge of them.
(2.) Thence we count him a wise man who is able to understand things difficult;
not only such as are easy (3) farther we judge him most wise in all Science,
who most exactly considers, and understands the first causes. (4.) And of
Sciences, that which is eligible for it self, and for its own knowledge is
rather Wisdom, than that, which is desirable for its effect. (5.) And that
Science which is more principal comes nearer Sapience, than that which is
subordinate: for it becomes not a wise man to take precepts from others, but to
give precepts. 6. Sapience is of things most universal and immaterial.
(6.) And for the most part things most Universal are most difficult to be
known by men; for such things are most remote from sense. (7.) Those also are
the most accurate of Sciences, 7. Of things first, and most excellent.
which are of things mostly first. Thus Aristotle in his proeme to his
Metaphysics, and Stobaeus out of him. Wherein we have a full character of
Sapience or Metaphysics, which is here described both in relation to its
Object, and Nature. 1. As for the object of Sapience, Aristotle says it is 1.
of things most Universal, and remote from sense. 2. Of things most difficult,
and excellent or rare. 3. Of the first principles, and causes of things, as of
God, etc. 2. As for the Nature of Sapience, Aristotle tells us, it is 1. most
desirable for it self, and for its own knowledge, not for any effect, that
flows from it. 2. It is the Architectonick or principal Science, not
ministerial, Sapience or Metaphysics The most noble, divine, and excellent of
all Sciences.
or Subordinate, etc, Whence also Aristotle adds (...) As we say a man is
free, who is su^juris, for himself, and not for another: so this Sapience is
the most free, and noble of all Sciences; for it alone is for it self, and not
for any other Science, whence also it appears to be divine, and the most
excellent of all Sciences. Aristotle 's Sapience applicable to none but God,
and things Divine.
These Characters, which Aristotle gives to his divine Sapience, or
Metaphysics, are applicable to no Science but the Contemplation of God, and
things Divine. For God alone is the First, and most excellent being, the first
principle, and cause of all things: and therefore the knowledge of him is the
only true Sapience, desirable for it self, and most principal, divine, and
excellent. This farther appears by the object of Metaphysics; Now though
Aristotle makes the Adequate Object of Metaphysics to be (...) Ens, Being in
its most Vinversal latitude; yet the Principal Object he makes to be the Prime
Being and Universal cause of all other Beings, God himself, as did Plato his
Master before him, calling God sometimes (...) very being, sometimes (...)
truly Being, sometimes (...) the first Being, and most frequently (...) The
Being, clothed with Vnit^e, verity, Goodness, etc. whence perhaps Aristotle
also made Unity, Verity, and Goodness Affections of his Ens, in Genere.

CHAP. II. Of the Cynicks, their Sect, and Philosophy.
I. Antisthenes the father of the Cynicks, and his Schole the Cynosarges. II.
Whence they were called Cynicks? viz. from their severitie against vice, etc.
III. The Professors of Cynicisme, Antisthenes, Diogenes, Crates, Demetrius,
etc. IIII. The Genius of the Cynicks, and their affinity which the Stoics. V.
Their principles. 1. To Live according to Virtue. 2. That External goods, as
Riches, Pleasures, Honors, are not desirable, because a wise man enjoys all
good in God. 3. They disliked flattery, and bore reproaches with patience. 4.
They affected impudence. 5. They were great reprovers of Vice, especially of
pride, yet guilty of the highest pride. 6. They rejected all conjectural
Science, and Philosophy, Except moral. 7. They were Religious, but not so
superstitious as others. 8. Their Justice, and Fidelity. 9. Their prizing
Liberty. The Cynick Philosophy originally from the Jews.

. 1. HAving discoursed at large of the Platonic, The original of the Cynicks
from Antisthenes, and his Schole the Cynosarges.
and Aristotelick Philosophy, we now proceed to the Cynick, which had its
foundation also from Socrates's Schole by Antisthenes the Disciple of Socrates,
who being greatly pleased with those Discourses of his Master, which treated of
Tolerance, and Labor, instituted this Sect; This Antisthenes the Head of the
Cynicks (being by Country an Athenian, but by his Mothers side, a Phrygian)
after the death of his Master Socrates made choice of the Cynosarges, a Schole
at Athens, just without the Gates; as the fittest place to Philosophize in; so
called from (...), the Temple of the White, or swift Dog. The origination of
this name is well given us by Hesychius (...), etc. The Cynosarges is a sacred
place so called for this cause. They say when Diomus sacrificed to Hercules,
there came a Dog, and Snatching away a leg of the Sacrifice, ran away
therewith; others following him; and the place was so called from the
whiteness, or Velocitie of the Dog. Suidas has much the same in (...).

Why called Cynicks.
. 2. From this Schole the Cynosarges some conceive Antisthenes, and his
followers were called (...) Cynicks, and Antisthenes himself termed (...) the
Sincere Dog. So Hesych us Illustris. Others, ill wishers to the Cynicks, will
have them to be so called from their Doggish impudence. Empiricus (in Pyrrh. l.
1. c. 14.) supposes them to be called Cynicks from their defending good men,
but barking at the wicked. This is the most probable conjecture. So Ammonius in
Categor. page 9. (...). The Cynicks are so called for their Liberty in
reproving Vice, and encourageing Virtue: For they say a dog has somewhat of a
Philosophic sagacitie, or discretion discovered in his barking at strangers,
and shaking his tail in a tawning manner on Domestics. So these Cynicks smile
on, and salute Virtues, and those, who live according to Virtue; but they
avoid, and bark at passions, and those who live according to passion, albeit
they be Kings. Thus Ammonius: The like Diogenes Laertius; who makes them to be
so called, because they were sharp reprovers of Vice, not regarding the
taunts, and abuses put upon them; as hereafter.

The professors of Cynicisme. Antisthenes.
. 3. Theopompus commends Antisthenes above all the Disciples of Socrates, as
one endowed with a great acumen of judgment, and sweetness of discourse; by
means whereof he could lead any man to what he would. See his Character at
large in Diogenes Laertius, Diogenes.
and Hesychius Illustris. Next unto Antisthenes, Diogenes Sinopensis, his
Auditor, is of most repute amongst the Cynicks; who was indeed a person of
prodigious Wit, as will appear by his following sayings, and greatly admired by
Alexander the Great, as also by Basil in his book Of reading Gentile books.
Diogenes the Cynick had for his Disciples Monimus Syracusanus, Onesicritus, and
Crates the Theban. Crates.
This Crates had for his Auditors, his wife Hipparchia, her brother Metrocles,
Menippus the Phenician, and Zeno the father of the Stoics, whence sprang a
great fraternity and communion 'twixt the Cynicks, and Stoics (as else where)
The^e followed also Demetrius Cynicus, Demetrius.
who flourished in the time of Domitian the Emperor, at Corinth; and drew into
one Systeme all the Philosophy of the Cynicks. Philostratus of the life of
Apollonius, lib. 4. cap. 8. says of him; that for Learning's sake he followed
Apollonius, as Antisthenes Socrates, etc. Seneca gives this Demetrius a very
large Character: So lib. 7. de Benef. cap. 1. Demetrius, says he, was very
great, if compared with the greatest. Again cap. 8. he was a man of exact
Wisdom. Also Epist. 62. He was the best of men: I admire him, why should I not
admire him? I have seen nothing wanting in him. Tacitus likewise Annal. 16.
cap. 34. gives an honorable mention of him.

. 4. As for the Genius of the Cynick Sect, The affinity 'twixt the Cynicks,
and Stoics.
it is greatly extolled by Arrianus in Epictet. lib. 3. Dissert. cap. 22.
(...); where he sets forth the Cynick Philosophy as masculine, and generous.
And indeed there was a very great Cognation betwixt the Cynicks, and Stoics.
So Laertius lib. 6. having mentioned the agreement 'twixt the Cynicks, and
Stoics as to their sentiments of the chiefest Good, he adds (...). There is a
certain communion betwixt these two Sects, whence they (the Stoics) said
Cynicisme is a short way to Virtue. Laertius here points at Zeno, who honored
the Cynick sect with this Elogie: And indeed no wonder, seeing he himself, who
was the head of the Stoics, sucked in a main part of his Philosophy from
Crates the Cynick. Yet the Stoics differed from the Cynicks not only in
external habit, but also in Modesty; which was the main motive, that enduced
Zeno to quit the Cynick Sect: for being commanded by Crates to do some
unbecoming acts, his modesty made him refuse, and quit Crates's Schole; as
hereafter. The Affinity betwixt the Cynicks, and Stoics will farther appear
by their Principles, and Practices.

. 5. The first main principle of the Cynicks was, The principles of Cynicisme.
1. That Virtue is our chiefest End.
that our Chief End is (...), to live according to Virtue; which was the (...),
or first principle of the Stoics also. And indeed th^re were scarce any of the
Wiser Philosophers, but embraced this Principle; for they were all convinced of
a vanity, and vexation, that attended sensible enjoyments; as also of a more
than ordinary beauty and sweetness, which was appendent unto Virtue; only
herein they greatly abused this common principle; in that they made Virtue
desirable for it self, and so their God. 2. That External goods are not
desirable.


. 6.2. Hence also the Cynicks affected a mean obscure, yea inindeed sordid kind
of life. Wherefore (says Laertius in Antisthenes) they lived meanly,
contemning Riches, Glory, Nobility: Their Food was herbs, and cold Water,
their houses obvious, and tubs, That a wise man enjoys all in God.
etc. All which Cyn^ck Mortification was sounded on that Principle of Diogenes
(...). Its proper to the Gods to want nothing, and to those, who are like to
the Gods, to make use of but few things. Whence also they asserted, that a Wise
man enjoys all things in God: so Diogenes the Cynick (as Laertius tells us)
affirmed, that Wise men enjoyed all things; because all things belonged to the
Gods; and the Gods were friends to wise men: now among friends all things are
common. Hence likewise they held, that Riches, Honors, Pleasures, and whatever
the world admired should be contemned. Wherefore Crates Thebanus, a noble man
of great wealth, sold his patrimony, and betook himself to Cynick Philosophy
upon the persuasion of Diogenes; and notwithstanding the importunity of his
friends to the contrary, he abode fixed in that opinion of the Cynicks (...).
That Philosophers have need of nothing. Hence also they delighted much in
frugalitie, according to that of Greg. Nazianzen. Orat. 23. touching Hero
Alexandrinus (...). In the Cynick Sect he accused their impiety, but praised
their frugalitie. Lastly; upon the same account they disliked all public
Games, shows, or pass-times. So Diogenes the Cynick said (...), The Olympic
games were but great miracles of fools.

3. Their abhorring flattery and bearing reproaches.
. 7.3. Hence also the Cynicks abhored flattery, and bore reproaches with much
patience, and constancy. Thence Antisthenes being commended, said (...); what
ill have I done? meaning it was an ill thing to be commended. Again being much
applauded by a wicked man, he said, (...). I am in an Agony, least I have done
ill; And Diogenes being asked, what beast bit most perniciously? replied (...)
Of wild beasts the Sycophant, and of tame beasts the flatterer bites worst. He
had also (...) a flattering oration is but an honey snare. As for bearing of
reproaches, the Cynicks were very eminent, as Diogenes Laertius acquaints us.
Orates was wont industriously to rail at whores, thereby to exercise himself
for to bear railing: and when others Scoffed at the deformity of his face,
holding up his hands he was wont to say (...), etc. Be confident, Crates, for
thine eyes, and the rest of thy body, for thou shall see Scoffers punished,
though now they bless themselves. Diogenes the Cynick being told, that many
mocked him, he replied (...), I mock not aga^n.

. 8.4. Hence the Cynicks affected a kind of impudence, 4. The Cynicks affected
a kind of impudence.
and immodestie even in things dishonest. So it is said of Crates, that he lay
with his wife, and had to do with her in open place. So Diogenes the Cynick did
many things very unbeseeming, which rendered him among many very ridiculous, but
Diogenes Laertius gives this favorable interpretation of this his seeming
excess: Laert. lib. 6. (...). Diogenes said, that he imitated the Masters of
the chorus, who admitted some excess in their tone, that so others might be
reduced to a Concent. So that, according to Laertius, these extravagant
excesses, and exorbitant impudencies of the Cynicks were assumed only to shame
others out of Vices; but this their design being not understood by the vulgar,
hence their Sect became contemptible, and exploded. Thence Cicero de Officiis
1o. says, that, The Nation of the Cynicks is wholly to be expelled, for it is
an enemy to Modesty, without which nothing can be right, nothing honest.
Whence Sidomus tells us, that in his age there scarce remained any of the Cynick
Sect.

. 9.5. 5. Cynicks great reprovers of Vice, especially of pride.
The Cynicks were severe censors and reprovers of Vice; whence some will have
them called (...), as before. And Diogenes the Cynick being sensible of this
imputation, that he was esteemed of a currish biting disposition, said wittily
(...), I bite only Evil men. And as they were great reprovers of vice in
general; so in a more special manner of Pride. Thus Antisthenes seeing a Vessel
wherein Plato had vomited* said (...), I see his choler here, but I cannot see
his pride: Diogenes Laertius.
meaning Plato had not vomited that up as yet. And Diogenes the Cynick coming
into Plato's Schole, he goes and treads upon his bed, or Philosoph^zing seat,
with this expression (...), I tread here on Plato's vain study, or proud
Philosophy; to which Plato replies (...); O Diogenes, how much of pride do
thou manifest, whilst thou seem not to be proud? And indeed Plato spoke
truth: for Diogenes, and the rest of the Cyn^cks under their external, and
seeming self-denial concealed much of real pride, and self-advancement. For the
highest self-advancement is that, which arises from a pretended
self-abasement. Thus the Cynicks in words cry down pride, though in deeds they
cry it up. So Demetrius the Cyn^ck said; (...). The height of Pride should be
taken away, but the sense of it left.

6. They rejected all Philosophy, but moral.
. 10.6. The Cynicks rejected all conjectural Sciences; as Astrology, and
Divination by dreams, etc. Whence Diogenes the Cynick blamed the
Mathematicians, who looked into the Moon, and stars, but overlookt the things
under their feet: He said farther to one discoursing about Meteors (...); when
came thou out of heaven? Diogen. Laertius.
Also to some affrighted at their dreams, he said Those things you do waking,
you consider not, but those things you imagine in your dreams you curiously
inquire into. Yea they rejected all Learning and Philosophy, except moral;
holding that our End is (...) to live according to Virtue. Hence they required
in their Disciples pure, and Chaste minds. So Anti^henes to a youth abused unto
Sodomie, but willing to be instructed by him, and demanding what was needful
for him in order thereto, replied (...) a new book, a new pen, and a new table:
meaning a new mind is necessary for a Disciple: as Diogen. Laert. in
Antisthenes.

7. Their Religion without superstition.
. 11.7. The Cynicks were very religious toward the Gods, yet not so
superstitious, as the Pythagoreans and other Sects. Thence Diogenes the Cynick
supping in the Temple, the Offalls, that were left, he took away, saying,
(...). Nothing that is sordid, must enter into the Temple. Yet were they not
superstitiously conceited about ceremonies of Religion: wherefore Ant^sthenes,
after he had initiated himself at the Orphean Oracle, to study those
my^teries, a Prie^t telling him, that those, who were initiated in those Rites
should partake of many things (...) after death; he replied (...); why then
do thou not dye? intimating that those ceremonies, and outward formalities
were not a good foundation to rely upon.

. 12.8. The Cynicks were great admirers of Justice, Faithfulness, 8. Their
justice and faithfulness.
etc. So Diogenes was honored by Xeniades his Master, who had found him very
faithful, with this Character (...). a good Demon has entered mine house. And
the same Diogenes being upbraided by one for stamping money falsely, replied,
Time was, when I was, as thou now art; but such as I now am, thou will never
be. Meaning that he was now quite another man. Whence also he said touching
living well (...); why live thou, if thou have no care to live well?

. 13.9. The Cynicks were great Esteemers of Liberty, 9. Esteem of liberty.
as all the Philosophers generally were; whence that saying touching Diogenes
the Cynick (...), He preferred nothing more than Liberty.

. 14.10. The Cynicks held also with the Stoics (...) that Virtue was
teachable; 10. Virtue teachable.
wherein they differed from Socrates. More concerning the Cynicks, their
Dogmes, and Institutions. See Diogen. Laert^us in Anti^henes; Augu^t. Civit.
Dei. lib. 14. cap. 20. and lib. 19. cap. 1. with Lud. Vives thereon.

. 15. That the Cynicks traduced the main of their Dogmes, The Cynick
Philosophy from the Jewish Church originally.
and Institutes originally from the Jewish Church may appear. 1. From what has
been demonstrated touching Socrates, and his Philosophy being derived from the
Jewish Church. 2. From the original of some of the Cynicks, who were of
Phenician extract; as Menippus the Phenician, etc. 3. From the Cognation 'twixt
the Cynicks, and Stoics, who received their Philosophy originally from the
Jews, as it will appear in the following Chapter.. 8.

Chap.
CHAP. III. Of the Stoic Sect, and Philosophy, its original, etc.
. I. Of Zeno his Original, and Praeceptors. II. Zeno's Schole the Stoa; his
institution of the Stoic Sect, his Charactor. III. Cleanthes his Character.
IIII. Chrysippus his repute amongst the Stoics. V. Diogenes Babylonius,
Antipater, Possidonius. VI. Roman Stoics, Cato, Varro, Antoninus, Tullie,
Seneca. VII. Christian Stoics. VIII Stoic Philosophy was but a corrupt
derivation from the Jewish Theology. IX. Of Stoicisme in general, and its
combination with Socratick, and Cynick Philosophy, with its difference from
the Peripatetick, and New Academick. X. Particular Dogmes of Stoicisme. 1. of
the Stoic Comprehension. 2. The Stoic Metaphysics; of God, his Names,
Nature, and Attributes, of God's works of creation, and Providence, of fate,
and God's providence over Mankind. 3. Of the Stoic Physics, the Soul; the
Stoic (...) 4. the Stoic Ethics. 1. Appetition, and self-preservation, with
tolerance, and abstinence. 2. That passions are irrational 3. that the wise are
only free. 4. (...) 5. (...). 6. Virtue desirable for it self.. 15. The
corruptions of Stoicisme, and its opposition to Christianity.

Of Zeno his original, and Instructors.
. 1. NExt to the Cynicks follow the Stoics, who received their original from
them, by Zeno the founder of their Sect, who was sometimes Scholar to Crates.
This Zeno was borne at Cittium, a Greek Sea-town in the Isle of Cyprus. So
Strabo lib. 14. (...) Cittium has a port, which may be shut; hence sprang Zeno
the prince of the Stoic Sect. This Cittium was planted, and enhabited by a
Colonie of the Phenicians, whence Zeno was by some styled the Phenician; Thence
Crates calls him the little Phenician; as Suidas in Zeno: Zeno being according
to Laertius about 17. years of age (or as Persaeus 22.) took a voyage to
Athens, whither he was inclined, as well by his particular propension to
Philosophy, as by his business, which was to sell some purple, which he had
brought out of Phenicia, as some will have it. Though Laertius seems to make
the only ground of his voyage into Greece to be for traffic; but being robbed
by Pirates, or shipwrackt, he thence took occasion of going to Athens; where
consulting the oracle, how he might live best? answer was made, (...) If he
should join himself to the dead, etc. which understanding of study, he betook
himself with great diligence to read the books of the Ancients, and so came
into familiarity with Crates the Cynick, but being, as Laertius tells us,
(...), too modest for the Cynick Impudence, leaving Crates, he applied himself
to Stilpo the Megarick Philosopher; From him he betook himself unto Zenocrates:
He heard also Polemo the Academick as Cicero lib. 1. Quaest. Acad.

. 2. Zeno having been long an hearer of others; Zeno 's institution of the
Stoic Self, with his Character.
endeavored to correct what was amiss in them, and at length thought good to
institute a new Sect: for which purpose he made choice of the (...), the
painted Porch, so named from the Pictures of Polygnatus, otherwise called
(...), where in the time of the 30 Tyrants near 1400. Citizens were put to
death. So Laertius (...). Zeno in tant^ apud Athenienses aestimie fuit, ut
coronae aurea donarent: ipsi aram consecrarent: dubiisque temporibus claves
urbi^ apud eum deponerent. Certatim igitur undique juventus non Artica solum,
sed and totius Graeciae ad eum confluebat. Hornius, Hist. Phil. l. 3. c. 16.
Here Zeno walked, and Philosophized, whither resorted many Disciples, who (as
Laertius adds) were (...), from this Stoa called Stoics. Zeno was indeed a
person of great Intellectuals, and naturals; as it appears by the opposition
made against him by Carneades, who was fain in his engagements against Zeno to
purge his head with white Hellebore. And as his worth was great, so his
reputation amongst the Athenians was not little: For by the Philosophy, which
he taught, and by the practice of his Life conformable to that Doctrine, Zeno
gained so high an estimation amongst the Athenians, that they deposited the
keys of their City in his hands, with their Liberties. His name was also much
honored by his own Countrymen, as well at Cyprus, as at Sidon. See Stanley of
Stoic. Philosophy; and Diogenes Laertius of Zeno, who farther adds, that
Zeno being sensible, what gain he had by Philosophy, was wont to say touching
his losses at Sea, which were the occasion thereo, (...). I made a prosperous
voyage, when I suffered shipwreck, etc.

Zeno 's successor Cleanthes his Character.
. 3. Zeno of Cittium was succeeded by Cleanthes Assius his Auditor, who by
reason of his unwearied labor and indefatigable study was termed another
Hercules; also (...), because he employed himself in drawing water by night
that so he might by day employ himself in his studies. Thence that of Arrianus
in Epictetum, lib. 3. cap. 17. (...); Where is Cleanthes, who together followed
his studies, and drew water? Tullie gives him an high Character, calling him
the father of the Stoics, as lib. 3. de Natura Deorum. And Simplicius
commentar. in Euchirid. Epicteti tells us, that he was so far honored by the
Roman Senate, that they appointed his Statue to be erected at Assum, a City of
Eolis, where he was born. And certainly the Fragments of his Works, which yet
remain, argue him to have been a person of great worth as to Philosophy. We
find 37. Heroic verses with an Hemistich of his in Stobaeus's Physic
Eclogues: also 5. Jambicks turned into Latin in Senecae Epist. 107. likewise 4.
Heroicks in Clemens Alexandr. lib. 5. (...). besides Proses in Sextus; and
Jambicks in Plutarch, Of Chrysippus. Reliquit discipulum Chrysippu^,
acutissimum omnium Philosophorum; unde Chrysippeu^ acumen, ^ qui tamen primus
corrupit virilem Sectam Spinofo accumine Quaestionu^. Lipsius l. 1. de Constable.
c. 10.

Of Diogenes Babylonius.


and Galen, with others.

. 4. Cleanthes's Auditor, and successor was Chrysippus, who was borne at Sole,
a Town of Cilicia (whence came the name Solaecisme) and of great repute amongst
the Stoics, according to that old saying of Laertius, (...) unless there had
been a Chrysippus, the Stoa had not subsisted. So Tullie lib. 1. de Finibus:
Nothing* says he* belonging to the Stoic Philosophy was pretermitted by
Chrysippus. He writ an excellent Discourse of Providence, out of which Aulus
Gellius (lib. 6. cap. 2.) has collected some heads, of which yet Laertius, who
has writ his life, makes no mention.

. 5. Chrysippus was heard, and succeeded by Diogenes Babylonius: Diogenes by
Antipater: and Antipater by Possidonius. We find all these mentioned together
by Galen, or who ever else were the author (...), initio, (...). This man was
heard by Zeno of Cittium, who invented the Philosophy of the Stoics, whose
mode of Philosophizing was followed by Cleanthes; of whom Chrysippus was an
auditor, who followed the same Institution: of this man Diogenes Babylonius was
Auditor, as also Master of Antipater; of whom Possidonius was Auditor. Diogenes
Babylonius was he, who in the Second Punick War (P. Scipio and M. Marcellus
being Consuls) was together with Carneades the Academick, Antipater Sidonius.
and Critolaus the Peripatetick sent by the Athenians to Rome on Public
Embassage, as Cicero lib. 4. Tuscul. Diogenes, Laertius (in Diogenes the
Cynick) tells us, that he was borne at Seleucia, and called Babybonian from the
vicinitie of Place. The Disciple of this Diogenes Babylonius was Antipater
Sidonius, whom Cicero de Officiis lib. 3. calls the most acute person. Seneca
Epist. 92. reckons him amongst the famous Heroes of the Stoic Sect. He was of
Sidon, and thence termed Sidonius. The Disciples of Antipater, were Panaetius,
as also Possidonius. Possidonius.
This Possidonius was Originally of Syria, though he chose rather to pass for
a Rhodian, as Strabo, and Athenaeus. Strabo lib. 16. says he was (...) the
most learned of his Age. Also lib. 14. that he had the Administration of the
Rhodian Republic.

. 6. Besides these there are several others amongst the Romans, who may justly
be reputed of the Stoic Sect, Roman Stoics.
as Tubero, Cato, Varro; and after them Thraseus Paetus, Helvidius Priscus,
Rubellius, Cato. Varro. Antoninus. Tullie. Seneca.
Plautus, with M. Antoninus the Emperor, in whose time no Sect flourished so
much as the Stoic, according to Sextus Empiricus: Tullie seems mostly in love
with this Sect; as in Tuscul. 4. where he seems to make them almost the only
laudable Sect. How far Seneca was inclined to this Sect is evident enough by
his Epistles: Epistol. 83. he calls it the the most valiant and holy Sect; and
de Constable. Sap. cap. 1. he says There was so much difference 'twixt the
Stoics, and other Professors of Wisdom, as there was 'twixt men, and women.
Seneca received the Principles of Stoic Philosophy from Sotion, whom he
acknowledges to be his Praeceptors So Epist. 49. and 58.

. 7. Yea not only amongst the Gentiles, but even amongst Christians many were
much drencht in Stoic Philosophy. Christian Stoics.
So Pantaenus Bishop of Alexandria, who as Jerome acquaints us, i^ was sent to
the Indian Brachmans, to preach Christ among them, that so, if it might please
God, this Christian Philosopher might convert those Pagan Philosophers.
Disciple to this Pantaenus was Clemens Alexandrinus, who often discovers his
affection to the Stoic Philosophy. That which made this Sect so pleasing to
many Christians, as well as Pagans, was the gravitie of their conversation,
their contempt of terrene good, their moderation in the use of
creature comforts, and patience in the want of them: Hence Jerome on Esa. 10.
says, the Stoics do in many things agree with our Dogmes.

. 8. And indeed no wonder, if the Stoics agreed very far with the Chri^tian
Religion as to morals; That the Stoic Philosophy was but a corrupt derivation
from the Jewish Theology.
seeing the choicest of their notions were but corrupt derivations and
traductions from the Sacred fountain of Israel: which will be evident from
these particulars. 1. The Stoics Morals were but rivulets streaming from the
Socratick Philosophy, which, as we have before demonstrated, had its original
from Jewish Morals delivered by Solomon and others. 2. Zeno the Founder of the
Stoic Sect was (as we have before shown. 1.) Native of Cittium, a Phenician
Town in Cyprus, and so of Phenician extract. Now (as we have else where
demonstrated at large) the Phenicians had familiar conversation with the Jews,
and great notices of their Doctrines, especially such as were moral. That Zeno
traduced the choicest parts of his Philosophy from the Phenicians, and Jews is
well observed by Hornius Hist. Philos. lib. 3. cap. 16. It is easy for any to
understand whence Zeno attained to so great Sapience. For seeing he had his
original from Cittium, which received Phenician Colonies, we need no way doubt,
but that he drew from their Monuments, and Mysteries, those his contemplations,
which do so much accord with Divine Verity; Especially such things, as de
delivered touching Providence. Cyprus is near Palestine and Egypt, yea
enhabited by Colonies from both; etc. 3. Yea in Cyprus, where Zeno sucked in
his first breath, and institution, there were many Jews, as Grotius on Math.
22.23. In Cyprus (says he) whence Zeno was, there were ever many Jews. 4.
Antipater a great Master of the Stoic Philosophy was also of Sidon, a
Phenician town bordering on Judea; and thence had great advantage for the
acquainting himself with the Jewish Institutes, and Morals, as.. 5. 5. Lastly
many of the Stoic Dogmes are apparently of Jewish origination; as the Stoic
(...) Spermatick word, whereby the Universe was framed; which is evidently a
derivation from Genesis 1.1. Also the Stoic (...), or final conflagration, and
purification of all things by fire is evidently no other, than some broken
tradition of Enoch's, or some Jewish prophecy of the last conflagration; as
else where we may prove. The truth of this position will farther appear from
the following Dogmes of Stoicisme.

. 9. Of Stoicisme in general, and its combination with other Sects.
First that Stoi^isme was but a branch of the Socratick Philosophy is
sufficiently apparent both from their agreement in matter, and also from the
assistance Zeno had from Socrates's Disciples. The Stoics also held a very
good correspondence and accord with those of the old Academie. The Stoics
conspire with the Cynicks.
But their chiefest communion was with the ^ynicks. For Zeno their founder was
first instituted in Cynicisme under Crates, whence there sprang a great
fraternity 'twixt the Cynicks and Stoics, as in the former Chapter.. 4. The
Stoics stood at a great di^tance from, and Contest with the Peripateticks
about the agreement of Natural, and Moral good. The Stoics held that things
hone^t were disjoined from things Commodious toto genere, in their whole
Nature: Their difference with the Peripatetick.
The Peripateticks h^ld their difference to be only gradual. Some thought this
Controversy 'twixt the Stoics, and Pe^ipateticks to be only verbal: So
Antiochu^, Varro's Praeceptor, who composed a book of the Concord 'twixt the
Stoics, and Peripateticks. But Cicero, lib. 1. de Not. Deorum, contradicts him
thus. I wonder that Antiochus a person so greatly acute saw not, that there was
an huge distance 'twixt the Stoics, who disjoined things hone^ from things
commodious, not only in name, but toto genere; and the Peripateticks, who
compounded things hone^t with things commodious so as they should differ
amongst themselves in magnitude, and degrees only, not in kind. For this is not
a small dissension of words only, but a very great difference of things. Yet in
some things the Stoics and Peripateti^ks agreed; as that they both made (...),
right reason, the measure of good, and ^vil^ they both made Virtue desirable
for it self, etc. The Stoics also differed much from those of the New
Academie, who stiffely asserted an (...), or incompreh^nsion. For Zeno had
sharp, and perpetual conflicts with Arcesilas, Their contests with the New
Academicks.
who instituted the Second Acad^mi^, and the Academick (...). Whence also
Ca^n^ad^s, who was the In^itutor of the third, or New Acad^mie, writ sharply
against Zeno the Stoic his b^oks, as Aul. Gellius lib. 17. cap. 15. The
particular Dogmes of Stoicisme. 1. Comprehension.


. 10. As for the particular Dogmes of Stoicisme, the Stoics held 1. That there
are certain, common principles, or Ideas in men, which they called (...),
Comprehensions, in opposition to the Academick (...), incomprehension,
introduced by Arcesilas. (...) was first used in this sense by Leno; and that
in a sense Metaphorical, and borrowed from things apprehended by the hand,
which allusion he expressed by action: for showing his hand with the fingers
stretched forth, this he made the image of fancy: then bending them a little,
this he made a symbol of assent: then compressing them, and closing his fist,
this he made to be comprehension; which according to the Stoics is a firm,
and certain knowledge. For, say they, whatsoever is understood, is comprehended
by the mind one of these two ways: either 1. by evident incursion which
Laertius styles a knowledge by sense, or 2. by transition from Ev^dence, termed
by Laertius collection by Demonstration, of which they make 3. kinds. 1.
Assimilation: So a person is comprehended by his picture. 2. Composttion as of
a Goat and an Heart is made Hirco-cervus. 3. Analogy, which is either by
Augmentation, or Diminution. Thus of Stoic comprehension.

2. The Stoics notions of God, and his nature.
. 11. 2. As to Metaphysics; the Stoics held, as Laertius tells us, 1. (...),
etc. That God was but one called by several names viz. (...) the mind, (...)
Fate, (...) Jupiter, etc. 2. They define God, (...), etc. That God is a Living,
Immortal, Rational, Perfect Being, or intellectual in happiness, void of all
Evil, providential over the world, not of human form, maker, and, as it were,
parent of the Universe. According to Plutarch. Philos^ph. Placit. 1.6. The
Stoics define God, A spirit full of intelligence, of a fiery nature, having
no proper form, but transforming himself into whatsoever he pleases. So
Laertius acquaints us, that they held God to be the first, most pure being,
whose essence was comprehensive of, and diffused through all beings. 3. The
Stoics asserted likewise, that God was (...) ingenerable, and incorruptible.
We understand by God, says Antipater, a living Nature, or substance, happy,
incorruptible, doing good to mankind, etc.

God's creatition and Providence.
. 12. Touching God^s Works of Creation, and Providence, Laertius informs us,
that the Stoics held God to be the first Cause of all things, and as the
faetus is contained in the Seed (...). So also God was the Spermatick Word of
the Universe, according to Joh. 1.12. They affirm also (adds Laertius) (...)
That the Universe was framed according to infinite Wisdom, prevision, or
Providence: according to Genesis 1.31. God saw. Touching God's Providence over the
World, Of Providence.
the Stoics assert (as Plutarch. Placit. Philos.) That God is an operative
artificial fire, Methodically ordering, and effecting the generation of things,
comprehending in himself all that (...), Prolifick Virtue, whereby every thing
is produced according to fate. This seems the same with the Platonic (...)
Universal spirit traduced from Genesis 1.2. which is farther evident from their
notions of Fate, which Zeno makes not to differ much from Nature, and
Providence. Chrysippus defines Fate, Of Fate.
a spiritual power governing the world orderly, or an eternal indeclinable
series of things commixing, and implicating it self by eternal orders of
consequence, of which it is composed, and connected: or the reason of the
world, or the law of all things in the world governed by Providence. Panaetius
the Stoic expressly asserts Fate to be God. Though many of the Fathers, as
Ju^tin Martyr. Apol. 1. Ireneus, Epiphanius with others dispute vehemently
against this Stoic Fate, etc. The Stoics held also, that the Gods had a more
particular providence over mankind, God 's providence over Mankind.
which is manifested by this, that all things in the world were made for the
use of Man. Hence also they held with Pythagoras, Socrates, Plato and the rest,
certain Demons, which had inspection over, and compassion for men: So Laertius
in Zeno (...). That these Demons were but Satanick Apes of the Jewish Messiah,
we have else where demonstrated.

. 13. Touching Natural Philosophy, the Stoics held. 1. The Soul to be a
spirit connatural, and immortal: So Laertius in Zeno, Stoics Physics. 1. Of
the Soul. 2. The (...).
(...). 2. They asserted also the final conflagration of the World by fire,
which they called (...), and traduced originally from the Jews, though
immediately from the Phenicians, as Grotius affirms. This (says he) Zens
received from the Phenicians, etc.

. 14. The Stoics Ethics.
But the Stoics chief excellence consistes in Moral Philosophy; the first
part whereof they place in Appetition, and their first appetition (according to
Laertius) is (...), to preserve self, for, say they, it is not lawful for any
to be so proper to any, as to himself, and because nothing conduces so much to
self-preservation, as tolerance, and abstinence: thence some comprehend the
whole of their Morals in these two (...) bear, and abstain. 2. That passions
are irrational. Diogenes Laertius in Zeno.
2. The Stoics held (...), that Passions were irrational: whence they defined
(...), Passion is the irrational, and preternatural motion of the Soul: again
(...) an inordinate impulse: and thence they concluded all wise men were
austere, not indulging themselves, or others, in pleasures, grief, or other
passions. They held also (...), that Will was contrary to concupiscence.
Whence they assert also, that there were 3 (...), or good affections in wise
men: namely Will, Joy, and Caution: but 4 (...) or perturbations in fools,
Cupiditie, Gladness, Fear, and Sorrow: as Lud: Vives in Aug. Civ. lib. 14.
cap. 8.

. 14.3. The Stoics held also (as Diogen. Laert.) (...) that the wise man was
only free, but wicked men slaves. This Liberty they defined thus (...),
Liberty is a power of self-motion. 4. They affirmed likewise, that there was
(...), a right reason not only Objective, but also Subjective, and innate in
human nature, which being improved might bring men to a state of happiness. So
Laertius (...). 5. Hence also they held, that there was (...) a good nature, or
seeds of Virtue in nature, and Free Will to good. Whence likewise, contrary to
Socrates, they asserted (...), that Virtue was teachable. So Zeno, in an
Epistle to Antigonus, says, that a generous nature with indifferent exercise,
and the assistance of a Praeceptor might easily attain to perect Virtue. 6.
Some of them held, that Virtue might be lost; others that it could not, (...),
by reason of those firm principles. Cleanthes said (...). That a righteous man
was such by Nature, not by institution. 7. They held also, that Virtue was
desirable for it self, and that our Objective happiness lay in Virtue, etc. 8.
They thence affirmed (...), That friendship was to be found only amongst
virtuous persons, by reason of their likeness. 9. They held likewise, that
holy persons only could Worship God aright, (...), that devout, and just
persons only were skilful in such Rites, as belonged to the Gods. 10. Lastly
they affirmed that a virtuous man affects not monastic life, but active.
(...), a Virtuous person is communicative by nature, and active. See these
Dogmes of Stoicisme more largely in Laertius on Zeno, where he gives us a brief
account of the whole body of Stoic Philosophy. The same, as to morals, is
laid down more fully by Epictetus in his Enchiridion, as also by Simplicius in
his annotations thereon, and yet more amply by Arrianus, who collected
Epictetus his Stoic Discourses delivered at home, or abroad, and digested them
into a systeme. But none has given us a more perfect Idea of Stoic
Philosophy, than amongst the ancients Lucius Seneca, and Amongst the modern
Lipsius in his Manuduct. to Stoic Philosophy.

. 15. Albeit the Stoics, as to Morals, The corruptions of the Stoic
Philosophy, and its contradiction to Christianity.
came the nearest of any to Christians, yet were they of all Sects of
Philosophers the greatest Enemies to the Christian Religion: and indeed no
wonder; seeing their (...), or whole design was to attain unto Happiness by
their Virtuous Works, and so to make that of their own Carnal Wisdom, and
Free Will to all good, which we do of Christ. Hence they asserted (...), a
right reason, and (...), or (...) a Free Will to all good, with seeds of Virtue
in human nature. Whence Austin affirms, that the Stoics as well, as the
Epicureans, come under that condemnation of the Apostle Romans 8.5. Romans 8.5.
etc. They that are after the flesh, etc. For indeed to make our own Wisdom,
and Free Will, our God, as the Stoics did, is the most cursed piece of our
Carnal-mindednesse, and Idolatry. Now that the Stoics made their own Wisdom,
and Virtues their God, is very evident from that of Grotius in Act. 17.18.
(...)] who there says, that the Stoics were (...), Vessels filled with vain
presumption, and most averse from the Christian Religion; they denied, that
their Wise man came short in any thing of Jupiter; that he owed nothing to God
for his Wisdom; That Jupiter could not do more than a good man; that Jupiter
was for a longer time good, but that a wise man esteemed never the worse of
himself, because his Virtues were shut up within a narrower compass of time:
which you find in Seneca Epi^t. 73. that a man should kill himself, rather than
endure servitude, contumelies, or great diseases. Thus Grotius. And indeed
Stoic Philosophy, albeit it give us an excellent Idea of Morality, yet
falling upon our nature as degenerate, and corrupt, it has hitherto been of
little use, save to feed spiritual pride, and turn off men from the Covenant of
Grace to live upon the old Covenant of Works. This is sufficiently evident from
that poisonous influence which Stoic Philosophy has had on Pelagianisme: For
the chiefest of the Pelagian infusions received their first ferment from the
Stoa; Whence sprang the Pelagian Right Reason; Free Will; Seeds of Virtue;
Impeccancie, or perfect state, but from the Stoic (...), Stoic Philosophy, a
cause of Pelagianisme.
and (...)? as we shall else where, God willing, demonstrate fully. That Stoic
Philosophy is very apt to puff up, and swell proud corrupt nature, Plutarch
himself seems to confess in Cleomene, (...). The Stoic Philosophy, if it
fall upon great, and acute natures, proves lubricous, inordinate, or doubtful;
but if it be tempered with a grave, and meek, or humble mind, it confers much
to true, or proper good. This great, or proud nature, which receives so much
damage by Stoic Philosophy, is common to all men naturally: and the truly
humble, and Meek spirit (which Plutarch makes the only sit subject for Stoic
Philosophy) is no where to be found, but in the Schole of Christ, namely among
such, who being stripped of their own Wisdom, Free Will to all Good, and other
legal sufficiencies, know how to improve those Stoic Principles of Morality
on Gospel motives or grounds, with Gospel dependence on Christ, and unto Gospel
Ends, viz. the exaltation of Christ his free Grace, and the Glory of it. This
is the true Christian Stoicisme.

CHAP. IIII. Of Scepticisme.
I. Of the Scepticks, their several names. II. Pyrr^o his Character and chief
Dogme, that nothing was knowable. III. The formal Idea of Scepticisme. IIII.
The main design of Scepticks to overthrow the Dogmes of other Sects. V.
Scepticks denied any thing to be just, or unjust. VI. The original of this
Sceptick (...), from Heraclitus's, and Plato's Schole. VII. Plato, and the old
Academicks not Sceptick, but Dogmatick. VIII. Wherein the New Academicks
differed from the Scepticks. IX. The Scepticks avoided all manner of
Dogmatizing. X. Scepticisme a great enemy to the Christian Religion. XI. How
far it is commendable, and useful.

. 1. NExt to the Stoics we shall mention the Scepticks, Of the Scepticks their
several names.
who were also styled Pyrrhonians from Pyrrho their chief Coryphaeus. Laertius
in Pyrrho informs us, that they were called (...), Scepticks, because they
always (...) consider a matter, but never determine any thing: (...),
Aporeticks, because they always (...) doubt. (...), Ephecticks, because, after
all their long, and tedious inquisitions, there follows no assent, but (...),
an hesitation, and suspension of judgment, or retention of assent. Lastly they
were styled (...), Zeteticks, because they were ever seeking, but never sound
the truth.

. 2. The Head of this Sect was Pyrrho, who flourished in the time of
Theophrastus, and Epicurus, about the 109. Olympiad; Of Pyrrho, his Character.
for he heard Dryso the Son of Stilp^, and Anaxarchus the Abderite; whom also
he accompanied into India, in the Expedition of Alexander the Great, yea was
present, when the Indian upbraided Anaxarchus, that he followed the Court of
Kings, but taught no one Virtue: As Laertius in Anaxarchus: who also brings in
Ascanius affirming of Pyrrho, that he seemed to have sound out a noble way of
Philosophizing by introducing (...), incomprehension, and (...) suspension: his
chief Dogme that nothing could be known.
for he asserted nothing: and truly (adds Laertius) Pyrrho's life was
agreeable to his opinions; for he shunned nothing, nor took any heed to his
ways. We find the like mention of Pyrrho, and his incomprehension in Ammonius
(Comment. in Arist. Categ. page 9. (...) says he) (...). Pyrrho the chieftain
of this Sect said, that Beings had an incomprehension, etc.

The formal Idea of Scepticisme.
. 3. Hence the (...), or chief Dogme of the Scepticks is, that nothing could be
known, and therefore nothing might be affirmed, or denied. So Anaxarchus
Pyrrho's master held (...) neither did he know this, that he knew nothing. So
Zenophanes said that, no one certainly knew any thing: (...) for truth lies in
an abyss. Whence Sextus Empiricus cap. 4. dens Scepticisme a faculty
opposing Phaenomena's or apparences, and intelligibles all manner of ways,
whereby we proceed through the equivalence of contrary things, and speeches,
first to (...) suspension, then to indisturbance. Thence those expressions of
the same Sextus Empiricus, (...) not more this, than that: again (...) Every
reason has a reason equal opposed thereto; also (...) I define nothing: Lastly
(...) I persevere a Sceptick, or considering, etc.

. 4. Whence the Scepticks made it their main business, to overthrow all the
Dogmes of the other Dogmatick Sects, not by affirming, The Scepticks made it
their business to overthrow the Dogmes of other Sects.
or defining any thing; but by producing the opinions of all other Sects, and
showing their invaliditie or weakness. They instanced (says Laertius) in ten
ways, by which things became doubtful to us: as from the difference 1. of
Animals, 2. of men 3. of Senses 4. of Affections, and their vicissitudes 5. of
Educations, Institutions, Laws, and Customs, etc. Thence they denied, that
there were any (...) common principles known of themselves, or (...)
comprehensions; and so all Demonstration was by them taken away; concluding
(...) that the whole is indemonstrable. They also denied, that there were any
infallible signs, etc. This their (...) they termed also (...), because their
opinion held in bivio, without encl^ning to this, or that part: They named it
also (...), because there was nothing affirmed, or denied: for they durst not
affirm that they were borne, or so much as that they were men.

. 5. Yea the Sceptick (...), or suspension reached so far, The Sceptick
Suspension reached even to the denying any thing to be just, or unjust, or that
sense was to be credited.
as that they asserted nothing to be Good, or Evil; just, or unjust; but that
men passed their judgment according to the institution of Laws, and Custom;
not that one thing was in it self more just, or unjust than another. Yea at
last they came to affect an (...), that the very senses were not to be
credited. So Anaxarchus being carried against his will to Cyprus, where he was
thrown into an hollow rock, and command given, that he should be beaten with
iron hammers; he seeming not to regard his pain said (...) beat Anaxarchus's
Vessel, but Anaxarchus himself thou can not break. Lastly we find the whole
mystery of this Sceptick Hesitation well expressed by Aristocles in Eusebius
Praepar. Evang. lib. 14. (...). Things are equally indifferent, and uncertain,
and undeterminable; wherefore neither can our senses, or opinions speak truth,
or falsehood; wherefore neither ought we to believe them, but leave them void of
opination, and without inclination, or motion; declaring concerning every
thing, that it neither is, nor is not; also that it is, that it is not, neither
is it not.

. 6. The original of this Sceptick Suspension from Heraclitus and Plato's
Schole.
As for the Original of this Sceptick (...) incomprehension, it seems to be
more ancient than Pyrrho, or Anaxarchus; for Heraclitus laid a great foundation
for it, by asserting all things to be in m^tion, and nothing certain: So
Ammonius (in Ari^t. Categ. fol. 9 reckons Heraclitus among these Pyrrhonians
because (...) Heraclitus said, that all things were in motion and flux,
wherefore they are called Ephecticks from (...), suspending their judgment of
things. Yea this Sceptick (...) suspension had a considerable room, and
foundation in Plato's Schole, the old Academie, wherein there was allowed (...)
a Problematick kind of disputation pro, and con, for, and against the question,
with an (...), or liberty of suspending their judgments as to conclusions,
about things dubious. For the old Academicks held two sorts of things some
certain, and unquestionable, others doubtful, which might be affirmed, or
denied: As for things certain they held (...) some things are always the same,
without generation, whence they concluded, such things were (...), truly
knowable and certain: in which rank of things they placed our notions of God;
of the Soul; of happiness; of the other life, etc. concerning these things
Plato (and the old Academicks) allowed not any (...), problematick disputation,
or (...), suspension; but he lays them down as certain, and indubitable, or
proves them to be such (...), from indubitable principles indubitably. But
Plato lays down some sensibles, which are only Probable, or dubious; and of
these he discourses more freely, allowing an (...) Suspension of judgment
concerning them; whence his difference (...), of a Probable and demonstrative
character. From this (...) in Plato's Old Academie sprang the New Academick
(...), or suspension of judgment, which differs little from the Sceptick
(...), or suspension.

Plato and the old Academie not Sceptick but Dogmatick.
. 7. Albeit Plato, by his (...) Probationarie disputes pro, and con, about
sensibles, laid a considerable foundation for the Sceptick (...), yet he seems
professedly to dispute against this Sceptick Incomprehension, or suspension;
discovering himself to be rather Dogmatick, than Sceptick. Laertius tells us,
that it was much controverted whether Plato does Dogmatize, or not? and he
seems to conclude the question in the affirmative, that Plato did Dogmatize;
because he expounds those things, which he conceived true, and confuted those
things which were false; though he suspended his judgment in things doubtful.
So Sextus Empiricus c. 31. Some (says he) hold Plato to be Dogmatick, others
Sceptick, others, that he was in some things Sceptick, in some things
Dogmatick: for in his Gymna^tick Discourses, where Socrates is brought in
disputing with the Sophists, they say, he has a Gymna^tick, or Sceptick
Character: but when he declares his own opinion, he is Dogmatick. But Ammonius
(in Arist. Categ. page 9.) gives us a more full account of Plato's judgment
against this (...) incomprehension. (...). Plato in many discourses confuting
this opinion (about incomprehension) after many things adds this also to them.
When, Sirs, ye say there is an incomprehension, ye comprehend there is an
incomprehension, or not? if ye comprehend it, there is then a comprehension: if
ye comprehend it not, we have no reason to believe you, because you comprehend
not, that there is an incomprehension. By which argument Plato efficaciously
overthrew the Sceptick incomprehension.

. 8. But the^e seems to be a greater affinity betwixt the New Academicks, and
the Scepticks in so much, The New Academicks differ from the Scepticks, and
wherein.
that they are often taken for one and the same Sect. So Seneca Epist. 88. The
Pyrrhonians, and Megaricks, and Eretriacks, and Academicks, who introduced a
new Science, namely that nothing could be known, are verst almost in the same
things. So Suidas in (...). But Sextus Empiricus cap. 31. gives this difference
'twixt the Sceptick, and New Academick (...), or (...). Those (says he) of the
New Academie, though they say all things are incomprehensible, differ from the
Scepticks perhaps in saying all things are incomprehensible: for they assert
this; but the Sceptick admits it possible that they may be comprehended, etc.
Again (adds Sextus) we differ also from the New Academie, as to what belongs
to the End: for they use in the course of life what is credible; we following
Laws, Customs, and natural affections, live without engaging our opinion.
Lastly Sextus seems to observe this difference, that the New Academicks,
Arcesilas with others, affirmed (...), suspension to be Good, but Assent to be
Evil, and that according to Nature: But Pyrrho judged these things to be so,
(...), not according to nature, but appearance. By all which it appears, that
the Academicks held this common first principle, that all things are
incomprehensible, might be comprehended: wherefore they accordingly determined,
that nothing could be determined. But the Scepticks durst not affirm, or deny
any thing, not so much as their own first Principle, viz. that all things were
incomprehensible.

. 9. By which it appears, The Scepticks avoided all manner of Dogmatizing.
that the Scepticks avoided all manner of Dogmatizing, as well that of the New,
as that of the old Academie, and of all other Sects. So Sextus Empiricus Chap.
6. We say the Sceptick does not Dogmatize: not understanding Dogme, as some do,
in the general acceptance, for an assent to any thing; for the Sceptick
assents to those affections, or impressions which are necessarily induced by
fancy, or sense; but we say he does not Dogmatize in their sense, who takes a
Dogme for an assent to any of those inevident things, which are inquired into
by Sciences. For a Sceptick Philosopher assents to nothing, that is not
Evident; neither does he Dogmatize, when he pronounces the Sceptick Phrases
concerning things not manifest; as I assert nothing, etc. Thus Sextus
Empiricus, who treats more fully of Scepticisme in his books against the
Mathematicians, etc.

Scepticisme a great Enemy to the Christian Religion.
. 10. This Sect of Scepticks is very contradictorie to the Christian Religion
as it appears by the confession of Nicetas In Epitom. Clement. Roman. (...) we
have accurately inquired into those things, which are delivered by the
Philosophers; Especially those things, which are greatly repugnant to Piety
toward God: namely the Dogmes of Epicurus, and Pyrrho, that so we might be the
better able to refute them. And indeed Scepticisme is but a door to Atheism:
for by questioning every thing men at last come to believe nothing, though most
certain, even the Being of a God.

How far Scepticisme is commendable.
. 11. Albeit Scepticisme be a thing of dangerous Consequence, yet is it not
wholly to be condemned in things naturals and as it was used, in its first
original: for although there are many things certain, which ought not to be
called into question, yet there are, especially in naturals, many more
uncertain things, in such things, if we will not precipitately err, we must
not precipitately Judge. but in things of this kind it is most agreeable (...),
to suspend our assent; which was the practice of Plato, and his successors in
the old Academie, whence sprang the Academick (...). Thence Tullie in Lucullo
brings in the Academicks speaking thus: We are not those, to whom nothing seems
true; but we say that there are some falsehoods mixed with Truths, and that
under so great similitude, as that there remains in them no certain note of
discretion, or difference. Again says Cicero: what can there be more rash, and
unworthie the gravitie, and constance of a Wise man, than to yield a false
assent; or to defend without hesitation that, which is not sufficiently
perceived, or understood. This modest (...) or suspension was greatly affected
by Socrates, who in things uncertain, or dubious gave himself, and Scholars a
liberty of suspending; though in things necessary, certain, and Moral he was
very tenacious, and Dogmatizing.

CHAP. V. Of Epicurisme.
Epicurus his original, His Institution, Sect, and Character. His Pride, and
contention. His temperance according to the Character of his friends. His
Industry, and Disciples. His Philosophy. 1. Physics, of Atoms, etc. 2. His
contempt of Logic, and Rhetoric. 3. His Ethics: of Pleasure, and Passion.
That Pleasure is the chiefest Good. That this Pleasure consists in Virtue:
Epicurus's Atheistick Conceptions of God's Providence, etc. His denying the
Immortality of the Soul, what opposition Christianity found from the
Epicureans.

. 1. HAving taken some View of all other Sects, Of Epicurus his Original.
we shall conclude with the Epicurean, which was but a branch of the Eleatick
Sect; and received its Institution from Epicurus, who was born in the third
year of the 109 Olympiad, seven years after Plato's death, and 341 before the
birth of Christ. He was borne at Gargettus a Town belonging to the Egean Tribe;
and was bred up at Samus till the 18 year of his age; at which time he went to
Athens, Xenocrates living in the Academie, and Aristotle at Chalcis. About the
23 year of his age, he went to Colophon to his Father; and from the 32 year of
his age, to the 37 he lived partly at Mitylene, partly at Lampsacum, where he
instituted a Schole, as Suidas observes, and Gassendus after him ( Chap. 5. of
Epicurus) Epicurus returning to Athens about the 37 year of his age, he a while
discoursed of Philosophy in public with others, but after instituted a Sect
in Private denominated from himself Epicureans. At first indeed admiring the
Doctrine of Democritus he professed himself a Democritian, or of the Eleatick
Sect, unto which Democritus appertained. So Cicero de Not. Deorum. Democritus
was a very great Person, from whose fountains Epicurus watered his Garden:
meaning his Schole, which was in a Garden. Yet afterward, out of a spirit of
Pride, and contention Epicurus rejects Democritus, and changes many things in
his Dogmes; Thence (says Cicero) he was very ungrateful toward Democritus,
whom he followed. Clemens Alexandrinus (...). lib. 1. and others report
Nausiphanes the Pythagorean, Disciple of Pyrrho, to have been master to
Epicurus. Laertius affirms, he was chiefly addicted to Anaxagoras. He also
admired the Conversation of Pyrrho, as Gassendus in his Life cap. 4. By which
it appears, that Epicurus first embraced Scepticisme, whence he fell into
Atheism, and Epicurisme; and indeed no wonder, for the Sceptick is the fittest
matter to form an Atheist, and sensualist out of, as hereafter.

Epicurus 's institution of his Sect, and Character.
. 2. Epicurus having imbibed what he thought agreeable to his design, both
from the Eleatick and Sceptick Schools, he forms and shapes his own Ideas into
a peculiar Sect of his own, called from him Epicureans; and Pleasure being his
main End, he purchases at Athens a very Pleasant Garden, where he lived with
his friends, and discoursed of Philosophy. Apollodorus in Laertius tells us,
that this Garden cost him 80. Pounds. We find this Encomium, of him in
Petronius Arbiter, who followed this Epicurean Sect. Ipse Pater very doctis
Epicurus in hortis
Jussit, and hanc vitam dixit habere Deos.
Epicurus the Father of truth dictated in the learned Garden, and he said the
Gods led this life. Lucretius the Epicurean l. 3. gives him the like Character.
Tu pater, and rerum inventor, tu patria nobis
Suppeditas praecepta, tuisque ex, inclyte, Chartis, etc.
Again speaking of Epicurus. Qui genus humanum ingenio superavit, and omnes
Restinxit Stellas, Exortus uti aethereus Sol.
Lactantius lib. 3. Instit. producing the^e verses, subjoyns; Truly I can
never read these verses without smiling: for he spoke not this of Socrates, and
Plato, who were as Princes among the Philosophers: but of a man, than whom no
sick man ever dreamed, or talked more foolishly. Indeed the Disciples of
Epicurus extolled him (as some now adays) to the Skies, as if he only of all
the Philosophers had found out the Truth, and all others had embraced Shadows:
Yea his adherents were so ravished with the admiration of him, as that every
month they Sacrificed to his birth day, and that on the 20. day; whence they
called those holy days (...). And they burned with so great love to their
Master, as that they carried his Picture engraven on a Ring as a luckie fortune
wherever they went.

Epicurus 's Pride, and Contention.
. 3. But notwithstanding the great esteem Epicurus's Disciples had concerning
him; others were not a little offended at him; especially for his Pride,
Vanity, and Contentious spirit. As for Epicurus's Pride, and Vanity, Plutarch
in his book against Epicurus acquaints us, that he had so proud, and swelling
an opinion of himself, as that he would call no one learned, but himself, and
those, who proceeded from his Schole. And touching his contention, Cicero. 1.
De Not. Deor. relates, that Epicurus did most contumeliously vex Aristotle: he
did most shamefully rail against Phaedo the Socratick: he did by several
volumnes oppose Timocrates the brother of Metrodorus, his companion; because he
in some small matters differed from him in Philosophy: he was very ungrateful
even to Democritus himself, whom yet he followed: he never styled Chrysippus by
any other name than Chesippus, etc. As for Epicurus's Conversation; those, who
differed from him suppose him to have been immersed in all manner of sensual,
and brutish pleasures. Epicurus's temperance according to the relation of his
friends.
But those, that conversed with him, and adhered to his Sect, make him to be
very pious toward the Gods, his Parents, and Country: also very bountiful
toward his Brethren, friends, and servants: grave, and temperate, contenting
himself with most simple, and mean diet; likewise sparing in Wine, yea living
on bread and water only; So that he accounted it a great feast, if he had a
little cheese. His industry, and Works.
They make him also to be very studious, and industrious; which they argue from
the multitude of volumnes he writ, beyond any other of the Philosophers, to the
number of 300. All which books are perished, excepting three Epistles given us
by Laertius in his 10. book, who has also given us a compende of his
Philosophy. Epicurus lived 72. years; and died (as Laertius) of the stone
stopping his urine, in the second year of the 127. Olympiad.

. 4. Among the Disciples of Epicurus, The Disciples of Epicurus.
the first rank is given to Mus his servant, who Philosophized together with
his master, and after him became the head of the Epicurean Sect, as Diogen.
Laertius lib. 10. Also among the Sectators of Epicurus is reckoned Hermannus
mentioned by Porphyrie lib. 1. de Abstinentia. Also Lucian was an Epicurean,
and friend of Celsus the Epicurean, who writ against the Christians, and is
answered by Origin. This Lucian is by some styled the Atheist, because of his
blasphemy against Christ, so Suidas: but herein he is vindicated by Vossius)
de Philos. Sect. cap. 8.. 24.) who shows, that Lucian no where speaks Evil of
Christ, save in the person of a stranger, where he calls Christ a Sophist, a
title of no ill import amongst the Philosophers, only he speaks unworthily of
God, on which account I suppose he was termed (...) the Atheist. There were
also many of the Romans, who adhered to this Epicurean Sect, as Lucretius,
Cassius: also Maro, who dedicated the latter part of his life to the Epicurean
Philosophy; as in like manner, Petronius Arbiter; with others. And indeed
there was no Sect continued so long, as the Schole of Epicurus, which when all
other Sects failed, persisted in continual succession, as Laertius boasts of
it; and Lactantius lib. 3. Institut. easily grants; giving this reason
thereof. The Discipline of Epicurus was always more famous than that of other
Philosophers; not that it brought any thing of reason with it, but because the
popular name of Pleasure invites many: for all are prone to V^ce. Nazianzen
Orat. 23. on the praise of Hero Alexandrinus joins these 3. in Epicurus as
containing the chief of his Philosophy (...) Epicurus's Automatum together
with his Atoms, and Pleasure.

Epicurus 's Philosophy. 1. Physics of Atoms.
. 5. As for Epicurus's Philosophy, the best thereof consisted in Physics,
wherein he chiefly embraced the Dogmes of Anaxagoras, yet he differed from him
in many things. Touching the Origin of the Universe. Epicurus held, that all
things were composed of Atoms. Thence that of Au^tin de Civit. Dei. lib. 11.
cap. 9. Epicurus held, that there were innumerable worlds produced by the
fortuitous confluxe of Atoms. See Lud. Vives on the text. Epicurus's
Hypothesis is supposed to have been this: viz. that before the world was
brought into that form, and order it is now in, Stillingf. Orig. Sacr. l. 3.
c. 2.
there was an infinite empty space, in which were an innumerable company of
solid particles, or Atoms of different sizes, and shapes, which by their
weight were in continual motion, and that by the various occursions of these,
all the bodies of the Universe were framed in that order, they now are in.
These his sentiments of Atoms Epicurus is said to have traduced from
Leucippus, and Democritus; especially from the latter, as before; though indeed
the first great assertor of Atoms was Mochus, that famous Phenician
Physiologist, who traduced them from the Jews, as has been proved in the
Phenician Philosophy. The whole of the Epicurean Physics is comprehended by
Lucretius the Epicurean in 6. books.

Epicurus his contempt of Logic.
. 6. Epicurus contemned Logic, Rhetoric, and the Mathematics. His contempt
of Logic is mentioned by Laertius in Epicurus, (...). They rejected Logic, as
that, which perverts men's minds: for they say, that simple words suffice for
Physics. Yea Cicero lib. 1. de Not. Deorum, brings in Epicurus denying, that
either part of Contradictorie Propositions were true. In the room of Logic
Epicurus introduced his Canonick Ratiocination: His Canon.
whence he composed a book styled (...), which was (as Laertius tells us) (...),
concerning the Rule of judgment, and Principle; also a Work, that delivered
the first Elements. This Canon, or Criterion of judgment Epicurus made to be
not Reason, but sense. So Cicero de Not. Deor. lib. 1. Epicurus said, that the
senses were the messengers, His contempt of Rhetoric, and Mathematics.
or judges of truth. As for Epicurus's contempt of Rhetoric Laertius gives
this account thereof (...) he used a proper kind of speech, such as was
accommodated to things, which because it was simple or plain, Aristophanes the
Grammarian reprehended. So Cicero de Finibus lib. 1. acquaints us, that
Epicurus neglected letters, and ornaments of Speech. Epicurus's contempt of the
Mathematics is mentioned by Plutarch in his book against Epicurus.

. 7. Epicurus's Ethics. 1. That Pleasure is the chiefest Good.

Of Pleasure, and Passion.


In Epicurus's Philosophy nothing was more pleasing to corrupt nature, than
his Ethics especially touching the chiefest good, which he placed in Pleasure:
so that he made the first, and last cause of all human actions to be Pleasure,
or Delight arising from that good, which the mind enjoys. His Canons of
Pleasure, and Passion (according to Gassendus de Epicuri Philos. Morali, cap.
3.) are these: 1. All Pleasure, which has no pain joined with it, is to be
embraced. 2. All pain, which has no Pleasure joined with it, is to be shunned.
3. All Pleasure, which either hinders a greater Pleasure, or procures a
greater pain, is to be shunned. 4. All pain, which puts away a greater pain,
or procures a greater Pleasure, is to be embraced, etc. Epicurus's Canons
touching Pleasure, as the first and last good, were (according to Gassendus
cap. 3.4.5.) these. 1. That pleasure, without which, That Pleasure is the
chiefest good.
there is no notion of Felicity, is in its own nature good. 2. That Felicity
consists in Pleasure, because it is the first Connatural Good, or the first
thing agreeable to nature, as also the last of expetibles, or End of good
things. 3. That Pleasure, wherein consists Felicity, is Indolence of body,
and Tranquillity of mind: for herein the absolute good of man is contained.
The Indolence of the body is preserved by the use of temperance. The health of
the mind is preserved by Virtues provided, and applied by Philosophy. That
this Pleasure is in Virtue, and Mental.
Diogenes Laertius gives the like favorable interpretation of Epicurus's
Pleasures, in his Vindication of him against the imputations of Diotymus the
Stoic. Epicurus (says Laertius) held (...). That the chiefest happiness was
in God. 2. Hence he placed happiness in the Pleasures of the mind, and
reflection on former enjoyments. 3. Laertius also tells us, that he held there
was an unseparable connection 'twixt Virtue, and true Pleasure: whence he said,
that Virtues were naturally conjoined with a pleasant life: again, live thou as
God in immortal Virtues, and thou shall have nothing common with mortal.
Ammonius in Aristot. Categ. page 9. gives the like account of the Epicurean
Pleasure (...). The Epicureans are called Hedonici, because they make Pleasure
the last End; Pleasure; not that of the body, but the tranquille, and
indisturbed constitution of the Soul, following a Virtuous life, but they
mistake saying it is the Carcass of Virtue, or the shadow, seeing they make it
the last End. Seneca affirms, that Epicurus complained, men were very
ungrateful toward past enjoyments, because what ever good they enjoy, they
reflect not again upon it, neither do they reckon it among pleasures: where as
there is no pleasure so certain as that which is past, because it cannot be
taken from us. Present goods have not yet a complete solid being: and what is
future yet hangs in suspense, and is uncertain, but what is past is most s^t^.
Yea Epicurus himself in his Epistle to Idomeneus, speaking of the torments, he
was then under, being ready to dye, says, that the joy, which he had in his
mind upon the remembrance of the reasonings, which he had in his life time,
stood in battle of array against all those torments (as great as could be
imagined) of the strangurie he labored under. According to these accounts,
Epicurus's Pleasures were not so gross, as is generally conceived, yet
sufficiently blameworthy; in that he places man's objective, and formal
happiness in Pleasure, which is but a consequent thereof.

Epicurus 's Atheistical conceptions of God, his Providence, etc.
. 8. But whatever Epicurus's opinion was about Pleasure; certain it is, he was
foully mistaken in his Metaphysical Philosophizings about God, his Providence,
etc. Its true; Epicurus (according to Laert^us) denied not the Being, and
spiritual nature, of God: for he held (...), that God was incorruptible, and
most blessed, etc. Yet he denied the Providence of God wherein he discovered
the absurdnesse of his reason: for take away the belief of Divine Providence,
and the notions of a Deity, though never so excellent, will have no awe upon
the spirits, and lives of men; and therefore soon be rooted out of men's minds.
Wherefore some Ancient Philosophers supposed, that Epicurus's design in
acknowledging a Dei^ie which he really believed not) was only to avoid the
censure of downright Atheism: assuring himself, that albeit he asserted one
most excellent Being, which he called God, yet so long as he denied his
Providence, he sufficiently served his own Interest; which was to root out all
common foundations of Religion, and so to establish a practical Atheism.
Thence Tullie de Not. Deor. 1o. tells us, that Epicurus extracted Religion by
the roots out of men's minds, seeing he took from the immortal Gods both
assistance, and Grace. For albeit he affirmed the Nature of God to be most
excellent, and best, yet he denied Grace in God; and so took away that, which
is most proper to the best, and most excellent Nature. For what is better, or
more excellent, than bonity and beneficence? which if you take from God, you
make no one dear to God, How Epicurus undermined the Providence of God.
and no one beloved of him, etc. Epicurus's great Canon, whereby he destroyed
the Providence of God, was (according to Laertius lib. 10.) this, (...). The
blessed, and immortal being neither has any affairs of his own, neither does
he h^ed other men's. His great argument to defend this his Hypothesis was, that
it was beneath the Majesty of the Divine Being, to condescend so far, as to
regard and mingle with the affairs of this lower world. Whence he placed all
Religion in the adoration of the Divine Being, abstractly for its own
excellence, without any regard to his Providence; which is indeed to destroy
all Religion. This Atheistical persuasion makes Tullie, Plutarch, and the other
Great Moralists degrade him from the title of a Philosopher.

. 9. Epicurus also denied the Immortality of the Soul, He denied the
immortality of the Soul.
which indeed was but the consequent of his foregoing Atheistical persuasion;
and both, as I presume, imbibed together with his Sceptick Infusions from the
Sceptick Schole: for Scepticisme naturally degenerates into Atheism, and this
into Sensuality. Likewise Epicurus's Dogmes touching Atoms gave a great
foundation to his Atheism: For his Hypothesis being granted, that the first
production of the Universe, and all successive generations proceed from a
Casual combination of Atoms, it is easy to salve all the Phaenomenas of Nature
without a Providence.

. 10. What opposition the Christian Religion found from this Epicurean Sect is
evident from Act. 17.18. (...)] He mentions (says Grotius) two Sects of
Philosophers most opposite to the Christian Religion. For the Epicureans
believed that the world was not created by God; and that God regarded not human
affairs; that there were no Rewards or punishments after death; that there was
no Good, but what was sensible:

. 11. Campanella in his Politics seems to make the Scepticisme, Atheism, and
sensuality of the Epicureans the occasion of their Ruin. The Philosophers
(says he) passed not from opinion to opinion, beyond Epicurus; under whom
denying God, and Providence, their Sects were destroyed. He makes this the
curse of all that kind of Philosophy, which degenerating first into
Scepticisme, and from thence into Atheism, was then rooted out of the World.
And no wonder, God blasted Philosophy, when Philosophy dared so highly to
blaspheme God: No wonder God should root that Philosophy out of the World,
which in Epicurus, and his Sectators (the Swine of that Stie) became so
debaucht, and vain, as to attempt the eradicating of the Notion of a God, or at
least his due Fear, and Reverence out of the World. But the Mischief of all
such Vain Philosophy, to, and the Vsefulnes of sincere sound Philosophy in
the Christian Religion, may be the matter of an other Undertakement; if this
Historical Account now finished (and mainly designed in Order thereunto) find
any such Reception, and Entertainment, as may give Encouragement to such a
Work.

FINIS.
The considerable Errata to be thus corrected.
Page 13. Line 5. Read (...) p. 16. l. 30. for (...), p. 33. l. 21. for pretty
r. petty l. 29. dele by p. 37. l. 11. for we r. he p. 38. l. 32. for Barbarians
Barbarism p. 48. l. 33. dele has p. 61. Title for, from, r. vouchsafed to p.
66. l. 35. r. Esprits p. 81. l. 10. r. Sacrifice p. 86. l. 16. r. c. 47. p. 94.
l. 32. r. Tables of Philostratus. p. 93. l. 15. After Homer a period p. 99. l.
24. r. (...) p. 101. l. 16. after Ages add, and p. 101. l. 19. r. Theaetetus
l. 28. (...) p. 106. Contents l. 10. dele by p. 113. l. 6. r. (...) l. 14.
after Hypothesis a comma p. 136. l. 15. for Justin r. Apuleius p. 142. l. 11.
for, we should, r. The Jewish Priests were to p. 165. l. 36. for Third r.
Threefold p. 166. l. 13. After likewise inserr that p. 167. l. 13. After
Philostra^us, for Fables r. Tables p. 172. l. 36. for the first Principles r.
Principle p. 173. l. 3. r (...) p. 174. l. 35. r. (...) p. 175. l. 24. before
that insert he p. 179. l. 6. for C^rine r. doctrine p. 211. l. 8. Contents, for
Introduction r. Induction p. 215. l. 28. for when r. whence p. 254. l. 21. r.
(...) p. 265. l. 33. for Book read Part p. 266. l. 6. by Papal Hierarchy,
understand the whole Series of the Ruling Clergy under the Pope p. 268. l. 32.
for ineffectual r. ineffable p. 272. l. 35. r. (...) p. 283. in the lowest note
dele the 3 first words p. 285. l. 17. r. (...) p. 312. l. 26. before (...) r.
Medicine p. 338. l. 23. before see add (and dele (l. 24. l. 20 r. (...) p.
343. l. 17. after form, add and p. 344. l 31. (...) r. (...) and for
Col-ri-jah, r. Col-pi-jah p. 351. l. 32. for Myron r. Maherne p. 356. l. 2. for
1, r. 5, p. 365. l. 28. After 15, insert where l. 29. after Glory a period l.
31. after been, a comma and dele this p. 380. l. ult. For Hypothesis r*
Hypot^posis p 384. line 4. r. (...) p. 385. l. 10. after etc add 12. p. 431.
l. 10. r. (...) p. 433. l. 19. r. (...). In the Style of the last paper of
Verses r. the second word both.


