THE SABBATHS Sanctification. Herein

I. The Grounds of the morality of the Sabbath. II. Directions for sanctifying
it. III. Proofs that the Lords day is the Christians Sabbath. IIII. Aberrations
about the Sabbath. V. Motives to sanctify the Sabbath.
By W. G.



LONDON, Printed by G. M. for Joshua Kirton, and Thomas Warren, at their shop
in Paul's Churchyard at the white Horse, 1641.

To the Reader.
Christian Reader,
THis Treatise of the Sabbaths Sanctification, has in the private family of
the Author, and in other families of his pious Friends been taught, and
learned many years together. They who have been made partakers thereof, and
made conscience of well using it, have found a singular help thereby for a
comfortable and profitable passing through that day, which unto too too many
seems very tedious, and (if at least they be under the Ministry or
government of such as restrain them from those sensual works that satisfy
the flesh) makes them complain, and say as the Jews of old did (Amos 8. 5.)
when will the Sabbath be gone? But they who take notice of the variety of
duties therein set down, and of their fit dependence one upon another, shall
rather find want of time for a due performance of them, then superfluity. By
care and conscience in aright observing of them, the Lords day will prove an
holy spiritual market day, wherein we may procure, week after week, such
spiritual provision for our souls, as will nourish and cherish them unto
eternal life. The very life of piety is preserved by a due sanctification of
the Lords day. They put a knife to the throat of religion, that hinder the
same. Let such as desire and expect the blessed fruition of the eternal
Sabbath to come, make conscience of well sanctifying the Christian Sabbath
while here they live: for an help whereunto, this Treatise of the Sabbaths
Sanctification is published. To it is added another Treatise about Apostasy:
which two may fitly go together, because a conscionable sanctifying of the
Lords day will be an especial means to keep men from Apostasy.

THE SABBATHS SANCTIFICATION.
1 Q. IS the Sabbath moral, or ceremonial?

A. Moral.

That is accounted moral, which (as a rule of life) binds all persons, in
all places, at all times.

2 Q. How appears it to be moral?

A. 1 It was sanctified in Adams innocence. Genesis 2. 2, 3. Adam in his innocent
estate was a public person, and bore in his loins all mankind: and that
without distinction of Jew and Gentile. That therefore which was given to him
in chardge, appertained to all that in any age should come from him.

2 It is one of the ten precepts of the moral law. Ex. 20. 8. It is not an
appendix to another precept: but an entire precept in it self. If it be
abrogated, or made ceremonial, there are but nine precepts of the moral law:
contrary to these express Scriptures, Exodus, 34. 28. Deuteronomy. 4. 13. and 10. 4.

3 Q. Of how many hours does the Sabbath day consist?

A. Of four and twenty. Genesis 2. 3.

The Sabbath is called the seventh day: so as it is a seventh part of the
week: therefore so many hours as make up every of the other days (which are
four and twenty) must be accounted to this day.

4 Q. Are all those hours to be sanctified?

A. Yes. Exodus 20. 11.

The Lord rested the whole seventh day: and all the time wherein he rested he
sanctified. Genesis 2. 2, 3.

5 Q. How can all that time be sanctified?

A. 1. By observing things commanded. Jer. 17. 22.

2. By observing things permitted. Exodus 12. 16.

Duties commanded, by reason of Gods supreme sovereignty must be done. They are
so proper to the day, as in a right performing of them, the sanctification of
the Sabbath consists.

Matters permitted, by reason of Gods tender indulgency, having respect to our
infirmity and necessity, may be done. And though the Sabbath be not properly
sanctified in them, yet is it the better sanctified by them.

6 Q. What are the heads of Duties commanded?

A.

1. Duties of Piety. Luke 4. 16. 2. Duties of Mercy. Mark. 3. 4.
Isa. 58. 13.

Duties of Piery are such as immediately tend to Gods honor, wherein and
whereby he is worshipped: and withal they are such as directly tend to our
spiritual edification. Wherefore the wise Lord, who affords us six days for
secular and temporal affairs, sees it meet that every seventh day should be
set apart for divine and spiritual matters.

And because the works of our calling (wherein we are most employed in the six
days) tend especially to our own profit, God will have us on his day to show
mercy to others that stand in need of our help. Many are the works of mercy
which Christ did on Sabbath days, as appears, Mark. 1. 21, 25, 29, 34. and
3. 2, 5. Luke 13. 10, 11. and 14. 1, etc. Joh. 5. 9. and 7. 23. and 9. 14.

7 Q. What kinds are there of works of Piety?

A. 1 Public. Act. 15. 21.

2. Private. Act. 16. 13.

3. Secret. Mar. 1. 35.

The several duties of piety which are comprised under these heads, are very
helpful one to another, and cause the Sabbath to be more comfortably passed
over, without any seeming tediousness, or wearisomenesse.

8 Q. Where are public duties of piety done?

A. In the Church. 1 Cor. 4. 17. and 11. 20, 22, and 14. 19, 28. Heb. 2. 12.

Churches are public places, where many of several families meet together.
There use to be most frequent assemblies to worship God. The doors of Churches
use to stand open, for any that will to enter in. There the most solemn duties
of piety are performed.

9 Q. By Whom are they performed?

A. 1 By the Minister. Act. 13. 16.

2 By the People. Act. 20. 7.

3 By all together. 1 Cor. 14. 24, 25.

A Minister on the one side, and people on the other, make up a true Church.
The Minister is the mouth of God, in whose room he stands, to the people: and
by reason thereof he declares out of Gods word, Gods will to the people.

A Minister is also the peoples mouth unto God: presenting their mind to God:
which he does for order sake. For if all should utter their own mind together,
by their own several voices, what confusion would there be?

Yet are there also duties to be performed by the people jointly among
themselves, but distinctly from the Minister: else that which the Minister does
will be in vain.

Yea there are also some duties wherein the Minister joyneth with the people,
and the people with the Minister, even in the same manner of performing them:
as the particulars following will show.

10 Q. What duties are done by the Minister?

A. 1 Reading the Word. Act. 13. 27. Col. 4. 16.

2 Preaching it. Luke 4. 20, 21. Act. 13. 15.

3 Praying and praising God. 1 Cor. 14. 15, 16. Neh. 8. 6. and 9. 5. 6.

4 Administering Sacraments. Mat. 28. 19. and 26. 26. Act. 20. 11.

5. Blessing the people. Number. 6. 23.

In performing the two first (reading and preaching the word) and the two last
(administering Sacraments, and blessing the people) the Minister stands in Gods
room, and is his mouth: but in the middlemost duty (praying to God and
praising him) he is the peoples mouth to God.

11 Q What duties are done by the people?

A. 1 Attending to the Word read and preached. Act. 10. 33.

2 Assenting to the prayers and praises. 1 Cor. 14. 16.

3 Partaking of the Sacraments. Mat. 3. 6. 1 Cor. 12. 13.

4 Saying AMEN, audibly to all. Neh. 8. 6.

If people attend not to the Word, it is like the seed sown in the way side,
which the souls soon pick up, Mat. 13. 4, 19.

If they assent not to the prayers and praises, they are like those that draw
near to God with their lips, but have their hearts far off. Mat. 15. 8.

If they partake not of the Sacraments, they cast themselves out of the
communion of Saints. Genesis 17. 14. Number. 9. 13. Luke 14. 24.

As for an audible pronouncing of Amen, if the Of peoples uttering Amen, See
The Guide to go to God 243
mind of them that pronounce it, have been upon that which the Minister
uttered, and their heart have given consent thereto, it compriseth altogether
as much as the Minister has uttered. This is the only warrantable means for
people to utter their mind in a Congregation. It must therefore be uttered by
every one, altogether, so loud, as the Minister may hear their consent, as
well as they hear what he has uttered in their name. For the one is as
requisite as the other.

12 Q. What duties of piety are done by Minister and people all together?

A. Singing Psalms. Mat. 26. 30.

Singing of Psalms was always used by Gods people, not only in the
Tabernacle, Temple and Synagogue of the Jews, but also in Christian Churches.
Christ used it with his Disciples (Mat. 26. 30.) It is enjoined by the Apostle
(Ephesians. 5. 19. Col. 3. 16.) and it was practiced by the primitive Church, (1.
Cor. 14. 15, 26.) By this duty jointly performed by all, as our own spirits
are quickened, so we quicken the spirits of others: and we are all made the more
cheerful in serving God. On this ground they who are merry are enjoined to
sing. Jam. 5. 13.

13 Q. Where are private duties of Piety done?

A. In a family or some other private place.

Herein lies a difference betwixt performing public and private duties, that
from the public none are excluded: but private are done by the mutual consent
of a certain number: either of such as are under one roof (Josh. 24. 15. Act.
10. 2, 30.) or else of others that agree together for that end (Act. 16. 13.)
By private meetings of such as are of the same mind and piously affected,
Christians do bring much sweet consolation and mutual edification one to
another: and the power and profit of public duties is much promoted thereby.

14 Q. What are private duties of Piety?

A. 1. Reading Gods Word. 1. Tim. 4. 13.

2. Praying and praising God. Act. 16. 13.

3. Catechizing, Deuteronomy. 6. 7.

4. Repeating Sermons. Act. 17. 11.

5. Holy conference. Luke 24. 14.

6. Singing Psalms. Act. 16. 25. Jam. 5. 13.

By a conscionable and constant performance of these private duties, a private
house is made Gods Church: and God will be there present, as he was in the
house of Obed-edom (2. Sam. 6. 12.) to bless them. Yea wheresoever two or
three duly meet for such purposes, Christ by his Spirit will be among them.
Mat. 18. 20.

In performing these, it is requisite, that some one of ability be as it were,
the mouth of the rest, in reading the Word, praying to God and praising him,
instructing in the grounds of Religion, which is catechizing, and repeating
Sermons: and the governor of the family if he be able, is the fittest to
perform those duties.

By such kind of duties of piety performed, as we can, before we go to Church,
we are the better fitted to the public, and after we come from Church, by
these will public duties be made the more profitable: yea by these, much of
that time wherein we are absent from Church, is sanctified.

15 Q Where are secret duties of piety done?

A. In some secret place between God and ones self alone. Mat. 14. 23.

No place is exempted from secret duties, so as a Christian may be there alone,
and none with him; In relation to such duties, thus says the Lord, enter into
thy Chamber, and when thou have shut thy door, pray, Mat. 6. 6. Secret duties
ought so to be performed, as none but God should know what we are about: so
will thy soul be the more upright, and freed from hypocrisy and vainglory:
so will the duties bring the more comfort to the performers thereof.

16 Q. What are secret duties of Piety?

A. 1 Reading Gods word. Act. 8. 28.

2 Praying and praising God. Mar. 1. 35. Act. 10. 9. Psalm. 119. 164.

3 Meditating. Genesis 24. 63. Psalm. 63. 6.

4 Examining ones self. Psalm. 4. 4. 1 Cor. 11. 28.

The two former of these secret duties, are such as may be performed both in
private and public: but the difference is in the manner of performing them.
But the two latter (meditation and examination of ones self) are most proper
to be performed in the most secret places that may be: because they are actions
of the mind, and concern a man's own self in particular.

These secret duties of piety would especially be performed first in the
morning, and last in the evening; that the Lords day may be begun with them,
(for a better preparation to the other duties) and ended with them, as a means
of atonement for all our failings past. The forenamed secret duties are of
excellent use to both those purposes.

They who are conscionable in performing all the forementioned duties of
piety, public, private and secret, shall find time little enough from their
rising up to their lying down: so as they shall have no cause to complain of
the many hours, or to say, they know not what to do, or how to spend their
time: especially if to those sundry duties of piety, they add duties of mercy.

17 Q. What kinds are there of works of mercy?

A. 1 Such as concern the soul. Joh. 7. 22, 23.

2 Such as concern the body. Mar. 1. 29, 30, 31.

Man consists of two parts: Soul and Body, and both of them are subject to many
maladies, and many necessities: we may therefore afford much succor, and show
much mercy one to another, both in soul and body.

18 Q. What are the works of mercy which concern the soul?

A. 1 Instructing the ignorant. 1 Cor. 12. 1.

2 Establishing the weak. Act. 20. 35.

3 Resolving the doubtful. Luke 24. 38, 39.

4 Comforting troubled souls. Joh. 11. 31, and 14. 1. 2 Cor. 2. 7. 1 These. 5.
14.

5 Informing such as are in error. Mar. 22. 29. and Jam. 5. 19, 20.

6 Reproving the sinner. Mar. 8. 33. Luke 3. 19. 2 Cor. 2. 6.

7 Every way edifying others. 1 These. 5. 11. Romans 15. 2.

These in one respect may be accounted works of piety, namely as they are
instructions, directions and reprehensions gathered out of Gods word: but in
another respect they are works of mercy, namely as they tend to the relief of
our brother in regard of his spiritual distress and need of his soul. The
matter of them makes them works of piety, the end whereto they tend makes them
works of mercy.

There is therefore a double bond to tie us to a diligent performance of all
these on the Lords day, as we can find any occasion of doing them: one, the
bond of piety: the other, the bond of mercy. Yea as the soul is more excellent
then the body, and the good of the soul more necessary then the good of the
body, so these works of mercy which so much concern the good of the soul,
ought with more diligence to be done, then those which concern the good of the
body: which yet we must not neglect. These we ought to do, and not leave the
other undone.

19 Q. What are the works of mercy which concern the body?

A. 1 Visiting the sick, and such as are otherwise restrained of liberty.
Mark. 1. 29, 30. Mat. 25. 36.

2 Relieving the needy with what they want. Isa. 58. 7. 1 Cor. 16. 2. Mat. 25.
35, 36.

3 Pulling out of danger such as are therein. Mat. 12. 11. Luke 13. 16.

4 Affording all other seasonable succor. Mat. 12. 1, 4.

These may be so ordered, as none of the forementioned duties of piety need to
be omitted for them. If Christians rise in any seasonable time, they may
perform both private and secret duties of piety before they go to Church in
the fore-noone: and if they spend not too much time at dinner, they may do the
like before Church-time in the afternoon. And when they come from the
afternoon public service of the Church, either before, or after, the like
private duties of piety, they may do some of the forementioned works of
mercy: and those such as concern the body. If they prove such as hinder works
of piety, they belong to works permitted, which are hereafter distinctly set
down.

20 Q. Are not duties of piety and mercy to be done on other days also.

A. Yes. Act. 2. 46. 2 Timothy 4. 2. 1 These. 5. 17, 18. Prove. 3. 28.

God every day continues the same God: and answerably he is to be so
acknowledged: and in testimony thereof divine worship is every day to be
performed. Under the law they had their morning and evening sacrifices every
day, Exodus 29. 38, 39. By duties of piety to God, are our secular affairs
sanctified and seasoned. Every day therefore are they to be performed. And
because every day the necessities of some or other require works of mercy, we
must be ready every day to do them so far as we are able. The rules for
showing mercy are especially these three,

1 Our brothers necessity. 2 Our own ability. 3 Gods opportunity: that is, the
occasion which by the divine providence is offered unto us. Luke 10. 33, 34. 1 John 3. 17.
21 Q. Wherein lies the difference betwixt doing works of piety on the
Sabbath, and on other days?

A. They are on the Sabbath as meat: on other days as sauce. Numb. 28. 9, 10.

We use to fill our bellies with meat: and to eat as much as we can (I speak
of such as eat for strength and not for gluttony) but we take a little sauce,
no more then will give a relish to the meat, and sharpen appetite. So on the
Sabbath we ought to do as many duties of piety thereon as conveniently we can.
To secret duties, private must be added: to secret and private, public. The
greater part of the Sabbath day must be spent in these. But it is sufficient on
other days, to perform secret and private duties of piety, morning and
evening, to season and sanctify the works of our calling thereby: and that by
craving pardon of sin, assistance and blessing, and by giving praise to God,
yea and by learning directions out of Gods word. For which end, some part of
the holy Scripture is to be read: and some opportunities are to be taken where
they may be had, to hear Sermons on week days. But the greatest part of
every of the six days is to be spent in the works of our calling, Exodus 20. 6.

22 Q. Wherein lies the difference betwixt doing works of mercy on the Sabbath
and on other days?

A. Opportunities for works of mercy, are to be sought on the Sabbath, and
taken on other days, 1. Cor. 16. 2.

No Sabbath ought to pass over our heads wherein some work of mercy (if at
least we be able) is not done. The time that we spare from duties of piety, and
from a lawful refreshing of our bodies, ought to be spent in works of mercy.
For which end it is requisite that we take due notice of such as are sick, or
in prison, or otherwise restrained of liberty, or any way troubled and
perplexed, and of such as are poor, and in want: yea if we know none such, to
enquire after them, and to go to visit them, and comfort them, and relieve
them. Where the Apostle enjoyneth to lay up something in store every first day
in the week (which is the Lords day) he implies that that is a very fit season
not only to do works of mercy which then are offered to us, but also to
prepare on that day for other times.

Surely if every one would every Lords day lay something aside, as God has
prospered him, for a stock to give to the poor, much good might be done
thereby. Thus will men have more to give: thus will they have in a readiness
to give: (it being a sacred stock by their voluntary setting it apart to such
an use, their conscience will account it sacrilege to lay it out any other
way:) thus will they more cheerfully give, because the stock out of which they
give is prepared before hand: and thus will their benevolence on another day be
a Sabbath-daies work, because it is out of the stock which on the Sabbath day
was laid aside. If poor men that live on their days labor, if servants that
live on their wages would every Lords day lay up some tokens or pence for this
end, they might have, without any sensible damage to themselves a stock for
the poor: how much greater stoare would be for the poor, if rich men
according to Gods blessing on them, would so do?

23 Q. What servil works are permitted on the Sabbath?

A. 1. Such as further the proper works of the Sabbath, Mat. 12. 3, 4, 5.

2. Such as hinder them, Mat. 12. 11.

Such is Gods wisdom, as in all things that he requires, he affords all
means that may further the same. And withal, such is Gods tender respect to
us, as he ordaines and orders all things for our good. For our good, namely for
the spiritual edification of our souls, he first ordained the Sabbath. The
Sabbath was made for man, Mar. 2. 27. Therefore those ordinances wherein and
whereby he is worshipped and honored, are the means of edifying and saving
our souls.

But God did so aim at our spiritual good, as he would not on his day have
the temporal good of our bodies neglected. If therefore our bodies stand in
need of present succor, for the affording whereof duties of piety must be
omitted, he suffers us to forbear the external works of piety: and thereby
verifies that, which the Prophet of old testified (Hos. 6. 6.) and Christ once
and again confirmed (Mat. 9. 13 and 12. 7.) I will have mercy and not
sacrifice.

24 Q. What servil things may further the proper works of the Sabbath?

A. First, external rites about the performing of them, Levit. 24. 8. Number. 18.
9, 10.

Under the Law there were sundry rites which required much bodily labor that
tended to that worship which God then required: as slaying sacrifices, fleaing
and cutting them in pieces, laying wood on the altar, and the sacrifices
thereon, renewing the lamps, setting the shewbread on the table: and many
other the like: concerning which Christ thus says of the performers thereof,
The Priests in the Temple profane the Sabbath and are blameless. Mat. 12. 5.
that is, they do such things, as in other cases, not concerning the Worship of
God, would be a profanation of the Sabbath. (If a butcher in his
slaughterhouse should so slay, slay, and cut beasts in pieces on the Sabbath,
he would therein profane the Sabbath:) But in the case of Gods worship they
are no profanation, and therefore the performers thereof may justly be
acquitted of all blame therein. Thus Churchwardens, and Clearkes may provide
good Bread and Wine for the Communion, and Water for Baptism, and bring them
to Church. Thus Collectors may receive, tell out, and distribute money to the
poor. Thus Ministers may study for their Sermons. And other like works may be
done that tend to the principal duties of the Sabbath.

25 Q. What other servil things may further the proper works of the Sabbath?

A. Such as our weak bodies do stand in need of. Exodus 12. 16. Mat. 12. 1.

Man by sin has brought many infirmities upon his body. By them is he much
disabled and hindered from performing good duties. The Lord therefore every way
endeavoring with his goodness to overcome man's wretchedness, has by his
providence afforded him sufficient means to support and redress his
infirmities. These means God is willing that man should use at all times, on
all accasions, so far forth as may be needful and useful for him. The Lord
is not like that cruel Tyrant who laid upon the Israelites, whom he held in
hard bondage, Exodus 5. 7, 8.
as much as they could do, if not more, and yet would not afford them ordinary
means to do it. He rather will have his work intermitted, then man oppressed
thereby.

26. Q. What are those particulars which our weak bodies do most need?

A. 1. Sleep. Eccles. 5. 12.

2. Food. Luke 14. 1.

3. Apparel. 2. Sam. 12. 20.

4. All other occasional helps. Mar. 2. 3, 4.

27. Q. Why is sleep requisite?

A. If we have not seasonable sleep the night immediately before the Sabbath
(the latter part whereof, namely from midnight to the time we rise, is part of
the Sabbath) the duties of the day will be so drousily performed (if at all
they be performed) as they cannot be acceptable to God, nor advantageable to
our spiritual edification. Sleep does much refresh our drowsy bodies, and
cheer our dull spirits: and so make us much better perform the duties of the
Sabbath. Therefore sleep is said to be sweet, Eccles. 5. 12.

28 Q. Why is food needful?

A. Food is of special use to refresh the body and quicken the spirit, if it
be seasonably, and moderately taken. Many men's spirits will be ready to faint
if they be not in due season refreshed with convenient food. Christ therefore
on the Sabbath took his ordinary repast, Luke 14. 1. and made an apology for
his Disciples refreshing themselves on that day, Luke 6. 1, etc. yea he shows
that such mercy ought to be afforded to Beasts. Luke 13. 15.

29 Q. To what use is apparel?

A. Apparel also is needful and useful for refreshing the body, and for
comeliness. It keeps the body warm, it covers our uncomely parts. Then
especially are we to make our selves comely when we go into great assemblies:
and greatest assemblies use to be in Churches, on the Lords day. Of old they
were wont to put on their best apparel when they went to the House of God (2.
Sam. 12. 20) unless it were a time of humiliation, Exodus 33. 4, 5.

30 Q. What other helps are there?

A. There are sundry other helps, which occasionally arise from sundry
accidents. As in case of lamenesse, or weakness of limbs by gout, spraining,
or any other means, it is a great help to be carried to Church: and that
carrying may prove to the bearers a laborious work: So where the Church is
remote, the help of horse and coach by land, and boat by water is needful. It
appears that many brought such friends to Christ as could not come of
themselves, on the Sabbath, Mar. 1. 32. and 2. 3.

31 Q. How do the forementioned means further duties of piety?

A. By enabling us the better to do them, Psalm. 104. 14, 15.

We heard how they refresh our bodies, cheer our spirits, and support, yea and
redress our manifold infirmities: thereby they enable us to do the things
which we take in hand the more cheerfully, and steddily, and thereby further
the same. A man that has a long journey to ride, by resting some-time in an
Inn, by taking repast himself, and giving his horse provinder, enableth
himself and horse to go further then other-wise they could: and so does
further his journey. Though in baiting he does not travel, or go any whit of
his way, but abide in his Inn, yet he helps forward his journey, and shall
by that means better come to the end thereof. Even so, though in doing those
servill things which are needful for our bodies the Sabbath be not properly
sanctified, yet by them the sanctification thereof is furthered, in that the
services tending thereto, are thereby better performed.

32 Q. What cautions are to be observed, for well using these on the Sabbath
day?

A. First, no more time then needs, must be spent on them, Exodus 34. 4.

The Lord testifies his respect to us, in offording us liberty to use the
things whereof we stand in need: and time convenient therein to use them. It
becomes us therefore to testify our respect to God, by giving to him and his
service as much time as we can: and not to abuse his indulgency by spending on
our selves more time then is needful. Wherefore having had quiet rest in the
night, we ought to rise betimes in the morning, and to be quick and speedy in
attiring our selves, that we may have the more time to serve God on his day.
The like must be done by servants in the needful services which they do. So
in sitting at table to eat meat, we must use all convenient speed. To rise
the sooner from bed and table, and to do all needful servile works the more
speedily, because it is the Lords day, argues a good respect to God and his
service.

33 Q. What other caution is to be observed?

A. Such servil works as are permitted on the Sabbath must be performed as
Sabbath days works.

Such respect must be had to this sacred time, as we ought to endeavor to
turn all things, so far as we can, to a sanctification of that day.

34 Q. How may they be so done?

A. 1. With due respect to the end.

2. With like respect to the manner.

The end and manner make much to the qualifying of that we do. An evil end
and manner much pervert the things we do: but a good end and manner add much
to the glory of warrantable things.

35 Q. What is the end to be aimed at?

A. To be better enabled to works of piety. 1. King. 19. 7.

This end (especially if indeed we do the better what we are enabled to do,
which is the right use and proper effect of the end) this end makes servile
works to become Sabbath works. For instance, if going to bed the evening before
the Sabbath, we pray to have quiet rest for this end that we may more
cheerfully do the duties of the Sabbath, that sleep is a Sabbath sleep: so to
eat and drink for that end is a Sabbath eating and drinking. So in other
things.

36 Q. After what manner must they be done?

A. With raising matter of spiritual meditation from them. Luke 14. 7.

On the Lords day our mind ought to be so heavenly, as thereby every thing
should be done after an heavenly manner: not only works of piety, but also
every other work that we do thereon, should be so done. When we first wake,
we should call to mind what day it is, and desire God to sanctify us to the
duties thereof. Rising out of bed, should bring to our mind the first
resurrection out of sin, and the second out of the grave. In apparelling our
selves, we should meditate on the adorning of our souls. In washing face and
hands, think on the cleansing of our souls. Servants in making and blowing
the fire, should thence take occasion of stirring up the fire of Gods Spirit in
them. In preparing meat, they should think of the food of their souls. There
is nothing which may lawfully be done, from which a pious mind may not draw
matter of heavenly meditation: whereby the things from which meditation is
drawn, are sanctified.

37 Q. May servil works be done on the Sabbath, though they hinder duties of
piety?

A. Yea. Mat. 12. 7.

God does not so strictly tie us, as fall what will, or can fall out, we must
go to Church. This phrase, not sacrifice (Hos. 6. 6.) implies that there may
be cases, wherein God does not expect sarcrifices, that is, external duties of
piety to be performed by us.

38 Q. What are those servil works which may be done though they hinder duties
of piety?

A. Such as are of an absolute necessity.

This absolute necessity has relation to man's need: namely, that it is
necessary that such and such things be done, or else some great damage or
prejudice will come to man.

39 Q. How may that absolute necessity be known?

A. If that which must needs be done could not be done the day before, nor can
be put off to the day after.

This implies a necessity of the present performance, even upon the Sabbath
day. This first is laid down as a ground, that it must needs be done: then it
is taken for grant, that it could not be done the day before, and also, that it
cannot be put off to the day after: therefore it remains that it must be done
on the Lords day. For instance. A tile falls on a man's head and soarely wounds
him on the Lords day. It is necessary that succor be afforded to this man. The
day before nothing could be done for his cure, because no man knew he would be
hurt. Succor must not be put off to the day after, least the man perish for
want of succor. Such therefore as are able to help him, must do it, though
thereby the duties of piety be hindered. Note for this purpose, Joh. 7. 23.

40 Q. Of what sorts are those works of absolute necessity?

A. 1. Ordinary.

2. Extraordinary.

Ordinary are such as for the most part happen every Sabbath: and some-where or
other are performed on that day.

Extraordinary are such as may fall out, and sometimes do fall out: but very
seldom: and it is a lamentable accident when any of them do fall out.

41 Q. What instances may be given of ordinary servil works which hinder duties
of piety?

A. 1. Tending young children.

2. Keeping sick and impotent persons.

3. Helping women in travel.

Most families have some young children which cannot look to themselves nor be
brought to Church without disturbance of the whole Congregation.

Very often it falls out in every City and Town that some be sick, or otherwise
impotent by age, or some casualty, so as they cannot go to Church, but require
some to tarry with them, and to attend upon them. And in what day of the year
does it not fall out that some women in one place or other fall in travel? If
every day, then also every Lords day. But it is requisite that more then one or
two assist them in their travel.

All these therefore are ordinary servil works whereby some are kept from
duties of piety, and yet are blameless. Instance Hannah who tarried from the
Temple till her child was weined (1 Samuel 1. 22.) and was blameless.

42 Q. What instances may be given of extraordinary servil works which hinder
duties of piety?

A. 1. Quenching fire on houses.

2. Making up breaches of water.

3. Withstanding enemies.

4. Freeing living creatures out of present danger.

The three first of these concerning Fire, Water, and Enemies, are so violent,
that if present help be not afforded against them, irrecoverable damage may
soon follow thereupon. If therefore, in any cases that rule hold, mercy and
not sacrifice (Hos. 6. 6. Mat. 12. 7.) most of all in these.

As for freeing living creatures out of danger, we have Christ's express
warrant, Mat. 13. 11. Luke 14. 5. If unreasonable creatures are instantly to be
pulled out of danger, much more reasonable. Luke 13. 15, 16.

By these particulars which are permitted, we may see, that a conscionable
observing of the Sabbath is not so heavy a yoke, as many imagine it to be.

43 Q. Is our Lords day now the true Sabbath?

A. Yes.

44 Q. What grounds are there to prove it to be so?

A. 1. Divine authority.

This is the best ground that can be: even that which is sufficient to settle a
man's judgment and conscience. Divine authority is that which is set down in
the holy Scriptures, either by express precept, or by approved practice. This
later is it which is most apparent in Scripture. For it is noted, that Christ's
Disciples were assembled together the first day of the week (which is our
Lords day) and so again eight days after (John 20. 19, 6.) which Christ is
said (Mar. 8. 31.) to rise again after three days: which is to be taken
inclusively: the whole third day being included. Again where (Mat. 17 1. and
(Mar. 9. 2.) it is said that Christ went into the Mount where he was
transfigured six days after, Luke (9. 28.) says about eight days after,
Matthew and Mark speak exclusively: leaving out the day wherein he was last
with all his Disciples, and the day wherein he came to the Mount: and mean
only the six days betwixt. Luke speaks inclusively: including the foresaid
two days.
inclusively was the first day of the next week. It was also the first day of
the week, when after Christ's Ascension they were with one accord in one place
(Acts 2. 1.) and the Holy Ghost descended upon them in cloven tongues. Many
years after that, it is noted of Christians, that on the first day of the
week they came together to break bread (meaning Sacramental bread) and that
Paul took that occasion to preach unto them (Acts 20. 7.) The manner of
setting down their assembling together implies their custom therein: which
is yet more manifest (1. Cor. 16. 2.) where the Apostle advises them to take
that opportunity of their assembling together, for laying up a stock to relieve
such as were in distress. It is not set down as an act of one time, once
only to be observed, but as a weekly act, to be observed every first day of
the week. And why that day? Surely because of their great assembly whereby
they might whet on one another, and their contribution be the more liberal:
yea also because then was the time of observing Gods Ordinances, whereby their
souls must needs be incited to more bountifullnesse and cherfulness
therein. The title of the Lords day, Rev. 1. 10. can be applied to no other day
so well as to this. For by LORD, without all question is meant the Lord Christ
(1. Cor. 8. 6.) It is an usual title given to him in the New Testament. Now
what day can so fitly be applied to Christ, to have a denomination from him,
and to be dedicated to the honor of his name, as the day of his Resurrection,
whereon the Church so accustomed to meet together, as we heard before. On this
ground, the first day of the week is styled the Lords day, to this very day.
Now this day being by the Church dedicated to the honor of the Lord Christ,
John gave himself to holy devotion, and the Spirit took that opportunity on
that holy day to show him the divine revelations mentioned in that book.

45 Q. What other ground is there for our Lords. day?

A. The constant custom of Christ's Church.

From the Apostles time hitherto has the Church celebrated, as holy, the Lords
day, and that under this title, The Lords day. Now the constant custom of the
Church is not to be slighted. This Apostolical phrase (1. Cor. 11. 16.) If
any man seem to be contentious, we have no such custom, neither the Churches
of God, shows that the custom of the Church is a matter to be regarded.

46 Q. What third ground is there?

A. Christ's Resurrection which made all things new. 2. Cor. 5. 17.

This as it gives a ground for celebrating the day, so it shows the reason of
altering it. Christ's resurrection gave evidence of his full conquest over
death, the punishment of sin; and over him that had the power of death, the
Devil: yea it gave evidence of a full satisfaction to the justice of God, and
of a clear pacification of the wrath of God. In these respects Christ is said
to be raised again for our justification. Romans 4. 25. For Gods justice being
satisfied, and wrath pacified, death and Devil being overcome, what can
hinder our full redemption and justification.

This then is a work that far surpasses the Creation: and much more
deserves a weekly memorial. Yea this greater work has swallowed up the
former, as the Temple did the Tabernacle (1. King. 8. 4.) And we that live
after Christ's Resurrection are as much bound to the celebration of the first of
the week, as they that lived before, to the last.

47 Q. What fourth ground is there?

A. The substance of the Law which requires a seventh day.

The words of the Law are these, The seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord. I
deny not but that the Law has a special relation to the first seventh day:
but so as it was a memorial of that great work of Creation. When that was
swallowed up with a greater, then the substance of the Law is to be observed in
a sevenths day memorial of that greater work.

And it is observable, that the seventh which we celebrate is so ordered, as in
the change no week had two Sabbaths, nor any week, as part of a week was
without a Sabbath. Their Sabbath concluded their last week: and our Sabbath
began our first week. The change could not have been so fit to any other day.

48 Q. When begins the Lords day?

A. In the morning. Act. 20. 7.

When Paul came to the Church at Troas, he had a mind to spend a Lords day with
them, though he was in great haste to depart so soon as he could. He came
therefore to their assembly at the time that they came together according to
their custom: but he kept them till the end of that day: (for he would not
travel on the Lords day) and having dismissed the assembly, he departed. Now
it is said, that he continued his speech till midnight (Acts 20. 7) even till
break of day (ver. 11.) and then departed: which departure of his is said to
be on the morrow. By this punctual expression of the time it appears that the
first day of the week, the Lords day, ended at midnight: and that then the
morrow began. Now to make a natural day which consists of twenty four
hours, it must begin and end at the same time: for the end of one day is the
beginning of another. There is not a minute betwixt them. As therefore the Lords
day ended at midnight, so it must begin at midnight: when we count the morning
to begin. Which is yet more evident by this phrase (Mat. 28. 1.) In the end of
the Sabbath (namely of the week before, which was the former Sabbath) as it
began to dawne (namely) on the next day, which was the Lords day) or (as Joh.
20. 1.) when it was yet dark there came diverse to anoint the body of Jesus,
but they found him not in the grave: he was risen before: so as Christ rose
before the Sun.

49 Q. What reasons may be given of the Lords days beginning in the morning?

A. Other days then begin.

That they do so with us, is evident by the account of our hours. For
midnight ended, we begin with one a clock: then the first hour of the day
begins. And it appears to be so among the Jews: for when Aaron proclaimed
(Exodus 32. 5, 6.) To morrow shall be a feast to the Lord, They rose up early on
the morrow. I deny not but that sundry of the Jewish feasts began in the
evening: as the Passover (Exodus 12. 6.) But it cannot be proved that their
weekly Sabbaths so began. There were special reasons for the beginning of
those feasts in the evening, which did then begin. As for the supposed
beginnings of the first days gathered out of this phrase, (the evening and the
morning were the first day) they cannot be necessarily concluded to be at
evening. For the evening and the morning there imports the moment of the
evening and morning parting one from another, and the return to the same
period: which moment is rather at the beginning of the morning then of the
evening. The evening uses to be referred to the end of the day, and the
morning to the beginning, as Exodus 29. 38, 39. 1. Sam. 17. 16. and 30. 17. Joh.
20. 19.

50 Q. What other reason is there of the Lords days beginning in the morning?

A. Christ then rose. Mar. 16. 2, 9.

Of Christ's rising in the morning no question can be made, all the Evangelists
agree in the narration thereof. Now the Lords day being a memorial of Christ's
Resurrection, if it should begin in the evening, the memorial would be before
the thing it self: which is absurd to imagine. As all Gods works were
finished before the first Sabbath, so all Christ's sufferings before the Lords
day. His lying dead in the grave was a part of his suffering: therefore by his
Resurrection was all ended. With his Resurrection therefore must the Lords day
begin.

To make the evening before the Lords day a time of preparation thereunto, is a
point of piety and prudence: but to make it a part of the Lords day is
erroneous, and in many respects very inconvenient.

Hitherto of Directions. Aberrations follow.

Aberrations concern Men's Opinion. Practice.


Some men's opinion is erroneous in too much looseness: others in too much
strictness.

Errors in too much looseness are four.

1. Denying the morality of the Sabbath. 2. Accounting the Lords day a matter
arbitrary. 3. Judging external rest and rites sufficient. 4. Supposing servil
works in case of hazard to be lawful.
The error in too much strictness is this, Thinking needful works to be
unlawful.

Aberrations in practice respect others, or themselves.

Two respect others, viz. Keeping others from sanctifying the day. Scoffing at
such as make conscience thereof.


Four respect men themselves. Doing servil works openly. Deviding the Lords
day betwixt God and themselves. Waxing weary of holy duties. Profaning the
Lords day under a pretense of keeping it.


51 Q. What aberrations are contrary to the Law of the Sabbath?

1. Denial of the morality and equity thereof.

There be many that account it no moral precept, but reckon it among the
ceremonies which were appropriated to the Jews. Herein they may justly be
reckoned in the number of those who make void the law of God, Psalm. 119. 126.
Much more they who account it too heavy a yoke for Christians to bear. Indeed
the sacrifices and other legal rites which were enjoined to the Jews, for the
manner of solemnizing the Sabbath, are too heavy a burden now to be laid on
Christians. But none of those are mentioned in the Moral Law. That which we
account Moral, and to have a perpetual equity, is the substance of the Law.
Yet against this do many also except, as a wrong done to Christians, in that
thereby (as they allege) they are deprived of a seventh part of their time.
Is man deprived of that time which is best spent? which is spent in serving
God, edifying his soul, and promoting the eternal salvation thereof? Fie on
such sensual and unreasonable conceits? who complains of being deprived of
that time which is spent, or rather misspent in idleness and wickedness?

52 Q. What is a second aberration?

A. Making it a matter arbitrary.

There be that grant it to be a very meet and equal thing, that a day should
be set apart to Gods honor, and our spiritual edification: but they hold it
too strait a bond to be tied to a set and certain day: they would have it left
to the liberty, if not of particular men, yet of the Church to set apart what
time they think fit. What is this, but to suppose that men may be wiser then
God? or at least, that men who live in after ages, when the Spirit has
withheld his extraordinary assistance and immediate inspiration, may better
know how to order times, then they who were in special manner inspired and
assisted by the Holy Ghost? yea what is this but to give liberty to man to
break the Lords bonds, and to cast away his cords from them. This is a ready
way to bring man to teach for doctrines the commandments of men: and so to
worship God in vain, Mat. 15. 9.

53 Q. What is the third aberration?

A Judging external rest and rites sufficient.

This was one of the reasons, and that an especial one, which moved the
Prophets to cry out against the Jews, for observing those ordinances which God
himself had enjoined: namely, that they rested only in doing the outward
works. In this respect, says the Lord (Isa. 1. 13.) The Sabbath and calling
of assemblies I cannot away with. Yet herewith do most content themselves. The
external rites are only means and helps for sanctifying the day; the
sanctification thereof does not simply consist in them: much less in sneere
rest, and cessation from labor: for then a beast might sanctify the Sabbath.

54 Q. What is the fourth aberration?

A. Supposing servil works in case of Hazard to be lawful.

Thus they pretend unwarrantable works of necessity, that is, such works to
be of necessity, which are not so. What are to be accounted works of
necessity, we heard before: namely such as require a present performance, in
that they could not be done the day before, nor put off to the day after. To
them many add such things as are in hazard, or whereof there is fear that they
may be spoiled: as in harvest, if the weather have been foul a day or two
before the Lords day, they think they may on the Lords day, if it be fair,
make hay, reap corn, gather fruit, and do other like servile works. But
these are not of an absolute necessity. For the weather may be fair after the
Lords day, as well as upon it. The Law therefore has expressly forbidden
this. Exodus 34. 21. In earing time and in harvest thou shall rest on the
seventh day. To work on the Lords day on fear that the next day will be
foul, is to distrust the divine providence.

These four are errors in overmuch looseness.

55 Q. What is the fifth aberration?

A. Thinking needful works to be unlawful on the Lords day.

This is an error in overmuch strictness. For some are so over-strict, as
they will not suffer a fire to be kindled on that day, nor any hot meat to be
dressed, nor sundry works of mercy to be done: like the Jews who blamed Christ
for the manifold cures he did on the Sabbath: and his Disciples for plucking
and rubbing ears of corn, and eating the grain. The many proofs which
Christ alleges in defense of himself, and of his Disciples, and the many
evidences which he gives of the Jews superstition herein, are a sufficient
refutation of this erroneous opinon. For this purpose read Mat. 12. 1, 2, etc.
Luke 13. 15, 16. and 14. 4, 5. Joh. 7. 23.

These five are errors in opinion.

Aberrations in practice follow, whereof two concern others.

56 Q. What is the sixth aberration?

A. Keeping others from sanctifying the Lords day. The Law lays the charge of
sanctifying the Sabbath on men, not only for themselves, but also for others,
especially for such as are under their charge. For the Law thus expresses the
prohibition of servile works, In it thou shall not do any Work, thou, nor
thy Son, nor thy Daughter, nor thy manservant nor thy maidservant, nor thy
cattle, nor thy stranger Which is Within thy gates. Yet there be many so far
from procuring others, and those under their charge, to sanctify the Lords
day, as they hinder them, and suffer them not to do it. Such are they that use
to make great feasts on the Lords day, rather for pomp, then necessity, or to
relieve the poor; or set out enterludes or such kind of solemnities for mere
pleasure: and they who having others to attend upon them, spend all the
fore-noone in attiring and adorning themselves: and all they who employ
servants or others upon secular affairs contrary to the commandment. These,
and other like to these, pull their own and others blood upon their own
souls. They have cause to fear the doom denounced, Jer. 34. 16, 17.

57 Q. What is the seventh aberration?

A. Scossing at such as make conscience of sanctifying the Lords day.

There are many not only deceived in their understanding, but also so
perverted in their will, and so impious in their heart, as they cannot endure
such as are better informed then themselves: or that bear and show a better
respect to God, and his worship then they do.

Therefore to discourage men from their pious courses, they brand them with
ignominious titles, as Precisians, Puritanes, Sabbatarians and Jews. Herein
they do exceedingly aggravate their sin: and show themselves like him that
was borne after the flesh, whose doom was to be cast out, Genesis 25. 9, 10. Gal.
4. 29, 30. David was troubled with such in his days: for thus he complains,
Psalm. 119. 51. The proud have had me greatly in derision. But yet mark his
resolution in this that follows, yet have I not declined from thy Law. To which
purpose note also 2. Sam. 6. 16, 20, 21, 22.

These two last aberrations in practice have respect to others. The sour last
that follow have respect to men themselves.

58 What is the eight aberration?

A. Doing servile Works openly on the Lords day.

Many that are convinced in their judgments concerning the equity of
sanctifying the Lords day, yet have their hearts so possessed with
covetousness, and their minds so filled with the affairs of this world, as
they are loath to spare a day from their worldly employments to the honor of
God, and the spiritual edification of their own souls. They are like those
who being invited to a great supper, made their excuses from their secular
affairs, Luke 14. 16, 18. Great was the zeal of Nehemiah against such, Neh.
13. 15, 16, 17. The faires that in many places are kept, and open selling of
commodities, are too public and open profanations of the Lords day.

59 Q. What is the ninth aberration?

A. Deviding the Lords day betwixt God and themselves.

Some think they do sufficiently sanctify the Lords day, if they go to
Church, and serve God some part of the day, though they spend the other part
thereof in their own affairs. Herein they show themselves like to those who
set their threshold by Gods thresholds, and their posts by Gods posts, whereby
they defile Gods holy name, Ezekiel. 43. 8.

60 Q. What is the tenth aberration?

A. Wearisomenesse in the duties of the Lords day.

Many that live in Countries, Cities, Towns, Parishes and Families, where good
orders for sanctifying the Lords day are strictly observed, are thereby brought
to perform the duties tending thereto, but because they have no delight
therein they are exceeding weary thereof, and think it the longest, and most
tedious day in the week, saying, When Will the Sabbath be gone, Amos 8. 5.
This wearisomnesse takes away all the glory and comfort of what they do: it is
neither acceptable to God, nor profitable to their own own souls. Therefore
let us not be weary in well-doing, Gal. 6. 9.

61 Q. What is the eleventh aberration?

A. Profaning the Lords day under a pretense of keeping it.

The Government under which men live, and the laws of their Governors which
they dare not transgress, make many to forbear the ordinary works of their
calling, the doing whereof is in all men's opinions an apparent profanation of
the Lords day: therefore Lawyers will forbear to plead at the bar:
Tradesmen will shut up their shops: Husbandmen will forbear the ordinary
tillage of their ground; workmen their usual labor, and others that which in
the six days they busy themselves about: But yet under pretense of that
external keeping the Lords day, they will take advantage of doing sundry other
things which are plain prophanations of the day: wherein they do not
celebrate the Sabbath of the Lord, but the Sabbath of sundry other things: all
which may be brought to four heads: and under them, all profanations of the
Sabbath may be comprised, as the particulars following will show.

62 Q. What is the first kind of Sabbath that is not the Lords?

A. The Sabbath of worldlings.

Worldlings are such as have their minds so set upon the things of this world,
as they take all the advantages that possibly they can to get and heap up the
things of this world: and to that end they will turn those things that are
ordained to another end, even the means which are afforded to attain to
eternal life, to their worldly advantages.

63 Q. What is the Sabbath of worldlings?

A. Doing his works on it.

In that ordinary works of a calling are forborne, there is a show of keeping a
Sabbath: but that forbearing of such works gives occasion to worldlings to do
other things that prove as advantageable to them, and which must be done at
other times, if they were not then done. For instance, the Lawyer will on the
Lords day (when he pleads not at the bar, because the Law suffers it not)
appoint his Clients to come to him to inform him in their causes. The
Tradesman that shuts up his shop, will then cast up his books, and send his
servants to his Creditors to require his debts. The Farmer will then take his
time to meet with his neighbors, to make bargains, to buy and sell their
commodities. So in other cases advantages being taken for the things of this
world from a show of keeping the Lords Sabbath, makes it to be, not the Sabbath
of the Lord, but the Sabbath of worldlings.

64 Q. What is a second kind of Sabbath that is not the Lords?

A. The Sabbath of Epicures.

There was a Philosopher called Epicurus, who held pleasure to be man's summum
bonum, his greatest happiness. Thereupon they that pursue their pleasures with
all the might and maine they can, and place a kind of content therein are
called Epicures.

65 Q. What is the Sabbath of Epicures?

A. Satisfying men's own delights in it.

They who are given to their pleasures, being on the Lords day restrained from
their ordinary calling and the works thereof, take that opportunity to make
pompous feasts, to follow their sports and pastimes, and other ways to
satisfy their fleshly delights, neglecting Gods service. Thus the Sabbath
which they keep, is not the Sabbath of the Lord, but the Sabbath of Epicures.

66 Q. What is the third kind of Sabbath that is not the Lords?

A. The Sabbath of Beasts.

Beasts being unreasonable creatures do not conceive any difference of days,
nor the end why they rest from their accustomed labor and work. Thereupon that
time wherein they are not put to work they spend in sleeping, grazing, or
otherwise feeding, in standing still, or going idly here and there.

67 Q. What is the Sabbath of beasts?

A. Passing it over in idlenosse.

There be very many that do no more consider the end of intermitting the duties
of their calling then beasts. But because they may not do them, they spend the
Lords day in lying a bed, or otherwise sleeping, in attiring themselves, in
eating and drinking, in vain talk, in sitting at doors to behold what comes
to their eyes, in walking up and down, and such other idle courses. This is not
to keep the Lords Sabbath, but the Sabbath of Beasts.

68 Q. What is the fourth kind of Sabbath that is not the Lords?

A. The Sabbath of Devils.

Devils are spirits of wickedness, doing all the evil they can, and taking
all the occasions they can to do evil.

69 Q. What is the Sabbath of Devils?

A. Making it a day of sin.

Many that by their calling are all the six days restrained from outward
notorious evil acts, make the Lords day a time to let loose the reins to all
sin. Whoremongers and whores appoint the Lords day to meet on to commit their
lewdness. Thieves set that day apart to break into houses, to rob and steal.
Then drunkards meet together to make one another drunk. Others that have
mischievous plots in their heads, will then meet to advise about the execution
of them: and animate one another thereunto. Thus they serve the Devil: they do
his works: they show themselves herein like the very Devils. This therefore is
to keep, not the Sabbath of the Lord, but the Sabbath of devils.

70 Q. What motives may be given for sanctifying the Sabbath?

A. 1. Express precept. Deuteronomy. 5. 12.

Were there no other motive, this were sufficient to a pious mind, that knows
God to be the only Lord, the highest Sovereign over all: who has an absolute
power to command: to whose commandment obedience is expected, yea shall be
exacted, and severe vengeance executed on such as refuse to obey.

71 Q. What other motive.

A. The item before that precept. Exodus 20. 8.

The item prefixed before the Precept concerning the Sabbath is this, Remember
(remember the Sabbath day.) Where among sundry precepts a meme^to is set upon
one, without question it implies an especial heed to be given to it: as if
more largely it were said, Of all that is given in charge let not this be
forgotten: especially remember this, and give good heed thereto.

74 Q. Why is a MEMENTO especially set before the fourth Commandment?

A. First, the fourth Commandment brings a singular help to all the other
precepts, as shall be distinctly showed on the seventh motive.

Secondly, it intimates man's averseness against this precept. The morality of
none of the ten Commandments, written with Gods own fingers in the two
Tables of stone, was ever questioned by such as professed themselves
Christians, but this of the Sabbath. Indeed Papists in setting down the ten
Commandments (whether in Catechis. 1c uit. Catechis. Vicelij. Catechis. B.
llarm. Lege Alanum Copum cap. 21. Dialogi 4.
Catechismes or els-where) do leave out the words of the second Commandment:
yet they do not deny the morality of it: for they render this reason of
leaving out the words, The substance of the words left out is in the first
Commandment: all that is left out is but an exposition of the first. Though
the reason be not sound, much less sufficient to justify so audacious a fact,
as the leaving out of that which God has so expressly with his own fingers
set down, yet it shows that, they deny not the morality of that precept.
The memento then intends thus much, That though there may be many that deny the
morality of the Sabbath, yet let such as bear a due respect to whatsoever is
given in charge by the Law, remember this part thereof. Remember the Sabbath
day to sanctify it. Thus we see that this is a motive of moment.

75 Q. What third motive?

A. Gods honor. Isa. 58. 13.

To have one of the seven days weekly set apart for the worship of God, and
to dedicate the same wholly thereunto, must needs make much to the honor of
God. And who would not, who should not do all that he can, especially all that
that is appointed by God himself, to the honor of God. Them that honor me,
will I honor, says the Lord, 1. Sam. 2. 30.

76 Q. What fourth motive?

A. Gods example. Genesis 2. 2. Exodus 20. 11.

The example of God in this particular is for this end expressly produced in
the Law, that we should the rather be induced thereby to sanctify the Sabbath,
Exodus 20. 11. To imitate God in that wherein he is to be imitated; must needs
be acceptable to God: and most honorable it is in it self. It is a matter of
good credit for a child to imitate a good Father, for a subject to imitate a
prudent. Prince, yea for any to imitate those, whose example is worthy
imitation. How much more to imitate God. This motive is much pressed in the
holy Scriptures. Levit. 19. 2. Luke 6. 35, 36. Ephesians. 5. 1.

77 Q. What fifth motive?

A. The practice of Saints. Luke 4. 16. Act. 16. 30. 1. Cor. 16. 1, 2.

This, though it be not equal to the former motive, yet it is a motive of
great moment: and it is also much pressed in sacred Scripture, as Ps. 99. 6.
Heb. 6. 12. Jam. 9. 10. Patterns of Saints, who were men, subject to like
passions that we be, show that what we endeavor after is no other then that
which appertains to man. Now for this duty, of sanctifying to God a seventh
day, we have the examples of Saints before the Law (Exodus 16. 30.) under the Law
(Neh. 13. 19, 22.) after the Law (Act. 20. 7.)

78 Q. What sixth motive?

A. The equity of the duty. Exodus 20. 9.

The Lord might exact of us every day to be dedicated to the honor of his
name. But it pleases him in tender respect to our need to afford us six days
to do our own work therein. Is it not then most meet and equal, that we
should give a seventh to God and to the honor of his Name? may not God in this
case say, is not my demand equal? Do not they who take this day to
themselves, deal worse with God then he did with his neighbor, who had many
sheep of his own, yet took from his poor neighbor the one only one which
he had. 2. Sam. 12. 4.

79 Q. What seventh motive?

A. The help it brings to keep the other Commandments?

An especial part of sanctifying the Lords day consists in reading Gods Word,
in hearing it preached, in conferring about it, in meditating on it, and in
calling upon God. Now by those duties which are about Gods Word we are
instructed in God, and in our duties to him, how we may take him alone for our
God, how we may worship him and honor his name aright: yea we are instructed
also in all duties which we owe to our neighbor. By Gods Word also we are
persuaded and enduced to endeavor after those things wherein we are
instructed. And prayer is an especial means to get the Holy Ghost (Luke 11.
13.) This precept therefore is to be observed, as simply in regard of it self,
so relatively in respect to all other the precepts: and thereupon an especial
memento is set before it alone.

80 Q. What eight motive?

A. The spiritual benefit thereof. Jer. 17. 26.

A conscionable sanctifying of the Lords day, by a due observing of those
divine ordinances which God has prescribed, is an especial means to convert
such as have formerly lived in their natural corrupt estate, and to quicken
and increase the graces which have been formerly wrought in us. We by reason
of the flesh in us, are prone as heavy things to fall down: and as water to
wax cold. But the Lords day by the ordinances thereof is an especial means
of renewing what is decayed. As waits of a clock by often winding up are kept
continually going, so grace by the foresaid duties is kept in continual
exercise. The Lords day is a spiritual market day, wherein we may get such
spiritual provision, as may feed and sustain our souls the whole week
following: and so week after week, while here we live in this world.

81 Q. What ninth motive?

A. The temporal benefit of it. Deuteronomy. 5. 14.

Surely a days rest in every week is very needful and useful for man and
beast: especially for such as labor all the six days. Experience gives good
proof thereof. Howsoever such as on no day take any great pains find no such
benefit thereby: yet others do. And the wise God saw it to be so. For which
end he expressly commanded that the beast should rest (Exodus 20. 10.) Now the
beast can reap no other then a temporal benefit. There is therefore a
temporal benefit thence arising. Some masters are so covetous and gripulous,
as if there were not a seventh day for rest set apart, they would never afford
any days rest to servants or cattle: but so weary them, as their strength
would quickly be exhausted. It remains then that as the rest of every night,
so the rest of every seventh day, is useful and needful: and a great
temporal good is thereby brought to man and beast.

82 Q. What tenth motive?

A. Promises to observers thereof. Isa. 58. 13, 14.

Promises, great and precious promises being made by one that is able to
perform what he promises, and withal is true and faithful, and in that kind
will not fail to make good his word, are a strong motive to stir up men to
do with the uttermost of their power the things whereunto such and such
promises are made. But promises, great and many, by God himself, of whose
power, and truth no question can be made, are made to such as are conscionable
in keeping the Sabbath: as appears Isa. 56. 2, 4, 6. and 58. 13, 14. Jer. 17.
24, 25.

83 Q. What eleventh motive?

A. Threats against profaners of it.

What promises cannot do on hard hearts, threats may do. For they are of force
to affright men: and in a manner to force men to obedience. The Lord therefore
being willing every way to try how men may be wrought upon, uses this remedy:
and the rather he uses it, that judgment, and the execution thereof may be
prevented. For this is the proper end of threatenings before hand, that
after-judgements may be avoided: so as in regard of the end whereat they aim,
they appear to be evidences of Gods favor. For these read Exodus 31. 14, 15.
Ier. 17. 27. Ezekiel. 20. 13, 21.

84 Q. What twelfth motive?

A. Judgments executed on such as violated it.

Execution of judgment has a threefold end.

The first aims at him on whom the judgment is executed: by the sense and
smart thereof to be drawn to repentance. Thus was Manasseh wrought upon by a
fearful judgment executed on him, 2. Chron. 33. 12, 13.

The second aims at others, that if they on whom the judgment is executed be
so hardened, as it move them not, yet others may be warned thereby: For this end
the judgments on impenitent sinners of old is set before Christians to
admonish them. 1. Cor. 10. 6, etc. Heb. 3. 12. Jude ver. 5, 6, etc.

The third aims at God: that if neither they on whom judgments are executed,
nor others that see them or hear of them, be wrought upon, yet God may be
justified. In which respect he is said to be known by the judgment which he
executes (Psalm. 9. 16.) He thereby is known to be a mighty, a just, a wise
God, a God that hates iniquity. Read Dan. 9. 7. and Neh. 9. 32, 33. Now
judgments being terrible to such as feel, and to such as see them, or hear
of them, they must needs be a forcible motive to restrain men from profaning
the Sabbath. Instances of fearful judgments executed for this sin are in
Numb. 15. 32. and 2 Chronicles. 36. 21. Neh. 13. 18.

85 Q. What thirteenth motive?

A. The safety of sanctifying it. Act. 4. 19.

There is great question about the Sabbath, whether it ought now to be
sanctified, and wholly dedicated to God or no. Now to one that is not persuaded
one way or other, I would propound this question, whether may be the safer, to
sanctify it, or not to sanctify it?

If on the one side it still remain as a precept whereunto we are all bound,
then it is a palpable transgression of the Law not to sanctify it: and in this
case, woe to the transgressors thereof.

But suppose the precept do not still absolutely bind us, yet if voluntarily
we set apart a seventh day to the honor of God, and the spiritual edification
of our own souls (provided that superstition be not placed in the keeping of
the day) surely there is no sin therein, nor any great inconvenience. So that
questionless it must needs be the safest course to sanctify the day. Among
other motives let this also be well considered.

FINIS.

