THE CORRUPTION OF THE TIMES BY MONEY. A SATYR.

By ROBERT GOULD.

LONDON: Printed for Matthew Wotton at the Three Daggers in Fleet Street, 1693.

TO Fleetwood Sheppard Esquire Gentleman Usher to the KING, etc.
SIR,
I Heartily wish there were anything in this Poem that would countervail the
Honor you would do me if you please to accept of it: I lay it at your Feet,
with an humble Acknowledgement of the many Favors you have done me; And as I am
sensible this Return will not weigh down the least of 'em, so it should not be
omitted if I were certain 'twou'd overbalance the greatest. Though I am removed
from you so far, and have not seen you for some Years, yet neither Distance nor
Time shall make me forget how great a Friend you have been to me, nor fail to
own it with all that due Respect that becomes me whenever I hear you mentioned.
I never think of Ingratitude but with Detestation; certainly there is not a
greater Sign of an ill Christian than unthankfulness to Benefactors: It Is true,
there are some Men that falsely pretend to that Honorable Title; if they do a
Kindness they will sometimes repent of it, which shows their Benevolence was
only good Humor: Others will boast of it, and that proclaims theirs to be
Ostentation: There are others that confine their Bounty to a single Person, a
Pimp or a Parasite shall be plentifully relieved, and the poor Man that is just
ready to perish shall be sent away with Curses; an Action quite contrary to the
noble and diffusive Essence of Charity. It Is not, Sir, so with you; there never
was a Man known so ready, upon all Occasions, to be serviceable to all sorts of
Persons. Again, there are yet others that think they merit very highly by
dropping some small pieces to the Poor, and they too come dribling from them as
if their Charity had the Strangury: It Is better, indeed, to give little than
not at all, but it is better to give nothing than to bestow it grudgingly, for
what Benefit can such pretend to from that Text of Scripture that says, God
loves a cheerful Giver. In the mean time you are endeavoring to procure for
Indigent Persons competent Subsistences for their Lives, which is relieving
whole Families at once, and stretching your Charity to succeeding Generations.
No Man that ever asked your Assistance wanted it, even though he had no
pretense to it. That Importunity which others think is Impudence appears to you
Necessity; and it is not to be doubted, but a Man deprest in his Circumstances
says and does many things which he blushes at in private. You have yet another
Benificence of Mind which is very much admired, and seems to have more Humanity
in it than any thing I have mentioned; and that is, that even a Man's Faults
makes not your Kindness the less active; in which, no doubt, you do excellently
well: To forbear to do good to any Person because he is not so virtuous as he
ought to be, gives us a just pretense to do no good at all, for no Man is
without his Failings: To be kind to Merit is so indispensably our Duty, that it
leaves the less room for our Praises; on the other hand, to deal out our
Kindnesses promiscuously, without regard to the Errors of some, or the
blind-sides of others, is, in some proportion, to be like God himself; for we,
by our Desert, have no pretense to his Favors, should he withold his
Bounties from all that are bad, there would hardly be one good Man left to
thank him for his Blessings.

From what has been said may be collected the Nobleness of your Temper; and
indeed you have ever valued Virtue so much, and Riches so little, that were not
this Address my Duty, it should have been my Choice: To whom could I more fitly
make a Present of this Poem, than to him that needs not blush when he reads it?
Had my Performance been equal to my Idea of the Subject, there had not one
Knave or Fool gone unpunished: But however, I may have failed in the main
Design, I have to say, in my Defense, that my Intentions were honest, and I beg
you, Sir, to let that (for it has scarce any other Virtue,) recommend it to
your Protection: Though it may want that Spirit that should animate a Satyr, it
wants not that Sincerity that should Influence a Christian, for I may safely
swear to the Truth of every Article.

Having this Opportunity, I should here declare to the World those other
Excellencies of yours that are so much the Admiration and Delight of it; that
happy Pleasantness of Disposition, that habitual Liveliness and Delicacy of
Conversation, that Reach and Sublimity of Judgment, that inexhaustable Variety
and Newness of Wit, which has made you the Esteem of the First Rank of Nobility
in the Kingdom, and raised you up even to an Intimacy with Princes; but this is
what I shall forbear to insist on, because I will comply with your Modesty,
and, indeed, with all things else that may show I am,

Sir, Your most humble, and truly devoted Servant R. GOVLD

THE Corruption of the Times BY MONEY. A SATYR.
'TWAS not the dazzling Gem, or shining Ore,
The Pride of Courts, nor Pluto's endless store
That in mild Saturn's peaceful Reign, of old,
Did constitute the famous Age of Gold;
'Twas Innocence alone, the greatest Good
That could on human Nature be bestowed:
Under his Vine each Man securely lay,
And, Wealth unknown, never practiced to betray.
The Daughter's Dowry was untainted Youth,
Attended by Virginity and Truth;
Who now can one with such a Fortune find?
O charming -- but O faithless Womankind!
Why are not Heaven's best-Blessings made to last?
Ah! Why so brittle? Why so quickly past?
Why did those Golden Minutes fly so fast?
Upright the Image of his God was made,
But Ah! How is he warped? How is he strayed?
His own Inventions, wildly, he pursues,
Can gain but little; and has much to lose*
Even Earth's dark Bowels from his piercing sight
Could not conceal her seeds of glittering Light!
He digs, succeeds, his shining Labor fines,
And straight has new Desires and new Designs:
Swelled with his Wealth, disclaims his kindred Earth,
And talks of Titles, Dignities, and Birth.
With Use of Money use of Fraud began,
And then 'twas, first, that Man did ruin Man.
A while, indeed, the happy Spartan State,
With a firm Mind, did all her Charms rebate,
And so long stood as if 'twere prop'd by Fate:
Success her Standard ever did attend,
And Fame declares her Praise shall never end:
But Gold and Silver seized the Reins at length,
Those Delilahs betrayed her of her Strength,
Unstrung her Nerves and ushered in her Bane,
Which half the World, before, had strove to do in vain.
To name the Guilt, the Cruelty, and Rage*
This Mischief has produced in every Age,
Is not the Task which here the Muse enjoins;
We only speak the Follies and the Crimes
With which it does infest the Present Times:
Bold the Design, but points at public good,
And that will have the public Thanks, -- or should.
Take, then, a view of all that you can see,
Of each Religion, Calling, and Degree;
The Presbiterians, Baptists, Quakers, Papists,
Socinians, and their elder Brethren Atheists;
Lords, Laqueys, Juglers, Judges, Knaves and Fools,
Punks, Players, Pimps and Bawds, with all the shoals
Of Trading Cuckolds that encompass Paul's;
Mark to what Center all their Motions tend,
And see if Mony's not their only end,
Their Primum Mobile that makes no stay,
But wheels about and turns 'em all one way.
The dutious Knee Observance paid by Heirs,
The Bully's Curses and the Beggars Prayers,
The Lover's Courtship and the Cant of Schism,
The Strumpet's Patience under Priapism,
The Statesman's Love he to his Country bears,
The perjured Villains Lavishness of Ears.
The Noise of Billingsgate, the Eloquence
Of Lawyers, which they Copy out from thence,
Only the Jargon's more and less the Sense;
The Whitehall fawning Office to obtain
(While good Men dance Attendance there in vain;
A Fluttering Coxcomb, or a pliant Knave
Has still, in Court, the Advantage of the Brave,
For he that is honest will not be a Slave:
The base Submissions to Insult we show,
(For Man, by Nature, cannot stoop so low)
The Slavish Distance we to Favorites pay,
(For Knaves in Office turn Promotions Key,)
Priests cringing to Superior Mitr'd-Pride,
Supple to them, but stiff to all beside;
The Love and Friendship we to rich Men feign,
And even the Poets Panegyric Strain,
Is nothing else but the pursuit of Gain.
It Is true, most of them (which would force a Smile)
Hunt on cold scent, pursue a fruitless toil.
The Punning Coxcomb may pretend to get,
But -- (if I too may pun) it is more in Debt.
The Laquey may grow Rich while Lords come short,
Of which we'ave store of Instances at Court.
The Jugler and the Judge, too, may complain,
For both now strive to cheat the World in vain;
In slight and shift and Trick they both agree,
But a quick Eye may all their Hocus see:
This difference, tho, we may between 'em write,
That, by Profession, does deceive your sight,
This does you wrong and sits to do you right:
How many for a trifling Theft have died*
While Murd'rers live and flourish by a Bribe.
Why (O ye Powers) must the sad Hemp and Hymn*
Belong to Common Rogues and only them?
And the cursed Judge, that has an Itching Palm,
Dye Old, without his Halter and a Psalm?
The Soldiers, too* may cease of War to prate,
For cutting Throats may once grow out of Date!
And then we starve the Malcontents of State;
Those needy Villains that still pray for Change,
To satisfy their Wants and their Revenge.
The Scismatick may Cant but be deceived,
For Knaves and Fools may cease to be believed:
What Holiness so ever the Fops may feign,
Their Audience finds their Godliness is Gain:
Large Contributions made 'em leave the Church,
And now grown small, have left them in the lurch.
Their Resty Flocks will serve God in no way
The Indulgence of the State allows they may:
A true-blue Sect'riss, like a Weed that crop'd,
Will thrust Ten Branches out for one that is lop'd,
But let alone, like that, he grows so fast,
He is by his own Rankness killed at last:
Whoever, then, intends their Extirpation,
Will do it easiest by a Toleration.
The Harlot's Pleasure too may turn to pain,
One cruel Flux licks up a Twelve-months Gain;
But Flux on Flux makes not her lewdness less,
Nor the vain Fop less eager to possess;
Till pox'd all over, embracing one another,
They but change Hells at last, from that to 'tother.
The Friendship of the Rich we may implore,
And shall attain it -- if we are not poor:
They Feast, invite, and pamper one another,
But spare not one Thought on a Starving-Brother:
Yet some will give, but it is to get applause,
Or patch up many avaricious Flaws;
A specious Veil they draw, but who is not blind
May see the sneaking, grudging Churl behind.
Can a few Pence you give the Crime atone
Of scraping Pounds together, not your own?
Some of it gleaned from the Day-Laborers Hire,
And some retrenched from Servants Food and Fire:
Or if I throw a Shilling to the Poor.
Relieves it him I wronged of Ten before?
Mistaken Men! so did that Limner paint.
That made a Devil and designed a Saint.
The Poet, too, a Parasite may be
But through his fulsom Praise all Eyes may see
His Little Truth and large Necessity:
If he cringe much the less will be his Lot;
A Hangman's Hire is not so basely got.
Why should a Wit (against Apollo's Rules)
Take pay for giving Fame to Knaves and Fools?
Why should that Art to prostitution fall?
Inspired by Heaven, yet at a Coxcomb's Call.
O fix not him a Pattern for the Times
That Is Eminent for nothing but his Crimes!
But let that Patron only fill your Lays
That does Reward your Toil, not buy your praise:
Such Sidney was, and such is Dorset now,
With Wreaths of everlasting Praise adorn his generous Brow.
But Pander, Player, Pimp and Bawd will thrive
As long as Farce, or Theater survive,
For Lust and Vanity overflow the Age,
And still ebb back to their own Spring, the Stage;
But leave, at every Tide, more Vice behind
Than there would need to taint all Human-kind:
So Nile, decreasing, spreads a slime so Rich,
Serpents take Life from the Suns Vital Itch,
Less monstrous Births than Playhouse Dog and Bitch.
Thus, tho the extremest Shift and Craft is tried.
The most that Toil for Gain shoot short, or wide;
Unluckily at the bright mark they aim,
Which tho they miss, they must not miss the blame,
For their undue pursuit is still the same.
Destructive Mineral! when God cursed the Earth
Was the sad Minute that did give thee Birth;
From Hell thou come, and thither must again
Retire, when done thy Universal Reign:
Nor does this with the Ancients disagree*
When to each thing th'assign'd a Deity,
He that was God of Hell was God of thee.
Talk not of Nations ruled by Caesar's Line,
The greatest Monarchy on Earth is thine:
With Faith thou may Futurity contend,
For Thine's a Kingdom that will never end.
What more than happy Minutes might we see?
How Virtuous? How like Angels might we be
(Thou thrice accursed Mineral!) but for thee?
While we are Infants we but with thee play,
Nor care to keep, but rather throw away:
Ah! Why (or do we older grow in vain?)
Don't we in Age that Quality retain?
Why should our first Five Years be wiser far
Than all our following, riper Moments are?
Much are we tempted by the Female Face,
A Thousand ways they bring us to disgrace,
But Gold's the great Debaucher of our Race!
Lovers and Fools, perhaps, would come by kind,
But among Men one Villain you would not find
That Tempter silent, our quick-hoisted Sail
Is always spread to take the smiling Gale;
Not once considering there in that may be
More Rocks and Shelves and Sands than in the Sea.
Gold to Deaths Palace leads the steepy way,
Once in the Path we have no Power to stay;
It blinds our Eyes, nor one safe step assures,
And has a Key to all his Thousand Doors.
When should we hear of Treachery in War,
But for thee, thee, thou greater Mischief far?
What Countries has the Gallick Monarch's Gold
Poorly and basely, fasly, bought and Sold?
No Persons for his Countries Friends are known
But Spotted Traitors that would sell their own:
True Glory he, yet never had in Chase*
But ows his Honors (what can be more base?
Even to the Refuse of all Human Race.
Why should we talk so hard of Machiavel
(As if he had equaled the Prime Fiend of Hell)
And pass by Mazarin and Richlieu's Name,
No less than him deserving endless blame?
Justice, Injustice were by turns carest,
Just as they served their Tyrants Interest?
Tho the blessed Pledge of Public Faith had past,
The League, if not convenient, must not last:
Not done in the dark, the World proclaimed the shame!
And taught from hence (their freedom who can blame?
Even Infidels reproach the Blessed Name:
Doubt a Turk's Faith, he will this reply afford;
Am I a Christian Dog to break my Word?
These two Achitophels are justly cursed,
And should have had the Fate, too, of the first.
Their Politics does still his Councils Rule,
To these two fatal Names he went to School,
And such successful, wicked Progress made,
He does transcend the Teachers in their Trade.
His treacherous Gold he deals by Sea, by Land,
Bribery's the Base on which his Fame does Stand,
Take that away he falls, while every Eye
Sees 'twas not Courage made him soar so high!
That no true Conduct the Crowned Atheist reared,
But his Suborning of the Foes he feared.
Flagitious Villains! that for Foreign Pay
Their King their Country and their Friends betray!
Villains! whom Mercy's Self would blush to save,
Or, tho 'twere under Tyburn, grant a Grave,
For whom all Curses past and all to come
Here and in Hell it Self's too mild a Doom!
Yet they shall boast their Birth and high Descent,
Which is, if possible, more Impudent:
It Is true, we own, as to their Station here,
Some of 'em move in an Illustrious Sphere;
( Illustrious, if they would continue there:)
But as no Man is Base-born that is Good,
So Peers may be Plebeians understood,
For Virtue 'twas that first distinguished Blood:
He that betrays his Country, tho the first
In Power, is, in degree of Vice, the worst:
If he, then, that is most Vicious is most Base,
Why should a Villain talk of Noble Race?
If by brave Deeds our Fathers got a Name,
Have we by Ill the same Pretense to Fame?
Ah! no -- their Glory, but decrys our Shame.
These are the Tools the Tirant does seduce,
No Devil half so proper for his Use.
So Philip, when he with the Graecians strove.
Did by the same Machine his Actions move;
Cities he sacked, and did much more perform
By that, than his whole Army could by Storm.
But Infamous his Memory is compared
With his great Son, who made his Sword his Guard,
In Person fought, the conquered East over ran;
Tho not Heaven-born, if Blood by Blood we scan,
Not Philip, Sire, but some more God-like Man:
Of his reputed Father's Acts ashamed,
Begot that Saying, yet so justly famed;
(To which his Life so clearly did agree,)
Advised, by Night, to fight the Enemy,
He cried -- He would not steal a Victory:
Tho then he for the Mightiest Empire fought,
So, as he greatly spoke, 'twas bravely-sought.
Gold he despised, or used as Glory bid,
And made it the Reward of those that did
Great things; the Man of Merit lay not hid.
So in the Age to come, when William's Name
And haughty Louis are declared by Fame,
The first shall stand with such Illustrious Braves
We named before, the last with Treacherous Slaves;
Whom here the Muse the rather does impeach,
To show no Crime beyond a Satyrs reach*
Yet, tho he bribes so high, it has its rise
To that low sordid Crime of Avarice;
For if he part with a Substantial Sum,
It Is but a Penny gone for Pounds to come.
Well may to Covet (as Prescription Sings)
Be the cursed Root from whence all Evil Springs,
When that Plebeian Vice can Mount to Kings.
But these, cursed Mineral, are not half the ills
That down from Thee on Wretched Man distills;
Thou art not only cause of Public bane,
But do in Private hold as loose a Rein:
All Dealing is thy own; cheat that cheat can,
Is thy great Maxim between Man and Man.
Some are thy Sworn and some thy daily Slaves;
Women and Thee make all Men Fools and Knaves.
Man is so pliant to thy forming Hand
He runs into all Moulds, at thy Command
Takes all Impressions, and is proved, by Thee,
The constant Drudge of Inconsistency.
It Is thou that do this Proteus unbind
From what h'has Sworn, and what he has designed,
And make him vary Color, Shape and Mind;
Now in Trunk-Breeches, next in Pantaloons,
Now prays with Priests, then Curses with Dragoons,
In the same Breath, it is bless us, and it is Zoons.
Influenced by Thee, we trust not one another,
Or if we do, we are cheated by a Brother.
Neighbor on Neighbor thou like Dogs do set,
And make 'em faster keep the Hold they get:
We first grieve at another's Happiness,
And the next Step we strive to make it less,
Or what he has, would wrongfully possess.
Envy from thee draws out her sharpest Stings.
By thee encouraged, she her Arrow slings,
Alike, Promiscuously, at Slaves and Kings:
The very Altar cannot secure the Hand
On which she will fix her Stigmatizing Brand;
Traduces them, does their just Income grutch,
Prays they may starve; to her (her Nature's such)
To God that gave all, one in Ten's too much:
Not but it is wished those Tenths were better used,
More duly paid, and, taken, less abused.
It Is thou that do the Fashion-Monger guide,
And art the sweetest Nourishment of Pride;
It Is thou do spread her like a Peacock's Tail,
And breath the Blast that fills the gaudy Sail:
In Women thou do, chiefly, make her Reign,
And Female Fops, if possible, more vain.
Head-Tires like Turbants, now, our Ladies wear,
False Hearts, false Shapes, false Honor and false Hair:
Against the old Woman's Steeple-Hat they cry,
Yet, with slight Gauzes, dress three times as high:
The good Wives Cover was not made in vain,
The Other's housed with the first drop of Rain:
Close to her Tail the Obsequious Coxcomb goes,
And licks his Lips with pleasing of his Nose:
VVhere-e're she comes, so loose a Train she brings,
Tho Men by Name, you would swear they are other things:
Just so attended the proud Bitch does pass
The Streets, Tray, Ring-wood, Jowler at her Arse.
The Changes of their Minds we may admire,
But can they vary more than their Attire?
You Will say this is false Doctrine I maintain,
Women may plead Prescription to be vain:
To clear their Guilt, that Plea will never do,
For then all Fops might plead Prescription too.
But you, perhaps, are bribed to take their Part,
And cry, no Pride's a Sin, but Pride of Heart;
And therefore, since no Optics can pretend
Into those deep Recesses to descend,
We know not who is Proud -- you err again,
No other Crime can be descried so plain:
Who does not see Pride in our Nature lies*
When what we ought to Honor we despise?
The Parents that did press us to the Breast
Must not appear, if they are meanly dressed,
Or if they do, their Visits must be brief,
As if they lost their Senses with their Teeth.
Some drive 'em from their Doors (unnatural Race!)
And wonder they will come there to their Disgrace.
It Is true, this only is of Upstarts said,
The better Sort, you will say, are better bred;
But mark if in their Conduct you can find
One Thought that is to Humility inclined:
Their nearest Kin, reduced to Poverty,
They loath to hear of, and they blush to see.
Observe the Fop that is just come to Age.
(His Mother dead that brought the Heritage;)
See in a Storm, when he does Coach the Streets,
And his old Father overtakes, or meets,
Dropping all over and soaked through to the Skin,
Mark if the Villain stops to take him in.
In short, Men of Estate, and Noble Blood,
By consequence, are rather Proud than Good:
Pride's Fountainhead we may from Money bring
As nat'rally as Water from the Spring;
Whether it is in the Heart, or in the Dress,
More Money makes it more, but never less:
But when this Vice does on poor Gentry fall,
It Is then the most Ridiculous of all*
For he that is Threadbare, and that is bare of Pence,
If to Nobility he makes Pretense,
WE may conclude to be as bare of Sense.
With Pride thou giv'st Birth to her grinning Train,
To all that is affected, all that is Vain;
Vanity (who one whole Sex devours)
Stands waiting at her Elbow at all Hours,
Just as, they say, the Devil does at Ours;
And Affectation takes her very Trace,
When one appears, the Other's still in Place:
So the Bawd waits at the great State's- Man's Doors,
And so attended with her Brace of Whores:
For the vain Nymph, and the affected Dame,
If not so yet, will quickly be the same.
In Coach and Chair they whirl it up and down,
No Common Haokny-Strumpet's better known,
Not Hatton's Steel-chin'd Drab that tired the Town,
And did more Surgeons in a year enrich,
Than all the rest -- the Ne plus ultra Bitch!
These Creatures are for ever on the Range;
The Playhouse, Park, Spring-Garden, Court, Exchange,
Their daily Round, where, tho whole years they run,
They tire no more than when they first begun;
Rather push faster onwards in the Race,
As falling Stones, could we suppose a Space
So deep, would near the Center mend their Pace:
Chatt'ring, Dancing, Singing, each her Part
Runs wildly over, without Wit, Heed, or Art;
And if a Coxcomb, Pert, and Vain, and Dull,
Does join their Train, he makes the Concert full:
Not Guzling Gossips at a Christning Feast,
When Mother Midnight drops a Bawdy Jest,
(Of all the Women, still the greatest Beast)
Can make that Unintelligible Din
As these abound with when their Hands are in.
In Dress, in Language, Converse, Shape and Miene
Are Vanity and Affectation seen:
Nothing so hard, of all ill things, to hide
As these Appendixes and Rags of Pride.
Yet, who can think their selves so free from Guilt
As the vain Coxcomb and affected Jilt?
In vain we would convert 'em with our Rage,
They Are best convinced by Beggary and Age,
Both be their Lot, for who would Pity have
On a fine foolish Drab, or Selfish Slave?
False glaring Fires! but raised (O Gold!) from thine,
Thy Brightness makes these Exalations shine.
Even Contradictions take from thee their Rise,
As Prodigality and Avarice;
Nor do thou only but in Them agree,
Thou art the Sire of Sloth and Industry:
Not of that Industry, by which the Swain,
With Sweat and Toil, does earn an honest Gain:
(O Industry! thou Child of true Content,
VVho'd not be Needy to be Innocent?)
But that which makes the Merchant cross the Main,
The Lawyer any Villain's Cause maintain,
Those Indefatigable Slaves of Gain:
Who would not be the Labourer, named before,
Than these with an Ill Conscience, and their Store?
But, as the Man that is Civil never will hit
The lucky Vain that constitutes a Wit;
So he that is Honest, cannot Wealthy grow
By the bare Method of Continuing so:
Whatever, then, the thriving Churl may say,
All great Estates are got another way.
O Honesty! thou lasting Peace of Mind,
Thou Radiant Jewel which but few will find*
All over bright thou lie'st to charm the Eye,
But (wretched Men!) we wink and pass thee by.
Give me but that, ye Powers, I ask no more,
To Muck-Worms leave the Riches they adore:
No surer Guard I Will e're desire to keep
Me safe, nor softer Opium for my Sleep:
Serene my Hours, like them my Conscience, free,
Which no rich prosperous Villain e're can be,
No griping, scraping, hard, assiduous Slave,
No wealthy Fool, or overreaching Knave,
Tho he is lighted by the Sun of Pleasure,
And can by Basking on his Banks of Treasure.
But, as this faulty Industry takes Growth
From thee, no less does Laziness and Sloth:
If by our Servants Labor we can shun
The thought of Care, we hold our Work is done:
Not thinking, while we doze away our Hours,
The more their Business, so, the more is Ours;
Their Labor does our Laziness reproach,
Our Laziness their Labor does debauch.
Who'd think, at ten a Clock it should be said
That the great Lady's soaking in her Bed?
When, to repair the sensible Decay
That twelve hours hearty Sleep has took away,
Dish after Dish, for Chocolate she calls;
(She must be often raised that often falls.)
That strong-back'd Liquor hoops 'em in the Chine,
No other Nectar they allow Divine.
Vain Sex! at once both Foolish and Unjust,
To think they need Provocatives to Lust:
Were all their Lives to be one Nuptial Night,
Their Stock would never be exhausted quite;
Then, on their Natural Fund they might rely,
And not so lavishly take in Supply.
Name but a Kitchen to the Lady fair,
She cries, O filthy! What should I do there?
Not thinking that the more she knows, the less,
By consequence, she is blamed for Foolishness.
Her Offices she never comes into,
Or scarce knows one from 'tother, if she do;
Full of themselves, they nothing else can see;
Tho Mothers, yet their Pocket-Glass shall be
Looked into oftener than their Nursery:
Mark, in this Town, if there is not many a one
That hugs her Monky oftener than her Son,
(And, says, we scarce know which is most her own:
It Is that she cheers and fondles all we can,
And loves the nearest Print of it in Man:
The vilest Fop, whom Nature did create
For nothing but to Cringe, to Grin and Prate,
Fraught with more Fashion, Nonsense, Lies, Grimace,
Than e're before were crowded in Ass;
Let him appear, the unnatural Brute's received,
Nor only Loved, but, which is worse, Believed!
Yet Sloath's not only to that Sex confined,
But has a large Dominion in Mankind.
Would not that Noble Coxcomb raise our Mirth,
That thinks his Laziness declares his Birth,
Joined with a Resolution, never to get
Out of a Mercinary Rascal's Debt?
Of all the Blockheads that debase their Kind,
No Wretch more Vile and Scandalous we find,
Than he, that for Respect and Honor looks,
Yet over Head and Ears in Trades-Mens Books:
(Not that we should despise the Man that is poor;
But these look bigger, as their Wants grow more:
If Quality can stoop so very low,
What is it it may not condescend to do?
Dissolved in Idleness, he grows a Drone,
And neither Eats, or Drinks, or wears his own;
But spunges on the Labors of the Poor,
Who, trusting Them, make but their Wants the more.
Their Servants Wages, if they ever pay,
I warn the lucky Wretch to make no Stay,
Let him go off with Money, while he may;
For Quality has long the Trick professed,
To bilk the yearly Hireling with the rest.
A Man that is doomed to serve so loose a Knave,
Is sunk down ten Degrees beneath a Slave:
And who his Life would in that Drudgery spend,
When, should he hang himself, his Case would mend?
In short, to Cheat, and to be Impudent
When Duns appear, is the last Element,
(And by mere Choice it so it self involves)
To which Decaying Quality resolves.
The lesser Gentry, rather that Abroad
Venture to serve their Prince, infest the Road;
But a Thieve's Valor no true Praise deserves,
For any Coward rather Fights than Starves.
It Is not that Providence, as Atheists feign,
Has made more Creatures than it can maintain;
All Men may thrive, at least, thus far you will grant,
By just Endeavors rise above their Want:
Who did you ever yet in Tatters see,
That did exert his utmost Industry?
For no Man Fortune does so far forsake,
But he may sometives give, as well as take.
But it is mere Sloth, incorporate with his Blood,
And Pride, that says it is slavish to be Good,
That it betrays a Base, a Vulgar Mind,
To seek by Industry their Bread to find; --
As if 'twere Great to prey upon their Kind;
As if the Wolf were e're the better Beast,
Because more Bold and Ravenous than the rest,
And on the Blood of Innocence will Feast.
From these the Muse with Detestation flies,
And straight, what more she loathes, the Spend-thrift spies:
Preposterous Fop! that thinks it an Abuse
To put his Money to the Genuine Use,
As if no Gentleman, if not Profuse.
See how he deals it out as he comes on,
And with both Hands too, as 'twou'd never be gone!
You Would swear he studied, or he understood
How to live all his Life, and do no Good.
A Guinea she that gives his Lust Relief
Bears off, a Guinea he that cleans his Teeth,
A Guinea he that brings him a Lampoon,
To Peaceable a Guinea for a Tune;
A Guinea, where he Dines, among the Men,
The Dedication of a Play is Ten,
His Peruke five, and his Point Ruffles four,
His Beaver three, his Laced Coat fifteen more,
And then Five hundred to his Annual Whore:
Besides his Coach, his Horses, and his Slaves,
His Parasites, his Pimps and Hireling Braves,
Must be conceived to wast a Countless Sum;
From what vast Bank can all this Treasure come?
What English Land, or Indian Mine can last,
When the vain Animal does spend so fast?
Rich, tho he be, when to that Vice inclined,
He Blazes like a Candle in the Wind,
And, gratifying all his loose Desires,
Is melted down, and in a Snuff expires:
Tho Wealth and Power does in his Van appear,
Want and a Jayl does still bring up the Rear;
A Jayl is the Inevitable Lot
Of an Extravagant and heedless Sot.
Shook by a thousand Debts, the Prodigal
Does, in effect, like the Colossus fall;
Too ponderous to lift up, like that, he lies,
And as unable, of himself, to rise.
Thus, that this Vice proceeds from Gold we see,
Fox without that, no Prodigality.
That Avarice from that, too, takes its Birth
Is true, as that the Churl has his from Earth:
But this Notorious Crime it were a Shame
To offer to Convict, or to Reclaim;
Nor was it here to lash it our Intent,
It Is to it self a sharper Punishment.
What Plagues upon a Miser can you throw,
Worse than that One of his Continuing so?
May then these Slaves (by Contradiction ill)
Gripe, scrape, be close and Avaritious still,
Gaze on his Gold, think that his only Good,
And so be damned for grutching himself Food.
But as the Wretch is Covetous that hoards,
So some are Covetous to spread their Boards;
By Power supported ( Rapine their Delight)
They set no Bounds to their wild Appetite;
Whatever they Covet they think lawful Prize,
So Lawlesly the Labourer's Substance seize,
And all to dwell in Wantonness and Ease:
The needy Churl we may, almost, excuse,
But these are Covetous to be Profuse.
What a strange Madness does these Fools betray?
That rake together just to throw away,
And give that Wings that never was know to stay.
The former errs in knowing not the Use;
This in the Getting, then in the Abuse:
Haughty, yet condescends to crush the Poor.
To cram his Belly, and to pay his Whore.
Thus Luxury's maintained by Avarice;
But then another sort, as bad as this,
Has from Hereditary Wealth its Rise:
Extant in them who in their Bills of Fare
Summon, at once, the Earth, the Sea, the Air:
The Elements must all their Bounties show,
As if not what they gave, but what they ow,
And must pay in when they will have it so.
The want even of a Trifle's not endured,
Tho by th'extremest Art and Charge procured.
Nature is forced, as if most good they find
In Fruits and Plants before they are ripe, by kind.
Not a more numerous Army Xerxes led,
Than these, by Name, have Dishes to be fed:
More barbarous Terms we now in Cookery see,
Than in that barb'rou Mystery Heraldry;
And as those Terms distinguish Gentry there,
So Friscasies, Ragousts and Soups do here --
And both, alike, their Wit and Worth declare.
That God made all for Man we all agree,
But then 'twas for his Use, not Luxury;
He did not open his unbounded Store,
Only to feast the Rich, and starve the Poor;
Tho now they Lord it over the meaner Sort,
And make their Labors and their Wants their Sport;
Voluptuously, all Nature's Rarities,
(As if by Charter theirs) Monopolize:
Yet, tho they have all, they think they are treated rough,
And, like the Barren Womb, never say -- Enough.
What a sad Sentence on these Men will fall
At the last dreadful Trump, the general Call?
When, notwithstanding all their Wealth and Power,
They murmured more, the more they did devour:
Tho Heaven sent Quails, and tho it Manna rained,
They, like the stubborn Israelites, complained;
The more its Miracles appealed to sense,
The less they would be convinced of Providence:
While the poor Man, which (if we may presume
So far) must strangely aggravate their Doom,
While he, resigned, by his just Labor fed,
Lived pleased and thankful upon Scraps of Bread!
O Poverty! thou only Blessing, sent
From Heaven, if you are attended with Content;
She on that Hand, and Honesty on this;
And thou art, then the greatest Human Bliss:
Not Caesar, Lepidus, and Antony,
Did make so famous a Triumviri
As you, O you much more illustrious Three!
Wealth has no Center, endlesly aspices,
Yet never can reach the Height it so admires,
As there to pitch and fix her Wild Desires:
But Poverty close to the Ground does go,
And hugs the Fate that lets her walk so low;
No fall she fears, contented to be just,
She sinks beneath Ambition, Rage and Lust:
Envy her self, that takes the surest Aim,
Cares not for stooping to such prostrate Game.
So Storms on Mountains the tall Cedar tears
Up by the Roots, the humble Shrub it spares.
O Blessed State! which God was pleased to bear
While, in the Flesh, he sojourned with us here;
He knew thy lovely Dress would best agree
With Peace, with Truth, and with Humility:
Thy Badge, too, all his mighty Followers bore,
And would be what their Savior was before;
What Wretch, then, would Repine that he is Poor?
Bounded by Thee, w'ave no desire to ly
On Beds of Down, or Offices to buy,
Which, rightly took, is but Lay-Simony; --
It Is to that common Clergy-Crime a Brother,
And one is punished now no more than 'tother.
He that has Money cannot Preferment want;
Let him be Coward, Atheist, Ignorant,
He straight grows Wise, a Hero, and a Saint.
As once 'twas said, knock, it shall opened be,
Seek you shall find -- so in this World, we see,
And most at Court, when e're the Penny's shown,
The Heaven of bought Preferment is your own.
Some, Places buy, because they will Courtiers grow,
And some, again, because they must be so,
Above the fear of Paying what they ow;
There they, secure, as in Alsatia, rest,
Alsatia, of the two Retreats the best;
There you, unearth the Fox, Relief may have;
But here there is no reaching of a Knave:
And while they, thus, a sure Protection find,
They are but Authorized to cheat Mankind:
A Villain that will use this Privilege,
Cuts like a Sword that has a double Edge;
May arrest you, yet fear not an Arest,
Always oppressing, not to be oppressed:
Thus, ow a World, it is this way even made,
Get but a Place at Court, your Debts are paid:
It Is hence the vilest Offices are bought,
They fall not half so fast as they are sought.
Five hundred Guinea's (faith the Bargain's hard)
Only to Cock a Hat, and mount the Guard:
Fantastic Ape! that struts in Scarlet Clothes,
And has of Soldier, nothing but the Oaths.
Little his Father thought (who had been long
Getting the Sum, and from his Tenants wrung
It half by Indirection) that his Soul
Was pawned, to make his Eldest-Born a Fool.
What Man can think that Money justy gained,
By which a Villain's Vanity's maintained?
It Is true, the Wars (which don't their Natures suit)
Has shook, perhaps, these Locusts from the Fruiut;
But who that, lately, would Hyds-Park survey,
Did not see many a Coxcomb that took Pay,
Only to ride a Cock-horse on May Day?
His Credit just for Rabble-Praise to sell.
And bowing to the Ladies in Pell-Mell;
While prancing on, and straining to look fierce,
And his fine Scarf hung dangling at his Arce,
The whole Town was diverted with the Farce.
In vain the honest Man is Brave, or Wise,
When any Mony'd Fop so soon may rise;
If but a Seavenger does tender Gold,
The Man of Birth and Worth is bought and sold:
For he that can no better Merit bring
Than Loving of his Country, or his King,
May even go whistle for Advancement there;
His Lung's too fine to breath in such an Air.
In short, all things are bought; Buying's so rife,
Fools Knighthoods buy, the Murderer buys his Life,
And, which is worse, even Grandio bought his Wife;
A thousand Guinea's down and down were told,
Before the Pander did produce the Scold:
But, if to have her, the preposterous Sot
Could let so large a Parcel go to Pot,
What would he give that, now, he had her not?
Enough of Buying between Fool and Rogue:
But Begging is, at Court, as much in Vogue,
And it is a sort of Begging baser far,
Than all the vilest ways of Bribery are.
The Natural Fool that has a Great Estate,
Is, to the Courtier, grown a luscious Bait:
But if Estates are forfeit by the Laws,
When Fools are Heirs (tho Fools by Natural Cause)
Half of the Gentry must their Lands resign,
For why is theirs more priviledg'd than thine?
In short, would not a near Relation's Care
Cherish the Idiot, the Soft-moulded Hair,
More tenderly than any threadbare Lord,
Of all the Hundreds filled upon Record?
Profit maks one take Care, and Nature 'tother;
What Love is like the Yernings of a Mother?
Unhappiness enough she knew that bore
So sad a Weight, but this does make it more:
Deprived of all that Mothers make their Boast;
Because she lost her Hope, must all be lost?
Why should such senseless Cruelty be shown?
Why punished for an Error nor her own?
'Twas Nature's Crime, who sometimes is in have,
For when a Fool is formed she works too fast,
And letting but the grosser Substance pass,
Shuts out the Mind, that should inform the Mass;
At the next Trial, she her Bungling mends,
And thither too, of Right, the Estate descends:
The Birthright Esau's Folly did refuse;
What he deserved not, Jacob did not lose.
But if it is fit, Fools should be begged at all,
Of all Sorts, we should spare the Natural;
The acquired Coxcomb should the Person be,
That Is so of Choice, not of Necessity:
This way some equal Justice might be shown,
For those that beg Estates might lose their own.
Must a whole Lineage perish, undeserved,
Because without their Lands a Fop had starved?
Whatever made this Custom first prevail,
Morality still told another Tale;
For, let us fairly ask, is it to do,
What you would have yor Issue done unto?
Nor is it only Fools that suffer hence,
The Affliction falls too often on Men of Sense;
Thou -- do of this the Example stand,
Thy Case is known and pitied through the Land.
With these Court-Beggars, we may fitly join
The Slaves in Office that Collect their Coin:
Tell me (O Stewards!) that do all you can
When you are Dealing with the Laboring Man,
With Plausible Discourse and Artifice,
To screw him up to the extremest Price;
Making him give (if he don't understand
Your Craft) as much for Coppy-hold as Land;
Yet, after all, there comes thy Lady's Fee,
Five Guinea's -- (which, perhaps, she never does see)
Because you have used him well, five more to Thee:
Tell me behind what Shift thou can retreat,
To Avoid the the Imputation of a Cheat?
Perhaps, you may this dull Reply afford,
Thou do it for the Interest of thy Lord;
The worse, that can a Villains Name obtain,
Without the least Encouragement of Gain,
It shows thy Guilt does in thy Nature grow,
And that it is not by Chance, but Choice, you are so.
But tho their Interest you pretend, it is known,
By Proofs Infallible, you mean your Own.
How can you spend so fast, and live so high,
New Houses build, and New Possessions buy,
And get some Hundred Pounds, per Annum, clear,
Out of, at most, but Fifty Pounds a Year?
Yet, tho so bad, we justly may allow
The Man that does protect thee worse than Thou,
Who, tho he is sure thou art a Knave, employs
The still, and so whole Families destroys.
But that which grieves me more, is, when I see
A Lawyer made a Steward, or Trustee;
Cormorants, that neither Lord or Tenant spare,
But Banter one, and strip the other bare:
An Honest Lawyer would a Monster be,
But who, alive, e're saw that Prodigy.
As Proffligate, a braz'd Case-hardn'd Race,
As ever yet had Infamy in Chase:
Knights of the Post, that perjured Oaths will take
As fast as Pills, much better Christians make,
And have, without Contrition, more pretense,
To Heaven than these with all their Penitence;
For Ignorance, joined with strong Necessity,
Does sometimes goad men on to Villainy;
It Is certain when we are born we must be fed,
And what will not starving Rascals do for Bread?
But what can those Men urge in their Defense,
That roll in Wealth, and are indu'd with Sense?
Yet Lie, Deceive, Cheat, Ravage, Crush and Grind,
As if they would sworn to ruin Human-kind.
Just as the Vulture, Tiger, Wolf and Bear,
By Nature, nothing in their Fury spare;
So he, that does to study Law incline,
By Nature, is as Ravenous after Coin;
Only this Difference does between 'em light,
Those better Bruits for Hunger kill and fight,
Destroy for Need, which he does for Delight:
So Cruel, his own Kindred he will not save;
When Born, his Stars their sharpest Influence gave,
And turned his Constitution to a Knave.
Knavery's his Life, his Soul, his utmost Sphere;
But Virtue makes him gape like Fish in Air,
That pure thin Element he cannot bear.
Ah Wretch! that so can to be Rich presume,
Yet think not on the Rich Man's dreadful Doom!
Happy that glorious Man, thrice happy he,
That, tho possessed of Riches, yet, can be
From all the Crimes that it produces free;
Who, Spite of that Temptation to be ill,
Can his Disires and Wealth command at will;
What God designed his Servant, manage so,
As never to let it his proud Master grow;
Ungoverned, then, as Water, or as Fire,
Who, tho for Servants we so much admire,
Yet ruin all when they to rule aspire;
That does the Genuine Use of Money know,
And, served himself, the Surplus can bestow;
That does believe Compassion of the Poor,
A truer Key to Heaven's Eternal Door,
Than all the Merits of his Birth and Store;
That does with Virtue, Peace and Truth comply,
The Center of his Actions, Charity,
The Cammel then goes through the Needle's Eye!
But where? O where! (and search the Land around)
Can Ten of these enlightened Souls be found?
Could Ten be found, they would atone our Crimes,
And, by their Blessed Example, fix the Times,
Keep all Calamities from entering here,
Plague, Famine, Sword, and Fire we need not fear;
Our Sodom had not burnt, had ten such Lots been there,
Nor, first, with Plague, called to repent her Sin;
But when is her Conversion to begin?
The only Fear of all, methinks, should be,
When such Transcendency of Soul we see,
We should fall back to flat Idolatry;
In them the Image of the Power Divine
Does with so perfect a Resemblance Shine,
That, tho no Gods, they are scarce of Human-Line!
Instead of these, a Brutal Race we see,
Composed of Pride, of Spite and Cruelty:
The Poor (their kinder Dogs will lick their Sores)
Like Lazarus, are driven from their Doors;
Their needy Neighbors made eternal Slaves,
At least, they have no Ease, but in their Graves,
That silent, kind Retreat from Fools and Knaves:
Not Busby's more despotick in his School,
Than these are in the Villages they Rule.
The Sat'rist may the Abuse of Riches mourn,
Or blame the Abuser, but he meets with Scorn,
For, straight they cry -- You like the Fox impeach,
And but dispraise the Fruit you cannot reach:
Did you but know the Blessings of our Store,
You Would rather choose Damnation than be Poor:
The Rich Man rules Assemblies with a Nod,
His Steps are by a Train of Followers trod;
Where e're he turns his Eyes, Respect he sees,
And bending Crowds salute him on their Knees;
The Statesman, Courtier, Soldier, Scholar join
In their Esteem, and Bless the Man of Coin.
While base, opprobrious Want does skulk and hide,
Loathed by her self, and shunned by all beside;
And then the Term of Idle to prevent,
She calls her sneaking Poverty, Content. --
Thus they run on, and that Seraphick State,
Conferred but on Heaven's choicest Favorites, Hate;
A State, did Angels live on Earth, they would choose,
A State, next to the Loss of Heaven to lose,
And only Man and Devils can abuse.
But tell me, Sons of Earth, ye Sordid Crew,
That would deceive our Souls by specious Show,
And to your own, add our Destruction too;
Tell me if Money from Perdition saves,
Or keeps you e're the longer from your Grave?
Can it preserve your Bodies (tho your Bed
Be Down, and tho your Tomb he hoop'd with Lead)
From Stinking Living, and from Rotting Dead?
Can it the Charges of your Crimes defray?
Or Bribe the Jury on the Judgment-Day?
Can it procure, in Pain, a Moments Ease?
Make Pleasure last? or Disappointments please?
Honor, you cry, and all her Blessings wait
On his Command that has a large Estate;
O fond Mistake! a thousand things he wants,
Which God even to the meanest Creature grants:
Richer than Crassus, though the Muck worm be,
He may not have a Grain of Charity,
Of Courage, Justice, Fortitude, of Truth,
Of Sense, of Prudence, Beauty, or of Youth;
And, last of all, that Blessed Peace of Mind
May want in Death, which even the poorest find.
To all Temptation he lies open still;
For he that has the Means never wants the Will,
So, almost, by Necessity is ill.
To Women does your Inclination ly?
This brings you in a numberless Supply --
But Women are so cheap that all may buy:
To Villainy, or Wine, then, bend your Mind,
To Sins of the most Black, or Scarlet-Kind,
Gold is the readiest Prompter you can find;
Dare you to act, your Cue you shall not miss,
But down you go, tho Hell the Precipice:
He is not, then, the Favorite of Heaven,
Where there is much, but where enough is given.
Of all the several Fates that Mortals share,
His is most sad, his is the most severe,
That has (O dreadful Doom!) his Portion here;
That in this Life does his good things receive,
And whom, when dying, his Enjoyments leave:
The Pale-faced Tirant's Call he must obey,
He dares nor go, yet knows he must not stay,
Nor bear the Wealth, he so admires, away;
But, opening the Inevitable Gate,
Hopeless of Heaven, does shoot the Gulf of Fate.
How dismal will the flaming Prospect show,
When Hell, and full Damnation come in view?
In vain he will, then, his Crimes and Follies mourn,
The deeper plunged for thinking of Return.
Then will he feel, and feeling Rue, how vain
He was, to trust in cursed, ill-gotten Gain:
These Lines (which we expect he will laugh at here)
Will then a sad, a dreadful Truth appear:
Then he will wish (Ah wretched Wish! too late)
He had believed, or feared a future State.
Why (O ye Powers!) was Man so subject made,
To be by Gold, that glittering Toy, betrayed?
Or, as the Fire tries that, was that to be
The Test and Trial of our Honesty?
Or was it gave (that way our Judgment leans)
To show how ill we are when we have Means?
Or was it, merely, of Compassion sent,
To mind us of that future Punishment
Which it does so exactly represent?
For as those Souls to endless Burnings doomed,
Are ever undiminish'd, unconsum'd,
That Substance, so, in Flames abides entire,
"And lies Immortal in the Arms of Fire.
How e're it is, of this we may be sure,
By Nature we'ave a thousand Crimes in Store
And that subjects us to ten thousand more;
Yes, cursed Mineral! Eve did, in the Fall,
Thy Project of Damnation but fore-stall.
Against our Consciences you stem the Tide;
In vain we'ave Truth and Reason on our side,
When you assume the Chair, and grow our Guide:
We know we are wicked, yet thou goad'st us on,
As if our Mortal Race would never be run.
Injurious Truths you to the World raveal,
And on black Falsehoods six an endless Seal:
The Tongue of horrid Murders thou have tied,
And Innocence for Guilt as often decry'd:
Often has the Guiltless Wretch been Gibbet-high,
Seen swinging, and the Murderer smiling by.
Even a chaste Kiss has Scandal brought on some,
While Buggery has met a milder Doom.
Nothing was e're so wicked, Old or New,
But thou have done, or art prepared to do;
Crimes that deserve more than for Fiends was meant,
And Hell cannot equal in the Punishment.
For thee the Friend proves Faithless to his Trust,
And Mother Bawds to their own Daughter's Lust;
At twelve years Age, expose the Girl to sale,
For at fifteen she will be found too stale:
What in her riper Whoredoms will she be,
When she does Pox with her Virginity?
For thee the needy Drab does strowl the Streets,
And cling to any nasty Bruit she meets,
A Bulk her Bed, her daggl'd Tail her Sheets:
To Cripples, Lepers, Moors she opens wide;
It Is certain (could the Experiment be tried)
A Dog with Two Pence would not be denied:
But, wisely, they let taimed Flesh alone,
Or fear the Scandal, having (as it is known)
A nicer sort of Bitches of their own.
For thee the Husband (to himself unjust)
Does wink at, or allow his Spouse's Lust;
And, tho he but enjoyed her just before,
Can rise and open her Gallants the Door:
Thus Laccar'd first, she is for the Labor eased,
As Coach-Wheels for a Journey still are greased.
For thee, if by hard Fate he cannot thrive,
The well-bred Wife does her poor Husband leave;
She thinks below her Character she goes,
And cannot be Honest in unmodish Clothes.
In vain her Spouse believed her plighted Troth,
Her Virgin Vows, and Sacred Marriage Oath;
A Tie sufficient her loose Faith to bind:
Unless a plenteous Maintenance she find,
Wedded to him, she is Bedded to Mankind.
For thee the Buffoon is a Foe professed
To all that is good, and lives and dies a Beast:
Paid to make Mirth, he cannot Witty be
Without the help of loose Scurility,
Of Irreligion, or of Ribaldry:
Thus, not by Wit, but Wickedness possessed,
He does but Damn himself to clinch his Jest.
For Thee the Cit not only Truth denies,
But solemnly calls God to vouch his Lies:
His Faith and Conscience he does pawn so fast,
It Is to be wondered how the Stock does last.
As just is he that steals for his Relief,
For what is a Tradesman but a licensed Thief.
For Thee his Wife (too cunning for the Man)
Does cheat the Cheater all that Woman can:
Yet to the Fop an Angel she appears,
And is so Fond, that it breaks out in Tears:
His ready Cash he to her Care does trust,
And laughs at those that think their Wives unjust.
Mean while she, like a Leech, does drain him dry,
Then ranges all the Town for a Supply:
Frequents the Exchanges, Parks and Plays, and strikes
A Bargain up with every One she likes;
And let 'em do their best, for as their Play
Is More or Less, it is answered in their Pay.
For Thee then, thus, we see Men Stallions grow,
Yet few will blame these Slaves for being so:
The Punk was Liberal, Loving, Young and Fair,
And they will cry -- Could Flesh and Blood forbear?
But what can that Wretch for his Lewdness say,
Who is the Drudge of an old Hag for Pay?
Thus Shrivel, wicked to increase his Store,
Lives infamously with a Rampant Whore;
Exhausts his Strength to please the insatiate Itch
Of a bold, strong Dock'd, fleshly, brinded Bitch;
And all to enjoy (and has enjoyed it long,)
A pitiful Estate she holds by Wrong.
What shall we say? but that of Villainy,
Has any Bounds (as yet we never could see)
Its utmost Pillars are set up by Thee:
In vain we would the Ills you cause unfold,
If we write Ages, half will be untold.
Even Women, in comparison of Thee,
Use wretched Men with some Humanity --
They Damn One Part, and you the other Three*
THE END.

