THE ACADEMY OF COMPLEMENTS: Or, A new way of Wooing. Wherein is variety of
Love Letters, very fit to be read of all Young Men and Maids, that desire to
learn the true way of Complements.

Love with his Golden Arrow wounds the heart,
To cure it learn this (...) way of Lovers Art.


London, Printed for Thomas Passinger at the Sign of the Three Bibles on
London Bridge, 168^.

The Academy of Complements, OR, A Neat way of Wooing.
A Letter of Complements to a fair young Gentlewoman.
Mistress,
FOr me to express over your beauty which has been done by many, would appear
a rude boldness, I will therefore acknowledge that my skill in blazing your
precious perfections, cannot come near your worth, and that it is fitter for me
to admire a far off your excellencies, than to make my addresses too near,
since all that I can perform in the way of Writing, is but a shadow, a piece of
that beauty which you glory in, and which Venus beholding would blush even to
paleness, finding her self so far exceeded. Your person is able to make the
rugged brow of Winter smooth as the Spring: while the drooping Flowers would
lift up their withered heads, and the deceived Birds (thinking that Summer was
come) would sit and sing on the warm Boughs, and all for joy of your
approaching to them: Thus nature does rejoice to behold you, who are the joy of
my heart: Thus subscribed

Yours, not his own, B. M.

The Gentlewomans Answer.
SIR,
IF you did attribute these praises unto me out of Judgment, it would appear a
great weakness in you, but I know that led on by a fancy you have thus
Complemented your self into an error, and think to make me believe more of my
self than my modesty will permit. Sir, alas! my eyes are full of my own wants,
and by your praises I find out my own perfections, wanting that which you
ascribe to me: may I carry a fair mind in my breast, and I care not for outward
beauty, some other might be taken with your praises, which I imagine are the
effects of passion, not reason: But I shall desire you to pardon me, if I
return you no thanks for your flattering Complements, it is best to write truth.
A natural kind of sweetness does move best, and in such honest addresses of
Love I shall regard your affection.

Your humble friend, J. M.

A Lover to his Mistress.
Bright Lady,
I Am now in love with my own eyes, and wit, for were not the first exceeding
good, they could not endure the luster of your beauty, and I am apt to believe
the latter may be sharp, since it has so exact a Character of your worth. Be
more just to your self and me, then to think I flatter you; look into your
self, and then you will wrong neither, and when you find I have done you right,
call not my affection in question for making the discovery, since it is my duty
to serve you and truth in all things honorable, but if in my commending my own
services I am so presumptuous as to exceed your pleasure, let your pity seal my
pardon, since my default was only the defect of love, and I shall doubly be
engaged to be, Madam,

Yours, now and ever, R. P.

The Answer, A Lady to her Lover.
SIR,
YOU do well to love your own eyes, and wit and I will own the first to be good
and the latter sharp, but if they both went together as you place them, your
brains might be on the outside of your head, and then if you prove mistaken,
blame your self, your eyes, your wit, and not me, but that I may be just to
you, where there is no fault, there is no need of pardon, though the worth of
ones affections oftentimes appear more in words than in reality: however, if
you will take the liberty and trouble to commend me, I must and will claim the
privilege to subscribe my self, Sir,

Your obliged servant, S. D.

A rich old Gentleman to a fair young virgin.
Young Lady,
LEt not my years be an obstacle to your love, since I have those gifts of
Fortune, that will not only maintain our affections, and keep the fire of love
in a continual flame, but will also afford you all those Ornaments which he
has designed for the adorning such tender and beautiful Birds of Nature:
Besides, though I come not to you with a powdered Lock, or in the Mode of a
young Gallant, yet know, my Girl, my zeal for you can be as hot, and as
sincere, as the sprucest pretenders in the World: and if age does make me seem
in your apprehension as a withering Tree, yet I have Gold which will keep its
color, and it is that which in this world is ones best friend: pray have me in
your thoughts, and I shall watch for an opportune season, wherein I may make my
self farther known to be, farirest Lady,

Your most affectionate Servant, R. K.

The Answer. A beautiful young Virgin, to a decrepid, rich, old Gentleman.
Grave Sir,
YOu are too far distant from me in years to be admitted into my affection,
since you are arrived to the pitch of dotage, and I yet ignorant of what is
love; However, I must do you so much justice as to commend your discretion for
fishing with a Golden bait, for believe me, next to beauty, I cannot imagine
any thing to be more taking among Mortals, than the glorious name of wealth: I
could be content to keep my Coaches, my Pages, my Lacqueys and Maids; but I
confess I could never endure, the society of a bald pate: How can you think,
Reverend Sir, that I should love you, when by the temptations which you offer,
you clearly manifest your Opinion, that if I should marry it must be to your
Gold, rather than to you? I confess a silver Mine is a pretty toy for a thing
of my years to dote on, but I have a Childlish humor peculiar to my self, that
is never to humble my affections so, as that they suffer treasure, as a
lodestone, to draw me to its beck. It Is true, wealth will be welcome to me to
maintain my train, but the person of that more lovely Creature, Man, will be
ever more welcome to a Maids embraces. Can you think me so weak, as to exchange
the flower of my youth for a bundle of Snow, or rotten dirt? No Sir, Gold with
a Man is good, admirable good, but it is a man that in the School of Love
passes for the principal verb: for my own part, rather than join my self to a
mear wedge of Gold I shall chose to accept of a bundle of rags, so they have
any affinity to a Man.

Old-men are Gray, Old-men are gray:
I am a lusty bonny young Lass,
And I prithee Old Man away.
By this time good Old man you know my mind, be wise, and Wed your self to
Heaven, and I shall thank you if in your Death you remember to bequeath your
Gold to

Your young Adviser. M. M.

A Gentlewoman being unjustly charged by her Husband, for having too much
familiarity with a Gentleman, with whom she never had any dishonest compliance,
(to assuage her Husbands jealousy) does thus admonish the Gentleman to refrain
her house and society.
SIR,
IT is not with blushes, but tears, that I presume to write unto you, for
indeed it grieves me to publish my Husbands folly, which by duty I am bound to
conceal, neither had I attempted it, but that grief and necessity throws me on
this exigent; for so it is, that my unspotted chastity is not capable to defend
him from jealousy, which makes me as much triumph in my own Loyalty, as I
grieve at his ingratitude, and not content to wrong me, his folly, or rather
his frenzy has reflection on you, whom he takes to be both the object and
cause thereof; but as your innocence can justly warrant and defend my honor
and your honor, my innocence from the least shadow of that Crime, so that we
may both endeavor rather to quench than inflame this irrigularity, I most
humbly beseech you to refrain our house and neither to visit me, nor be
familiar with him and so peradventure time may wear away from his thoughts,
that which at present truth and reason cannot; your eloquent virtues, and true
Generosity, assure me of this courtesy, which I will repay with thanks, and
requite with prayers, that your days may be as infinite as your perfections,
and your fame as glorious as your merits, so prays, Noble Sir,

The honourer of your Virtues, and lover of your worth, O. R.

His Answer.
Noble and virtuous Lady,
Your Virtues, and my Conscience, make us as unworthy of your Husbands
jealousy, as he of so chaste a wife as your self, and so true a friend as I
am: but as your affection to him has still shined in your loyalty, so it must
now in your Patience, since he in this base passion of his, seeking his own
shame, will at last assuredly find out your glory: Had his folly revealed me so
much as your discreet Letter, I would have exchanged my pen to a Sword; and
with the hazard of my life, and loss of my dearest blood, made known as well to
him as to the whole World, the truth both of your Chastity and Honor, and of
mine Honor and Innocence. In the mean time I will both embrace and obey your
request, and will manage it with such observance to your Husband, such respect
to your Virtues, and such regard to mine own Reputation, as I hope he shall
rest satisfied of your Chastity toward himself, and of mine to you, otherwise
I Prize Ladies of your respection, at so high a rate, and set one of his humor
and inclination at so low an esteem, that I will know how to answer his choler
with contempt, and to requite your discretion, both with Admiration and Praise.
Madam,

Your affectionate honourer in all noble Essays, E. G.

A merry, but civil discourse betwixt Roger and Kate, sitting up late together.
Roger. IT is time, Kate, that I should now discover my mind unto you; we have
long been Servants together, and ever since my first coming I have born you
good will, which I would desire you to accept, and grant me your love.


Kate. For that you must pardon me, for I do not intend to marry, and
therefore, let that serve for an excuse, since I would be loath to discourage
you, and say I cannot love you.


Roger. I hope you will not, for since I beheld you I have admired your
perfections.


Kate. You know affection cannot be compelled, therefore I thank you for the
good will which you have hitherto born, but as for your love I cannot accept of
it.


Roger. Then I perceive you love some other.


Kate. I desire you to excuse me, I cannot frame my mind to fancy you, though I
know you deserve my betters, but for me to settle affection where I cannot
love, would be an endless misery: the Bryer and the Honey-suckle cannot agree.


Roger. Then you compare me to a Bryer, but I will with all humility put up
your disdain, hoping that the continuance of my love shall soften your mind to
receive me into some degree of favor, for I protest I love you entirely.


Kate. The utmost that I can do for you in requital of your love, is to give
you thanks and counsel to suppress your desire, and not to proceed any further
in this fuit, which at last will become fruitless.


Roger. I shall be sorry then, by this Kiss which I presume to take, none has
power over me but your self; I love you all over, and if you would license my
hand to stray about, how happy shall I be?


Kate. Nay, then I perceive your love is but rash and wanton desire, neither
can I stay with you any longer, lest my absence out of my Mistrisses Chamber
may breed some suspicion.


Roger. Nay, I will hold you in the Prison of my Arms, and if you will get your
freedom, you shall yield me some of your sweet kisses, which are but shadows of
that substantial happiness which you can afford me.


Kate. Nay, pray be not so rude, nor give me a cause to suspect that your love
is dishonest, I had formerly a better opinion of you; but now I am jealous of
your good intent.


Roger. Pardon me, if Love has made me to offend in some boisterous actions.


Kate. Come, let me be gone, I shall be angry if you hinder me.


Roger. Sweet Rogue, I obey thy desire, but let me prevail further with you at
your next meeting.


On Love.
Love is a Game at Tables, where the Dye
Of Maids affection does by fancy fly;
And if you take such pleasures in a blot,
It Is ten to one if that you enter not.
But Gamester you may safely venture,
When that your point is opposite to the center;
And watch your play for now and then
Do what you can, they will be learning Men.
A Whimsie to his Mistress.
Venus naked in her Chamber,
Wounds more deep than Mars in Armor.
Her Reply.
Which an Enemy you fear,
Book to it, see you come not there.
A Description of true Love.
Two Hands, two Feet, two ears two eyes,
One Tongue, one Heart where love never dies.
A Lady to whom she affects.
SIR,
I Should have been happy if Heaven had given me merits to deserve your
affections, since I hold it no great difficulty to afford you mine, but that we
may discourse with a little freedom, I will borrow so much time from my other
affairs as to meet you, only I shall give this caution, that as I am a Virgin,
you will show your self so far a Gentleman as not to offer any thing that may
savor of incivility; pardon me, that I lay such an injunction on you, it is
not that I question you are otherwise Noble but only what is commonly expected
from a Maiden that has respect to her own modesty and credit, and may
therefore very well become, Sir,

Your Friend and Servant, R. T.

The Answer. The Lover to his Amorous Lady.
Dear Madam,
I Do so well understand my respect to you, that (Pardon my boldness if I say)
your care was somewhat needless. Lady, it is you that I adore, and can you then
imagine I would injure you, you that I would gladly make mine own and be proud
of such a Purchase; Again, my Birth is not so base as to tyrannize over Ladies,
especially you, the best of Ladies. When the Sky puts on her bespangled
Garments the glittering Stars, I will expect you with all the reverene^ and
submission due to your Noble merits, from, Divine Lady,

Yours if you think me worthy, R. P.

A SONG.
I am comfirmed a Woman can
Love this or that, or any Man;
To day her Love is melting hot,
To Morrow swears she knows not what:
Let her but a new object find,
And she is of another mind:
Then hang me Ladies at your door,
If ever I dote upon you more.
And yet I love the fair own, Why?
For nothing but to please my Eye;
For he that is Musical long,
When I am sad to sing a Song:
And for that fair and smooth-skin'd Dame,
I flatter to appease my flame:
Then hang me Ladies at your Door,
If ever I dote upon you more.
I give my fancy leave to range
In every face, to find a change;
The Black, the Brown, the Fair shall be
But Objects of Variety:
I Court you all to serve my turn,
But with such flames as shall not burn:
Then hang me Ladies at your Door,
If ever I dote upon you more.
A Letter of Love from John Downright, to his Sweetheart.
Sweet Susan,
YOu know I am no Miller, and therefore will make no cogs with you; nor no
Gamester, and therefore will not play a false Card with you but as true as I
live, I told you now that is the plain truth, and therefore believe it, for by
my kerson Soul, I do not hault with you, for at the last turn when I last
danced with you, your hand gave such a quitch to me heart, that it was ready to
leap out of my mouth to deliver me mind to you, and therefore I have gotten the
Schoolmaster of our Town to write this to you; Now, if you be as you are, and
I hope still to be as kind to m^ as I shall be to you, it shall not be long
ever it, come to that up-shot, that shall not in haste he put back again; And
therefore I pray you wear these Gloves that I send you, they cost me two
groats. I would then were better for you. So till I see you at the Wake the
next Week, where I hope a good bargain shall not be long a making, when good
ware shall be worth money, and an honest Man will take pains for his living, I
rest

Your own Sweetheart. J. D.

Her Answer.
TRuly John, I know not what to say to you, but I would be loath that you
should be so ill, that I could not help you: but had I known your mind when I
was last with you, I could with more content have written to you; for I will
tell you what: after you were gone from me, here came a youngster unto me, that
kept such (...) stir with me, that there was no ho, but he would have me. For
by his troth he swore, and ^ll the troths that he could swear by, that, for
^his whole year he has had a months mind to ^e, and do what I could, I could
not be rid of ^im, before I did tell him that I could love him, and so indeed I
could, if I had known him; for ^e was a handsome fellow, but being a Stranger
^e should pardon me for the main chance. Now therefore yet John all is whole,
and I am a true Maid, and since an honest Bachelor is worthy of a good Wench,
without Cogs or Cards, by my Holidum I swear, there shall be no love lost
betwixt true hearts; but I am my Fa^hers jewel and you are your Mothers joy;
and therefore if they will think well of the matter, I hope it shall be as it
will be; for your Gloves I thank you, but why are you at such charges with me?
but it is no matter, there will be more gotten or lost by that time, ere the
bargain be made up: at the wake I hope to meet you, and therefore be not asleep
when you should be there. I will have a trick to get my Father thither, and if
you can bring your Mother, I hope we shall make a merry day. Farewell.

Thine own if good hap hit, M.J.

What Love is.
Love is a blinded God, and angry Boy;
A slave to beauties will, a witless toy.
A Ravening Bird, a Tyrant most unjust;
A private Hell, a very Sea of lust.
A Love Letter to a most worthy Gentlewoman.
FAir Creature, to tell you I love you, were (...) phrase of too plain a
fashion, and yet when truth is indeed the best eloquence, affection needs no
invention to express the care of her contents which being in the Letters, makes
a word soon to be read, which being Y, O, U, nothing doubting your spelling, I
hope you will so kindly put together, that a conjunction of Love shall have no
separation during Life; and thus beseeching you to learn this Lesson by heart,
without a cross i^ conceit, to hinder the course of Loves comfort, t^^ I hear
from you in that nature that may make me a happy Creature, I rest,

Yours wholly and only, if you will, T. H.

Her Answer.
KInd Sir, to tell you I love you, were to cross an Answer with a comfortable
request, and yet when dissimulation is the worst fruits o^ invention,
discretion may be pardoned in concealing of Love; touching your Letters, they
are sooner read than understood, while imaginative hopes may be deceived in
their haphappiness and yet to avoid all touch of ingratitude, in that nature of
kindness that may give honor content, as a simple Scholar in the art of Love,
loath to have that by heart that may trouble more than my head; when separations
of Conjunctions may endanger the Death of Comfort, wishing nothing amiss to
them that mean well: I rest,

Yours, as I may be mine own, F. S.

An Old Man's Letter to a Young Widow,
WIdow, I have neither a smooth-Face, nor a filed Longue to clear your Eyes,
nor abuse your Ears withal; but a true heart and a constant mind that does
inwardly love you, and will never deceive you; fickle heads, and unbridled
wills, know not where or how to bestow themselves when their Wits go a
Wool-gathering, among shrews that have had fleeces; they may be kind, but not
constant; and love loves no out-lookers, but besides, light heads have no
stayed heels, and a little wealth is soon spent. Who knows the woe of want,
can tell you the difference between an Old Man's darling, and a Young Man's
Warling: Why? how can they love, that scarce know how to like? I know you have
many Suitors of worth, but none that I think more worthy than myself: for none
can love you so much, nor esteem you so well; for I have known the World, (...)
are not for it, nor for any thing but you. If therefore all I have may please
you, and myself to love and honor you, make my comfort your contentment, and I
will seek no other Paradise in the World. Thus hoping that reason in your
favor will effect the hope of my affection, leaving you to your self, to be
your self, I rest

Yours, or not mine, J. C.

Her Answer.
SIR,
I Could never see you but in a Letter, I should delight much in your presence,
but contraries are not correspondent. A gray head, and a green mind fit not,
your persuasions were forcible, were not your self of too much weakness: but
though for your good Will I thank you, yet for nothing will I be indebted to
you, no not for a World would I be troubled with you; for as our years, so I
fear our fancy will be indifferent, and the patience moving choler may breed
anger, when to be an Old man's Darling, is a kind of a curse to nature. You say
well, who can love that know not how to like? when the senses are incapable of
their comfort, what is imagination but a Dream? A blind Man can judge no
color, A Deaf Man has not skill in Music, a Dum Man no Eloquence, and an Old
Man little feeling in lo^es passion. For my Suitors they suit my time and serve
their own, and for their worth, I shall judge of the most worthy. Now for their
wits, if they lose not their own fleeces, let them gather wool where they can;
but for your love, I will not venture on it, lest being too old, it be not
sweet: and for my young Suitors, I hope I shall take heed of a shadowned
sowerness: As for fortune while virtue governs affection, I will not fear my
felicity. So hoping your town reason will persuade you to have patience with
your passion, and leave me to my better comfort, meaning to be as you wish me,
my self, and no other, I rest,

Not yours, if my own, P. M.

On Maids Inconstancy.
SHall I weep, or shall I sing?
I know not best which fits mourning.
^f I weep, I ease my brain,
^f I sing, I sweeten pain;
Weeping I Will sing, and singing weep,
To see how Maids no love can keep.
On Virginity.
Jewels being lost, are found again;
This never, this lost but once, is lost for ever.
To his Mistress.
When first I saw thee, thou did sweetly play
The gentle Thief, and stole my heart away;
Render me mine again, or leave thy own,
Two are too much for thee since I have none:
But if thou will not, I will swear thou art
A sweet-fac'd Creature with a double heart.
Posies for Rings, and other pleasant things.
As I expect so let me find,
A faithful heart, a constant mind.
God has kept my heart for thee,
Grant that our love may faithful be.
God has thee chosen a Mate for me,
I Will honor him in loving thee.
Such liking in my choice I find,
That none but Death shall change my mind.
Innumerable are the Stars I see,
But in my heart no Star like thee.
Had I not spoke,
My heart had broke.
I fancy none,
But thee alone.
Heart and Hand,
At your Command.
Where Hearts agree,
No strife can be.
A SONG.
He that will court a wench that is coy,
that is proud, that 's peevish, and antic:
Let him be careless to sport and toy,
And as peevish as she is frantic:
Laugh at her, and slight her,
Flatter her, and spite her,
Rail and commend her again;
It is the way to woo her,
If that you mean to come close to her
Such Girls will love such Men.
He that will court a Wench that is mild,
That is so soft and kind of behavior;
Let him kindly woo her,
Not roughly come to her,
It Is the way to win her favor;
Give her Kisses plenty,
She Will take them were they twenty,
Stroke her and kiss her again;
It is the way to woo her,
If that you mean to come close to her,
Such Girls do love such men.
He that will court a Wench that is mad,
That will squeak and cry out if you handle her,
Let him Kiss and fling,
Till he makes the house ring,
It Is the only way to tame her:
Take her up and towse her,
Salute her and rouse her,
Then kiss her and please her again;
It is the only way to woo her,
If that you mean to come close to her,
Mad Girls do love Mad Men.
Another Song.
My Mistress loves no Woodcocks,
yet loves to pick the bones;
My Mistress loves some Jewels,
and other Precious Stones.
My Mistress loves no hunting,
yet loves to hear the Horn;
My Mistress loves not Irish,
yet loves to see men Born.
My Mistress loves no Wrestling,
yet loves to take a fall:
My Mistress loves not all things,
yet loves my Master withal.
On the Representing of a Nosegay of Roses, with a Nettle in it.
Such is the Posie love composes,
A stinging Nettle mixed with Roses.
On the representing of Ring with a Picture and a Jewel on it.
Nature has framed a Gem beyond compare,
The World's the Ring, but you the Jewel are.
On the Presenting of a pair of Gloves.
These will keep your hands from burning,
Whilst the Sun is swiftly turning:
But who can any veil devise
To shield my heart from your fair eyes.
The Butler and the Chambermaid having passed the night merrily, toward
morning enter into a pleasant discourse, ad follows:

Butler. LOok, by this light day, the time has stolen from us strangely.


Chambermaid. By this light (say thou) it is day? not by this, by the other,
it is indeed


Butler. Thou art such another piece of temptation, my Lord raves by this time
for his cup of Purl.


Chambermaid. Fie upon thee, thou art as fearful as a young Colt, boglest at
every thing, as if Lovers had considered hours; I Will peep in.


Butler. I am as weary of this Wench, as if I were married to her, she hangs
upon me like an Ape upon a Horse, she is as common too as a Barbers-glass,
conceit too like Dye-dapper.


Chambermaid. There Is no body within, my Lady sleeps this hour longer at the
least.


A Letter of discontent after the falling out of two Lovers.
Most discourteous and painted Friend.
It Is the custom of Lovers after the breach of their League and amity, to send
back those Gratuires which formerly passed as Tokens of their natural
affections. You have taken up the fashion; and believe me, I abhor any longer
to have nearness with one of your qualification, who for mere trifles can
dissolve the knot of Friendship, and shake hands with familiarity. For know hat
your memory, which was something dear in my thoughts, is now abhorred, seeing
that the firmness and stability of affection, you have so carelessly brought to
annihilation: I may paral^el my present condition to the state of the Sun, when
pitchy Clouds environing him round about seem to extinguish his splendour. But
time, the perfecter of all Terrestial things may in due season impart a luster
correspondent to my hopes, and suitable to my disposition, till when I will
scorn the blasts of adversity, and all those who having little or no merit, are
endowed by the dispensation of the Owl-eyed Goddess Fortune, with large
possessions. However, if I can find no better to converse and spend my time
with than your self I will turn Momus, and for ever hate the society of Men,
but having a better Opinion of the generality, I casheer you with this Ultimum
Vale, and rest

A Stranger, T. P.

A Virgin to her Parents, that would have her matched to one she cannot love.
Most dear Parents,
I Beseech you, let the Rules of nature be so prevalent with you, as not to
marry me to the Man you design, but if you do resolve that I shall marry, let
it be to one that I shall love, or to my Grave: be not overruled by the
thought of Avarice, lest you become inhumane to your own blood, and make me

Your sad, sorrowful, and afflicted Daughter, L. C.

FINIS.

