THE COURT OF THE GENTILES.

PART IV. Of Reformed Philosophy.

Wherein Plato's Moral, and Metaphysic or prime Philosophy is reduced to an
useful Form and Method.

By Theophilus Gale.

LONDON, Printed by J. Macock, for Thomas Cockeril, at the Sign of the Atlas in
Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange. MDCLXXVII.

PREFACE.
WHat venomous and efficacious Influences Corruptions in Philosophy diffuse
into Theology and Christianity, The first Reformers of Philosophy.
has been sufficiently demonstrated throughout the precedent Discourse,
touching the Vanity of Philosophy; as also by the late practices of the
Jesuits, who have made it their principal concern to adulterate Philosophy,
thereby to make it subservient to their corrupt Theology. And it has been to
me for some while a sad Contemplation, that Students in Philosophy are
compelled to have recourse to the poisoned springs of Jesuitic Philosophy, and
therewith to imbibe many poisonous infusions in Theology. Hence it was that
our first Reformers, observing what potent influences corrupt Philosophy had
on corruptions in Theology, first attemted the Reformation of Philosophy, and
that in order to the Reformation of Theologic and Ecclesiastic Affairs. This
noble and generose design was begun by Wiclef, Wiclef.
that great English Apostle, who first begun to engage against Antichristian
Dogmes in Philosophic Disputes; wherein he attained unto a great Eminence and
Fame, both in England and Bohemia: for John Husse was at first illuminated by
Wiclefs Philosophic Discourses; who was indeed a person, not only of admirable
Claritie in explicating Divine Mysteries, but also of a mavelous acumen to
penetrate the secrets of Nature and Philosophy. Wiclef was followed by
Wesselus Groningensis, who, Wesselus.
by reason of his incomparable skill in all Sciences, was communly styled, Lux
Mundi. He was called by Philip the Elector Palatine to the profession of
Theology at Heidelburg, Anno 1477. but being, by reason of his warm zele for
Reformation, forced to leave his Theologic profession, he undertook that of
Philosophy, specially Platonic; which he estimed most profitable and agreeable
to Christianisme. Savonarola.
The same generose design was espoused by Hieronymus Savonarola, in Italia, a
person of great natural Acumen and Sagacitie as to Philosophy, as well as
flagrant zele for Reformation. He reduced Philosophy to a more natural Form
and Method, rendering it subservient to Theology, so far as the Darkness and
Iniquity of those times would permit; in which noble undertakement he made no
small progress, as it is evident by his Epitome of Philosophy. To whom we may
add foarnes Picus, Picus Mirandula.
Prince of Mirandula and Concordia, a person of prodigiose Parts and Learning;
who was also very zelose in his Endeavors for the Reformation of Philosophy,
as well as Ecclesiastic Discipline, as it appears by his most elaborate and
learned works.

Neither were there wanting some in the following Age, who spent indefatigable
studies and endeavors for the Reforming Philosophy, in order to the
Reformation of Theology. Among those Ludovicus Vives, Philip Melanchton, Lud.
Vives.
Jacobus Faber Stapulensis, and Peter Ramus deserve immortal commemoration.
Ludovicus Vives, a person of singular parts and Intelligence in Philosophy,
made it his design to detect the Vanity and Abuses of the Aristotelean
Philosophy, as depraved by the Scholastic Theologues. He addicted himself
principally to the Platonic Philosophy, Phil. Melanchton.
as it appears by his accurate commentaries, in August de Civit. Dei. Philip
Melanchton gave in like manner a very great advance to the Reformation of
Philosophy: who was a person endued with a great Vivacitie of judgment, and
dexterous Sagacitie, whereby he penetrated into the deepest Mysteries of
Scholastic Sophisterie, as well as Philosophy. He excelled al Reformers of
Philosophy of his times: whence he is styled by Hornius, First Philos l. 6. c.
9. The Author and Restaurator of Philosophy in Germany: So much was the whole
of Philosophy refined by him. He illustrated Logic, Physic, Ethic and
Mathematic Sciences; and reduced them to an excellent and useful Method: he
pared off from Philosophy a great quantity of sterile, inutile, spinose
Questions, and clothed her with a more native evident habit or form, whereby
she became Beautiful and Amiable. See more hereof in his life incomparably
drawn by Joachimus Camerarius Also Jacobus Faber Stapulensis is greatly
renowned for his warm endeavors in order to the Reformation of Philosophy,
Fab. Stapulensis.
as well as Theology in France; for the which he suffered great Persecutions by
the Scholastic Theologues at Paris: yet was he preserved by the Mediation of
that illustrious Princess Marguerite de Valois, Queen of Navarre. It was this
Stapulensis, who, by his elaborate Lectures and Books, brought to light in the
Universitie of Paris, that true Logic and Mathematics, in lieu of that
Scholastic Sophisterie, which before reigned there. That which is most
mavelous in him is this, that being educated in the midst of Barbarism, he
arrived to so great an Elevation of Philosophic Sciences and ingenuous Arts, as
also of Theology. Beza styles him one of the most noble personages on earth,
in regard of his Learning, Piety, and generose designs for Reformation. Out
of his Schole proceeded many Learned men, who proved great Instruments of
Reformation. But yet, I conceive, none deserves a more illustrious Character
among the first Reformers of Philosophy, Pet. Ramus.
than Peter Ramus, who followed the steps of Faber Stapulensis, for the
Reforming of Logic and Philosophy, as also of other ingenuous Arts; which lay
buried under the Barbarism of Scholastic Theology. He at first professed and
taught the Liberal Arts, Philosophy, and Mathematic Sciences in the College
Prelaea; and afterward in the Royal College, at Paris. He mostly inclined to
Plato's Philosophy, greatly opposing Aristotle, which gained him the hatred of
Jacobus Carpentarius, professor also of Philosophy; whose Scholars imbrued
their hands in Ramus's blood, in the general Massacre at Paris, 1572. This
Ramus was a person of a very generose and flagrant zele for the Reformation of
Ecclesiastic Discipline, as well as Philosophy.

Thus we see how much our first zelose Reformers thought themselves concerned
for the Reformation of Philosophy, The right use and abuse of Platonic
Philosophy.
in order to a more pure Theology. And indeed no wonder, since the main
corruptions in Theology have had their origin from some corruptions in
Philosophy, as it is sufficiently demonstrated throughout the precedent part
of Vain Philosophy. These and such like considerations gave the first
Impresses and Impulses to this our present undertakement, for the Reduction of
Philosophy to a more sane and useful Form and Method. And whereas in my first
Conceptions I intended to have discoursed only historically of Plato's
Philosophy, since finding upon a review of Plato's Philosophemes a very great
Affinity and Conformity of mine own Contemplations thereto, I have discoursed
more largely and Philosophically thereon, reducing mine own sentiments thereto;
yet not without variety of Restrictions, Limitations, and Amplifications, as
the substrate matter may require. And herein we are not without many Precedents
both among the more Orthodoxe of the Fathers, as also our first Reformers. It Is
well known, how much Justin Martyr, that great Christian Philosopher, delighted
himself in the Study of Platonic Philosophy, even to some Intemperance, in
that he affirms, Apol. 1. p. 51. That the Dogmes of Plato were not, (...),
aliene from those of Christ And who knows not how much Augustine does Platonise,
Augustinus noster immensas Deo gratias agit, quod ad ejus manus pervenerint
libri Platonicorum. Picus Mirandul. Apol. p. 82.
in some of his most sublime Contemplations? Yea, the noble Picus Earl of
Mirandula assures us, that Augustine gave immense thanks to God, for the
Platonic Books that came to his hands. So great use did his humble, Spiritual
mind make of Platonic Philosophemes, in order to the exaltation of free,
efficacious Grace. So likewise among our first Reformers, Picus Mirandulanus,
Savonarola, Wesselus, Lud. Vives, Ramus, etc. chiefly addicted themselves to
Plato, in order to the Reformation of Philosophy. Thus also Jansenius, that
great Patron of Efficacious Grace, greatly prefers Platonic Philosophy before
al other. Yea, may we not avouch, that the choicest Physic or natural
Philosophemes entertained by our New-philosophers, Gassendus, Cartesius, etc.
are but Imitamens of Contemplations laid down by Plato? This we have endeavored
to make good, in our Philosoph. General. P. 1. l. 3. c. 2. Albeit that Plato's
Philosophy has been thus generally entertained by the best of Christian
Philosophers, yet it cannot be denied, but that it has been the Prolific cause
of the worst Heresies and Corruptions in the Church. For whence sprang
Arianisme, Pelagianisme, Mystic Theology, and may we not say the whole
Complexum of Antichristianisme, but from Platonic Philosophy, professed in the
Schole of Alexandria? This is evidently demonstrated in the precedent Part of
the Vanity of Philosophy. All this being granted, yet it follows not, but that
Platonic Philosophy may be greatly useful if well managed, and rendered
subservient to Theology, as in Augustine. Whereas Origin and his Sectators, the
Monks of Egypt, by their too fond estime of Platonic Philosophy, and
reduction of the Scriptures, yea the whole of Theology to a subordination
thereto, gave the first Formation, yea perfect Lineaments to the Man of sin,
and his Antichristian Theology. I shall only add on this Theme what Plutarch,
in Cleomene, declares of the Stoic Philosophy; If it fall on great and acute
wits, it becomes lubricous, inordinate, and uncertain; but if it be mixed with
a serious, meek, and humble mind, it greatly conduces to the true and proper
good. So greatly useful may Platonic Philosophy be, if loged in a serious,
humble, meek, believing mind; which has both Wisdom and Grace to render the
same subordinate to Theology.

But now having prefaced thus much touching the first Reformers of Philosophy,
The Design of this Discourse to render Philosophy subservient to Christian
Theology.
and what Method may seem most conducible to the Reformation thereof, we may
not conclude without some notices of the principal design of this Discourse,
and our procedure therein. As for its original Design, it is too too apparent,
that our Theology of late has received great damage and prejudice by the old
Aristotelean Philosophy, as Sophisticated by the Jesuits; as also by
New-philosophie, as abused by Atheistic wits: would it not then be a design of
great moment, so to Reform Philosophy, as to render it no longer opposite,
but subservient to Theology? How far we have attained hereto the Reader must
be Judge. As for our procedure herein, thus much, it is hoped, we may without
Vanity declare, that we have sincerely endeavored to render our Philosophemes
Conformable to Sacred Philosophy, and the Doctrine of the Church of England. I
must confess, as I grow in years, so I daily grow more and more in the
Admiration of the Wisdom, Zele, and Piety of our first great Reformers,
Cranmer, Jewel, etc. who delivered down to us the Apostolic Doctrine, sealed by
some of them with their own blood. O! how curiose and tenacious were they of
the Form of sound Words! But Alas! what a reproach is it now, among wanton
wits, to be an Orthodoxe Divine! What a world of new-coined terms of art are
foisted into Christian Theology, virtually if not intentionally to the
prejudice thereof! Chrysostom understandes (...), 1 Timothy 6.20. of Novel Terms
and Forms, which then began to be introduced into the Church: Alas! what would
he say, if he lived in our days, and heard those vain Clamors, and bablings
about words, which are now affected! And was not this the grand crime imputed,
by the Orthodoxe Fathers, to Origin, That despising the simplicity of the
Scriptures and Christian Theology, he affected new Terms and Modes of
interpreting Scriptures? which his too great confidence in his own Parts, and
presuming himself to be wiser than others precipitated him into, to the
subverson of Christian Theology, as Court Gent. P. 3. B. 2. C. 1.. 8. And may
we not fear the like Catastrophe as to those exotic Notions of some now-adays?
May not the Doctrine of the Church of England, which now lies bleeding, take up
that Lamentation, Zech. 13.8. These are the wounds, with which I was wounded in
the house of my friends? Have we not just cause to persuade ourselves, that
were there but an Uniformitie of assent and consent as to the Doctrine of the
Church of England, contained in 36 Articles, there would not be so great a
Difformitie and disagreament about Discipline, contained in the other three?
Albeit I am no friend to those vexatiose, contentiose, and inutile Disputes of
these Times; yet I have been forced to declare my dissent from some learned and
pious men of this Age and Nation; with hopes that it will not bring me under the
Imputation of being Contentiose, disaffected, or irrespectuose toward persons
of so great estime for natural Parts, Learning, or Piety: For I solemnly
declare, that it is no small affliction to me to dissent, much more publicly to
declare my dissent, from any who are of repute for Learning and Piety: neither
could any thing induce me to offer such an apparent violence to mine one repose
and retirement, did I not conceive my self under an essential obligation, to
give my Testimony to those great Truths and Doctrines of the Church of
England, which our Ancestors valued more than their blood.

I shall conclude with that of profunde and pious Bradwardine, in his Preface to
his most excellent Book, do Causa Dei: where having laid open the Pride,
Multitude, and continued Successions of the Pelagians, he breaks out into this
pure Flame of Divine Zele, Page 5. Burning with Zele for the Cause of God I
deliberately thrust mine hand into a terrible flame: For I am not ignorant, how
much the Pestiferous Pelagians, enraged in their spirits, will with tumultuose
clamors bark at, and with cruel Teeth endeavor to rend in pieces this Paper,
or Book.

A PROEMIAL SCHEME OF REFORMED PHILOSOPHY.
. 1. WHereas I sometimes intended to have cast the whole of Reformed
Philosophy into one Systeme, I am herein in part disappointed, in that I have
communicated the principal part of what I intended in my Philosophia Generalis.
But what I could not well digest therein, I have now made public in this Part
IV. Of Moral and Metaphysic Philosophy. So that, to speak the truth, I have
now put my last period to Philosophy, without the least Intention of making
any farther progress therein: only to give the Reader a Breviarie of the Form
and Method I would assume, were I to cast Philosophy into one entire Systeme
or Idea; as also to give him an Index where to find all the parts of Reformed
Philosophy more professedly discussed by me, I judge the following Scheme of
Philosophy most necessary. Philosophy is either General, or Particular:
Particular Philosophy is either Notional, or Real: Real Philosophy is either
Natural, Moral, or Supernatural. This General Distribution of Philosophy,
taken from its object, seems to me of al most genuine and natural; and that
which reduces it to one uniforme Syntagme or Systeme, as it may appear by the
following particulars.

Philosophy in its General Idea comprehendes the following particulars. (1)
The General History of Philosophy, General Philosophy.
and Philosophers; with their several Sects, Dogmes, Modes of Life, Discipline,
and Characters: Of which we have treated copiosely, Court of the Gentiles, P.
2. and Philos. General. P. 1, and 2. l. 1. (2) The Generic Idea of Philosophy,
Cognition: which takes in all the Intellectual Habits. As [1] Opinion; which is
a kind of Medium between Ignorance and Science, arising either from Sense, or
Affection, or Considence, or Conjectures. Its object is things Physic,
Sensible, Singular, etc. Its Attributes, Infirmity and Incertitude, Obscurite,
Instabilitie and Inquietude: Of which see Philos. Genesis P 2. l. 2. c. 1. [2]
Experience; its Diguitie, Object, Subject, Extension, Qualities and Effects: Of
which see Philos. Genesis P. 2. l. 2. c. 1. s. 3. [3] Imitation; wherein are
considerable its Nature, Origin, Subject, Object, Effects; namely Images and
Signs, regular Use and Abuse; of which, Philos. Genesis P. 2. l. 2 c. 2. [4]
Faith; its Generic Nature, Object both Material and Formal, Act, Subject,
Proprieties, Differences, and Species; of which see Philos. Genesis P. 2. l. 2. c.
3. [5] Sapience; its prime Cause, Object, Act, Proprieties, Effects,
Conveniences with and Differences from other Sciences, and Corollaries; of
which, Philos. Genesis P. 2. l. 2. c. 4. [6] Intelligence; which is said to be an
Habit of or Assent to first Principes, not Practic but Speculative, which give
al evidence to, but receive no evidence from conclusions; as Philos. Genesis P. 2.
l. 2. c. 5. s. 1. [7] Science; which is a certain assent to necessary
conclusions, by some certain Medium; as Philos. General. P. 2. l. 2. c. 5. s.
2. [8] Art; which is an Imitamen of Nature, or habitual Idea and Exemplar
inherent in the Mind of the Artificer, whereby he is directed unto a regular
Operation; as Philos. Genesis P. 2. l. 2. c. 5. s. 3. [9] Prudence; wherein we
have considered its Subject, the Practic Judgment or Conscience, consisting of
two parts, Synteresis, and Syneidesis: its Object, both End and Means: its End
and Offices, (...) and (...): Its Species, (...), Good Counsel, (...),
Sagacitie, (...), Experience, (...), Sensate and reflexe Cognition, (...),
Providence: its Material parts, Ethic, Oeconomic, Politic: its Causes both
Dispositive and Proxime: its Opposites and Differences, specially from Carnal
Policy or Craft in 20 Particulars: its Effects, Characters, and Corollaries.
Al which we have copiofely considered, Philos. General. P. 2. l. 2. c. 6. Also
Court Gent. P. 4. B. 1. c. 1. (3) The General part of Philosophy includes also
the Examen of its Object, Subject, Ends, Adjuncts, Difference from Philosophy
and Theology, Excellence, Effects, Corruption, Right use, Parts, as also the
Characters and Offices of Philosophers: which we have largely discussed,
Philos. Genesis P. 2. l. 3.

. 2. Philosophy considered in its Particular Ideas, Notional Philosophy or
Logic
is either Notional, or Real. Notional Philosophy, termed by the Platonistes
Dialectic or Rational, because the ancient mode of Reasoning was by Dialogues,
is now communly styled Logic; which properly treats of Notions, either Simple
or Complexe. Simple Notions are (...), Imitamens or Ideas of things impressed
on the mind, without either Affirmation or Negation: as the Notion or Idea we
have of a Man, Horse, or the like. Complexe Notions are either Propositions,
which, being composed of simple Notions, give some judgment of things; or
Syllogismes and Discourses, which are composed of Propositions; or Method,
which is composed of simple Notions, Propositions, and Discourses. These are
the four parts of Logic; which are taken from its proper End, and answer to the
four great Operations of the Mind. For what is the End of al Logic, The End of
Logic.
but to direct and conduct the Mind into the Cognition of things? Hence Logic
is termed by Plato (...), The Art of Introduction, i. e. whereby Men are
conducted into the knowledge of things: also (...), the Way and Method for the
Acquirement of Sciences, and al useful knowledge. Yea Aristotle, as well as
Plato, defines Logic, (...), a Method for the right disposing of every Problem
proposed. Whence also Aristotle styles Logic, (...), the Organ or Key of al
Sciences; whereby we are introduced into the Cognition of althings. Aristotle
made Logic the Organ of Philosophy, yet no part thereof; but Plato made it
both an Organ and Part. So Ammonius, as Court Gent. Part. 2. B. 3. c. 8.. 3. Of
what great use Logic is, not only for the Acquirement of Sciences, but also for
the Restoration of the mind to its native Claritie and Acumen, in order to a
right Apprehension, Judgment, Discourse, and Method, in the Cognition or
Disquisition of things, is most evident to any that understandes the Nature and
Use thereof. Yea, according to the Idea I frame of Logic, the Clarifying and
Rectifying of the Mind is its principal End, and that of the Acquisition of
Sciences much inferior thereto. For of what use are al natural Sciences, but to
Clarify and Elevate the Mind, for the contemplation of more Sublime and Noble
Objects? So that to make use of Logic only as an Instrument or Key to Sciences
is to deprive ourselves of the principal use thereof; which is to Purify and
Refine the Intellect, in order to the more distinct, real and perfect knowledge
of things, specially such as are most Sublime and Divine. I no way dout, but
that a judicious person, by the aid of Logic, may be greatly Assisted and
Capacitated for the more expedite exercice of Mechanic or Politic Employments:
but O! of what incomparable advantage might Logic be in Theologic
Contemplations and Controversies, were it but well Reformed and seated in a
solid, judicious, humble, serious, rectified Mind? So much for the End of Logic.

The Vtilite of Logic may further appear if we consider the Parts thereof; The
first part of Logic, about Simple Ideas or Notions.
which are four, answerable to the four Operations of the mind. 1. The prime or
first Operation of the Mind consistes in its simple Apprehension of things,
without Affirmation or Negation, Judgment or Discourse. This simple
Apprehension of things is by Ideas, or Notions impressed on the Mind: These
Ideas or Notions arise either immediately from the things themselves,
considered in their real Natures and Attributes, or else from the Minds
Comparation and Abstraction: the former they call first Notions; the later
second Notions. Again these Ideas and Notions may be considered, either in
regard of their Quality, namely their Clarite and Obscurity: or in regard of
their Quantity, i. e. their Extension or Restriction; their Universality,
Particularitie, and Singularity. Now the mind of Man having been by the Fall
much wounded and disabled, as to the regular exerting this first Simple
Apprehension of things, in order to the Acquirement of right Ideas and Notions,
hence the first part of Logic is to succur and direct the mind in this its
first Operation of simple Apprehension, for the procurement of Clear, Distinct,
and real Ideas or Notions, both first, and second, Universal, Particular,
Objective Ideas or Categories.
and Singular.

And because al Subjective Ideas or Notions of things arise from, and are
indeed but Imitamens or Images of the things themselves, hence Logic, (1)
begins with the consideration of the things themselves, as they lie in their
Objective Ideas, and are the Original Exemplars of al Subjective Ideas or
Notions impacted on the Mind. Logic handles these Objective Ideas, not as any
part of its formal Object, but only as the Substrate Matter, or prime Elements,
from which subjective Ideas and Notions arise. These Objective Ideas or real
Beings considered in Logic are reduced by the Aristoteleans, (from I know not
what Pythagorean Superstition) to Ten Categories or Predicaments; unto which
they conceit al Beings are to be reduced, as to their proper Classes. But this
Distribution being now generally exploded by all awakened spirits, yea
disapproved by some of the more candid Aristoteleans, we shall content our
selves with this curt, yet apparently more native and distinct distribution of
Beings. Ens, or Being is either Infinite, or Finite. Infinite Being is but one,
namely God, who having no terms of Essence, cannot admit terms of Definition;
but does every way transcend al Predicamental Confinement, as the sober
Aristoteleans acknowledge. Finite Ens or Being may be distributed into
Substance, or Mode. 1. Substance.
[1] Substance is either Incorporcous or Corporeous: Incorporeous Substance is
divided into Angels, or Human Souls. Corporeous Substance is either Inanimate
or Animate: Inanimate Bodies are either Simple, as the Three Heavens, with the
four Elements, Fire, Air, Water, Faith: or Mixed; which are again divided into
imperfectly mixed, as Meteors: or Perfectly mixed, as Minerals, Metals and
Plants. Animate Corporeous Substance is divided into Brutes, or Human Bodies.
Of al these we have copiosely Philosophised, Philis. Genesis P. 1. B. 3. c. 2. and
Court Gent. P. 2. B. 3. c. 9. [2] Mode is not a Complete Ens or Being, 2. Mode.
neither is it a mere Non-entitie or Nothing; but of a middle nature between a
complete perfect Being and nothing; or, as some properly term it, Appendicula
Rei, an Appendicule, or Little Appendix of a thing. A Mode is either
Substantial and Essential, or Accidental. A Substantial and Essential Mode is
that which Essentially adheres to the thing, and cannot, no not so much as by
Mental Abstraction, be separated from the thing: so that to deny it of the
thing Modified thereby, implies a slat contradiction, either Virtual or Formal.
Thus Quantity is a Mode Essentially appendent to and inseparable from
Corporeous Substance: in like manner al Proprieties are Essential Modes of the
Subject they are proper to. Accidental Modes are such as appertain not to the
Essences of things, and therefore may be separated, at least Mentally, if not
Really. Again Modes may be distributed into interne and externe: Union and
Corporeous Forms are interne Modes; but Actions and Relations externe. Thus
much for Single Objective Ideas loged in things.

(2) As for Simple Subjective Ideas, and Notions, First Notions.
they are usually ranged under these two Heads, of First and Second Notions.
First Notions, are such as arise immediately from the thing it self, or from
the Comparation and Comprehension of several Individual things under one commun
Notion. Hence they may be distributed into Singular, and Universal. A singular
first Notion or Idea is the simple Imitamen or Representamen of some one
indvidual thing in the mind: as the Idea of Alexander, Plato, or the like. An
Universal first Notion, is that which comprehendes and representes many
different Species, or Individuals: As Animal, Man, Brute. These Universal Ideas
or Notions are either Generic, as Animal; Second Notions.
or Specific, as Man. Second Notions are only Terms of Art abstracted and
assumed by the busy Mind, the more distinctly to apprehend and express things.
Al Disciplines, specially Organic, have certain terms of Art, whereunto they
reduce things comprehended under those Disciplines. Such are the parts of
speech in Grammar, Noun, Pronoun, Verb, etc. Thus in Logic there are certain
Second Notions or Ideas, framed out of first Notions collated or compared
together. As by comparing al Animals together, we find there is one commun
Nature, in which they al agree, albeit they may have in other regards their
Specific Differences. Thus it appears, that al Animals agree as to Sense, etc.
Thence we conclude that Animal is Genus: which is a second Notion or Term of
Art, under which al Animals are involved. So that indeed these second Notions
are not Real, but only Mental or Rational Beings, framed out of Real Beings,
and unto which al Real Beings are reduced, as to so many Artificial Classes.
These second Notions are by some distributed into Separate or Simple, and
Conjunct. Separate second Notions are such as agree to things apart: as Genus,
Species, Difference; the Whole and the Part; the Cause and the thing Caused;
the Subject and the Adjunct, or the Accident. Conjunct Second Notions are such
as agree to things Conjunctly: as Convenience, Diversitic, Opposition, and
Order. Which are copiosely discussed by Logicians, specially the Ramistes; who
in Imitation of Cicero, term this first Part of Logic, which treats of Simple
Ideas and Notions, INVENTION; because it furnishes our Invention with Topics
and Arguments, in order to a Judgment and Discourse of Things.

2. Propositions and Judgments.
The second Part of Logic regardes Propositions or Judgments, as it answers to
the Second Operation of the Mind, which consistes in a judgment of things by
Affirming or denying the same. For albeit the Mind may have a simple Idea or
Notion of a thing by simple Apprehension; yet it cannot make a Judgment
thereof, without Affirmation or Negation. So that the proper object of this
second part of Logic, is, to use Aristotle's style, (...), Complexe orations,
Notions, or Ideas; such as carry with them an Affirmation, or Negation.
Propositions, in regard of their Species and Affections, admit of various
distributions. (1) In regard of their Species, or Kinds, Propositions, are
distributed, [1] into Simple and Composite. A Simple Proposition is that which
cannot be resolved into other Propositions. The Simplicity of a Proposition is
taken from the Unity of its Subject, Predicate, and Verbal Copule. As, A man
is Rational. A Composite Proposition is that which is composed of other
Propositions conjoined. The Principal of Composite Propositions are Hypothetic,
and Disjunctive. The parts of an Hypothetic Proposition are copulated by the
conditional particle, If: as, If he be a man, he is rational. The first part is
called the Antecedent, the later the Consequent. The Verity of an Hypothetic
Proposition consistes not in the truth of the Parts, but in their Connection. If
the condition be impossible, an affirmative Hypothetic is equipollent to a
simple Categoric Negative. A Disjunctive Proposition is that which has parts
conjoined by a Disjunctive particle: as, Every Animal is either a Man, or a
Brute. [2] Proposition, as to its kind, is divided into Pure and Modal. (2) The
Affections of Propositions are either Absolute, or Relate: Absolute Affections
are Quantity and Quality. [1] A Proposition in regard of its Quantity, is
either Universal, Particular, or Singular. The notes of Quantity regard the
subject of Propositions, which is either Universal or Singular. If the subject
be Universal and taken Universally, i. e. in its utmost Latitude and Extension,
expressed by the note Al, or No, then the Proposition is Universal: as Al men
are rational. If the subject be Universal, but limited and confined by some
note of Particularitie, then the Proposition is Particular: as, Some men are
learned. If the subject be Singular, then the Proposition is such: as, Plato
was a Philosopher. The Aristoteleans add, though without reason, a fourth sort
of Propositions, which they call Indefinite, consisting of an Universal Subject,
without any note of Quantity. As, Man is learned: Virtue is beautiful. But
their mistake herein is obvious: for if an Universal subject be found without
restriction and limitation, it must be taken Universally. Whence the first
Proposition, Man is learned, is false; because al men are not so: but the
second, Virtue is beautiful, is true, yet not indefinite, but Universal;
because al Virtue is so. [2] In regard of Quality, a Proposition is
Affirmative or Negative, True or False. A Proposition is true, when it conjoins
things to be conjoined, or divides things to be divided. A Proposition is
false, when it conjoins things to be divided, or divides things to be
conjoined. The Relate Affections of a Proposition are Conversion, Equipollence,
Subalternation, and Opposition.

3. Syllogism and Discourse.
The third part of Logic is of Syllogismes, answerable to the third operation
of the Mind, which is Ratiocination or Discourse. That which induces a
Necessity of Ratiocination and Argumentation is the Composition and Limitation
of the human Intellect, which cannot judge of the Verity or Falsitie of a
Proposition, by the sole consideration of its Terms, without assuming a middle
Term or Argument, for the demonstration thereof. A Syllogism may be
considered either in regard of its Composition and Constitution; or in regard
of its Division and Species. In the Composition and Corstitution of a
Syllogism, we may consider both its Matter and Form. 1. The Matter of a
Syllogism is either remote or proxime. The Matter of a Syllogism.
(1) The Remote matter of a Syllogism is its three Term; two whereof are
Extreme, the other Middle. The Predicate of the Question is always the Major
Extreme; because it is ever more Universal and Extensive than, or equal to the
Subject. Hence the Subject of the Question is ever the Minor Extreme, because
less, or not more extensive than the Predicate. The Middle Term is assumed as
an Argument to prove the Question, and is collated and compared both with the
subject or minor extreme, as also with the predicate and major extreme; either
separately, as in simple Syllogismes, or conjunctly, as in composite. This
middle Term is so termed not in regard of its Site, but Office: yet in the
first Figure it is middle as well in regard of Site as Office. (2) The Proxime
matter of a Syllogism is its Propositions; which in a simple perfect Syllogism
are three; Major, Minor, and Conclusion. The two first are usually termed the
Premises; the last, the Conclusion; which is the same with the Question, or
Thesis to be demonstrated.

2. The Form of a Syllogism.
The Form of a Syllogism consistes in the apt disposition of the Premises,
so as the Conclusion may thence necessarily follow. And because al kinds of
Conclusions cannot be deduced from al kinds of Premises, hence Logicians
prescribe certain general Rules, for the regular deduction of Conclusions from
their Premises: These Rules they bottom on certain Axioms, General Axioms
and Rules.
such as these: (1) Particular Propositions are contained in the general of the
same kind. (2) A Proposition becomes Particular or Universal from the
Particularitie or Universality of its Subject. (3) The Predicate of an
Affirmative Proposition having not greater Extension than its Subject, is
always considered as taken Particularly; because it is by accident that it is
sometimes taken Universally. (4) The Predicate of a negative Proposition is
always taken Universally. From these Principes the following general Rules,
for the right constitution of simple Syllogismes, as to their form, are
deduced. [1] From two particular Propositions nothing regularly can be
concluded. [2] From two Negatives nothing duly follows. For two negative
Propositions separate both Predicate and Subject from the middle term. [3] The
middle term must once at least either in the Major or Minor, be taken
Universally. For if it may be taken twice Particularly, it may be taken for
diverse parts of the same whole: whence the terms of the Conclusion can
neither be rightly conjoined, nor separated. As, Some Animal is a Man: Some
Animal is a Best: Therefore some Best is a Man. [4] The Conclusion ever
follows the weaker Part. i. e. If any one Proposition be Particular or
Negative, the Conclusion also is Particular or Negative. The reason is; because
the Premises are the cause of the Conclusion: now we al know, that what
infirmity is in the cause, follows also in the effect. [5] The terms of a
Conclusion may not be taken more Universally in the Conclusion, than in the
Premises: and the reason is manifest; because we may not argue from a
Particular to an Universal. [6] The Minor term or extreme is the same in the
Conclusion, as it is in the Premises: i. e. if it be Particular in the
Premises, it is so in the Conclusion: and if it be Universal in the Premises,
it must be such in the Conclusion. [7] When the Minor Proposition is an
Universal Negative, the Conclusion also must be Universal. [8] When the
Conclusion is Negative, the Major Proposition cannot be a Particular
Affirmative. [9] When the Conclusion is Negative, the Major term must be taken
Universally in the Major. The reason is; because it is taken Universally in the
Conclusion. [10] A Negative Conclusion cannot be proved by two Affirmative
Propositions. The Reasons of these Rules see more fully, L'Art de Penser, or
the Jansenistes Logic, Part. 3. C. 3.

These general Rules for the right formation of a simple Syllogism being
premissed, Figures and Modes.
we proceed to Figures and Modes, wherein the formal Constitution of a
Syllogism is placed. A Figure is the regular Disposition of the middle term
or Argument with the two extremes, or the parts of the Question. A Mode is the
regular disposition of the three Propositions, according to their differences
as to Quantity or Quality: which Logicians express by these four vowels, A,
E, I, O. A denoting an Universal Affirmative; E, an Universal Negative; I, a
particular Affirmative; O, a particular Negative. There are three Figures. (1)
In the first Figure the middle term or Argument is the Subject in the major
and the Predicate in the minor Proposition: hence it becomes middle not only as
to Office but Site. This first Figure has four Modes, expressed by certain
terms of Art, whose vowels express the Quantity and Quality of the
Proposition annexed thereto. As [1] Barbara: which notes each Proposition in
the first mode to be Universal and Affirmative. [2] Celarent: which notes the
first Proposition to be Universal and Negative; the second, Universal and
Affirmative; the third, Universal and Negative. [3] Darij: which notes the
first Proposition to be an Universal Affirmative; the second and third
particular Affirmatives. [4] Ferio: which notes the first Proposition to be an
Universal Negative; the second a particular Arffimative; the third a particular
Negative. Of these Modes two are Affirmative, two Negative: the Affirmative are
grounded on this principe: Whatever agrees to an Idea or Notion taken
Universally, agrees also to all that which is comprehended within the extension
of that Idea or Notion. Or thus: Whatever is affirmed Universally of an
Universal Idea or Notion, is also affirmed of all that is contained under that
Universal Idea. Thus the Notion of Sense agrees to al Animals; therefore to al
Men and Brutes. The Negative modes are founded on this principe: Whatever is
denied of any Idea or Notion taken Universally, is denied also of all that, of
which that Idea or Notion is affirmed. Or thus: Whatever is denied Universally
of any Universal Notion, is also denied of althings contained under that
Universal Notion. Thus a Brute is denied Universally of al men; therefore also
of Peter, John, etc. This first Figure has two Rules, [1] The major ought
always to be Universal. [2] The miner ought always to be Affirmative. The
perfection of this first Figure, beyond that of the second or third, consistes
in these two particulars. [1] In that al manner of Problemes, as Universal
Affirmatives, Universal Negatives, Particular Affirmatives, Particular
Negatives may be concluded herein: whereas in the second Figure the Conclusion
can be only Negative, and in the third only Particular. [2] In that the
necessity of the Syllogism consequence appears more evidently in this first
Figure, than in the second or third. Hence it is, that Logicians advise, that
our Arguments be, so far as it may be, reduced to this first Figure; for which
they give us many useful Rules. (2) In the second Figure the middle term is
the predicate both in the major and minor Proposition. The Modes of this Figure
are four, expressed by those fictitiose terms of Art: Cesare, Camestres,
Festino, Baroco. The Rules of this Figure are two. [1] The Major ought always
to be Universal. [2] One of the Premises, and thence also the Conclusion must
be ever Negative. (3) In the third Figure the middle term or Argument is the
subject in both Premises. Its Modes are six: Darapti, Eclapton, Disamis,
Datisi, Bocardo, Ferison. Its Rules are two. [1] The Minor must be Affirmative.
[2] The Conclusion must be Particular. So much for the Constitution of simple
Syllogismes: whereunto we must also reduce Enthymemes; which are imperfect
simple Syllogismes, curtailed of some one of the Premises, which lies latent
(...) in the mind: thence Enthymeme.

A Composite Syllogism is twofold: (1) That which has one or both Premises
Composite: This is either Hypothetic, or Disjunctive, A Composite Syllogism.
Hypothetic.
or Relative. [1] An Hypothetic Syllogism, is that wherein the Major, or
Minor, or both Propositions are Hypothetic. If the Major only be Hypothetic,
the Conclusion is Categoric: but if the Minor be Hypothetic, the Conclusion
also must be Hypothetic. Disjunctive.
[2] A Disjunctive Syllogism is that whose Major is Disjunctive: which if it
consiste only of two members immediately opposite, we may argue from the
Position of the one, to the Remotion of the other; or from the Remotion of the
one, to the Position of the other. If the Major has more members than two, some
being removed, what remains is concluded. When upon the Remotion of both or all the members the whole is removed, the Syllogism is from the enumeration of the
parts. [3] A Relative Syllogism is that whose Major includes a relation of the
parts. Relative.
(2) A Syllogism composed of many Syllogismes is either a Dilemma, or Sorites.
Dilemma.
[1] A Dilemma is an argumentation from two members, whereof both are attended
with incommoditie. It consistes of a disjunctive Syllogism, wherein from the
Remotion of the parts we conclude the Remotion of the whole; Sorites.
and two Categorics, whereby the remotion of the parts is confirmed. [2] A
Sorites is an Argumentation consisting of many Propositions, so connected, that
the predicate of the precedent Proposition is the subject of the subsequent;
and thence the last predicate concludes of the first subject. Thence a Sorites
contains so many Syllogismes as there are terms between the subject of the
first Proposition, and the predicate of the last: as in that of Paul, Romans
8.29, 30.

4. The fourth part of Logic is touching Method, Method.
which directes the fourth operation of the Mind, called Disposition. For the
mind of man, so far as rectified, is the Orderer and Disposer both of Notions
and Things: and the principal End and Office of Method is to succur and assist
the mind in the ordering and disposing of notions and things. And look as
Syllogism cures the Mind of Errors, so Method of Confusion. Yea indeed, to
speak the truth, Method is very influential on all the former parts of Logic, as
also on the operations of the mind, about which they are conversant: For how
can the mind define, or divide, or distinctly explicate simple Ideas and
Notions without Method? How imperfect and confused will its Judgments,
Ratiocinations and Discourses be, unless Method assist? Hence the Ancients,
Plato, and others, reduced the whole of Logic to Method, which without al
peradventure is the most utile part thereof, if not Comprehensive of the whole.
In the general, Method is an Art, whereby the Mind is rendered capable rightly
to dispose a series of many simple Notions or Apprehensions, Judgments, and
Ratiocinations, in order to the Investigation, Explication, and Demonstration
of truth; as also the deeper impression thereof on the Memory. In this
description we have both the Object, Ends, and Effects of Method. The Object of
Method is, (1) Simple Notions and Apprehensions. Wherein we are to consider
their Definition and Distribution: In the Definition we are to consider, [1]
The Name. And herein the principal care is to clear the Name from al Obscurity
and Equivocation: which is best performed by an Examen of and Inquisition into
its Etymology, or Origination, Homonymie, and Synonymie. [2] The Definition of
the Thing; which must be expressed in terms most known and essential: for what
is a Definition but the Idea or manifestation of a Thing? As for Distribution,
it is of the whole into its parts; which gives a distinct Idea or Notion of a
thing. (2) Another Object of Method is, Propositions and Judgments. Wherein we
are to avoid al Precipitance, Anticipation, and Prejudice; giving to al
Propositions that Measure of Assent as their insite Reason, or Authority
requires; admitting nothing as certain or evident, but what we know or have
reason to believe is certainly or evidently true. (3) The last object of Method
is Ratiocination and Discourse. Wherein we are [1] To leave nothing ambiguous
or obscure in the Terms. [2] To deduce al Ratiocinations from principes most
certain and evident in themselves, such as no one invested with commun sense
may gainsay. For first principes give evidence and force to al conclusions, but
receive none from them. [3] Al Cogitations and Ratiocinations employed for the
Investigation of Truth, or Remotion of any error must be digested and ranged
into the most natural order: beginning from things more general, simple, and
easily to be known; and thence passing on to things more difficult and
composite. [4] In seeking out Arguments and examining Difficulties there must
be a complete enumeration of all singulars and parts, with a distribution
proportionable thereto; that so nothing be omitted, that may conduce to the
examen of truth. More touching Method, see Court Gent. Part 2. B. 3. c. 8.. 3.
and B. 4. c. 1.. Thus much for Logic, wherein we have been the more large;
because we have no where treated distinctly and fully of it.

. 3. Real Philosophy may be, according to its different Objects, Real
Philosophy.
distributed into Natural, Moral, and Metaphysic or Supernatural. Natural.
1. Natural Philosophy regardes things considered in their natural Ideas, and
Essences: or things considered in their notional extension. (1) Things
considered in their natural Ideas and Essences belong to Physic or Natural
Philosophy strictly so termed: Physic.
which considers Things Natural, [1] In their General Principes and Affections.
[2] In their parts; which are two, the Macrocosme or greater world, and the
Microcosme or Man. Of which see Philosoph. General. P. 1. L. 3. c. 2. and Court
Gent. P. 2. B. 3. c. 9. (2) Natural things considered in their Notional
Extension or Quantity are discoursed of in Mathematics, Mathematic.
which comprehend Arithmetic, Geometry, Astronomy, Music, Optics, Geographie,
Mechanics, etc. Of which, Philos. Genesis P. 1. L. 1. c. 2. s. 2.

2. Moral Philosophy is, according to its object, Moral Philosophy.
distributed into Ethic, 1. Ethic.
strictly so termed, Oeconomic, and Politic. (1) Ethic strictly so termed
regards the morals of private persons. Wherein we may consider, [1] Its Generic
Idea, Moral Prudence: whereof we have copiosely discoursed, Philos. Genesis P. 2.
L. 2. c. 6. and Court Gent. P. 4. B. 1. c. 1.. 1. [2] Its prime Object, which
is the last end and chiefest good: which we have largely discussed, Philosoph.
Genesis P. 1. L. 1 3. c. 3. s. 1. and P. 2. L. c. 1. s. 3. also Court Gent. P. 2.
B. 4. c. 1.. 2, 3. and P. 4. B. 1. c. 1.. 2. [3] The Principes of Human Acts:
Practic Judgment, Volition or Intention, Consultation, Election: of which
Court Gent. P. 2. B. 4. c. 1.. 24-27. and P. 4. B. 1. c. 1. also Philos. Genesis
P. 2. L. 1. c. 1.. 4. [4] Subjective and Formal Beatitude: wherein we are also
to consider Use, Fruition and Delectation, or Joy. Of the first see Philosoph.
General. P. 1. L. 3. c. 3. s. 1.. 2. and P. 2. L. 1. c. 1. s. 3.. 2. also Court
Gent. P. 2. B. 4. c. 1.. 23. But of Use, Fruition, and Delectation, see Court
Gent. P. 4. B. 1. c. 1.. 4-8. [5] The Morality of human Acts: of which, Court
Gent. P. 2. B. 4. c. 1.. 29. and P. 4. B. 1. c. 2. 1, etc. also Philos. Genesis P.
1. L. 3. c. 3. s. 3.. 1. and P. 2. L. 1. c. 1. s. 4.. 1. [6] Natural Liberty,
which we have copiosely explicated, Philosoph. General. P. 1. L. 3. c. 3. s. 2.
and P. 2. L. 1. c. 1. s. 4.. 2. also Court Gent. P. 2. B. 3. c. 9. s. 3.. 11,
12. and B. 4. c. 1.. 28. [7] Moral Good, or Virtue, its Causes, Formal Idea or
Nature, Parts, and Adjuncts: Of which Court Gent. Part 2. B. 4. c. 1.. 29-32.
and P. 4. B. 1. c. 2, 3. also Philosoph. General. P. 1. L. 3. c. 3. s. 3. and
P. 2. L. 1. c. 1. s. 4. [8] Moral Liberty: of which, Court Gent. Part 4. B. 1.
c. 3. also Philos. Genesis P. 1. L. 3. c. 3. s. 3. [9] Sin, its Nature, and
Causes: of which, Court. Gent. P. 2. B. 4. c. 1.. 33. and P. 4. B. 1. c. 4.
also Philos. General. P. 1. L. 3. c. 3. s. 4. and P. 2. L. 1. c. 1. s. 4.. 6.
[10] The effects and servitude of Sin: Oeconomic.
of which, Court Gent. P. 4. B. 1. c. 4. (2) Oeconomic: of which, Politic.
Philos. General. P. 1. L. 3. c. 3. s. 6. (3) Politic: of which, Court Gent.
Part 4. B. 1. c. 5. and Philos. Genesis P. 1. L. 3. c. 3. s. 6.

3. Metaphysic or prime Philosophy, Metaphysic.
which principally regards the supreme most excellent Being and prime Cause of
althings, namely God; his Existence, Essence, and Attributes; his Acts of
Creation, and Providence; his Concurse and Gubernation, both Natural and
Supernatural, and Creatural Dependence, etc. Which we have more copiosely
discussed, Court Gent. P. 4. B. 2. more cursorily, Court Gent. P. 2. B. 2. c.
8. also Philos. Genesis P. 1. L. 1. c. 2. s. 5. and L. 3. c. 4.

BREVIARIE OF CONTENTS.
The COURT of the GENTILES. PART IV. Of Reformed Philosophy.
Preface. THE first Reformers of Philosophy, Wiclef, Wesselus, Savonarola,
Picus Mirandula, Lud. Vives, Melanchton, Stapulensis, and Ramus. 1. The Right
Use and Abuse of Platonic Philosophy. 4. The Design of this Discourse to
render Philosophy subservient to Christian Theology. 6.


A Proemial Scheme of Reformed Philosophy. Philosophy Considered, 1.
Generally (1) in its History. (2) In its generic Nature, Cognition. Which
includes nine Intellectile Habits. (3) In its Ends, Adjuncts, Differences,
Right Use, Abuse, Parts, and Characters, etc. 1. 2. Particularly, 1. As
Notional, or Logic. Wherein consider, (1) Its End, the Refinement of the
Intellect. 3. (2) Its Parts, touching, [1] Simple Ideas or Notions, both
Objective and Subjective, and these both first and second. 4, 5. [2]
Propositions and Judgments. 6. [3] Syllogism and Discourse, its Matter and
Form, Figures and Modes. 8, 9. [4] Method, which regardes the former three
Parts. 12. 2. Real Philosophy. 13. (1) Natural: Physiclogic and Mathematic.
Ib. (2) Moral: Ethic or Private, Oeconomic, and Politic. Ib. (3) Metaphysic or
Prime. 14.


BOOK I. Of Moral Philosophy.
CHAP I. Of Prudence, the last End and chiefest Good, Use, Fruition, and
Delectation.
MOral Philosophy, its Genus, Prudence. 2 Prudence, its Nature and Object. Ib
Its Offices and Parts, (1) (...), (2) (...) (3) (...). 3. (4) (...). 4. The
Subject of Prudence, Conscience. 5. The Law of Conscience. Ib. Synteresis and
Syneidfies what. 6. The Rule of Purdence (...). 7. (1) Subjective right Reason.
Ib. (2) Objective right Reason. 8. The Last End its influence in Morals. 9 The
last End as extensive as the First Principe, and but one. 10. The last End
desired infinitely. 11. God the Last End of al. 12. Assimilation to the Divine
Bonitie the Last End of Man. 13 To adhere to God as our Last End speaks
Perfection. 14. The Chiefest Good its Proprietles Ib. (1) It Is the Idea of al
Good. 15. (2) It Is the Preme Beautle. Ib. The Nature of Beaurie Explicated. 16.
The Soverain Beauty of God. 17. (3) The chiefest good most proper. 18. Use and
its Regulation. Ib. What Temperance is. 19. The Utility of things in reference
to their Last End. 20. Concupiscence the Fruition of created good for itself.
22. Intention of God as the Last End, how it must be ever actual. 23. Fruition,
its Difference from Use. 25. Al Fruition importes, (1) Love. 26. (2) Union and
Possession. 28. (3) Communion with the best Good, 29. By Contemplation and
Love. 30. (4) Delectation and Joy. 31. Which requires, [1] a sweet Good. 32.
[2] Possession thereof. 33. [3] Action thereon. 34. Adjuncts of Delectation,
[1] Realitie. 35. [2] Connaturalitie and Agreament. 36. [3] Uniformity and
Harmony. 37. [4] Purity, [5] Force. 39. [6] Infinitude without excess. 40.
The Effects of Delectation, [1] Amplitude. Ib. [2] Quietation and Satisfaction.
41.
CHAP. II. Of the Morality of human Acts, and Moral Bonitie.
THE Morality of human Acts. 42. Moral Bonitie in Conformity to the Divine
Law. 46. The measure of Moral Good Perfect. 48. The Universality of a perfect
Law. Ib. Subjective right Reason not the measure of Moral Good. 50. No human
Law a perfect Rule. Ib. The Divine Law the rule of Moral Good. 51. Right Reason
Objective Light. 52. The Mosaic Law a perfect Rule. 54. The Parts and Causes of
Moral Good. 55. The Matter of Moral Good. 56. Things Indifferent in Genere and
Specie. 57. No Action Indifferent in Individuo. 58. A Virtuose Will the
Effective Principe of Moral Good. 60. The best End Essential to Moral Good. 62.
The Form of Moral Good in Conformity to the Moral Law. 63. How the Form of
Good Consistes in the (...), Well-doing. Ib. How far Circumstances Moralize. 64.
The Unity and Uniformity of Good. 68. Al Good and Virtue Supernatural. 69.
The Difficulty of Moral Good. 70. The Virtues of Pagans only lesser Sins. 71.
The Distribution of Virtue into Piety and Justice. 72.
CHAP. III. Of Virtue and Moral Liberty.
MOral Virtue an Habitual Perfection. 74. Moral Liberty as to State in
Virtuose Habits. 76. Virtue gives, (1) Dominion. 78. (2) Life, Health, Vigor,
and Force. 79. (3) Amplitude and Enlargement. 80. (4) Nobility and Dignity.
82. (5) Beauty and Glory. 84. Moral Liberty as to Exercice. 85. (1)
Contemplation of God. 86. (2) Adherence to the chiefest Good. 87. (3)
Dependence on the first Cause. 90. (4) Conformity, [1] To Gods Precept. 93.
[2] To his Providential Will. 95. (5) The reference of althings unto God, as the
Last End. 96. Moral Libertle of Exercice the highest, demonstrated, (1) From
its Order. 98. (2) From its Spontaneitie and Suavitie. 99. (3) From its
Vitalitie. 101. (4) From its Amplitude. 103. (5) From its Purgation of Sin. Ib.
(6) From its Stabilitie. 104. (7) From its Improving Virtue. 105. (8) From its
Formal Beatitude. 106.
CHAP. IV. Of Sin and Moral Servitude.
SIN a Transgression of the Law. 108. Sin as to its formal Reason Privative.
110. The Causes of Sin, (1) Man's Defectibilitie. 111. (2) The Vitiositie of
human nature. 112. The Nature and Influence of Original Sin. 114. (3) Practic
Error. 115. (4) Self-love. 119. Sins of Ignorance, Passion, Wilful. 121. The
Moral Servitude of Sin. 122. (1) Sin repugnant to human Nature, 123. [1] As a
Falling from God. Ib. [2] As it strips of the Image of God. 124. [3] As Enmity
against God. 125. [4] As it divestes men of Humanity. 126. (2) Sins repugnant
each to other. 127. (3) Sin most Impotent. 128. (4) Sin the defilement of the
Soul. 129. (5) Sin full of Shame and Reproach. 130. (6) Sin the Tyranny of the
Soul. 132. (7) Sin full of Penury and Want. 133. (8) Sin the Fetters of the
Soul. 134. (9) Sin Folly and Madness. 135. (10) Sin makes Men Bestes. 136. The
Adjuncts and Effects of this Servitude. 137. The Servitude of Sin, (1)
Voluntary. Ib. (2) Necessary: the Degrees and Kinds of this sinful Necessity.
138. (3) Infinite as to Number and Magnitude. 141. (4) Penal: with the Nature
of Punishment. 142. (5) Sin in it self the greatest Punishment. 144. (6) Other
Punishments of Sin. 145. [1] Sin breeds Fear and Shame. Ib. [2] Sin full of
Instabilitie. 146. [3] Sin full of Anxietie and Torment. Ib. [4] Eternal
Punishment of Sin. 147. Sinners Dead in Sin. 148. (1) The Death of Sin not
Metaphoric or Hyperbolic, but Real. 149. (2) No Seeds of Virtue or Spiritual
Life in Corrupt Nature. 150. (3) The Impotence of Corrupt Nature to what is
Good Universal and Total. 152. (4) Man cannot prepare himself for the Reception
of Virtue. 153. (5) No Freewil in Nature to Moral Good. 155.
CHAP. V. Of Plato's Polity, its Essential Constitution, and Administration.
POlitic Philosophy what. 158. Polity, its Form in Order. 159. The Object of
Polity, the Multitude or Community. 161. God the Founder of al Polities. 162.
Man's Inclination to Sociatle. Ib. Consociation constitutes a Politic Body or
Society. 163 Al Consociation by some Law. 164 Perfect Polity requires Amity
and Fraternity. 165. Religion the Principal Ligament of Politic Society. 166.
The Ends of Polity, (1) Gods Glory. 169 (2) To render men Virtuose. 170. (3)
The Good of the whole. 171. (4) Mutual Assistences. 172. A Politic Body or
City what. Ib. Legislation, its Origin. 176. The Necessity of Laws. 177. Al
Laws Originally from God. 178. The Qualification of human Legislators. 179. Al
Laws from the Multitude. Ib. Al Laws for public Good. 181. Virtue a principal
End of Laws. 182. The Qualities of good Laws. 183. The Law of Equity, its use.
184. Conservators of Laws. 185. A Law its Equity and Constitution. 186. Three
kinds of Politic Administration; Monarchy, Aristocratie, Democratie. 187.
Monarchy mixed with Democratie. 190. Mixed Polity its use. Ib. Moderate
Empire best. 191. Tyranny Empire, its Origin, etc. 192. The Evils of
Tyranny. 193. Civil Magistrates, 1. Their End. 194. 2. Their Qualifications,
(1) Wisdom both Natural and Acquired. 195. Knowledge of human Laws and Factes.
196. Knowledge of Divine Laws. 197. (2) Virtue, both Natural and Moral. 198. (3)
A Public Spirit, free from Self-interest. Ib. A Magistrates Diet and Richesses.
199. (4) His Education and Examen. Ib. Scriptural Qualifications. 200. A
Magistrates Faculty and Authority. Ib. (1) Divine, (2) Human. 201.
Magistrates Conservators of Laws. 202. The Magistrates Exerclce of his Office,
(1) With Justice, without Briberie. 204. (2) With Temperance. 205. (3)
Moderation, (4) Clemence, (5) Fidelity. 206. The Effects of Polities Good and
Bad 207. Things destructive to Republies, (1) Atheism. Ib. (2) Lururie and
Idleness. 208. (3) Prosperity and Poverty. Ib. (4) Divisions. (5) Injustice.
209.
BOOK II. Of Metaphysic or Prime Philosophy, etc.
CHAP. I. Of Metaphysic in General.
ARistotle's Metaphysics. 210. Metaphysic Sapience, what. 211. Metaphysic a
Natural Sapience. 212. Contemplation, its proper Act. 213. Contemplation of God
best. 214.
CHAP. II. Of Atheism, and the Existence of a Deity.
THe Origin of Atheism. 215. Atheism, (1) From Polytheisme. 216. (2) From
Vain Philosophy and Policy. 217. (3) From Man's Carnal Mind and Pride. 218.
Three sorts of Atheism. 220. The Monstrose Nature and Pestiferous Influences
of Atheism. 221. The Punishment of Atheism. 222. The Existence of God
demonstrated, (1) From Universal consent. 223. (2) From the Subordination of
second Causes to a First. 224. The World made by a Prime Cause. 225. (3) From a
Prime Motor. 228. (4) From the Order of the Universe. 230. (5) From the Connate
Idea of God in the Soul. 231. (6) From Practic Arguments. 232. [1] From
Conscience, its Notions and Exercices. 233. [2] From the sense of Religion.
234. [3] From the Politic World. 235. [4] From the Atheistes Cavils and
Enmity. 236.
CHAP. III. Of God his Names, Nature, Attributes, Unity, and Simplicity.
GODs Name (...) Being. 237. (...) Jehovah. 239. Jehovah the proper Name of God
240. The explication of Jehovah and Jah. 241. Ehjeh, Elohim, El, Shaddai,
Adonai. 242. Elion, Zebaoth, (...). 243. The Divine Essence and Attributes. Ib.
God not Capable of a Definition. 244. Gods Essence Absolute and Independent.
245. 1. The Divine Unity demonstrated. 249. 2. The Simplicity of God
Explicated. 251. The Simplicity of God demonstrated. 254.
CHAP. IV. Of Gods Immutabilitie, Infinitude, Eternity, Immensitie, and
Incomprehensibilitie.
3. THe Immutabilitie of God. 257. God Immutable, (1) In his Essence. 259. (2)
In his Immanent Acts. 260. (3) In regard of his Word. 263. Gods Immutabilitie
demonstrated. Ib. 4. Gods Infinitude demonstrated. 266. (1) By his
Independence. 267. (2) From his Unity and Simplicity. 268. (3) From his
Transcendence. 269. (4) From the Idea of Perfection. 271. (5) From the infinite
Bonitie and Beatitude of God. 273. (6) From Gods Infinite Power. 274. 5. Gods
Eternity explicated, (1) By Scripture. 275. (2) By Plato's Philosophemes. 276.
The Eternity of God demonstrated. 277. What Eternity is. 279. (1) Eternity
not mesurable by time. Ib. (2) Eternity without beginning or end. 281. (3)
Eternity most Simple and Uniform. 282. (4) How Eternity coexistes to the
parts of Time. 283. (5) Eternity a fixed Instant. 284. (6) Eternity the same
with the Divine Essence. 286. 6. Gods Immensitie and Omnipresence. 288. The
Explication and Demonstration thereof, (1) From the Infinitude of the Divine
Essence. 290. (2) From Gods Simplicity. Ib. (3) From his Infinite Power and
Operations. 291. 7. Gods Incomprehensibilitie. 292. Its Demonstration by 6
Arguments. 294. How far we may apprehend God. 296. Against Poetic figments of
God. Ib. Against Curiosity in our Inquiries after God. 297. The least Notices
of God of great moment. 299. Al Notices of God by Divine Revelation. Ib. The
Grades or Ascents of Knowing God, (1) Natural. 300. [1] By way of Causalite.
301. [2] By way of Eminence. 302. [3] By way of Rematiom. 303. (2)
Supernatural, [1] By Christ. Ib. [2] By the Scriptures, etc. 304.
CHAP. V. Of Gods Life, Knowledge, Will, and Power.
THe Life of God. 305. Life in its generie Notion. 306. The Life of God, (1)
most Spirituose. 307. (2) Most Actuose. 308. (3) Most Self-moving. 309. (4)
Life it self. 310. (5) Eternal Life. 311. (6) The first cause of Life. Ib. Gods
Science and (...) most Perfect. 312. The Object of Gods knowledge. 313. (1) The
Divine Essence. Ib. (2) Althings cognoscible. 114. The Object of Gods
Owniscience, (1) Complexe Intelligibles. 315. (2) Incomplexe Intelligibles.
316. (3) The Human soul. 317. God knows althings by his Essence. 318. How the
Divine Ideas represent althings. 321. Gods Science, (1) most Simple. 322. (2)
Intuitive, not discursive. 323. (3) Immutable and Necessary. 325. (4) Most
Certain. 327. (5) Absolute and Independent. Ib. (6) Eternal. 329. (7)
Infinitely perfect, Essentially, Intensively, Extensively. 330. Gods Simple
Intelligence. 331. Gods Science of Vision. 332. God knows things future by his
Will. Ib. Against Scientia Media. 334. The Will of God. 336. (1) The Object of
the Divine Will. 337. (2) The Divine Will one pure Act. 338. (3) The Divine Will
Independent. 339. God Independent Physically and Morally. 340. (4) The Divine
Will Immutable. 343. (5) Gods Will Absolute, not Conditionate. 344. (6) Gods Will
Antecedent, not Consequent. 347. (7) The Divine Will most perfect. 348. [1]
Intensively. [2] Extensively. 349. [3] Effectively. 350. (8) The Divine Will
most Free. 351. What Indifference may be ascribed to the Will of God. 352. (9)
Gods Will Irresistible. 353. Gods Will distributed, (1) Into Decretive, or
Preceptive. 355. (2) Into Secret, or Reveled. 356. (3) Into Complacential,
Providential, and Beneplacite. 357. Gods Power. Ib. Gods Power his Essence.
358. Gods Ordinate Power the same with his Will. 359. The Object of Gods Power,
every thing possible. 360. What things are Impossible. 361. Divine Power
Omnipotence. 363.
CHAP. VI. Of Gods Justice, Veracitie, and Sanctity. Also of the Trinity.
THe Justice of God. 365. Gods Absolute Justice as to the afflicting the
Innocent, and acquitting the Nocent. 367. How far Gods Punitive Justice is
necessary. 368. Gods Ordinate Justice from his Will. 370. Gods Ordinate Justice
the same with his Veracitie. 371. No Acception of Persons with God. 372. The
Difference between the Justice of God and that of Men. Ib. How far Gods Justice
regardes the Qualities of its Object. 373. Gods Veracitie and Fidelity. Ib.
(1) In fulfilling Promises. 376. (2) In fulfilling Threats. 377. Gods
Veracitie Demonstrated. 378. The Sanctity of God. 379. Platonic Philosophemes
of the Trinity, with their Abuse. 382.
CHAP. VII. Of Gods Prime Causalitie, Efficience, and Concurse in general.
1 GOD the first Cause of althings. 387. 2. The Object of Divine Concurse. 391.
(1) God's Concurse not merely conservative of the Principe. 392. Durandus's
Objections against Gods Immediate Concurse to al Operations answered. 394. Gods
Concurse to the Substrate matter of Sin what. 395. (2) Divine Concurse reaches
the human Will, and al its Acts. 396. (3) Gods Concurse Universally extensive as
to al Objects. 397. (4) Gods Concurse Principal. 398. How Second Causes are al
Instruments of the First. 399. 3. Divine Concurse as to its Principe or
Subject. 401. (1) Gods Concurse not his Essence absolutely considered. 402. (2)
Gods Concurse procedes not from any executive Power in God. 403. (3) The Divine
Will Omnipotent. 404. (4) The Divine Will of it self Operative and Influential on
al second Causes and Effects. 405. 4. The Adjuncts of Gods Concurse. 406. It
is, (1) Immediate. Ib. [1] God Concurs Immediately to every Act of the second
Cause. 408. [2] God Concurs Immediately to the second Cause it self. 409. [3]
The Act of the first and second Cause the same. 410. (2) Independent and
Absolute. 412. (3) Previous and Antecedent. 416. (4) Total, not Partial. 417.
(5) Particular, not general only. 420. Objections against Gods Particular
Concurse answered. 421. (6) Most potent and efficacious. 422. Gods Moral and
Physic Concurse. 426. Gods Efficacious Concurse Demonstrated. 427. (7)
Congenial and Connatural. 428. The Suavitie and Efficace of Divine Grace. 429.
CHAP. VIII. Of Creation, and Providence in General.
GODs Creation demonstrated and explicated. 431. Creation the Production of
something out of nothing. 432. Active Creation the Act of the Divine Will. 433.
Passive Creation a mode of the thing Created. 435. The Providence of God
demonstrated. 436. The Wisdom of Divine Providence. 439. The Eternal Law of
Providence. 441. The Wisdom of Providence Active. 442. Providence an Act of
the Divine Will. 443. The Spirit the Immediate Efficient of Providence. 445.
Platonic notions of the Mundane Spirit. 447. Providential means used by the
Spirit. 449. No second Cause can act but in Subordination to God, and by his
Providence. 450. Fire the Create Universal Spirit. 452. The Object of Divine
Providence Universal. 453. The particular Objects of Providence. 454. The
Adjuncts of Providence. It is (1) Efficacious. 455. (2) Immobile and fixed.
456. (3) Connatural and Agreeable. 457. (4) Beautiful and Perfect. Ib. (5)
Mysterious. 459. The distributions of Providence. 460. Of Miracles. Ib.
Providential Conservation proper to God. 461. Gods Conservative Influxe
Immediate. 463. Gods Conservation by his Word or Will. 464. Gods Conservation by
Means. 465. Gods Extraordinary Provision for some. 466. Conservation continued
Creation. 467. The Object of Divine Conservation. 468.
CHAP. IX. Of Divine Gubernation in general; and as to Sin.
DIvine Gubernation. 469. God the supreme Gubernator. 470. Divine Glory the
last end of Divine Gubernation. 471. The order of Divine Gubernation fixed.
472. None can avoid Divine order and Gubernation. 474. The order of Gods
Gubernation a Law. Ib. Gods Gubernation by second Causes. 475. Gods Gubernation
reaches althings. 476. Divine Gubernation as to Man, (1) Moral, by Law. (2)
Efficacious. 477. Wicked Men fall under Gods Gubernation. 478. Gods Gubernation
about Sin. Ib. The Causes and parts of Sin. 479. God not the Author of Sin.
480. God the Prine Cause of the Entitative Act of Sin. 482. Gods Concurse to
the Entitative Act of Sin Demonstrated. 483. How Sin falls under the Divine Will.
485. Gods Will about the Obliquitie of Sin Permissive. Ib. Gods Permissive Will
about Sin Efficacious. 486. Gods Gubernation of Sin Ordinative. 487. Judicial
Gubernation of Sin. 488. Gods Attributes Illustrious in the Gubernation of Sin.
489.
CHAP. X. Of Divine Gubernation about Virtue, Virtuose Men, and Angels.
SVpernatural Illumination from God. 490. The Infusion of Virtues. 493. Gods
care of Virtuose Men. 496. Gods Gubernation of the Angelic World. 498. The
Angelic Law, Obedience, and Disobedience. 500. Good Angels Ministry as to
God. Ib. Good Angels Converse with Saints. 501. Angels employed, (1) at the
giving of the Law. 502. At Christ's Birth, and for the propagation of the
Gospel. Ib. (2) For the Conservation and Protection of the Saints. Ib. (3) For
Information, Counsel, Conduct, and Consolation. 503. (4) Angels Communion with
Saints. 504. (5) The final service of Angels. 505. Gods Gubernation as to evil
Angels. Ib. Satan's the Prince of this World. 507. Satan's Power to Temte. 508.
CHAP. XI. Of Creatural Dependence, both Natural and Supernatural.
CReatural Dependence what. 509. Every Being Dependent or Independent. 510. One
Prime Independent Being. 511. Dependent Being by Participation. 512. The
Origin of Dependence. 515. (1) Passive Power. Ib. (2) The Dominion of God.
516. Every Creature Dependent. Ib. Dependence the same with the Essence. 517.
Dependence Importes, (1) Subordination. 519. (2) Posterioritie. Ib. (3)
Inferioritie. 520. Creatural Dependence, (1) As to Futurition. Ib. (2) As to
Essence and Conservation. 521. (3) As to Operation. 522. (4) The Dependence of
the human Will in all its Acts. 523. Dependence Natural, Moral and Supernatural.
524. Supernatural Dependence on Christ, Ib. (1) For Habitual Grace. 526. (2)
For Actual Grace. 527.
Table of Hebraic Notions Explicated.
(...), Adonai, my Lord 242, 339 (...), Ehjeh, I shall be 242 (...), Light and
Fire 452 (...), Then, Eternity 275 (...), El, the potent God 242, 358, 430
(...), Eloah, and (...), Elohim 242, 358 (...), If, a formule of swearing 374
(...), Amen ibid. (...), Truth, Fidelity 200 (...), desperately sick 128
(...), a Prince, or Principatie 187 (...), Belial, lawless 109 (...), a son,
devoted 122 (...), to create 419 (...), Gillulehim, filthy Idols 129 (...), to
adhere 88 (...), a word, or thing 363, 428 (...), Dath, Order, Law 187 (...),
mad sinners 136 (...), Hallelujah 241 (...), separate 496 (...), glued 135
(...), force or power 429 (...), to see 35 (...), Aberration 109 (...),
Ability, force 200 (...), notes Gods soverain Will 340, 345 (...), to search
317 (...), Jah, its import 241 (...), Jehovah, its explication 239, 240 (...),
together 318 (...), to form 318, 419 (...), denotes Gods Eternity 275 (...),
they that dwell, morally 425 (...), to consume 88 (...), Stratagemes 506 (...),
the essential Word 385 (...), Prodigies 461 (...), Nabal 130 (...), Villainy,
folly 129 (...), free, who 83, 130 (...), Willingnesses 429 (...), to break 343
(...), Eternity, strength 374 (...), to lift up the face, what 366 (...), to
break, infringe 343 (...), rebellious 125 (...), Iniquity 123 (...), the most
High 243 (...), toilsome labor 123, 147 (...), is determined 343 (...), to
evacuate 526 (...), tormenting Idols 135 (...), Gods determinate purpose 343
(...), to supplant 155 (...), to perfect 419 (...), naked 131 (...), the shadow
of death 425 (...), Zebaoth 243 (...), a Speculator 211 (...), holy 82 (...),
Kanna, a Canon 48 (...), a beam of the Sun 423 (...), to see 35, 380 (...),
Impetus 125 (...), Amplitude 80 (...), to amplify 142 (...), poison 128 (...),
Shaddai, self-sufficient 242, 497
Table of Grecanic Notions Explicated.
A and O, what in Scripture 267 (...), an Angel, what 498, 499 (...), sociable
163, 164 (...), from (...) Veneration 82 (...) Ignorance, what 117, 136 (...),
Sagacitie 3 (...), Truth, what 376, 492 (...), Sin, what 108 (...), Independent
339 (...), Discord 123 (...), unimpedible 515 (...). Transgression of the Law
109 (...), to adhere 89 (...), upon, for 525 (...), Insensibilitie 140 (...),
Essulgence 304 (...), from (...) Mars 82, 104, 156 (...), Principatie 187
(...), absurd, what 136 (...), a self-subsistent Idea 327, 339 (...),
self-motion 99 (...), how applied to God 349 (...). Democratie 188 (...),
Miracles, what 461 (...), an Image 304 (...), Experience 4 (...), to demand 508
(...), He is, proper to God 276 (...), been, the form of Good 63 (...), a good
Sensation 4 (...), Gods complacence 345, 357 (...), Dexterity, what 3 (...),
Nobisitie, what 83 (...) Gods Beneplacite 345, 357 (...), Facility of
Judgment 4 (...), good Order 99 (...), to take alive 506 (...), the Sun of
(...) El 242 (...), God, its Origination 243 (...), Contemplation, what 213
(...), Jao, from (...) Jah 241 (...), Vitiositie of Nature 115 (...), Canon,
whence and what 48, 99 (...), Comprehension 8 (...), to swallow down 507 (...),
to cauterise 140 (...), Society 158, 159 (...), what 88 (...), the Word 383,
384 (...), to play the Widwise, in Morals, what it notes 398 (...), a Method of
cheating 506 (...), Monarchy 188 (...), an Oriental Tradition 299 (...),
Stratagemes 506 (...), a Law, what 46, 52, 55, 181, 186 (...), Castigation 143
(...), the Divine Mind 383, 384 (...), proper to Eternity 275, 284 (...),
Concauses, or Instruments 399 (...), Oligarchie 188 (...), Being, Gods Name
211, 237, 246 (...), an Instrument 400 (...), Right Reason 7, 8, 50, 52 (...) a
Definition not proper to God 244 (...), the eternal Exemplar 441 (...), and
(...), what 258 (...), Transgression of the Law 109 (...), Stupor 125 (...), to
obey fully 138 (...), to circumvent 506 (...), a City, what 172, 173 (...) 159
(...) torment 147 (...), antecedent Aid 416 (...), Providence 3, 439 (...), a
Larve, Face, Person 369 (...), Acception of the person 366, 372 (...), callose
concretion 140 (...), Miracles 461 (...), to winnow 509 (...), a Sieve ibid.
(...), from (...) Sophe 211 (...), what 135 (...) of Conscience 6 (...) of
Conscience ibid. (...), to walk by rule 99 (...), q. (...) a Sepule^e 149
(...), Slaves 144 (...), Order, what 98, 161, 187 (...), to order 127 (...),
Prodigies, what 461 (...), ordained 347 (...), Trinity among the Platonistes
382 (...), a Tyrant, who 192 (...), Hypostasis 383 (...), the Law of Conscience
5 (...), Self-love 119 (...), a Lover of Traditions 211 (...), Fraternity 115
(...), Prudence, what 2 (...), a Character 304 (...), Poison 128 (...), to lie,
or deceive 375 (...), the mundane Spirit, what 382, 384, 447
Table of Scriptures Explicated.
Genesis. Chapter Verse. Page 1. 1 242 1. 3 358, 433, 452 2. 17 377 2. 18 172 2. 23,
24 161 3. 7, 9, 22 124 4. 12, 13 146 10. 9 194 11. 4 274 14. 19 243 14. 20 242
15. 2 ibid. 17. 1 ibid. 18. 14 363 22. 16 373 Exodus. 3. 12 242 3. 14 212, 238,
241, 246 6. 3 241 15. 3 240 15. 11 378 16. 30 128 18. 21 200 22. 8 242 32. 25
131 Numbers. 27. 16, 17 201 Deuteronomie. 1. 13 200 6. 4 249 7. 6 82 8. 3 444
16. 18, 20 205 17. 18, 19, 20 197 29. 17 129 29. 18 128 29. 29 356 32. 40 305
33. 2 502 1 Samuel. 2. 2 379 14. 39 306 15. 29 374, 378 1 Kings. 21. 20 131
Nehemiah. 9. 6 468 Job. 8. 16 424 11. 7, 8, 9 292 15. 34 205 26. 13 446 26. 14
358 37. 6, 7 467 38. 41 466 42. 2 314 Psalms. 5. 9 151 7. 9 318 7. 14 146 8. 3
446 10. 4 218 14. 1 ibid. 16. 3 82 16. 4 142 17. 7, 8 496 18. 20 374 19. 6 424
25. 13 33 27. 4 35 27. 13, 14 527 31. 1 373 32. 2 109 32. 10, 11 343 33. 6 446
33. 13, 15 318 34. 12, 13 102 34. 7 503 36. 5 374 39. 3 87 47. 8 379 51. 10 412
55. 19 275 61. 2 527 63. 8 88, 527 65. 11, 12 465 72. 6 406 73. 26, 28 88, 527
75. 2, 3 167 82. 1, 2 205 87. 7 525 89. 1, 8, 33, 34, 35 374 90. 2, 3, 4 275
91. 1, 4, 10 497 92. 12 379 93. 2 275 97. 1, 2 459 101. 3 109 102. 27 251, 164
103. 4 498 104. 27, 30 446 104. 34 35 106. 5 ibid. 107. 20 444 110. 3 428 115.
3 354, 359 119. 45 80, 93 119. 89 343 119. 123 371 119. 137 365 119. 165 103
135. 5, 6 339, 354, 359 139. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 317, 440 139. 7, 8, 9, 10 288,
410 139. 11, 12, 13 318 141. 8 526 145. 3 269, 292 145. 15 466 147. 4 440 147.
5 314, 330 147. 15, 16 444 147. 9 466 Proverbes. 3. 7, 8 80 4. 23 61 8. 22, 23
275 15. 3 316 Ecclesiastes. 3. 1 467 8. 4 479 Canticles. 1. 4 527 6. 10 161 8.
5 526 Esaias. 1. 4. 156 9. 2 425 9. 5 242 9. 17 129 10. 21 430 14. 20 139 19.
18 425 22. 17 130 22. 20, 21, 22 202 25. 1 374 26. 19 406 28. 17 365 32. 5 130
40. 17 238, 246 41. 4 267 43. 1 412 43. 7 419 43. 13 275 44. 5 430 44. 6, 48
241, 246 46. 10 353 53. 11 398 55. 11, 12 406 57. 4 150 64. 6 129 Jeremie. 5. 1
137 13. 33 153 17. 9. 155 23. 23, 24 288, 314 51. 58 147 Ezechiel. 16. 6 413
16. 44 153 23. 7 129 33. 11 345 Daniel. 2. 20 467 4. 30 218 4. 34 306 11. 36
242 Hosea. 2. 21, 22 438, 465 4. 12, 16 125 4. 17 135 6. 2 146 8. 8 129 11. 12
78 13. 1, 2 131 14. 5 406 Jonah. 1. 14 340 3. 9 377 Amos. 3. 6 482 5. 12 142
Micah. 5. 2 275 6. 9 312 Habakkuk. 1. 13 380 2. 5 142 2. 13 147 3. 4 423
Zecharie. 3. 7 505 9. 16 82 Malachie. 4. 2 424 Matthew. 3. 9 413 4. 4 444 6.
20, 24 89 6. 22 24 7. 8 61 7. 18 72 8. 2 360 12. 25 209 13. 12 105 16. 16 305
19. 17 273 20. 21 366 22. 29 364 Mark. 3. 5 141 Luke. 1. 19 500 1. 37 363 10.
42 214 12. 29. 146 12. 24 466 15. 13, 14, 15 134 16. 13 89 17. 5 525 22. 3 507
22. 29, 30 97 22. 31, 32 508 John. 1. 9 51 1. 13 156 1. 14 87 1. 16 525 3. 8
413 4. 24 251, 308 5. 4 502 6. 63 308 12. 26 98 Acts. 2. 44, 46 165 7. 53 502
8. 9 135 8. 23 128 13. 48 347 15. 18 315 17. 25 271 17. 26 349 17. 28 311
Romans. 2. 2 365 2. 11 365, 372 2. 14, 15 8 3. 9 133 3. 23 125 5. 12, 13 214 5.
21 133 6. 12 133 6. 13, 16 138 6. 23 144 8. 2 94 8. 7 125, 127 8. 21, 22 23 9.
11 346 9. 16 359 11. 5 346 11. 17 416 11. 33 295 11. 36 397 12. 3 299 12. 11
104 1 Corinthians. 2. 11 313 2. 14 137, 493 4. 7 157 6. 12, 13 96 6. 17 88 7.
31 21 13. 1 501 13. 12 304 15. 45 308 17. 10 504 2 Corinthians. 2. 11 506 4. 4
304 10. 13 48 12. 9 91 12. 9, 10 527 Galatians. 6. 16 48, 99 Ephesians. Chapter
Verse. Page 1. 4, 5 341 1. 9, 11 342 2. 2 122 2. 8, 9, 10 414 2. 11 506 4. 24 72
4. 29 129 Philippians. 2. 12, 13 396, 526 3. 16 48 Colossians. 1. 15 304 1. 16
499 2. 5 161 1 Timothic. 4. 2 140 6. 12. 107 6. 16 293, 306 2 Timothy. 2. 19
339 4. 7, 8 107 Titus. 3. 6 127 Hebrews. 1. 3 304, 444, 464 2. 2 502 4. 13 415
6. 17, 18 375, 377 9. 14 308 11. 3. 320 12. 1, 2 526 12. 11, 12 106 12. 15 128
12. 22 504 13. 8 284 James. 1. 17 258 1. 25 94 2. 8 52 4. 15 345 1 Peter. 5. 8
507 2 Peter. 1. 3 156 2. 12 137 3. 7 465 1 John. 3. 4 109 Jude. 12 166
Revelations. 1. 4, 8, 11 240, 246, 267 4. 11 360 8. 2 501 18. 13 144 19. 1, 3,
4, 6 241

ERRATA.
Proemial Scheme, etc. Page 2. l. 37. l. Philologie. p. 5. l. 23. dele, Three.
p. 6. l. 23. dele, al. p. 8. l. 1. dele, been. Page 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 13, 15.
Title, for Sect. l.. p. 5. l. 30. l. (...). p. 14. l. 39. l. Repub. l. 2, 6, 9.
p. 18. l. 26. dele hereafter. p. 19. l. 5. l. and pleasures and griess. p. 21.
l. 26. l. (...). p. 39. l. 26. l. is, for are. p. 43. l. 7. l. P. 2. p. 52. l.
5. l. (...). p. 63. l. 37. l. P. 2. B. 4. p. 74. l. 31. l. Chap. 2.. 4. p. 92.
l. 34. l. Manuduction. p. 108. Contents l. 15. dele, A Sum of the Pelagian
History. Item, l. ult. l. (...). p. 132. l. 7. l. (...). p. 143. l. 24. l. B.
2. Chap. 6.. 1. p. 156. l. ult. l. Man. p. 202. l. 19. l. N. T. Romans 13.1. p.
204. l. 38. l. shall. p. 207. l. 25. l. Policy, Item l. 31. l. Policy. p. 215.
Contents l. 2. l. Policy. p. 227. l. 38. l. Hurtado de Mendoza. p. 235. l. 2.
l. void. p. 250. l. 13. l. (...). p. 258. l. 13. l. (...), Parallaxes. p. 260.
l. 39. l. 2. p. 262. l. 33. l. (...). p. 263. l. 36. l. (...). p. 288. l. 37.
l. (...). p. 290. l. 1. l. 1. The. p. 292. l. 21. l. God's. p. 298. l. 36.
dele, Lastly. p. 327. l. 5. l. See Greg. p. 343. l. 29. l. (...) p. 360. l. 36.
l. pro Sect. 4. Chap. 7. p. 361. l. 19. l. Ens possibile. p. 381. l. 18. l.
(...). p. 382. l. 24. l. Sect. 35. p. 385. l. 29. l.. 9. Item, l. 34. l. (...).
p. 386. l. 16. l. Cabala. p. 398. l. 28. l. (...). p. 416. l. 26. l. (...). p.
421. l. 32. dele 1. p. 424. l. 17. pro and, l. is. p. 426. l. 3. l. (...). p.
440. l. 3. l. 2. Item l. 5. l. (...). p. 465. l. 28. dele, liquors. p. 469. l.
27. l. (...). p. 492. l. 8. for as, l. is. p. 493. l. 27. l. (...). p. 494. l.
14. l. (...). Item l. 16. l. (...). p. 514. l. 24. l. (...).


THE COURT of the GENTILES.
PART IV. OF REFORMED PHILOSOPHY: Wherein Plato's Moral and Metaphysic
Philosophy is reduced to a useful Form and Method.
BOOK I.
Of Moral Philosophy.
CHAP. I. Of Prudence, the last End and chiefest Good, Use, Fruition, and
Delectation.
Moral Philosophy, (1) Its Genus, (...), which connotes Prudence: wherein
consider its Objects, Offices, and Acts: which are, [1] (...), [2] (...)
Dexterity, [3] (...) Sagacitie, and (...), [4] (...). (2) The subject of Moral
Prudence, (...), and particularly the Conscience: Plato's (...), Law of
Conscience, [1] In the (...), which is the seat of Principes. (2) In
Syneidesis, which is a reflexive Light, and springs from (...) sensation. (3)
The Rule of Moral Prudence (...), which is either subjective, or objective:
(...), Romans 2.14, 15. James 2.8. The last End, its Influence in Morals: the
chiefest Good, its Characters, (1) The Idea of Good. (2) The first Beauty. (3)
Most proper. Use, its Regulation and Intention. Fruition, its parts, (1) Love,
(2) Union, (3) Communion, (4) Delectation, considered [1] In its Causes, a
sweet Good, Possession and Action. [2] In its Adjuncts, Realitie,
Connaturalitie, Uniformity, Purity, Force, and Infinitude. [3] In its
Effects, Enlargement, and Satisfaction.

. 1. HAving discussed Plato's Natural Philosophy, we now descend to his Moral,
which regards the Morals of single Persons, Families, The Idea of Moral
Philosophy.
and Cities, or Republics. We find the Idea of Philosophy, as it relates to
Morals, and Active Sciences, in the Platonic Definitions, page 414. (...),
Philosophy is a prudent or studiose consideration of the Soul according to
right reason. Wherein we may consider, (1) The Genus, (2) The Subject, (3) The
Measure, or Rule of Moral Philosophy.

1. The Genus, 1. Its Genus. Moral Prudence.
in this Platonic Definition of Moral Philosophy, is (...), which signifies a
prudent Inspection, studiose Consideration, and sollicitous Care, communly
styled by Plato (...), Prudence, or Moral Wisdom; which we have thus copiosely
described in the Platonic Definitions: (...), Prudence is a faculty of it self
effective of human Happiness. Prudence what.
Wherein we have, (1) The Specific reason, whereby it is differenced from
contemplative Science, expressed by that notion Effective. (2) Its Vltimate
End, which is to make men happy. Again, Prudence is defined in the same
Platonic Definitions, (...), A Science of good and evil. Again, (...), A
Disposition, whereby we judge what is to be done, and what is not to be done.
In all which Definitions laid together we have these Considerables.

1. The Vltimate End, Its Object.
and supreme Object of moral Prudence or Philosophy, namely human Happiness,
which is the measure of al moral Acts, and the first thing treated of in moral
Philosophy, according to that of Aquinas: The end of moral Virtues, is the
chief principe of Prudence, as Luke 10.41. Of which Chap. 2.

2. We have here the intermediate Objects of moral Prudence, which are in
general al Agibles or Practicables. (1) Singulars. (2) Things present. (3)
Things in our power. (4) Things good, or evil.

3. Here is also considerable the proper Exercices or Offices of Prudence,
which are according to Plato, (in his Charm.) (1) (...), Its Offices.
To do what belongs unto us. (2) (...), To understand a man's self. (3) (...),
To use al things well, i. e. with respect to our supreme end. (4) Rightly to
distinguish 'twixt good and evil. (5) To conserve the rectitude of the Will. (6)
To moderate the Affections. (7) To govern the whole Life. Of which see more
fully Philos. Genesis P. 2. l. 2. c. 6. s. 3.

4. This moral Prudence may be considered in its Integrals; The parts of
Prudence.
which are, according to the Platonic account, four: (...). (1) (...),
Providence, which, 1. (...), Providence.
in the Platonic Definitions, page 414. is thus described: (...), Providence is
a preparation (or provision) for somewhat future. Which implies, [1] An
universal comprehension of al circumstances, means, difficulties,
encouragements, which may make for, or against our end. [2] Serious
consultation about, and prudent determination of what is to be done. [3]
Prudent precaution of what may impede, etc. this is termed (...), Caution,
according to that of the Stoics, (...), A wise man ought never to fear, but
always to use caution, etc. 2. (...), Dexterity of Judgment.
(2) Another part of moral Prudence is (...), a Dexterity in judging things:
which in the Platonic Desinitions, page 413. is thus defined: (...), Facility
of judgment, is a connate ability of reasoning, or discerning. And Plato, de
Repub. 4. page 428. says, (...), Facility of judgment is certainly some kind
of Science, etc. (3) (...), Sagacitie or perspicacitie of finding out things,
3. (...), Sagacitie.
which Plato makes to be an excellent kind of Prudence, or a natural Invention,
which directs the Reason to find out things wrapped up in Nature: which he
elsewhere calls a Sagacitie of Nature. So in his Epino. page 976. There remains
a mavelous faculty, whereby we easily and expeditely learn any thing; and
having learnt it can faithfully commend it to memory, and as occasion serves,
by an happy celeritie recall it, which some call Wisdom, others good Nature,
but others, (...), Sagacitie of Nature. This (...), or natural Sagacitie, Plato
makes to be the same with his (...), good Nature: So Plato, Defin. page 412.
(...), Sagacitie is a natural generositie of mind, whereby a person is enabled
happily to conjecture what ought to be done. Again it is styled (...), an acumen
of judgment. This natural Sagacitie, Plato, Repub. 2. page 376. makes very
essential to a Magistrate, in order to his more exact judging of persons and
things, and final decision of Controversies. Solomon we know was endowed with
this natural Sagacitie, even to admiration; which discovered it self in the
decision of that arduous case between the two Harlots, 1 Kings 3.23, 24, etc.
as also in resolving the Queen of Sheba's questions, 2 Chronicles. 9.1. which kind
of Sagacitie Politicians call King-Craft. This natural Sagacitie is elsewhere
styled (...), (...).
a facility of judgment: which in the Platon. Defin. page 414. is defined
(...), A good judgment tenacious of what is determined by reason. Again, this
natural Sagacitie passes sometimes under the notion of (...), which is
defined, Platon. Defin. page 412. (...), An habit elective of what is best. One
great office of this natural Sagacitie, consistes in the knowledge of men, their
several Humors, Inclinations, Designs, Interests, 4. (...), Experience.
and Combinations, etc. (4) Another part of moral Prudence is Experience, which
Plato calls (...), and makes very essential to a true Philosopher. So Plato,
Repub. 9. page 582. (...), The experienced person endowed with prudence is the
only true Philosopher. Then he adds: (...). Thence (in the same Repub. 9.) he
joins Prudence and Experience together with Reason, which he makes the best
Judges of human Affairs: (...), We rightly judge by Experience joined with
Prudence and Reason. And Plato, in his Gorgias, gives us the reason, why
Experience is so essential to Prudence: (...), Experience makes our life to
pass away according to Rules of Art; whereas inexperience makes us live
casually. Again: (...), There are many Arts experimentally found out among men,
from several Experiments, etc. And because experimental Prudence is gained by
sense and sensible observation; thence Plato Timaeus, page 103. defines it a
subtlety of sense, or good sensation of the Soul: (...), Prudence is a good
sensation of Soul. Expetience is indeed the main Seminary of human Prudence.
(1) In that it furnishes us with the choicest observations of past and present
times, whereby we are capacitated to make some prudent conjecture of what is
likely to succeed. (2) Experience draws down general Rules and Precepts of
Wisdom to particular and proper use. (3) Experience gives men a more inward
feeling and lively apprehension of themselves and others. Thence Plato makes
this self-knowlege the highest piece of Prudence; which he calls (...), a good
sensation. (4) Experience does much greaten and add to the quantity of our
knowledge, by furnishing the mind with fresh observations: whence Plato brings
in Solon speaking thus, ((...), The longer I live, the more I know and teach.
(5) Experience adds not only to the quantity, but also to the quality of our
knowledge, by rendering it more clear and distinct. For experience reduces
particular observations, in themselves confused, unto a regular Series and
Order; whence general Rules are framed, which makes our knowledge more distinct
and certain. (6) Experience greatly fixes and confirms our Notions of things.

2. Having finished the Generic Notion of moral Philosophy, 2. The Subject of
Moral Prudence the Soul, and particularly the Conscience.
which is moral Prudence, we now proceed to the Subject thereof, expressed in
the Platonic Definition by (...), the Soul: for indeed moral Prudence moves
and influenceth the whole Soul, and therefore it is not unjustly seated
therein; though the proper seat thereof be the practic Judgment, which Divines
term Conscience; which is a petty God, or God's Vicegerent, and Vicar in the
Soul, to command, or threaten; to accuse, or excuse; to justify, or condemn.
This Vicarious Divine office of Conscience, Plato seems to have had some
Traditional Notices of: whence he terms Conscience (...) Fame; and makes it to
be a kind of Demon, or petty God in men. So de Leg. 8 (...), This Law of Fame
partakes of a mavelous faculty, seeing no one durst to breathe otherwise than
according to the Dictates of her Law. Serranus here acquaints us, Plato's
(...), Conscience's Law.
That Plato calls (...), his Law of Fame, that Imperial power of Conscience well
known to al; which comprehends those commun Principes, That God is to be
feared, etc. This Law of Conscience he says is unwritten, yet notwithstanding
there is in all men's minds, (...), a Sacred Law, whose force and efficace tames
every Soul, and compels it, by fear, to obey positive Laws. From the authority
of this Law it is, as the Philosopher teaches, that men come to understand the
difference of good and evil. Again Serranus adds: Our Philosopher calls this
Divine Law of Conscience, (...), the Law of Fame; and says, that it is connate
in all men, it being a Science that teaches the difference of good and evil;
and the Conservator and Vindictor of al Laws; and the (...), or Precursor of
that most excellent Chorus of Virtues; whose admirable faculties and actions
flow from no other Fountain, than the sparks of this (...), etc. This Law or
Light of Conscience is twofold. (1) Habitual, which is called in the Schools
(...), Synteresis. (2) Actual, which is termed (...), Syneidesis.

(1) The Synteresis, 1. Synteresis, the Habit of Principes.
or habitual Light of Conscience is defined, in the Schools, a natural habit of
active Principes. For as speculative Reason discourses of Speculatives, so
practic Reason of Practics: as therefore there are naturally implanted in us
certain speculative Principes, which appertein to Intelligence; so also are
there certain active Principes, which belong to that natural habit of
Conscience, called (...), Synteresis, as Aquinas, Part. 1. Q. 79. And this
habitual Light or Law of Conscience, is the same with Plato's (...), a Law of
Fame, which is elsewhere by him termed (...), 2. The Syneidesis, self-reflexion.
Right Reason, as anon. (2) The actual Light or Law of Conscience called by the
Ancients (...), is Conscience strictly taken. So Aquinas, Part. 1. Quaest. 79.
Art. 13. Conscience taken properly is not a power, but an Act; whereby we apply
our Science to what we undertake; which application is followed by
Testification, or Ligation, or Excusation, and Accusation. By which it appears,
that the proper office of this Syneidesis is self-reflexion; whence follows
accusation, or excusation, etc. as Romans 2.15. And because this reflexive Light
of Conscience does necessarily suppose inward sense, hence it is often called
(...), sensation, also (...), Synesis, or sensate judgment. So Aquinas,
Synesis, or sensate judgment imports a right judgment about particular
operables. So Plato, in his Theaet. makes al true Science to be a kind of
Sensation, (...), Science is nothing else but Sensation. And more particularly,
in his Timaeus, page 103. he calls (...), Prudence, (...), a good Sensation:
which exactly answers to the Scripture Phraseologie, which sets forth this
reflexive act of Conscience by (...), as Phil. 1.9. (...). and thence Heb.
5.14. we read of (...), Phil. 1.9.
etc. The life of the new Creature, as well as of the old, consistes in these
self-reflexive Acts of Conscience, which spring from inward sense and feeling.
And Plato, in his Alcibiad. page 133, 134. tells us, That he that reflectes upon
himself, his own Soul and Wisdom, thereby becomes as it were omniscient:
whereas they, who know not themselves, know not what is good or evil for them;
nor yet what belongs to themselves, or to other men: such therefore can never
make good Politicians, or Occonomists, etc. In brief; Self-reflexions, or our
actions upon our selves, are of all the highest and noblest, and those by which
we live and work as men, and perfect that part of the Soul called Conscience;
which directs al we do, according to right Reason, etc.

3. As for the Measure or Rule of Moral Prudence, 3. The Rule of Prudence,
(...) Right Reason.
we find it expressed in the forementioned Platonic Definition under this
notion, (...), according to right Reason. This Platonic (...), (which is
asserted in like manner by the Stoics, and others) right Reason is the same
with the Light or Law of Nature, which is twofold. (1) Subjective. (2)
Objective.

1. As for Subjective Right Reason, Light or Law of Nature, Right Reason is 1.
Subjective.
it is no other than those commun Principes of Morality, seated in that part
of Conscience which they call Synteresis, of which in the foregoing. 6. This
Seminary of engrafted active Notions, or moral Principes is styled by the
Stoics (...), the Commun Law; also (...), right Reason; against which, say
they, nothing is to be done; as Diog. Laert. in Zeno. It Is termed by Plato
(...), the Law of Being. So Minos, page 315. (...), where, says Serranus, by
this appellation (...), Plato understands the Eternal Law of Nature, which,
amidst the various Laws of Nations and their vicissitudes, continues uniforme
and the same; and thence is truly termed (...), Being; therefore he calls it,
(...), the right Reason of the Eternal Law: and because our actions are to be
measured by the Rule of these commun Notions, therefore Plato names this Law
(...), the Royal Law. So again, Serranus in Plato de Legib. 8. The (...),
Delineation of this Eternal Law is this. There is in the minds of al, as soon
as they are borne, a certain (...), Sacred Law. He that consecrates this Law in
his mind, as a certain sacred, is thereby furnished with an excellent remedy
against the insolence and impotence of human lusts; as it was said of the
Tyrant, (...). These active Principes, contained in this interne Law of
Conscience, are generally styled (...), (...),
commun Notions: they were named by Zeno (...), Comprehensions; because they
comprehended the first seeds or principes of knowledge. Cicero tells us, that
Epicurus called them (...), (...).
Anticipations, (as he translates the word) because they supposed a Previous
formation of things in the Soul. The Stoics used the same term likewise.
Chrysippus defined this natural Law, or Conservatorie of commun Principes, a
natural Intelligence of those things, which universally are. Cicero styles
these commun Notions, Inchoate Intelligences, of which see Lud. Vives in
August. Civ. lib. 8. cap. 7. The Scripture also styles these commun Principes
fixed in Conscience, a Law; so Romans 2.14, 15. where the Gentiles are said to be
a Law to themselves, etc. And indeed these commun seeds of natural light are a
private Law, which God has deeply engraven on men's Consciences, and is
universally extensive unto al, though with a latitude of degrees; it being in
some more, in some less, but in all in great measure obliterated, and defaced
since the Fall. It is also by Divines generally termed the Light, or Law of
Nature; because it flows in, and with, and from human Nature, either
immediately, or mediately.

2. As for the Objective (...), 2. The Objective (...) Law of Nature.
Right Reason (which Plato seems to have had some traditional notices of) it
contains those broken Traditions of the Moral Law, which were scattered up and
down among the Gentiles. That Plato had received some fragments of Gods Law;
and that by his (...), Right Reason, he does import the same, seems very
probable, both from that expression in his Minos, page 315. (...), The Law of
Being, i. e. of the first Being, as he usually styles God: as also from that
other expression of his, Minos, page 317. (...), This right Reason is the Royal
Law, i. e. Gods Divine Law, which is so styled Jam. 2.8. In this sense right
Reason may be said (as the Schools will have it) to give (...) esse morale, or
Morality to human Acts: so Stobaeus de Virtut. Ser. 1. fo. 9. (...), Virtue is
a conformity according to right Reason, and Sin is a transgression against
right Reason. Where, by right Reason we must understand not the subjective
Light, or Law of Conscience, which is imperfect; but the objective Light of
Nature comprised in the Moral Law. In this sense we must understand that
Principe in the Schools, That right Reason gives the esse morale to moral
Beings. Thus much for the Platonic Definition of Moral Philosophy.

. 2. Next to the generic Notion of Moral Philosophy, The last End its
Influence in Morals.
the first thing that comes under consideration is the last End, which is first
in intention, though last in execution. Yea, indeed the last End is the first
Principe of moral Prudence: For what is Prudence, but the right disposition and
ordination of al means and actions? And is not the last end the rule and
measure of al order? Is not every thing then rightly disposed, when it is
conveniently brought into a subordination to its last end? Wherefore the
contemplation of the last end is of greatest moment in Moral Philosophy. And
they say, that Plato was the first that used the Greek (...) in this
philosophic and strict Notion: for Homer and other of the Ancients used the
word to express an Effect in its accomplishment and perfection; but Plato
restrained it so, as to signify thereby a final Cause, or that which is last
in the series of things desired, yet first in intention. This Cicero interprets
extreme, last, chiefest. What force, efficace and influence the last end has in
Morals, Plato frequently inculcates. So in his Theaetetus, he assures us, That
al Science is inutile, yea noxious, without the notice of the best End. This
last End he makes to be, (...), the principal End of althings: which Proclus
calls, (...), the End of Ends. And for the more full and clear explication of
this last End, its universal influence and excellence, the following
Propositions are diligently to be considered.

1. Prop. It is necessary, that we constitute some last End, as well
posititively as negatively, in every Series of Actions. This Hypothesis is well
argued by Suarez, Metaph. Disput. 24. Sect. 1. And the reason is most evident:
for look as in Descent from the intention of the end to the election and
execution of the means, we must necessarily at last stop in some one or more
means, which are first in execution, though last in intention; so in Ascent
from the means to the end, it is as necessary that we at last stop in some last
end, which is first in intention and last in execution. Again, as there is a
subordination of second Causes to the first Cause; so in like manner of
inferior Ends to the last End. For in Ends, and those things that conduce
thereto, there cannot be a progress into infinite; but as there is a first
means from whence the motion begins; so there must be a last end, in which it
terminates. In Ends there is a twofold order, (1) of Intention, (2) of
Execution: and in both orders there must be a first and a last. That which is
first in the order of Intention is as it were the Principe, which moves the
appetite, and gives bounds to it; and therefore can be no other than the last
End: that which is first in the order of Execution, is the first means
conducing to the last End. So that a progress into infinite is on neither part
possible: if there were not a last end, nothing could be desired, no action of
the appetite could be terminated, neither would the intention of the Agent ever
cease: if there were not a first means, from whence the execution should begin,
no Agent could begin to work, etc.

2. Prop. The last End of althings must be as extensive and ample, as the first
Principe or Cause. Thus Plato, de Leg. 4 p. 715. (...), God, (as the old
Tradition testifies) having in himself the Principe, and End, and Medium of
althings. In which he plainly indigitates, That God is the first Cause and last
End of althings. That the last End is as large as the first Principe is
evident, because the order of Ends must correspond and answer to the order of
Agents: as they who are under God, ought not morally, neither can they
physically move, but as dependent on the motion and concurse of God, the first
Cause; so neither ought they to desire any thing under God, but what may
conduce to God as their last End. Such as the Universalitie of the first Cause
is in giving Being or Welbeing; such is the Universalitie of the last End in
requiring and calling for the emprovement of al. Neither does man pay the
homage due to his first Cause, farther than his regresse thereto answers his
progress therefrom. God as the first Principe gives Being, and as the last End
terminates and sixeth the Being conferred. Wherefore the Creature that
depends on God as the first Cause, must tend to him as his last End.

3. Prop. The last End of althings can be but one. This Hypothesis both Plato
and Aristotle concord in. And the reason is most apparent; because althings
desire their utmost perfection, which consistes in their tendence to the most
perfect Being. Now the most perfect Being can be but one: For if there should
be more than one most perfect, then the one would have somewhat which the other
has not; and so neither would be most perfect. Every good by the addition of
some other good is made better and more perfect, except the most simple and
perfect Good, by the participation whereof al other goods are made better. Hence

4. Prop. Every man, in every human Act, virtually, if not actually, intends
some last End. This is manifest; because in every human Act something is
desired for it self, which cannot be referred to any other thing: and what is
this but some last end? Again, man naturally desires the complement of al
good: and albeit there may not be an actual elicite intention in every man as
to his last end, yet there is a natural propension thereto; whence proceed al
Acts about particular goods.

5. Prop. The last End is desired infinitely, without end or terms. Thence
Aristotle, (following Plato herein) in his Magn. Moral. lib. 1. cap. 1. defines
the last End thus: (...), The perfect End is that, which being obtained, we
neither desire nor need any thing beyond it. So the Stoics, who were akin to
the Platonists, define the last End, (...), That for the sake of which al
offices are performed, but it for nothing else. So that the last End gives
terms and bounds to althings, but admits no terms or measure. As to take away
the first Cause of our Being, supposes us not to be; so to take away the last
End, supposes a confused infinity as to acting. Therefore something must be
simply desirable for it self and for no other: For that which a man desires in
order to a further end, the same he desires in such a measure as is most
conducible to that end: but what he desires for it self, toward that his
desire is infinite: for the better it is, the more desirable: therefore if
infinitely good infinitely desirable, without terms or bounds. The only
measure of loving our last End is to love it without measure: for the last End
being the term of the appetite, it may not receive terms or limits from any
other thing; but by how much the more it is loved, by so much the better is the
love. In althings appetible the last End gives measure but receives none;
because the proper reason of althings we desire is taken from the End. Hence

6. Prop. The last End is the term and measure of althings. What Principes are
in Demonstration, the same is the last End in Action: for all means receive
their Necessity, Goodness, and Specification from the last End. Whatever is
ordained to an end ought to be proportioned thereto, and so measured thereby.
The last End has the same influence on the means, as the Aristotelean Form is
said to have on the matter: They say the form gives the main of Essence,
Distinction, Virtue, Operation, and Perfection to the body; and does not the
End give the same to the means? How little desirable are the means, as means,
without their reference to the End? Is not the distinction and perfection of
althings, morally considered, taken from their End? This is well expressed by
Plato, Phileb. page 25. (...), Al these things must be referred to the one
infinite, i.e. the last End. So again, de Leg. 4. page 716. (...), But truly
God is to us the chief measure of althings, i.e. God, as our last End, is the
measure both of essence, faculty, and operation: all the multitude of means
ought to be reduced to and governed by the Unity of our last End: which is the
true meaning of that moral Axiom, Al multitude ought to be governed by Unity.
Thus also Aristotle, Eth. l. 3. c. 10. (...), Everything is defined or bounded
by its End. Hence the End is styled the Term, which confines and fixes the
flux of things, which without it are full of confusion and indetermination. And
therefore by how much the more the Soul departs from God, its last End, by so
much the more instable, confused, and vagrant it is. Hence

7. Prop. God is the last End of althings. This Hypothesis resultes out of the
former, and is in it self most evident: for every thing is so far only an end
as it is good: wherefore the last end must of necessity be the chiefest good:
and what is this but God? Is not God the prime Cause of al goodness in every
good? And is he not thence the Cause of every End? Must he not then of
necessity be the last End of althings? For that for which every thing is such,
must needs be more such. Again, is not God the supreme and first in order of
Causes, and therefore the last in order of Ends? Thence Plato, Gorg page 499.
(...), Althings seemed to us to be undertaken for good. Art thou of the same
opinion with us, that the end of al actions is good, and that althings else are
undertaken for its sake; but the end it self is not undertaken for any thing
else? Wherein he proves, (1) That every end is good, and the last end the
chiefest good. (2) That althings else are undertaken for the last end, but it
for nothing else. Whereby it is evident, that God is the last end of althings;
because the chiefest good, for which althings else are desired. Thence Proclus,
that great Platonist, Theolog. Plat. lib. 2. cap. 4. calls God (...), The End of
Ends, who convertes al Ends to himself, and subsistes in or about himself. Hence

8. Prop. The ultimate formal Reason or proper Motive of loving things is, not
their own goodness, but the Divine Bonitie. For the end having the reason of
good, and the last end of the chiefest good, hence althings are so far
desirable as they refer to the last end and chiefest good, which is God. The
end as compared with its means has the same regard, that the formal reason has
to its object: now is not the object specified by its formal reason? and must
not the means also be specified, determined, and ordered by their last end,
which is God? Althings are so far good as they come from and tend to the Divine
goodness; which is the first effective Principe, Exemplar, and final Cause of
al good. So Plato, Repub. 2. page 357. tells us, That the chiefest good, which
makes althings else good, is, (...), that which is desired for it self: yea,
(...), Goodness it self and Being it self. Whence it necessarily follows, that
nothing can be the ultimate formal reason of love or desire, but the Divine
Bonitie. For the necessity and goodness of al means is taken from their last
end, which is the first Mover in the order of Ends, as the first Cause is in
order of Efficients. Hence

9. Prop. Assimilation to the Divine Bonitie is the last End of althings,
specially human operations. For so far as any thing participates of the Divine
Bonitie, so far it is made like unto the same: if therefore althings tend to
God as their last end, that so they might participate of his Divine Bonitie, it
necessarily follows, that the last end of althings is Assimilation to God. What
are al Creatures but Imitamens of the Divine Bonitie? And is not every thing so
far participant of the Divine Bonitie, as it is assimilated thereto? Do not
althings then in their motions tend to the divine similitude, as to their last
end? It Is true, the tendence of inanimate Creatures and Brutes, yea of al
Minkind in their natural state is only passive and remote: they are reduced to
their last end the Divine Bonitie, but they have no active power of adhering
thereto. Hence al lower Creatures, yea man himself in his apostate state, have
only some vestigia or dark shadows of the Divine Bonitie; the bright image
thereof being peculiar to pious Souls, and good Angels. That (...),
Assimilation to God is the last end of human Nature, Plato frequently
inculcates. Thence says he, (...), The end of good men is to be assimilated to
God. So in his Theatet. page 176. he makes Assimilation to God the end of his
Philosophy; which he elsewhere makes to be Contemplation, Love, and Imitation
of God. Hence

10. Prop. Adherence to God as our last End importes not only subjection and
dependence, but also the best Constitution, Complexion, and Perfection of a
rational Creature. For by how much the higher the end is, by so much the more
noble and perfect is the act: as the intention regulates and qualifies the
Action; so the end regulates and qualifies the intention. Now Assimilation to
the Divine Bonitie being the ultimate end of the rational Creature, it
necessarily follows, that Adherence to this Divine Bonitie be his supreme
perfection. The Divine Bonitie, says Proclus, Theolog. Platon. l. 1. c. 21. is
conscrvative of althings, constitutive and fundative of althings, impletive of
althings, and conversive of althings to it self. Such as the last end is, such
is the wills motion: that is the best election, which does most actually intend
God as its last end. The nearer the Soul approaches to God, the more perfect it
is: the last end attractes the appetite to it self: for to tend to an end is to
be drawn by that end: and by how much the more strongly the Soul is drawn by
God as its last end, by so much the more intimately it adheres to him. The
motion of the Soul toward its last end is much stronger than that toward the
means; and therefore the adherence is the greater. What more natural than for a
rational Creature to adhere to its last end? And O, what perfection arises
hence! To be drawn by God as our last end, is to be drawn by our most noble,
perfect, and best self; and therefore this speaks not only Subjection, but
blessed Constitution and Perfection.

. 3. Having summed up Plato's Philosophemes of the last End, The chiefest Good,
its Proprieties.
we now proceed to his Contemplations of the chiefest Good; which has intimate
connection therewith. His main Discourses of the chiefest Good he lays down in
his Philebus, his Convivium, 1. It is the Idea of Good.
and de Repub. l. 26. c. 9. we shall reduce the whole to these following
proprieties. 1. Plato styles the chiefest Good (...), the Idea of al good. So
in his Philebus, having proposed this Question, Wherein the chiefest Good
consistes? he resolves it into the Idea of Good. Which he elsewhere styles
(...), the Good, meaning the chiefest. He terms the chiefest good, the Idea of
al good, (1) because it is (...), a self-sufficient Good, yea Goodness it
self, in the abstract: i. e. al Good, pure Good, Good by himself, and so (...),
perfectly Good. The chiefest Good is Good by his own Goodness, and not by any
participated Goodness. Whence some of the Platonists style him (...),
superessential Goodness. Where ever is the chiefest Good, there is the Essence
of Good: Goodness in the abstract, and the chiefest Good are convertible: you
cannot find the one, but you will find the other also. Whatever good is predicable
of any Creature is in the chiefest Good in the abstract: and al know, that
Abstracts speak Forms and Essences. So that the chiefest Good must needs be
essential Goodness in the abstract, and thence by consequence al Good in Idea.
Thus Basil, in Psalm. 1. (...), The self-good [or Ideal good] is really blessed,
unto which al look, and which al desire, as the measure of al good. (2) Plato
styles the chiefest Good the Idea of Good; because he is both the prime
Efficient and Exemplar of al Good. [1] He is the prime Efficient of al good. As
al Creatures flow from and reflow to God, as the Ocean or plenitude of al
Being; so also their Goodness participates of the like flux from, and refluxe
to the Divine Goodness. No Creature has any good in it, further than it
partakes of the chiefest Good: whatever you possess, if you want the chiefest
Good, you possess nothing. Hence, (2) the chiefest Good is the measure of al
Good. Every thing is so far good to us, as it corresponds with and refers to
the chiefest Good. So Plato, Repub. 2. page 357. (...), We love the chiefest
Good for its own sake, as also althings else that flow from it: meaning the
chiefest Good is the only measure of our love. So Arist. Rhet. l. 1. c. 7.
makes that the chiefest Good, which is chosen for it self, and thence the
measure of al good.

2. The chiefest Good, according to Plato, is (...), 2. The chiefest Good the
first Beauty.
Beauty it self: or (...), the first Beauty. So in his Conviv. page 210.
Whosoever is brought thus far, to contemplate things beautiful rightly and in
their order, arriving to the end of things lovely, (...), he shall immediately
contemplate that wonderful native Beauty, for the sake of which we have
hitherto undertaken al our labors. Wherein he teaches us, that we may not fix
our eyes only on these inferior Beauties, but by them, as by so many ascents,
mount up to the contemplation of the first supreme Beauty, which is our
chiefest good. That the prime Beauty is the chiefest good will be most evident,
if we look into the nature of Beauty as opened by Plato, who makes al Beauty
to consiste, (1) in Symmetrie and Proportion. So in his Timaeus, page 87.
(...), Every Good is beautiful: and what is beautiful cannot want measure,
order or proportion. Aquinas makes this difference between Bonitie and Beauty,
that Bonitie or Goodness properly regards the Will, but Beauty the Eye and
Understanding: thence beautiful colors arise from that variety and convenance,
which is in them to please the eye. That Symmetrie is essential to Beauty,
Timaeus tells us, p. 103. (...), etc. The Principes of Beauty are Symmetrie or
proportion of parts, etc. Thence Plato, Leg. 3. makes Wisdom to be most
beautiful: because (...), the chiefest of Symphonies, or Harmonies. So Conviv.
page 205. (...), Wisdom is the greatest of Beauties. Now Plato, Conviv. page
211. says, The chiefest Good is, (...), of it self, with it self, the most
uniforme and simple Being; and therefore most beautiful. Again, is Wisdom most
beautiful, because most concordant with it self? And is not God the chiefest
Good also the most uniforme Wisdom? The proportion required to Beauty is well
expressed by Sales, de l'Amour de Dieu, l. 1. c. 1. Union, says he, established
in distinction makes order: order breeds convenance, agreament, and proportion:
and convenance in things entire and accomplished makes Beauty. An Army is
beautiful, when it is composed of al its parts, so ranked together in their
order, that their distinction is reduced to that agreament, which they ought to
have together. To make Music beautiful, there is required not only that the
voices be clear and well distinguished, but also that they be conjoined in such
sort one to the other, that they make one just consonance and harmony, by means
of the union that is in the distinction, and the distinction that is in the
union of the voices, which may deservedly be called a discordant Accord, or
rather an accordant Discord. Hence (2) Al Beauty arises from Perfection and
Integrity of parts. Those things are most beautiful in their kind, which are
most perfect: And is not the chiefest Good most absolutely and simply perfect?
(3) The last and main Cause of Beauty is Splendour, Light and Claritie. Thence
Beauty is defined by Plato the Fulgor and Luster of Good. Splendour and
Brightness is essential to Beauty, to the end that it may be visible or
intelligible. Obscurities, Shadows, and Darknesses are deformed, and render
althings deformable; because nothing in them is visible or intelligible:
neither order, nor distinction, nor union, nor convenance. So Job 10.22. in the
description of the grave, he says, It is a land of darkness, as darkness it
self, and of the shadow of death, without any order, and where the light is as
darkness: i.e. There is no light, therefore no order and beauty. Light gives
life to brightness; which is but a dead inutile thing, if splendour and beauty
give not life and efficace to it, as we see in lively colors. So in man, his
beauty is not accomplished without a good grace and luster, which is the life
of beauty. Thus in the soverain Beauty of God, the Splendour and Brightness
of his Perfections renders him most beautiful. Whence Beauty and Glory, both
in profane and sacred Philosophy, have one and the same Idea: for what is
beauty, but the effulgence, or shine of al perfections in any object? And if
this fulgor or splendour be illustrious and most bright, it is termed Glory. So
the beauty of the Sun, what is it but the gloriose effulgence or brightness
of its light? Whence it being a grand Question among the Ancients, What in
Nature was most beautiful? it was answered, Light. Hence beauty is defined by
the Orator, A due congruence, with a certain suavitie of color. This suavitie
of color is nothing else, but the light or splendour of that perfection or
goodness which is in the subject. Whence Aquinas defines Beauty, A certain
bland face of Bonitie or Goodness. And do not al these notions of beauty
greatly illustrate the surpassing heart-ravishing Beauty of God the chiefest
Good? What more gloriose, resplendent and effulgent than the chiefest Good?
Where may we expect more gloriose light and beauty, than with the Fountain of
Light, in whose light alone we behold light? Has not the chiefest Good the most
sweet color and bland face of goodness? Yea Plato, Repub. lib. 6. page 509.
discriminating (...) those things which are good by participation only, from
(...), the chiefest Good; he adds, That this has (...), a certain infinite
immense Beauty. So Conviv. page 211. he assures us, That althings else are
beautiful, (...), etc. by participation and in some certain mode only; but the
first Beauty is, (...), etc. most sincere, pure, immixed; not contaminated
with human colors, or other trifles. And then he breaks forth into this rapture
of Admiration: O what a blessed sight would it be, to contemplate this divine,
sincere, incontaminate, simple, uniforme Beauty! Yea, he positively affirms,
That God, who is the chiefest Good, has (...), the most illustrious and amiable
Beauty. Thus the spurious Dionysius, de Nom. Divin. cap. 4. says, That God,
as the soverain Beauty, is the Author of the soverain Convenance, beautiful
Grace and luster, which is in althings, making the distributions and
departments of his rays, by which althings are made beautifully to shine
forth. God intending to render althings beautiful and good, has reduced their
multitude and distinction to a perfect unity, i. e. to subserve the enjoyment
of himself as the first Beauty.

3. Plato makes the chiefest Good to be (...), The chiefest Good most proper,
etc.
most proper. So Repub. 9. page 586. (...), That which is best for every one,
that is most proper. Thus Conviv. page 205. (...), The chiefest Good is most
proper to every one, and yet commun to al: Propriety with Community is proper
only to the chiefest Good. There are several other proprieties of the chiefest
Good mentioned by Plato, namely that it is the most pleasant, solid,
substantial, vital, uniforme, agreeable, infinite, eternal, necessary, divine
Good: which by his own concession are applicable to none but God. Of which
hereafter more in Aristotle's Philosophy, B. 4. c. 1.. 22.

. 4. Next to the last End, Of Use and its Regulation.
and chiefest Good follows Use and Fruition; the former belonging to the Means,
the later to End. Use properly consistes in the subordination and reference of
althings to our last end, which alone is the object of Fruition. The whole life
of man is distributed into Use and Fruition. Use is a tendence or referring
thing to our end. This by Plato is often expressed under the notion of
Temperance, which he makes to be the moderate use and reference of althings to
our last end. So in his Gorgias, page 507. he begins thus: (...), The temperate
Soul is good. Thence he collects, That the intemperate Soul is (...), mad and
dissolute. Whence he adds: (...), The temperate man will do that which has a
decorum both toward God and men. And he gives the reason of it: (...), For it
is not the part of a temperate man to prosecute or fly from what he ought not;
but to fly from and prosecute both things, persons, and pleasures as need
requires; as also patiently to tolerate the same. Thence he concludes: (...),
etc. This seems to me to be the primarie and chief end of a regular life, that
Justice and Temperance be always present. In which we have these observables.
(1) That the temperate Soul is the best, and the intemperate the worst. (2)
That Temperance formally consistes in giving al persons and things their just
decorum, and measure. (3) That we then give althings their just measure, when
we prosecute, or fly from them, in that manner and measure as we ought. (4)
That we then prosecute and fly from things as we ought, when we use, or use
them not in subservience to our last end, which is the measure of althings.
This is well expressed by Aristotle, (who followed Plato herein) Eth. l. 3. c.
15. (...), Wherefore in a temperate man the concupiscent part ought to conform
to reason: for moral good is the end of both. Thence a temperate man desires
what he ought, and in that manner as he ought, and when he ought: which is the
Constitution, Law, and Order of Reason. Whereby he fully confirms Plato's
sentiment, that Temperance gives althings their just number, weight, and
measure, by reducing al to such an Order, as may render them subordinate to the
last end. The Stoic expresses this Temperance in the use of things by (...),
sustain what is grievous, and abstain from what is delicious. Which is thus
expounded: The temperate man, (...), sustains without grief the absence of
pleasures, and abstains from the fruition of them when present. This some make
to be a great degree of fortitude: for the valiant man (...), bears things
terrible, and forbears things audacious. The sum of al is, that the temperate
man is not inordinately afflicted for the loss, or excessively affected with
the presence of any inferior good, but uses althings in measure and
subservience to his last end.

This Temperance in the use of things Plato also illustrates by the notions of
Order and universal Justice. So Gorg. page 506. The virtate of every thing is
its order: (...), That therefore which is constituted and conformed by order,
is the virtue of every thing. Wherefore the Soul that keeps its order is better
than that which wants it. And what is it, in Plato's sense, for a Soul to keep
its order, but to use althings, servato ordine finis, in subordination to its
end? This is well illustrated by Jansenius, August. Tom. 2. l. 2. c. 19. where
he proves out of Augustine, That virtue is nothing else but the order of Love.
For by Love, as a Divine Pondus, the Soul reduces althings to its last end,
namely God. This is incomparably well expressed by Plato, in his Philebus, page
24, 25. Whatsoever things seem to have excess or defect, more or less, (...),
al those ought to be referred to the infinite Being, as the only measure. This
he more openly expresses, Leg. 4. page 716. (...), etc. God is to us the
measure of althings, unto which scope and mark al our actions, as so many
arrows, ought to tend. So Repub. 1. page 331. (...), I count the possession of
things of great use, yet not for every man, but he who is moderate and
temperate, i. e. who refers al to his last end. Thence he adds: (...), That
riches are most useful for a wise man, who can and will use al in subordination
to his last end. Whence a thing utile, Definit. Plat. p. 414. is thus
described: (...). Again, (...), A thing utile, is that which renders us capable
of suffering well, or doing good, in order to our last end. So also (...),
conducible is defined, (...), that which conduces to good, namely our last
end. These and such like are Plato's Philosophemes about Use, which may be al
reduced to these following Propositions.

1. The Utility of any created good consistes not in its own goodness, but in
its reference to our last end. Herein consistes the good of every inferior
good, when it subserves and tends to our chiefest good. The good and evil of
althings is to be judged by their relation to, or distance from the last end.
Things are so far good as they enable us to do good by serving God. All that we
have, or can do is of God, and therefore ought to be for God. Nothing is to be
loved or enjoyed for it self, but the chiefest good. Thus Aristotle, Eth. l. 4.
c. 1. (...), Those things that come under Use, we may use either well or il.
Thus Riches are reckoned among utile goods. Now he that is endowed with virtue
for the use of any thing, does use that thing in the best manner. Therefore he
uses riches best, which has attained to that virtue, which belongs to the use
thereof. Thus riches and al other lower goods must be referred to God. Hence

2. To use any thing, is to refer it to some other thing superior in our
estime. Herein consistes the formal difference between Use and Fruition: Things
are enjoyed for themselves their own goodness; but they are used in order to
something else. We do not properly enjoy, but use the means, neither use but
enjoy our last end. Hence it follows (1) That al Use of God as a means for the
obtainment of some other end is inordinate. (2) That al Use of the Creature,
which is not referred to God, is also sinful. This perversitie and inordination
is found in every sin, whiles men enjoy what they ought to use, and use what
they ought to enjoy. This Augustine makes to be the perversion of al order,
fruendis uti velle, atque utendis frui: When men enjoy the means and use the
last end. But of this more, Prop. 4.

3. Things are then used orderly when they subserve and are subordinate to our
last end. Herein chiefly consistes the order of Love, when it resolves al lower
goods and actions into the chiefest Good. Al lower goods are to be desired not
for enjoyment, but use; and when we have them, we must use them well. This is
well explicated by Simplicius, in Epictet. cap. 1. page 2. where he tells us,
This is the Spirit of Philosophy, (...), to keep the force of the mind free
from the body and brutish affections, and to refer the use of al to the
chiefest Good. Wherefore it does allow the moderate use and fruit of externe
things, which are estimed as good, so far as they agree with the true or best
good: but yet so far as they differ therefrom, [ i. e. subserve not the
chiefest Good] she commands, that they be rejected. A Philosopheme worthy of a
Christian mind. This is the import of that Divine Admonition, 1 Cor. 7.31. And
they that use this world as not abusing it: 1 Cor. 7.31.
(...), as not overusing it. When ever we overuse any lower good, we abuse it,
i. e. turn it off from its proper use. Man has a great liberty to use
althings indifferent indifferently, yet so as al must conduce to his last end.
And indeed we are no further master of any thing, or free in the use of it,
than it is brought into subservience unto God. Hence,

4. Concupiscence.
To use or enjoy any inferior good for it self is to abuse it. This lower
Universe and each part thereof was not made for man's Fruition, but Use. It Is
true, Brutes have liberty to enjoy the good things of senses; because they are
not capable of any higher good: but man's liberty lies in the using these
inferior goods for an higher end, the enjoyment of God: and when he perverts
this order, he falls under miserable cursed bondage. Thus Plato, Gorg. page 507.
having laid down this Hypothesis, That Temperance consistes in the regular use
of althings, he concludes: (...), And thus he must act, lest giving the rains
to lusts, and suffering them to wander where they list, whiles he thinks to
satisfy them, he fall into an infinite evil, and live a robbers life. Whereby
he means, that when men's lusts grow irregular in the use of things, they soon
prove infinite and insatiable. This inordinate love to the Creature for it self
is usually styled Concupiscence and Lust: which is nothing else but a brutish
desire after, and fruition of the Creature for it self, without reference to
God, the chiefest Good. This tyrannic Concupiscence Plato accurately
philosophiseth on, Repub. 9. page 574. where he describes it, as the greatest
Tyrant in the world: Of which see Philos. Genesis P. 1. l. 3. c. 3. sect. 5.. 2.
This perversion of the order of Love, and abuse of inferior goods Augustine
sadly complains of, in that men hereby use what they should enjoy, and enjoy
what they should use, i. e. they use God and what belongs to him as means to
promote their inferior goods, the object of their fruition; and that against
the order of true Charity, yea of human Nature, which requires, that we should
use al lower goods in subordination to God the chiefest Good. Creatures, when
they are used in subservience to God their last End, they are then in their
proper place and amiable; but when they are made the object of Fruition, they
are then in the place of God, and so most abominable. Jansenius, August. Tom.
2. de Not. laps. l. 2. c. 19. page 156. gives this reason a priori, why it is
unlawful to love or enjoy any Creature for it self; because it is against that
natural order, which is established by the eternal Law. For such is the natural
condition of a rational Creature, that, according to the order of Nature, he is
placed beneath God, coordinate with intellectual Creatures, but above
corporeous Creatures. Wherefore seeing God alone is superior to the rational
Creature, he ought, according to the Law of Nature, by the Pondus of Love to
subject himself to God only: which so long as he continues to do, he remains
just and virtuose, and most ordinate in his kind; sithat virtue is the best
state of a rational Creature; or, according to Augustine, nothing else but the
order of Love: and by Love, as by a weight, the Soul is kept in this middle
state, under God the most supreme Being, and above inferior Creatures. This
therefore is the bitter root of al inordinate motion, when the Soul does by its
love, as a terrene Pondus, move inordinately toward the Creatures, so as to
become subject to them. Yea, does not this perverting the order of Love bring
the whole Creation under bondage, as Romans 8.21, Romans 8.21, 22.
22? Wherein consistes the present bondage of the Creatures, but in this, that
they are perverted and turned aside from that Order for which they were made,
namely from the serving their Creator, to feed the lusts of men? The Creatures
are not put to that use for which they were made by God, and this makes them
groan to be delivered, etc. Herein consistes the Liberty of al Creatures, and
our Liberty in the use of them, that we are thereby made more free in the
service and fruition of God; by subjecting our selves and al inferior goods to
God, for the serving and enjoyment of him, we gain dominion over our selves and
althings else. But if the heart be inordinate in adhering to or use of the most
lawful comforts, we immediately fall under bondage to them. The way to have the
Spirit free in the use of any created good, is not to use or enjoy it too much,
by letting the Spirit to run too far into it, or loving it for it self: for
thereby we become slaves it.

5. The more actually the Soul intends God as its last End, Intention.
in the use of inferior things, the more perfect is the use of them. It Is a
great Saying, The most actual Intention is best: Intention is the most eminent
act of Love: and the most perfect intention is that which most eyes God in the
use of althings. To intend any thing, as Suarez well observes, is to tend
toward it by all manner of vehement desires, and important endeavors. Indeed
intention differs not from efficacious desire of the end, together with the
means conducing thereto: whereby it is differenced from Velleitie; which is
only a conditionate, saint, imperfect volition of an end, without regard to the
means. The more strongly and actually we intend our end, the sooner shall we
arrive thereto in the use of means: Mat. 6.22.
a single strait intention keeps the Agent strait in its way to its end. Thus
Mat. 6.22. If therefore thine eye, i.e. the intention of thy will, be single,
i.e. if it has a single end, namely God. Jansenius, out of Augustine, Tom. 2.
l. 2. c. 20. page 162. informs us, that althings are to be referred to God,
not only by habitual Intention, as the Schools determine, but also by an
intention virtually actual. And he thus demonstrates it: because the mind, when
it acts, must requiesce in the love, not of the Creature, but of God. For this
is most certain, according to Augustine, that an habitual Intention only
without actual or virtual will not suffice; because the just, when asleep, have
habitual intention, yet they cannot then be said to refer their actions to God.
Wherefore there is always necessary an actual, or at least virtual intention of
referring althings to God. A virtual intention in human acts has the same
force as actual intention: for it acts in virtue and force received from some
former actual intention. As when a man in a journey is carried on toward his
end by a virtual intention, influenced by some former actual intention. A right
intention is the deliberation of a bended will toward God as the last end: for
where the intention is right, God is the predominant end. The end of an action
discovers its kind: and the intention discovers the end: For intention properly
belongs to the Will, whose office it is to refer al to the last end. The
intention is the guard of the thoughts and desires, that which girds up the
mind, and keeps it fixed on its last end, in the use of al means. He that does
not intend and eye God in his worldly concerns, will not intend him in his best
duties and services. To have the intention of the Will actually directed toward
God in all inferior goods is the Spirit of right Use. And herein indeed
consistes much of the Souls liberty as to means, to intend God in all. It Is a
good Notion of Aquinas, That the Soul, by intending temporals in order to God,
is elevated and advanced; otherwise it is depressed and brought down, namely
when it intends any temporal thing for it self. Thus also Jansenius, in his
August. Tom. 2. l. 1. c. 6. page 40. where he gives this difference between Use
and Fruition: Whatever is loved as an end, which a man desires to enjoy and to
be blessed therein, that rules over the Lover: for this is the difference
between Use and Fruition, that the Will depresseth it self under what it enjoys,
but it elevates it self above what it uses: so that it is a Servant of that
which it enjoys, but Lord over what it makes use of. This inferior visible
World what is it but a Map of things invisible? And ought we not then firmly
to intend God in all these lower things? And is not this the most perfect use,
when the Soul does spiritually and actually contemplate, intend, and adhere to
God in all these lower goods of time? As Intention directs the Will, so Faith
directs the Intention in the use and prosecution of al means: it is the
Intention that regulates the quality of the action in the use of things; and
it is divine Faith and Love that regulate the Intention. This is well explicated
and demonstrated by Greg. Ariminensis, 2. Sent. Did. 38. Quaest. 1. Art. 1.
where he proves, That according to the bonitie or pravitie of the Intention of
the Worker, we are to measure the bonitie or pravitie of the work. Which he
demonstrates by these Conclusions: (1) That Intention only is right or morally
good, whereby that is intended or loved for it self, which ought to be loved
for it self. (2) Every Intention of a Worker, whereby any thing besides God is
intended for it self, that Intention is evil. And the reason is invincible,
because every rational Creature ought to refer al his acts to God as his last
end. Hence, according to the bonitie or pravitie of the Intention, we may take
a measure of the bonitie or pravitie of Use: Every Intention of the Agent,
wherein any thing but God is intended as the last end, is a depraved Intention:
because nothing is to be intended for it self but the last end. Whence it
follows, that no Intention is right or morally good, but that whereby we intend
or love for it self, that which ought to be intended or loved for it self,
namely the last end and chiefest good, using and referring althings else, as
means subordinate thereto, as it is acutely demonstrated by Ariminensis, in 2.
Sent. Did. 38. Quaest. 1. Art. 1.

. 5. Having explicated the nature of Use, Fruition.
we may with more facility and expedition examine what Fruition imports. As to
use a thing, is to intend, elect, and employ it for the acquirement of some
other thing; so to enjoy a thing, is by love to adhere unto it for it self,
without reference to any other thing. Thus Jansenius, Aug. Tom. 2. l. 1. c. 6.
gives us this difference between Use and Fruition. He that uses a thing has
dominion over it, to refer it to this or that end; but he that enjoys any thing
does bring down his Soul by love unto a subjection thereto, and is in that
regard inferior to it, though superior to whatever he does use. This
Ariminensis, in Sent. Part. 1. Did. 1. Quaest. 1, 2, 3. has acutely
determined: where he gives us the nature of Fruition, and its difference from
Use in these Conclusions. (1) No Nolition is Fruition: because every Nil is the
slight of the will, and that which is ordained for some other. (2) Every
Volition is either Use or Fruition: because every thing is willed either for it
self or some other. (3) No Use is Fruition: because no one that wills a thing
for another, can be said to will that thing as his last end: because the
volition of the last end is the cause of the volition of that which refers to
that end: but nothing can be the cause of it self: Ergo. (4) Fruition and Use
may consist together in the Will, as to different objects. (5) The Will ought not
to Use God: i. e. as a means conducible to some other end. (6) A Love of
Fruition must terminate no where but on God. (7) To love any thing for God, is
nothing else than to love it, because God is loved: i. e. to love it as
conducible to God. In Fruition there are four considerables, (1) Love. (2)
Possession of and Union with the Object beloved. (3) Communion. (4) Delectation
and joy. Of these in their order.

1. Al Fruition imports Love. For no man can enjoy what he does not love: al
Love tends to Union, specially with its last end: Yea, according to the
Schools, there is a mutual Inhesion between the Lover and Beloved. The Lover
lives in the Beloved, and the Beloved in the Lover: which is most true in
regard of that Love of Fruition, whereby the Soul enjoys God: for God lives in
the Soul that loves him, and the Soul lives in God, who is essential Love. This
Love of Fruition is well expressed by Plato, Repub. 6. page 485. (...), But in
that man, whose affections are greatly ravished with one object, they are
infirm and remiss toward other things, as rivers, derived elsewhere. His
mind is, that Love of Fruition is properly toward one object, namely the last
end. But more expressly, in his Phaedo, he says: (...), He that is wise
desires always to be with and enjoy that which is better or his best good: i.
e. Union and Fruition is the main thing his Love aims at. Every one is strongly
carried forth by Love toward his last end: yea those very acts of love and
desire are fruition in part. Thence Arist. Rhet. lib. 2. cap. 18. (...),
Because al are wont to be conversant about what they love. This intime
connection between Love and Fruition is excellently well explicated by Jansenius,
August. Tom. 2. l. 1. c. 6. page 40. Love of Fruition ordains and disposes the
Love toward its Beloved: whom it regards as its first Principe or Cause, and
its last end, in the fruition of which it expects perfect felicity. For what
is Fruition but this, to adhere to and acquiesce in another as its first
principe and last end? But now every thing that is ordained to another, is in
that respect necessarily inferior to that other. Whence Love of Fruition keeps
the Soul in subjection to God its last end, but gives it dominion over every
inferior good. This Jansenius more fully explicates, Tom. 2. l. 2. c. 16. page
149. Many, says he, think they love not such things, to which they are indeed
intimately and strongly united: but this is with facility detected by
Fruition: for Love cannot be well understood without Fruition, nor yet Fruition
without Love; because Love is the beginning of Fruition, and Fruition the end
of Love. No man enjoys but what he loves; and no man loves any thing as his
last end, but what he would enjoy: whence, as there is no Fruition but what is
sweetened with Love, so there is no Love but what tends to Fruition. Therefore
Love, according to Augustine, is nothing else but the Will, by its Pondus,
tending to Fruition. What is Love, but a secret Fountain streaming toward
Fruition? And what is Fruition, but an Ocean of satisfaction, in which Love is
immersed and swallowed up? Is not then Fruition near akin to Love? Thence
Augustine, explicating the nature of Fruition, tells us, that to enjoy, is to
adhere to a thing for it self: for if it be not adhered to for it self, it is
not properly loved or enjoyed, but that other thing, for whose sake it is
embraced. But to speak precisely, every kind of Love is not Fruition, but that
only which solaceth it self in the embracements of its beloved: which if
absent, the will moves toward it by desires. This is well expounded by Plato,
Phaedro, page 251. (...), etc. Wherefore every Soul, so long as it is pricked
and wounded with desires, it feels grief, and is enraged thereby; and then
again it is recreated with the memory of that first Beauty it once beheld.
And thus variously affected, by reason of impatient fury, it cannot sleep, but
wanders up and down with desire to see the first Beauty: which when it has
once got a glance of, then breaking al bounds of Modesty it solaceth it self in
the embraces thereof, etc. By all which it is apparent, (1) That al Fruition of,
or love to any Creature for it self is sinful concupiscence. (2) That God alone
is to be embraced with a love of Fruition as our last end; because he alone is
to be loved for himself. He that loves any thing with God, and not for God,
loves him not as he ought.

2. Union.
The next part of Fruition is Possession of and Union with the Object beloved.
Al complete Fruition supposes Possession and Union: Frui est terminus
desiderii. Suar.
for if the object be absent, there can be only love of desire, not perfect
Fruition: because to enjoy a thing is the term of desire. Plato, in his
Timaeus, informs us, that (...), Beatitude, consistes in nothing else but
(...), to have a good Demon dwelling in himself, etc. whereby he understands
God. The like also in his Politicus, page 309. he shows how the Soul being
united to the first Beauty or chiefest Good, it thereby becomes happy. And
Thales being asked, What was most sweet? answered, (...), to possess, meaning
the chiefest Good. This possession of the supreme Good, which belongs to
Fruition, is well expressed by Aristotle, Eth. lib. 4. cap. 4. art. 37. (...),
For the virtue of possession and of work is not the same: For the virtue of
possession is that it might be most estimed, precious and dear. Where by
Possession he seems to mean Fruition, as by work, Use. So Aristotle, Rhet.
lib. 2. cap. 18. speaking of Rich men, their Fruition of riches as their last
end, says, (...), They receive a great impression from the possession of
riches: for they are so affected as if they enjoyed al good: i. e. possessing
Riches they enjoy them as their chiefest good; and so have their spirits formed
by, yea transformed into them: for althings are fashioned and framed into the
image and idea of those good things which they possess and enjoy as their last
end: Fruition breeds first imitation of or likeness unto, and then union with
what we enjoy. Neither does Fruition import possession only, but also union
with its last end, i. e. moral and objective union at least, if not physic and
real: for without union there can be no Fruition of that good we possess. Now
the union which the Soul has with its chiefest Good is most intimate, firm,
and inviolable. For the Union of Spirits is far more intimate and firm than
that of bodies among themselves, or with Spirits. The senses in extracting
pleasures out of sensible good are conversant only about the externe accidents:
Moreover the pleasures taken in by the senses come not in altogether, but
gradually and by parcels: therefore the union of object and subject is more
remote and partial only: But the Soul, in the Fruition of the chiefest sweetest
good, being spiritual, and of the same nature with its object, has a more
complete reception thereof, and intimate union therewith: whence the pleasures
that attend the same are of all the most spiritual, pure, intense, and
permanent, as hereafter.

3. Al Fruition importes Communion with our chiefest Good. Communion. Frui, ex
vi nominis est, capere fructum a re. Suar.
For to enjoy a thing, according to the origination of the word among the
Latins, is to participate of the fruits thereof. And may any participate of
the fruits of the chiefest Good, without communion therewith? Indeed al union,
at least with the supreme Good, is in order to communion; which does formalise,
yea consummate the Souls Beatitude in its most perfect state. It is not the
possession of any good can make them happy that have it, unless they enjoy
what they possess. This is lively illustrated by Plato in his Phaedo, page 80,
etc. This Phaedo coming to Socrates at the time when he was ready to die,
Socrates philosophiseth, even to admiration, on the Souls immortal state after
death, and its felicity in communion with the chiefest Good. His words are
these: (...), But the Soul, being a thing invisible, departs to such a place,
as is most generous, pure, and invisible, namely to the state of the dead,
where it enjoys God the most wise and choicest Good; where, if God will, my Soul
must immediately go. Thence he adds, page 81. (...); Does not therefore the
mind thus qualified go to that divine Being like it self? I say, that divine,
immortal, and wise Being? Where when it arrives, does it not evade altogether
happy, being freed from Error, Ignorance, Terrors, wild Loves, and other human
Infirmities; and as we say of those who are initiated in Sacreds, spend the
rest of its time in communion with God? This he makes to be the state of pure
Souls separated; whereas impure polluted Souls pass unto their place of
punishment as he in what follows demonstrates.

This Communion with God Plato, Contemplation.
Tim. 90. makes to consiste, (...), in giving the Soul its proper food and
motions: which he chiefly places, (1) in the Contemplation of God. This he
more fully explicates, Conviv. page 211. where he makes, The Contemplation of
the first Beauty, (...), etc. that divine, sincere, uniforme, simple, pure,
incontaminate, perfect Beauty, to be the most ravishing spectacle; and that
which makes us perfectly happy. Acts of Contemplation on God are most
tranquille, pleasant, congenial to the Soul, uniforme, self-sufficient, and
permanent. Thus Aquinas, 2.2. Quaest. 179. Art. 1. Every thing manifestes its
life by that operation which is most proper to it, and whereunto it is chiefly
inclined: Now, in as much as Contemplation is the proper act of man whereunto
he is most inclined, and wherein he delights most, it follows, that herein the
main of his life consistes. To contemplate the first cause and last end of
althings how delicious and agreeable is it! Contemplation binds the mind to its
object, and thence insensibly transformes it thereinto. Is it not sweet to the
eye to contemplate light? And is not the last end the prime light of the Soul?
Does not the contemplation of our last end give us a divine light to improve al
other objects we converse with? And are not althings hereby turned into God?
Does not the Contemplation of God, as our choicest Good, enable us to live in
God, and to him?

(2) But yet together with Contemplation there must be divine Love and
Complacence, Love.
which is another part of the Souls communion with its last end. Contemplation
brings in the chiefest Good into the Soul; but divine Love carries out the Soul
to it, by adherence to, and delight in it. The amorous Soul living in God by
love, dies in it self. How many artifices does divine Love use for the
enjoyment of its choicest Good? As man lost God by loving the Creature more
than God; so by loving God more than the Creature he again finds God, and
satisfaction in him. Love to God settles the Soul in one point, out of which it
needs not stir to find Felicity. Dulcius est amare quam amari. Sen.
A Soul thus inspired with the flames of divine Love has a little Heaven in it.
The Stoic thinks it sweeter to love than to be beloved. Certainly divine Love
is most unitive and perfective: it has a violence and pain, which is most sweet
and delicious. The Soul by loving its last end possesses, enjoys, and lives in
it. Have not althings a desire of union and communion with what they love? And
the more vehement our love is, if it be of the chiefest good, the sweeter our
fruition thereof is. This love gains strength by opposition: it makes the most
difficult service sweet. The only limits this victorious divine Love proposes
to it self, is to have no limits. Where ever the Soul turns it cannot but feel
dolors, if it acquiesce not in God; but so far as it adheres to God, it feels
no pain. Augustine, that great Doctor of Love to God, comprised al Christian
Morals in Love; which is the plenitude of the Law and our best Instructor in
every Duty. It is a luminous fire that discovers things most secret, and
penetrates things most profound: it is an incomparable Antidote against human
corruption. Whence also Augustine termed al Virtue but the order of Love: and
its admirable efficace is seen in this, that it does lift the heart above al
things create, and yet at the same time depresse it at the lowest center of
self-nothingnesse. All the labors of this Love are full of divine suavities, and
carry their rewards in them: Afflictions blunt not its edge: cast it into an
ocean of misery, and it swims above al: it estimates its misery only by the
loss, and its Beatitude only by the fruition of its last end. Mediocritie,
which in other things is estimed Virtue, is a Vice in Love to God, which admits
no excess. These and such like are the Acts of the Soul in Communion with God,
as our last end. This Communion with God, the Romans, in their manner and
according to their obscure sentiments, expressed by their Lectisternia, or Beds
placed in their Temples, whereon they conceited they feasted and had communion
with their Gods: Of which see Lud. Vives in August. Civ. lib. 3. cap. 17.

. 6. Lastly, Delectation and Joy.
Fruition of the choicest Good carries with it satisfying Pleasures, Suavities,
and Delights. No one properly enjoys a thing, who has not some joy in the
Fruition thereof. Frui, est cum gaudio frui. August.
The Quietation, Delectation, and Satisfaction, which the Soul finds in the
enjoyment of its last end is greatly illustrated by Plato, in his Philebus,
where he treats professedly of this subject. So page 15. (...), He that being
young having tasted thereof, like one overjoyed, as if he had found a treasure
of wisdom, leaping for joy, and as it were under a divine Enthusiasme or
rapture, he moves every discourse cheerfully and orderly. This Transport of
divine Joy is proper to no act but the Fruition of our last end. Thence Phileb.
page 40. he thus distinguishes between true and false pleasures: There are in
the minds of wicked men (...), painted pleasures, but such as are altogether
false. Whence he concludes: (...), Wherefore wicked men for the most part are
glutted with false pleasures; but virtuose men with such as are sincere and
genuine. Wicked men's pleasures are sucked from some dirtie terrene goods; and
therefore only imaginary and spurious; but the virtuose man's pleasures are
formed out of the chiefest good, and therefore genuine and satisfying. But to
philosophise more distinctly of that Delectation, Joy, and Pleasure, which
attends the fruition of the chiefest Good, we shall examine and inquire into,
(1) The Causes, (2) The proper Adjuncts, (3) The Effects thereof; and that
according to Plato's Philosophemes.

1. 1. The Causes of Delectation.
Three things are essentially requisite to the constitution of true Delectation
and Joy. (1) A sweet Good. (2) Possession of that Good. (1) A sweet Good.
(3) Actions consequent to that possession. (1) There must be a sweet Good, out
of which al true pleasure is formed: and by how much the more sweet and
pleasant the good is, by so much the more perfect is the delight. Satisfying
joy is formed out of nothing but the most amiable best good. This Plato
frequently inculcates. Thus Phaedr. page 251. treating of the Contemplation of
the chiefest Good, he says: (...), Whom when it shall see, and instill the
desire of him into it self, it shall then break al bounds of modesty, and
having got liberty of breathing, it shall cease to be exagitated by pricking
dolors. This most sweet pleasure it enjoys in the presence of its sweetest
good, so that it can never depart from its embraces, neither does it value any
thing more than its beloved. Such infinite pleasure flows from the presence of
the sweetest Good. Perfect Joy cannot form it self out of any inferior good:
it springs only from the best sweetest good, which infuseth its divine
suavities into the Soul. What but the first essential, universal,
Soul-satisfying good can feed immortal Souls with perfect delights? (2) Another
Spring of Delectation is Possession; (2) Possession.
which as it is essential to al Fruition, so in a particular manner to Joy that
attends the same: for every one is delighted in the obtainment of what he
loves: and by how much the sweeter the object beloved is, and the possession
more intimate, by so much the greater is the delight. Generatio voluptatis ex
copulatione finiti and infiniti.
Thence it is a great Philosopheme with Plato, That true Joy issues from the
copulation of finite and infinite, i. e. to speak nakedly, from the Union of
the Soul with God. This Plato, according to his allegoric mode, expresses,
Conviv. 206. Al men, says he, in their manner conceive and are pregnant; and
when they have gone their time, Nature desires to bring forth. Thence he
concludes: (...), Therefore as often as that which is pregnant adheres to the
first Beauty or sweetest Good, it is affected with joy, hilaritie, and
pleasure; and brings forth and generates: but on the contrary, when it adheres
to what is base and fordid, it is contracted by sorrow and grief; and thence,
being not able to bring forth, it is tormented with pains and dolors. By which
he describes to the life the different effects which follow on the Souls
adhering to God, and to inferior Goods: upon the Souls adherence to God follows
the generation of Soul-ravishing pleasures; but upon adherence to base worldly
good no true pleasure follows, but vexatious dolors and torments. This
pleasure, that follows on adherence to, and possession of God, is well expressed
by David, Psalm. 25.13. Psalm. 25.13.
His Soul shall dwell at ease: Heb. loge in goodness. When God dwells in the
Soul, it then does loge in goodness, or dwell at ease: where there is want,
there can be no perfect ease and delight: but when the Soul logeth in divine
Goodness, it then finds ease and pleasure. Every want wrings and pincheth the
Soul: it can never loge with ease, til it loge in the chiefest Good by
possessing the same, whereby al its wants are supplied. The Soul, when it sits
most uneasy as to inferior goods, so far as it dwells in God, and God dwells in
it, so far it finds ease. Properly we never enjoy any thing, til we find rest
in it: this the Soul finds so far as it possesses God. Whence springs
delectation and pleasure: Possession gives the obtainment of desires: and
desires so far as obtained fill with joy proportionable to the desires.

(3) The immediate effective Spring of Delectation and Joy is Motion or Action.
(3) Action a cause of Joy.
Whence Joy is defined by Cicero, a sweet motion in sense. Yea, things in
themselves bitter and irksome, how sweet are they often made by exercice! It is
generally determined in the Schools, That operation and motion is the proper
cause of Delectation: and is not the operation and motion of the Soul in the
fruition of the sweetest good of all the most noble and perfect? Actings of the
Soul on the chiefest good, O what sweet inspirations of Divine suavities are
they attended with! Thus Plato, Repub. 9. page 582. (...), etc. How great
pleasure the contemplation of the first Being brings with it, none but a
Philosopher can taste. So in his Phaedrus, page 249. speaking of the
Contemplation of the first Being, he adds: (...), This is the most ravishing
ecstasie and composed of the best things. That al true pleasure arises from
virtuose exercices about the sweetest good, Aristotle, in imitation of his
Master Plato, has well demonstrated. So Eth. l. 1. c. 9. p. 43. As in the
Olympian Games not he that is most beautiful, or most valiant carries away the
Crown; but (...), but they that contend for Victory: So in this human life,
they that do good, are made partakers of good things. And then he adds the
reason: (...), Their life is indeed sweet and joyous of it self -- He is
delighted or recreated in just things, who by love embraces justice -- To
those that are studiose of virtue, virtuose acts are of themselves pleasant and
delicious: i. e. they carry in them their own reward, a divine suavitie. And
he subjoins the reason: (...), etc. But their life needs not pleasure as an
additament or appendix, but has pleasure included in it: For besides what has
been spoken, he is not a good man, who is not delighted in good actions.
Neither does any call him just, who does not take pleasure in just deeds: or
liberal, who is not delighted in liberal acts. So in other Virtues. Whence he
concludes: If so then, (...), virtuose acts are of themselves sweet. Whence he
collects this general Conclusion: (...), formal Beatitude is the best, fairest,
and sweetest thing: i. e. Nothing so sweet as by virtuose acts to adhere to,
and enjoy the sweetest and best good. And indeed herein Plato and Aristotle
accord and agree with sacred Philosophy. For David assures us, that nothing
was so sweet to him, as the Contemplation and Fruition of God, by acts of
Faith, etc. So Psalm. 27.4. Psalm. 27.4.
One thing have I desired -- to behold the beauty of the Lord: Heb. to behold
with singular delight. For (...) construed with (...) in signifies, to see with
great pleasure and delectation, as v. 13. O! how sweet and delicious was it to
David to look on the golden Arc, the Symbol of Christ's Humanity, and there by
Faith to adore the Deity! So Psalm. 106.5. That I may see the good of thy
chosen, Psalm. 106.5.
that I may rejoice in the gladness of thy nation: Heb. to see in good, i. e.
to enjoy the good seen with pleasure and satisfaction: for (...) construed with
(...) signifies, to enjoy with pleasure. O! how deliciose is the fiducial
contemplation of the sweetest Good! What is formal Beatitude, but the
immediate, gloriose, perfect Intuition or Vision of the supreme Beauty? And
what infinite delectation ensues hereon? What a joyous contemplation is it to
behold the Deity in the Arc of Christ's Humanity? What infusions of Divine
suavities flow hence? Does not the Beauty of the first Cause and fairest Good
captivate al hearts that behold it? How much spiritual delectation is there in
one glance on the sweetest Good? How soon is the holy Soul filled with divine
suavities, when it can, in any measure, contemplate the Glory of the prime
Beauty. Thus Psalm. 104.34. My meditation of him shall be sweet: Psalm. 104.34.
I will be glad in the Lord. Yea, would not an appropriating view of the
admirable perfections of God, the sweetest Good, turn Hell it self into Heaven?
Such are the divine suavities, which attend virtuose acts, in the Fruition of
the sweetest Good.

. 7. 2. The Adjuncts of Delectation.
We now descend to discourse of and explicate the nature of Delectation in
regard of its proper Adjuncts, which are various. (1) Al Delectation and Joy
must be real and sincere: (1) It is real.
and the more real and sincere it is, the better it is. And does not this give
a great advance to those joys and suavities which attend the fruition of our
last end and sweetest good? May any delices be compared with these, in point of
sincerity and realitie? What are al other pleasures in comparison of these,
but painted shadows, yea mere lies? This is lively illustrated by Plato,
Phileb. page 40. where he styles al terrene pleasures, (...), Phantasmes or
Imaginations painted in our minds: as when a man conceits he has a vast
treasure of gold in his possession, which he has not, yet takes pleasure in
such a sick dream. Whence he adds: There are false pleasures in the minds of
men, which yet, by men's ridiculous figments, imitate true pleasures. And then
he concludes: (...), Neither do I judge, that we may consider pleasures in any
other regard evil, but as they are false. B^ which he invincibly demonstrates,
that no pleasures are truly ^^ch, but those that are sincere, real, and
substantial; which he makes proper to virtuose men, who adhere to the sweetest
Good. This real pleasure is elsewhere styled by him (...), sincere genuine
pleasure; which he makes to be peculiar to the fruition of the best Good. This
he more openly expresses, Repub. 9. page 580. where he assertes, That a wise
or virtuose man only, (...), does taste of the most genuine and true pleasures.
So page 583. (...), Neither is there any true pleasure, but that of a wise man.
Whereby he, (as Solomon) understands a virtuose man. Thus Plato the Jew, that
great Platonist: (...), etc. Because al genuine and sincere joy is found only
in the minds of good men; therefore every wise man rejoiceth in himself, and
not in things foreign. Thence, says Seneca, Those things in which the vulgar
sort delight themselves, have only a thin superficial pleasure; and sometimes
an adventitious joy, which has no funde or bottom. There is no solid
substantial joy, but what slows from, and some way refers to the fruition of
the sweetest good: al other pleasures are only opinionative, and grounded on
false imagination.

(2) The Delectation that flows from the Fruition of the sweetest Good is most
congenial, (2) Congenial Pleasures.
and proper to the Soul; and therefore most perfect. Thus Plato, Repub. 9. page
585. (...), If therefore to be filled with things consentaneous to nature be
sweets then that which is indeed filled with the first Being, and those things
that partake most of Being, is more truly affected with true pleasure. His
Argument lies thus: Nothing is more delicious to human Nature, than to be
filled with such things as are most consentaneous and agreeable to its more
noble part the Soul: Now to be filled with the fruition of the first Being and
sweetest Good is most proper and agreeable to the Soul: therefore this is most
delicious to human Nature. So Plato, Repub. 9. page 580. says, A wise man from
the contemplation of God enjoys, (...), pleasures proper to himself, and
therefore the best. The perfection of al human pleasures and joys arises from
their connaturalitie to the Soul: for this being man's most noble part, yea
indeed (according to Platonic as well as sacred estimation) a man's self, the
more congenial our pleasures are hereto, the more perfect they are: Now the
pleasures and suavities, which flow from the fruition of our sweetest good, are
of al most connatural and congenial to the Soul. For by how much the more
immaterial, spirital, and intellectile our joys are, by so much the more
agreeable they are to our Spirits: and are any joys more spirital, than those
that flow from the fruition of our last end and sweetest good, which is God?
Can any thing affect the Soul with higher delectation, than the fruition of the
chiefest good, which is so agreeable to it, and which she receives immediately
without the ministry of her externe senses? This is well expressed by Digby,
of the Souls Immortality, page 459. We are sure that what pleasure a man
receives, he receives by means of his Soul, even al corporeal pleasure: for
be the working object never so agreeable and pleasing unto him, he reapeth
thence small delight, if his Souls attention be carried in the mean time another
way from it. Certainly then those things affect the Soul most powerfully, which
are connatural to her, and which she seizes on and relisheth immediately;
rather than those impure ones, which come sophisticated to her, through the
muddy channels of the senses. Observe but the different comportment of an
ambitiose and sensual man, and you will easily perceive this. Are not mental
pleasures, specially in the contemplation of the first Beauty, most savorie
and delicious? Yea, do not these by exercice become as it were one with the
Soul? Again, are not spiritual pleasures most rational, judicious, discrete,
and wise? O! what a world of folly and indiscretion, yea, may I not say, for
the most part, brutish passion lies wrapped up in sensual pleasures? Lastly,
these pleasures, which flow from the fruition of the sweetest good, do most
elevate, dignifie, and ennoble the Soul; and therefore are most agreeable
thereto: whereas sensual pleasures degrade and bring down the Soul, yea place
it below the rank of Brutes, as Hos. 4.10, 11.

(3) Another proper Adjunct of that Delectation, (3) Uniform Pleasures.
which attends the Fruition of the sweetest Good, is Uniformity and Harmony.
By how much the more uniforme and concordant pleasures are, by so much the
better they are: what makes Music so sweet and delicious, but its Concent and
Harmony? Hence Plato makes this a character of true pleasure, that it be
(...), uniforme: and the Stoics, who were enemies to pleasure, yet allowed an
uniforme regular joy, which they made to attend, (...), the tranquillity and
undisturbed state of the Soul. And where may we expect this regular tranquille
serene Joy, but in the enjoyment of the chiefest Good? Plato, in his Philebus,
page 26. makes these pleasures to be (...), symmetrous and harmonious, but
terrene joys to be (...), a discordant jarring passion. And he gives us a
lively illustration, by the sweet Harmony that is in Music; which, says he,
is composed of Acutes and Graves, swift and flow, with other infinite Tones,
which conjoined make a complete Harmony: So, adds he, True pleasure is (...),
symmetrous; whereas petulant false pleasure is (...), dissonant, (...),
circumscribed by no bounds, without measure or order, etc. And indeed al
sensual pleasures are extreme jarring and repugnant, not only to human Nature,
but amongst themselves. Does not the pleasure of Sensuality fight against the
pleasure of Avarice, and both against that of Ambition? This is well illustrated
by Aristotle, Eth. lib. 1. cap. 9. page 43. (...), Those things which seem
sweet to the multitude, have an intestine war among themselves; because they
are not such by nature: i. e. The pleasures of the multitude are difforme and
repugnant each to other; because they are opinionative, artificial, and
inordinate, not natural and regular. There is no joy uniforme, regular, or
natural, but that which flows from, or tends to the fruition of our last end,
which is the measure of uniformitie and harmony in Morals. Again, this
delectation is by Plato made to be (...), impassible, i. e. such as receives
not impression from, and therefore admits not conformity to the various
mutations of terrene objects. For whatever receives impression from sensible
objects, must needs fall under the same variations and vicissitudes, that those
objects are obnoxious unto. And this is the true reason why al sensual
pleasures are so variable, difforme and dissonant; because the objects, by
which they are impressed and influenced, are most mutable and difforme. But now
those pleasures that attend the fruition of God the sweetest Good partake of
his Simplicity, Immutabilitie, and Uniformity. No Joy so regular, uniforme
and harmonious as those that proceed from the fruition of God.

(4) The Delectation that attends the fruition of the sweetest Good is most
pure and immixed, and therefore most perfect. (4) Pure immixed Pleasures.
Thus Plato, Repub. 9. page 583. makes the Pleasure of his wise man to be
(...), pure; but that of other men to be, not pure, but (...), only an
umbratile pleasure. The delectation which follows the enjoyment of the chiefest
Good rejoiceth in a twofold Purity, (1) Objective, as it is fed and maintained
by pure objects; whereas all the pleasures of sense are but seculent and dirtie;
in that their matter is only sensible terrene good: but the joys and pleasures,
which flow from the sweetest original good, partake of the crystalline purity
of their object, which is most pure. (2) Effective, as it does banish al
sorrows and grief. So Plato, Phileb. 53. (...), Al pleasure so far as it is
free from grief, it is more pleasant, true, and fair. Thus Repub. 9. he makes
(...), Pleasure to be the cessation of grief, and grief the cessation of
pleasure. So also, Phileb. page 66. he avoucheth true pleasures to be (...),
without mixture of sorrow, and pure. Which is the peculiar privilege of those
pleasures that attend the fruition of the sweetest Good: for all other pleasures
are mixed with much grief and sorrow; they being indeed but bitter-sweets; yea
more bitter than sweet.

(5) The Delectation which attends the fruition of the sweetest Good are most
intense and strong. Thus Plato, (5) Strong Pleasures.
Phileb. p. 44. (...), We must look, not to the least pleasures, but to such as
are supreme and most vehement, if we will make a true judgment of pleasure. For
the stronger any pleasures are, the better they are: and the more pure they
are, the stronger they are Sensual pleasures are feeble and impotent, because
impure and mixed; but spiritual joys are most potent and vehement; because most
pure. Again, the vehemence and intensnesse of any pleasure is proportionable to
the energie, power, and activitie of the subject, which is assected with such
pleasure, and to the Pondus, Bent, or Impetus that it has to the object it
takes pleasure in. Now how vehement is the Pondus, Impetus, and Energie of the
Will, whereby it shoots it self into its sweetest Good; which when it
enjoys, what an ecstasie, rapture, and transportt of joy is it affected with?
Does not Plato style this, (...), The best and strongest of al Ecstasies?

(6) The Delectation which attends the fruition of our last end is infinite and
without excess. (6) Joys without Excess.
Thus Plato, Phileb. page 27. (...), For pleasure is not al good, unless it
partake of an infinite nature. His design is to prove, that pleasure is not
the chiefest good; because it is not in its nature infinite, so as to partake
of al good: yet so far as it is a consequent that attends the fruition of the
chiefest good, so far it is infinite. For as the chiefest good admits of no
excess in our fruition; because it is in it self infinite and al good; so, by
a paritie of reason, the joy and pleasure that attends the fruition of the
chiefest good is infinite without excess; because the object is infinitely
sweet and amiable. The pleasure the Soul takes in the fruition of inferior
goods soon admits excess, which it endeavors to cure by change of objects.
Thus Aquinas, 1.2. Quaest. 33. Art. 2. Corporal delectations, when augmented
and continued, do excede the natural habitude, and therefore become nauseous;
as it is evident in the delices of food: whence the appetite desires change and
variety. But spiritual delectations never excede the natural habitude, but
perfect nature: whence the more they come to a consummation, the more they
delight us. How soon are men glutted with the best of pleasures that sense can
afford! And what remedy have they but intermission or exchange of objects? But
now in the fruition of the sweetest Good there can be no excess, either in the
act of fruition, or in the pleasures that attend it; and therefore there is no
need either of intermission or exchange.

. 8. 3. The Effects of Delectation.
Having explicated Delectation in its Causes and proper Adjuncts, we now
proceed to the Effects thereof, thereby to demonstrate that the most perfect
delectation is that which attends the fruition of the sweetest Good. There are
two great Effects of this divine Delectation, (1) Amplitude and Enlargement,
(2) Quietation and Satisfaction.

1. 1. Enlargement.
The Delectation that attends the fruition of the sweetest Good brings with it
Amplitude and Enlargement. Indeed al delight and joy brings Enlargement; which
arises from the Sympathy between the object and the subject, or sacultie;
specially if the object be ample, how does the faculty spread it self to enjoy
the same? When the animal or vital Spirits are recreated, what enlargement
follows thereon? How diffusive are they? Whereas Grief and Sorrow contracts and
coarctates the Spirits. This is in an higher degree verified of that spiritual
Joy, which attends the fruition of the best Good. There is a twofold
Enlargement that follows spiritual Delectation in the fruition of the chiefest
Good. (1) There is an Enlargement of the Faculty or Subject. The more pleasure
the Soul finds in the enjoyment of its last end, the more its desires are
enlarged. Thus Plato, Phileb. page 45. (...); But what? are not those pleasures
most excellent, whereof the greatest desires are kindled in us? Whereby he
shows, that those are the greatest and best pleasures, that most enlarge the
heart in desires after them. Indeed there is an intime connection between true
joy and enlargement; and therefore in sacred Philosophy one word is expressive
of both. So Psalm. 4.1. Thou have enlarged me when I was in distress. (...)
signifies both to exhilarate and dilate: or to dilate by exhilarating. His
spirit was straightened, narrowed and confined by distress; but dilated and
enlarged by spiritual joys from Gods presence. This Dilatation or Enlargement,
which follows on spiritual Delectation, is well explicated by Aquinas, 1.2.
Quaest. 33. Art. 1. Dilatation is a motion unto Latitude; and it agrees to
Delectation both in regard of its apprehensive and appetitive virtue: for as
man apprehends the conjunction of some convenient good, so his Soul is dilated
toward it, in order to its perfect fruition thereof, and satisfaction therein,
etc. (2) Spiritual Delectation in the fruition of the sweetest good brings with
it also enlargement in Operation and Acting. Al joy is vigorous and active: as
it is the effect of precedent, so the cause of subsequent operation. Delight is
the Spring of motion: it puts the Soul into a continual agitation: for by how
much the more we delight in any object, by so much the more vehement and strong
are our operations about it. Delectation makes us ardently and vehemently to
move in the fruition of our sweetest good, and in all acts that tend thereto.
What divine suavities does it infuse into al our acts? Thus Plato, Conviv. page
210. The mind that converts its eyes to that so great amplitude of the first
Beauty, does no longer regard human affairs, but is as it were captivated
thereby, etc.

2. The Delectation which attends the fruition of the sweetest Good, brings
with it infinite Quietation and Satisfaction. Satisfaction.
These spiritual pleasures do not only amplify and widen the Soul, but also
bring satisfaction. Carnal joys breed a vexatious enlargement of the desires,
but never sil them with satisfaction: they may slater and tickle the senses,
but never quiet the appetite: the best they leave behind them is repentance.
This is well explicated by Digby, of the Soul, page 460. The violence of
fruition in those foul puddles of flesh and blood presently glutteth with
satietie, and is attended with annoy and dislike: and the often using and
repeting it, wears away that edge of pleasure, which only makes it sweet and
valuable, even to them that set their hearts upon it: and nothing heighteneth
it but an irritation, by a convenient hunger and abstinence. Contrary, in the
Soul, the greater and more violent the pleasure is, the more intense and
vehement the fruition is; and the oftener it is repeted, so much the greater
appetite and desire we have to return unto the same. Spiritual Delectation in
the fruition of our last end does not only widen, but fill the Soul, and crown
its desires with satisfaction. Delectation is the quiet of the Appetite in the
fruition of its end: where there is no rest, there can be no perfect delight or
satisfaction: and where there is want, there can be no rest: every want wrings
the Soul, and keeps it in a restless condition. So that Quiet and Satisfaction
is appropriated to the fruition of the last end and sweetest good. Thence
Plato, Conviv. page 211. assures us, That the contemplation of the first,
sincere, most perfect Beauty is formal Beatitude, that which brings with it
perfect Delectation and Satisfaction: for they who arrive hereto, are content
to live alone, in conversation with this first Beauty, etc. Of which see
Philos. General. Part. 1. lib. 3. cap. 3. sect. 1.. 2.

CHAP. II. Of the Morality of human Acts, and Moral Bonitie.
The Morality of human Acts. Moral Goodness in Conformity to the Divine Law.
The measure of moral Goodness perfect. The Universality of a perfect Law.
Subjective right Reason not the measure of Moral Good, but the Moral Law. Right
Reason among the Philosophers the objective Law of Nature. The Mosaic Law a
perfect Rule. The Parts and Causes of moral Bonitie. (1) The Matter: Things
indifferent in genere and specie: Nothing indifferent in individuo. A virtuose
Will the Principe of Moral Good. The best End essential to Moral Good. The form
of moral Good Conformity to Gods Law. How (...) gives Form. How far
Circumstances formalise Moral Good. The Unity and Uniformity of al Moral
Good. There is no real, moral, or natural Good, but what is supernatural. Moral
Good most difficult. The Virtues of Pagans lesser sins only. The distribution
of Moral Good into Piety and Justice.

. 1. HAving dispatched the generic Idea and last End, The Morality of human
Acts.
which has the place of a first Principe in Ethics, we now pass on to the
Morality of Human Acts, and their Bonitie. And here we should first treat of
the natural interne Principes of human Acts; namely the practic Judgment or
Knowledge, Volition, Consultation, and Election: But having discussed these more
largely in Court of the Gentiles, P. 1. B. 4. c. 1.. 24. we shall not here
undertake the discussion of them. As for the Morality of human Acts, there are
great disputes in the Schools, Wherein the Esse morale of human Acts does
consiste? Suarez, in 1.2. (which vulgarly they style his Ethics) Tract. 3.
Disp. 1. page 207. discourses largely of the Morality of human Acts under
these heads. (1) He makes the formal denomination, or that form whereby an Act
is denominated moral, to be more than an Ens rationis properly so termed, or a
figment of men's minds, something in or appendent to the things themselves. This
we grant. (2) He thence deduceth, That the Esse morale in the act of the Will,
besides its Entitie and substance, adds a certain mode of emanation or moral
dependence on the Reason adverting, and the Will freely working. This Hypothesis
needs animadversion and restriction. It Is true, the Morality of human Acts
has dependence on the Reason and Will as the subject of those Acts: for all
moral Acts depend on the physic Principes of those Acts: there is no moral
Being but has its foundation in some physic or natural Being: As al moral
capacity is subjected in natural, so al moral Acts. Virtue flowing from God
has its seat in the Creature, and so supposes a create intelligent Nature as
antecedent thereto. Thus Cyril Alexandr. Compend. Dialog. de S. Trinit. Tom. 5.
part. 1. page 673. (...), That which is holy by participation, being the
receptacle of adventitious Sanctity, that of it self existes primarily in
proper nature: namely as Man and Angel, or any other rational Creature. So
Damascene, Dialect. cap. 59. (...), That is first by nature which is inferred,
but infers not, i.e. secundum existendi consequentiam: if there be Grace there
must be human Nature wherein it is seated; but if there be human Nature, it
does not necessarily follow, that there must be Grace. Thus the human
Understanding and Will precede Virtue, as the subject thereof. Yet hence it
follows not, as Suarez seems to conclude, that moral Acts receive their formal
denomination from their relation to the Understanding and Will. (3) Hence Suarez
concludes, that the Esse morale is a mode not physically and intrinsecally
inherent in the moral act; but in the externe act it speaks denomination from
the free act of the Will: and in the very act of the Will, besides its physic
emanation from the Will, it speaks denomination from the reason directing, and
the Will acting with a plenarie power. Though, as it has been granted, al
Morality of human Acts does presuppose the emanation of those acts from the
Understanding and Will, as their main Principles; yet it follows not hence, that
the formal reason of their Morality must be taken from this mode of emanation.
May we not as well argue, that al virtuose acts are formalised by their relation
to the natural Principes of human acts; because they flow thence? But there
lies a mystery in this Jesuitic Hypothesis, which when laid open will soon
evidence its vanity and falsehood. The Jesuits, and some other Schole-men, in
imitation, yet on mistaken grounds, of the ancient Philosophers, place the
formal reason of al moral Virtue in conformity to right Reason. Hence no
wonder if they make al Morality, formally considered, to be a mode dependent
on Reason and Will. But the falsitie hereof will appear by what follows.

If we consider the Morality of human Acts as stated by Plato, it cannot be
denied but that he also makes mention of an (...), a right Reason, which he
seems to make the measure of al Morality, Bonitie, and Vice. But what a vast
distance there is between Plato's (...), right Reason, and that maintained by
the Jesuits and some other Schole-men, we shall, when we come to discourse of
moral Bonitie, sufficiently evince. For the present we shall endeavor to
determine the true nature of Morality, so much darkened by scholastic
niceties, in the following Propositions. (1) Prop. Al Morality of human Acts
speaks some fundamental subjective dependence on the natural Principes of human
Acts. For there is nothing in Morality but has some relation to, yea
dependence on human Nature as its subject and fundament. Morality is but a
mode or relation, which cannot subsist of it self, without a subject and
foundation in Nature. Can a man know and love God, without reason and will? (2)
Prop. The Morality of human Acts is not formalised or specified in genere
moris by the relation such Acts have to Reason or Will. For every thing is
specified and formalised by its formal reason: and what is the formal reason of
any thing but the Idea of its Essence? And wherein consistes the essence of
moral Acts, but in their conformity to, if good, or difformitie from, if bad,
the perfect measure of Morals? and what is the perfect measure of Morals, but
the moral Law? (3) Prop. The Morality of human Acts is a real mode, not
absolute but relative, appendent to those Acts. That Morality is not a mere
figment of Reason, but something real is generally confessed, and that on
invincible grounds; because it has real influences and effects. Moreover, that
Morality is not an absolute mode, but relative, is as evident; because the
whole of its essence speaks a relation to somewhat else. Hence, (4) Prop. The
Morality of human Acts speaks some relation to the last end. For the last end
in Morals has the force of a first Principe, Form, and Measure. It Is a great
Effate in the Schools, That the End specifies in Morals. Althings are defined
and measured by their last End, but this by nothing. The last end, as a
pregnant universal Principe, conteins al Morals in its womb. (5) Prop. The
object matter does also in some degree concur to the formalising of moral Acts.
Thence, says Aquinas, A moral Act receives its species from the object and
end. And Petrus a Sancto Joseph, These. 165. adds, That an Act is moral from
the order it has to its object, not considered in its being but morally, as
subject to the Rules of Morality. To this of the object we may add al
essential moral circumstances, which often add much to the being and intension
of Morality. (6) Prop. But yet we must conclude, That the adequate exemplar
and perfect measure of al Morality, formally considered, is the Law of God:
This comprehends and gives measure to al other Rules of Morality: the last
end, object, and circumstances are al measured hereby. Thus Scotus, and other
of the Schole-men determine, That the Esse morale, or Morality of an Act as
such is its relation to that Law, unto which it is referred. And the reason is
most evident; because al Morality speaks a (...) or relation to some Rule: And
what adequate perfect Rule is there of moral Acts, but some moral Law? And thus
we must understand the ancient Philosophers, as also some late Divines, who
make (...), right Reason the only (...) or measure of moral Acts. That by right
Reason we are to understand an objective Reason or a divine Law will be most
evident by what follows touching moral Bonitie and its measure.

. 2. Moral Goodness in conformity to the Divine Law.
Having inquired into the Morality of human Acts in the general, we descend to
examine their moral Bonitie and Pravitie. Every thing is so far good as it
answers to its proper measure and rule; but evil, so far as it comes short
thereof: And what is the measure or rule of moral Bonitie, but the divine Will
and Law? Thus Plato, Repub. 9. (...), That is most distant from reason, which
is most remote from Law and Order: i. e. Things are so far conformed to reason
and good, as they are conformed to Law and Order. Whence, Definit. Platon. page
4.13. (...), a Law, is defined, (...), that which puts an end to controversies
about what is unjust or just. Thence (...) is also defined, (...), an obedience
of virtuose Laws. And on the contrary, (...), Injustice is defined, (...), an
habit that over looks Laws. This Plato more fully explicates, Gorg. 504. And
truly that wherein the order of the body consistes may, as it seems to me, well
be termed Salubritie; whence the bodies health arises: (...), but those things
wherein the order and ornament or goodness of the mind consistes, we call legal
and Law: whence men become legitime and orderly. He compares the Bonitie of the
Soul to the sanitie or health of the Body; which as it consistes in the order
and regular temperament of al humors; so the goodness of the mind does in like
manner consist in its order or conformity to Law. This is well explicated by
his Scholar Aristotle, Rhet. lib. 1. cap. 9. art. 9. page 44. (...),
Righteousness truly is a virtue by which al have what is their own, and as the
Law establishes: But Injustice, by which men possess what is not their own,
against the precepts of the Law. What he here determines of Justice and
Injustice in particular holds true of al other Virtue, and Bonitie, or Vice.
But to bring Plato's Philosophemes to sacred Philosophy, touching the
conformity of al moral Good to the divine Law, we shall determine the whole in
the following Propositions.

1. Prop. Al moral Bonitie, Moral Bonitie in conformity to a Law.
whether objective or subjective and formal, denotes a conformity to some Law.
The Schools distinguish moral Bonitie or Honesty into objective and formal.
The former is that which constitutes a thing morally good as an object; but the
later, that which constitutes an act as an act morally good. (1) In the objects
of human Acts there is necessarily required a moral goodness, which agrees
thereto as objects, as Suarez 1.2. Tract. 3. Disp. 2. strongly proves. And the
reasons are demonstrative: For [1] If the object or matter be not morally good
or lawful, the act conversant thereabout can never be good: because al moral
good requires an integrity of causes: an irregularitie in the object will
render the act irregular. [2] The object of the Will is good as good: therefore
that Bonitie which moves the Will cannot slow from it, but must be supposed as
inherent in or appendent to its objects. [3] This moral goodness of the object
does not only agree to human Acts, but also to al other things which may be
lawfully loved and embraced. [4] This moral objective Bonitie arises from the
matter as clothed with all its conditions and circumstances, whereby it is
rendered a meet object for the Soul to close with. [5] The moral goodness of
any object consistes in its conformity to or agreament with the Divine Law.
(2) There is also formal Bonitie or Goodness, which constitutes a man formally
good. For [1] An object, though never so good, cannot constitute a man or his
act formally good. It Is true the Act receives some goodness from its object,
yet only materially and terminatively, not formally, so as to constitute the
Act formally good. [2] The Act is so far formally good as virtuose, i. e.
proceeding from right Principes, tending to a right end, and measured by a
perfect Rule. Al which presuppose some divine Law as the measure.

2. The Measure of Moral Good perfect.
Prop. That Law, which is the measure of moral Bonitie, must be perfect. This
Hypothesis is most evident, and will appear to be such, if we consider either
the nature of a measure, or the condition of the thing measured. (1) As for the
nature of a measure, Plato, Repub. 6. well explicates the same: (...), A
defective measure of such things is no measure; for that which is imperfect
cannot be the measure of any thing. Every Measure or Rule is indivisible, and
therefore capable neither of addition or substraction. Thus Phavorinus: (...),
A Canon or Rule is an infallible measure, admitting neither addition nor
detraction. And thus much indeed is formally included in the notion Canon: for
(...), as the Hebr. (...) Canna, whence it is derived, primarily denotes a reed
of such a just longitude, whereby they measured their Lands: and thence it was
used in the general for an exact measure: as (...) Job 38 5. is rendered by
Aquila (...). 2 Cor. 10.13. Phil. 3.16.
Thus (...), 2 Cor. 10.13. is explicated by (...) such is its use, Gal. 6.16.
Phil. 3.16. whereby the perfection of the Divine Law is illustrated. (2) That
the measure of moral Bonitie must be perfect, is easily demonstrated from the
condition of moral Bonitie: for a plenitude of being, or integrity of Bonitie
is essential to al moral good. Moral evil arises from the least defect, but
moral good requires an integrity of causes and parts. If there be the least
circumstance misplaced or mistimed, it renders the act vitiose. Now if al moral
good must be thus perfect and entire, then it necessarily follows, that its
measure and rule must be perfect and entire. But of this more in what follows.

3. The Universality of a perfect Law.
Prop. The perfection of a Law, as it is the measure of moral Bonitie,
consistes in its comprehension of the most perfect objective matter, end, and
principes. The explication and demonstration of this Proposition depends on the
explication of moral good, as to its constitutive parts and causes. It was said
before, that al moral good requires an integrity of Being and Causes. In the
Schools they make four Causes of moral Good, proportionable to those in natural
productions, namely Matter, Form, End, Efficient. We shall not at present think
our selves obliged to examine or defend the legalitie of this distribution; but
endeavor to demonstrate, that a perfect measure of moral Bonitie comprehends
each of these Causes and Principes. (1) It must comprehend the objectmater of
al moral Bonitie in its fullest Amplitude, Extension, and Universality. Thus
Plato, Leg. 1. page 630. Truth and Equity require that they who will discourse
of a divine Republic, determine, (...), that the Legislator has respect, not to
one only particle of virtue, and that truly the least; but rather to al virtue,
and that he find out Laws according to those several Species of Virtue: i. e.
The Law of moral Bonitie must extend it self to all the various Species and
Offices of Virtue. If there be any moral Duty, which the Law of Morality
extends not to, it is no perfect measure. And this argues the imperfection of
Natures light in us, and al human Laws, as hereafter. (2) As for the Form of
moral Bonitie, it consistes in conformity to the Rule or Law of Morality;
which if perfect, exacts the most perfect conformity. Thus Plato, Leg. 1. page
630. Our whole discourse tends to this, to show, that this Legislator, and al
other who will institute utile Laws, (...), ought, in framing Laws, to aim at
the highest Virtue, i. e. at the highest conformity to the best Law. (3) That
a perfect Law of Morality comprehends the most perfect End is also most
evident; because the end is as the Soul and Spirit in Morals: al offices of
virtue are but as a dead Corpse, without a spirituose perfect end, as Jansenius
demonstrates out of Augustine. Thence Plato, Repub. 5. page 444. (...), Good
Institutes or Laws make way for Virtue, but bad precipitate men into vice. Now
he elsewhere assures us, That the end gives life and perfection to al virtuose
Acts. Yea, Leg. 1. he openly says, (...), Al Laws are to be so constituted, as
that they may promote the best end. (4) The Law of moral Bonitie must be
perfect as to the Efficient or Principe of Morality: i. e. it must extend it
self to the qualification of the subject, and its virtuose disposition: for as
the end directs the act, so the principes or dispositions of the subject direct
the end. Arist. Eth. lib. 3. c. 10. assures us, That (...), the end of every
act is according to the habit: i. e. if the mind be not wel-disposed, or
clothed with virtuose habits, it will never aim at a virtuose end. Thence that
great Saying of Augustine, The intention of the best end makes the work good,
and Faith directs the intention. So that the Law of Morality, if perfect,
extends it self to al virtuose principes and moral habits, which the subject
ought to be invested with.

3. Subjective right Reason not the measure of moral Good.
Prop. Subjective right Reason, or objective human Laws are not a perfect Rule
of moral Bonitie. There are two parts in this Proposition to be examined: (1)
That subjective right Reason is not a perfect Rule of moral Bonitie. To
explicate and demonstrate this Hypothesis we grant, [1] That Reason is the
Organ of apprehending, albeit not the measure of our duty. [2] That practic
Reason or Conscience, so far as illuminated by the Spirit of God, is the regula
regulata of our duty: for Conscience is God's Deputy, and a Law unto a man's
self. Yet we deny that there is an (...), or right Reason in nature corrupted,
which may suffice as a Rule of moral Goodness. I am not ignorant how much the
Light of Nature, or, as some term it, Right Reason is cried up by some as the
only Rule of Morality. Thus Seneca would needs persuade us, That we have this
merit of Nature, that virtue does premit its light into the minds of al: yea
those that will not follow, yet see it. And not only some vulgar capacities now
adays, but also the Stoics of old generally cried up the Light within them, as
the Rule of Morality. The Schole-men also, in imitation of Aristotle their
Oracle, generally proclaim right Reason to be the formal Rule of moral Good.
But that Aristotle and Plato by their (...), right Reason, understood the
objective Law either of Nature or Moses, I no way dout but hereafter to
demonstrate. Indeed al our subjective Light by Nature is no other than a
nocturne, dreaming, tenebrous knowledge, as Plato styles it. (2) That no human
Law or Laws is the perfect measure of moral Bonitie, No human Laws a perfect
Rule of moral Good.
is also evident; because al human Laws are extreme defective in their
extension and prescripts as to all the Causes and Principes of moral Goodness:
how deficient are they both as to the Matter and Manner of moral Good! What
Restrictions, Emendations, and Alterations do they need? What an infinite
number of particular cases are there, which no human Law can reach? Well
therefore does Androcles, in Aristotle, Reth. l. 2. c. 25. inform us, That al
human Laws need another Law to correct them, as fishes need salt, to preserve
them from putrefaction. This corrective Law they term (...), Equity, which
indeed is no other than the Law of Nature, as hereafter, cap. 5.. 5.

4. The Divine Law the Rule of moral Good.
Prop. The adequate perfect rule and measure of moral Bonitie is the Divine
Law. This Hypothesis being the main will require more ample explication and
demonstration. (1) The Divine Being is (...), the first essentially just and
holy Being; and therefore the first essential rule or measure of al Justice and
Sanctity. (2) But the Divine Essence being too remote and distant from the
Creature, he has therefore given us a divine Law, as the Miroir and Idea of
his essential Sanctity, to be the rule of al moral Bonitie as to us. (3) This
Divine Law given us, as the Rule of moral Bonitie, was concreate and connatural
as to Adam, it being impressed and engraven on his nature, and so needed not
any further promulgation. (4) Hence the objective and subjective Law or Light
of Nature was to Adam, in his innocent state, one and the same; he having a
perfect understanding and comprehension of the whole Duty of man, and so
became a Law unto himself. (5) But lapsed man having lost his subjective Law
and Light of Nature, as to supernaturals, and very far as to naturals and
civils, retaining only some fragments or broken notices, our most benign Lord,
out of his great clemence and pity to lapsed man, gave a new Edition of that
natural Law, and therein fresh notices of his soverain. will and pleasure,
touching man's duty. So that the World was never without an objective Law and
Light of Nature, albeit the subjective was lost in Adam. Yea, some Divines of
great note conceive, that those very commun natural Notions, communly called
the Fragments or Remains of the Image of God lost by Adam, are vouchsafed to us
by the Covenant of Grace in and by the Mediation of Christ. Thus they
interpret, Joh. 1.9. of Christ's illightening every man: Joh. 1.9.
i. e. not only supernatural light vouchsafed to the Elect, but even the
natural notices or Light of Nature vouchsafed to the lapsed Sons of Adam is the
effect of the second Covenant and Christ's Mediation. And the reason seems
demonstrative; because our very Beings and all the comforts of our Beings having
been forfeited by the breach of the first Covenant, whatever good we enjoy on
this side Hell, is but the overflowing of the Grace of the second Covenant, and
Christ's Mediation, by which the whole World stands. So far are we from any
real claim to a subjective Light of Nature, by virtue of the first Covenant, as
that both subjective and objective Light is from Christ. The objective Light or
Law of Nature is styled by the Hebrews, (...); and its Offices, (...), the
known Duties, i.e. by nature: to which they opposed (...), the Divine, namely
Institutes, or positive Commands of God. For Jus natural, the natural Law is
not opposed to supernatural, but to positive Laws, as Grotius has well
observed. Right Reason the objective Law of Nature.
(6) This objective Law of Nature, in its second Edition, as contained in
divine Revelations of moral Bonitie, was not altogether unknowen to the wiser
of the Heathen: and that Plato's (...), Right Reason, was but an Imitamen
hereof, we now undertake to demonstrate. He discourses hereof professedly in
Minos, page 317. (...), That which is Right, is the Royal Law. (1) That by
(...) he means the same with (...), is to me unquestionable, and I think it will
clearly appear so to others by what follows. (2) He says this (...), the Royal
Law, which is the style the Hebrews gave their moral Law, as Jam. 2.8. (...).
Jam. 2.8.
And why does he term it the Royal Law, but because it was the supreme Law of
God, the King of Kings? Thence Socrates adds, We therefore rightly granted,
(...), that this Law was the invention of Being it self, or of the first
independent Being. For this generally he understands by his (...). Thence,
Defin. Plat. page 416. (...), Sin is defined, (...), an operation against right
Reason, i. e. the objective Law and Light of Nature. Thus also Aristotle, Eth.
l. 2. c. 2. art. 6. page 76. (...), And truly this, to act according to right
Reason is commun to al, and let it be fixed as a Canon. So again, Eth. l. 3. c.
8. page 153. he says, Virtues are mediocrities freely undertaken, (...), and
so as right Reason shall prescribe. This right Reason he elsewhere terms,
(...), the universal commun Law, which al by nature are subject to. So Rhet. l.
1. c. 14. art. 3. page 69. (...), etc. I say, Law is either proper or commun:
proper or private Law is that written Law, which belongs to particular Nations.
(...), The commun Law I call that which is according to nature: for there is a
certain commun Just and unjust, which al consent unto, albeit there should be
no society, or confederation of men. This commun Law of Nature is the same
with his (...). For look as in speculative Sciences there are certain first
Principes, which are the foundation of al demonstration; so in Practics and
Morals, there is an objective Law or Light of Nature containing certain practic
Principes, which are the Rule of Conversation. Thus also we are to understand
the Stoics, if we will make a right use of their (...), of which Diog. La^rt. in
Zeno: The Stoics say, that to live according to nature, is, (...), to do
nothing that the commun Law prohibits, which is right Reason diffusing it self
throughout althings. Where it deserves a remarque, That they make the commun
Law of Nature the same with right Reason. Which cannot rightly be understood of
subjective right Reason, but of objective it may. Again, they say, This right
Reason diffuseth it self throughout althings. Which cannot be understood of any
subjective reason, which is confined to individuals; but must be applied to the
commun objective Light and Law of Nature, which is diffused throughout the
whole Creation, according to the various conditions of things. Thus Hierocles
in Pythagor. Carm. page 106. says, That the vices of the mind are, (...),
Aversions and Errata from right Reason: And page 209. he adds: This right
Reason is the great Legislatrix and Judge of al human affairs, etc. And
Stobaeus, de Virt. Sermon. 1. page 9. also informs us: (...), Virtue is a
Syntaxe, or orderly contexture according to right Reason; but Vice a
Transgression against right Reason. Where by right Reason we must necessarily
understand the commun objective Light or Law of Nature, not that dark
subjective Light in the minds of blind Mankind. Thus also we must understand
Parker, Amyraldus, and other Divines, who make (...), right Reason the unic
Criterion or Rule of moral Virtue. Though I deny not, but that the Stoics
generally, and perhaps Aristotle, as many of his Followers among the
Schole-men, by right Reason understand the subjective Light of Nature in men's
minds; yet I am very apt to persuade my self, that Socrates and Plato, who seem
to be the first Promulgators of this (...), meant thereby no other than the
objective Light and Law of Nature, whereof some more commun Precepts were
conveyed down by the posterity of Noah; but those irradiant and bright
notices thereof, which shone among them, they received by oriental Tradition
from the sacred Books of Moses, wherein Plato was not a little versed, and
which by his (...), royal Law he seems to allude unto.

5. The Mosaic Law a perfect Rule.
Prop. That Divine Law, which is the adequate perfect Rule and Measure of moral
Bonitie, is no where to be found but in the sacred Philosophy or Scriptures.
Here, and here only is extant Plato's (...) and (...). This sacred Rule,
whereof he had great notices, he sometimes calls (...), the Divine Word. Here
also Aristotle's (...), Commun Law of Nature in its perfection is alone to be
found. Hence likewise it was that Pythagoras, Lycurgus, Solon, Minos, and Plato
borrowed the principal heads of their best Laws, as we have at large proved,
Court Gent. P. 1. B. 3. C. 9. The sum of the Law of Nature, and al divine
Precepts is contained in the Decalogue or Moral Law delivered by Moses, which
is thence styled by the Hebrews (...), the matrices of the Law and its roots.
And indeed what are the Ten Commandments, contained in the moral Law, but a
Transumt, Compend, Abstract, or rather extended Copy of the Law of Nature
given to man in the beginning, from that first original Exemplar the eternal
Law? Is not the formal reason of al Equity prescribed and expressed in the
moral Law? Ought not this then to be the term, measure, and scope of al Laws?
To clear which we are to remember, that the Ten Commandments, contained in the
moral Law, must not be taken literally as ten Words, but in a more ample
extensive notion, as Christian Pandects, or commun heads of al moral Duties
toward God and man, to be explicated and extended accordingly to the
Illustrations and Commentaries of the Prophets, our great Lord, and his
Apostles. Though the Decalogue does not mention each particular Duty in the
Gospel, yet it does command obedience to all that are or shall be specified; and
expresses every particular Duty generically or synecdochically: and although
it were not a Duty from the general Precept, til it was specified in the
Gospel, yet when it is once a Duty, the neglect of it is a sin against the
Decalogue. Indeed are there not almost in all the Precepts manifest Synecdoches?
Is it not then ridiculous for men to restrain the most ample sense of the moral
Law to the narrow confines of its words? Does not the great Legislator take the
blackest sins, as Murder, Adultery, Theft, etc. and place them, as so many
commun Heads, in the Decalogue, that so by these we may be instructed, how
black and odiose al those other sins, reducible to those heads, are? Wherefore
to penetrate and dive into the nature and contents of the Ten Commandments, we
must in a particular manner inquire (1) What in every Command is treated of,
(2) The end for which it was given, (3) What therein is displeasing or pleasing
to God. And after al we shall find, that the moral Law is spiritual, holy, just
and good, as Romans 7.12, 14. reaching all the motions and dispositions of the
heart. And indeed how absurd is it to conceit, that he, who made the heart, and
knows all the diverticules, or turnings and windings of it, should make a Law to
reach only the outward acts, and not the inward principes and motions? May we
not then conclude, that the Decalogue and moral Law of the supreme Legislator
extends its Precepts to the whole Soul, and al its Principes, Powers,
Inclinations, Thoughts, Affections, and Operations interne and externe;
directing the same to their right objects and ends; affecting them with their
inseparable Accidents and Modifications; clothing them with their immutable
circumstances; in such sort, that the action good by this Law can never be made
evil; that which is evil by this Law can never be made good; that which is good
or evil by this Law can never be made indifferent? Hence Plato brings in Pindar
speaking thus of the regal Power, as I take it, of the Law of Nature: (...),
The Law is King over al both mortals and immortals. And Aristot. Pol. l. 4. c.
4. affirms: (...), That the Law ought to command al. Which is most proper and
peculiar to the moral Law, that lively Idea and Image of the Divine Sanctity
and Will, the original and universal Exemplar of moral Bonitie, that great bond
of union, by conformity whereto man's Will becomes one with the Divine Will; yea,
man himself one with God. Whence, as Tyndal, page 83. well observes, Man's
imagination can make the Law of God neither greater nor lesser: neither can it
add to or diminish from the Law of God: Gods Commandment is as great as
himself. Such is the Amplitude of the moral Law as the immutable, universal
Rule of moral Bonitie.

. 3. Having considered the Measure and Rule of moral Bonitie, The parts and
causes of moral Good.
we now pass on to examine the Nature and Causes thereof. It was before
suggested, that al moral Bonitie requires a plenitude of Being, and integrity
of Causes; albeit any defect render an action morally evil. This Canon holds
true whatever distribution we give the causes of moral Bonitie. Jansenius, in
imitation of Augustine, makes two essential constitutive parts of al moral
Good, (1) The Office or Matter of the Act, which he makes to be as the Corpse:
and the End, which he makes to be as the Form that specifies. (2) Plato, in
his Theaetetus, page 187. and Arist. Eth. l. 2. c. 4. seem to distribute moral
Good into the good deed done, and the (...), the well-doing of it: i.e. into
Bonum, and Been. The good deed-done is as the matter: and the been or well-doing
of it, as the form. (3) Others, according to the Aristotelian distribution of
the causes, make four causes of al moral Good, the Matter, Efficient, End, and
Form. Albeit I judge this distribution of Causes, as to Naturals, every way
absurd, and that which can never be defended; because it makes the same things
both constitutive Parts of the whole, and yet also Causes thereof: so that it
hence follows, the matter and form are causes of themselves, which constitute
the whole: yet in Morals, where the causes need not such an accurate
distinction from the parts, we may admit this distribution: or else we may take
the matter and form as parts, and the efficient and end as causes of moral
Good. This being the commun and received distribution, I am not scrupulose in
following the same, yet so as not to exclude the two former divisions.

1. The Matter of moral Good.
If we reflect on the Matter of moral Good, it comprehends al human Acts, with
the Objects and Circumstances relating thereto, whether things necessary or
indifferent. It Is true, as to the Circumstances of moral Good, there are some
that relate to the form; others to the efficient and end; yet some also that
regard the matter. The matter of every good action is either good or indifferent:
it is good when commanded by and conform to the moral Law, the measure of
objective goodness as before: it is indifferent when neither good nor evil,
but as it were in the middle between both. Here that which chiefly requires an
examen and discussion is the nature of things indifferent; which, so far as it
may concern moral Good, we shall inquire into. Plato, in his Gorgias, Things
indifferent.
calls a thing indifferent, (...), neither good nor evil, but a middle between
these. So Diogenes the Cynic taught, (...), That things between virtue and vice
were indifferent. And the Stoics held, (...), Of things some were good, some
bad, some neither good nor bad, i. e. indifferent. These neuters, or things
indifferent, they said, were such as neither profited, nor did hurt. Again,
they affirmed, That things might be termed indifferent two ways. (1) (...),
etc. Such things as pertein not either to felicity or misery, as Riches,
Glory, etc. (2) (...), etc. Such things as men act neither with an Impetus,
nor aversation: as the extending the finger, or numbering the hairs of the
head, etc. as Laertius, in Zeno. But the more fully to explicate the nature of
things indifferent, we are to consider, that things are said in the general to
be indifferent, which in themselves are neither good nor evil, but equally
inclined to either. Now this indifference of actions or things, may be
considered physically or morally, according to the generic, specific, or
individual nature of Actions and Things.

1. If we consider Actions and Things in genere and abstracto, Physic
Indifference in Genere.
in their generic abstract nature, without the supervenient determination of
the moral Law, so they are in themselves nakedly considered indifferent: For
althings physically considered, without their moral estimation and respect to
the Law, are neither morally good nor evil. Thus al our Thoughts, Words and
Actions nakedly and physically considered, without respect to the moral Law,
(which is the rule and measure of moral Good and Evil) are said to be
indifferent.

2. Actions and Things are said to be indifferent in specie, Moral Indifference
in Specie.
when the matter of them is neither commanded nor forbidden by the moral Law.
For as althings are of God, through God and for God, so it belongs to his regal
Will to give moral or spiritual determination to them, whereby they are made
good or evil in specie, as to the matter of them. Neither can any created
limited power make that which is good, evil, or that which is evil, good, or
that which is indifferent, good or evil, except on supposition of
predetermination from him, who, being Creator of al, has an absolute dominion
over al. Every Creature having terms to its Essence, has also terms to its
dominion and operation: a limited Cause must necessarily have a limited power
and activitie. Except man had being of himself, and a World of his own framing,
he could not be a rule to himself, for the determination of his actions; but
must be determined by the Law of his Maker, for the specific nature or quality
of his acts as good, Quando dicimus, dari actus indifferentes quoad speciem,
qui non sunt boni nec mali, id intelligendum est negative. Petr. a Sancto
Joseph, These. 167.
or evil, or indifferent. Thence a thing is said to be morally indifferent in
specie, when it is neither commanded nor forbidden by God, and so neither good
nor evil: for all moral determination arises from the Divine Will expressed in
the moral Law. Whence it appears evident, that The reasons of good and evil are
not eternal, as some Platonists would fain persuade us; but dependent on the
divine Will and Determination: for althings are therefore good or evil in
specie, because so determined by the soverain Will, promulgated in the natural
or moral Law. Whence also we may easily perceive the danger of that commun
Notion, among some Divines, That somethings are good because commanded, other
things are commanded because good. Indeed this Maxim may be of use, to
express the difference between moral and positive Precepts, with this
limitation, that positive Precepts, which regard Worship, etc. are good because
commanded; but moral Precepts are commanded because good, i. e. agreeable to
human Nature, not that they have any moral goodness antecedent to the divine
Will and Determination. Hence,

3. No Action indifferent in individuo.
No Action considered, in individuo, in its individual nature is morally
indifferent: i.e. every individual action considered as clothed with its
Circumstances, and in relation to its Principes, Manner, and End is either good
or evil. That moral Indifference has place only in specie, in the specific
nature of Acts, not, in individuo, in their individual nature, is generally
avouched by the Orthodoxe, yea among the more sober of the Schole-men. This was
one of John Husse's Articles, condemned in the Council of Constance, Art. 16.
Quod nulla sint opera indifferentia, sed haec sit divisio immediata humanorum
operum, quod sint virtuosa vel vitiosa, That there are no works [in individuo]
indifferent; but this is an immediate division of human works, that they are
either virtuose, or vitiose. This indeed we may argue from Plato's Placites,
who strongly proves, That al our Acts ought to tend to some good end. So Gorg.
page 499. (...), It seems, that althings must be done for good, etc. So
elsewhere he says, That God is the marque and scope, unto which al our Acts,
as so many arrows, ought to tend. This is well determined by Aquinas, 1.2.
Quaest. 18. Art. 9. It happens sometimes that an Act is indifferent as to its
Species, which yet considered in individuo, is either good or evil: and that
because every moral Act receives its Bonitie not only from its object, but also
from its circumstances -- And it is necessary, that every individual Act has
some circumstance by which it is drawn to good or evil; at least as to the
intention of the end. For in as much as it belongs to Reason to order al human
Acts; if any Act be not ordered to its last end, it is so far evil: if it be
ordered to its last end, it is then good, etc. Thus Gibieuf de Libertat. page
74. We most evidently gather from the subordination of our Will to its last end,
that there are no human Acts indifferent in individuo; but al are good or evil:
for it is not lawful for a rational Creature, so long as he is such, not to
return that back to God which he received from God. Again, p. 77. Every thing
ought to act according to its nature: and he that does otherwise is deficient;
because nature is the measure of other things. If therefore man puts forth an
human Act, he ought thereby to be converted toward God. Indeed Indifference
can no more be found in individual Acts, than it can be denied as to some Acts
considered in their Species. Al Acts of Man in Innocence were good: all the Acts
of man under the dominion of corrupt Nature are evil: all the Acts of man in
Glory shall be good: all the Acts of man under Grace are either good or evil:
not one of al these indifferent. Were al our actions regulated by the Divine
moral Law, they would be al good. Yea our very natural and civil Acts, as to
their manner, so far as they are morally good or evil, are al regulated and
determined by the moral Law. For albeit the Divine Law be not, as it ought not
to be, a general sum of Arts and Sciences; nor yet a particular Directorie for
the Government of States or Politic Acts; yet the particular determination of
al our Acts falls under the Divine Law, so far as they are moral and Christian;
according to the nature of al Professions and Sciences, coincident for the most
part in the matter, but distinct in the manner of consideration. Thus much
Petrus a Sancto Joseph, that late compilator of Schole-Divinitie, These. 167.
acknowledges: There is not, says he, any Act indifferent in individuo; but
every such Act, if it proceed from sufficient deliberation, is either good or
evil, although not as to its object, yet in regard of its circumstances. The
scratching of the head, or the taking up of a straw, is either good or evil.
This seems a Paradoxe to some that are ignorant, and disgustful to Libertines,
who would be so; yet generally granted by Philosophers and Divines, yea scarce
ever professedly denied by any, save some sew, who distinguish between Acts
proceeding from mere Imagination, and such as are deliberate. That no Acts in
individuo are indifferent, see the Commentators in Sent. lib. 2. did. 41. and
in Thomam, 1.2. Quaest. 18. Art. 9.

2. A virtuose Will the Principe of moral Good.
Having discussed the Matter of moral Good, we now proceed to its next efficient
Cause or Principe; which is the Will, or rather Soul clothed with supernatural
Habits of Virtue or Grace. The moral Law requires, that to the constitution of
an Act morally good, there concur a good Principe: now the Will or Soul as
willing being the fountain of al moral efficience and operation, its rectitude
is necessary to constitute an Act morally or spiritually good. Such therefore
as the disposition of the Will is, such will the action prove as to its goodness
or pravitie. The bent of the Will is as a Pondus that carries the whole Soul
either to good or bad: when the deliberation and intention of a bended Will
concurs in a good matter for a good end, the action is good: And what bends the
Will in this manner, Actio recta non erit, nisi recta fuerit voluntas: ab hac
enim est actio.
but virtuose habits? So many degrees as there are of a sanctified Will in any
Act, so many degrees there are of moral Good therein. Morality, as well as
Divinity, is in a more special manner conversant in ruling the Will, which is
the measure of good and evil. The bent of the Will makes a good or bad man, as
also act. Thus Plato, Meno: (...), Virtue is to will, and to be able to perform
good. Again: (...), If he will not to do unrightcously, this is sufficient; he
shall not do unrighteously. But more particularly Plato, Leg. 3. thus
philosophiseth: This is not to be desired, (...), that althings follow his Will,
but that his Will follow Reason: i.e. that it prosecute what is good. This is
well expressed by Simplicius, in Epich. c. 1. page 14. (...), For when the Will
is free and pure in the power of Reason it self, on which our nature dependes,
then it is carried to things truly eligible; yea, to truth it self. Wherefore
the proper good of the Soul is called (...), Virtue, because (...), properly
desirable, and attained by real election. Simplicius here, in imitation of
Plato, (whom he much follows) asserteth, (1) That the moral Goodness of human
Acts dependes on the purity and goodness of the Will. (2) That moral Good is
called (...), Virtue, because most eligible. Which derivation he borrowed from
Plato. What Virtue properly is, and how it disposes the Will to what is morally
good, will hereafter. 4. and sect. 3.. 1, 2. come under contemplation: at
present this may suffice to demonstrate, that al moral Good requires a moral
Principe virtuously inclined for the production thereof. And had we no other
evidence hereof but what sacred Philosophy does assord, it might suffice. Thus
Solomon (the wisest of mere men, since the Fall) Prove. 4.23. Above al keeping
keep thine heart: Prove. 4.23.
for out of it are the issues of life: i. e. al spiritual life and moral good
issues from the heart rightly disposed and qualified with virtuose graciose
Principes: where the heart thus qualified is not the Spring, there no Act is
morally or spiritually alive toward God, but dead. Be the actions never so
seemingly splendid and gloriose as to the matter of them, yet if they flow not
from this living Fountain, they are but as your Automata, those artificial
Machines or Images called Puppits; which seem to move their eyes, hands, feet,
etc. whereas indeed they are moved only by artificial foreign impresses: such
are al moral Acts that flow not from a vital Principe virtuosely disposed,
morally dead, albeit they may seem to have shadows of life. Or look as no
member of the body performs any action of natural life, wherein a pulse
derived from the heart beats not; so no action is morally good, wherein there
beats not some pulse of a virtuose rightly disposed Will. Actions are
conformable to the fountain whence they spring: no living virtuose Act can
proceed from a dead corrupt Principe: Being, life, and motion go together in
Morals, as well as in Naturals: such as the Faculty, Spring, and Principe is,
such will the motion and operation be, both in Grace and Nature, as Medo has well
observed, on Prove. 4.23. Thus Augustine, on Mat. 7.18. where by the good Tree
he understands a believing Will, which he makes essential to every good Act: for
if the Will be bad, the Act cannot be good: and every unbelieving Will is a bad
Will: for where there is no Faith in Christ as the first Principe of life, there
can be no love to God as the last End: as the end forms the Will, so Faith
forms the End. Thence that of the supposed Ignatius: (...), Faith is the
Principe of life, Love the end: these two in unity perfect the man of God. And
Chrysostom says: (...), Nothing is good without Faith.

3. The best End essential to moral Good.
To the Constitution of moral Good there is also essentially requisite the best
End. Thus Plato, Gorg. page 499. assures us, That al Acts must be undertaken
for the last end and best good, as before, Sect. 1.. 2. This is well explicated
by Aquinas, 2.2. Quaest. 2.3. Art. 8. It must be said, that in Morals the form
of an Act is principally to be attended in regard of its end: and the reason is
most evident; because the Will is the Principe of moral Acts, and the End the
main Object, and as it were the form of the Will: but now the form of an Act
always follows the form of an Agent: whence in Morals it is necessary, that
what gives an Act its order to an end, give it is also form, etc. This is more
nakedly laid down by Angustine: Whatever good is done by man, but not for that
end for which it ought to be done, albeit the office it self [ i. e. the matter
of the Act] seem good, yet the end being not right, it is sin. This is well
explicated by Jansenius, August. Tom. 2. lib. 4. cap. 10. Two things are to be
regarded in every act of a virtuose Will; (1) The office or work it self done:
(2) The cause for which it is done, or the End. In the weighing the Bonitie of
any Virtue, our main regard must be to the End. This is as it were the last
rest and scope of the mind in acting, that which the Will, its habit, and act
most incline unto. This deservedly rules al Offices, which flow from its
Empire, are tinctured with its color and sapor, and ought to be referred to it.
This is the genuine cause why so many vexatious litigations were found among
the Gentile Philosophers, touching the chiefest Good. So again he says, That
the Office it self is but as the Corpse of Virtue, which is animated by the End,
which gives form and life, without which the office is but as matter without
form, or a carcass without Soul. Aristotle well instructes us, That the end is
the measure of althings: which is true as to moral Good. Thence Petrus a Sancto
Joseph, These. 166. assertes, That an human action takes its Bonitie or
pravitie, not only from the intrinsec end of the work, which is coincident
with the object; but also from the extrinsec, which is the end of the Worker.
Certainly Offices are to be weighed not so much by their Acts, as Ends: And
what is the last end of al good works, but the Glory of God? which, though
last in Execution, yet ought to be first in Intention, at least virtually, if
not formally, in all we do. Thence, says Angustine, That is not true Virtue,
which tends not to that end, wherein the best Good of man consistes. And
Gregor. Ariminensis, 2. Sent. Did. 29. Quaest. 1. proves that, Every volition,
which refers not to God for himself, or to other things for God, is vitiose.

4. The last Cause, The Form of moral Good conformity to the moral Law.
or rather constitutive part of moral Good is its Form, which consistes in its
Conformity to the divine moral Law. This may deservedly be termed the Form of
moral Good; because it gives form and measure to all the former Principes and
parts: For wherein consistes the Goodness of the Matter, Principes, and End,
but in their Conformity to the Divine Will and Law? This therefore is the
formal Idea or Reason of al moral Good, whereby al difference and perfection is
to be measured. Arist. Eth. lib. 5. cap. 2. tells us, (...), That the great
difference of things is according to their Idea or formal Reason. Hence
Conformity to the Divine Law being the formal Reason or Idea of al moral Good,
by this we are to take our measures of al differences or perfection therein.
This Conformity of moral Good to the Divine Law is described by Plato, under
various emphatic notions: as (1) it is termed (...) and (...). So Protag. page
326. (...), All the life of man ought to consist of Concent and Harmony: i. e.
of Uniformitie and Conformity to the Divine Law. Hence (2) In his Phaedo, he
says, (...), Al Virtue consistes in Harmony: whereas vice is a confused
inordination or irregularitie. So in his Timaeus, page 47. he says, That
Harmony being very near akin to the motions of the Soul, it is given us to
reduce the disorders of the Soul to a decorum. So Stobaeus, Sermon. 1. de Virtut.
page 15. (...), etc. Virtue has for its rule a decorum, or that which is most
convenient, i.e. agreeable or conformable to the Law of Nature. Hence (3) This
Conformity is styled by Plato (...), Symmetrie and Symphonie. Al these notions
Aristotle comprehended under his (...), Mediocritie, of which more fully B. 4.
C. 1.. 30. and Philos. General. P. 2. l. 1. c. 1. sect. 4.. 4.

Others place the Form of moral Good in the mode or manner of doing, namely
that it be done well: How the Form of Good consistes in the (...), well doing.
and we find some foundation for this Hypothesis in Plato's Theaetetus, page
187. (...), It Is better to a little well, than much il. Where he seems to make
the (...), the w^l doing, the form and measure of good. So Aristotle, Eth.
lib. 2. cap. 3. page 83. (...), etc. He therefore shall be a Grammarian, who
does what is Grammatic, Grammatically, i.e. according to Rules of Grammar. But
yet he adds, by way of caution, That (...), the well-doing of Arts is not the
same with that of Virtues: for the perfection of Arts is included in
themselves, without regard to the perfection of the Artificer: but the
perfection of Virtue requires, that the subject be so and so qualified. And
then he concludes: (...), He is a righteous and temperate man, not that does
those things, but does them in such a manner as righteous and sober men do
them, i.e. rightcously and soberly. Hence that vulgar Effate, That good works
are to be judged by Adverbes: for all must be done with those adverbial
conditions of sacred Philosophy, Tit. 2.12. (...), soberly, and righteously,
and piously. This is in a peculiar manner true of good actions, where the matter
is indifferent; because such have no goodness at al, but what is from the
Adverb. So that it suffices not that the Act be (...), good, but it must have
(...), a right manner of being done: and herein, according to some, the Form
of its goodness does consiste, even in the manner of it; and any defect herein
will render the action evil: according to those scholastic Maxims, The form
gives being, and any omission or defect therein gives millitie as to moral
Good. So in the Canon Law they tell us, That the form must be precisely and
punctually observed. And indeed this notion of the form of moral Good amounts
to the same with the former, and must be resolved thereinto. For a moral Act
may be said then to have its (...), or been factum, well done, when it is in all
points exactly conformable to the moral Law: for all moral Good is a relation of
conformity with the rule of Morals; but the least privation thereof is sin.

But, How far Circumstances formalise moral Good.
to descend to particulars, an human Act is then conformable to the Law and well
done, when it is not only good for the matter, but also clothed with all those
Circumstances, which necessarily attend its moral goodness. The particular
form of moral Good consistes much in the Circumstances that attend it. The
Circumstances often formalise and specisie the Act, making it good or evil:
sometimes they only make it better or worse. But the Circumstances have the
greatest sway in things indifferent, where the manner of doing does chiefly
specify the Act. We find the Circumstances of human Acts well expressed by
Aristotle, Eth. l. 2. c. 5. Virtue, says he, consistes in the well doing of
things: for we may fear, trust, desire, hate, despise, be angry, pity,
rejoice, and grieve, (...), not duly. (...), But truly to be moved with these
affections, when, and in what things, and toward whom, and for what end, and
in that manner as we ought, this is the golden mean, and that which is best,
wherein Virtue consistes. Whence also Aristotle, Eth. lib. 3. cap. 10. art. 5.
page 160. assures us, That a defect in any one Circumstance renders an Act
evil: (...), But sins may be committed, some, when that is done that ought not;
others, when not as it ought; others, because not at that time when it ought,
or the like. Thence, art. 10. he adds: (...), For a valiant man suffers and
acts according to the dignity of the matter, and when, and in that manner as
reason [or the Law of Nature] dictates. Thus we see how Plato and Aristotle
require to the constitution of moral Good, not only a right matter, but that it
be clothed with all due Circumstances, whereby it may be rendered conformable to
the Law as to manner. This Hypothesis has been generally maintained among the
more sound Schole-men. Thus Aquinas, 1.2. Quaest. 7. Art. 2. A Circumstance is
a condition or accident of an human Act, which touches it extrinsecally. And
seeing human Acts are disposed toward their last end by circumstances, the
contemplation hereof greatly concerns Theologues. For a Theologue considers
human Acts, as a man is thereby ordained to Beatitnde: Now whatever is ordained
to an end ought to be proportionate thereto: But Acts are rendered
proportionable to their end by a certain commensuration, which they receive
from due circumstances: whence the consideration of circumstances chiefly
belongs to a Theologue. What these circumstances are he adds, Art. 3. In human
Acts, Who did it; By what aides or instruments; What, Why, How, When, and Abour
what he did it, are to be inquired into. Some explain these Circumstances thus:
(1) Quis, who, must not be taken for the efficient cause, but for his condition
and quality, as a private person, or public, etc. (2) Quid, what, must not be
understood of the matter or object, but of the quality thereof. (3) Neither
must Quomodo, how, be taken for the form or manner, but whether it be done
openly or secretly, etc. Greg. Ariminensis, 2. Sent. Did. 38. Quaest. 1. Art.
1. strongly assertes and proves, That no moral Act wanting its due Circumstance
is morally good. By an Act morally good, I understand, says he, no other
(according to the Doctors) than an Act conform to right Reason, [objective,
i.e. the Divine Law] according to al circumstances requisite to this, that the
Act be truly virtuose. When therefore a moral operation is not conform to
right Reason, [or the Law] according to al due circumstances, it is vitiose and
morally evil. This his Hypothesis he proves by two Conclusions. 1. Conclus.
That no moral Act wanting any one due Circumstance, is truly virtuose. This he
proves by showing that the contrary implies a contradiction. For if a moral Act
want any one due circumstance, it is not as it ought to be: therefore it is
evil. Due circumstances are communly said to be such things, as are required to
this, that the Act be truly virtuose: and if an Act be truly virtuose it is
conform to right Reason, or the moral Law: and if such, then it wants not any
due circumstance: wherefore if any Act wanting a due circumstance should be
truly virtuose, it will then necessarily follow, That it does want, and yet that
it does not want a due circumstance: or, That it is truly virtuose, and yet
that it is not truly virtuose. 2. Conclus. That every such Act as wants its due
Circumstances is morally evil and sin. It is evil because it wants its due
bonitie or goodness, namely its due circumstance. For sin is nothing else but
the want of a due good, or voluntarily to act against the Divine Law. Thus much
also Suarez grants us, That some conditions that are only circumstantial and
accidental to an Act in esse rei, as to the physic being, are yet essential in
esse moris, as to its moral being. So Suarez, 1.2. Tract. 2. Disp. 5. page 169.
The first opinion, says he, is, That an human Act may be considered in its
natural or moral being: and that circumstances are so called in relation to the
natural, not the moral being of the Act; but that al these conditions are
substantial Principes or proper Causes of the moral action as such. He mentions
this as the opinion of some Scholemen, namely, that there are no accidental
circumstances of human Acts morally considered; but that al these Circumstances
are essential and properly influential on the said moral Acts. Which indeed is
a great truth, whereunto, though not fully, yet thus far he assents: It is
true, says he, what the first opinion asserted, That some conditions may be
accidental to the act, in esse rei, as a natural act, and yet essential to it,
in esse moris, morally considered. And the reason, adds he, is taken a priori,
because the esse morale or moral being of an Act primarily dependes on the
order of Reason; (we say of the Law:) but now it often happens, that an act or
object has a diverse order to reason, by reason of diverse conditions of those
things that concur to the moral Act. Thence page 174. he tells us what
Circumstances are essential. Right Reason, (which must be understood
objectively) is the rule of human acts and their circumstances: therefore the
affection or reason of these Circumstances cannot be better explicated, than by
their order or regard to right Reason, (I would say the Divine Law.) And the
same rule is to be used for the understanding when the conditions of moral Acts
are not properly Circumstances, but essential, namely when they are such as,
according to right Reason, are altogether necessary, not only as to degrees,
but simply as to the honesty or turpitude of the act. For when a Circumstance
altogether changes the conformity or difformitie of an human act, it changes
its Species. In which he plainly grants, That al those Circumstances which
change the conformity or difformitie of an human act, are specific and
essential: Which is all that we need contend for; because the Controversy is
not about natural or civil Circumstances, but such as belong to the act morally
considered: which if good requires an integrity of Causes and plenitude of
Circumstances: so that if one Circumstance due to the moral bonitie of the act
be defective, the whole act is changed and rendered morally evil. By the whole
of which it is most evident, that al Circumstances due to the moral goodness
of an human act, are essential and specific, such as concur to formalise moral
Good; which requires a complete conformity to the Divine Law, not only in
Matter, Principes, and End, but also in all Circumstances morally due to the
integrity of such an Act: For all good (as has been sufficiently demonstrated)
requires an integrity of Causes; whereas sin arises from the least defect:
according to that known Effate of the spurious Dionysius, Divin. Nom. cap. 4.
(...), Good is from one and complete cause, but sin from many and singular
defects.

. 4. The Unity and Uniformity of al moral Good.
Having considered moral Good in its Causes and constitutive parts, we now
descend to the contemplation thereof in its proper Adjuncts, and Attributes,
which we shall deduce and draw forth in the subsequent Corollaries. 1. Al moral
Good, Virtues, and virtuose Acts have one and the same simple uniforme Idea and
Nature. For all moral Good and virtuose Acts flow from one and the same virtuose
Principes, tend to one and the same End, and are formalised by one and the same
conformity to the Divine Law. Thus Plato, Repub. 5. page 445. It appears to
me, as it were in a Watchtower, (...), that the face or form of Virtue is one;
but that of Improbitie, manifold and almost infinite. His mind is, that al
Virtues have one and the same formal Idea or face; but sins have variety, yea
almost infinite deformed shapes. This Aristotle, Eth. lib. 2. cap. 5. page 89.
having proved, that al moral Virtue consistes in a Mediocritie and Uniformity,
he adds: (...), Moreover we may sin many ways: (for as the Pythagoreans
conjecture, sin is infinite and boundless; but good is terminate and bounded)
but there is but one way of doing good. Wherein we may observe, (1) That al sin
is difforme, boundless and endless: it has no form, measure or number. (2)
But Virtue and moral Good is bounded and uniforme. Whence he concludes with a
Verse out of some ancient Poet, (...), For good men truly are simply and
uniformely such; but wicked men are difformely and variously so. Thus also
Aristotle, Mag. Moral. lib. 1. cap. 25. affirms, That al Good is (...),
uniforme; but al Vice (...), multiforme. Hence Plato asserted, (...), That
which is just, is equal and uniforme. Whence that Stoic Hypothesis, (...), Al
moral goods are equal and uniforme, i.e. conform to the rule of Morality. All this is well expressed by Augustine, who makes al Good to consiste, in Modo,
Specie, and Ordine, in Mode, Species, and Order, i.e. in a uniforme conformity
to the rule of Morality. Hence,

2. Al moral Good and Virtue supernatural.
There is no real moral Good, or natural Virtue but what is supernatural. This
Corollarie evidently follows from the former, and indeed from the whole of this
discourse about moral Good. For if al moral Virtue or Good requires an
integrity of causes, and is formalised by conformity to the Divine Law,
thence it necessarily follows, that moral Good or Virtue can be but one
uniforme simple thing. Thence Chrysostom, Hom. 4. in Genesis calls Grace, (...), a
gift above nature, overcoming nature. And Cyril in Esa. terms it, (...), above
proper Nature; as elsewhere, (...), a Prerogative above Nature. I am not
ignorant that many of the Scholemen, and too many of our Divines, in imitation
of them, make a twofold Good and Virtue; one natural and moral: the other
spiritual and supernatural. The natural Virtue and moral Good they make to be
that which a man may, by the force of natural Conscience and other natural
Principes, attain unto: The spiritual and supernatural Good or Virtue they make
to be infused. Albeit this distinction may, with due limitations, pass for
orthodoxe; yet in as much as it was at first framed by the Pelagians, and taken
up by their Sectators in the Schools, I should be glad if Jansenius's advice
for the utter extirpation of it, were embraced: who, in his August. Tom. 2.
lib. 4. cap. 14. page 256. gives us the origination of this Distinction, which
he makes to be first taken up by the Pelagians from the Gentile Philosophers,
specially the Peripatetics and Stoics; who held, that there were in men natural
seeds of Virtue, which being well cultivated, might arise up to perfect Virtue.
These natural seeds of Virtue, adds he, first the Pelagians and Semipelagians
brought into their Heresy; and afterward the Schole-men introduced the same
into the Christian Schools, to the great prejudice of our Doctrine. For those
Heretics held, that out of those philosophic seeds true Virtues-might be educed
by the alone power of the human Will. But because the Schole-men saw that this
Dogme was openly contrary to the constantly received Doctrine, they therefore
framed a double man in one man; and thence a double Charity, double Virtues,
double Works; some natural, others supernatural; of which there is not the
least footstep in the whole Doctrine of Augustine. As if those very Virtues,
which the Philosophers and Schole-men call Natural, were not, by Augustine,
styled Vices. And Tom. 2. lib. 2. cap. 2. page 326. he assures us, That he has
often greatly wondered, that many of the Philosophers had more truly, accurately,
and holily philosophised of the main Heads of moral Doctrine, than many
Schole-men; who would fain frame two men in one; the one a Philosopher, and the
other a Christian: whence they also coined a twofold Charity, twofold Virtues,
twofold Works, and a twofold Beatitude, the one natural, the other
supernatural. Hence,

3. The difficulty of moral Good.
To perform any moral Good or virtuose Act is most difficult and rare. O! how
difficult and rare is it for men to perform what is good, from good Principes,
Ends, in a good manner as to Circumstances, and universal Conformity to the
Divine Law! Thus Plato, Repub. 5. page 476. (...); But of such as can arrive to
the first Beauty, and contemplate him in himself, are there not very few? So
Phileb. page 16. he says, (...), To explain Wisdom is not very difficult, but
to reduce it to practice and use most difficult. So again: (...), What way men
may attain to be good is most difficult, i.e. to understand and practice Again,
he says: (...), It is difficult for a man to be made good, and to continue
such. Whence in his Cratylus, page 385. he says, (...), According to the old
Proverb, things good are very difficult. Thence also, in his Epinomis, page
973. (...), I say it is not possible for men to be blessed and happy here,
except some few only. Lastly Plato, in his Repub. 6. says, That Virtue has
the most perfect accurate form, and therefore it requires, (...), the most
perfect exactitude and diligence for the acquirement thereof: for (...); Do not
the greatest things require the greatest exactitude? And what things greater
than moral Goods and Virtues? Thus Aristotle also, in imitation of his Master,
once and again demonstrates the difficulty and raritie of moral Good. So Eth.
lib. 2. cap. 5. page 89. having showed, That there were variety of ways,
wherein men might sin; but one only way of doing good; he adds: (...),
Therefore it is most easy to offend, but most difficult to do good: for to
err from the scope is most-facile, but to hit it, is most difficult. So in
like manner, c. 9. page 108. he says, Virtue consistes in mediocritie, i.e. in
one indivisible point of conformity. Whence he concludes: (...), etc.
Wherefore to acquire Virtue is most difficult and laborious: for it is an hard
work to attain to the middle of any thing. As every one cannot find out the
point of a Circle; but only the intelligent Mathematician: So to be angry, to
give money, or the like, is easy; but to be angry, to give money, etc. to
whom, and in such a measure, and at such a time, and for such an end, and in
such a manner as we ought, this is not easy. Thence he concludes: (...), The
been or manner of doing good, is difficult, laudable, and beautiful. Wherein
indeed he gives us an excellent account of the nature and difficulty of moral
Good. (1) He supposes al moral Good to consiste as it were in one middle
indivisible point; so that the least deviation therefrom destroys it. Quo enim
magis strenue currit extra viam, eo longius a scopo recedit, ideoque sit
miserior. Calvin.
(2) That it is very difficult to find out this golden mean, but much more
difficult to reach it by our actions. True indeed it is no difficult work to
perform the act materially good, as to give alms, or the like; but (...), the
well doing of it, i.e. from those Principes, for those Ends, and with those
Circumstances, that the Act requires in regard of its formal constitution, this
is most rare, difficult, and only laudable. Hence,

4. The splendid Heroic deeds of Pagans, The Virtues of Pagans lesser sins only.
and al such whose minds are not virtuosely disposed, are but lesser Sins. This
is most evident by the confessions of the Philosophers themselves, who require
to moral Good an integrity of Causes and constitutive Principes: so that it
suffices not, that the Matter or Office be good, but there is also required a
good disposition and habit, the best end, and al such Circumstances as
essentially concur to formalise the Act, or denominate it morally good. Now let
us inquire, did ever any Pagan or man in his natural state perform any one Act
thus morally good? What? can we produce any Pagan or natural man, who had his
mind so far sanctified by Faith and Love, as to act by force received from God,
out of love to God and his Glory? Truly Augustine, and Jansenius out of him;
are not afraid to declare, that al those Heroic Acts and Exploits, which the
Philosophers and Schole-men honor with the title of natural or moral Virtues,
are indeed but more splendid sins; because poisoned with pride and vain-glorie.
Yea, they rise higher and affirm, that the Stoics themselves, who seemed to be
the greatest admirers and sectators of Virtue, did indeed come under the
Apostles condemnation, Romans 8.6, etc. of living after the flesh; because they
made their carnal Reason, Free Will and Self the only measures and springs of
their pretended Virtue. Lastly, al moral Virtue, according to philosophic
Placits, is but one: so that the Virtues of Pagans must be supernatural, or
none at al, as before. Thence Greg. Nazianzen, Orat. 3. in Julian. speaking of
the Platonists, Stoics, and peripatetics, says: (...), Virtue to them is only
a speciose name, and in nothing more lasting than this life. Thus Chrysostom,
Hom. 27. in Joan. It is not yet apparent to me that the Gentiles lived well --
For if the hope of the celestial Kingdom, and the commination of Hell, with
other such like solicitude, (...), can scarce keep men in Virtue, those who
are persuaded of none of these things, will not embrace Virtue. But if some of
them counterfeit the same, this they do out of desire of Glory, etc. This
Hypothesis is frequently inculcated by Augustine; and he grounds it on that
eternal Verity of our Lord, Mat. 7.18.
Mat. 7.18. Neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit. So contra
Julian. l. 4. c. 3. The unbelieving will, as every Christian grants, is an evil
tree, which cannot produce any other than evil fruits, i.e. sins only. The like
Cyril, in Hos. (...), etc. Probitie in those that God hates is without its
reward, and good manners tending not to true good shall be always reprehended by
him. Not but that many Heathens, as Christian Hypocrites, may perform Acts and
Offices materially good, which yet may be deservedly (as they are by the
Ancients) termed Sins, as they proceed not from Faith in Christ, and Love to
God, the main Principes of al true moral Good. So Chrysostom. ( Tom. 17. Hom. 17.
Edit. Paris.) (...), They are good works ( i.e. materially) but dead, because
they have not Faith.

5. The distrioution of moral Good or Virtue into Justice and Piety.
Albeit al Virtue, according to its formal Idea and Reason, be but one; yet,
according to its objective material consideration, it may be variously
distributed. Thus in sacred Philosophy moral Good or Virtue is distributed, as
to its object or matter, into Holiness and Righteousness, Ephesians. 4.24. (...),
In Righteousness and Holiness. Righteousness comprehends al
Second-table-duties, which regard men; and Holiness, al First-table-duties,
which regard God. This distribution is most ancient, and, I presume, was
communly received among the Jews. Sure I am Plato has it, and, as I conjecture,
from the Mosaic Institutes. Thus in his Gorgias, page 507. (...), But now he
that comports himself decently toward men, does righteous things; but he that
behaveth himself aecently toward God, does holy or pious things: but he that
does both rightcous and holy things, must necessarily be righteous and holy.
Wherein observe, (1) That he distributes al moral Good into just or righteous,
and pious or holy. (2) That he makes Justice or Righteousness to regard men,
but Piety or Holiness to regard God. (3) That some may seem to be righteous
toward men, who yet are not pious or holy toward God; as on the other hand,
some may pretend to be pious toward God, who yet are not just and righteous
toward men. But (4) he that is just and righteous toward men, in giving them
their due, as also pious and holy toward God, in giving him his due, such is
indeed a virtuose man, morally good, just, and pious. Thus also Serranus, on
Plato, Alcibiad. 2. page 136. takes notice, how Plato distributes Virtue,
(...), into Piety and Justice; the former relating to the Worship of God, the
later to men; whereby our whole life is duly framed and regulated; these being
two seminal roots or commun heads of particular Offices and Duties. Lastly
Plato, in his Minos, page 319. says, That we should take diligent heed first
that we offend not in word or deed against God: and then that we offend not
against men, specially such as are divine. A Golden Rule for moral Duties.

CHAP. III. Of Virtue, and Moral Liberty.
Moral Virtue an habitual Perfection. Moral Liberty as to state in virtuese
Habits. Virtue gives, (1) Dominion, (2) Life, Health, Vigor, (3) Amplitude, (4)
Nobility and Dignity, (5) Beauty and Glory. Moral Liberty as to Exercice
consistes in virtuose Acts. (1) The Contemplation of the first Truth. (2)
Adherence to the chiefest Good. (3) Total actual dependence on the first Cause.
(4) Conformity to the divine preceptive Will, as also submission to his
providential Will. (5) Using althings in subordination to the Fruition and
Service of God. Moral Liberty as to exercice the greatest; because it brings
(1) Order, (2) Spontaneitie and suavitie, (3) A Divine Life, (4) Amplitude, (5)
Freedom from Sin, (6) Stabilitie of Spirit, (7) Improvement of Virtue, (8)
Formal Beatitude.

. 1. Moral Virtue an habitual Perfection.
THE general Idea and Nature of Moral Bonitie having been discussed, we now
proceed to the discussion of Virtue, as it is the origin and cause of moral
Liberty. Plato discourses of Virtue in his Meno, the title of which is (...).
Virtue properly, according to its orgination, signifies a Power or Efficace; it
being derived from Vir, which primarily signified among the Ancients a stout
valiant man; answering to (...) among the Hebrews. So the Greek (...) primarily
and properly signifies warlike Virtue or Courage, from (...), Mars; and this
from (...) arits, terrible, valiant, potent; or, as Vossius, from (...),
marats, to wax strong. Hence in the N.T. (...) is used to express the Divine
power and efficace of God, as 1 Pet. 2.9. and 2 Pet. 1.3. (...), i.e. by his
gloriose power. Thus (...) is expounded by Hesychius (...), a divine power. So
the LXX. translate (...), which signifies the gloriose power of God, (...), as
Hab. 3.3. Zach. 6.17. Neither is (...) used in the N. T. more than once, if
ever, to denote a virtuose disposition of mind, namely Phil. 4.8. So curiose
were the sacred Penmen in avoiding philosophic terms, which had been so much
abused. But by moral Virtue we here understand an habitual disposition of Soul
conform to the Rule of Morality, the Divine Law. In which strict notion it
has one and the same formal idea or reason with supernatural Grace, as
Jansenius, Amesius, and others understand it. For that there is no real moral
Virtue but what is supernatural, has been sufficiently demonstrated in the
precedent Section,. 4. Whence true moral Virtue is nothing else but a certain
perfection, whereby man is ordained and disposed toward God, as Aquinas, 1.
Quaest. 95. Others call Virtue, the most regular and best state of a rational
Creature. Whether Virtue be a Power, Affection, Habit, or merely Act, has been
disputed among the ancient Philosophers, Gratia non est habitus proprie, sed
habitudo sive sanitas mentis. Aq. 1.2. Quaest. 100. Art. 3.
as well as Schole-Divines. But the communly received opinion is, that it is an
Habit, or as Aquinas expresses it, an Habitude of the Soul. That Virtue is an
Habit Aristotle largely demonstrates, Eth. l. 2. c. 4. as Philos. General. P.
2. l. 1. c. 1. sect. 4.. 3. An Habit properly is of a middle nature between a
Power and an Act, which gives the power an accidental facility of acting.
(...), a power, Definit. Platon. is defined, (...), that which is of it self
effective, or operative: but (...), an Habit, is desined, page 414. (...), a
disposition of the Soul, whereby we are said to be so or so qualified for
acting. So that every Habit is in order of nature at least, if not of time,
before the Act, but subsequent to the Power. For the Soul by its Habits is made
more facile or capable to act. The definition and cognition of Habits depends
on the cognition of their proper Object, Subject, Mode of existing in their
Subject, and Acts. For the form of the Act follows the form of the Agent: and
such as the Habit is in relation to its object, such is the Agent. Hence, by
how much the more noble and perfect the habit is, by so much the more noble and
perfect is the Agent and his operation. Whence Virtue is a supernatural
Habitude, Habit, or active Form, whereby the Soul is elevated to supernatural
Acts. Thence Virtue is termed by Basil, (...), Completive of Nature. This
indeed might be evinced out of Plato's Definition of Virtue, drawn into form
by Serranus, Meno, page 68. Virtue is (...), the habit of the Soul rationally
operating by the natural power, the best work, and aiming at the best end. So
that al Virtue requires not only the best matter or object, but also the best
end. And indeed such as the habitual aptitude or disposition of the Soul is,
such will the end be, as Aristotle, Eth. l. 3. c. 10. page 160. well observes:
(...), The end of every action is such as the habit is: as an habit of
fortitude makes men affect valiant acts. Again, lib. 4. cap. 13. page 254.
(...), Such as every man is, such is his action, and speech, and such is his
life: i.e. such as a man's habitual frame of Spirit is, such is his end, acts,
and life. Al habits are as a Pondus affixed to the Soul, whereby it is strongly
bent and inclined toward objects, ends and acts, suitable thereto. Al habitual
Virtues are one and the same in regard of principe and seed, though different
as to their proper objects and acts. The same habitual Entitie as it
facilitates to know God, is called Divine Knowledge; but as it facilitates to
love God, it is called Divine Love; and so in the other virtuose Habits. That
Supernaturalitie is a Mode intrinsecally and essentially included in all
virtuose Habits, is evident, because human Nature, specially as now corrupted,
cannot reach an end or act supernatural: For if a natural power should have any
activitie in respect of a supernatural act and object, it may, by a paritie of
reason, by degrees attain to the highest supernatural objects and acts, as
Alvarez, de Auxil. Disp. 65. demonstrates. Of the nature of Supernaturalitie,
and how it is intrinsecally and essentially included in the substance of al
graciose Habits, see Choquetius, de Great. l. 1. Disp. 7. and 12. Also Thomas
Hurtado, Praecursor Theologus, de Supernaturalitate Entis, Disp. 1. Controvers.
1, etc.

. 2. Moral Liberty as to state in virtuose Habits.
From what has been laid down touching the nature of Virtue it evidently
follows, that al moral Liberty arises from those virtuose habits the Soul is
clothed with, and agreeable exercices flowing therefrom. What Natural Liberty
is, has been fully explicated Court Gent. P. 2. B. 3. C. 9. Sect. 3.. 11. How
much moral Liberty differs from natural may easily be discerned by any that
impartially considers the same. The later indeed is essential to and
inseparable from man as man, and al human acts; but the former is proper to man
as virtuose, as will sufficiently appear by what follows. Every man is so far
morally free as he is near to God. Althings aim at Unity: God, who is the
supreme Unity, convertes althings to himself: and every thing is so far free
and perfect, as it comes near to God. The human Soul has a twofold approach to
God, (1) by Similitude, (2) by actual real Union and Fruition. (1) The more
like the Soul is to God, the more one it is with him, and free: al similitude
is a kind of Unity: and whence springs the Souls similitude to God, but from
virtuose habits? (2) The Soul has actual real union with, and fruition of God
by virtuose exercices. Hence arises a twofold moral Liberty: (1) As to State,
(2) As to Exercice in that state. The former depends on habitual Virtue; the
later on virtuose exercices. Of each in their order.

Moral Liberty as to state consistes in virtuose dispositions of Soul, whereby
it is capacitated for and made like to God. Thus the spurious Dionysius,
Eccles. Hier. cap. 2. (...), Seeing the Divine Nativitie or Regeneration is a
certain Divine state, certainly he that has not attained to that divine state,
shall never know, much less do the things delivered by God. Whence also he
concludes: (...). The principal progress of divine dilection in the sacred
observation of divine Commands consistes in the most ineffable framing of our
divine state. This Athanasius, Dialog. 1. contr. Macedon. terms, (...), The
participation of sanctity by Grace. And the supposed Ignatius, ad Magn. (...),
the forment of Grace: i.e. that which gives a forment or principe of operation
to the whole Soul. And Greg. Nyssenus styles this State of Virtue or Grace
(...), Transelementation, or Restoration of the Principes of the divine life,
or of the Soul, whereby it is made like to God, and capable of adhering to him.
Whence Damascene, Orthodox. Fid. lib. 2. cap. 12. gives us this excellent
Character of Man, as invested with the Image of God: God made man a little
world in the greater, another Angel, an Inspector of the visible Creature, and
Disciple of the intellectual; King of those things that are on earth: both
terrene and celeste, temporal and immortal, and that which is supreme, (...),
by access to God to be deified: but to be deified not by transalition into the
Divine Essence, but by participation of the divine irradiation. Thence
Augustine styles Liberty the best disposition of Soul. Similitude to God is
the highest Liberty as to state: so far as any is made virtuose, so far he is
made free: The connection between Piety and Liberty is so intimate, as that
indeed they have one and the same beginning, progress, and consummation. By
how much the more ample, spiritual, pure, and perfect the Soul is, by so much
the more free it is: and whence springs the Amplitude, Spiritualitie, Purity,
and Perfection of the Soul, but from virtuose habits? Indeed Plato estimed
nothing good but Virtue, and moral Good: whence Antipater the Stoic writ three
Books with this Title, (...), That according to Plato Virtue only was good.
That Virtue is the most perfect state of the Soul, and that which brings with
it most moral Liberty is most evident; because hereby it is rendered capable of
adhering to its first Cause, and last End, which is the top of moral Liberty.
For wherein consistes the perfection of moral Liberty, but in its conformity
to its most perfect Exemplar, which is the Divine Bonitie? And is not this the
privilege of moral Bonitie or Virtue? Hence Virtue is defined by Aquinas,
Dispositio perfecti ad optimum, The Disposition of a perfect Subject, to the
most perfect Exemplar and End. Virtue indeed is more perfect than the Soul it
self: so Aquinas: Grace, says he, in it self and according to its essence, is
more noble than the nature of the Soul; because it is an expression or
participation of the divine Bonitie: and that which is substantially in God, is
accidentally in the Soul participating of the divine Bonitie. That which
belongs to God by nature, belongs to us by Grace. And Suarez says: That Grace
is the Bond, whereby man is conjoined to God, his last end. Now by how much the
more the Soul is conjoined to God, by so much the more sublime, free, and
perfect its state and condition is. In sum, Liberty of state consistes in a
virtuose or graciose disposition of Soul, whereby it is enabled to understand,
embrace and adhere to what is good, in that manner and measure as it ought.
Take all the notions of true moral Liberty, and they agree to none but the
virtuose man.

1. Virtue gives Deminion.
Liberty is defined by the Platonist, (...), a Principality or Dominion of
Life: also (...), a plenary power over althings. Which the Stoics interpret,
(...), a self-moving authority or power. And whence arises this Dominion of
the Soul over it self and other things, but from virtuose habits? Plato assures
us, That a virtuose temperate man is (...), stronger than himself: i.e. by
virtue he has dominion over his sensitive part. Again, Repub. 9. he instructes
us, That he who is best is most happy and august or royal; because he is able
to govern himself, (...): But he that is most wicked is most miserable,
because he is a Tyrant over himself. May we account him a man fit to govern
himself, who is a slave to his unlawful passions and lusts? The Orator defines
Liberty, a power of living as men list: and who has this power to live as he
list, but the virtuose man, whose will is conformed to the divine Will? Does the
voluptuose sensual man live as he list, whose mind is distracted and torn in
pieces by unbridled lusts, as by so many wild Horses? Can it be imagined, that
the ambitiose man lives as he list, whose mind is still on the rack of ambitiose
designs? Does the avaricious man live as he list, who the more he has, the
more he wants? It Is most evident, that no man lives as he list, but the
virtuose man, who has a will slexible to the divine Will. This Dominion that
attends moral Liberty is well expressed in sacred Philosophy: Hos. 11.12.
So Hos. 11.12. But Judah yet rules with God, and is faithful with the Saints.
(1) Observe, That Judah's ruling with God is opposed to that of Ephraim, who
ruled also, but not with God, as v. 7. Ephraim endeavored to exalt himself on
the ruins of Gods Worship, by erecting Calves at Dan and Bethel, etc. But
Judah ruled with God, and was faithful with the Saints. (2) Judah rules with
God: i.e. by serving and obeying God obtains Dominion and Rule over himself and
al lower things: he lives as he lists; because his will is conformed to the
Divine Will.

2. Moral Liberty consistes in the moral Life, Health, Vigor, Virtue gives
life, health, vigor and force.
and Force of the Soul, which also arises from virtuose Habits. Al natural
freedom supposes a vital subject in which it inheres: and so, by a paritie of
reason, al moral spiritual Liberty supposes a moral spiritual life and vital
subject: and indeed life renders every thing most beautiful, active, and
perfect. Whence, by how much the more noble, excellent and perfect the life of
any thing is, by so much the more raised, noble, and excellent is its state,
and al its operations. Life is that which seasoneth every thing: and every life
draws to it things suitable to its nature: so the spiritual, divine, virtuose
life has Principes above human Nature, more noble and excellent: and herein
consistes moral Liberty as to state. Plato, Repub. 4. page 444. informs us,
That the health of the body consistes in the equal temperament of al humors,
etc. So in the Soul, (...), Virtue truly is a certain health, pulchritude and
good habitude of Soul: but sin is the disease, turpitude and infirmity
thereof. Health, according to Augustine and Jansenius, consistes in the vigor,
force and strength of Nature: and what makes the Soul more vigorous and strong
than Virtue? Whence is the vigor and force of any Creature, but from its
Spirits? And are not virtuose Habits the Spirits of the Soul? That Virtue is
the vigor and force of the Soul, Plato once and again assertes. So in his
Gorgias, page 467. (...), Power is of good, etc. Also page 470. he says,
(...), To be able to do much is to be good. And in his Hippias, page 375. he
says, Righteousness is the vigor and power of the Soul: for the more
righteous the Soul is, the more potent it is. Divine Light and Virtue is the
strongest thing in the World. In the sensible World nothing is so strong as
Light: and in the rational World nothing so strong as Truth and Virtue. All the
force and vigor of lust comes from impotence; but Virtue is as a Pondus or
weight on the Soul, which strongly impels it to its last end. What more potent
than Love, whereby the Soul adheres to its last end? By how much the more
spiritual and pure any faculty is, by so much the stronger it is: and is not
Virtue the purity of the Soul? Again, the strength of every thing consistes in
its adhence to its first Principes, and last end: departure from our first
Principe and last end speaks impotence: And what is it that enables us to
adhere to our first Principe and last end but Virtue? The strength of the Soul
lies in its ability to do good and suffer evil: and whence is this but from
Virtue? The better any thing is, Prove. 3.7, 8.
the stronger it is. Thence Prove. 3.7, 8. The fear of the Lord is said to be
health to the navel, and marrow to the bones. The navel is the great organ,
which conveighs both food and physic to the infant inthe womb: also marrow
gives strength and vigor to the bones, as Job 21.24. Such is Virtue to the
Soul, both health and strength.

e. Moral Liberty as to state consistes chiefly in a divine Amplitude and
Enlargement of Soul, The Amplitude of virtuose Habits.
whereby it is made capable of enjoying its first Principe and last End. Indeed
al Liberty, both natural and moral, implies Amplitude. Thence, amongst the
Hebrews, (...) signifies both Liberty and Amplitude, as Psalm. 119.45. And
whence comes al moral Amplitude as to state, but from virtuose habits? The
first most ample Being is God, who has no limits to his Being, or his
Felicity: and so far as man is like to God, so far he enters into this Divine
Amplitude of state. Hence the Platonists assert, that Amplitude is founded in
Unity, namely God, and from this divine Unity it takes its origin and
measures. For every thing is by so much the more ample and extensive, by how
much the nearer it comes to pure Act. Al matter and passive power brings with it
limits and coarctation: every thing is so far straightened and narrowed in its
being and appetite, as it partakes of matter either physic or metaphysic: but on
the contrary, so far as things approach unto pure Act, which is God, so far
they rejoice in Amplitude and Enlargement, either of Being or Appetite: and who
approach nearer unto God, who is pure Act, than virtuose Souls, who partake of
the Divine similitude? Do not these then partake most of divine Amplitude as to
state? How miserably is the Soul straightened, pinioned, and cooped up by sin? But
O1 what a boundless moral Amplitude do virtuose habits bring with them?
Subjection and Adhesion to God by Virtue brings the highest Amplitude and
Dominion. For God being the first Efficient, that gives Being, and the last
End, that gives blessed Being; it hence necessarily follows, that Subjection
and Adhesion to God, in both these respects, must bring the highest Amplitude
and Dominion with it. As man, by departure from God, is subject to a miserable
necessity, and coarctation of sin; so by regresse and return to God he
passes into Divine Amplitude. Is not the Assimilation of the Soul to God by
virtuose habits, its ultimate perfection as to state? Must not then al divine
Amplitude take its origin hence? This is well illustrated by Plato, in his
Theaetetus, page 176. We may not presume, that sin finds place with God:
wherefore we must endeavor to fly from it, as much as may be: (...). But this
flight consistes in this, that we are assimilated and conformed to God, so far
as possiby we may be: and that which assimilates us to God is Justice and
Sanctity conjoined with divine Wisdom. His mind is, that Assimilation to God
by virtuose habits puts the Soul into a state of distance from sin, and
conjunction with God, whence al moral Amplitude does emerge. Thence Cyrillus,
lib. 1. in Joan. terms Grace, (...), Sanctity infused from without by Grace,
according to the divine and supermundane Image. And Greg. Nazianzen, in Apolog.
terms it (...), Deification; also (...), the Appropinquation of God. And the
spurious Dionysius, Eccles. Hierar. cap. 2. says, That in the divine
Regeneration men attain, (...), to a divine state or existence. Whence Virtue
is termed by Ammonius, (...), as it were a Quality of the Divinity in us.
Indeed what is the pious virtuose Soul, but an immense bosom and living
receptacle of the chiefest Good? And O! what an infinite Amplitude must such a
Soul rejoice in? It Is a commun Saying among the Platonistes, Bonitas est nexus
cum unitate.
That Bonitie is a nexe or conjunction with Unity, i. e. God. And must not
such an intimate conjunction necessarily bring with it the highest Amplitude?
Again, Plato and his Sectators generally inform us, that al Virtue is (...), a
participation of the divine Nature. So Plato, in his Phaedo, assures us, That a
virtuose man is (...), akin to God, because partaker of the divine Nature, as
the sacred Philosophy, 2 Pet. 1.4. This he explicates at large, Repub. 6. page
501. as Genesis 1.26. Now then, if Virtue be such an expression and participation
of the divine Nature, must it not of necessity also partake of the divine
Amplitude and Liberty? In short then, the nearer and more like to God the Soul
is, the more ample and capacious it is: and by how much the more virtuose it
is, by so much the nearer, and more like to God it is: does it not then
necessarily follow, that according to the degree and measure of Virtue, such is
the degree and measure of divine Amplitude as to state? Consinement to what is
good, gives the greatest amplitude and enlargement of heart, for the knowledge,
love, and imitation of God, as Psalm. 119.45. (...) in Amplitude, etc. The Soul
never walks in greater amplitude and liberty of spirit, than when it most
firmly and inviolably adheres to God and his Divine Will.

4. Moral Liberty as to state importes Nobility, Dignity, Eminence,
Excellence, Nobility, Dignity, Greatness from Virtue.
Singularity, Separation, and Magnitude or Greatness of Disposition, and
Condition of Life. And are not al these essentially and intrinsecally included
in Virtue, both as to name and thing? (...), Virtue is derived from (...),
Mars; as this from (...), arits, a potent valiant man: which notes, that Virtue
is most potent and great. So Plato, in his Cratylus, makes (...), Good, to be
the same with (...), excellent, eximious, preeminent. And indeed all the notions
of Virtue or Sanctity in sacred Philosophy import Discretion, Separation,
Singularity, Preeminence. Thus (...), holy, is derived from (...), to separate
from commun use: and it is sometimes synonymous with (...), which signifies
peculiar, most pretiose, excellent, etc. Whence (...), an holy people, Deuteronomy.
7.6. Deuteronomy. 7.6.
and 14.2. is there interpreted (...), a most excellent, eximious, noble
people: by the LXX. as also, Tit. 2.14. (...), a select, peculiar,
superexcellent people. And Psalm. 16.3. (...), Psalm. 16.3.
Saints, is interpreted inwhat follows, (...), magnisicent, eximious: which
shows that none are truly magnificent but virtuose holy persons. Thence also
(...), holy, pure, is deduced from (...), veneration, worship; and this from
(...), to worship: which they also derive from (...) azaz, to honor. That
Sanctity and Virtue is the Crown of al other Excellences, is evident from
Zach. 9.16. Zach. 9.16.
For they shall be as the stones of a Crown, lifted up as an Ensign on his
land: i. e. God will deliver his Saints out of their dangers and troubles; as
also lift them up to that honor, which pretiose stones have in the Kings
Diadem. The word (...) signifies both Separation and a Crown: which notes
here, that every Saint is separated by God, as a Jewel in his Crown. Thence God
terms them, Mal. 3.17. My Jewels. Which notes both separation and propriety,
as also dignity and excellence. Indeed Sanctity and Virtue is the Glory and
Crown of al other Excellences; because it implies separation from al
impurities, and a comprehension of the highest perfections: It raises things
and persons, otherwise commun and vulgar, to the highest degree of excellene,
even to the Image of God, which is the perfection of human Nature. Thus Plato,
Leg. 4. page 716. largely demonstrates, That conformity to the divine Image is
the highest perfection of human Nature: Of which see Philos. General. P. 1. l.
3. c. 3. sect. 3.. 5. But more particularly, That Virtue brings with it the
highest Nobility, Magnificence, and excellence, is evident from many Platonic
Philosophemes. Thus Definit. Platon. page 413. (...), Nobility is desined,
(...), a Virtue of generose manners. So (...), Magnificence, is page 412.
defined, (...), a Dignity according to the most august or venerable right
Reason: i. e. according to Virtue. For indeed all the ancient Philosophers made
Honor and Nobility to be but the shadow and reward of Virtue. A free man,
according to the Hebrews is styled (...), nadib; which signifies also a Prince
or Noble man, one endowed with noble, generose, virtuose dispositions. What
more sublime and noble than Vitue? Ut foelicitatis est, quantum velis posse;
sic magnitudinis, quantum possis velle. Plin. ad Trajan.
Is not that a generose Soul, that is wel-disposed and inclined to generose
heroic deeds? Is any Soul more great than he, who can despise great mundane
things for Virtues sake? It is accounted by some a great piece of felicity to
be able to do what they will: but is it not a greater piece of liberty to will
what we ought, which alone belongs to virtuose persons? Is he not truly great,
who has a great measure of Virtue? Hence among the Heroic Virtues, there was
found out an Apotheosis; which was nothing else but an extension of Virtues and
human conditions to a perfection not human. Virtuose persons are the greatest
men in the world: they have the greatest Souls: yea nothing is really great,
but what is good. The best Nobility lies in the mind endued with Virtue: what
mind more great than that, which is subject to the great God? Who is greater
than he, who is least in his own eyes? Is not such a Soul most great in divine
favor? It was a great Saying of Zeno the Stoic: You are not therefore good,
because great; but you are therefore great beause good.

5. Moral Liberty as to state implies Splendour, Beauty, and Glory. The
Splendour, Beauty and Glory of Virtue.
Plato makes Beauty to arise from the predominance of the form over the
matter, which otherwise is distorme. By the form I understand the spirituose
active Principe; and so indeed it holds true of the Soul, the Beauty whereof
consistes in the predominance of virtuose habits, which are as the spirits, and
form of the Soul. For look as the Soul, which is the form of a man, gives
life, vigor, perfection and beauty to the human body; so proportionably
virtuose habits give life, vigor, perfection and beauty to the human Soul.
Plato abounds much in this argument, that Virtue is the Beauty of the Soul. So
in his Phaedrus, page 279. O Friend Pan [the Ape of the Messias] give me to be
beautiful within: i.e. in my Soul. Thence page 250. he says, The Beauty of
divine Wisdom [which is the Spirit of Virtue] is so illustrious and amiable,
that if it were seen with eyes it would stir up wonderful Loves. Al Beauty
arises from Light, spirits, and proportion of parts: and what gives Light,
Spirits, and proportion to the Soul but Virtue? Some define Beauty, the
fulgor, or bland face of Goodness: and does not this speak Virtue most
beautiful? Cicero defines Beauty, a due congruence with suavitic of color: and
what has a more due congruence and sweet color, than Virtue? Among the
Beauties of Nature nothing more beautiful than Light: and O1 what a gloriose
illustrious Light attends Virtue? Is not divine Verity the Spring of Virtue,
the most virgin, unspotted, gloriose, affective Light? Plato, in his Philebus,
page 64. says, That (...), the Idea or face of Good is composed of three
things, (...), Beauty, and Symmetrie, and Truth. Yea, he says, (...) The very
Images of things beautiful, are beautiful. And is not God most beautiful, yea
the first Beauty, as before Chap. 2.. 2. And what is true Virtue but the
gloriose Image of this first Beauty? Must it not then be most beautiful?
Aristotle, Eth. lib. 1. cap. 8. assures us, (...), according to the Delphic
Inscription, That which is most just is most beantiful. And Seneca, Epist. 115.
adds: If it were lawful to look into the mind of a good man, O! what a
beautiful face should we see? How holy, how resplendent a mind, composed of a
magnific and placid countenance? yea, says he, Virtue is so graciose and
beautiful, that it is natural even to wicked men to approve better things:
neither has any one so far banished the natural Law, or put off humanity, as
to espouse wickedness for wickedness sake. So Plato and Aristotle: (...), No
man is voluntarily wicked for wickedness sake. Which shows, that Virtue in it
self is most amiable. Greg. Nyssenus, Hom. 2. in Cant. terms Virtue, (...),
the Grace of the Beauty of the Soul flowing from God, the supreme Beauty. And
Basil, in Psalm. says, That Grace is, (...), the Beauty of the Soul. Also
Corysostome, ad Theodor. Paraen. 1. tells us; That a deformed body cannot be
made beautiful, but a deformed Soul may be rendered such by Grace: (...), etc.
To render the Soul beautiful, although it be fallen into extreme turpitude, to
reduce it to the most excellent pulchritude, and so to make it amiable and
desirable, etc. In sum, what is Beauty but the splendour and luster of those
perfections, which are loged in any subject? And thence is not God the first
Beauty, because most perfect? And are not althings so far beautiful as they
partake of his Divine Perfection and Goodness? For what is al created Beauty,
but a ray of the Divine Beauty? And among created Beauties, does any thing
more ressemble the Divine Beauty than true Virtue? 'Plato, in his Phaedrus,
page 250. says, That Justie and Temperance and other Virtues in this our
imperfect state have little Light and Beauty: but in the future state, (...),
then we shall contemplate the most perfect Beauty, etc. And then he concludes:
(...), But now Beauty [of things divine] has gained this dignity, that it is
the most illustrious and amiable of althings.

. 3. Having explicated and demonstrated moral Liberty as to state, we now
descend to consider it as to its Exercice, Moral Liberty as to Exercice in
virtuose Acts.
which consistes in virtuose Acts. For it is a good Theoreme in Philosophy,
That the second Act follows the first: such as the state is, such are the
Exercices in that state: As in natural and civil Liberty, such as the state
is, such are the Exercices in that state: if a man be, sui juris, a free man,
he may act as such in that Corporation wherein he is free: Thus in moral
Liberty, such as are free as to state, by having their Souls clothed with
virtuose habits, they will exert and put sorth virtuose Exercices in that state.
So that moral Liberty as to Exercice is nothing else but a liberty to act
according to that dignity of state they are invested with. Now for the more
full explication and demonstration of moral Liberty as to Exercice, we are, (1)
To explicate what it is, and (2) To demonstrate, that it is the supreme
Liberty of a rational Creature. As for the explication of moral Liberty as to
Exercice we may comprehend it in the following Propositions.

1. Moral Liberty as to Exercice consistes in the spiritual, affectionate,
permanent Contemplation of the first beauty or Truth. To contemplate the first
Truth, The Contemplation of the first Truth.
as well according to sacred, as Platonic Philosophy, is one of the supreme
parts of moral Liberty as to Exercice. Contemplation, according to the
Platonist, is the Exercice of the mind on things intelligible: and what more
intelligible, than the first Truth? Thence Plate, in his Phaedrus, page 247.
tells us, That the mind (...), beholding for some while the first Being, and
satiating it self in the contemplation of Truth, and giving up it self thereto,
is thereby nourished and recreated with the highest pleasure. As sight is of all the most noble sense, and most quick in apprehension; so contemplation or the
sight of the first Beauty and Truth is one of the highest Exercices of moral
Liberty; that which brings in most tranquillity, satisfaction and pleasure to
the mind. Of al Contemplations there is none so powerful, so sweet, so free, as
the contemplation of the first Cause and last End. As God is infinitely better
than al Creatures, so the contemplation of God is infinitely better than the
contemplation of all the Creatures. That the contemplation of the first Being is
one of the highest Acts of moral Liberty is most manifest; because (1)
Contemplation is the highest Act of the Soul; and therefore when placed on the
supreme Being and highest Object, must needs bring the highest Liberty and
Perfection with it, Joh. 17.3. (2) The mind of man, when rectified, has a
flagrant ardent desire to contemplate the first Beauty and Truth. Aristotle
assures us, (...), That those who are conversant in the inquisition of truth
have been sweetest manner of life. How sweet and free is it then to contemplate
the first Truth? (3) The contemplation of the first Being gives a wise
emprovement of al other Beings and Objects which occur. This spiritualiseth and
draws out the Elixir of al objects, providence, persons and things we converse
with. (4) The contemplation of the first Beauty is that which most assimilates
the Soul thereto. If there were a beautiful Picture, which persons by looking
on, should gradually be made like unto, who would not gaze thereon? And is not
the first Beauty such, which makes al those as spiritually contemplate
thereon, beautiful, and free? Joh. 1.14. Joh. 1.14.
(...), We have diligently and attentively beheld his glory, as on a Theater.
The Human Nature is that gloriose Theater, on which the Deity descends and
offers himself to our contemplation: and O! what a gloriose contemplation is
this, to behold the Deity in the golden Arc of Humanity? How is the Soul
hereby transformed into the same gloriose Image, as 2 Cor. 3.18? (4) Spiritual
contemplationof the first Being gives possession therefo. Truth is made one
with the Mind by contemplation: and does not the first Truth become one with
the Mind, by lively affectionate contemplation thereof? (5) Contemplation of
the first Beauty is most influential on the divine Life, and therefore a main
Spring of Moral Liberty. Is not this a great Source of Divine Wisdom? Are not
contemplative persons in things natural and moral the wisest of men? And is not
this most true in things moral and divine? Was it not a great Saying of that
great Divine, The greatest Musers are the best Artists? and does not this hold
most true here? yea, does not the Psalmist assure us, Psalm. 39.3.
Psalm. 39.3. That whiles the heart museth, the fire of divine affection
burns? Does not contemplation on the first Beauty fortify the heart against
every tentation, tune it for every service, and sweeten every cross? Is it not
both food and physic to the Soul, the life of our life, yea universally useful
in every state and condition.

2. Another Exercice of moral Liberty consistes in an intimate and inviolable
Adherence unto the last End and chiefest Good. Adherence to the last End and
chiefest Good.
What the last End and chiefest Good is, with the proper Characters of each, we
have,. 1. of this Chapter, fully discussed: our present work is to explicate
what moral Liberty the Soul acquires by adhering thereto. The last End
possesses the greatest Amplitude, Universalitie, and Liberty imaginable, as
to al means: it is, as an infinite Ocean, an immense universal Principe, that
conteins al Morals in its bosom: althings receive bounds and limits from their
last end: but this receives bounds and limits from nothing. Now the last end
enjoying such an infinite Amplitude and Liberty, it necessarily follows, that
the more intimately and firmly the Soul adheres to it, the more liberty as to
exercice it is possessed of. Thence Plato, Leg. 4. page 715. says, That God
(according to the ancient Tradition, I suppose Judaic) is the Principe and End
of althings. And then he adds, page 716. That he, who adheres, with a composed
mind and sirme purpose, to this last end, is most blessed and free. And in what
follows, he lays down the manner how the Soul adheres to God, namely, by
conformable Acts of Piety, etc. And herein indeed his Philosophemes are
consonant to sacred Philosophy; which frequently places moral Liberty as to
exercice, in inviolable close Adhesion unto God, as our last End. Psalm. 63.8.
So Psalm. 63.8. My Soul adheres closely to thee, as the Original (...)
importes. We find the same word in the same sense, Deuteronomy. 10.20. Ruth 1.14, 16.
Job 41.17. Psalm. 119.31. and it primarily denotes, that intimate inviolable
conjugal Adherence, which is or ought be between man and wife, who are, by Law
of Nature, one flesh, as Genesis 2.24. And that this Adherence to God as our last
End, and chiefest Good is a main part of moral Liberty, Psalm. 73.28.
as to exercice, is further evident from Psalm. 73.28. But it is good for me: i.
e. it is my chiefest Good, that wherein my highest liberty consistes. To draw
near to God, (...). Appropinquation, Access, Adherence to God. Thence the LXX.
render it, (...), To adhere to God, to be as it were glued to God: So the word,
in its primary notion, signifies. Thence it is frequently used to express that
intimate conjunction that ought to be between man and wife, as Mat. 19.5. yea
Ephesians. 5.31. it signifies the conjugal adherence and union between Christ and
his Church. 1 Cor. 6.17.
And we find (...) used in the same sense, 1 Cor. 6.17. (...), He that is
glued, or conjugally united to God as his chiefest Good, as the precedent words
import. And O! what an high piece of moral Liberty is this, intimately and
inviolably to adhere to God, as our last End and chiefest Good? Is the heart
ever more free, than when it does most strongly, by all manner of affectionate
exercices, adhere to its chiefest Good? So many grains as there are of a bended
will for God, so much moral Liberty. A tenacious, resolute, invincible
adherence unto our last end, by acts of love, desire, and other affections,
makes the Soul exceeding free in all its motions. Psalm. 73.26.
Thus Psalm. 73.26. My flesh and my heart fails, (...) signifies to consume
with desire, or, to fail with long expectation. This poor man's case was thus
stated: He saw the wicked to flourish, and the godly oppressed, which brought
him under anxious disputes about the chiefest Good: but, upon inquiry in the
Sanctuary, he was resolved to adhere inviolably to God as his chiefest Good So
it follows: But God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever. Some
render it, the reck unto which my heart adheres: others, the firm adhesion of
my heart is to God, my chiefest Good. Whence follows his liberty v. 28. Psalm.
86.4.
Thus Psalm. 86.4. Rejoice the Soul of thy servant: i. e. make me free for and
in all moral exercices: and why? for unto thee, O Lord, do I lift up my Soul:
i.e. unto thee as my chiefest Good do I adhere. So Psalm. 25.1. This tenacious
adherence of the Soul to its last end, is lively illustrated by our Lord, Mat.
6.20-24. v. 20. He exhorts them, Mat. 6.20-24.
To lay up treasures in Heaven: i. e. to make God their last End and chiefest
Good: to cleave to himwith an inviolable intime bent of will: and he gives the
reason of it, v. 21. For where your treasure is there will your heart be also.
the heart and the Treasure are ever together. This our Lord illustrates by a
lively notion, v. 24. He will hold to the one, and despise the other, (...),
mordicus adhaerebit. (...) properly signifies, to hold fast a thing, in
opposition to those that would pluck it from us: Thence, to be very tenacious
in adhering to persons or things: So in Plato, Xenophon, and Isocrates. It Is
emphatically here, as Luke 16.13. Luke 16.13.
applied to the Souls tenacious adhering to its last End and chiefest Good.
Whence it is added, and despise the other. A Soul that tenaciously adheres to
its chiefest Good, despises al frowns or blandishments that may assault it.
Thence v. 25. our Lord concludes, (...), Therefore: i. e. If you adhere to God
as your chiefest Good, you will not be so anxiously concerned about the goods
of Time. To sum up this Argument. Every Creature has an Element to live in: and
when it s in that Element it is most free: The Souls Element is its last End
and chiefest Good: and every man is more or less morally free, as he more or
less adheres thereto. For such as a man's last end is, such is the motion of
his Soul as to moral good or evil, and moral liberty or bondage. By how much
the more we love, delight in and enjoy our last end, by so much the more free
we are in all our ways. The liberty of a rational Agent consistes, not in
having variety of objects to adhere to, and take complacence in, but in
transmitting al to his last end, which is his best good.

That a Will actually and strongly bended to adhere to its last End and chiefest
Good is most free, will appear by the following Particulars. (1) The more the
Will is fortified by true Virtue to adhere to its last End and chiefest Good,
the more free it is from sin, which is the worst servitude. He indeed is truly
noble and generose, who is not a vassal to any base lust. Al power to sin is
the diminution of liberty. Impeccabilitie or an utter impossibility of
sinning is so far from destroying liberty, as that it is perfected hereby. The
sweetest and highest liberty is to have no power to sin. Now the more the Will
actually adheres to its last end, the less power it has to sin. (2) Moral
liberty consistes in the Souls being preserved from whatever may damnifie or
prejudice it: and wherein consistes the preservation of every things, but in
its Unity? Does not division ever bring dissolution? And what preserves the
Souls unity so much, as actual adherence to God, the first Unity? (3) The
moral liberty of the Will consistes chiefly inhaving al inferor things subject
to it: and when are althings more subject to the dominion of the Will, than when
it is, by a resolute actual adherence, subject to the Will of God? (4) The more
harmonious and uniforme the Souls acts are, the more morally free they are? And
whence springs this harmony, but from actual regard and adherence to the last
end? (5) Where ever the Soul finds rest and satisfaction, there it finds moral
libetie: and does not the Rest of the Soul arise from its adherence to its
chiefest good. Thence that great Essate of the spurious Dionysius: (...),
Bonitie [ or the chiefest Good] convertes althings to it self: i. e. althings
tend to and acquiesce therein as in their Center or ultimate perfection. (6)
The more the Will is conformed to the Divine Will, the more free it is: and whose
Will is more conform to the Divine Will, than his, who actually and resolutely
adheres to God? Does not such a Will touch the Divine Will in every point, as two
strait Lines?

3. Moral Liberty as to Exercice consistes in an actual, Dependence on the
first Cause.
total, and immediate Dependence on the first Cause of althings. Every Creature
having something of Nothing, or passive Power, either physic or metaphysic and
obediential; it thence falls under the Law of Mutabilitie, which is the root of
Dependence. Novitie of Being, Deficience and Dependence is essential to the
Creature, as Eternity of Being, Immutabilitie, and Independence is to the
Creator. For every Creature being only Being by participation; hence Dependence
becomes intrinsecal to it, and inseparable from its nature, as Suarez, Metaph.
Disp. 20. Sect. 5. acutey demonstrates. Yea, Disp. 31. Sect. 14. he further
demonstrates, That Subordination or Dependence of a created Being, both in
acting and causing, formally belongs to its essential reason as such; because
this dependence is founded, not in any quality or propriety of the Creature,
extrinsecal to its Essence, but in the very intrinsecal limitation thereof. So
that the very Essence of the Creature, as such, is the root of this dependence:
and to suppose a Creature, and not to suppose it to be dependent in essence and
operation, implies a contradiction. Neither has the rational Creature a natural
dependence only, but also moral on its first Cause. We find both mentioned by
Plato, Leg. 4. page 715. where he shows, That God is (...), the Principe and
End of al Beings, whose conduct he that follows, shall be happy. And Epinom.
page 980. he assures us, That he, who praying to God does trust in his
Benignity, shall act well. So in his Timaeus, page 27. he tells us, That al, who
have any thing of an awakened mind, when they attemt any matter either great or
small, are always wont to call on God. Which is an high act of Dependence. Thence
Theages, page 128. he brings in Socrates philosophising of his Dependence on
God, thus: (...), AIMONION, For there is a certain DEMON, which has followed me
with a Divine Afflation even from my childhood This is a voice that signifies
to me what I must do, etc. What this Demon of Socrates was, is greatly
controverted by the ancient Philosophers, who have written Books concerning it.
That it was some Divine Afflation or Inspiration they generally grant, as Court
Gent. P. 2. B. 3. C. 1.. 4. It certainly importes his great sense of Dependence
on some Divine Power, either Real or Imagiuary. Yea, Planto, in his Timaeus,
says, That Beatitude or moral Liberty is nothing else but to have (...), a
Demon dwelling in him. Whereby peradventure he may allude to the Hebraic (...)
Shekinah, i.e. the Divine Habitation of Gow with men. Thence the Greek Fathers
term efficacious Grace and our Dependence thereon, in imitation of sacred
Philosophy, (...), the inhabitation of the holy Spirit, also (...), indwelling
Grace. Which alludes to that of Paul, 2 Cor. 12.9. (...), 2 Cor. 12.9.
that the power of Christ might tabernacle or dwell on me. It evidently alludes,
both name and thing, to the Divine (...), or habitation of God with and in men;
which denotes the highest Dependence. And indeed herein consistes one main part
of moral Liberty as to exercice. Look as the beams of the Sun touch the Earth,
yet hang on the Sun as their original Cause; so does al true moral Virtue on
its first Cause. Virtuose persons, who are most feeble in themselves, are most
strong and free by dependence on their first Principe. Where there is a
subordination of Causes, either moral or natural, it is the liberty of the
inferior to depend on, and receive from the superior. Does not the first Cause
give forth actual assistances usually according to the measure of our actual
dependence on him? If he drop not in every moment new spirits and influences,
how soon do al moral Virtues wither and die away? What more natural than for
the second cause to depend on the first? Where there is a limited essence, is
there not also a limited dependent Activitie? Can a dependent cause produce any
more than a dependent effect? Must not every mutable, variable, defectible
Being he reduced to some immutable indefectible first Cause? That which had not
Being from it self, may it have Operation independently from it self? Is not
the operation of the second cause founded on the operation of the first? If the
created Will cannot subsist of it self, may it expect the privilege of acting
from it self, independently as to the first Cause? Is not the human Will a mere
passive, though vital, instrument as to the reception of divine influences,
albeit it be active as to its own operation? Must not then its dependence on
the first Cause be absolute and total? Yea, is not this Dependence immediate?
And, O! how is the Soul enlarged, according to the measure of its actual
dependence on the first Cause? Without this dependence the most facile moral
duties are most difficult; but with it the most difficult are most facile. The
Soul is well compared to a Glass without a foot, which so long as the Divine
hand holds there is no danger of its being broken; but if God withdraws his
hand, it soon sals to the ground, and is deshed in pieces: he need not take it,
and throw it against the wall; it will break of it self. Hence the efficacious
Grace of God is termed by the Ancients, (...), Munudaction; also (...),
assistent Grace: Again, (...), the energie and cooperation of God: Basil terms
it, (...), al manner of energie: Cyril, (...), the aid from above:
Chrysostom, (...), the auxiliant or assistent Power. Greg. Nyssen. in Psalm.
says: (...), The Aid of God is the Head and Sum of Virtue. And Chrysostom,
in Genesis (...), The whole of good is from the Grace of God. Whence God is termed
by Cyril, in Esa. (...), the Creator and Framer of al good: and his efficacious
Grace is termed, by him, (...), the multiforme Energie: also (...), the
efficacious Aid: as by Chrysostom, (...), the invincible Assistence. Of which
more hereafter. The moral divine Life is nothing in regard of the first Cause,
but continual effusions and insusions into the Soul, and in regard of man
nothing else but constant regard toward God, and continual dependence on him.
As the excellence of the Angelic nature could not preserve them, when
self-dependent; so the impotence of Human nature cannot prejudice us, so long
as we are dependent on the first Cause. True moral Virtue is a celestial Plant,
fed by some invisible root in the celestial World; from which it derives its
influences. Members and branches live no life, but the life of their head and
root: al divine and moral Respirations toward the celestial world, are from
sweet Inspirations of divine Concurse. We cannot actively draw down divine
influences, but we may enlarge our passive receptive capacity by actual
dependence thereon. Al moral Beings, even the Angels themselves, as they have
new services to do for God daily, so they are dependent for new assistances;
and herein consistes a main part of their moral Liberty. Those who are
strongest in self dependence, are soonest foiled; as Peter.

4. Another Exercice of moral Liberty consistes in actual conformity unto
God, and imitation of him, both by obedience to his preceptive, Conformity to
the Divine preceptive Will.
and submission to his providential Will. (1) It Is a great essential part of
moral Liberty, to conform to the preceptive Will of God. God being the prime
Exemplar and Measure of al Liberty, it necessarily follows, that the more we
imitate and follow God, the more freedom we obtein: and who imitate and follow
God more, than they, who conform most to his Divine preceptive Will? Nothing
more commun in sacred Philosophy than this, That Adherence, Conformity and
Subjection to the Divine Law is the top of moral Liberty. Thus Psalm. 119.45.
Psalm. 119.45.
I will always walk at liberty; because I seek thy precepts. (...), in
amplitude: i. e. I will walk in all manner of Amplitude and Liberty both of
heart and ways; because my heart adheres inviolably to thy royal Law of
Liberty. The Law of God written on the heart is no other than the very Image
of God, a bond or cord of Love, whereby the heart is knit to God, and so made
free for the fruition of him. Delight in and conformity to the Divine Law, by all manner of virtuose exercices, is the highest liberty. O! what a regal,
gloriose liberty is this, to be always found in ways of obedience to the
divine Will? What a practic contradiction is it to expect moral Liberty in ways
of sin? When the Spirit of God takes the Law of God, and transcribes it on the
heart, and thereby makes it free to perform actual conformity to the externe
Law, Romans 8.2
what a soverain Liberty is this? Thus Romans 8.2. For the law of the Spirit of
life, i. e. engraven on the heart, as 2 Cor. 3.3. has made me free from the
law of sin and death: i. e. enabled me freely and cheerfully to conform to the
Divine Law, etc. Thus also, Jam. 1.25.
Jam. 1.25. But whose looks into the persect law of liberty: (...) denotes
(1) an accurate inspection or prying into a thing, as they who bring their eye
close to an object, in order to a more distinct perception thereof. (2) A
dwelling on an object: as some curiose persons, who spend much time in dressing
themselves, do, as it were, let their eye dwell on their glass; just so the eye
of the mind should dwell on the Divine Law, which is the glass, wherein we
contemplate the Divine Will, Image and Sanctity. Thence follows the object, the
perfect Law of Liberty. (1) The Divine Law is called perfect, as it is an
absolute perfect Miroir or Glass, wherein we contemplate the Image and Will of
God, and whereby the mind is perfected. (2) It is termed a Law of Liberty, [1]
As evangelised and sweetened by evangelic Grace. [2] As it makes those free,
that conform to it. So far as the heart is made conformable to divine
Commands, so far its actings in conformity thereto and free and cheerful.
Hence a godly man is said to be a Law unto himself: i. e. if there were no Law
extant, yet he would do the same virtuose acts, from that inward Law engraven
on his heart. Whence Jam. 2.8. it is styled the Royal Law: and v. 12. The Law of
Liberty: because conformity thereto, from an inward principe of Virtue, is
the highest Liberty, according to Divine estimation.

And as sacred Philosophy, so Platonic places much of moral Liberty in
actual conformity to the divine Law. Plato, Repub. 9. page 592. assures us,
that in Heaven there is (...), a perfect Exemplar, for him that will behold it,
and by beholding be conformed thereto. Meaning God the original essential
Exemplar of al Sanctity, whose sacred Will is the grand Pattern of our
Conformity. And leg. 4. page 716. he largely demonstrates, That by how much
the more conformable the Soul is to the Divine Will, by so much the more perfect
and free it is. It is most evident, says he, that every man ought mostly to
attend this, how he may be of the number of those that follow God. What action
therefore is it, that is most beloved by God, and most consentaneous to his
Will? Truly but one, according to the old Proverb, (...), because like is
beloved by lie, whereunto it is conformable, etc. Wherein he shows, that moral
Liberty consistes chiefly in following God; which is performed by actual
conformity unto his Will. Thence Philo Judaeus, that great Platonist, in his
Book, That every virtuose man is free, demonstrates at large, That to be free
is to follow God by conformity to his divine Will. And indeed what is Liberty
as to exercice, but adhering unto God? and who adhere to God, but they who
conform to his divine Will and Law? Does not moral Liberty arise from
subjection to God? And are not they most subject to God, who conform most to
his Law? It was a great Saying of Pythagoras, (...), Follow God. Thus also
Epictetus, in Arrian. lib. 1. cap. 20. (...) The end of Philosophy is to
follow God, i.e. to conform to his divine Law. And the ancient Philosophers,
specially Pythagoras, Socrates and Plato, made Assimilation to, and Imitation
of God the main end of al Philosophy.

(2) This actual Conformity unto God implies subjection and submission to his
providential Will, both Afflictive and Diretive. Conformity to Gods
providential Will.
And herein also much of moral Liberty does consiste. Is not that mind most
noble, great, and free, which can bear great crosses with equanimitie and
patience? Does not this give more liberty and enlargement than any temporal
affliction can deprive us of? O! what a sweet thing is it to have a free
generose mind under a straightened consined condition! How facile are burdens made
hereby! A virtuose Spirit, that follows God in afflictive providence, becomes
a King over his crosses: his losses prove his gain; his reproach, his glory;
his confinement, his liberty. This is incomparably well expressed by Epictetus,
in several Philosophemes. So Enchirid. cap. 38. Know, says he, that this is
the main part of Religion toward God, that thou conform thy self, (...), to
obey him, (...), and to acquiesce in althings that happen, and willingly to
follow, as that which is best governed by the most excellent Mind. Thus also in
Arrian. l. 1. c. 12. (...). To submit the mind, to the mind that governes
althings, as good Citizens to the Law of the City, this is liberty in its
perfection. So lib. 3. cap. 7. (...), etc. I always rather will what happens;
for I estime what God wills, better than what I will. I adhere to him as a
minister and sectator: I desire what he desires, and simply will what God wills.
thus Seneca: That is a great and free mind, which has given up it self to God.

5. Moral Liberty as to exercice importes the using and referring althings in
order to the service and fruition of God. The reference of althings to God.
Liberty, according to both sacred and Platonic Philosophy, consistes (...),
in the concent, harmony, symmetrie, and right order of althings: i. e. when al
subserve our last end. And what is the last end of man, but to serve and enjoy
God? Whence Plato, Protag. 3. page 326. says, That the whole life of man
should be composed of harmony and uniformitie: i. e. al actions, means,
occurrences should sweetly conspire and agree for the promoting our supreme
end. The mind is morally free, not by extending it self to variety of objects,
but by reducing al to unity, or God, who is the supreme Unity, which reduces
althings to it self. Again, Liberty implies Election: and is not that the best
election, which refers al to its last end? the respect we have to Creatures
depends on the respect they have to God: and so far as we refer them to God, so
far we are free in the use of them. By subjecting our selves, and al enjoyments
to the service of God, we gain dominion and freedom over althings: but if the
heart be irregular and inordinate in adhering to the use of the most lawful
comfort, it is immediately captivated thereby. This is most evident from sacred
Philosophy: as 1 Cor. 6.12. Althings are lawful to me. 1 Cor. 6.12, 13.
Paul seems to have taken up the commun Phrase of those Corinthian Libertines,
who under a pretexte, that althings were lawful, did abuse their just liberty
to the grieving of their weak Brethren. It Is true, says he, althings are
lawful: I grant it: yet withal remember, that althings are not expedient: if
you have not a great care, your desires and use of things lawful will soon prove
unlawful. For my part, adds he, althings are lawful for me, but I will not be
brought under the power of any: (...). Here is an elegant Paronomasie between
(...), which the Corinthian Libertines boasted of, and (...), which signifies
primarily, to be brought into bondage, under the power of another. They that
use things lawful, without regard to their expendience and subservience to the
service of God, are brought under bondage to them. Thence the Apostle adds, v.
13. Meats are for the belly: i. e. for the ventricule or stomach and
intestines, to supply them with nutriment: and the belly is for meats: i.e. to
receive and digest them. But God shall destroy both it and them: i. e. take away
the use both of meats and ventricule in Heaven. The Apostle brings this as an
argument to prove, that our Christian Liberty does not lie simply in the use
of these things; because when we are most free, there will be no use of them.
God gives not men liberty to enjoy what they list, but what they ought: the
free use of Creatures consistes in this, to make us more free inthe service of
God: herein lies the goodness of any Creature, in our being thereby enabled to
do good. Those that subject their hearts to God in the use of Creatures, are
most free therein: yea, you are never free longer than you serve God by them.

That to serve God is the highest Liberty that human Nature is capable of,
sacred Philosophy does abundantly assure us. It Is an old Saying, but most
true, that To serve God is to reign. This is a Kings life. Every one has his
Talent from God; and as he does more or less employ it for God, so he is more
or less free. It Is honor enough for the Creature to be employed by his
Creator. Yet over an above this God rewards every degree of servicer with some
degree of liberty, tranquillity and peace. There is nothing that has greater
dignity and liberty entailed on it, than the service of God. Thus Luke 22.29.
Luke 22.29, 30.
And I appoint unto you a kingdom, as my Father has appointed unto me. (...)
signifies to appoint or dispose by Will and Testament. The mind of our Lord is,
that, as the Father appointed to him a Kingdom to be acquired by suffering and
service; so in like manner he appointed to his Servants a Glory and Dignity
next to his royal Majesty, to be acquired in the same manner and way. This our
Lord adds to give check to their carnal ambitiose humor, v. 24, 25. It follows
v. 30. That ye may eat and drink at my table, and sit on thrones judging the
twelve Tribes of Israel. There are two things wherein the preeminence of Nobles
and Peers is most illustrious. (1) In the honor vouchsafed them by their
Prince. (2) In their Power and Authority over others. Both of these are here
mentioned, as belonging to Christ's Servants. (1) Their honor consistes in
sitting at Christ's table. (2) Their power, in sitting on Thrones, etc. Yea, we
find a strange and unusual honor vouchsafed by Christ to his Servants, Luke
12.37. He shall gird himself, and make them sit down to mean, and will come forth
and serve them. Joh. 12.26.
O1 what an incomparable honor is this! The like Joh. 12.26. If any man serve
me. Our Lord here speaks of himself as a great King, who has many Ministers of
State to order his Affairs: and every Minister of his is a King in his place.
Thence he adds: And where I am, there also shall my servant be: i. e. in my
Kingdom of Glory, if he follows me in the Kingdom of my Patience. yea, he
adds: If any man serve me, him will my Father honor: i. e. he shall not only be
happy, but most honorable. Neither is this Dignity and Liberty reserved only
for Heaven, but even in this life God investes his saithful Servants therewith.
Thus it was with Joshua, Zach. 3.7. And I will give thee walks among those that
stand by: i. e. among the Angels, that stand by and minister to me, and my
Church, as Tarnovius.

. 4. Having explicated what moral Liberty as to Exercice is, we are now to
demonstrate, Moral Liberty of Exercice the highest.
that this is the supreme Liberty that a rational Creature is capable of.

1. The more ordinate and regular human Acts are, the more morally free they
are: Its Order,
for all moral freedom denotes order and reference to our last End: and are not
virtuose Acts most ordinate and regular? Thus Plato, Gorg. page 504. (...), The
Soul and its acts receive order and ornament from the Law: whence men are made
regular and orderly: which belongs to Justice and Temperance: i. e. al Acts are
so far regular, as they partake of Justice and Temperance, which give order and
harmony to al our Exercices. Justice and Temperance, according to Plato, are
universal cardinal Virtues, which regulate and dispose al human Acts according
to the best order, wherein their freedom chiefly consistes. Whence Plato makes
mention of (...), a Chorus of Virtues, wherein al move in the most regular
orderly manner. Yea, he affirms, That the whole life of man should consiste of
Harmony, Order, and Uniformity. And Rep. 3. page 412. he informs us, That a
life composed of Contemplatives and Actives, (...), is most musical and
harmonious: i. e. The whole life of a virtuose man must be composed, (...), of
Symphonie or Concent and musical Ryme: so that Thoughts and Affections must
answer to Rule, Words to Thoughts, and Actions to Words: and herein consistes
the (...), good Order and Liberty of human Exercices. So again, in his Laches,
page 188. he assures us, Non est hujus animus in recto, cujus acta discordant.
Omnia facta dictaque tua inter se congruant ac respondeant sibi, and una forma
percussa sint. Virtus aequalitas ac tenor vitae per omnia consonans sibi. Sen.
Epist.
That is the best Music, when words and life concord, or agree among
themselves, as also to the Rule. Virtuose Exercices consiste in all equal tenor
of life, agreeable to it self, and to the Law; which is always attended with a
good order, and liberty. It is an excellent Character of Padre Paul the
Venetian, mentioned in his Life, page 133. That his life was singularly
composed of active and contemplative: he always yielding to God what he could,
to his Prince what he ought, and of that which belonged to his own Dominion
more than he ought by any Law, but that of charity. Again, page 175. That
which made him most admired, was the coupling together of Virtues, and with
conditions that are not usually met in one and the same subject: as Knowledge
and Humility; Prudence with Meekness; Retiredness and Officiousness;
Seriousness and Pleasantness; Argutenesse without offense; Brevitie and
Perspicuitie; Sweetness and Soliditie. So great was the concent and order of
virtuose Exercices in this great Soul. Indeed order is the life and perfection
of moral Acts: and the more of order the more of liberty. Now virtuose Acts
are of al most regular and orderly; because they are measured by the exactest
Rule, and directly tend to the last End, which is the first Principe in Morals.
Thus in sacred Philosophy, Gal. 6.16. Gal. 6.16.
And as many as walk according to this rule peace be unto them. (...)
signifies a Reed whereby Geometers measured their ground: also the white Line
in the Grecian Race. And (...) here signifies, so to walk as to keep an exact
order, not to deviate the least from the white Line in our Race. And what is
the privilege of those who thus walk? Peace be to them: i.e. moral Liberty
and Tranquillity.

2. The Liberty of an Act both Natural and Moral is to be measured by its
Spontaneitie, Connaturalitie, Facility, and Suavitie. Virtuose Exercies most
spontaneous and sweet.
For all Liberty consistes in an (...), a self-motion: and by how much the more
spontaneous, connatural, facile and sweet the self-motion is, by so much the
more free it is judged to be. And what motions of the Soul are more
spontaneous, spiritually connatural, and sweet, than such as are virtuose?
Plato, in his Lysis, assures us, that (...), Good is most proper to our nature,
and what is better than virtuose acts? are they not then most proper or
connatural? Thence Definit. Platon. page 411. Temperance is defined, (...), a
self-motion according to nature: i.e. connatural, or agreeable to rectified
human Nature. And Plato, in his Timaeus, tells us, That the best motion of the
Soul is in it self; because this is most akin to rational Nature. And when does
the Soul move more in it self, than when it moves virtuosely toward its last
end? Is not the last end the best part of our selves? Therefore when the Soul
moves virtuosely toward it, does it not move most in it self? It Is a great
Notion among the Platonists, That Virtue is, (...), most proper and congenial
to man; but sin is (...), most aliene and repugnant. And Bradwardine strongly
demonstrates, That to adhere to God, as our first Cause and last End, is the
most natural act of a rectified Soul: and is it not then most free? Every
motion of the Soul is so far free as connatural and proper: O! then how free
are virtuose Acts? The Platonist instructes us, That to a good man God is a
Law, but to the wicked Lust is a Law: Now if God be a Law to a good man, then
al his motions toward God are most free. There is indeed a divine Sympathy
between a virtuose Soul and the divine Law: Repugnanti non volenti necessitas
est. In volente necessitas non est. Sen.
and therefore he most freely obeys it: for all obey what they love, as Plato
assures us: Hence a virtuose man is a Law to himself: he has the divine Law
impressed on his Soul: and thence the Law of God is to him a Law of Love and
Liberty: so that he obeys it not out of force, but choice: for (...), force
cannot touch love. There is a service of Love which is most free: by how much
the more closely and inviolably the Soul is, by virtuose acts, subjected to
God, by so much the more free it is: for the very act of love, as terminated on
the Creator, is formal moral Liberty, as Jansenius acutely demonstrates,
August. Tom. 2. page 41. Yea virtuose exercices are not only spiritually
natural to the virtuose Soul, but also most facile, sweet and delicious. Plato,
Timae. page 81. tells us: Whatever is repugnant to Nature, is most irksome;
(...), but what is consentaneous to Nature is most sweet. Now that virtuose
acts are most agreeable to rectified Nature has been already demonstrated. What
can furnish us with greater dexterity, facility, and alacrity in acting than
virtuose Principes? (...), Alacrite is defined, Definit. Platon. page 413.
(...), A manifestation of practic election: and who manifest more free practic
election, than such as act virtuosely? Frequence of exercices both in Nature
and Virtue give a great facility. (...), Customs are defined by Galen, (...),
superadded Natures: and Arist. Rhet. l. 1. c. 11. page 57. says, (...),
Custom is akin to Nature: whence he adds, (...), Custom makes every thing
sweet. Now virtuose exercices frequently repeted breed a divine spiritual
custom, which is attended with divine suavitie and delight. The frequent
repetition of the same exercice makes it more facile, dexterous and sweet.
Experience teaches us, that whatever is long customary, turns into our
natures, even diseases and poisons. How much more then spiritually natural and
sweet are divine customs and habits attending virtuose acts? Thence Heb. 5.14.
(...). Heb. 5.14.
Virtuose customs and habits make the exercices of spiritual senses most
familiar, pleasant and sweet, and therefore most free: for the freedom of an
act is much to be measured by the delight and pleasure that attends it. And
what acts of the Soul have more of true pleasure and delight attending of them,
than virtuose exercices? O! what sweet inspirations, what divine suavities are
infused into the Soul upon virtuose actings? Frequence of acts makes bitter
things sweet: and is not the bitter cross sweetened by virtuose exercices? are
not the most difficult services made facile hereby? Does not every act of
Virtue carry some degree of pleasure, and therefore of liberty in it? And by
how much the more pure and spiritual any virtuose act is, by so much the more
pure is that joy which attends it. For all joy and pleasure is the effect of
some operation: and the more raised and spiritual the operation is, the more
refined and strong the pleasure and joy is. The purest and strongest pleasures
are such as attend the Souls actual adhesion to its first cause and last end:
for the nearer things come to their first Principes, the more joyful and free
they are: and what brings the Soul nearer its first Principe than virtuose
Acts? Is not then a virtuose life the sweetest and most free? Do not acts of
Virtue bring with them the most judicious, real, solid, pure, spiritual,
strong, self-sufficient and permanent pleasures and delights, as Psalm. 119.14,
16, 20, 35?

3. The Liberty of moral Acts consistes much in their Vitalitie. Virtuose
Exercices most lively.
The more excellent and noble the life is, the more free the acts are: and the
more virtuose the acts are, the more of the divine life they carry in them.
Thus Plato, Charmid. page 171. Sin being banished from the Soul, and Rectitude
presiding in every act, it is necessary, that those who are thus disposed,
(...), do act well: (...), and that those who act well, do live happily. The same
page 173. But rather let us endeavor discretely to lead our lives and act, that
so we may live blessedly. Whereby he intimates, that virtuose Acts are always
blessed and free: no man that acts virtuosely can live miserably. Thus also
Aristotle, Eth. l. 1. c. 4. (...), To live well is to act well. The life of every
living Creature exerts and manifests it self most in that operation, which is
most proper to it, and unto which it is most naturally inclined: and are not
virtuose Acts most proper and natural to man considered in his best state? What
is life, but the Actuositie of the Soul informing the body? And what more
promotes this Actuositie than exercice? Is not also the life and Actuositie of
the Soul morally considered improved by virtuose exercices? Where there is
natural life there will be some pulse and motion of the Spirits: So where there
is a moral life of Virtue there will be exercice. Quanto perfectius quis a se
movetur, tanto perfectior est modus vivendi. Aquin.
By how much the more perfectly any thing is moved by it self, by so much the
more perfect it; mode of living is: and are not those who act virtuosely most
perfectly moved by themselves? Plato tells us, Phaedr. page 245. (...). Again,
(...). By which he shows, That it is proper to life, to move it self by it
self. And when does the Soul most freely move it self by it self, but when it
acts virtuosely? And as al life consistes in action, even the life of God in a
pure Act of understanding and willing; so in like manner the divine moral life
in virtuose actions. A virtuose Soul, as it has Principes of life above Nature,
so also actings: for by how much the more noble and excellent the life is, by
so much the more excellent is the operation. The life and motion of virtuose
hearts, is upward, like that of fire, which is of all the most noble, active,
and free life. Thence in facred Philosophy, Life is frequently put for a
noble, comfortable, free, blessed condition of life, Psalm. 34.12, 13.
consisting in virtuose exercices. So Psalm. 34.12. What man is he that desires
life, i. e. a blessed, free, sweet life. And how may such a life be acquired?
That he tells you, verse. 13, 14. Depart from evil and do good, etc. The like,
Psalm. 22.26. and 69.33. and Psalm. 119.77. Eccles. 6.8. 1 Pet. 3.10. And
Augustine gives us the true reason of this facred Phraseologie; namely, because
there is no true life, but what is virtuose, blessed, and free. So that as
there is no moral liberty without a divine life; so there is no divine life
without virtuose exercices. Whence by how much the nearer the Soul comes to God
by virtuose Acts, by so much the more divine and free its life is.

4. Virtuose Exercices most ample.
The moral Liberty of human Acts may be much measured by their Amplitude and
Magnitude. And are not virtuose Acts of al most ample and great? Actual
adhesion to God and his divine Law importes not only subjection, but also
enlargement and liberty. Thence Psalm. 119.96. the divine Law is said to be
exceeding broad or ample: and why? because it is the expression and Character
of the divine Sanctity and Will, which is most ample. Whence the Soul, by
actual adherence to the divine Law, rejoiceth in the divine Amplitude and
Liberty. Thus Psalm. 119.165. Great peace have they who love thy law. Or, Psalm.
119.165.
ample peace, with liberty as to walking. Thence it follows: and nothing shall
offend them. Or, they shall have no stumbling block: ie. They shall walk in the
Kings highway, according to the royal Law of Liberty, with all manner of
liberty and boldness. Liber ab infinito, ad infinitum, super infnitum movetur.
It Is a great Saying of the Platonists, That one free is moved from infinite,
to infinite, upon infinite: i.e. a virtuose man, in all exercices of Virtue is
moved, (1) From God, as the first Cause and original Spring. (2) To God, as the
last End, and infinite Good. (3) Upon, or according to the infinite Will and Law
of God, as the measure and rule of al his virtuose exercices. Whence also they
tell us, That the motion of a free Soul is circular, from God, as the first
Cause; to God, as the last End; and by God, and his divine Will, as the measure.
Such is the amplitude and magnitude of the Soul in all the exercices of Virtue:
So that it falls under no coarctation or confinement, either in regard of
Principe, or End, or Rule; but partakes in its measure, of that Amplitude,
which its Principe, End, and Rule rejoiceth in. For such as a man's first
Principe, last End, and Exemplar is, such is he as to liberty, or servitude.
Quanto finis altior, tanto actus volun^^ est libe^^.
By how much the more ample and sublime the end is, by so much the more ample
and free is the Act. Again, the virtuose Soul adhering to and depending on God
as the first Cause obteins great enlargement. Whereas sin, being an aversion
from God our first Principe and last End, puts fetters, chains, limits and
confinement on the Soul.

5. Moral Liberty as to exercice consistes in the freedom from vitiofe
Inclinations, Affections, and Motions. Plato, in his Timaeus, (...)
persuades us, That the culture and cure of every thing consistes in giving it,
(...), its proper diet and exercices: and what more efficacious to cure the
Soul of its vitiose humors and maladies, than to give it its proper virtuose
exercices? When is the Soul more vigorous and healthful, than when it is most
in virtuose exercitations? Althings are purified by perfective fermentation:
and is not the Soul also purified from its noxious peccant humors by the divine
fermentation of virtuose affections? Thus Romans 12.11. Romans 12.11.
(...), fermenting or boiling in spirit. Sir. (...), which is spoken of boiling
waters, Job 41.22. So Job 30.27. LXX. (...), My bowels fermented or boiled. The
more the affections ferment and boil by virtuose exercices, the more free they
are to serve God, and less obnoxious to the service of sin. By how much the
less we serve sin, by so much the more free we are: And who serve sin less,
than they who are most deeply engaged in virtuose exercices? Plato, Tim. page
89. tells us, That the most healthful purgation is by Gymnastic exercitation.
What is health but the spirituose vigor of Nature? And what more promotes this
spirituose vigor than exercice? And does not this hold true as to the Soul? Is
not its most healthful purgation by virtuose exercitation? Does not this most
promote the spirituose vigor and health of the Soul? What makes the fire to
conserve it self in its purity, but its grand and perpetual activitie? Does
not also the running stream keep it self pure, whiles the standing Pool gathers
mud? Are althings in Nature purified by motion? Quanto virtus aliqua intensius
tendit in aliquid, tanto fortius repellit omne contrarium. Aquin.
and shall we not also allow the same efficace to virtuose exercices? It Is true,
virtuose exercices do not purge out sin by their own innate force, as Physic
purges out il humors; but by the divine promise, concurrence, and
benediction. By how much the more intensely the virtuose Soul actually tends to
its last end, by so much the more strongly does it repel whatever is contrary
thereto.

6. Virtuose Exercices most stable and permanent.
Virtuose Exercices are most stable, firm and permanent: Therefore most free.
Moral Liberty as to exercice consistes much in the firmitude, stabilitie, and
permanence of such exercices. Whence Plato, in his Cratylus, page 415. derives
(...), Virtue, (...), because it is always in flux or motion: whence he makes
it to be synonymous to (...), a facile and expedite progress: For, says he,
it always flows in an equal stable manner. The Soul, according to Plato, is
(...), an ever-moving Principe; and therefore it ought (...), to be always in
action. Now it is most certain, that no acts of the Soul are more stable, firm
and permanent than virtuose acts. Thus Arist. Eth. l. 1. c. 10. (...), Virtuose
exercices are most permanent. And he gives this reason of it: Because blessed
Souls live and dwell always in such Acts, without tediousness or oblivion. And
Plato, in his Cratylus, tells us: (...), Sloth is the greatest bond and fetter
of the Soul, which obstructs al virtuose exercices. The firmitie and stabilitie
of every thing arises from its adhesion to its first Principe and last End:
and by how much the more the Soul departes from these, by so much the more
instable and sluctuating it is: To stand invariable and immutable in adhering
unto God, under all the vicissitudes and various changes of this World, argues
great moral liberty as to exercice: and wherein consistes the Souls adhesion
to God as its first Principe and last End, if not in virtuose exercices?

7. Virtuose Exercices do greatly improve and advance Virtue, Virtuose
Exercices improve Virtue.
and so by consequence moral Liberty. Plato, in his Timaeus, page 90. assures
us, That when the faculties of the Soul grow sluggish and lazy, they are
rendered more infirm and impotent; but by continual action they are made more
robust and vigorous. And does not this Philosopheme hold valid in Morals, as
well as Naturals? Does any thing render the virtuose Soul more robust and
vigorous, than virtuose exercices? So page 103. The Soul is nourished and
corroborated, (...), by labors and exercices. And are not virtuose labors of al
most nourishing and corroborative? Thence, says Seneca, Labor nourishes
generose minds. O! Generosos animos labor nutrit. Sen.
then how are virtuose minds nourished by the labors of Virtue! As the native
heat is preserved by the Pulse, or twofold motion of the heart; so is Virtue by
its exercices. It Is a trite Saying in the Schools, Cessation from acts diminish
habits, but continuance therein emproves the same. It Is true, there is a
difference in this regard between acquired habits, and virtuose, which come by
infusion; because acquired habits are the natural products of their acts, but
virtuose habits are not naturally produced by virtuose acts, but given in by
God of mere Grace. God rewards virtuose exercices with farther degrees and
advances of Virtue, or Grace, and that of mere Grace. So Mat. 13.12. Mat. 13.12.
For whosoever has, to him shall be given. (...) here does not signify the
mere having of a Talent, but the employing, using, or occupying the same: for
it is a good Rule among Grammarians, That Verbes, which primarily signify to
have or possess, often denote the using of what we have. So here Has notes to
use, occupy, or traffic with what we have. To such it shall be given, and he
shall have more abundance: i. e. God will reward his diligence in using and
occupying his Talent, be it natural or supernatural, with much more in the same
kind. If his Talent be natural gifts or commun illuminations, he shall receive
more in that kind: if true moral supernatural Virtues, his stock shall increase
in its kind. Whence it follows: But whosoever has not, i. e. employes not by
exercice: from him shall be taken away even that he has: i. e. his Talent shall
be taken from him: his commun gifts and seeming virtues shall wither. Yea,
virtuose exercices in the sharpest winter of affliction make Virtue to flourish
and prosper. Heb. 12.11, 12.
Thus Heb. 12.11. Every chastisement for the present seems not to be joyous,
but grievous; but afterward it yields the tranquille fruit of righteousness,
to them that are exercised thereby. (...), exercised as in the Gymnade: whence
it follows, v. 12. Wherefore lift up the hands that hang down. (...), signifies
such a remission or dissolution as is opposed to intension, firmitude,
strength. It here denotes sloth and remissness as to labor, whereof the hand is
the instrument. Thence he adds: and the feeble knees. (...), the paralytic
knees, such as are as it were struck with a Palsy, and therefore unapt for
motion. This later clause seems to refer to the Race, which required the
exercice of the knees; as labor, that of the hands.

8. Formal Beatitude in virtuose Exercices.
A great and main part of moral Liberty consistes in virtuose exercices;
because herein consistes formal Beatitude. Both Plato and Aristotle place
formal Beatitude in virtuose operations. Thus Plato, in his Conviv. page 211.
makes the perfection of human Felicity to consiste in contemplating, (...),
etc. the most sincere, uniforme, divine Beauty, etc. of which before Chap. 1.
The like in his Phaedrus, page 250. So Aristotle, Eth. l. 1. c. 7. defines
formal Beatitude, the exercice of the rational Soul, according to the best and
most perfect Virtue, in the most perfect life. And Cap. 8. he adds, That to
act well and live well makes man happy. And the demonstration hereof is most
evident. For (1) Operation and exercice is the end of al virtuose Habits and
Principes, and therefore their perfection: for every Form, Power, or Habit is
ordained to its act, as to its perfection. Whence Basil terms Grace, (...),
completive or perfective of Nature. Which chiefly belongs to gratiose Acts.
Thence Aristotle strongly argues, that formal Beatitude cannot consiste, (...),
in possession of objective Beatitude and habitual union therewith, but (...),
in use and exercice. For a man may possess the chiefest good, and have
habitual likeness thereto, and yet not formally happy, as virtuose men asleep.
(2) The more Virtue is in exercice, the more it ressembles the Divine Liberty
and Perfection. The Divine Being and Liberty is a pure simple Act, without the
least habit or passive power, either physic or metaphysic: and therefore the
more actuose Virtue is, the more like it is to God. (3) Virtuose exercices
bring most satisfaction with them. Both Plato and Aristotle instruct us, That
virtuose Acts are of themselves (...), self-sufficient. They inspire sweet
satisfaction into the Soul, as before Chap. 1.. 6. And this is very commun in
sacred Philosophy. Yea we are herein assured, that by virtuose exercices we
may have some prelibations of formal Beatitude, even in this life. This seems
the import of that Exhortation, 1 Timothy 6.12.
1 Timothy 6.12. (...), Exercise thy self in that famous contest of Faith. Our
Apostle alludes to those famous Olympian Games, specially that of the Race,
wherein they contended for a Crown. Thence he adds, (...), lay hold of eternal
life. (...) here, as v. 19. is of the same import with (...), 1 Cor. 9.24.
Phil. 3.12. in which places the Apostle seems to allude to such as ran in the
Race, who, when they came to the end thereof, laid hold on the (...) or Crown
on the top of the Goal. Thus Christians, by virtuose exercices, lay hold on
eternal life, as the Crown at the end of their Race. Thus he speaks of himself,
2 Timothy 4.7, 8. (...), 2 Timothy 4.7, 8.
I have exercised my self in that famous contest. The double Article adds a
great Emphase, and shows with what vigor and activitie he had dispatched his
Christian race, and therefore now was in expectation of the Crown. Such
efficacious and soverain influence have virtuose exercices on man's formal
Beatitude and moral Liberty.

CHAP. IV. Of Sin and moral Servitude.
Sin a Transgression of the Law. Sin, as to its formal reason, privative. The
causes of Sin, (1) Man's defectibilitie, (2) The Vitiositie of human Nature, (3)
Practic Error, (4) Self-love. Sins are either of Ignorance, of Passion, or
wilful. The moral Servitude of Sin, as (1) Repugnant to human Nature, (2)
Repugnant each to other. (3) The Disease of the Soul. (4) Defilement. (5) Shame
and Reproach. (6) Tyranny. (7) Penury. (8) Captivity. (9) Folly and
Madness. (10) It makes men Brutes. The Adjuncts of this Servitude. It is (1)
Voluntary. (2) Necessary. (3) Infinite. (4) Most penal. Sin the worst
punishment. Other punishments of Sin. It brings (1) Fear and shame, (2)
Instabilitie, (3) Anxietie, (4) Eternal punishment. Al naturally Slaves of Sin.
No seeds of Virtue in corrupt Nature. Natural impotence to what is good. No
moral Free will. A sum of the Pelagian History.

. 1. HAving examined the nature of moral Good, Virtue, and Liberty, we now
pass on to the discussion of moral Evil, and that Servitude which attends it.
It Is a good Notion of Aristotle, Rhet. l. 3. c. 2. (...), Parallel opposites
illustrate each other. So in his Ethics, l. 5. c. 1. a. 17. (...), For the most
part therefore the contrary habit is known by its contrary. Which holds true
here; in as much as the beautiful Idea of moral Good serves greatly to
illustrate the deformity of moral Evil. Sin a Transgression of the moral Law.
Does al moral Good consiste in conformity to the moral divine Law? What then
is moral evil or sin but a Transgression of the Law, as 1 John 3.4? That al
moral Evil or Sin is a Transgression of the Law, is an Hypothesis frequently
inculcated, as well in Platonic as in sacred Philosophy. Thence Definit.
Platon. page 416. (...) Sin is defined, (...), a practice against right reason,
which must be understood objectively, of the Law of Nature, as before. Whence
Plato himself, Rep. 9. says, That Sin is most distant from Law and Order.
Again, Leg. 10. he affirms, (...), That Sin is an intemperate excess of the
Soul. (...) is of the same import with (...), and signifies primarily the
excess of any humor in the body: and thence the inordinate and irregular
excess of the Soul and its Affections. For look as Virtue is (...), the
Concent and Symmetrie of the Soul; so sin is (...), Asymmetrie and Ataxie.
Hence also Plato, in his Epinom. page 978. calls Sin, (...), etc. A motion void
of reason, order, decorum, measure, yea a confused agitation, whereby the Soul
is depraved, and contaminated. Whence (...), injustice, Definit. Platon. is
defined, (...), an habit over-looking, or despising Laws. Yea, Plato, Repub. 9.
page 574. calls sin (...), Transgression of the Law, as sacred Philosophy, 1 John 3.4. Thus also Aristotle, 1 John 3.4.
both in his Ethics and Rhetoric, styles sin (...) and (...), a Transgression
of the Law. But this Hypothesis shines with more illustrious beams in sacred
Philosophy, whence Plato borrowed his choicest Philosophemes. Thence in the O.
T. all the notions, whereby sin is expressed, signify a Transgression of the
Law. We find three several notions of sin together, Psalm. 32.1, 2. (1) (...),
Psalm. 32.1, 2.
which denotes Defection, Rebellion, Prevarication against God. (2) (...),
which signifies Aberration and Deviation from the right way of Gods Law. (3)
(...), which importes Perversitie, Obliquitie, Iniquity, Privation of
Rectitude. (4) Sin is styled, Psalm. 101.3. (...), Psalm. 101.3.
a matter of Belial: i. e. a lawless matter, such as will not come under the
yoke. From (...), without a yoke: which the LXX. translate (...); and whereto
Paul seems to allude, 2 Cor. 6.14, 15. (5) Sin is styled a Violation, or making
void the Law, Psalm. 119.126. Zeph. 3.4. and Hos. 4.2. (...) They break the
bounds of the Law. An allusion to Inundations, and Land-flouds, that break down
al bounds. So great is the violence, which sin offers to the Divine Law. (6)
Sin is said to be a Tortuositie or wresting of the Law, Psalm. 125.5. (...),
Obliquations or crooked ways. (7) Sin is called a Declination, Aberration,
Deflexion, Psalm. 119 51, 67. and Psalm. 101.3. yea, v. 4. it is styled (...),
perverse. (8) It is termed Rebellion, Psalm. 5.10. and 66.7. Which terms,
though different in themselves, yet they al import Transgression of the Law.
Thus also in the N. T. (...), with other notions, whereby sin is expressed, do
al import Transgression of the Law. Hence the Stoics held, (...), That al sins
are equal; because the least deviation from the Law is a Transgression, as well
as the greatest. Yet hence it follows not, but that there are degrees and
aggravations of sins, according to their various objects, and circumstances.

Hence it follows, Sin as to its formal Reason privative.
that sin, as to its formal Idea, Reason, or Nature is not positive, but
privative. For the clearing whereof we may consider these following
Propositions. (1) Al moral Evil or Sin is founded in some natural Good. For
albeit there be pure good, which has no mixture of evil, either natural or
moral, as the chiefest Good; yet there is no pure Evil, which has not for its
subject some natural good. It Is true there are some Acts that are intrinsecally
evil, that is, so far evil, as that they can never be good: as the hatred of
God, and the like. Yet these Acts are called intrinsecally evil, not as if
their evil were intrinsecal to the natural entitie of the acts; for it is
possible that the evil may be separated from the acts; but because they cannot
be put forth toward such an object morally considered without sin. (2) Al Sin
is an aggregate composite Being, composed of positive and privative. The
material Subject or natural Act is positive; but the formal Reason, or moral
deficience of Rectitude is privative. The positive Act of it self, abstracted
from the privation, is not sinful; but both together, as matter and form, make
up one Compositum. It Is a Question in the Schools, Whether Sin thus compounded
of privative and positive be unum per se, or per accidens? And Suarez well
solves this difficulty, telling us, That if we consider sin as a physical real
Being, it is unum per accidens; but if we consider it as a moral Being, so it
is unum per se; because the positive act and privative deficience, are so
intimately conjoined for the constitution of one moral Evil, that they may be
looked on under the notion of act and power, or matter and form; so that the
act cannot be evil without the privation; nor the privation without the act.
(3) Every Privation as such is evil, as every Form or Act good. For what is a
privation but the want of some due perfection? And is not every want of due
perfection evil to that subject that wants it? Every thing, if it want any good
that belongs to it, is so far evil. (4) When we say the formal reason of Sin is
privative, the term formal must not be taken strictly, but in a laxe notion,
and morally. For the (...), or Obliquitie of sin being that by which it is
formalised, and yet not formally intended by the Agent, hence sin in a strict
sense cannot be said to have any formal Cause: yet because this obliquitie or
privation of Rectitude does morally constitute the act sinful, it may in a more
laxe notion be rightly termed the formal Reason or Cause. (5) Sin, as to its
formal reason, is not a Physic or Logic privation, nor yet pure nothing; but a
moral privation, or deficience as to moral rectitude. In this respect some
Divines ascribe to sin something positive, not absolutely, as if it were
somewhat subsistent, but relatively and morally, as it is opposed to pure
nothing: for, say they, sin is a privation, which makes the act whereto it
belongs sinful; and therefore it is not mere nothing. So Suarez says, that sin
is not a real Being, yet it is such a Being as may suffice to the truth of a
proposition. Thus indeed Plato, in his Sophist, teaches us, that (...),
non-ens may be considered as pure nothing, and so it is (...), unintelligible,
and ineffable: or else it may be considered, as (...), that which truly is not,
yet not simply, (...), non-ens, or nothing. And such is sin, not simply and
purely nothing, yet according to its formal reason, not a positive real Being,
but a moral privation, or as others, a privative relation.

That Sin, according to its formal Idea and Nature, is privative, was generally
asserted by the ancient Philosophers, both Platonists and others. Thus Plato,
Repub. 2. page 380. denies God to be (...), the moral cause of sins; because
there cannot be (...), a positive idea of sin. So Proclus argues from this
place, That there cannot be (...), an Idea of sins; because then it would
follow, that God should be the Cause and Author of sin. And Plato himself
informs us, that (...), Sin is (...), an irregular affection; and (...),
privation of order: also (...), Injustice against Law: Again, (...), a
privative Being: and lastly, (...), privation of moral Being, as the night is,
(...), the privation of the Suns light. But among the ancient Philosophers none
has more acutely and solidly defended this Hypothesis, than Simplicius, on
Epicbet. cap. 34. page 171. where he largely demonstrates, that, (...), Sin
really is not in the nature of Beings, but (...), a privation of good. Of which
see Philos. Genesis P. 1. l. 3. c. 3. sect. 4.. 2. Among the Schole-men this is
strongly proved by Ariminensis, Sent. 2. D^st. 34. Quaest. 1. Suarez in 1.2.
Tract. 3. Disput. 7. sect. 3. page 275-278. and Barlow Exercit. 2.

. 2. Having discussed the formal Nature of moral Evil or Sin, we now proceed to
its Causes; among which, Man's Defectibilitie the first Origin of Sin.
if we will ascend up to its first Origin, we must reckon first the
Defectibilitie of the human Creature, as the original cause of al sin. For, to
speak in the Platonic mode, Man, as al other Creatures, being composed of
something and nothing, yea more of nothing than something; hence passive power
and defectibilitie is essential to his Being. For whatever sprang out of
nothing is capable of returning to its originary nothing. Where there is place
for Proficience, there also remains a capacity of Deficience. Every Creature,
because made by God, is capable of Proficience; but because made out of
nothing, it is also capable of Deficience. It Is true, Man, as made by God, was
void of al moral deficience or sin; yet as Man, he was never void of
Defectibilitie and Mutabilitie: he had a moral free will for good; but a natural
free will or defectibilitie as to sin: which passing from power into act gave
being to the first sin. This is well explicated by Suarez: In a free Agent,
says he, the mode of failing in an act, arises from the dominion he has over
his act: hence sin in a free cause does not always suppose the like sin in the
same cause: for it may arise merely from the liberty of the Creature, which is
good. That the Will of Adam, in his innocent state, was capable of sinning, was
a natural defect, conjoined with a natural perfection: for it was also capable
not to sin: and this mutable capacity being drawn forth toward a prohibited
object, was the first origin and root of al sin. Thus moral Evil sprang out of
natural liberty in it self good, but evilly applied.

Adam's person being vitiated by that first Sin, The Vitiositie of human Nature.
he thereby vitiated his own and our Nature. Yea, his personal actual sin is
originally ours by imputation: whence there adheres a vitiositie to our
natures, whereof we find frequent and great notices in Plato, and other
Philosophers. Plato, in his Timaeus, page 90. makes mention of a Sin
contracted, (...), in our head, [which I understand of Adam] whereby our
nature, from the first generation, is corrupted. And Timaeus Locrus, from whom
Plato borrowed many physic Philosophemes, page 103. explicates the origin of
this Vitiositie thus: Vitiositie comes from our Parents and first Principes,
rather than from negligence and disorder of public manners; because we never
depart from those actions, which lead us to imitate the primitive sins of our
Parents. A great confession of a Pagan, beyond what many that profess
Christianity will allow. So Plato, in his Critias, says, That in times past
the Divine nature flourished in men [ i. e. in the state of Innocence] but at
length it being mixed with mortal, [ i. e. upon the Fal] (...), human custom
[or sin] prevailed to the ruin of mankind: and from this source there followed
an inundation of evils on men. So Leg. 5. page 731. (...), The greatest Sin is
ingenite in men's Souls. And Grotius assures us, That the Philosophers
confessed, (...), that it was congenite or connatural to men to sin; whence the
Platonist makes mention (...), of an evil nature: which, Definit. Plat. page
416. is defined, (...), a Vitiositie in nature: also (...), the natural
disease, or disease of nature. Thence Plato, in his Politicus, page 274. being
about to treat of Civil Polity, gives this demonstration of its necessity;
because the nature of mankind is greatly degenerated and depraved, and al
manner of disorders infeste human Nature: and men being impotent are torn in
pieces by their own lusts, as by so many wild Horses. And thence he concludes,
That from this plague of vitiositie men were driven to great straits and
confusions. The like Stobaeus, Sermon. 2. page 31. out of Lycurgus's Dictates,
(...) [or (...).] (...), etc. Phy! how depraved is man's nature altogether!
otherwise there were no need of Laws. Do thou think that man is any thing
more excellent than Bestes? Truly but little, except only in figure: Brutes
look toward the earth; but man has an erect countenance. Thus also Plato, Leg.
10. page 906. affirms, That Souls living on the earth are (...), of a brutish
nature. And it is said of Democritus, that he affirmed, The diseases of the
Soul to be so great, that if it were opened, it would appear to be a sepulcher
of al manner of evils. Yea Aristotle, albeit he were too much a friend to
corrupt nature, yet he has left this ingenuous confession of its vitiositie,
Eth. lib. 1. cap. 13. page 64. That there is in us somewhat, (...), naturally
repugnant to right reason. But Seneca does greatly illustrate this Vitiolitie
of Nature. So Epist. 50. Why do we deceive our selves? our evil is not from
without; it is fixed in our very bowels. Again, Al Sins are in all men, but al
do not appear in each man: He that has one Sin has al. We say that al men are
intemperate, avaricious, luxurious, malign; not that these Sins appear in all;
but because they may be, yea are in all, although latent. A man may be nocent,
although he do no hurt. Al Sins are perfect, [ i. e. in corrupt nature] before
they break forth into effect. These and such like great confessions, touching
the Vitiositie of human Nature, made Jansenius break forth into a rapture of
admiration, that Socrates, Plato, and other poor Heathens should leave us truer
and better Philosophemes hereof, than the Pelagians and later Schole-men.

Yet it cannot be denied, but that many of the ancient and modern Schole-men
have given us great notices of this natural Vitiositie, specially such as were
Sectators of Augustine, as Aquinas, Ariminensis, Bradwardine, Alvarez, etc. We
may reduce the explication of the whole to the following Propositions. (1)
Adams personal actual Sin becomes the natural original Sin of al his
Posterity. This the Gentile Philosophers were ignorant of: they had some
notices of the corruption of nature, but were ignorant of the originarie cause
and manner of its traduction, as Augustine has well observed. Iste Tullius rem
vidit, causam nescivit. August. Peccatum introivit non per modum imitationis,
sed per modum originis.
This Traduction of original Sin from Adam to his posterity is well
demonstrated by Aquinas, contra Gentiles, lib. 4. cap. 50. where he
demonstrates, from Romans 5.12, 19. against the Pelagians, That this original Sin
infects al Mankind, not only in a way of imitation, which the Pelagians grant,
but by propagation and traduction. And Cap. 52. he farther explicates, how
Adams personal, actual Sin, by imputation becomes our original and natural sin.
This original Sin is termed natural; because congenite with, proper to, and
inseparable from corrupt nature, as to any power of its own. It consistes
formally in the privation of original Righteousness: which privation is both
our punishment and sin: as original Righteousness, upon the imputation of
Adams Sin, is by divine Justice denied to us; so this privation is our
punishment: but as it ought to be in us, and is wanting, by reason of Adam's
Sin become ours, so it is our sin. (2) The Vitiositie of Nature or original Sin
is said to be voluntary as it inheres in the Will, and corrupts the same.
Aristotle tells us, Acts are voluntary, because they pass from the Will; but
habits, because they are received into the Will, and impressed thereon. Such is
original Sin as to its Vitiositie, which is as an habitual Pondus impacted on
the Will, and inclining it to al manner of vitiose acts. Others make original
Sin to be voluntary, with respect to the commun representative Will of our first
Parent, whose Will, as he was a commun Head, politically included ours. So
Davenant, and the Schole-men. (3) The Vitiositie of corrupt Nature is seminal,
radical and universal both extensively and intensively. As every man naturally
considered is a Microcosme or little abridgement of the greater World; so
morally considered, he is a Macrocosme or a great World of corruption. Yea, all that is of contagion in the greater World comes from the superfluity of
Vitiositie shut up in the heart of man. If corrupt human Nature were not on the
earth, there would be nothing in the World but what was good. Yea farther,
there is more of Vitiositie in one corrupt Nature, than a world of Sinners can
vent. Every man has sin enough in his own nature to defile the whole Creation.
And this corruption of nature is so deep, that all the fire in the World, yea of
Hell, will not fetch it out. It is universal both as to extension of parts and
degrees. The man is infected with it from top to toe: it poisons his eye, ear,
tongue, hand and every part: it dogs him from place to place. This Plague of
corrupt Nature is greater in some than in others, and usually greatest in those
of greatest condition. Al sins in the heart do not act alike at al times; yet
al are there in the seed and root of corrupt nature. Many lusts work
indirectly as Principes that lie low: men act in the power of them, and yet
observe them not. (4) This universal Vitiositie of corrupt Nature is the
soverain reigning Sin, which breeds, foments, and influenceth al other Sins.
Adams person first corrupted our Nature; and human Nature being corrupted,
corrupts our persons: and our persons being corrupted, corrupt al our actions,
and thereby increase the corruption of our Natures. It is a great Question in
practic Theology, What is a man's reigning Sin? But if we consider reigning sin
simply and absolutely, it is no other than corrupt nature. It Is true, there are
in particular persons, according to their particular inclinations, tentations,
and circumstances, particular sins that bear sway and rule: but these are but
as Viceroys and Vicegerents under the vitiositie of corrupt nature; which is
the supreme Soverain and Lord, as a cruel best nourished in our bowels, ever
ready to devour us. The main part of our enmity against God, and his enmity
against us lies in the vitiositie of our natures, and its contrariety to God,
Romans 8.6.

. 3. The first product of Original Sin, Practic Error the cause of al Sin.
and that which has a malign efficacious influence on al sin, is practic
Error, or Ignorance. How great, universal, and venomous the Ignorance of al
Mankind by nature is, Plato frequently inculcates. He gives us a lively
description hereof in his Repub. 7. page 514. Suppose, says he, a
subterraneous Dungeon, in which men should be, from their infance, bound neck
and heels together; so that they can see nothing, but some glimmerings of
light, or rather shadows just before them: such is the barbaric ignorance of
Mankind by Nature. It Is true, many attain to great speculation and
contemplation of things divine, even by natures light and heat, assisted by
commun illuminations; yet how defective are they as to al practic knowledge,
which is the worst ignorance? Thus Plato, Leg. 3. page 689. What is the worst
ignorance? (...), Lo, when a man loves not but hates, what he knows and estimes
to be honest and good: but, on the contrary, loves and embraces what he knows
to be evil and injust. Wherein he instructes us, that speculative knowledge
conjoined with practic error renders our ignorance most inexcusable and
dangerous. And that which yet adds greater malignitie to our ignorance is,
when men fondly conceit they sufficiently understand, what indeed they are
really ignorant of: such proud conceits are the worst self-deceits and errors:
all the use such make of their knowledge is to concele their ignorance from
themselves and others: their very light adds to their darkness. And their
terrible darkness is by so much the more deplorable, in that they take it for
light; which they follow with pleasure, as children do the Ignis Fatuus, which
leads them to Precipices. Thus Plato, Leg. 5. page 732. From the same sin this
a so happens to men, (...), that every one counts his ignorance his wisdom:
Hence it comes to pass, that whiles we know nothing, we think we know
althings. And are not those greatly to be pitied, who make no other use of
their reason but to render themselves more unreasonable and ignorant? Is any
thing more worthy of compassion, than the blindness of such as seem most
quick-sighted and sage in the World? And whence comes this proud affected
ignorance, but from men's not knowing God and themselves? Is it not a strange
thing, that the Soul which knows althings else, should be so ignorant of it
self, and of its Maker? Thence Plato, Alcibiad. 2. page 144. says, It is no
wonder, that they who are ignorant of God, should account that which is worst
best. Whence he concludes, That the ignorance of the best good is the worst
evil. And as to the ignorance of our selves, he openly affirms, Theaecet. page
176. That those are by so much the more what they think they are not, [ i. e.
ignorant] by how much the less they think they are so. And that this proud
affected practic Ignorance of God and our selves is the root of al sin, he
further demonstrates, Alcibiad. 1. page 117. Thou see therefore that Sin is
appendent to action by reason of that ignorance, whereby a man thinks he
knows, what indeed he is ignorant of. And he subjoins the reason: Those are
left under error, (...), who knowing nothing, think they know every thing.
Confidence of knowledge is a sure marque of ignorance. Whence he concludes, page
118. (...), This very ignorance therefore is the cause of Sins, and most
opprobriose. Lastly, Leg. 5. page 732. he assures us, That when we attemt those
things whereof we are ignorant, we grossly err. Such a venomous, malign,
efficacious influence has proud, conceited, practic Error on al sin. Indeed the
power of sin lies in the power of darkness or ignorance: practic Errors foment
and maintain lusts. The mind, like a silk-worme, lies entangled in those
errors, that came out of its own bowels: when lust has put out Reason, it soon
takes the Chair: men of corrupt minds, are men of sinful lives: Mind and Will do
reciprocally vitiate each other: whiles lust bribes conscience out of office,
it cooperates with sin. Divine light is a burden to a corrupt conscience; which
delights to spin out of it self sick dreaming errors, thereby to create its own
chains and fetters: a carnal mind vainly puffed up out-reasons al good
convictious of duty: surely there is no duty done by that man, whose
conscience does not its duty: for there is nothing in man active for God, when
conscience is not first active. It Is evident then, that practic error of
conscience opens the door to al sin.

And as Plato, so Aristotle, his Scholar, has greatly explicated and
demonstrated the pestiferous influence which practic error has on al sin. Thus
Eth. l. 3. c. 2. page 121. where he makes this difference between Sins of
ignorance, and ignorant Sins. A drunken man, that kills another in his drunken
fit sins ignorantly; and yet his sin is not a Sin of Ignorance, because that
ignorance was voluntarily contracted. Thence he concludes: (...), etc.
Therefore every wicked man is ignorant of what he ought to do, and from what he
ought to abstain: and by this they are made unjust and wicked. And Eth. l. 3.
c. 7. page 144. he distributes this practic ignorance into its several kinds.
(1) There is, says he, an ignorance, the cause of which is in our selves. As
when drunken men sin ignorantly; which ignorance was contracted by their
voluntary drunkenness. (2) There is an Ignorance of Right or Law: when men are
ignorant of their duty, which they ought to know. (3) There is an ignorance
from our own neglect: which had we been diligent in the use of means we might
have avoided. (4) There is an ignorance from depraved affections and custom in
sinning.

We may reduce these Philosophemes of Plato and Aristotle to this more formal
distribution. Man is directed in his action by a twofold knowledge, the one
universal, the other particular: a defect in either of these causes sin.
Whence it follows, that a man may have an universal knowledge, that this or that
is sinful in general, and yet want a particular judgment of its sinfulness in
this or that case. So that particular ignorance is very well consistent with
universal knowledge. But now, sithat universal knowledge, though most certain, is
not so influential on our actions, as particular; because actions are about
singulars; hence it follows, that particular ignorance has more force to lead
men into sin, than universal knowledge has to prevent it. This particular
ignorance may be again distributed into natural or voluntary: and voluntary may
be again divided into that which is antecedent, or that which is consequent to
the act. Yea al ignorance which arises from the Will, may be looked on as
voluntary. For what is involuntary, if it arise from some precedent voluntary
act, it may be judged voluntary, according to moral estimation. As in that
instance which Aristotle gives of a Drunkard, whose ignorance is voluntary;
because arising from the act of his own Will. For it is a good Rule of
Aristotle, That those Acts whose Principe is in us, may be said to be ours and
voluntarily undertaken by us. Lastly we may, with Aristotle, distinguish
between sins which are per ignorantiam, i. e. when ignorance is the cause of
the sin: and such as are cum ignorantia: i. e. when albeit ignorance attends
the sin, yet the proper cause of that ignorance lies in the sinners will: The
former are those which we call sins of ignorance, but the later not; because the
ignorance is voluntary. Men want not so much means of knowing what they ought
to do, as will to do what they know. Reason may rightly discern the thing which
is good, and yet the will of man not incline it self thereto, as often as sensual
passions, prejudice, or affected ignorance prevail. So that some practic error
or inconsideration lies at the root of every sin: either because men do not
practically consider al circumstances; or if they do consider them, yet they do
not practically determine this or that Act to be evil; but instead thereof they
foist in another false Conclusion, That this or that sinful Act is sweet, or
profitable. A corrupt Conscience may assent to good premises, and yet dissent
from the conclusion, yea consent to a bad conclusion. Lusts pervert Conscience,
and sil it with partiality and prejudice in its inquiries. The light of a
carnal mind is easily reconciled with lust: for a secure Conscience takes up
such a Religion as will not distaste its lusts; nor yet its lusts molest it.
There is a peace between the lust and light of a carnal heart: It Is easy for a
secure Conscience to cast light into prison, and detain the truth of God in
unrighteousness: to believe as it list, not as it ought. A corrupt Conscience
has many turnings and windings, various coverts and hiding places for lust:
Sometimes the veil of hypocrisy, yea of Religion is made use of to cover sin,
as Mat. 23.14. Sometimes a good name is put on a bad thing, or a bad design is
justified by a good end: or a good cause is made use of to justify a bad
action: or when men's lusts will not comply with the rule, men bring down the
rule to their lusts. Again, sometimes new lights are pleaded to maintain old
errors: Men's lusts make many controversies about sin: they make great sins
little, and little none at al. Thus practic error and ignorance is the cause of
al sin. Of which see more fully Philos. Genesis P. 1. l. 3. c. 3. sect. 4.. 5.

. 4. Not only practic Error, Self-love a radical cause of Sin.
but also Self-love has a malign venomous influence on al sin. Plato has
excellent Philosophemes on this Theme. So Repub. 9. page 574, etc. he describes
to the life, the servile condition of a wicked person, under the Tyranny of
Self-love; how he is thereby violently impelled and hurried into al sin. So
also in what follows, page 577. of which hereafter. Thus likewise in his Leg.
5. page 731. he lively demonstrates, (...), That Self-love is (...), an
ingenite evil, in which they who indulge themselves, have no remedy against
sin. Then he adds: (...), And to speak the truth, self-love is altogether the
cause of al those evils, in which the life of man is involved. And he gives the
reason of it: (...), For he that loves is truly blind about what he loves; and
thence misjudgeth things just, good, and honest; being in this opinion, that
there is more honor due to him than to truth. And Aristotle gives us the reason
hereof; Because (...), a self-lover acts a! for himself, according to his
profit. Every self-lover is chained to that great Idol Self, which he makes his
God, and the only Center, in which all the lines of his Affections and Actions
meet. Self is the last end of self-lovers, even in their highest acts of
self-denial: if they give their goods to the poor, or their bodies to be burned
for Religion, it is al to please self. They may cross their own wills, but
never cross self as their last end: if they seek after God, it is to advance
self: self-love forms al their actions and passions into a subservience unto
some carnal self-interest. What makes superstitiose persons so much to vilify,
mortify, and with so much severitie torment their bodies, but thereby to exalt
their inward excellences? And as self-lovers make self the last End, so also
the first Principe of al they do. Self-love ever affects self-dependence: it
would fain have a World of its own to live, act, and breathe in: it lays the
whole weight of religiose services on self as the bottom of its dependence: it
would live and die within the sphere of its own activitie, as well as interest.
It Is exceeding sweet to self to have a stock of its own even in things
religiose to trade with, and thereby merit divine favor. And alas! how soon are
men overcome by tentations, when they are self-dependent and self-strong? He
that thinks to keep himself from sin by self-strength, will soon be overcome by
it. Now Self being the last End and first Principe of self-love, it hence
becomes a spermatic universal cause of al sin. Every self-lover is his own
Idol: and whiles he inordinately embraces and adheres to himself, he is soon
overcome thereby, and so hurried into sin. Yea self-love makes the best duties
and services for God most carnal, vile, and abominable to God. Where self is
predominant, the intention of the Soul is spurious and rotten: and a bad
intention makes the best works bad. Where self rules, it forms even religiose
services into a conformity to carnal lusts: wherefore he that cannot depart
from self, will soon depart from God, and tumble headlong into al sin. Self-love
is the strongest carnal concupiscence, and most directly opposite to divine
love. The soverain power of Lust increases according to the obedience men
render to themselves and self-love: by obeying self and its particular
movements men make it a God: yea, the more men endeavor to humor and gratify
it, the more tyranny it is. Man has not a worse or more dangerous Companion
than himself, his carnal self, which is so potent to draw him into sin. It has
always been the ambition of the Creature to deifie it self, not by being equal
in nature with God, but by being its first Cause and last End, which is the
spring of al departure from God, and conversion to the Creature. And that which
makes self-love more potent to promote sin is its policy and many artifices to
concele its self and sin. How often does carnal self-love put on the masque of
true lawful self-love, and thereby delude the Soul into sin? There is a great
ressemblance between spiritual self-love and carnal: whence the later often
conceles it self under the vizard of the former. The more a man loves himself,
the less he conceits he loves himself: as the more mad a man is, the less he
judges himself so. Self-love is so artificial in its colors, as that it can
discolor virtue with the face of vice, and vice with virtues face. Thus by its
frauds and deceits in conceling it self and sin, it greatly advances sin. The
members of self-love are principally three. (1) Concupiscence, or adherence to
the Creature as our last end. (2) Carnal confidence, or dependence on self as
the first cause. (3) Spiritual pride, or an over-valuing estime of
self-excellences. Each of these have a venomous influence on al sin, as we have
largely demonstrated out of Plato and others, Philos. General. P. 1. l. 3. c.
3. sect. 4.. 8, 9, 10.

. 5. Next to the Causes of moral Evil we may consider its Species or Kinds. Al
moral Evil or Sin may be distributed into involuntary, Sins are either of
Ignorance, of Passion, or wilful.
or voluntary: again involuntary, into sins of Ignorance, or of Passion. We
find the foundation of this distribution in Plato, Phileb. page 22. where he
says, That those who choose sin, do it either involuntarily and ignorantly, or
out of a voluntary miserable necessity. 1. As for involuntary Sins, they are,
(1) Sins of Ignorance, when the ignorance is not affected, either from
prejudice, voluntary neglect, or custom in sin, as before,. 3. (2) Sins of
Passion or Infirmity, when the passion is antecedent to the will, and does as
it were extort the consent of the will, being vehement and violent. For if the
passion be consequent to the act of the will, or but a languid remiss motion,
such as does not force the will, the sin is not so much of passion, as
voluntary: whence passions that arise from evil customs, and follow the will,
do not constitute a sin of passion. Thence Aristotle. Eth. l. 3. c. 3. says,
That every sin from passion is not involuntary. Thus also Suarez, 1.2. Tract.
5. Disp. 4. page 395. Now involuntarinesse, in sins either of ignorance or of
passion, takes away something of their aggravation: where there is real
unaffected ignorance, passion or perturbation, there is less of sin. Where
there is involuntary Ignorance, there is want of that which might help the
understanding: where antecedent involuntary passions hurrie men into sin, there
is voluntary dissent or subsequent repentance. Hence the Disciples of
Aristippus said, That they who sin from perturbation, not voluntarily, deserve
pardon, as Laertius. 2. Voluntary wilful Sins, are such as proceed from a
strong bent of will, without ignorance or passion as the original cause thereof.
Such sins are of greater aggravation, because of less provocation, and excuse.
From a perseverance in voluntary sins, and frequent repetition thereof procedes
a fixed custom and rooted habit of sin, touching which we find many good
Philosophemes in Plato, of which hereafter. 7. of the necessary servitude of
Sin.

. 6. The Nature, The moral servitude of Sin.
Causes, and Kinds of moral Evil being laid open, we may with more facility
explicate and demonstrate, what that moral Servitude is which attends it. That
al moral Evil or Sin is attended with the highest moral Servitude is evident
from sacred Philosophy, as also the Philosophemes of Plato and others. There
were three ways whereby men were brought under civil servitude among the
Ancients: some were made servants by being taken in war; others were bought
with a price; others became such by being borne in the house of servants, as
Ishmael. Sacred Philosophy, in treating of the servitude of sin, alludes to al
these three kinds of service. (1) Sinners are said, 1 Kings 21.20. and 2 Kings
17.17. To sell themselves, to work evil: i.e. deliberately and voluntarily to
commit sin, and that with a full bent of heart: which is opposed to Paul's being
sold under sin, Romans 7.14. (2) The servants of sin are said to be led captive
by sin, 2 Pet. 2.19. (3) Al men by nature are said to be borne slaves of sin,
Ephesians. 2.2. and 5.6.
Ephesians. 2.2. Children of disobedience: i.e. addicted, devoted, given up to it. So
Ephesians. 5.6. and Col. 3.6. This is an Hebraic Idiotisme: for among them (...), a
Son, being put in the state of Regiment, and construed with a Noun signifying
an inanimate thing, is emphatically used to note that such a person or thing is
addicted or given up to that which is predicated of it. Thus a child of
disobedience, is one that is a perfect slave or devoted to it. And Plato, Rep.
9. page 575. tells us, That he who is subject to the Tyranny of his own Lusts,
is the greatest slave imaginable: for he cannot do what he would; but is shut
up in the prison of his own unbridled lusts. Therefore in his Cratylus, as he
derives (...), Virtue, from (...), always to flow, which importes liberty; so
he derives (...), Vice, from (...), because a wicked man is ever fettered and
chained by his lusts. But to illustrate the miserable vassalage and slaverie
which attends al Sinners by nature, we shall consider this servitude of Sin, (1)
In regard of the Adjuncts and Effects that attend Sin. (2) In the proper
Adjuncts, or Attributes that attend this servitude. First as to the Adjuncts
and Effects that attend Sin, we shall draw them forth according to the mind of
sacred and Platonic Philosophy, in the ensuing Propositions.

1. Al moral Evil or Sin is repugnant to human Nature. The Civilian, Sin
repugnant to human Nature.
Justin. Institut. l. 1. tit. 3. defines Civil Servitude, a constitution of the
Law of Nations, whereby one is subject to the Dominion of another against
Nature. And is not this most true of the moral servitude of Sin? What more
against human Nature, than to be subject to the tyranny of irregular passions?
Yea does not Sin make not only the Creatures an enemy to man, but also himself
the greatest enemy to himself? That Sin is most repugnant to human Nature, may
easily be evinced out of Plato's Philosophy. Thence he calls it (...) and
(...), Discord and Confusion; because it causes an intestine war, discord, and
confusion in human Nature. Thus also in his Lysis, he says, Al good is (...),
proper and agreeable to human Nature, but (...), evil is aliene and repugnant to
it. Good, albeit it slow not from Nature, yet it inclines us to what is most
for the perfection of human Nature; whereas al Sin tends to its ruin. As al
moral Liberty consistes in Virtue, which gives an elevation and advance to
human Nature; so al moral servitude arising from Sin implies a depression of
human Nature. Thus Psalm. 106.43. And were brought low for their iniquity.
(...) signifies attenuated, depressed. Psalm. 106.43. Vitium contra naturam est,
ut non possit nisi nocere naturae. Non itaque esset vitium recedere a Deo, nisi
naturae, cujus id vitium est, potius competeret esse cum Deo. August. de Civ.
Dei, l. 11. c. 17.
It Is here spoken of their being brought down from an high to a low condition.
Then follows the cause of this their being brought down: (...), for, or in
their iniquity. Their iniquity was not only the meritorious cause, but also
the instrument or machine by which they were brought down. Nothing does so much
empoverish and bring down human Nature, as Sin. So Psalm. 107.12. Therefore he
brought down their heart with labor: they fell down, and there was none to help.
(...) with toilsome labor. The toilsome labor of Sin is most potent to bring
down human Nature. (1) Sin brings down human Nature, and is most repugnant to
it, in that it importes an aversion and falling from God, who is our most
laudable and excellent Being, our first Principe and last End. This is implied
in that dreadful interrogation of God to Adam, Genesis 3.9.
Genesis 3.9. Where art thou? In this Question we may consider [1] That it regards
not Adams place, but state: Where art thou? Not in what place, but in what
state? How is it with thee now Adam? How do thou do? Is al well? What is the
condition of thy Soul? Art thou in that state I placed thee in? [2] It Is a
question not of ignorance as to God, but of conviction as to Adam: it is the
question of a Judge making inquisition after the Malefactor. Where art thou?
Where is now thy confidence in thine own strength? Do thou see unto what a
condition thy pride, thy unbelief has reduced thee? Thou aimedst to be as God,
free from my yoke and Law. But is it so with thee? Art thou not fallen into a
miserable bondage? Does not thy fear, thy running away, and endeavor to hide
thy self, discover thy guilt and servitude? [3] It is a sarcastic, biting,
upbraiding question. Where art thou? O! how is it with thee now Adam? Have thou
not brought thy self to a sine pass? Where is the Deity thou affectedst?
Plato seems to give frequent hints and intimations of this Fall of Man, and the
servitude that attends it. So in his Phaedrus, page 245. he compares the Soul,
in its innocent state, to a winged Chariot, that slies aloft; but in its lapsed
state, he makes it to have lost its wings, and to be imprisoned in the body.
And the Platonists generally complain of the Souls servitude in the body, as a
punishment of some former sin. Which makes Steuch. Eugubinus and others to
think, that Plato knew more of the Fall, than he would discover, which he
disguised under that Hypothesis, of the Preexistence of Souls. So Eusebius,
Praep. Evang. lib. 12. cap. 11. page 584. thinks that Plato, in his Symposium,
expressed the Fall allegorically under the Symbol of Porus, of which see Court
Gent. P. 1. B. 3. C. 5.. 1-6.

(2) Sin pulls down and is repugnant to human Nature, Sin strips off the Image
of God.
as it divestes men of the Image of God. Thus in sacred Philosophy, Genesis 3.7.
Genesis 3.7.22.
And they knew that they were naked: i.e. they perceived themselves divested of
the image of God. Thence v. 22. God said: Behold man is become like one of us!
i.e. Ironically, most unlike unto us, a sad spectacle, a prodigiose monster,
unlike the Creature made by us. It alludes to the words of Satan, v. 5. And ye
shall be as Gods. It is said, Genesis 5.1. That Adam was created in the likeness
of God. But v. 3. it is added, That he begat a son in his own likeness, i.e.
sinful, as he was. This deprivation of the image of God is well expressed by
Paul, Romans 3.23. Romans 3.23.
For all have sinned and come short of the glory of God. (...), are deprived,
spoiled, divested of the glory of God. This may be taken (1) Actively: Al have
come short of the gloriose image of God, and conformity to his Law, which Adam
was at first invested with. (2) Passively, as to future Glory. The former
sense seems primarily intended here. Adams Soul was silled with the gloriose
image of God; but ah! alas! how has sin defaced and dissigured the Soul! how
far short does it now come of that gloriose Image! This Fall of man from the
Image of God Plato was not altogether a stranger unto: for, in his Critias, he
says, that anciently there flourished in our first Parents, (...), or (...), a
divine nature, which rendered them happy, but human custom or sin prevailing,
an inundation of evils followed.

(3) Sin brings down human Nature and is repugnant thereto, Sin is enmity
against God.
in that it infuseth a Principe of confusion, enmity, and rebellion against
God. The perfection of human Nature consistes in an intimate adherence and
subjection to God; but sin puts a law of enmity and rebellion into the heart,
Romans 8.7. Romans 8.7.
The carnal mind is enmity against God, i.e. a complexe or systeme of al
manner of enmity: yea nothing but enmity: enmity in the highest-degree: for
abstractes speak forms and essences. Greg. Nazianzen, in Apolog. makes three
Species of the carnal minds Rebellion and Reluctance against Grace. (1) (...),
a servile departure from God. (2) (...), a contentiose aversion and obstinate
reluctation against God. (3) (...), a stupor in sin: when men rush into sin,
(...), with a bare face. The carnal mind is the greatest enemy God has. Al sin
in corrupt nature is a kind of Antipathie against God; that which puts men upon
al acts of rebellion against, and aversation from him. Hos. 4.12. A spirit of
fornication: Hos. 4.12, 16.
i.e. of Idolatry, which is spiritual fornication. (...) a Spirit denotes a
vehement fervor, flame, or impetus of lust: such as carries with it the highest
impetuositie, effort, and force. For the Hebrews call all the extraordinary
motions or perturbations of the mind, Spirit. Thence it follows: from under
God: i.e. from under his Power, Empire, and Dominion. From under has the force
of a privation, and denotes their aversion from God. Thence he adds, v. 16.
For Israel slideth back, as a backsliding heifer. (...), as a rebellious,
contumacious, refractary heifer: such as thinks her self free, casts off the
yoke from her neck, and is impatient of subjection, as Deuteronomy. 32.15. The meaning
is, that Israel, like a lascivious refractary Heifer, had cast off al regard to
divine Commands, and wandered up and down according to her own lusts. Thence
follows her punishment answerable to her sin: The Lord will feed her in a large
place. She affects a wandering, vagrant, licentious course of life, and she shall
have it: The Lord will feed her in a large place, or barren desert, not in a
fruitful place. When Churches or people wander from God, he will feed them in a
desert of affliction, as Hos. 2.14. Such is the state of those that wander from
God. Sacred Philosophy and the Greek Fathers express this enmity of the
carnal mind against God, by such expressions as these: (...), to resist God;
(...), to resist the Spirit; (...), to affect to overcome the power of God;
(...), to make void, or repel Grace; (...), to deride God. And what greater
bondage can there be, than for a rational Creature to turn his back on God,
and fly from his chiefest good? Does not this pull down and impoverish human
Nature? Thence Plato, in his Politicus, tells us, That after the Golden Age,
i.e. the state of Innocence, had its period, sin brought into the world a
deluge, (...) of confusion and disorder, etc.

(4) Sin is most repugnant to human Nature, Sin strips men of Humanity.
in that it strips men of the right use of their Reason, Will, Affections, yea
of their comfortable Being and Humanity. Plato, in his Theaetetus, assures us,
That the excellence of man consistes in his Ressemblance unto God; but so far
as he falls short thereof, he falls under, (...), Nothingnesse, and Inhumanitie.
Sin reduces human Nature to a kind of Inhumanitie and Nothingnesse, in that it
spoils it of the right use of its rational Being and operations. For man having
an intrinsec relation unto God, as his first efficient and last End, he so far
enjoys his Being, as he does adhere to God: he that bids farewell to, or departs
from God, bids farewell to, and departs from himself, as to al right use of what
he has. Man is then said to live, when he uses and enjoys things as he
ought; which sin deprives him of, in that it makes him use things that are to
be enjoyed, and enjoy things that are to be used. Thus it invertes the order of
things. Hence it was a commun Saying with Socrates, as also the Stoics, That al
Vice is against Nature; because human Nature as such, was made to adhere unto
God as its first Cause and last End; which state man by sin does relinquish;
and so by consequence lose the right use of his Being, Life, Reason, Will,
Affections, and al human Acts. Such is the Repugnance of Sin to human Nature.

2. Moral Evils or Sins are not only repugnant to human Nature, Sins repugnant
each to other.
but to themselves. This greatly demonstrates the servitude and bondage of Sin:
for all moral Liberty implies Order, Harmony, and Uniformity, which arises
from Virtue: but Lusts are extreme jarring, dissonant and opposite each to
other. Oh! what strange discords, confusions, and seditions are there among
lusts in the heart? How is the heart distracted and as it were torn in pieces
by them? Lusts are extreme mutinous and lawless; they keep no order. Thence in
sacred Philosophy it is said, The corrupt mind cannot subject it self to the
law of God. Romans 8.7. (...), Romans 8.7.
cannot keep the place, order, and rank the Law of God has put the Soul into.
It alludes to Military order: for (...) primarily denotes the order and
discipline of Soldiers. Yea it is added, (...), neither indeed can be: namely,
because the Law is the rule of order, but Lusts are al for disorder: they
disagree among themselves, as well as from the Law of God. Lusts have no end,
bounds, measure: what is sin, but a confused Chaos of al manner of disorders?
How do sensual passions fight, not only against Gods Law, but against each
other? And oh! what a slavery arises herefrom? Thence sinners are described,
Tit. 3.6. Tit. 3.6.
Serving lusts and diverse pleasures. These sinful pleasures are not only
diverse as to Number, but also as to Quality, as different and opposite each
to other. Thence Jam. 4.1. Lusts are said to maintain an intestine war in men's
Souls, whence al externe wars and contests arise. Thus Plato makes frequent
mention of the discords and intestine wars of Lusts. So Repub. 5. page 444. he
makes injustice to be (...), a Sedition of the Soul, or Insurrection. So (...),
page 214. he makes al virtrose persons to be like each other, and friends; but
as for profligate wicked men, they differ as well from themselves, as each from
other. And in his Phaedo, page 92. he says: (...), etc. Al sin is full of
discord, but virtue is harmonious. The reason of this Discord and Repugnance
among lusts is this: Al concord and agreament in the Soul arises from its
adherence to God, who is the first Unity: so far as men depart from this prime
Unity, so far they fall under confusion, Nulla major poena nequitiae est, quam
quod sibi and suis displicet. Sen. Epist.
difformitie, and disorder. And what greater punishment of sin is there than
this, that it is displeasing, yea repugnant to it self? How often do men
relinquish the lusts they longed for, and then reassume what they relinquished?
What a conflict is there between avaricious and prodigal lusts? But of this
more in what follows.

3. Sin most impotent and infirm.
Sin is the Disease of the Soul, full of impotence and infirmity. Al moral
Liberty implies health, vigor, force and strength: and wherein consistes the
vigor and strength of any thing, but in adherence to its first Principes? The
more any thing departes from Unity, the more Division, Contrariety,
Dissolution, and Infirmity. And is not God the first Principe or Cause of the
Soul? Does it not by departing from him depart from its first Unity and
strength? O! then how impotent and infirm is sin? This is every where
intimated in sacred Philosophy. Ezech. 16.30.
So Ezech. 16.30. How weak is thy heart! i.e. how sick, faint, and impotent by
reason of lust. Yet it follows: Seeing thou do al these things, the works of
an imperiose whorish woman. She had potent imperiose lusts, but a weak heart to
resist tentations. Sin is said to be a poisonous bitter root, which sheds its
malign influences on al our Affections and Actions. Deuteronomy. 29.18.
Thus Deuteronomy. 29.18. Apostasy is said to be a root bearing gal and bitterness.
The Hebrew (...) rendered Gal, signifies a poisonous herb; and so it must be
rendered here, a root, whose influences and fruits are poisonous and bitter.
Thence the LXX. render it, (...), springing up in gal, or poison and
bitterness. For (...) signifies both gal and poison, answerable to (...),
because the poison of some Serpents lies in their gal. Act. 8.23.
Peter alludes hereto, Act. 8.23. where (...), signifies the bitter poisonous
root of corrupt nature. So Heb. 12.15. Heb. 12.15.
Root of bitterness: i.e. poisonous root of sin. Nothing so poisonous and
killing as sin. Whence sinners are said to be, Jer. 17.9. (...), desperately
sick, even unto death. So Esa. 24.4. languisheth, as a feeble, crazy,
consumtive body, as v. 5. Basil, in Psalm. says, That men are rendered by
Virtue or Grace (...), without wound and blemish: whence they become, (...),
inexpugnable and free, as before, Chap. 3. Thence it necessarily follows, that
sin is the wound and blemish of the Soul, that which renders it most impotent
and servile. That sin is full of impotence and infirmity Plato once and again
inculcates. So Repub. 4. page 430. he says, An intemperate man (...), weaker
than himself; whereas a temperate man is (...), more potent than himself, i.e.
than his sensual appetite. Thus in his Timaeus, page 86, 87. he proves, That
the irregularitie of our affections is the worst disease. So Repub. 10. page
608. he informs us, That evil is that which dissolves and corrupts things, but
good conserves and relieves. And thence he concludes, That a servile Sinner
has nothing sound. Lastly, Repub. 1. he says, Unrighteousness is the disease
of the Soul.

4. Sin is the spot, stain and defilement of the Soul, Sin the defilement of
the Soul.
and therefore the greatest servitude. Virtue gives a Nitor, Luster, Splendour,
Beauty, and Glory to the Soul; but Sin is the Blot and blemish of human
Nature: indeed nothing can pollute and defile the Soul but Sin, and sinful
Idols. Hence we find mention, Deuteronomy. 29.17. Ezech. 23.7.
Deuteronomy. 29.17. and Ezech. 23.7. of (...), gillulim, filthy Idols. The word
signifies both filth and Idols, or sordid, dunghill, filthy Idols, such as
pollute by the very touch. So Levit. 26.30. Psalm. 106.28. The Soul, by its
lusts, running into and being made one with filthy Idols, is thereby made
filthy and impure: as on the contrary, when it mingles with things above it,
God and things virtuose, it is thereby made more pure and excellent. We read
also, Tit. 1.11. of filthy lucre. Lucre is not filthy in it self, but being
beneath the Soul, it defiles the same when it is coveted thereby. For when the
heart of man runs down into things beneath it self, it is thereby defiled,
whence such things are called filthy Idols. This also Plato observed: whence in
his Minos, he tells us, (...), A good man is of al most sacred: but a wicked man
most impure and polluted. Sin indeed pollutes the whole man. (1) It defiles
men's persons: whence sinners are termed Swine, Mat. 7.6. which are the most
unclean Creatures. (2) It defiles men's Minds and Consciences, Tit. 1.15. (3) It
defiles men's Discourses, words, and communications: Esa. 9.17. Every mouth
speaks folly. (...), which is rendered villainy, Chap. 32.6. signifies the
flowers and leaves of plants putrified and rotten. So Ephesians. 4.29. No corrupt
communication. (...) signifies rotten, stinking, noisome, like rotten fruits or
stinking breath. (4) It defiles men's Actions and Fruits: Mat. 7.17. (...)
malign fruits. (5) It pollutes whole Nations and Churches. Hence Israel in her
Apostasy is said to be, Hos. 8.8.
Hos. 8.8. a vessel wherein is no pleasure: i.e. as some expound it, like such
vessels as are most abject, and exposed to the most sordid uses, to retein only
excrements. So Lam. 1.8, 9. Zeph. 3.1. (6) Yea Sin pollutes our very
Righteousness and makes it unclean. Esa. 64.6.
Esa. 64.6. As an unclean thing, or person; because the term is masculine. As
a lump of some filthy matter, or such unclean stuff, as by the Law was to be
burned, Lev. 13.55, 57. or like some leprose person; or one laboring under some
noisome disease, even from the crown of the head to the sole of the foot, as
Chap. 1.6. Thence he adds: And al our righteousnesses as filthy rags. There
are different interpretations of these words: some take them as an allusion to
Beggars Rags: others, to Rags polluted by putrified sores: others, to
garments defiled by blood: others, to menstruous rags: but al generally agree
in this, that the term notes much defilement. In sum, there is this universal
defilement on human Nature: Adams person first polluted our nature; and our
natures polluted defile our persons and whatever procedes from us, or is
inherent in us. Hence,

5. Sin is the Reproach, Sin full of shame and reproach.
Dishonor, Shame, and Disgrace of the Soul. As God has entailed honor and
renown on true Virtue, so shame and disgrace on Sin: neither can the wit and
power of man cut off this Entail. This is frequently inculcated in sacred
Philosophy, which teaches us, That Sin does degrade men, and strip them of
their highest excellence, clothing them with shame and reproach. Esa. 32.5.
Thuch Esa. 32.5. The vile person shall no more be called liberal, nor the
churl said to be bountiful. (...) nabal signifies primarily a vile person, a
man of no worth, like a withered flower, or leaf in Autumn. Thence it
signifies a fool, as Abigal's speech importes, 1 Samuel 25.25. Such a vile
foolish sinner shall no more be called (...) nadib, i.e. free, noble, ingenuous,
generose Prince. No Nabal or vile sinner, shall, in the days of Christ's gloriose
reign, (which this Text refers to, as v. 1, etc.) be called Nadib, free,
generose Prince. Esa. 14.20.
This is more fully expressed, Esa. 14.20. The seed of evildoers shall never be
renowned. (...), shall not be named: or shall not be men of name, or renown for
ever. The great God delights to clothe proud sinners with shame and reproach.
Thus Esa. 22.17. Esa. 22.17.
Behold the Lord will carry thee away with a mighty captivity, and will surely
cover thee. Hebr. in covering will cover thee. This repetition, according to the
Hebrew Idiome, importes, (1) Certainty, (2) Expedition, (3) Abundance, (4)
Continuance. He shall certainly, speedily, abundantly, and continually cover
thee. Ay but with what? With shame and reproach. It implies such a covering as
persons fallen into disgrace, or carried captive, or condemned to die were wont
to have, whose faces were covered, as unworthy to see light. And who was it,
who should be thus covered? It was Shebna the Kings Treasurer, a man covered
and clothed with gorgeous apparel, and many Titles of Honor, as v. 18. God
first or last clothes the highest of sinners with shame and reproach. Sin
strips men of their highest excellences, and then God, in just judgment,
clothes them with disgrace. Exodus 32.25.
So Exodus 32.25. And when Moses saw the people were naked. (...), naked, in the
shame of their sins, divested of the glory of God. So it follows: For Aaron
had made them naked unto their shame amongst their enemies. Unto their shame,
(...), or, unto their infamy. LXX. a rejoicing and mockery, namely to their
adversaries. Sin makes men a shame, infamy, and reproach to their friends, and
the scorn, mockery, and rejoicing of their adversaries. What more contumeliose
and reprocheful to human Nature, than to be a voluntary drudge of Sin and
Satan? Whiles Nations and Churches keep close to God, they are formidable and
terrible to their enemies; but when by sin they depart from God, they are the
reproach of al. Thus Ephraim, Hos. 13.1. When Ephraim spoke trembling, Hos.
13.1, 2.
he exalted himself in Israel. Some read it thus: Ephraim was a tremblement to
him that heard him: i.e. so long as he kept close to God, he was formidable to
al his enemies, he was exalted in honor and renown. But when he offended in
Baal he died: i.e. he is now most abject and contemtible in the eyes of al. And
why? because he has departed from the Worship of God to worship Baal. Thence
it follows, v. 2. And now they sin more and more. Hebr. They add sin to sin.
O! what an ignoble thing is sin? Does it not bring al under a scorn? Thus
Israel in Babylon, Lam. 3.14. I am made a derision to al my people. Or, as
others, to al people, namely round about. Thence Paul demands of the Romans,
Romans 6.21. What fruit had ye then in these things whereof ye are now ashamed?
The state of sin is always attended with shame and bondage. This was also well
observed by Plato and many of the wiser Heathens. Thus Plato, in his Phaedrus,
calls (...), concupiscence, (...), the contumely or reproach of human Nature.
So in his Gorg. page 477. he says, (...), The pravitie of the Soul is the
basest and vilest of althings. Yea, he affirms: (...), It is not only by Law,
but by Nature more base to do an injury than to receive it. So in his
Symposium, page 183. he says, That love is of it self neither excellent nor
vile; but if it be irregular, it is most vile. Whence he concludes: (...), It
is therefore a vile thing, vily to obey any vile thing, such as sin is. And he
adds, page 184. (...), To lust after riches or civil power is most base and
vile. The like in his Leg. 5. (...), Injustice is the basest thing imaginable.
And he subjoins the reason: For he that fills his Soul with sins, (...) does
reproach it, and make it vile. Indeed nothing can make man vile, unless he
first make himself vile by sin. Thence Anacharsis being upbraided by an
Athenian, that he was a Scythian, of a base Country; he replied, My Country
is a disgrace to me, but thou art a disgrace to thy Country: meaning by his
vitiose courses. And is not this too true of too many Englishmen? It Is true,
many, by reason of their high condition in the world, may be exemted from the
punishment of their sin, yet assuredly none is or can be exemted from the shame
of it. Thence Basil, Psalm. says, (...), That there is a turpitude and
impressed stamp or print of sin, as it were of an indeleble tincture. Al other
excellences cannot keep a man from being vile, if sinful. Antiochus a King is
said to be a vile person, because wicked. Seneca tells us, That none is
contemned by another, but he who first makes himself contemtible by sin: a free
noble mind may live in a Cottage; whereas servitude may inhabit a marble golden
Palace. Pious humility exalts the Soul by making it subject to God, but proud
self-exaltation brings down the Soul: nothing more servile and base than to be
subject to the imperiose dictates of proud vile lusts.

6. Sin is the greatest Tyranny, Sin the Tyranny of the Soul.
and therefore its servitude greatest. Plato, Repub. 9. page 574, etc. gives us
a copiose, lively, and emphatic illustration of the Tyranny of Self-love:
(...), etc. When the Soul has subjected it self to the Tyranny of Love, it is
hurried into al manner of flagitiose vices, neither can he abstain therefrom:
but that tyrannic Love living in him, (...), in all manner of Anarchie and
lawless Empire, as a great Monarch, precipitates him into al manner of vices.
So also page 577. The mind being subject to tyrannic Lust cannot do what it
would, but is torn in pieces by violent assaults, etc. Yea he affirms, That
by how much the more men indulge and observe the commands of Lust, by so much
the more tyrannic and insolent it is. So in his Gorg. page 478. He must needs
live miserably, who carries about with him unrighteousness, that imperiose
Lady, whose commands he can never be free from. And indeed thus much sacred
Philosophy informs us, That he who refuses to be under the sweet Empire of
the divine Law, falls under the miserable servitude of sins tyranny. Thus Romans
5.21. (...), Romans 5.21.
Sin is brought in as a great Tyrant, ruling with the greatest rigor
imaginable, even unto death. So Romans 6.12. Romans 6.12.
Let not sin therefore reign in your mortal bodies, that you should obey it in
the lusts thereof. (...), he brings in Sin as an infamous imperiose Lady, whom
to serve is most unworthy of a free ingenuous Spirit. Thus Romans 3.9. For we
have before proved, both Jews and Gentiles, Romans 3.9.
that they are al under sin. Schmidius reads the first part thus: For we have
been al long ago accused and convinced, namely Psalm. 14.1, 2, 3. of what? That
al are under sin. (...), to be under sin, is to be under the Jurisdiction,
Tyranny, and Subjection of Sin; which is here brought in as some imperiose
domineering Lord, that delights to tyrannise over his Vassals. Sin is the
basest thing in the world: O then how servile is subjection to its Tyranny! A
sinner addicted to any base tyrannic Idol he lusts after, does not possess
that beloved Idol, but that possesses him, and brings him under a miserable
Tyranny, so that he can neither part with, nor enjoy what he lusts after: and
by how the more the Idols he lusts after are multiplied, by so much the less
power has he over himself, or the things which he possesses. And the soverain
power and tyranny of sin appears in nothing more than in this, that men do
voluntarily obey its dicates and commands. Such whose hearts are chained to any
inferior Idol, have no power over themselves: they are not their own: they have
no dominion over their own persons, actions, objects of use or fruition, in
moral estimation. There is nothing that human Nature more abhors, than to be
under the Tyranny of others; and yet al sinners electively embrace a
self-tyrannie, to be under the power of tyrannic lusts.

7. Al Sin is full of Penury, Want and Necessity; Sin full of penury and want.
which is another attendent of servitude. Plato, Repub. 9. page 577. tells us,
That the Soul under the Tyranny of Sin, (...), must necessarily be always
under an indigent insatiable condition. So in his Politicus, page 274. (...),
By all these things, [meaning such as attended the Fall of Man] men were driven
into great straits. Thus also, Rep. 9. page 579. speaking of one under the
tyranny of lust, he says, He is a slave; neither are his lusts ever
satisfied: (...), and he indeed appears to be a beggar, if any one knows how to
look into his Soul. There is nothing so indigent and greedy as lust: the more
it has the more it wants: which denotes great slaverie. Luke 15.13, 14, 15.
Thus we find exemplified in the Prodigal, Luke 15.13, 14, 15. What is spoken
here of famine, want, feeding on husks with swine, etc. demonstrates that
great penury, slaverie and misery, which those who are slaves to their lusts
are obnoxious unto. This is in a more peculiar manner visible in such whose
hearts are captivated by richesse, Neminem pecunia divitem facit: imo contra
nulli non majorem sui cupiditatem incussit. Quaeris quae sit hujus rei causa?
Plus incipit habere posse, qui plus habet. Seneca.
pleasures, or honors. The avaricious man has a vehement desire to be rich, and
yet that very desire or lust makes him poor: yea, the richer he is as to this
worlds goods, the poorer he is as to the real use and comfort of what he has:
whiles he endeavors to increase an infinite treasure of riches, his lusts also
are infinitely increased, which make him most poor. Thus also sensual and
ambitiose men, the more they have the more they want: the increase of what they
lust after makes them poorer as to real comfort and satisfaction therein. Sin
indeed makes men most poor, in that it deprives them of God, who is the best
riches. O! what a poor, shiftlesse, forlorn, miserable thing, or rather
nothing is Sin.

8. Sin captivates the Soul, Sin the fetters of the Soul.
puts chains and fetters on it; which is a great piece of servitude. Al lusts
do contract, pinion, and bind up the Soul, which is in it self most ample and
extensive. Thus Plato, in his Phaedo, page 83. says, The mind, (...), is bound
or fettered by sensual lusts. And he subjoins the reason: Because every
pleasure and every dolor of the mind, being as it were armed with a nail, does
fasten it to the body, (...), and makes it corporeous, or sensual like the
body. Wherein he gives us a lively symbolic image, how the Soul, by sensual
lusts, becomes glued and chained to the body, yea transformed thereinto. Every
Idol lusted after captivates the heart: so many lusts so many chains: yea every
repeted act of sin brings the Soul under new fetters and bonds: the longer such
go on in ways of sin, the greater slaves they are. It Is true, some men's chains
are lined with pleasures, or gilded over with terrene richesse; but yet that
adds not to their liberty: yea, the greatest natures and most noble
dispositions, if sinful, have the greatest chains: for by how much the more
free such conceit they are, or affect to be, by so much the more they are
entangled in their lusts, as Esa. 44.20. Such as feed on any Idol, are chained
thereto, neither is it possible for them to deliver their own Souls. Thus Hos.
4.17. Ephraim is joined to Idols, (...) bound, glued, chained. It alludes to
the conjunction of unclean persons, whereby they become as it were one flesh,
as 1 Cor. 6.16. Israel was chained to her Idols by indissoluble bonds of false
Worship, and it was impossible to pull her thence. (...) Idols, from (...),
which signifies grief, straits, trouble. Idols do greatly straiten, torment,
and vex sinners, and yet they cannot part with them. Plato, Repub. 9. page
579. tells us, That sinners are shut up in the prison of their own lusts, and
fettered by their irregular desires. Yea, indeed every sinner is chained to the
worst of Idols, himself, and fettered by his own lusts. This we find
exemplified in Simon Magus, Act. 8.9. giving out that himself was some great
one: i.e. potent in miracles, Act. 8.9.23.
one that could do great feats. Ambitiose self was that unhappy Center, unto
which he was chained. And it is worthy our serious observation to consider, how
this Idol chains and fetters his heart, even by and under a profession of
Religion. The case stood thus: Simon perceiving the Apostles to outshine him in
doing miracles, he has a mind to turn Christian, thereby to gain the same
power, they were invested with, as v. 19. Give me also this power. Peter
smelling out his ambitiose rank hypocrisy, tells him, in plain terms, v. 23.
I perceive thou art in the gal of bitterness and bond of iniquity. This
(...), bond of iniquity signifies, (1) a Covenant or compact with iniquity:
such as is between Servants and Masters, or those who are in some deep
conspiracy. And so the sense is: he was still a sworn slave of iniquity: one
bound to sin by an Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy. (2) It is used by the
LXX. to express the bands of iniquity, or a chain, such as prisoners are kept
in, Esa. 58.6. (3) It denotes, the binding up of many things together. Thus was
Simons heart bound up by the chains of many sins. And we find something like to
this in Plato's Cratylus, page 415. where he says, That the vitiositie of the
mind appears much in sloth: and he thence concludes; (...), Therefore sloth
indicates, that the bond or chain of the Soul is most potent and tenacious.

9. Sin is the greatest servitude, in that it makes men sots, fools, Sin folly
and madness.
and mad men: it deprives of the use of reason. Thus Plato, Protagor. page 332.
(...); Do not they who act irregularly, act foolishly and madly? So, in his
Phaedrus, page 231. he makes inordinate love a kind of madness. Also in his
Timaeus, page 86. he makes (...), ignorance, specially of the supreme Being and
Truth, to be (...), the disease and madness of the Soul. And the reason is
evident; because the proper office and use of Reason is to unite the mind to
its object Truth, and so by consequence to that Truth primarily, which is
first, and most intelligible in it self, namely God, in the contemplation of
whom the minds perfection consistes. But now sin disunites the mind from God,
and fills it with ignorance, folly, and madness. Hence the knowledge of the
wicked is termed by Plato (...), nocturnal knowledge; because it neither
illuminates, nor directs, nor delights them, which are the three main offices
of knowledge. Thus our Lord, the first Light and Truth, assures us, Mat. 6.23.
That the very light and knowledge of wicked men, though never so much cultivated
and elevated by acquired notions, or commun illuminations of the Spirit, is but
darkness, yea the blackest darkness. Stobaeus also informs us, That,
according to Plato, nothing was (...), ridiculous or absurd but sin. And
Grotius tells us, That Plato conjoined (...) and (...), as Luke 23.41. so that
nothing is indeed absurd but sin. Hence frequently in sacred Philosophy
sinners are said to be without (...), an heart, i.e. practic judgment or
conscience rightly informed, as Jer. 5.21. and in the Proverbs often. Yea wicked
men are styled, Psalm. 5 5. as elsewhere, (...), mad men. Thence it is said of
the Prodigal, Luke 15.17. When he came to himself, i.e. to an awakened
conscience and sound mind: which denotes, that so long as he lived in sin, he
was not himself, but like a mad man. And indeed the more wit men have, if under
the power of sin, the greater mad men, fools, and slaves they are; because
their wit does but serve to entangle them in their lusts: their reason does but
fortify their minds with arguments and cavils against the means of their
liberty.

10. Sin, Sin when prevalent makes men Bestes.
when in its dominion and prevalence, transformes men into mere Brutes, which
is the worst of servitude. Plato styles sensual affections the brutish part of
a man, which when they prevail, transform him into a best. For whatever the
heart of man does vehemently adhere unto, it receives a stamp and character
from; yea is transformed thereinto: if the Soul strongly adhere to God, it has
the impresse of his image stamped on it: if unto the world, it is transformed
into the spirit of the world. And the reason is evident; because al love is a
kind of ingresse, or running of the heart into what it loves: Thence follows
first Union, and then, if it may be, Unity with its beloved. And where it
cannot attain to Unity, it affects Ressemblance and similitude. Thus sinners
having their hearts glued to the Idols of time, are transformed into their
likeness: by loving sensual carnal objects, they become sensual and carnal.
Hence we find sensual sinners styled, 2 Pet. 2.12. (...), natural brute bestes.
Neither is this the case of sensual sinners only, but of the most refined
spirits under the power of any base lusts. The Apostle speaking of al mankind
in a natural state, says that every man is, 1 Cor. 2.14. (...), an animal
brutish man. Sin has made al human Nature inhuman and brutish: a man is not a
man, in true moral and divine estimation, til he be virtuose: the wisest and
best of men, if not sanctified, are but animal and brutish. Thence the Lord
makes diligent inquisition throughout Jerusalem, If there were a man to be
found, Jer. 5.1. How few men then are to be found in this sensual age! Al
sinners carry the image of Satan or of Bestes: they are either like Satan in
subtlety and malice; or like Bestes in sensuality. And ah! what a miserable
Metamorphosis is this, for man to be made like a best! were it not much better
for man to be a best, than to be like a best? For man by being like a best
degrades himself, yea places himself below the condition of a best, which
keeps in that state it was made by God.

. 7. Having considered the servitude of Sin in regard of the Adjuncts and
Effects that attend sin, we now come to consider this servitude in its own
proper Attributes and Affections, thereby farther to demonstrate how miserable
it is.

1. The servitude of Sin is most voluntary and wilful, and therefore most
miserable. Electively to espouse evil is the worst of evils. The servitude of
Sin is most voluntary.
The slaverie of sin is in this most miserable, that men voluntarily elect
their slaverie. They that take the most liberty in sinning are the greatest
slaves; because voluntary slaves: Nulla servitus turpior quam voluntaria.
Every sinner naturally estimes his Prison his Palace; his Hell, his Heaven. The
will tamely and voluntarily puts it self into the fetters of sin, which renders
its servitude most sordid: for the more there is of the will in sin, the more of
sin and slaverie: when the servitude of sin becomes a rational choice to the
sinner, it is extreme miserable: when men hug and embrace their chains, love
and delight in their sins, yea take a kind of satisfaction therein, what
forlorn slaves are they! Who can pity such, who have no pity for themselves?
Now that all the slaves of sin are voluntarily such, and so most miserable,
Plato assures us, in his Phaedrus, page 238. (...), etc. It Is altogether
necessary, that he who voluntarily subjects himself to the empire of lust, be
as a sick man, etc. i.e. restless in every condition. So Aristotle, Eth. l. 3.
c. 15. says, (...), Old men voluntarily serve lucre or profit, as their Idol.
This voluntary servitude of sin, the Scripture sometimes styles a selling a
man's self to do evil, as 1 Kings 21.20. 2 Kings 17.17. To sell himself to do
evil implies a deliberate, Nec voluptates sibi emit, sed se voluptatibus
vendit. Sen. Romans 6.16.
voluntary, wilful giving up himself to sin, which is the highest servitude:
for he that sels himself to be a slave, is deservedly such. This is lively
expressed in sacred Philosophy, Romans 6.16. Know ye not, that to whom ye yield
your selves servants to obey, his servants ye are to whom ye obey: whether of
sin unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness? (...), to whom ye yield
your selves servants. (...), is, so to yield a man's self a servant to another,
as to observe every beck and nod of him to whom he yields himself a servant,
with all manner of promtitude to obey his commands: yea it signifies, to seek an
occasion of serving him. Thus those that yield themselves servants of sin to
obey it in the lusts thereof become voluntary slaves thereof, and seek al
manner of occasions to serve it. We find the same word used in the same sense,
v. 13. Neither yield your members weapons of unrighteousness unto sin. (...),
Neither observe all the becks and nods of sin, do not catch at occasions for the
serving of it: be not ready to obey its irregular dictates; as it is the
practice of those who are slaves thereof. The word is no where else used in the
N.T. This voluntary servitude of sin is expressed Mich. 7.3. by doing iniquity
with both hands earnestly, or strenuously, i.e. with a violent impetuose,
deliberate bent of heart. The will is in every thing the best or the worst: when
men's wills are in their sins O! how loath are they to part with their chains,
their burdens! how do they hug themselves therein! If men's wills be in their
slaverie, it is by so much the worse: men are never so much slaves, as when
their wills are in their slaverie.

2. The servitude of Sin is not more voluntary, The servicude of Sin most
necessary.
than necessary; which adds much to its miserable state. The more voluntarily
men sin, the more necessarily: and the more necessarily, the more voluntarily:
the voluntarinesse of sin adds to its necessity; and the necessity to its
voluntarinesse; and both to its servitude. This necessity, whereby the sinner
is determined only to sin, arises from his own free and voluntary impiety.
Its dura necessitas, as Augustine phraseth it; and therefore the more servile,
because voluntary. As a person laboring under a violent fever the more he
drinks to extinguish his heat, the more his heat and thirst is augmented: so
sinners the more greedily they drink down sin, the more is the feverish heat
of lust inflamed; thence the more necessarily do they thirst after it.
Wherefore this wretched necessity, that attends sin, does not oppose its
voluntarinesse, but arise from it: the more the sinner delights in sin, the
more he is enslaved to it: and the more necessarily he is enslaved to it, the
more freely does he act it. Such a miserable necessity is he under: For the
more insuperable and inevitable any servitude is, the more miserable it is: and
such is the slaverie of sin: all the wit, power, and conflicts of corrupt Nature
cannot deliver the sinner from it. Men are easily drawn into sin, but not from
it. No man ever did by his own forces deliver himself from this slaverie, and
therefore no man can: an argument from the Act to the Power is here valid. Yea,
this servitude of sin is so invincible and necessary, that the sinner wants not
only an active power to deliver himself, but the next passive power and desire
of being delivered from it. This necessary servitude of sin is termed by Plato,
a miserable Necessity. So in his Phileb. page 22. he says, That those who
choose sin choose it either, (...), ignorantly and against their will, or from a
miserable necessity. Wherein observe, (1) That he distinguishes sins into
such as are from ignorance and involuntary; and such as are voluntary and
necessary. (2) He says the necessity that attends sin is miserable. He
elsewhere makes mention of (...), a blessed Necessity, which attends moral
liberty, i.e. when men necessarily elect and adhere to what is best: but as
for this Necessity, which attends men's voluntary adherence to sin, Oh how
miserable is it! Men are tormented by their sins, and yet cannot leave them.

This miserable Necessity of sinning is both connate and adnate, Necessity of
Sin connate and adnate.
arising partly from the corruption of Nature, partly from custom in sin.
Continuance in frequent voluntary repetitions of sinful acts breeds a fixed
custom and rooted habit of sin, whereby the servitude of sin becomes necessary
and insuperable. Thus Plato, Repub. 4. (...), etc. The least prevarication,
like a joke, secretly and easily creeps into men's minds, and by custom
becoming familiar to us, by little and little steals into private and public
manners: wherefore good education is necessary. Thence, Leg. 5. page 728. he
says, It is the greatest punishment to be assimilated to wicked men; for
thereby they imbibe their customs, and come to have one and the same affection
with them. So Leg. 7. he says, Man is an Animal, which by good education is
made tame and mild; but by bad, wild and fierce. Whence beholding some playing
at dice, he greatly rebuked them for it: and being asked, Why he so severely
reprehended them for such a small matter? he replied: But the custom is not
small: meaning, that sinful customs, though about small matters, were not small,
in that they drew on a necessity of sinning. So in his Timaeus, page 86. he
says, (...), By an evil habit or custom an evil man is made evil, in an high
degree. Hence Antisthenes, being demanded, What was chiefly to be learnt?
replied, (...), to unlearne evils, i.e. evil customs. Radicated customs
produce a necessitude of sin and servitude, in that they occecate, indurate and
harden conscience in sin. This occecation and induration of conscience was
styled by Plato and others, (...) and (...), Apathie and Insensibilitie. (...),
Apathie, Definit. Plat. is defined, (...), An habit, by which we abhor from
affections. (...) or Insensibilitie of sin is well expressed by Aristotle, Rhet.
l. 2. c. 5. (...), The greatest sins are least sensible. By how much the more
stupid and senseless conscience is, by so much the more necessary and
incurable is the servitude of sin. This Apathie or Insensibilitie of
conscience, 1 Timothy 4.2.
is well set forth, 1 Timothy 4.2. (...), Having their conscience cauterised, or
marqued with a cauter. (...), from (...), to burn, signifies a cauter or hot
iron, or whatever may be used by Surgeons to burn the flesh. Thence (...),
by burning to set a marque, or to dead the flesh. The sense is, that their
consciences were burned, made dead and senseless by lusts; as proud flesh by a
Cauter. Again, this Apathie of Conscience is in sacred Philosophy set forth by
(...), which being derived from (...) a stone, signifies properly a callose
concretion, like that of stones; thence Hardness, Insensibilitie,
Inflexibilitie, Immobilitie. It is used metaphorically, Mar. 3.5.
Mar. 3.5. to denote the callose concretion and hardness of heart, by reason
of sin. Whence it is expounded by Suidas, (...), occecation. Thence (...),
(whence (...) is immediately deduced) is by Suidas and Phavorinus interpreted,
(...), to harden, and petrifie, or turn into a stone: by the LXX. (...), to
hebetate, Genesis 27.1. (...), to darken, Deuteronomy. 34.7. (...), to make heavy, 1
Kings 3.2. (...), to exanimate, or dispirit, Ezech. 21.7. (...), to excecate,
Zach. 11.17. Yet according to the proper strict notion, (...) differs from
(...), as Joh. 12 40. By all which it appears, that frequent repeted custom in
sin renders the conscience blind, obdurate, and senseless; Difficulter
reciduntur vitia, quae nobiscum creverunt. Definit esse remedio locus, ubi quae
fuerant vitia mores sunt. Sen.
so that the greatest moral evils are not felt, whereby sin becomes necessary
and immobile. For when once conscience is, by frequent repetition of sins,
cauterised, dispirited and made senseless, it leaves men to the swinge of
their own lusts; whereupon follows a miserable necessity of sin and servitude;
which ends at last in judicial hardness. Neither does this immobilitie and
necessity of sinning diminish, but aggravate the guilt of sin: for this
necessity is contracted by the wills voluntary pursuit after sin: and is it not
just with God to leave men under the power of their lusts, seeing they
electively desire to be under them? The sum of al is this. (1) There is a
natural obduration or hardness of conscience, which is innate and connate with
corrupt Nature. (2) There is an adnate or acquired hardness by custom in sin,
Heb. 3.13. (3) There is a judicial hardness inflicted by God as a punishment,
which seals up sinners from the darkness of mind to the darkness of Hell. Each
of these Hardnesses has a necessary servitude of sin attending of it, though
gradually different. For the second superaddes to the first, as the third to
the second.

3. The servitude of Sin is infinite. The servitude of Sin infinite.
This Hypothesis is frequently inculcated not only in sacred, but also in
Platonic Philosophic. The servitude of sin is infinite, (1) If we regard the
object of sin, as it is a departure from an infinite good. (2) If we consider
the object or matter it turns unto, which is an infinite number of Idols. So
Psalm. 16.4. Their sorrows shall be multiplied, that hasten after another God.
Their sorrows, or according to the Hebrew, their Idols: i.e. They that forsake
the true God, shall multiply to themselves an infinite number of Idol-Gods,
according to their lusts: which indeed is a great piece of servitude; because
every Idol is a great Tyrant. Thus Plato, Rep. 9. says, An avaricious man
(...), whiles he endeavors to heap up an infinite treasure of richesse,
involves himself in infinite evils. (3) This servitude of Sin is infinite in
regard of the Subject, the Soul, its infinite insatiable desire after its
Idols. Hab. 2.5.
Thus sacred Philosophy, Hab. 2.5. Who enlarges his desire as Hell. (...)
amplifiath, extends, even to infinity. (...) his Soul, desire, or lust
(...), as Hell, or rather as the grave, which is never satisfied with dead
carcasses. Thence it follows: and is as death, and cannot be satisfied. This
infinite inextinguible thirst after terrene goods is well illustrated by Plato,
in his Gorg. page 507. And therefore he must take care, lest that giving way to
his lusts, and causing them to wander up and down unpunished, whiles he
endeavors to satisfy them, he bring in (...), an infinite evil, and live a
vagrant, robbers life. Natural desires are finite, but sinful infinite, as
Seneca. (4) The servitude of Sin is infinite, if we consider the nature and
kinds of Sin. Thus Plato, Repub. 5. page 445. I see as it were from a
watchtower, that the face of Virtue is one, (...), but the face of Sin is
multiforme and infinite. Which his Scholar Aristotle well explicates, Eth. l. 2.
c. 5. page 89. Moreover there are many ways to sin: (...), for sin is
interminate and infinite, but good terminate and finite, as the Pythagoreans
hold. This he expounds thus: There is but one way to hit the marque, but
infinite ways to miss it. Thence, says Seneca, Men follow sins without
measure, without end: for indeed they have neither end nor measure. Al moral
good is bounded and measured by God as its last end, and the Law of God as its
rule: but sin knows no bounds either of End or Law. Virtue consistes in number,
weight, and measure; but sin is void of each. This infinitude of sin and its
servitude is set forth to the life in sacred Philosophy; Amos 5.12. For I know
your manifold transgressions and your mighty sins. Here is infinitude both as
to multitude and magnitude. This infinite servitude of Sin is often set forth by
a miserable Amplitude. So Prove. 5.23. And in the amplitude of his folly, or
sin, shall he wander. So Prove. 21.4. Esa. 57.10. Jer. 13.22.

4. The servitude of Sin is most penal and afflictive, The servitude of Sin
most penal.
and therefore most miserable. There were among the ancient Romans servi
poenae, servants only of punishment, such as were condemned to dig in
metallic Mines, or to sight with wild bestes: and such is every slave of sin;
he is obnoxious to the most severe punishments. This we shall explicate in the
following Propositions. (1) Al moral Evil has guilt appendent thereto, as its
immediate effect. Guilt is not a physic accident or mode inherent in the
Sinner; but a moral debt contracted by him: which as to God importes a certain
moral right he has to punish the offender. Whence Guilt is said to be a medium
or middle thing between sin and punishment: for as to its term it belongs to
punishment; but as to the judge, it belongs to sin: yet it more properly
belongs to the sin than punishment; because it does indeed antecede the
punishment, but is inseparably conjoined with the sin. Noxa sequitur caput.
Thence (...) signifies both Guilt and Sin, denoting that guilt does
essentially and inseparably adhere to al moral evil.

(2) Punishment is an evil of passion inflicted for some moral evil action.
Punishment is said to be the necessary debt of sin, and naturally due to the
Sinner, as he stands in relation to divine Justice; Qui malum fecit, malum
ferat.
yet the actual inflicting of this punishment is not absolutely necessary in
regard of divine Justice, but rather the effect of his will: it is most just and
morally necessary that the sin should be punished: but yet it is not unjust for
God to remit or relaxe this punishment, for the greater advance of his glory.
Every Soul that sins deserves punishment, and falls under an essential, natural,
and necessary obligation thereto: and the execution of this punishment is
morally necessary for the vindication of divine Justice: of which more fully,
Chap. 11. Of the Justice of God.

(3) Punishment is either for the correction and emendation of the person
offending, or for the satisfaction of Justice and the person offended: the
former is usually styled (...) or (...), castigation, which Plato makes to be
(...), the medicine of the Soul. So Plato, Gorg. page 478. tells us, That
castigation is the medicine of impiety, etc. Thence Definit. Platon. (...)
castigation is defined, (...), The curation of the Soul from its sin. This
castigatory punishment is well consistent with moral liberty: for it is a good
Maxim among the Civilians, Jure nullus ingenuus fit servus ex supplicio.
Gloss. in Justin. Instit.
That by right no ingenuous man is a servant of punishment: i. e. albeit he may
be punished as a free Citizen, yet he is not as a slave devoted and destined
thereto. But vindictive, judiciary punishment, for the satisfaction of Justice
and the person-offended, always carries servitude with it. Such offenders are
properly poenae servi, according to sacred Philosophy children of wrath, i. e.
sentenced and adjudged to punishment. Hence that Effate among the Civilians: A
Servant, whiles he lives, is, according to the civil Law, reputed as dead.
Whence Slaves were anciently by the Grecians called (...), Rev. 18.13.
Bodies, as Rev. 18.13. because they had no power over their own life, wills, or
persons, but were wholly their Lords. Hence,

(4) Every Sinner under the Dominion of Sin, is, Servus poenae, a Slave
adjudged to the punishment of Sin. Punishment is the usual attendent of
servitude, and the proper effect of sin. Indeed sin and punishment came into
the world together, and all the art of man cannot separate them. Genesis 2.17.
Thus, Genesis 2.17. In dying thou shall die. This reduplication, according to the
Hebrew Idiome, notes the certainty, suddenness, perfection and perpetuity of
this death. The righteous God never intended that any should purchase sin at an
easy rate: he gathers his rods for punishment from the same tree, we planted
by our sin: Sin is the proper soil wherein punishment grows: those that make
bold with Gods Law, must expect that he make bold with their peace and
comforts: Sin is never so swift in flying from God, but divine vengeance is as
swift in persuing of it. Divine wrath, which is the sorest vengeance, lies in
the bowels of every sin: Death is the proper wages of sin. Romans 6.23.
So Romans 6.23. (...) properly signifies that stipend of fish or food, which
they gave to their Soldiers, to eat with their bread. Death is the proper
stipend, which Sin gives to its Soldiers and Slaves to feed on, to preserve
life: it is the reward of al their labors and toil in the ways of sin: it is
their sustenance and food; al they have to keep them alive unto al eternity.
And O! what a miserable life is that, which is maintained by death?

(5) Sin is in it self the greatest punishment, Sin in it self the worst
Jounishment.
because the greatest evil. Sin was the first evil that came into the world,
that which opened the door to al other evils, and conteins in it the spirits,
venime, and malignitie of al evils: therefore there cannot be a more severe
punishment of sin, than to be left to a course of sin. This Plato once and
again takes notice of. Thus in his Gorgias, page 477. (...), The moral evil of
the Soul is of al evils the greatest. This is an universal evil: nothing but
evil is in sin: it is the Spirit and Elixir of al evil: al evil is in sin; and
sin is in all evil. So page 479. Thou accountest unjust men happy if they escape
punishment; but I account them more miserable. And he gives the reason of it,
(...), For not to be punished for sin is the stablissement of Sin. So page 472.
According to my opinion, O Polus, (...), an unjust man is of al most miserable:
yet he is more miserable, who acting unjustly avoids punishment. For what
greater misery or punishment can there be, than to be given up by God to the
swinge of a man's own lusts, without check or rebuke? Are not such punishments,
which seem most silent, most severe and desperate? Albeit men may enjoy
security in their sin for a while, yet is not this the worst part of their
punishment? Does not the righteous God often conveigh his worst curses and
plagues in the sweet wine of temporal prosperity? There is no one blessing
that such a Sinner enjoys, but there is a curse stamped on it. Divine Justice
writes a piece of Hell on al his temporal comforts, as he writes a piece of
Heaven on all the chastisements of the righteous. Thus also Plato, in his Meno,
page 78. (...); For what else is it to be miserable, than to desire evils and
to possess them? And this indeed is a general Dogme with Plato, as in his
Gorgias, That to be punished by a Judge for sin is not the greatest punishment;
but even then when they are involved in their sins, they fall under the most
severe punishment. That sin that is guilt in the commission of it, Maximum
scelerum supplicium est in ipsis. Statim puniuntur cum facta sunt, imo dum
fiunt. Non nascitur ex malo bonum: ad semen nata respondent. Sen. Epist. 87.
is punishment in the power of it: so much pleasure as men take in the
commission of their sin, so much torment they find in the issue. The evil of
punishment is answerable to the evil of doing: He that departs from God
executes on himself his own doom: and the farther he departs from God, the more
he is involved in chains of darkness. O! what an indissoluble connection is
there between sin and punishment? Can any sin be so deliciose in the
commission, as it is bitter in the issue? Is not sin a pregnant mother with
child of misery? Yea, does it not carry Hell in its womb? He that loses his
God by sin, does he not lose comforts, life, yea self and al?

(6) Albeit the servitude of Sin be in it self the greatest punishment, Other
punishments of Sin.
yet there are many other punishments that attend it. [1] Al Sin is attended
with fear and shame. As sin breeds guilt, so guilt breeds fear and shame. So
Plato, Leg. 5. tells us, That he who fills his Soul with sin clothes it with
reproach and shame, as before. 6. Prop. 6. And that Fear always attends sin is
frequently asserted by the ancient Philosophers; who tell us, Tuta scelera esse
possunt, secura non possunt. Sen.
That Fortune may deliver some from punishment, but none from fear: A nocent
person has sometimes the privilege to lie hid, but never any true confidence:
Sins may be safe, but not secure: it is a great portion of security to do no
il. Thence Bion said: (...), That impiety is the worst companion of
confidence. And it was a good observation of Tertullian, That Nature has
clothed al Sin either with fear or shame.

[2] The servitude of Sin is attended with Instabilitie. Plato, in his
Philebus, Imperitis ac rudibus nullus praecipitationis finis est. In Epicureum
illud chaos decidunt inane sine termino. Sen.
page 59. says, That such things as have no firmitude in them, are most
instable. Such is Sin. The firmitude of the Soul consistes in its adherence to
its first Principe and last End. Thence by how much the farther men depart from
God, by so much the more instable they are. He that leans on a thing instable
must needs be instable in all his ways: and what more instable than Sin and
sinful Idols? Whatever the Soul, by inordinate love cleaves unto, it is
overcome by, and suffers changes, as that object lusted after changes. As a
Ship is poised by its ballast, and a Be poiseth its airy body by a gravel; so
the heart is poised by virtue: but corrupt Nature and sinful passions are full
of Levitie and Instabilitie, whereby the heart is kept in suspense, as a Meteor
in the Air, as Luke 12.29. (...). This was Cains curse, and a great part of his
servile punishment, Genesis 4.12, 13.
Genesis 4.12. A fugitive and vagabond shall thou be in the earth: i. e. in an
instable vagrant condition, both as to soul and body: and what follows? v. 13.
And Cain said unto the Lord, My punishment is greater than I can bear. (...) my
punishment, or my sin. O, what an heavy piece of servitude is this to an
awakened conscience, to have a wandering vagrant spirit! Jam. 1.6, 8. This
instabilitie, which attends the servitude of Sin, Hos. 6.2.
is well illustrated, Hos. 6.2. But they al like men have transgressed the
Covenant, Hebr. like Adam: i.e. like vain inconstant man. Adam had no sooner
entered into Covenant with God, but he brake it. Thus al his seed turn after
him.

[3] Another punishment that attends the servitude of Sin is Anxietie and
Torment. Thus Plato, Repub. 9. page 579. speaking of the Soul under the
Tyranny of Sin, he says, (...), It is inflamed with perpetual sparks of
Fears, Angors, and Agitations. So in his Symposium, page 206. he informs us,
That the Soul, when it adheres to sin, is under dolors and torments, and yet
brings forth nothing but wind, Isal. 7.14.
as Psalm. 7.14. He travelleth with iniquity, and has conceived mischief, and
brought forth a lie. It Is spoken of Saul's mischievous yet abortive designs
against David: and it alludes to the pangs and torments of a woman in travel.
(...) signifies hard toilsome miserable labor, such as poor slaves are
tormented with. The LXX. render it (...), which in the Greek Glossary, (found
at the end of Cyril) is rendered dolor. So in the N. T. (...) signifies
vexatious grief and torment, as Rev. 16.10, 11. and 21.4. Hence the Greek word
(...), an evil man received its derivation. For every (...), conceives and
brings forth (...) miserable torments, David's meaning here is, Qui voluptari
tradidere principia -- non ipsi voluptatem, sed ipsos voluptas habet, cujus aut
inopia torquentur, aut copia strangulantur. Sen.
That Saul had been long hatching mischievous designs full of torment and
anxietie; and endeavored by much travel and sore labor, like a woman in travel,
to bring them forth and accomplish them; but he could bring forth nothing but a
mere lie: he was frustrated in all his mischievous contrivements. Note here an
elegant Allegory in these terms, Conceives, travelleth, and brought forth:
which argues the highest vexation, travel, and torment, which Sinners labor
under, in all their mischievous designs, as Jer. 4.31. Wicked men are as much
tormented with the sin they love, as with the fear of the punishment they hate:
al their labor is pain. So Jer. 51.58. and Habak. 2.13. Sinners are said to
labor in the fire, Jer. 51.58.
or for the fire: i. e. (1) In vain, without any profit: as if any one should
weave a thread over the fire, which brings not only loss of labor, but of
materials also. (2) To labor in the fire, notes a dangerous, tedious, toilsome,
servile labor, such as is proper to slaves. What more tedious, irksome, and
fruitless than the drudgerie of sin? Eccles. 10.15.
So Eccles. 10.15. The labor of the foolish wearieth every one of them. As in
Nature, it is not storms without, but vapors within the bowels of the earth,
raised up by subterraneous fires, that cause Earthquakes and Tremblements; so
in the Soul, it is not afflictions from without, but the interne fire of lusts
and sinful vapors that cause torments and tremblement in Conscience. It Is
better to be possessed of the Devil in the body, than of lusts in the heart,
which always breed labor and pain. No Sinner ever attains to what he aims at:
he would be somewhat else than what he is; and these desires breed anxietie and
torment.

[4] The servitude of Sin is of al most penal, in that eternal punishment is
annexed to and entailed thereon. This is the top of al punishment, that Sinners
shall be turned into Hell, with all their sins at their back. Neither was this
kind of punishment altogether hid from Plato: for in his Gorg. page 522. we
find this punishment thus described: (...), For a Soul to descend down to Hell
laden with many sins, is the most extreme of evils. A great Philosopheme for a
Pagan, and that which argues his acquaintance with sacred Philosophy; which
more fully instructes us, that sin is eternally punished in Hell; because it
makes a man eternally willing to sin. The righteous God takes the same course
in punishing sin, as men take in the committing of it: he sees men have an
eternal love for and delight in sin, and therefore they shall have an eternal
punishment for sin: As sinners lay up eternal treasures of sin, so God lays up
eternal treasures of wrath and punishment. In fine, what more just than that
he, who by sin acts eternally against the will of God, should suffer eternal
torments against his own will? And can there be a more penal afflictive
servitude than this?

. 8. Having explicated and demonstrated the servitude that attends Sin, Al men
borne servants of and dead in Sin.
it now only remains to demonstrate that al mankind are borne in this state of
servitude. It Is a Maxim in the Civil Law, Just. Institut. l. 1. tit. 4. That
among Servants there is no difference, so as one should be more a Servant than
another: though among Freemen there are many differences. This holds true in
moral servitude: for among the Ilaves of sin there is no difference as to
state; because al are dead in sin; and death as well moral as natural admits no
degrees: al dead men are equally such without difference. Whence the Civilians
have another great Saying; That a Servant is reputed dead whiles he lives. Such
are all the servants of sin, who are really dead, whiles they seem to live.
Lapsed man is under a miserable, natural, yet voluntary necessity of sinning,
wherefore altogether incapable of erecting himself to a state of virtue, as
before. 7. That al men by nature are dead in sin, is an Hypothesis avouched not
only in sacred, but also in Platonic Philosophy. Thus Plato, in his Gorgias,
page 493. I heard this from the wise men, (...), that we are now dead, and that
our body is the sepulcher of our Soul. By the wise men, I presume, he means
the Barbarians, specially the Egyptians and Hebrews, from whom he received this
Tradition, That men are naturally dead in sin. Thus Clemens Alexandrinus,
Strom. 5. page 419. In the Barbaric Philosophy they call those dead, who have
fallen from their Dogmes, and subjected their minds to lusts. This Pythagoras
expressed by the Symbol of a Coffin, which he placed in the room of any
expelled out of his Schole, thereby to indigitate, that he was dead. Thence
that other Symbol of Pythagoras: Abstain from the dead: i.e. from conversation
with dead sinners, which Symbol Grotius makes to be derived from the Hebraic
Philosophy, according to that of our Lord, Mat. 8.22. Let the dead bury the
dead. Moreover Plato calls the life of men dead in sin, (...), a life without
life. Also he says, That men's Souls are in this life, (...), of a ferine or
brutish nature. Yea, Aristotle, Problem. S. 10. Prob. 45. assures us, That
(...), Nature does althings that are wicked. Among the primitive Christians
nothing more commun than this Hypothesis, That Virtue or Grace could not be
educed out of the potence of corrupt Nature, because al men by nature are dead
in sins. Thus Clemens Alexandr. Strom. 2. proves against the sectators of
Basilides and Valentinus, those forerunners of the Pelagians, That faith is
not, (...), the good effect of freewil, nor yet the prerogative of Nature. But
to explicate and demonstrate, how al men by nature are under this spiritual
death and moral servitude of sin, take the following Propositions.

1. Prop. This Philosopheme, That al men are by Nature dead in sin, is not
hyperbolic, but metaphoric and real. Plato speaking of the moral death of the
Soul, he understands it, in his dark way, according to the mind of sacred
Philosophy, whence he borrowed this as other of the choicest of his
Philosophemes. Now in sacred. Philosophy this moral death of the Soul is not
hyperbolic, but real, albeit metaphorically expressed. Psalm. 5.9. Romans 3.13.
Thus Psalm. 5.9. cited by Paul, Romans 3.13. Their throat is an open sepulcher.
What David ascribes to the throat, Plato, Gorg. 499. attributes to the whole
body, namely, that it is but the sepulcher of the Soul. Whence he makes (...)
to be, by a Paronomasie, derived from (...), a sepulcher, as before. And
Democritus said, That the diseases of the Soul were the greatest: which if men
could open, they should find there, (...), a sepulcher full of evils. David calls
the throat an open sepulcher, because (1) the heart or soul of al by nature
lies morally dead and rotten in the body as in a sepulcher. (2) The Soul lying
dead in this sepulcher continually sends forth loathsome and noisome smells: as
if you draw nigh to an open sepulcher, where dead bodies newly rotten lie
buried, you will soon scent their noisome sumes. (3) Men's mouths and throats are
as it were the mouth of this sepulcher, by which men's dead rotten hearts
breathe forth their loathsome smells. You may scent men's corrupt hearts in their
words, which pass through their throats, those open sepulchers Again, that men
are borne naturally and morally dead in sin is well illustrated, Esa. 1.4. Ah!
Esa. 1.4.
sinful nation! a people laden with iniquity, as with a mountain of lead. But
lest men should conceit, that all this iniquity comes only by custom and
frequence of sinful acts, he adds: a seed of evil doers, or malign sinners.
This notes, that men are borne sinners, a sinful brood; that sin is
hereditarie, and not only by custom. Esa. 57.4.
Thus Esa. 57.4. Children of transgression: i. e. (1) borne in sin, of sinful
parents. (2) Addicted to transgression, given up to it: for according to the
Hebrew Idiome, (...) a child, being used with a Genitive Case of Appellatives,
is taken for such an one as is wholly addicted and devoted to such a thing.
Thence it follows: a seed of falsehood: i. e. a lump or mass of hypocrisy:
wholly composed and made up of iniquity, an adulterous brood. Al sin is in the
heart of man, and the heart of man is in all sin, albeit he be not always
hurried into al acts of sin. Hence Plato mentions, (...) and (...), an innate
and connate evil, or vitiositie of nature, commun to al, as before. 2. of this
Chapter. And Seneca assures us, That corrupt Nature has drunk in such deep
draughts of iniquity, which are so far incorporated with its bowels, as that
you cannot get it out, but by tearing out its very bowels. Hence,

2. Prop. There are no seeds of spiritual life, No seeds of Virtue in corrupt
Nature.
no active power or disposition to what is spiritually good in corrupt Nature.
Thence Cyril Alexandr. terms Virtue or Grace (...), a Prerogative above the
Creation. And Chrysostom, in Genesis 4. (...), a Gift above Nature overcoming
Nature it self. Where there is a spiritual death, there is a total privation,
without the least seed of active power for the production of a virtuose life.
Free Will in corrupt nature is alive to do evil, but dead as to the doing what
is good: it is mighty knowing and potent to do evil, as Jer. 4.22. but every
way ignorant and impotent as to doing what is good: it can find legs to run
away from God, but none to run to him. And if the person be dead, can his acts
or works be alive? May we expect a good thought, or word, or deed from such al
their days, so long as they continue in such a dead state of sin? Is it
possible for a dead corpse to take up its coffin, and grave upon its back, and
thence to arise and walk? And is it not much more impossible for a dead Soul
to dispose it self toward a virtuose life? It is frequently inculcated in
sacred Philosophy, That there are no seeds of spiritual life in corrupt
nature. A human power is not sufficient to produce an act more than human. The
divine life and motion toward God must proceed from God. Man's sin and misery
come from his own free will, but al Virtue and Beatitude from free Grace: he
that is not acted by divine Grace, is necessarily acted by carnal lust: corrupt
nature is not only emty of, but contrary to al good; and therefore al works
done by it are dead works; because they proceed from a dead nature, and tend
to death: wherefore true moral Virtue cannot be extracted out of the power of
Nature. Thus Cyril Alexandr. lib. 1. in Esa. (...), It Is proper to human Nature
in no wise to receive any heavenly gifts of Grace out of its own nature, but to
enrich it self with the gifts of God above Nature. This Hypothesis, albeit the
Stoics and Aristoteleans contradict it, is evidently deducible from Socrates
and Plato's Philosophy. Thus Plato, Meno, page 99. (...), Virtue comes not by
Nature, neither from the Institutes of Learning, but by divine Afflation or
Inspiration, without the concurse of the human mind, in those in whom it is
produced. It Is true, the Stoics held, (...), That Virtue might be taught;
because there were sparks or seeds thereof in human Nature, which might be
drawn forth by good institution: but this Socrates greatly opposed, as that
which was inconsistent with the depraved state of the Soul, and divine concurse
for the production of Virtue. And sacred Philosophy is most positive in this,
that there are no seeds of spiritual life or virtue in man. Psalm. 5.9.
Thus Psalm. ^.9. Their inward part: or the most sublime, refined, intimate part
of the Soul, is very wickedness, (...), wickednesses, pravities. The Plural
for the Singular, and abstract for the concrete; which denotes (1) an
Universality both of the predicate and subject: that al their inward parts
were full of sin, and that al sin was in their inward parts. (2) The perfection
of Sin. For abstracts, specially in the Plural Number, speak Essences and
Spirits. The Elixir and Spirits of Sin are in the inwards of corrupt Nature,
Hence,

3. Prop. The inclination of corrupt Nature to evil, Natural impotence to what
is good.
and its impotence as to what is good is universal and total. This naturally
follows from what precedes: for if the Soul be morally dead in sin, without any
seeds of spiritual life, or moral virtue, then it follows, that its impotence
to good is total: for as in naturals death is a total privation of life; there
is not the least seed for the reduction of the life lost; so in morals, such as
are dead in sin, are under an universal privation of spiritual life, and total
impotence to what is spiritually good. This Hypothesis may be demonstrated, (1)
From the universal ignorance of the natural mind. Plato discourses accurately
of this Theme, as we have in what precedes. 3. mentioned; but more fully,
Philos. Genesis P. 1. l. 3. c. 3. sect. 4.. 5. Yea so great and soverain is the
natural ignorance of the mind, that those very commun notions of knowledge loged
therein are not to be estimed, as some call them, the fragments of the Image of
God, but rather effects of divine Bounty vouchsafed his lapsed Creature upon
the Intercession of the Mediator, who illuminates every man that comes into the
world, as Joh. 1.9. That al true knowledge of things divine is the effect of
divine illumination has been generally confessed by Platonists as well as Divines.
Thence Clemens Alexandr. calls Faith, (...), a supernatural contemplation. So
Chrysostom calls divine Grace, (...), that which instructes and illustrates the
mind; Grace from above, not from human Nature. (2) From the formal Idea and
nature of moral or spiritual good; which consistes in a conformity to the
moral Law, and that not only as to its matter, but also as to its end and
manner: now it is impossible for corrupt nature by its own power to reach a
supernatural end, or conform to the moral Law. (3) From the disproportion and
incapacitie of the subject. The natural power of the Will, as now vitiated, has
no connatural capacity, next power, or formal capacity, for the production of
what is spiritually good. Alas! what proportion is there between a carnal mind
and spiritual objects? And can an object be received into the mind, unless
there be some proportion? Is not every thing received according to the nature
and disposition of the recipient? Can then a carnal mind have any other than
carnal notions of things spiritual; as a spiritual mind has spiritual notions
of things carnal? See 1 Cor. 2.14. Joh. 6.44. and 8.43. and 12.39, 40. So also
for the corrupt will, it cannot possibly have any connatural virtue, next power
or formal capacity for the production of any virtuose Act. Is it possible,
that a natural power should have any causal connection with or connaturalitie
unto a supernatural act or effect? (4) Should we suppose corrupt Nature to have
any moral power for the production of Virtue, would not this subvert the whole
Oeconomie and Dispensation of efficacious Grace? For [1] Thence the whole
efficace of Grace would be measured and specificated according to the
complexion of Free Will, and so variated according to its diversity. [2] Whence
also the last differential reason whereby Grace is differenced from Nature must
be resolved into Nature. [3] Natural Free Will would, from this Hypothesis, be
of it self and nextly flexible to spiritual good; and so Virtue not the gift of
God. Aristotle himself, who was a good Friend to corrupt Nature, confesses, al
good to be (...), the gift of God. (5) From sacred Philosophy. Jer. 13.33.
Thus Jer. 13.23. Can the Ethiopian change his skin? etc. Consider [1] That
this is a proverbial speech, touching the vain attemts of such as endeavor to
bring about things impossible. Hence that commun Proverb, To wash a Black-moor,
relating to such as attemt things impossible. [2] The manner of expressing it
is very emphatic: for such rhetoric interrogations carry in them more vehement
logic negations. Then he adds: or the Leopard his spots? Then may ye also do
good, who are accustomed to do evil. And that this impotence is total and
universal, on al mankind, is evident from that other Proverb, Ezech. 16.44. As
is the mother such is the daughter, Ezech. 16.44.
i. e. This contagion runs in the blood, it is an hereditary disease, commun to
al mankind. Hence sinners are said to be borne in sin, Psalm. 51.5. and to be in
sin, Exodus 32.22. 1 John 5.19. The whole world is said to be in sin, i. e.
immersed and plunged thereinto. What this impotence to sin is, and how far
natural, we have explicated Philos. Genesis P. 1. l. 3. c. 3. sect. 5.. 1.

4. Prop. Man under the servitude of Sin cannot dispose or prepare himself for
the reception of Virtue. Thus Greg. Nyss. or de Scopo Christ. Man cannot
prepare himself for Virtue.
(...), The force of human virtue is not of it self sufficient to elevate Souls
void of Grace to a form of divine life, unless God build the house, etc. That
there can be no disposition, though never so remote, unto true moral Virtue
from the alone faculty of Nature, is evident; because nothing can dispose it
self to a condition above its nature, by its own force, unless it be
influenced by a superior Agent. A man in the state of corrupt nature cannot by all his own forces natural or moral (1) overcome any one tentation: or (2)
mortify any one lust: or (3) attain any one good thought, inclination, or
desire: or (4) remove the Remora, or bar in his heart against conversion: or
(5) by doing what in him lies lay any obligation on God to give grace. I know
it is a Position maintained by some, That such as improve their natural
abilities to their utmost power, shall thereby obtain supernatural Grace. But
for answer hereto [1] It Is certain, that none ever did or will improve to the
utmost their natural abilities. [2] Or if men should improve their natural
forces to the utmost, what obligation is there on God to give to such
supernatural Grace? Is God obliged by any law or promise to give grace upon the
performance of such an act or condition which is in it self sinful, and has
nothing of true moral virtue in it? And have we not already sufficiently
proved, that there can be no true moral virtue but by supernatural Grace? That
there is no law or obligation on God to give supernatural Grace to natural
emprovements is well demonstrated by Bradwardine, de Cause. Dei, l. 1. c. 37.
page 316. Yea does it not implie a contradiction in the Adject, that man should
make a right use of his natural abilities, or prepare himself for the reception
of supernatural Grace? Is it not also a sacrilegious Hypothesis to suppose,
that God should fetch the commun rule of his giving or not giving grace from
man's dignity or indignity? Corrupt nature wants not only an active power to
do good, but also an immediate passive power to receive good: thence it cannot
dispose it self to virtue, which is above its natural capacity. Is not al true
virtue above the whole sphere of corrupt nature? The Greek Fathers, such as
were more orthodoxe, acknowleged, That the preparation to Grace was from Grace:
whence it was by them termed (...), the direction of the way: also (...), the
preparation of the will: likewise, (...), the attraction of God. That man cannot
either de condigno or de congruo merit the first grace, is generally asserted
by the sober Schole-men, as Bradwardine de Causa Dei, l. 1. c. 39. and Greg.
Ariminensis, Sent. 2. Did. 26. Quaest. 1. Thence the Dominicans in the Council
of Trent, ( Hist. Counc. Trent, page 209.) denied, That the works preceding
vocation are truly preparatorie, and ever gave the first place to God. And
Alvarez, Auxil. Disp. 36. Can. 1. demonstrates, that God never established any
Law for the giving grace to such who should improve to the utmost their natural
power. But none has more fully improved this Hypothesis, than Jansenius,
August. Tom. 3. l. 1. c. 5. where he proves, that men's actions in their natural
state merit damnation; and therefore they cannot thereby merit grace. And
sacred Philosophic informs us, Jer. 17.9.
Jer. 17.9. The heart is above althings fraudulent. (...) signifies to supplant
and undermine, whence the word here signifies perverse, full of wiles, fraud,
guile. Thence it follows: and desperately wicked: (...), desperately sick,
diseased, incurable, wicked. And if so, then how impossible is it, that it
should prepare or dispose it self for the reception of virtue? See this more
fully demonstrated, Philos. Genesis P. 1. l. 3. c. 3. sect. 5.. 1. Hence,

5. Prop. Free Will in lapsed corrupt Nature has no moral active power or
faculty flexible to any spiritual or truly moral good. In corrupt Nature no
Free Will to moral Good.
This Proposition is but the result of the former, and may be demonstrated from
these following Heads. The Assertion of such a moral Free Will in lapsed Nature
does (1) raise up the human corrupt Will to the condition of God, and is the
Nurse of al Sin. It feeds men's pride and affectation of a Deity, vain-glorie,
carnal confidence, security, Atheism, unbelief, ingratitude. It also cuts the
nerves of al divine consolation and peace of conscience. (2) It pulls down God
from his Throne of Grace, and reduces him to the condition of a Creature. [1]
It strikes at the very Being of God, making him to be dependent on, and moved
by the human Will. [2] It subvertes all the divine Attributes; the Simplicity,
Immutabilitie, Infinitude, Omnipotence, Science, Goodness, Will, and all the
Decrees of God. [3] It strikes at the Dominion of God over his rational
Creatures, and ties him up by Laws and Rules of Justice dependent on the merits
of his Creatures. [4] It cuts off Gods Providence and Gubernation over the
human Will, making it to be independent as to Gods Concurse. [5] It abandons and
banisheth out of the world al supernatural efficacious Grace: admitting no
Grace but what will stoop and submit to the dominion of the human Will, and its
soverain Empire. [6] It is blasphemously injuriose to Christ, and al his
mediatorie Offices. It subvertes his Priestly Office, by laying a foundation
for human Merits, etc. It strikes at his Prophetic Office, by denying a
necessity of divine Revelation and Illumination, in order to Salvation. It
undermines his Imporial Throne as King, by denying him any Jurisdiction over
the human Will. It dispirits his special Love to the Elect, by attributing to
him universal grace and love to al, even Reprobates. [7] It takes away the
office of the Spirit of Grace. [8] It enervates the whole Covenant of Grace, by
reducing the whole of man's Salvation to a Covenant of Works. Yea [9] whiles it
seems to exalt the Law of God, it does really take away the use thereof as a
rule of life. These and many other are the injuries which this Free Will offers
to God and man. (3) Sacred Philosophy is positive and express in denying
corrupt Nature any Free Will to what is morally good. Joh. 1.13.
So Joh. 1.13. Not of blood, i. e. by natural generation. Nor of the will of the
flesh: i. e. Free Will in corrupt Nature, which is frequently in the Scriptures
termed flesh by reason of its impotence and infirmity. So Joh. 3.6. Whatever
is borne of the flesh, i. e. of corrupt Nature, or Free Will in its highest
elevation and refinement, as adorned with the most raised commun illuminations
and graces, as Esa. 40.6. Nor of the wi of man: i. e. the best of men or
Ministers, as Gods Ambassadors. But of God: i. e. by his gloriose efficacious
power. So 2 Pet. 1.3. (...), 2 Pet. 1.3.
by glory and virtue: i. e. by his gloriose virtue or power. For (...) Virtue
in God is (...), his divine power, as Hesychius. So it is used by the LXX. Hab.
3.3. Zech. 6.17 where it answers to (...), which signifies Glory, Power, or
gloriose Power. And indeed it seems to be the grand design of sacred
Philosophy to divest corrupt Nature and Free Will of al pretense to what is
morally or spiritually good. Can a vitiated corrupt Will be supposed to have any
natural connection with, or Virtue formally effective of a divine life? Is it
possible that the new Creature should be borne of the will of the flesh, which
is potent and good for nothing but sin? And must indeed the divine Will be
subordinate to man's Free Will in the dispensation of grace? Is it not more
becoming the human Will to be subordinate to the divine? Must we take the
adequate reason of Gods dispensing grace from the emprovement of Nature? Is not
the gift of Grace a participation of the divine Nature? Must it not then excede
the whole sphere of create Nature? Is it not strange Theology, to reduce the
discrimination of good and evil men to the contingence of man's ambulatorie
corrupt Free Will? May we not justly apply Augustins complaint against Cicero
to such Divines, who, to make men free, make him also sacrilegious, and a
robber of God? In sum, we deny not, but that the Will is naturally free as to
its physic act, but we deny that it is morally free as to the mode or manner
of acting well. Thus we see how this Pelagian Philosopheme does elevate the
Creature to the condition of God, and pulls down God to the condition of a
Creature. Thence Cyril, These. assert. 32. to 5. page 268. (...), For we deny,
that there is one natural operation of God and the Creature: that we may not
elevate that which is create to the divine Essence; nor, on the contrary,
depresse the excellence of the divine Essence to a place agreeable to Creatures.
Wherein he sums up the grand design of the Pelagians then newly started up.
Clemens Alexandr. Strom. l. 2. and 5. is very invective against the fectators
of Basilides and Valentinus; because they head, (...), that Faith is natural: i.
e. educible out of the potence of corrupt Nature. Which Hypothesis all the
Assertors of moral Free Will are sond of. Theodoritus, in Psalm. 118.32. says
peremtorily: (...), Neither can human Nature rightly perform virtue without
divine aid. It Is a great Effate of Basil, in his Homily of Humility, where
explicating that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 4.7. And what have thou that thou did
not receive? 1 Cor. 4.7.
etc. he thus philosophiseth: (...), etc. Here all the sublimitie of pride falls
to the ground: there is nothing left thee, O man, as matter of arrogance. Tell
me, why do thou lift up thy self, in reference to thine own good works;
whenas thou ought rather to render thanks to the Donor of them? For what
have thou, which thou have not received? And if thou have received any thing,
why do thou glory, as if thou receivedst it not? Thou have not known God by
thine own justice, but God has known thee by his own benignity. Thence he
adds: It is the greatest stupiditie not to understand a man is partaker of
grace, but to arrogate to his own Virtue what belongs to Grace.

CHAP. V. Of Plato's Polity, its essential Constitution, and Administration.
Politic Philosophy what. Polity its Form in Order: its Object, the
Community: its first Founder, God. Man's inclination to Society. The
Constitution of a Politic Body from Consociation; which is formalised by some
Law. Politic Amity and Fraternity, founded in Religion. The Ends of Polity,
(1) Gods Glory. (2) Virtue. (3) Public Good. (4) Mutual Assistance. A Politic
Body or City what. Legislation, its Origin. Laws their Necessity and
Origin. The Qualifications of Legislators Laws from the multitude: for public
Good: their principal end Virtue. Their Qualities: the Law of Equity. Politic
Government, Monarchic, Aristocratic, Democratic, or mixed. Moderate Empire
best. Tyrannic Empire, its Origin, etc. Civil Magistrates, their End. Their
Qualifications, (1) Wisdom, (2) virtue, (3) Public Spirits. Their Education.
Their Authority and Office as Conservators of the Law. The Exercice of their
Office, with Justice, Temperance, Moderation and Clemence. Things destructive
to Polity; Atheism, Luxury, Divisions, Injustice.

. 1. MOral Philosophy regards persons either in their single Capacities,
Politic Philosophy.
or as conjunct in Societies: the former which they style Ethic, we have
dispatched, and therefore pass on to philosophise, though more cursorily, of
the later. A Society, called by the Grecians (...), a Community, or
Communion, is either of a single Family, or of many Families incorporated:
Moral Philosophy, as it regards a single Family, is termed Oeconomie; as many
Families incorporated, Politic. The former is but a species of the later, and
may be deservedly included therein; and therefore Plato has not philosophised
distinctly thereof. But of the later, namely Politic, he philosophiseth most
copiosely and accurately, in his Menexenus, Politicus, Minos, Epinomis, X.
Books of Republic, and XII. Books of Laws. That Plato traduced the chief Ideas
of his Politic Philosophemes from Mosaic Politics, either immediately or
mediately, is generally asserted by the Learned both ancient and modern. Thus
Clemens Alexandr. Strom. 1. page 256, 257. and Admon. ad Gentes. Eusebius,
praepar. Evang. l. 12. c. 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 47, 48. Of which see Court
Gent. P. 1. B. 3. C. 9.. 6. and Philos. Genesis P. 1. l. 3. c. 3. sect. 6.. 6.

(...), Polity, according to the Platonic Definition, Polity its form in
Order.
page 4.13. is (...), A lawful or regular communion of a multitude sufficient
to Beatitude. In which Description we have the formal Constitution, Object, and
End of Polity. 1. Its formal constitution, which consistes in a lawful regular
Communion, or Order. Thus Aristotle, Polit. 3.1. (...), Polity is the Order of
the City. That Order is the Form, Spirit, and Life of al Polity is generally
asserted by Politicians, and Philosophers. Thus Plato, Repub. 4. page 433.
philosophising of the (...) or good Order of a Republic under the notion of
Universal Justice, he makes it to consist in (...), the regular consent of
Governors and Governed, so that every one keeps his proper place and station,
(...), that every one acts his own part, and intermeddles not with what is
aliene. This is the (...), good Order, which gives life and form to al
Polity, that there be (...), a mutual consent between Magistrates and people,
to walk and act according to that commun Law or Rule they are under. Thus also
page 443. he makes Justice to be the (...), Eutaxie of moderate Empire, i. e.
(...), the natural constitution of Governors and Governed: when each
understands and acts his proper parts. This (...) good Order, he makes to be,
page 444. (...) the Virtue, (...) the Preservation, (...) the Health, (...) the
good Habitude, and (...) the Pulchritude or Beauty of a Republic. Whereas, on
the contrary, Disorder, (...) and (...), when men keep not their stations, but
invade the offices or places of others, he makes to be that which brings (...),
a Disease, Turpitude, Infirmity, Vitiositie, and Anarchie, or Confusion to a
Republic. Thus page 434. (...), Therefore seeing there are these three distinct
orders of men in a City, a curiosity in meddling with the Office of another,
and mutual Permutation or Invasion of each others place, is that which without
al dout brings the greatest damage to a City, and therefore may be rightly
termed its peste. This Invasion of each others place he makes to be (...), a
certain sedition, as also (...), the Insurrection and Ataxie or want of good
order in the City. Plato tells us also, That the best and most perfect (...)
Polity consistes (...), in a well agreeing temperament or harmony of al parts,
so that every member keeps its station. This also, Repub. 2. page 372. he makes
to be the Universal Justice of a Republic, that althings be acted (...),
according to right Order. The force of which order diffuseth it self throughout
al parts, and is in a special manner visible in the distinct Administrations
and Subordinations of (...), Rulers and Ruled: which have each their proper
offices and works. Thence, in his Repub. 4. he makes the Justice of a City to
consiste in this, That every one (...) do what belongs to him; and thence
(...), what is convenient: So that albeit there are diverse Ranks of men, yet
they al, by virtue of this universal Justice, conspire to make up one (...),
Symmetrie or exact proportion and good order, which gives form and perfection
to every Society. Thence that of Nazianzen, (...), Order is the Mother of
Beings, as also their security. This good Order, Definit. Plat. page 413. is
thus defined: (...), Order is a similitude of office and action in all persons
and things that relate each to the other: or, more concisely and distinctly,
(...), a proportion of Society or Communion: i. e. when every person and thing
keeps its proper place and station. The seeds of this Order are diffused
throughout al parts of human Polities, and are the main Foundation of al
Society and Communion: For where things are not bounded by Order, there
infinite confusions disturb Societies. Thence Augustine, de Civit. Dei, l. 13.
c. 13. defines Order the Disposition of things equal and inequal, giving to
every thing its proper place. And herein he makes the Health both of Soul and
Body to consiste: yea indeed the Conservation, Beauty, Perfection, Vigor, and
Activitie of al Bodies, both natural and artificial, Military, Politic, and
Ecclesiastic, seem chiefly to consiste in their right Order. Thence Job 10.22.
the confusion of the grave or state of the dead is lively illustrated by this,
that it is a land of darkness without any order: i. e. where there is no
orderly succession of day and night; or no order among men. Plato
philosophiseth accurately of the great Advantages which althings acquire by
Order. So in his Gorgias, page 503. If we consult Painters, and Builders, and
al other Artificers, (...), how each of them dispose their work distinctly in
the best order, and compel althings to agree each to other, til their whole
work be constituted and composed in order, and with ornament. Thence he adds,
page 504. That Order is that which gives Beauty, Form, and Perfection to al
Bodies: of which see more in what follows,. 5. Again he says, page 506. The
virtue of every thing, both of an instrument, and of body, and mind, and
lastly of every thing animate is not rashly and confusedly acquired, (...), but
by Order and Rectitude, etc. Whence he concludes: (...), That therefore which
is constituted and conformed by Order, is the virtue of every thing. And thence
he subjoins: That Order or ornament which is proper and peculiar to every
thing, brings good to althings. By all this it appears, that the Life, Beauty,
Wel-being, and Perfection of any Society consistes in its Order. And the
reason is evident; because al Polities and politic Bodies, whether Civil or
Ecclesiastic, are not composed of homogeneous similar parts, al of like name
and nature with themselves and the whole, but of dissimilar, such as consiste
of diverse Members, of distinct Offices, Forms, Situations, Places: as the
human body is composed of diverse members, which have al their proper
situation, office, etc. So in politic Bodies there is variety of Members,
which are al to keep their station, and legitime subordination, without
invading each others place or function. Whence Plato places Civil Justice in
this, (...), not to invade the affairs of others; but to perform each his own
work. And as Order gives Form, Beauty, Vigor, and Perfection to Military,
Natural, Artificial and Civil Bodies, so also to Ecclesiastic. Thence the
Apostle says, Col. 2.5. it was a great joy to him, Col. 2.5.
to behold their order. (...) primarily notes military Order, which of al
Orders seems most beautiful and exquisite. Whence the Church, in regard of her
incomparable admirable Order, is said to be, Cant. 6.10.
Cant. 6.10. Terrible as an Army with Banners. What more terrible to an
enemy, and admirable to friends, than to see an Army on the March,
wel-disciplinated, with Banners flying, and every part moving orderly?

. 2. The formal Reason of Polity being dispatched, The object of Polity.
we now pass on to its Object, which in the Platonic Definition is brought in
under the notion of (...), the Multitude or Community, not simply considered,
but as consociated or conjoined by some commun ligament and bond. For in as
much as no man can politically rule himself, nor yet one another properly,
therefore Polity requires a multitude united together, which Community is
termed a City or Republic. And indeed man is borne for Society, as his
Speech, and Affections do sufficiently indigitate: wherefore al persons
naturally incline to consociation, either Domestic or Politic. Domestic
Consociation is either the first community and unity of man and woman, Genesis
2.23, 24.
instituted by the Law of Creation, Genesis 2.23, 24. or of parents and children;
or of the whole Family. Politic Consociation is of many Families in one City,
or of many Cities in one Republic. And for the more full and distinct
explication of the whole we are to inquire into the original Foundation,
Causes, and Effects of politic Consociation and Community.

1. God the Founder of al Politics.
The original prime Founder of al politic Society is God. Thence Plato, Leg.
4. tells us, That every Republic rightly constituted dependes, not on human
Comments, but on Divine Constitution or Laws: whence he says, (...), Therefore
in order to the right constitution of a City let us first call upon God, that
he being present would favor our desires, and adorn our City with good Laws.
Whence Politic. page 290. he says, That among the Egyptians the King was a
Priest, to show that he ought to consult God in all his Administrations. Thence
al your great Legislators and Founders of Cities, when they were about to lay
the foundation of their politic Societies, consulted, in appearance at least,
some divine Oracle, as that without which they expected no happy issue of their
undertakements. Thus Numa pretended, that he had his Laws for the Roman
Government from the Nymphe Egeria, in the Arecine Grove; and Zaleucus, his for
the Locrian Constitution, from Minerva; and Lycurgus, his for the Lacedemonian
Republic, from Apollo at Delphos; and Minos, his for the Cretians, from Jupiter
in the Cretensian Den. And that Plato did really traduce the best of his
politic Constitutions from the divine Constitutions delivered by Moses, we have
more largely proved, Court Gent. P. 1. B. 3. C. 9.. 6.

2. Man's inclination to Society.
God has implanted in Mankind a natural Inclination to Society. Thus Plato,
in his Politicus, page 261. (...), But we shall not find that a Politician does
concern himself about one single thing only, as he that drives an ox, or
dresseth an horse: but he is rather like such as provide for a number of horses
or bullocks. Whereby he illustrates how Politics regard not single persons, but
men in Society and Community. Whence in what follows, he calls this politic
Science, (...), the Nutrition of an Herd, or the commun Nutrition: i. e. as he
explicates his own mind, (...), the commun Nutrition, or Gubernation of many.
He makes politic Philosophy to be (...), namely as it concerns a Community
or Company of men, who are of al other living Creatures most (...), inclinable
to flock together as Herds. For as God has given Man the benefit of Reason and
Speech, the principal Organs of Society; so he has also given him natural
inclinations and affections of and for Consociation. And that which renders
these natural inclinations more efficacious and forcible, is the indigent
necessitous condition of man in this his lapsed condition, which calls for the
Advice, Conduct, Assistance, and Relief of Society, as hereafter, when we come
to the Ends of Polity.

3. Albeit man has a natural inclination to Society, Consociation constitutes
a politic Body.
yet that which formaliseth and constitutes any politic Body is Confederation
and Consociation. For a politic Body being an aggregate collected out of many
individuals, cannot acquire any real union but by Confederation. Thus Plato,
Repub. 4. page 433. makes (...), The consent of Governors and Governed to be
the formal bond of al politic Societies. This consent or confederation is
either in a way of Subordination between the Governors and Governed, or in a
way of Coordination between the Governed themselves. That Confederation is
essential to al politic Society is evident from the very nature of Order,
which gives form to al Polity. What is Order but the union of the things
ordered? And what union can there be between variety of persons, but by mutual
consent? The Order, Beauty, Vigor, Force, Consistence, flourishing, and
perfection of althings both Natural, Artificial, Moral and Politic consiste in
their Unity: Division ever brings with it Dissolution and Confusion: every
natural body hangs together by some ligament or commun bond of Union; so in
like manner al politic Bodies. Now what bond of union can there be in a politic
Body but Confederation? Plato, Repub. 4. assures us, That the best Term or
Boundarie of any City is its Unity: and what more conduces to the Unity of
a City than Consociation by mutual consent? This may be also argued from the
very nature and Idea of a City; which is defined by Grotius, de Jur. Belli and
Pacis, page 6. A perfect Company of Freemen consociated for commun utilitie,
and enjoying the same Right. So that Confederation is by all made essential to a
politic Body, whether Civil or Ecclesiastic.

4. Confederation by some Law.
The Confederation and Consociation of every politic Body must be bounded and
regulated by some commun Law. There can be no politic Society without consent
unto some certain Bond of Consociation: which Bond is that commun Law, whereby
the Order of that Society is bounded and regulated. Thus Plato, in his
Politicus tells us, That in all politic Community and Society, for the
preventing Tyranny and Anarchie, there must be Laws agreed on, according to
which Magistrates must rule and people obey. Thus also, Leg. 3. he says, That
man being by nature, (...), sociable and communicative, he cannot want
society: neither can human society want a Law: which Law gives bounds and
measures to al Orders, whereby the excesses of the more patent are restrained,
and the defects of the more infirm relieved. The like in his Protagoras, page
326. where he tells us, That a wel-governed Republic is bounded by the formule
of certain Laws, which prescribe the Offices both of Rulers and Ruled, and
compel each to live accordingly. This is also well expressed by Hooker in his
Ecclesiastic Polity, page 25. Two foundations there are which bear up public
Societies; the one a natural Inclination, whereby al men desire sociable life
and fellowship; the other an Order, expressly or secretly agreed upon,
touching the manner of their union in living together. The later is that which
we call the Law of a Commun-wealth, the very Soul of a politic Body, the parts
whereof are by Law animated, held together, and set on work in such actions as
the commun good requires. Thus much touching the necessity of some commun Law
as the bond of Confederation: but as for the Origin, Nature, and Effects of
politic Laws, we are to treat thereof under politic Legislation,. 5.

5. Amity and Fraternity.
Perfect Polity requires not only Confederation, but also intime Amity and
Fraternity. Plato, Repub. 3. page 415. gives us a Phenician Fable, touching
the original Fraternity of al men, which he makes to be the foundation of
Polities: (...), etc. Ye are indeed al, who converse together in the City,
Brethren; but seeing God has made those of you, who are fit to rule, as Gold,
and those who are to assist them, as Silver; the Ruled are but as Iron and
Brass. Two things are here laid down, (1) That all the Members of a politic
Society are (...), borne out of the Earth, that commun Mother, and therefore a
Fraternity. (2) Yet so as that this Fraternity may not destroy the distinct
Orders of (...), Governors and Governed. This Amity and Fraternity is
sometimes termed Familiarity, which Definit. Plat. is thus described: (...),
Familiarity is a Communion or Society of the same kind. Sometimes it is
styled Fellowship, which is thus defined: (...), Fellowship is an Amity
according to the same custom of life. According to the Civil Law, a Society
is defined, a right of Fraternity. Societas est jus fraternitatis.
Thence Bacon, in the Life of Henry VII. tells us, (what we al know by
experience) That Colleges and Societies of Merchants and Artificers, according
to the English mode, are called Fraternities. So the Pythagoreans called, in
imitation of the Essenes, their Society (...), a Fraternity. Plato carried
this Amity and Fraternity so far as to take away al distinction of meum and
tuum, and to reduce al to a community of Goods. So Repub. 5. page 462. (...),
These words Mine and not Mine are not used in the City. And page 464. he gives
the reason of this community of althings: (...), There are no contentions or
Lawsuits each with other, because none shall have any thing proper to himself,
but his own person: althings else are commun to al. This community of
althings, if well bounded, and not abused, may be of great use in some cases; as
in the primitive Churches it was a great effect of that Fraternity and Amity
which was among them, as Act. 2.44, 45, 46. Thence Plato, Repub. 5. page 463.
Act. 2.44, 46.
(...), He estimes and calls his familiar friend as himself. We find this
Fraternity and Community established to an high degree by Lycurgus in the
Spartan Republic, as Plutarch in the Life of Lycurgus, page 49, etc. relates:
Lycurgus persuaded the Spartans to make a new division of their Lands equally
among themselves; to live from thenceforth as Brethren together, so that none
should seek to go before each other, save in virtue only: thinking there should
be no difference or inequality among inhabitants of one City, but the
reproaches of dishonestie and praise of virtue -- Further he made another Law
for eating and drinking, and against Festes and Banquets. First he commanded
them to eat together al of one meat, and chiefly of those he had permitted by
his Ordinance. In these commun Repastes, which the Cretians called Andria, and
the Lacedaemonians Philitia; either because they were places wherein they
learned to live soberly, from Phido, to save or spare; or else because their
amity and friendship grew there one toward another, as if they would have
called them Philitia Love-festes, by changing d into l. And Plato, Leg. 11.
page 915. makes mention of such a kind of Love-feste in use among the Grecians.
His words are: (...), etc. In that kind of Feste, which is made up of Symbols
or Collations, and called (...), and celebrated among friends, etc. This (...)
or Love-feste was for the preservation of love and amity among those of the
same Society; which was in use also among the Jews, as it appears by their
Feste after the Passover; whence the Grecians seem to have borrowed their
custom, as the Christians their Love-festes, mentioned Jude 12. Jude 12.
See more of the nature of this Friendship, Philos. Genesis P. 1. l. 3. c. 3.
sect. 6.. 1, etc.

6. Religion the principal foundation of Polities.
The principal Foundation and Ligament of al politic Fraternity and Society
is Religion. Thus Plato, Leg. 4. page 713. (...), But it behoved, if the City
be designed by this name, that it be called by the name of God himself, who is
the true Lord of wise men. His mind is, that a City ought to be composed of
wise virtuose men, who have God for their Lord, and therefore may be called the
City of God. Whence he adds: (...), etc. Namely this Discourse reteining the
vestigia of the primigenous Truth teaches, that there will be no cessation of
evils and troubles in those Cities, whatsoever they be, in which not God, but
some mere mortal rules: but it commands, that, with all possible endeavors we
imitate that life, which was under Saturn, i. e. in the golden Age of the
state of Innocence, in which Religion and Virtue flourished. Thence in his
Politicus, page 290. Plato acquaints us, (...), etc. That among the Egyptians
it is not lawful for a King to rule without a Priesthood: yea if any one out of
the Royal line should by violence usurp the Empire, he is forced to be
initiated in Sacreds. Moreover in many Cities of Greece, and specially among you
[Athenians] thou shall find the chief Sacreds to be instituted by the supreme
Magistrates. For among you they say, that the most august Sacreds and most
ancient Rites of Religion are committed to the charge of the King created. By
which he shows how much the supreme Magistrate, both among the Egyptians and
Grecians, was concerned for the conservation of Religion. Thence Campanella,
Pol. cap. 8. page 156. says, That the Priesthood acts Gods part in an Empire:
therefore there never was any Republic or Society of men, nor yet can be
without a Priesthood. So essential is Religion to politic Societies. How much
the Civil Magistrate is to concern himself for the conservation of Religion is
evident from the promise and practice of David, Psalm. 75.2, 3.
Psalm. 75.2. When I shall receive the congregation, I will judge uprightly. David
promises in these words, that when he should obtain the full gubernation of the
Kingdom, he would administer it with justice, and settle Religion, which was
then miserably dissolved. So it follows v. 3. The earth and all the inhabitants
thereof are dissolved: I bear up the pillars of it. By the Earth he means the
Judaic Kingdom, which was grown very dissolute: but, says he, I do or [by an
Enallage of Tenses] I will bear up, or confirm, the pillars thereof. Some by
pillars understand just and religiose Magistrates: others, Religion and
Justice, which are the primarie pillars of a Nation, and these David promises
to confirm, when King. That Religion is the principal Pillar of any State
Plato more expressly inculcates, Repub. 4. page 424. where he premits this as
a preliminary proposition: (...), For a Republic, if it be once well begun, does
always increase as a circle. Whereby he shows, that the perfection of a
Republic dependes greatly on a good beginning. Thence he procedes to show, That
the best beginning and perfection of a Republic consistes in Religion, which he
symbolically expresses under the notion of Music: (...), Therefore the
Fortress, as it seems, in which the Office of the Keepers is constituted,
consistes in Music. And the prevarication hereof does secretly steal into and
influence men's minds. (1) By the Keepers he understands the Magistrates, whom
he makes to be Conservators of the Laws. (2) He says, the Fortress and strong
Tower of these Conservators of the Laws consistes in the Discipline of Music.
That by the Discipline of Music must be understood Religion, is evident by the
coherence, as also by the use of this phrase elsewhere: For Plato, herein
following the Pythagorean mode, styles Virtue and Religion Music or Harmony.
(3) He says, the prevarication or perversion of Religion has a great force
and efficace for the corrupting men's minds: and therefore the preservation of
it has great influence on the wel-being of Societies. Thence, in his Leg. 12.
page 966. he says: (...), etc. Is not this one of the chiefest things,
concerning which we have hitherto much discoursed, namely touching God, that he
is, and how great and august his forces are, as to human affairs? Whence he
concludes: That no one ought to be elected to the Office of a public
Magistrate, (...), save he that is divine or religiose, and addicted to divine
studies. Wherein he assertes (1) That the knowledge of God is the best Wisdom
and the very Soul of Virtue. (2) That nothing is more (...), impolitic, or
against the interest of a politic Society, than the ignorance of God, and
neglect of Religion: For without Laws a Republic cannot be happy: neither can
there be good Laws without a prudent knowledge of what is best: neither can
there be a prudent knowledge of what is best, without the knowledge of God. (3)
He shows also that a Republic cannot be happy without Virtue, which also
belongs to Religion. (4) Having placed Religion as the Foundation of an happy
Republic, he explicates the parts thereof, such as are most influential on
politic Bodies, namely the knowledge of the Deity, his Providence, Justice,
etc. Thus elsewhere Plato makes Religion to be the principal Fundamen of a
Republic, and thence more ancient: wherefore the first care of Legislators and
Politicians, in order to the right constitution of any Republic, as also for
the preservation thereof, ought to be for the establishment of Religion. The
like Aristotle, Eth. l. 1. c. 13. (...), It Is manifest that a Politician ought
to know what concerns the Soul, as he that will cure the eyes, must understand
the whole body. His design is to show that it belongs to Politicians and
Statesmen to make the people happy, and thence to make them virtuose.
Campanella, Polit. cap. 7. tells us, That three Causes, (to speak politicly)
found and govern Empires, namely God, Prudence, and Occasion; but in some
Empires one is more visible, in some another. In the Hebraic Kingdom God was
more visible; in the Roman, Prudence; in the Spanish, Occasion. Although
physically God is the Cause of al other Causes. Whence Cap. 8. he adds: That
al Governements (except wicked Machiavel) have acknowleged, that Prudence does
not so far avail, as to foreknow what Goods or Evils are approaching; therefore
al Nations have had recourse to God, etc. But how much the Interest of any
politic Body or State lies involved in that of Religion, is excellently laid
down by Padre Paul the Venetian, that pious and great Politician, as we find it
in his Life, page 161. Touching the provisions that were to be made from time
to time with the Senators, the Father gave his opinion and counsel viva voce
and vehemently upon al occurrents, having always taught and inculcated, that
not only for Truth and Conscience sake, but even for Necessity and Reasons of
State every faithful man, but most of al Princes ought to invigilate the
maintenance and conservation of Religion. He affirmed, that to this end God had
constituted Princes as his Lieutenants, in those States wherein the Church was
planted, and conferred their greatness on them, to make them Protectors,
Defenders, Conservators of the holy Church, as sacred Scripture makes mention:
in which calling the greatest of them can never give a sufficient discharge of
himself, except it be by a godly and vigilant care in matters of Religion. Thus
that great Master of Wisdom and true Christian Politics. How much Religion is
the support of States, is well determined by Solomon, the wisest Politician, or
rather by Christ himself, Prove. 8.15. By me Kings reign, etc. or, as some
render it, In me, i. e. in the exalting of me Kings reign most prosperously.
The exaltation of Christ is the support and exaltation of States: Religion is
both the conservant and promovent Cause of States, 1 King. 11.37, 38. Jeroboam
held his Crown by it. So Deuteronomy. 9.25, 29.

. 3. Having finished the original and principal Causes of politic Societies, we
now descend to its principal Ends, which, The Ends of Polity.
in the Platonic Definition are al included in that notion, (...), for the
Beatitude, or wel-being of a politic Body. This politic Beatitude implies many
particulars. Gods Glory.
As 1. The Glory of God, which is the last end not only in Ethic or moral, but
also in politic Beatitude. Thus Plato, Leg. 4. page 713. assures us, That al
manner of evils will befall that State, where God reigns not. And he adds the
reason, page 715. (...), etc. God has in himself the principe, and end and
middle of althings: i. e. althings not only natural and moral, but also politic
have their origin from God, dependence on him, and therefore ought to end in
him, as their main Center. Whence, page 716. (...), etc. But God is to us
principally the measure of althings. Lastly, page 717. he adds: (...), etc.
This [namely the Worship and Service of God] is the primary end of our life,
unto which al our actions ought to collime, as arrows to their Scope. Thence he
procedes, according to his blind capacity, to show how we ought to honor and
worship God. Hence,

2. Virtue.
Another principal end of politic Society is to render men virtuose, and like
unto God. This indeed Plato greatly inculcates. So Leg. 4. page 716. he says,
That a good man follows God, and is like unto him, and therefore only fit to
honor and worship him; which gives stabilitie to a State. So Leg. 12. he makes
the knowledge of God and Virtue the great pillars and principal end of Politics.
Thence Leg. 9. page 877. he says: (...), It behooves a City to have its
Families, so far as it may be, most holy and most happy. Wherein he seems to
place the happiness of a City in its Holiness and Virtue. So Alcibiad. 1.
page 134. (...), It cannot therefore be, that any should be happy unless good.
Whence he adds: Therefore, Alcibiades, Cities want not Walls or Naval forces to
render them happy: neither can they be so by a multitude of men, or by the
magnitude of power without Virtue. (...), But if thou do purpose to govern
the Republic rightly and worthily, Virtue is to be communicated to thy
Citizens. Thence Definit. Plat. page 413. (...), politic Philosophy is
defined, (...), a Science of things honest and utile: Also, (...), a Science
effective of Justice in the City. The like Aristotle, in his Ethics, l. 1. c.
13. (...), etc. And it seems, that he who is really a Politician gives his mind
and endeavors chiefly to this; [namely Virtue] because his design is to make
Citizens good and obedient to Laws. We have instances hereof in the Cretensian
and Lacedemonian Legislators: who made it the grand design to promove Virtue.
So l. 1. c. 9. he says, (...), We made the last end of politic Philosophy to
be the chiefest Good: but this makes it the chiefest Concern to render the
Citizens well qualified, and good, and Agents of the best things. Such
illustrious notices had these poor Pagans of the essential connection between
Virtue and true Politics.

3. Another principal end of politic Society is the good of the whole, The
Good of the whole.
not only of particulars. Thus Plato, Repub. 4. page 420. (...), We constitute
a City, not for this end, that some one particular number of Citizens be
separately happy, but principally that the whole City be so. The like he
subjoins: (...), Now therefore we frame a Republic as happy, when not a few
only therein are such, but the whole. That the public good is a principal end
of al Polity, and politic Society Plato frequently assertes. So Repub. 1.
page 345. (...), But now I estimed it necessary for us to confess, that al
Empire, as Empire, must regard the good of none other, but such as are subject
to that Empire, and committed to its care, whether it be in politic or private
Empire. Then he adds: (...), As if the profit from that dignity of governing
were not to return to them, but to those that are subject to them. By which he
instructes us, that Magistrates ought to intend not their private interest, but
the public. Again, he says: (...), That must be done which seems best for the
City. And elsewhere he says, That neither Republics nor Laws are good, but
seditiose, when the public good is not principally regarded. Thence Leg. 9.
page 859. he tells us, That Legislators ought to put on the person of a Father,
not of a Tyrant, i.e. they ought to aim at the public good, not their own
private advantage: For public Laws ought to regard public good. But of this
more in what follows of politic Administrations, Laws, and Magistrates. Hence,

4. Mutual Assistance.
Mutual Assistance is another principal end of politic Society. This Plato,
Repub. 2. page 369. largely philosophiseth on, as that which gave the original
foundation to al politic Societies. He begins thus: (...), etc. A City thence
received its origin, because none of us was of himself sufficient, but
deficient as to many things. Thence he adds: (...) [scil. (...)] (...), But
our necessity, as it seems, will make this City. (1) He makes our necessity
and indigence that which first gave origin to al Cities and politic Societies.
(2) The cause of this necessitic he makes to be the insufficience of al men to
live of themselves, without mutual assistances each from other: Hence it was,
says he, that men at first congregated into Societies, for the mutual relief
each of other, Genesis 2.18.
according to that general Edict of God, Genesis 2.18. It is not good that man
should be alone: which, albeit there it regards conjugal Society, yet it may
be extended to al politic Society. For, as Aristotle says, It was necessary,
(...), that they consociate together, who cannot subsiste without each others
assistance. Thence Plato procedes to show the various degrees of Necessity,
which forced men to congregate into politic Societies. (1) (...), The first and
greatest kind of necessity is the provision of food, that we may subsiste and
live. (2) (...), the second, of Habitation. (3) (...), the third, of Raiment
and such like. Now for the supply of these necessities, he says there must be
in a politic Society variety of Artificers; for all are not sufficient for all
employments; neither must any one invade the office of another; but every one
ought to take that part as is most proper to him, of which more in what
immediately follows. 4.

. 4. A politic Body or City what.
From what has been laid down touching the Constitution and Ends of Politic, we
may with facility delineate the true Idea of a politic Body, as also what is
preservative or destructive thereof. The Grecians usually confine the notion of
a politic Body to a City; because at first their Republics and Polities were
usually confined to one single City. Plato's Idea of a City with its origin
we have, in what immediately precedes, hinted. He gives it us, Repub. 2. page
369. (as before) making the necessities of men the ground of their
consociation; adding, (...) Therefore in this manner whiles one associated to
himself another, seeing there was need of many for that affair, necessity
caused, that those first men congregated many into one seat and place of
habitation, as companions and coadjutors each of other. This company of men we
call a City. Wherein he gives us a summary description of a City, its Origin,
End, Matter, and constitutive Parts; which he more copiosely explicates in what
follows. (1) He makes the origin, end, and occasion of men's congregating into
Cities to be commun necessities and mutual assistances. This he more fully
explicates in what immediately follows: (...), But one again impartes what he
has to the other, or receives from his companion; thus mutually giving and
receiving each from other; accounting this way of reciprocal communication ever
best. Mutual assistance and communication is the original end and occasion of
al politic Societies. The sum is this: Men being not in their single capacities
(...), self-sufficient, they find themselves under an essential obligation to
congregate (...) into Corporations, that so they might assist each other by
their mutual (...), or conversation, which consistes in their giving to, and
receiving from each other. (2) As to the Matter of a City, as also other
politic Bodies, he tells us, That it is not sufficient that it consiste of three
or sour members, but there must be a Society of different Occupations and
Offices. This he insistes on, page 369, and 370. (...), There is need therefore
of more than four to provide those things of which we have spoken: i. e. Food,
Raiment, Habitations, and other Conveniences; for which he tells us, that there
is need of Husbandmen, and al manner of Artificers. And he gives his reason for
it, page 370. (...), Because truly first every one is not borne alike to every
one, but very diverse in nature, therefore one is naturally more inclined to
one work. Thus also page 371. (...), Therefore our City needs many Husbandmen
and other Artificers. And he gives the reason in what follows: (...), For which
causes, namely that there might be a free Commerce and Trade, we have
instituted a City. So that the main end of a City being freedom of commerce
and mutual conversation, it is necessary that there be a multitude or community
to constitute the same. (3) As to the formal Constitution of a City, as of al
other politic Societies, he says, this (...), Communion must not be (...), a
Confusion, but althings must be transacted (...), with Eutaxie or good Order,
which he terms Justice, as it consistes in the prescribing to each member his
proper rank, place, office and exercice in the politic Body. For this good
Order or universal Justice requires [1] That every member has his proper place
and work prescribed to him; and that he take diligent heed not to invade the
office and work of another. Which invasion Plato greatly condemns, as (...),
a curiose and pragmatic interposition in other men's affairs. [2] That there be
a due observation of the distinct Orders (...), of Governors and Governed. (4)
Lastly, he makes (...), the plenitude and perfection of a City or Republic to
consiste in the forementioned community and multitude under their different
offices, conspiring together and falling into one certain harmony, for the
commun utilitie of the whole. Thence Definit. Platon. page 415. (...), a City
is defined, (...), an habitation of a multitude of men using the same commun
Decretes or Constitutions: Also, (...), a multitude of men, which are under the
same Law. Whence it is added: (...), The Virtue of a City is the constitution
of a right Polity. Whence also (...), a Politician or Statesman is defined,
(...), one that understandes the constitution of a City or Republic.

Agreably to those Platonic Philosophemes Aristotle, in his Politics, 1. and 5.
makes a City to be a kind of animate or animal nature. For look as an Animal,
rightly disposed according to nature, is composed of certain proportionate
parts mutually ordinate, and communicating each to other, as also to the whole
their exercices and operations; so in like manner a City, when duly disposed
and instituted, is constituted of such proportionate parts, for the mutual aid
and assistance each of other. And such as the comparation of an Animal and his
parts is as to sanitie, such is that of a City or Republic and its parts, as
to tranquillity. And what is sanitie, according to the Philosophemes of the
wisest Physiologistes, but (...) or (...), a good Disposition or right Order of
al parts in the Animal, whereby they are capacitated perfectly to exert al
exercitations and operations convenient to their nature: according to which
Analogy or proportion the Tranquillity of a City or Republic is nothing else
but its (...), good Order or right Disposition of al its parts counected
together by some commun Law, as Marsilius Patavinus, that great Politician, in
his Defensor pacis, cap. 2. page 6. has well determined. Cicero defines a
Republic, Rem populi, the Affair of the People: and he desines the People, a
Society of the multitude, Populus coetus multitudinis juris consensu and
utilitatis communione sociatas, Cic.
consociated by the consent of Right and communion of Utility: i. e. according
to our English Phraseologie, The people are a Societis consociated by commun
consent and according to some Law, for public Good. This Strabo also, lib. 16.
makes to be the origin and formal constitution of al ancient politic
Societies, as we shall show. 5. on that head of Legislation. A People is defined
by Augustine, de Civ. Dei, l. 19. c. 24. a Society of the rational multitude
consociated for concordant communion, in those things they consent unto. Which
is by so much the better, by how much the more they concord in what is best;
and by so much the worse by how much the more they concord in things that are
worse. And as the process of Nature and Art is always from things less
perfect, to that which is more perfect; so it has been with all Societies,
which begin at first only with two, Man and Woman, Genesis 2.18, etc. which Plato
terms (...). Whence this imperfect Society extended it self to more perfect
families: and then domestic Society extended it self to Pagus, i. e. to the
Society of Villages: for anciently Pagani were those in the same Pagus or
Village, who drank of the same (...), or Dor. (...). This Society of Villages
at last extended it self to that of a City; as this, to that of a Republic, as
Aristot. Polit. l. 1. c. 1. A City was at first instituted for the security,
preservation, and wel-being of the whole. Hence a City is defined by Augustine,
de Civit. lib. 15. cap. 8. A multitude of men collected together by some commun
bond of Society. So also, de Civit. Dei, l. 1. c. 15. he says, A City is
nothing else but a concord multitude of men. Thence Grotius, de Jure belli,
page 6. defines a City, a company of men cons^ciated together for the
enjoyment of the same Right and commun Utility. Wherein note (1) The generic
Idea of a City, which is a Company or Community, i. e. perfect: for it is
essential to a City, both as to Matter and Form, that it be perfect. It is
perfect as to Matter, in that it is composed of al manner of Artificers and
Occupations necessary for the subsistence and welfare of a Community. It is
also perfect as to Form, as it has a perfect Order and Regiment, for the
conservation and gubernation thereof. (2) Whence follows the formal
constitution of a City, which consistes in its regular consociation, of which
before. (3) Thence also its End is, for the enjoyment of the same Right and
commun Utility, of which also in what precedes. Touching a City, its
constitution and perfection see more fully that pious and great Reformer, not
only of Religion, but also of Philosophy, Savonarola, Epit. Ethicae, l. 10.

. 5. Legislation its Origin.
Having hitherto discussed and explicated the essential Constitution of a
Polity and politic Body, we now pass on to the Empire thereof, which
consistes in Legislation and Administration or Jurisdiction. That al politic
Bodies are bounded and governed by Laws has been already proved,. 2. And we
find a clear account hereof in Strabo, Geogr. l. 16. (...), etc. Men that are
politic or civil do lead their lives after one commun Law, appointing them what
to do: for otherwise, that a multitude should, without harmony among
themselves, concur in the doing of one thing, it is impossible. Of what great
use Laws are for the right ordering and governing Republics and al politic
Bodies is well laid down by Plato, Protag. page 326. where speaking of the
Education of Youth, he says, That after they depart from under their
Preceptors, the Republic compels them to learn the Laws, and to live according
thereunto; a certain Formule being framed, that so none act rashly according to
their own wills: but as Writing-masters prescribe such as begin to write certain
half-letters, and strokes of the pen thereby to form their hand, (...), etc.
So the Republic, having framed a Formule of Laws, invented by good and ancient
Legislators, according to their prescript compels both those that govern and
those that are governed to act: but if any transgress their bounds, him they
punish: which kind of punishment they call (...), Correction.

1. The necessity of Laws.
Touching the Necessity of Laws, we have an excellent Disscourse in Plato,
Leg. 9 p. 874 (...), etc. It Is necessary that Laws be framed for men, that so
they may live according to Laws: for if they should live without these, they
would in nothing differ from the savage bestes. The cause whereof is this;
because no man's ingenie is so framed by nature, as that he should certainly
know what conduces to the commun utilitie of human life: or if he should know
what is best, yet he is not always able or willing to act the same. This grand
reason of State inducing a necessity of Laws he explicates in the parts
thereof. (1) He says it is very difficult without Laws for any to understand
what most conduces to the public good, which is the measure and bond of
Societies. So page 875. (...), For first it is very difficult [without Laws] to
know what that public, not private, interest is, which true politic Discipline
is to provide for. Thence he adds: (2) (...), etc. Moreover, although
peradventure some one may, by the aid of politic Science, abundantly
understand these things; yet if it be so, that he has gained an absolute
power, and is not obnoxious to the check of any other, he will not be able
throughout his life to persevere in this resolution of preferring the public
Interest as best, and of postponing his private concerns after the public
utilitie; but mortal nature always impels him to his proper interest and
private opportunity; which without al reason flies from grief and persues
pleasure -- and thence will fill the City with all manner of evil. These are the
principal reasons which enforce the establishment of Laws, namely men's
ignorance of what is best, and their strong inclination to promove their
private interest, more than the public good. Whence he concludes: (...), etc.
Namely, if any mortal were endued with such a nature, as could understand the
public good, and were, by a divine afflation, made apt to undertake the same,
such an one would not need Laws or their Empire. But such a Divine nature,
adds he, is no where to be found, and therefore there remains an absolute
necessity of Laws, to instruct men in what is their duty, to restrain them
from the prosecution of their private interest and lusts, as also to constrain
them to what is good. Laws have much more force to compel men to their duty,
than the wisest of men: For let men, though never so wise and just, oppose
themselves in the wisest and most just manner to the irregularities of others,
yet how inefficacious are their endeavors for reformation! what contradictions
do they meet with from those they endeavor to reform? Yet let the same persons
be instructed in their duty by a Law, and they are with more facility
convinced thereof and inclined thereto: and why? because they presume the Law
does speak without prejudice, partiality, and private interest: therefore they
look on it as the Oracle of God.

2. Al Laws originally from God.
As for the Origin of Laws, Plato assures us, That the best are such as come
from God. For he says, (...), No mere mortal can make Laws to purpose. Whereby
he instructes us, that a Republic ought not to depend on mere Comments of men,
but on some Divine Law, namely the eternal Mind and Will, which is the source of
al true politic Laws. Whence also he says: (...), etc. Let us therefore call
upon God for the right disposition of the City, and that he favoring us may be
present, and grant our requests, and constitute our Laws and Citic. And
touching the first Institution of Laws he says expressly, Repub. 4. page 427.
(...), It belongs not truly to us: but to the Delphic Apollo the chiefest,
best, and first Institutes of Laws belong. (1) That by Apollo he symbolically
indigitates the true God, though unknown, will be evident to any that observes
his Phraseologie. Thus also Lycurgus (as Plutarch in his Life relates) being
about to frame his Laws, he consultes first with the Oracle of Apollo, to
establish good Laws in his Country -- And Lycurgus took so great care to
establish well his Laws, that he brought an Oracle from Apollo's Temple for the
chief of them, which Oracle is to this day called Retra, i. e. the
Statute-Oracle. Thus also Plato, in his Minos, page 319. treating of the
Origin of Laws, brings in Homer commending Minos, for consulting Jupiter in
order to the framing right Laws: (...), For he says, Sane caeterorum
Legislatorum, quos tantopere admirata omnis vetustas est, sanctiones multae
Mosaicis similes fuere. Cunaeus, de Repub. Jud.
that Minos conversed with Jupiter, and used secret conference with him for
nine years space: and that he addressed himself to Jupiter, as to a certain
Sophist, that he might be instructed, i.e. how to frame Laws aright. (2) That
Plato ownes God as the supreme Legislator, from whom the best and first Laws
came, is as evident, and that not only from his confession, but also by his
practice, in making such a curiose inquisition into the sacred Mosaic Laws, and
traducing thence the choicest of his Laws, as we have more largely proved out
of his own Works, as also out of Clemens Alexandr. Eusebius and others, Court.
Gent. B. 3. C. 9. Philos. Genesis P. 1. l. 3. c. 3. sect. 6.. 6.

3. Human Legislators ought to be men of Wisdom, public Spirits, and virtuose.
We find an excellent Character of an human Legislator in Plato, Leg. 9. page
858. where he puts this Question: Whether ought we to consult a Legislator,
more than other Writers, touching things honest, good, beautiful, just? Which
being granted, he assumes: It is consentaneous, that of all the Writings, which
are used in Republics, those that concern Laws be most accurately composed;
and that all the Writings of other men be so far approved, as they agree to
these Laws, and so far exploded as they are dissentaneous. Whence he concludes,
page 859. (...), Let us therefore take this course in framing Laws for Cities,
that the Legislator entirely clothe himself with the person of a Father and
Mother: that so those written Laws may represent the image of men endued with a
certain sollicitous affection, whereby they take care of those for whom they
dictate Laws; as also with a sagacious prudence, whereby they know how to
consult things good and commodous for them: But they must not put on the person
of a Tyrant, and some impotent domineering Lord, who with an infinite or
absolute kind of Empire commands what he lists, and adding menaces, wills that
his pleasure stand for reason and Law; whereby he begets only hatred and envy.
Wherein we find many great Characters of a good Legislator. He says (1) He
must have a sagacious prudence, or prudent sagacitie, to find out what Laws are
best and most commodous. (2) He must put on the person of a Father and Mother,
i. e. al manner of tender affections, such as are sollicitous for the good of
those for whom the Laws are made. (3) He must avoid al shadow of Tyranny and
absolute Dominion of such as make their Will their Law, without Reason. (4) He
must make such Laws, as may beget, in those for whom they are made, a good
opinion of and love to them, not hatred. Hence,

4. Al Laws from the Multitude.
Al politic Laws ought to proceed originally from the Multitude or from their
Representatives. Thus Plato, in his Gorgias, page 488. (...), Does not the Law
of Nature constitute, that MANY [or the multitude] are better than ONE? who
truly make Laws for one, namely for the commun good. Whence he concludes:
(...), Therefore the Laws of the MANY, or Multitude are the Laws of the most
excellent. Whence he farther argues, That the Laws of the Multitude are of the
best: (...), Are they not also the Laws of the best? For they that are more
excellent are better. Thence he adds another Argument: (...); Are not their
[the many] Laws according to nature beautiful and honest; because they are most
excellent? Whence he concludes: (...); Do not therefore the MANY [or multitude]
judge, that it is just to live according to some equal Right, [or Law of
Equitie] and more base to do injustice, than to suffer it? By all which he
demonstrates, that the most equal Laws are such as proceed from the MANY or
Multitude. Thus Plato, in his Minos, shows, That it is both useful and
necessary, that Laws be framed by the free suffrage of the people. And his
reason is invincible, namely, because al Laws ought to regard the public
Utilitie, and therefore ought to be confirmed by public consent: Quod omnes
tangit ab omnibus approbetur. Jus Civil.
For that which concerns al must be approved by all. And herein Plato is
followed by his Disciple Aristotle, who Polit. l. 3. c. 6. demonstrates, That
the Legislative power belongs to the people, and universitie of Citizens, or to
their Representatives congregated in some general Assembly. This politic
Hypothesis is strenuously defended by that great Christian Politician,
Marsilius Patavinus, in his Defensor Pacis, cap. 12. page 36. where he proves
it by these Arguments. (1) The Universitie of Citizens, or Community do more
perfectly understand and affect the public Good, which is the principal end and
measure of al Polity. (2) Laws framed by the whole multitude or their
Repreentatives are better observed, than such as are imposed on them against
their consent. For a City being a Community of Freemen, as Aristot. Pol.
3.4. al Laws are most confirmed by their consent. Again he proves that the
coactive power is in the multitude or their more prevalent part, and therefore
those Laws are best observed, which are made by their consent. (3) The
Community or Universitie of the multitude do best understand what is most
commodous or incommodous for the preservation and promotion of their Society:
now al Laws are for the preservation and promotion of the Society: therefore
they ought to be approved by all: according to that commun Maxim: That which
touches the commun good of al must be approved by all. Thence he procedes p.
42. to solve a commun objection against the peoples consent in Legislation,
namely, That the multitude are ignorant, depraved, perverse, etc. To which he
respondes: (1) That the whole multitude has a better judgment and affection,
than any single part; because the wisdom of single persons is included in the
whole. (2) That the first invention and examen of Laws may be committed to
prudent men; and yet the approbation and confirmation of them appertain to the
universitie or commun multitude. (3) The multitude may commit the whole of
Legislation to certain Representatives elected by them. Thus Hooker Ecclesiast.
Polity, page 28, 29. By the Law of Nature, whereunto God has made al subject,
the lawful power of making Laws, to command whole politic Societies of men,
belongs so properly unto the same entire Societies, that for any Prince or
Potentate of what kind soever upon earth to exercise the same of himself, and
not either by express commission immediately and personally received from God,
or else by Authority derived at first from their consent, upon whose persons
they impose Laws, it is no better than mere Tyranny. But approbation not only
they give, who personally declare their assent by voice, sign, or act; but
also when others do it in their names, by right originally at least derived
from them. As in Parliaments and like Assemblies. The like Campanella, Polit.
cap. 4. As Virtue is the private Law of an individual person, so the Law is a
public Virtue of the Community: therefore none may make a Law but the
Republic, in whom the commun reason and consent is; or the most wise men, to
whom this commun reason is committed by the Community, as Solon, and Lycurgus,
and Numa; or God, who takes care of al, and is the supreme Reason. Hence,

5. Al politic Laws must tend to, Al Laws for public Good.
and be measured by the public Good. For that which has its origin from public
consent and dependence thereon, must tend to the public Good: Al Laws being but
an effect of the public Will, ought to end in the public Good: whence it is a
Maxim in the Civil Law, Publicum jus publicam utilitatem respicit. Just.
Institut.
Public Right regards the public Utility. Thus Plato, Minos, page 317. from
the origination of (...) (which is generally derived from (...) to distribute)
styles a Legislator (...) a good Distributor, one that distributes to every one
what is proper to him. Thus (...) a Law, is that which (...), distributes to al
their due, measuring al by the commun good. Whence he adds: (...), Therefore
the distributions hereof and Laws are best: and he that observes in these
things the most accurate reason of Laws, is most skilful in Law, and the best
Distributor. His mind is, that he that frames Laws, and distributes to every
one according to what is due to him and the public Good, is the best Legislator
and Distributor of Justice. Thus, page 320. discoursing of Minos's Legislation,
he says, (...), Therefore he framed such Laws for his Citizens, by the
Benefice whereof both Crete enjoys a perpetual felicity, and Lacedemon, from
the time that she began to use these Divine Laws. So greatly were Minos's Laws
calculated for the public Good. But this Plato more fully determines, Leg. 4.
page 715. (...), Truly we deny those to be Republics; neither do we account
those to be right Laws, which are not referred to the commun Utility of the
City. But those, who so indulge their lusts, as that they make Laws in favor
of some Parties, we affirm those to be not Citizens, but seditiose persons;
and al those Titles of Right and Laws, which they, by their Comments, pretend,
to be void. So severe is Plato' in this point, as that he judges al Laws made
in favor of some one Party, and not for the commun Good, to be ipso facto
seditiose and void. And he gives the reason, Leg. 9. page 875. (...), For the
public Reason and Good does firmly connect and keep together Republics, but
oblique regard to private Interest does subvert and overthrow them.

6. The principal public Good, Virtue a principal end of Laws.
unto which al Laws ought to tend, is universal Justice and Virtue. For as
Virtue is a private Law, so Law is the public Virtue, or that whereby the
Virtue of the whole Community is measured and promoted. Thus Plato, Leg. 1.
(...), Al Laws are to be constituted for the best end, namely for Virtue. So he
explicates himself, page 630. where he says, That a Legislator sent by God to
establish utile and commodo^s Laws, (...), will, in the constitution of Laws
have regard to no other than the chiefest Virtue. Yea he adds: That he who will
constitute a Divine Republic, (...), must, as Legislator, have respect, not
only to one particle of Virtue, and that the least, but to universal Virtue,
and accordin gto the forms or kinds of Virtue find out Laws, proportionable
thereto. The like he lays down, Repub. 4. page 444. (...); Do not therefore the
preclare and illustrious Institutes, or Laws of living make way to Virtue; but
base Laws precipitate men into vice? Whereby he instructes us, that Laws, if
good, have an efficacious force for the promoting Virtue; but if bad, of Vice.
Hence,

7. Al politic Laws must be natural, voluntary, facile, expedite, Laws must be
proper, and universal, otherwise they cannot reach that universal Virtue and
public Good they tend unto. (1) Al Laws ought to be Natural. So Plato, Leg. 3.
page 690. says, Natural.
That Laws ought to be constituted, (...), against nature, but according to
nature, i. e. the natural condition and exigence of the Community. (2) Laws
must be Voluntary, Voluntary.
or such as the Community may cheerfully assent and consent to. Thus Plato,
Leg. 4. page 684. (...), etc. But now many prescribe that to Legislators, that
they frame such Laws, as the people and Community may freely receive; as if
any should command Physicians, that they heal with a kind of pleasure and
jucunditie to such as they heal. Hence, Facile.
(3) Laws must be facile and expedite, otherwise how can the Community consent
thereto, or cheerfully observe the same? Thus Plato, Leg. 3. page 684. in what
follows on the former: (...), That also had great force at that time, that Laws
were more easily constituted. Campanella, Pol. cap. 4. tells us, That those Laws
are best, which are curt, facile, few in number, accommodated to the manners of
the people and public Good. Whereas tyrannic Laws are numerous, obscure,
difficile, as many snares, utile only to one or few, neither accommodated to
public manners and utilitie. (4) Laws ought to be proper and agreeable to the
Community, Proper.
their state and condition. Hence that commun Aphorism among Politicians, That
laws are to be fitted to times and persons as the shoe to the foot. In matters
of Government men must do what they can, not what they would. Universal.
Hence, (5) Laws must be universally extensive unto al cases. So Plato, Leg. 1.
page 630. says, Laws ought to reach (...), universal Virtue. Thus Aristotle,
Pol. 3. where he gives us this difference between the particular judgment of a
Judge, and Laws: A Judgment is a particular Law, but a Law is an universal
Judgment: i. e. such as must reach al cases; though indeed al human Laws are
greatly defective in this particular, as it will appear by what immediately
follows. Hence,

8. The Law of Equity.
Seeing human Legislators cannot by their Laws reach al particular cases,
therefore al politic Laws need (...), the Law of Equity to correct their
defects, as also Conservators to keep them from degenerating. (1) That al human
politic Laws are greatly defective as to their comprehension of particular
cases is most evident from their Generality. Thus much Plato acknowledges,
Leg. 4. p. 718. where he says, That althings cannot be opportunely reduced to
one certain formule of Law; therefore a Legislator ought to lay down some
general indication, before he proceed to a singular constitution of Laws:
(...), Moreover these things are such, as that they cannot be comprehended and
defined by one certain formule. Wherein he instructs us, that seeing Laws
cannot be prescribed to al things singular, therefore a Legislator ought to
draw up some general Institutes, etc. This imperfection of Laws was taken
notice of by Solon and others, who have compared Laws to Spiders webs, which
ensnare and entangle the lesser flies, but let the greater break thorough.
Hence, (2) al human Laws need (...), a Law of Equity for the correction of
their defects. Thus Plato, Minos, page 317. (...), In these things therefore
that concern matters just and injust, and universally such as regard the
commodous disposition and ordering of the City, that which is RIGHT is the
royal Law. [1] That by (...), that which is right he understands the Law of
Nature and Equity is most evident, in that he styles it the Royal Law. [2] He
says, that by this Law of Rectitude or Equity al other Laws and politic
Institutes are to be regulated and corrected. [3] This Equity of Nature he
makes to be the fundament of al good Laws, in as much as it is one uniforme,
sempiterne and incommutable Rule of Justice in all times and Nations: whereas al
particular Laws of Nations are various and mutable, according to the various
conditions and mutations of Times and Nations. This Law of Equity he describes
also, Minos, page 314. (...), Law therefore is the invention of him, that truly
IS. Serranus by (...), that which is, understands the eternal Law of Nature,
which is the source of al private Laws; which is a truth: But considering
Plato's Phraseologie, I should rather understand (...), of God, from whom the
Law of Equity and al other Laws have their emanation. (...), Equity, Definit.
Plat. is described, (...), The imminution and correction of things just and
utile: moderation in commerces: a good composition of the rational Soul as to
things honest and base. That al politic Laws need a Law of Equity to correct
them, was anciently observed by Androcles, (cited by Aristotle, Rhet. lbi. 2.
cap. 25.) who said, That al Laws need a Law to correct them, as fishes need
salt to preserve them. Touching this (...), Law of Equity, its Necessity,
Use, and Nature see Idea Theolog. lib. 1. cap. 8. sect. 2. (3) Politic human
Laws need not only a Law of Equity to correct them, but also Conservators to
keep them from degenerating. Conservators of Laws.
Whence (...), Authority, Definit. Platon. page 415. is defined (...), the
Tuition of the Law. Thence Plato, Leg. 12. page 951. institutes a College for
the inspection and conservation of Laws. His words are: (...), etc. Let him
have recourse to their College, which is constituted for the inspection of
Laws. Let this College consiste of Juniors and Seniors; and daily at the break
of day, before the Sun rising, let them convene. First let there be of the
Priests such as excel in the offices of Virtue: then (...) of the Conservators
of the Laws ten of those that excel in age and virtue, etc. The sum of al is
this: In as much as Laws, without diligent conservation, are apt to degenerate,
and fall under depravation, from the unbridled lusts of men, therefore there is
need of certain (...), Conservators of Laws to keep their Authority inviolable:
on which account Plato constituted this his sacred College.

9. From what has been laid down of Laws in the general, A Law what.
we may with facility form a particular Idea of a Law, which, Definit.
Platon. is thus described: (...), A Law is a politic Decree of the Community
constituted not for a certain time only. This last clause is added to
discriminate a Law from a Suffrage or Vote, which is there thus defined: (...),
A Vote or Suffrage is a politic Decree constituted only for a certain time. To
speak more distinctly of a Law, it includes two formal essential parts, 1. Its
Equity.
Equity, and politic Constitution. (1) Eqitio is as the Soul of the Law, that
which gives vital spirits and life to it; and is one and the same immutable
Reason, which ought to diffuse it self throughout al Laws. Whence a Law is
defined by Pet. a Sancto Joseph, The Ordination of Reason, promulgated by him
that has the care of the Community, for the commun Good. Whence he proves,
That al Laws, so far as they participate of right reason, are derived from the
eternal Law, as also from natural Precepts. By the Eternal Law they understand
the Divine Decree or soverain pleasure of God, whence the Reason and Equity of
al Laws both natural and politic receives its derivation. Of this Equity we
have suffiiently discoursed in what immediately precedes. 2. Its Constitution.
(2) Politic Constitution is that which draws down general equity, and applies
it to this or that politic Society, according to the various exigences,
circumstances, and reasons of State, which are peculiar to that Society or
Republic for which the Laws are made. [1] This politic Constitution is that
which gives formal reason to politic Laws, and renders them obligatorie to the
Society, for which they are made. Thence, Definit. Plat. page 415. (...), a
Legislator is defined, (...), a Framer of Laws, accordin gto which we ought to
live in Republics. [2] This politic Constitution is the measure of al
Controversies, Determinations, and Civil Justice in any politic Body. Whence,
Definite. Platon. page 413. (...), a Law is defined, (...), a Disceptation
whether things be done justly, or not. And (...), the Bonitie of Laws is
defined, (...), the obedience of right Laws. [3] This politic Constitution is
that which gives Order to al Polity. Thence, Definit. Platon. page 413. (...),
Order, is defined, (...), a similitude of Office and Action of al those things
that are compared among themselves: or more briefly, (...), a Symmetrie or
proportion of Society: i.e. when all that appertein to such a Society consent
to walk and live together by soem commun Law. That politic Constitution or Law
gives Beauty, Perfection and Order to al politic Bodies, we are assured by
Plato, in his Gorgias, page 503, 504. where he shows, that althings both
natural and artificial receive their perfection from Order: (...), Therefore an
house having acquired order and ornament, will be good and commodous. Whence he
concludes, That as health is the virtue and order of the body natural; so
(...), Legal and Law is the Order of the Soul, as also of Bodies politic.
Politic Law and Order are intimely conjoined both as to Name and Thing. As for
Names, whence had (...), Order its origination but from (...), dath, (or as we
may pronounce it, tat) Law, Order? Hence sprang (...), with its Derivates,
(...), etc. And as (...) signifies Law as well as Order; so (...), (from (...)
to distribute orderly) Order as well as Law. Neither do Law and Order agree in
the reciprocation of Names only, but also in their Natures. Hence Plato often
uses them promiscuously one for the other, and joins them together as exegetic
each of other. So ^eg. 7. page 780. (...), For whatever in a Republic is
comprehended under a certain Order and Law, and by the conduct thereof is
governed, cannot but be conjoined with the greatest goods: But on the contrary,
either when there is no Order, or when things are il constituted, there cannot
but follow the greatest perturbation: which pervertes that good Order and all that Utility that flows thence. Wherein we have these observables. (1) He
uses Order and Law promiscuously for one and the same thing. So Leg. 9. page
875. (...), etc. In the next place we ought to choose Order and Law, which
propose what we are to consider, and concerns the commun use of life. (2) He
says, that from this legal Order and its conduct the bonitie and perfection of
things politic arises. (3) that from the defect and want of this legal Order
al perturbation, confusion, and evils in a politic body do arise. More
touching Order see. 1.

. 6. Having explicated Legislation, The several kinds of politic Administration.
which takes in the first part of Empire, we now pass on to the second, namely
Administration or Jurisdiction, which in Plato's Philosophy passes under the
notion of (...), Regiment or Government, from (...) arche a Prince,
Principatie or Government. Whence Lot is styled by the Rabbines, (...) a
Prince of the Judges. So Romans 8.38. (...) is taken for Principaties. Definit.
Platon. (...), Principatie is defined, (...), The care or charge of the whole:
Which is a good Idea of politic Jurisdiction and Administration. And that which
we are herein to consider may be reduced to these two commun Heads. (1) The
several kinds of politic Jurisdiction or Administration, with their
preferences. (2) The Civil Magistrate, who is the Administrator of politic
Jurisdiction. First, as for the several kinds of politic Jurisdiction or
Administration, they are reduced by Plato (as by others) to these three Heads,
Monarchy, Aristocratie, and Democratie. Monarchy, Aristocratie, Democratie.
Of these he treats distinctly in his Politicus, page 291. (...), Monarchy is
one form of politic Gubernations. Then he adds: (...), And after Monarchy we
may place the Government of a few, i. e. Aristocratie. Lastly he adds: (...),
The third form of Government is it not that of the people, called Democratie?
These three forms of Administration he distinctly explicates, according to
their legitime constitutions, excesses, and comparations each with other. The
excess of Monarchy he makes to be Tyranny, when Princes govern without, or
contrary to Law: and the excess of Aristocratie he makes to be (...),
Oligarchie, when a few usurp the sole Administration of politic Affairs: the
excess of Democratie is Anarchie or popular confusion, when there is no
distinction between Governors and Governed. As for the comparation of these
three Forms among themselves he affirms, that Monarchy or the Administration
of One is to be preferred, so far as it is moderated and bounded by good Laws,
together with a good Moderator and interpreter of those Laws; but on the
contrary, if it degenerate into Tyranny, it is then of all the worst. His own
words are: (...), Monarchy bounded by good Laws is of al best; but if it be
lawless, it is of all the most difficult and intolerable. Thence Definit. Plat.
page 415. (...) a King is said to be, (...), a Prince that governes according
to Laws; whereby he is opposed to a Tyrant, who is said to be one that governes
only according to his will; as hereafter.

In Aristocratie there must be one (...), chief among the Senators, who ought
to direct and order affairs: The Athenian Polity mixed of Aristocratie and
Democratie.
yea, in Democratie there is something of Aristocratie from the peoples
consent. Thence Plato, in his Menexenus, page 238. treating of the Athenian
Republic, its original state, as also that it then enjoyed, he says, It was an
Aristocratie mixed with Democratie. His words are these: (...), etc. For there
was the same form of Polity then as now, namely Aristocratie, under which now
we live, and have kept the same for a long time. Some would call it Democratie,
others by another name. But to speak truth it is the Gubernation of the best
men, with the peoples consent. For we had in times past Kings: and these truly
sometimes came to the Government by enheritance, sometimes by the suffrage of
the people. But now, sithat the power is in the people, they commit the
Administration to some most excellent and virtuose persons: neither is any laid
aside by reason of infirmity, or poverty, or low degree of parentage;
neither, if the contrary conditions are found, is he therefore promoted, as in
other Cities: but there is one Rule of determining al Offices, namely he that
is judged the wisest and best man, he is called to public Administration and
Office. And the cause of this Administration among us is our equality and
paritie as to origin. For other Cities being composed of persons different and
inequal, they have inequal and different forms of Administration, namely
Tyranny and Oligarchie: also some are Slaves, others Lords: but we, being
borne al of one Mother, judge it not equal, that some be Lords, and some
Vassals: but that equality of stock has made us to find out this equality of
Polity, that none precede the other, but in the estime of Wisdom and Virtue.
Wherefore their parents and ours having been educate! in all kind of liberty,
many noble deeds for the commun utilitie of Mankind have been performed: having
always judged it necessary for liberty, to fight against the Grecians for the
Grecians, and against the Barbarians for the Grecians. Thus Plato of the
Athenian Polity, wherein he shows, that Democratie does not require, that al
Administrations be transacted by the people, but that the supreme Power be in
the people, and that they be their free suffrage elect such as they judge to
excel in Wisdom and Virtue as Administrators, or Magistrates of public
Affairs. This he exemplifies by the Athenian Republic; which was a Democratie,
in which, (...), the supreme Power was in the Community, yet so as that the
Administrationof that Power was by the peoples suffrage committed to such as
they judged most eminent for Wisdom and Virtue. So that this Polity was
indeed, (...), an Aristocratie with the peoples consent, i. e. mixed with
Democratie.

Plato here joins Democratie with Aristocratie, Monarchy mixed with Democratie.
so in his Leg. 3. page 693. he joins Monarchy and Democratie as the two
constitutive parts of a good Polity: (...), etc. There are as it were two
Mothers of public Administrations or Polities, out of which he that shall say
other forms of Gubernation resulted, speaks the truth: the one of these is
called Monarchy, the other Democratie: the former is most eminently in use
among the Persians, the later among us. And almost al other kinds of Polities
are variously composed out of these. And it is necessary, that a City, which
would enjoy her liberty and amity with prudence, participate of both of
these: which indeed our commun speech signifies, when we say, that a City
destitute of these cannot be rightly administrated and governed. In which he
demonstrates that Regal Monarchy contempered with popular Democratie is the
most equal and best of Dominations, provided that it be well confined and
bounded by Laws: for such a mixed Polity comes nearest to pattern Authority,
which is most natural.

By comparing these Philosophemes of Plato it is evident, that, according to
his mind, Mixed Polity its use.
a mixed Polity or Gubernation of Monarchy, Aristocratie, and Democratie, if
well limited and bounded by Laws, is generally useful. Thus the Stoics also
held, (...), That the best Polity or Regiment, is that which is mixed of
Democratie, the Regal Power, and Aristocratie, as Laertius in Zeno. And the
reasons hereof are these: Monarchy has an unitive efficace, for the rpeventing
Division, Dissolution, and Ruin; which usually arises out of Factions; unto
which Democratie and Aristocratie is obnoxious: Democratie has a diffusive
faculty, as it takes in the concerns and interest of each individual:
Aristocratie has a collective virtue, as it gathers up the interest of the
whole Community into a systeme of the wisest and best Administrators. As al
these three kinds of Polities have their virtues and efficaces, so also they
have their excesses: Monarchy with facility degenerates into Tyranny,
Aristocratie into Oligarchie, and Democratie into Anarchie, as Plato, Repub. 8.
page 563. has well observed. Whence for the preventing the excess of each some
great Politicians, as also Theologues have judged a complexe or mixed
constitution of al these to be the best of Regiments.

But to speak natively and distinctly, Moderate Empire best.
as these three kinds of polity Administrations and Regiments may make an
excellent Composition; so may they also do well distinctly and apart, if suited
to the complexion, exigences, and condition of States, well moderated by Laws,
and committed to prudent wel-qualified Administrators. No one of these Polities
is in it self unlawful, or unuseful, but its excess: It is not Monarchy, but
Tyranny; nor Aristocratie, but Oligarchie; nor Democratie, but Anarchie that
is injuriose to Republics. Each of these Empires, if well moderated, and suited
to the condition of the State may be very useful, as Plato well determines. Thus
Leg. 3. page 690. (...), That Empire is most natural, which is, not violent,
and against the will, but voluntary, as to those that obey. Then he tells us what
this natural and voluntary Empire importes, namely, a certain blessed Empire
approved by Divine judgment, whereby he that is elected governes, etc. Thence
he goes on to demonstrate, That an infinite power bounded by no limits is the
peste of al Empires: (...), Whether or no did not that happen, because they
were ignorant of that great Saying of Hesiod, That Half is often better than the
Whole? seeing it is dangerous to usurp the WHOLE of Power; whereas to assume
HALF only is moderate: now that which is moderate is always to be preferred
before that which is immoderate, etc. Wherein he shows (1) that the Half of
Empire is better than the Whole: or moderate limited power, better than
Immoderate and Absolute. (2) He adds the reason, because infinite, immoderate
power brings ruin to Republics. This he lays down in more naked terms, page
693. (...) (...), Let us inquire what else ought to be done: namely sole and
absolute Empire ought not to be constituted: and the reason of this our
sentiment is; because a City ought to be free and friendly to it self, and
therefore a Legislator ought to aim at this end. Whence he procedes to show,
that a mixed moderate Empire is best, because most agreeable to and preservative
of public Liberties and Republic. So Leg. 6. he says, That an infinite
absolute Empire is permiciose; but that is the best Idea (...) of Polity,
which is a middle between Monarchic and Democratic Domination, (...), which is
intermediate between Monarchic and popular Polity.

Whence Plato is very severe against tyrannic and al immoderate Empire.
Tyrannic Empire its origin, etc.
Thus in his Gorgias: (...), I call that Tyranny, when a Magistrate counts it
lawful to do what he please in the City, etc. According to that French Maxim,
The Justice of a Prince consistes in his power: i. e. he may do what he can.
Whence Plato adds, page 510. (...); Where there is a Tyrant, is he not a cruel
and barbarous Lord? if there be any in the City much better, does not the
Tyrant fear him, and can never be cordially a friend to such? So Repub. 8. page
569. (...), etc. Thou say a Tyrant is a Parricide, and a severe nourisher of
old age, and that Tyranny brings the most cruel servitude. Yea Repub. 9. he
says, That one who is really a Tyrant is really a Slave. Again: (...), A
Tyrant leads the most miserable life. And Repub. 8. page 564. he tells us, That
the origin of Tyranny is from the abuse of Democratie: For (...), out of
excessive liberty arises much and most cruel vassalage. Thence on the
contrary, Leg. 3. he shows, how the (...) of Democratie sprang otu of the
Tyranny of MOnarchs: for when the people could no longer bear the Tyranny of
great Men, casting off their yoke they vindicated their Liberties. Definit.
Platon. page 415. (...), a Tyrant is defined (...), one that governes the City
according to his own pleasure. This self-wil Gubernation Plato greatly inveighs
against, Alcibiad. 1. page 134. (...) etc. For he that has a power to do what
he list, being destitute of prudence, can we expect that any thing else should
happen to him, whether he be a private person or Republic, than what happens to
a sick man, who has power to act what he list, but no mind to be healed, yea
rages impotently and tyrannically against him, who would reduce him from his
extravagances? what can be expected but that his body perish? Whence he
concludes, page 135. (...), Therefore O most excellent Alcibiades, thou may
not make provision for Tyranny, either over thy self or the City, if thou
desire they should be happy, but for Virtue. Wherein note (1) that for any to
govern themselves or a City merely according to their own will, without regard
to any superior Law, is Tyranny. A man may be a Tyrant over himself by letting
the reins loose to unbridled passions, as well as over a Body politic. Yea
politic Tyranny seems to have its origin from self-Tyrannie. (2) That as
self-Tyrannie makes a man miserable, so politic Tyranny a State. Seneca, in
his Instructions to his Pupil Nero, (who after proved a Tyrant) has excellent
Philosophemes touching the evils of Tyranny: To be able to hurt, says he, is
the most pestiferous power, or rather impotence: Regal crudelitie does increase
the number of Enemies, by taking them away. Thy Grandfather pardoned those whom
he conquered: for had he not pardoned them, whom should he have had to reign
over? The power of Tyrants is execrable, but short: A Tyrant differs from a
King in deeds, though not in name: He erres, who thinks a King to be safe
there, where nothing is safe from the King: the security of a Prince is
maintained by the mutual security of his Subjects: The love of the Citizens is
the inexpugnable Fortress of the King. Al crudelitie is from infirmity:
neither can that power stand long which is upheld by the evils and sufferings
of many: It Is necessary that he fears many, whom many fear. It Is more
dangerous to be feared, than to be despised. It Is Sacrilege to hurt the
Country; therefore also to hurt a Citizen, who is part thereof. Some have
observed, that the reason why Nature has not given a sting to the King of the
Bees, is to teach Princes, that nothing becomes Princes less than Tyranny;
also that their only defense should be in the strength of their Subjects. The
origin of Tyranny we find in the description of Nimrod, Genesis 10.9.
Genesis 10.9. As Nimrod mighty in hunting before Jehovah. Note here (1) that this
was a commun Proverb among the Patriarchs, whereby they described a Tyrant:
(2) He is said to be mighty in hunting: i. e. persecution, oppression, and
Tyranny over men, as Jer. 16.16. So the Jerusalemy Paraphrase expounds it. (3)
Before the Lord, i. e. openly, daringly, in the very sigh tof God. Hence, Mede,
Diatr. 3. page 539. on 2 Pet. 2.1. says, that old Babylon was the Foundresse
of tyrannic Domination, as also of Idolatry: and he makes their Tyranny the
effect of their Idolatry; because God usually punishes Idolatry with
Tyranny and Vassalage. This is most true of New Babylon or the Roman Church,
which brought in Tyranie into the Christian World together with Idolatry. And
is not this a just recompense and retaliation for God to leave men under the
iron yoke of Antichristian Tyranny, when they electively and voluntarily
embrace Antichristian Idolatry? O! how proportionable is the plague of
Antichristian Tyranny to the sin of Antichristian Idolatry?

. 7. Civil Magistrates.
Having examined the nature of politic Administration and Jurisdiction in
regard of its various forms and modes, we now pass on to its Administrators,
their Aptitude, Faculty, Authority, and Office. The Administrators of politic
Jurisdiction or Empire are usually comprehended under that general notion of
Civil Magistrates. We shall not here consider a Civil Magistrate as confined to
this or that form of Jurisdiction, but more generally under such Ideas and
Notions as may agree to every form of Jurisdiction. Now in a Civil Magistrate,
under this general Idea, we are to consider, (1) His End: (2) His Aptitude and
Qualification: (3) His politic Faculty, Commission, and Authority: (4) The
Exercice and Execution of his Office. Of these briefly in their order.

1. 1. Their End.
As for the End of Civil Magistrates, Platonic, as well as sacred Philosophy
informs us, that the proxime immediate end for which they were instituted is
the public or commun Good of the whole Community. This is the great end of al
politic bodies, whether Cities or Republics, as we have before proved,. 3. and
therefore of al Civil Magistrates. Thus Plato, Repub. 3. page 413. discoursing
of the Office of Magistrates he says: (...), We must chiefly endeavor that
they conceive what they judge will mot conduce to the commun Good. Thence
Politicus, page 274. he says, A King and Civil Magistrate is a Pastor of men;
and in this regard a God to mortal man, i. e. as Gods Vicegerent for the good
of men, as hereafter. Hence Petrus a Sancto Joseph and others make this
difference between a King and a Tyrant, That a King has his eye on the good of
his Subjects, but a Tyrant on his own private Good and Interest. But of this
sufficiently in what precedes,. 3.

2. That which next follows is the Apitude and Qua ification of a Civil
Magistrate. 2. The Qualifications of a Magistrate.
Plato gives us many illustrious Characters of a Civil Magistrate. 1. Wisdom
natural.
(1) He makes Prudence and Wisdom an essential constitutive Quality or
Requisite of a good Magistrate. Thus (...), It is convenient that he who
manageth the greatest affairs, should participate of the greatest wisdom.
There is a twofold wisdom required to the constitution of a well qualified
Magistrate. [1] He must be invested with a natural Sagacitie and Dexterity of
judging Persons and Things. Thus Plato, Repub. 2. page 376. compares the
Sagacitie of a Magistrate to that of a Dog, which can at the first glance
discern his friend from his enemy. Thence Aristotle, Rhet. l. 1. c. 16. page
76. compares a good Magistrate to a Goldsmith: (...), A Judge must be like a
Goldsmith, that he may discriminate adulterine just from what is true. This
natural sagacitie Solomon was in an incomparable degree endued with, as it
appears by his sentence given in the case of the two Harlots. [2] As he must
have natural sagacitie, 2. Acquired.
so also acquired Wisdom and Prudence. Thus Plato, Gorg. page 489. (...), Often
therefore one wise man is more excellent than an infinite number of fools, as
thou say; and it is most consent aneous, that this wise man obtain the
Empire; and that those are subject to him. By which he instructes us, That wise
men ought to rule, and fools obey. Whence he adds, page 490. (...), For this I
conceive to be just by nature, that the prudent is the more excellent, and that
he ought to rule over the more vile. Wherein he lays down two Maxims of
State. (1) That the more prudent men are, the more excellent they are: (2) That
the more excellent men are, the more fit to rule. The reason of this Maxim is
taken from the foundation of al Empire, which arises from that (...) or
supereminence of the Ruler above the Ruled. And because prudence is principally
acquired by multitude of years and experience, therefore Plato institutes, that
Magistrates be chosen out of the more ancient Citizens. So Repub. 3. page 412.
(...), That the Seniors ought to rule, and the juniors to be ruled. Thus among
the Romans the Senators were elected out of the more ancient Citizens, and the
juniors employed in War. Which was but an Imitamen of the Judaic Polity. How
much wisdom is essential to a Civil Magistrate Plato often inculcates. Thus
Repub. 5. (...), Either let Philosophers reign in the Cities, or let Kings
philosophise. His mind is, that Kings ought to have the wisdom of Philosophers
joined to their Majesty, in order to their more happy Gubernation. This
Plutarch takes notice of as an excellent Character in Numa Pompilius: Under
Numa, says he, there was constant peace without innovation or conspiracy:
which verified that of Plato, that the only mean of true quiet and remedy from
al evil, is when, from some divine Ordinance from above, there meets in one
person the right Majesty of a King, and the mind of a wise Philosopher, to
make Virtue Governesse over men. So Campanella, in his Politics, Cap. 3.
observes, That Wisdom only rules well and naturally; not sophistic, but
philosophic; not eremitic or monastic, but civil; not opposite to God, but
supposite or subordinate.

There is a threefold acquired Wisdom or Prudence necessary to the right
qualification of a Civil Magistrate. 1. Knowledge of human Laws.
[1] He ought to understand well (...), the first Principes of Right and Law.
Thus Plato, Rep. 6. (...), etc. I conceive therefore, that he, who ignores or
knows not the reasons of just and honest, deserves not the name of a Keeper or
Magistrate. It is an Effate among Civilians, That (...), or the Law of Equity
lies in the bosom of the Magistrate, i. e. he ought to have clear notices not
only of municipal Laws proper to Nations, but also of the Law of Equity,
whereby he ought frequently to direct himself for the correcting the defects
and excesses of municipal Laws. Whence it is also an Aphorism in Justinian's
Law, That ignorance excuses a man from public Office.

2 Knowledge of Factes.
[2] A Civil Magistrate must have not only knowledge of Law both natural and
municipal, but also a particular comprehension of Factes and Cases that may
occur. A Magistrates prudence consistes not only in the knowledge of the Law,
but also in the application of it to matters of Fact, and particular Cases that
may occur. For there are no human general precepts so universal, but such
circumstances may occur, as may cause much variation in matter of Justice. It Is
a good observation of the Philosopher, That (...), prudence is about things
singular, which are much varied by circumstances of Time, Place, Persons, etc.
Therefore the prudence of Magistrates ought to inquire, not only what is
lawful, but also what is expedient in this or that case. Much of politic
prudence consistes not so much in understanding the Rule, as in applying it to
the Case ruled. It Is a good observation of Padre Paul, that great Venetian
Politician, That it is proper to the Prince alone to know what is expedient.
None knows how to govern a Territory but the Prince himself, who alone
knows all the necessities of it. I shall conclude this Character touching the
Wisdom of a Magistrate, with what Plutarch in the Life of Lycurgus observes
touching his Prudence: Men, says he, communly disdain those that are not wise
in commanding; so that the faithful obedience of the Subjects depends much on
the sufficient Command of the wise Prince: for he that directs well, must
needs be well obeyed. For look as the art of a good Rider is to make his horse
gentle and ready at command; even so the chiefest point belonging unto a Prince
is to teach his Subjects to obey. Wherefore the Lacedaemonians procured, that
not only other people did willingly obey them, but also desired to be ruled by
them.

[3] A Civil Magistrate must have also some knowledge of the Divine Law. Thus
Deuteronomy. 17.18. 3. Knowledge of divine Laws. Deuteronomy. 17.18, 19, 20.
And it shall be, when he sits upon the Throne [ i. e. as King] that he shall
write for himself the copy of this law in a book, out of that which is before
the Priests and Levites. The original Book of the Law was kept in the
Sanctuary, as Deuteronomy. 31.26. and ot of that was the Kings Copy to be written
with his own hand, for his instructiion how to govern. Thence it follows v.
19. And it shall be with him: i. e. in all places whither he went, he was to
carry this Copy of the Law with him: and why? that follows: that he may learn
to fear Jehova his God, etc. The fear of Jehova includes not only interne
Affection and Reverence, but also the externe Worship and Service of God, yea
al Religion. Thence follows another end v. 20. That his heart be not lift up
above his brethren, etc. Because the Dignity of a King is so august and great,
therefore he is to be much versed in the Divine Law to keep him humble, as
David was, Psalm. 131.1, 2.

(2) Another essential Character of Quality of a Civil Magistrate is Virtue.
2. Virtue.
There is a twofold Virtue requisite to the right constitution of a Magistrate;
the one natural, the other moral. [1] A Magistrate ought to have a natural
Virtue which consistes in an heroic Spirit and natural Grace as to his externe
presence, Natural.
whereby he sweetly, and yet with Majesty draws his Subjects to obey him.
Those whom divine Gubernation intends for Empire he often indues with a great and
heroic natural Spirit. Thus Plutarch mentions of Lycurgus, in his Life, page
47. As for Lycurgus, the Spartans thought of him thus; that he was a man borne
to rule, to command, and to give order; as having in him a certain antural
Grace, and power to draw men naturally to obey him. But yet, [2] the main
Virtue requisite for the qualification of a Magistrate is moral. Moral.
Thus Plato, Leg. 12. p. 966. (...), It shall not be permitted, Virtus
praecellens in Rege praecipua causa est regnandi civiliter. Wicles.
that any take on him a public Office, but he who with much labor and firm
faith has embraced a pious sentiment of God. Again: (...), We must endeavor,
that the Censors of manners be divine men. Again: (...), Wherefore the Censors
ought to be most illustrious for a manner of Virtue. Again he says, (...),
That none ought to be chosen a Keeper of the Laws, but he that is divine. So
Bacon, in the Life of Henry VII. page 26. says, That it is incongruous, that
they should give Laws to others, who are themselves lawless. Whence Plato,
Repub. 3. page 416. says, That a Magistrate should have his gold not in his
purse, but in his mind, meaning Virtue, as in what immediately follows.

(3) Plato requires of a Civil Magistrate, 3. Public spirited and against
self-seeking.
that he be of a public Spirit, not avaricious or confined to his private
interest. Thus Plato, Minos, page 321. (...), Those therefore of the Ancients
were the best Legislators, and Pastors of the people: as Homer calls a good
Imperator the Pastor of the people. Now a Pastor, specially of men, implies a
public Spirit, free from self-interest. Thence he adds, Repub. 1. page 347.
(...), Therefore good man affect Empire not for lucre's sake, nor yet for honor
-- for they are not amb^ttose. Again: (...), For if the City consisted of good
men, the Citizens would strive to avoid the office of a Magistrate, as now they
contend for it. Thence it is apparent, that a genuine Magistrate is so
spirited, as not to seek his own private interest, but the public good of those
subject to him.

This Theme Plato more fully prosecutes, A Magistrates Diet and Richesses.
Repub. 3. page 416. where he shows, That Magistrates ought so far only to be
furnished with Richesses and other necessaries, (...), etc. as that they may
not cease to approve themselves the best Conservators: i. e. lest being made
drunken with too much prosperity, they wax insolent and worse, to the public
detriment of the Citizens. Consider therefore whether it be not better, that
they be so furnished with necessaries, as to life and habitation, that they
possess nothing as proper, but what urgent necessity requires. Moreover, that
they have neither house nor Buterie, but what is open for all. But as to their
provision and Diet, that they have so great plenty, as temperate Soldiers need:
and that they receive such a salarie for the discharge of their Office from the
Citizens, as that they may neither want, nor have what is superfluous. But this
must be inculcated on their spirits, (...), that they ever have gold and
silver, and that truly divine and august, in their Soul, so that they need not
men's gold and silver.

(4) For the acquirement of these Qualifications Plato requires that Civil
Magistrates have the best Institution and Education. 4. Magistrates Education
and Examen.
Thus Repub. 2. page 376. treating copiosely of the Institution of a
Magistrate, he distributes the Discipline, in which he ought to be instituted,
into (...), Gymnastic and Music: by Gymnastic Discipline he understands such
Virtues as appertain to an Active life, namely Temperance, Fortitude, Justice,
etc. by Music Discipline he means such Virtues as concern Piety and Religion,
which is the Music of the Soul and Republics. So again in his Repub. 3. page
395. he shows, how a Magistrate ought to be instituted and instructed even from
his infance in the best Principes and Exemples. And he gives the reason of it:
(...), Because imitations imbibed from the childhood, and of long continuance
are converted into Manners and Nature: According to that commun Effate, Custom
is a second Nature. Neither ought a Magistrate to have good Education only, but
also general Approbation. So Repub. 3. page 413. (...), And he that has been
tried thoroughout the degrees of al ages, namely of Childhood, Youth, and
virile Age, and on that examen has approved himself innocent and spotless, let
him be constituted Prince and Conservator of the City.

These Qualifications of a politic Magistrate are more lively and perfectly
laid down in sacred Philosophy. Qualifications of Magistrates in Scripture.
Exodus 18.21.
Thus Jethro, as inspired by God, to Moses, Exodus 18.21. And thou, provide out
of all the people, men of ability, fearing God, men of truth, hating avarice.
(1) (...), men of Ability. Or of Power, Force, Virtue, Activitie: i. e.
virtuose, active, and able men, in body and mind, as Genesis 47.6. LXX. able or
potent men. The Hebrews describe them thus: Men of Ability are such as are
potent in the Commandments, and exactly look unto themselves, and subjugate
their passions, so that there remains nothing dishonest or reprocheful in them,
nor evil name. And generally Able men are such as have a potent or courageous
heart, to deliver the oppressed out of the oppressors hand, as Moses, Exodus
2.17. Maimonides, in Sanhedr. cap. 2. sect. 7. (2) (...), men of Truth: i. e.
just men. So LXX. also Zech. 7.9. so Maimonides, in Sanhed. cap. 2. sect. 7.
Men of Truth are such as follow after justice for it self, who do love the
truth, etc. (3) Fearing God, i. e. religiose. (4) Hating Avarice, Deuteronomy. 16.19.
To these four Qualities here expressed three more are added, Deuteronomy. 1.13.
Deuteronomy. 1.13. (5) Wise men, (6) and Understanding, (7) and Known, i. e.
approved. Under which seven proprieties the Hebrews include al other good
Qualities, as Maimonides Sanhedr. cap. 2. sect. 7. Hence,

3. A Magistrates Faculty and Authority.
From the Aptitude and Qualification of a Magistrate we pass on to his
Faculty, Commission, and Authority, which is the second essential part. For
Civilians make two essential constitutive parts of any politic Administrator:
(1) His Aptitude, which has been already dispatched, (2) his Faculty or
Commission; whence his Authority does proceed: of which we are now to
discourse. 1. Divine.
(1) As for the Original Faculty, Commission and Authority of al Magistrates,
Plato assures us, that it comes from God the supreme Rector of the Universe. So
Leg. 4. page 713. (...), etc. When Saturn [ i. e. God] understood no human
nature was able to govern human affairs, but if it should govern al
according to its will, the World would be filled with all contumely and
injustice; he constituted as Governors over human Societies not men, but Demons
of a more divine and excellent nature. The great difficulty here will be, to
find out who those Demons were, which God constituted as the first Magistrates.
I conceive by these Platonic Demons we are to understand [1] the Patriarchs and
the great Hero's, who were the first Magistrates, whereof Plato had many
notices. [2] But yet these Demons formally include the Souls of great men
deified, which the wiser Philosophers constituted as Mediators between the
supreme God and men, as also Administrators of human affairs, in imitation of
the Judaic Messiah, (whereof they had many imperfect fragments and Traditions)
as we have at large proved, Philos. Genesis P. 1. l. 3. c. 4. sect. 4. as also,
Court Gent. P. 3. B. 2. C. 2. S. 2.. 3.

And herein Plato imitates Moses, who makes the Faculty, Commission, and
Constitution of Magistrates to be from God. Number. 27.16, 17.
So Number. 27.16. Let Jehovah the God of the Spirits of al flesh. He terms
Jehovah the God of the Spirits of al flesh, not only as Creator of men's Souls,
but also as he gives them spiritual Gifts, of Wisdom, Knowledge, Government,
etc. So Spirit is used, 1 Cor. 14.12. God first qualifies men with an Aptitude
or Gifts; and thence follows the Constitution or Ordination: Set a man over the
Congregation. Set or Visit, i. e. provide or constitute for Bishop or Overseer:
who therefore is called v. 17. a Pastor or Sheepherd. So among the Grecians,
Homer, Plato, and others, a Magistrate is styled the Pastor of the people.
Whence it follows, v. 17. which may go out before them, etc. By this Hebraic
Idiome of going out and coming in, and that which follows, leading out and
bringing in, is noted the Administration of the Civil Magistrate, as Deuteronomy.
31.2. alluding to the office of a Sheepherd, who in these times and countries
went out from and came into the Fold before his sheep: whence the same phrase
is applied by our Lord to himself as Pastor of Souls, Joh. 10.4, 9. Thus God is
said to choose David his servant, Psalm. 78.70. Whence Magistrates are said to
be, Psalm. 82.6. Gods, and the children of the most High: i. e. constituted and
appointed to their Office by God. Thence also God says Esa. 22.20. I will call
my servant Eliakim: Esa. 22.20, 21, 22.
i. e. he shall not intrude into his place, but be called by God. So much the
very name (...) Eliakim importes, namely one raised up or settled by God, as
Jehojakim. Thence he adds v. 21. And I will clothe him with thy robe, and
strengthen him with thy girdle: i. e. I will give him thy power and authority,
and confirm him in thy place. The Robe and Girdle were Emblemes of Power and
Office. Thence it follows: and I will commit thy government into his hand, etc.
So v. 22. The key of the house of David will I lay upon his shoulder, etc. The
Key was also an Emblem of Power and Authority. As for the seat of the divine
Faculty, Commission, and Authority, from which al Civil Magistrates derive
their Authority originally, it is loged in the Law of Nature, particularly in
that moral Precept, Honor thy father, etc. which gives divine constitution to
the power of the Civil Magistrate. This we have more fully laid down in the N.
T. The powers that be are ordained by God, (...), i. e. are ordained by the
constitution and commission of God.

(2) As for the human Faculty, 2. Human.
Commission, and Authority of the Magistrate, Plato derives it from the peoples
Election and Consent. So Repub. lib. 2. (...). Thus Leg. 6. treating of the
Election of Magistrates, he says, Such should be chosen as are most eminent
for prudence and probitie, and best qualified for the Offices they are elected
unto; as also will attend the same with fidelity and industry. The terms used
to express this Election and Creation by, are (...).

(3) Touching the Authority of Civil Magistrates Plato makes it to be not
Absolute, 3. Magistrates Conservators of the Law.
but Subordinate to the Law: For his great Character of a Magistrate is, that
he be (...), a Conservator and Minister of the Law. He lays down this for a
fundamental Principe, That a Magistrate may not do what he list, but what he
ought. Thus Alcibiad. 1. page 134. where Socrates instructes young Alcibiades
in this manner: (...), Therefore remember, that Power and Empire is not to be
acquired, that thou may rule over thy self or the City as thou list, but
according to justice and wisdom. Thence in his Politicus, page 276. he
distributes civil Government into, (...), Tyrannic and Voluntary. Tyrannic
Government he makes to be violent, when Subjects are forced against Law; but
voluntary, when men are governed by their own Laws: and this kind of
Administration he says becomes most, (...), one that is truly a King and
Civil Magistrate. So page 305. he makes a Civil Magistrate to be (...), the
Conservator or Keeper of Laws. Hence he cites a great Saying of Pindar: (...),
Pindar says, the Law is King over al, both mortals and immortals. Whence that
Latin Effate, Lex est Rex, The Law is King. The subordination of the Civil
Magistrate to Law, Plato more fully expresses, Leg. 4. page 715. (...), etc. I
have styled Magistrates Ministers of the Law not from an affectation of
novitie; but because I am persuaded, that the safety of a Republic consistes
herein; but the peste and ruin in the contrary. And he subjoins the reason of
this his persuasion: (...), For I behold ruin prepared for and present to that
City, in which Laws are not superior to the Magistrates, but Magistrates to
the Laws: but, on the contrary, safety to that City, where the Law rules over
Magistrates, and Magistrates are Servants of the Law, i. e. they subject
themselves to the Law and obey the same. For I apprehend al manner of good
things, which God usually confers on Cities, to attend this City. So
prosperous is the condition of that City, wherein the Magistrates
Administration and Jurisdiction is bounded and circumscribed by, as also
subordinate to the Law, which is, to speak in Pindars phrase, the King both of
Magistrates and People. Whence, Leg. 6. page 761. (...), But let no Judge or
Magistrate be exemted and free from rendering accounts, but let him render the
account of his discharge of his Office to the Citizens: only those excepted,
unto whom the last Appeal is made, according to the exemple of the Regal power.
Whence page 767. he adds: (...), But in public crimes it is in the first place
necessary, that the affair be brought to the community or multitude: for when
the City is affected with an injury, it belongs to al to take cognizance
thereof: therefore the people may justly take it il, if the cognizance of such
affairs should be wrested from them. Therefore the beginning and end of this
controversy ought to be brought to the people, but the examen and dijudication
to the three chief Magistrates. Thence Definit. Platon. page 415. (...),
Authority is defined, the Tuition of the Law.

4. The Magistrates Exercice of his Office.
Next to the Faculty and Authority of the Civil Magistrate we are to consider
him in the actual Administration or Exercice of his Office, which ought to be
performed with the greatest exactitude and fidelity. It Is a good observation
of Aristotle, Rhet. l. 2. c. 19. (...), Dignity makes great men more
conspicuous and illustrious: wherefore such act with greater moderation and
exactitude. Whence also that great Aphorism of Pittachus, mentioned by
Laertius: (...), Magistratie or Government discovers what the man is. If there
be an irregular principe or passion in a Magistrate, it usually appears in the
exercice of his Office. Therefore Plato, Leg. 12. requires, That a Magistrate
be most eminent for all manner of Virtues, as before. Now the main Virtues which
ought to appear most illustriously in a Magistrates exercice of his Office, are
such as these, Justice, Temperance, Moderation as to passions, Clemence,
Self-denial, Courage, Industry and Fidelity, of which we find many and great
Philosophemes in Plato.

(1) The Magistrates Administration of his Office must be with Justice, 1.
Justice and against Briberie.
without Briberie, Partiality, and al Respect of persons. Hence Plato, Leg.
12. requires, (...), That a Judge be sworn before he come to judge. And that
he may pass a righteous Sentence, he also ordaines, Demodocus, page 383.
(...), Neither judge any cause before thou have heard both parties. And against
Briberie he speaks expressly, Leg. 12. (...), That a Magistrate ought to
administer Justice without Gifts. Yea the 12 Tables determine, That a Judge
convicted of Briberie shall be punished with death. Briberie in Courts of
Judicature is like judicial Astrology, which, as Tacitus observes, is always
forbidden, and yet always retained. But sacred Philosophy does strictly oblige
Magistrates to the exercice of Justice, and against al Briberie, in their
Administrations. So Psalm. 82.1. Psalm. 82.1, 2.
God stands in the congregation of the mighty. (...) stands, i. e. as
President and supreme Judge, teaching others how they are to judge, and
punishing them if peccant. So it follows: he judges among the Gods: i. e.
rewarding those that are faithful, but punishing the unfaithful and unjust.
Thence v. 2. How long will ye judge unjustly and accept the persons of the
wicked? Selah. As if he had said: Dare ye be so unjust and partial, when as God
sits President in the midst of you? -- (...) and accept the face or person of
the wicked, as Lev. 19.15. Ezra renders it: lift up the faces of the wicked: i.
e. by your favor exhilarate and make glad the wicked. Thence he procedes v. 3,
4. to exhort the Judges to the execution of justice. And v. 5. he shows the
ruins that follow on unjust Administrations: v. 5.
They know not. (...). This notes their ignorance of Right or Law. Neither will
they understand -- (...). this notes their oscitance and negligence in
examining Causes, and matters of Fact. They walk in darkness, (...). This
some understand of being blinded by private Affections, and Bribes, so that
they cannot see what is just and equal; according to Exodus 23.8. And thou shall
take no gift, for the gift blinds the wise, and perverteth the words of the
just. Now by reason of these things, he says, All the foundations of the earth
[ i. e. the Judaic State] are out of course. Which shows, that injustice
destroys the very foundations of a Nation. Thus Job 15.34. And fire shall
consume the tabernacles of Briberie. How much Justice is necessary to preserve
States, and commanded by God, appears, Deuteronomy. 16.18. And they shall judge the
people with judgment of justice: Deuteronomy. 16.18,
i. e. with an equality toward al parties and in all matters. So v. 20. Justice
justice shall thou follow: i. e. al manner of justice, v. 20.
nothing but justice, exactly, diligently, continually.

(2) The Office of a Magistrate must be administered with Temperance. Temperance.
Thus Plato, Repub. 3. page 403. We have said, that the Keepers [of the Laws,
or Magistrates] be commanded, that they altogether abhor Drunkenness: for it
is lawful for any man to be drunk, rather than for a Keeper. And he gives this
reason of it: (...), For it is ridiculous, that a Keeper should want a Keeper.
Meaning that a Drunkard wants a Keeper himself, and therefore is not fit to be
the Keeper of others. Thus Solomon's Mother, Prove. 31.4.
Prove. 31.4. It is not for Kings to drink wine. Hebr. it is not convenient for
Kings to drink wine: i. e. a large quantity of it: which the Grecians term
(...), a drinker of wine, or one given to wine. Whence Plato adds, page 404.
That the diet of the Magistrate ought to be (...), simple, not (...), with
variety of dainties, which is most destructive to sanitie.

(3) Magistrates must administer their Office with moderation as to passions,
3. Moderation.
and freedom from discords. Thus Plato, Repub. 2. page 378. (...), Magistrates
of the City ought to be possessed with this sentiment, that it is the basest
thing for them to contend by mutual discords. How much irregular passions are
unbecoming a Civil Magistrate is well expressed by Aristotle, Rhet. lib. 1. cap.
1. art. 4. (...), It is not lawful to pervert a Judge, by provoking him to
anger, or to envy, or to compassion: for this is al one as if one about to use
a rule should pervert the same.

(4) Clemence also ought to be illustrious in magistratic Administrations. 4.
Clemence.
Thence Plato, Politicus, page 274. (...), We said, that a King and Civil
Magistrate is a Pastor of Mankind, and in this regard a God for mortal man.
Wherein he makes a Magistrate to be Gods Vicegerent, and a Pastor of mankind,
which denotes his clemence. Thence that of Seneca to Nero: The clemence of a
Magistrate works a shame of sin in the Subjects: that is the greatest
punishment, which comes from the mildest Magistrate, etc.

(5) Magistrates ought to exercice their Office with Self-denial, 5. Fidelity,
etc.
Diligence, Courage, and Fidelity. Thus Plato, Repub. 2. page 374. (...); Ex
quo se Caesar orbi terrarum dedicavit sibi cripuit. Seneca.
By how much the greater the Office of Magistrates is, does it not require by
so much the greater vacation, and thence the greatest art and diligence? How
much sloth and negligence is unworthy of a Civil Magistrate we are assured by
Homer, Iliad. 2. (...),
(...).
It becomes not a Magistrate to sleep swectly the whole night; to whom the
people and so great cares are committed. Again, Plato, Leg. 6. requires, that a
Judge be endued not only with judgment and prudence for the understanding of
matters, but also with fidelity in and for the determination of them.

. 8. Having explicated the essential Constitution and Administration of
Polity, we now proceed to the Utility thereof; The effects of Polity both
good and bad.
as also to what is Conservative and Destructive thereto. As for the Utility
of a good Polity we have it well laid down by Plato, in his Menexenus, page
238. (...), Polity is the Nurse of men; good truly of good men, but bad of
bad men. And we are now to explicate, that our Ancestors were educated in an
excellent form of Polity: by the benefit whereof, both those that now live
have become good, as also they which made a good end of their days. He being
about to describe the Polity of the Athenian Republic begins with a Preface,
touching the efficacious influence of good Polity, to make men good; as also
of bad, to render men bad.

Touching those things that are Preservative or Destructive of politic Bodies
Plato has given us many Philosophemes. Things destructive to Republics.
As for the Preservatives of a politic Body, they are sufficiently evident in
what precedes touching politic Constitution and Administration; and they will
farther appear by showing what things are destructive thereto. 1. 1. Atheism,
and carnal Polity.
As Religion is the main Foundation and Pillar of politic Society; so Atheism
and carnal Polity, in subjecting Religion to private interest, is that which
brings ruin to the same. What influence Atheism has on the ruin of Republics
Plato frequently inculcates, particularly in his Leg. lib. 10. and elsewhere,
as hereafter, when we come to discourse professedly of Atheism, B. 2. C. 1. S.
2. As more open Atheism, so carnal Polity in prostituting and subjecting
Religion to private interest, either of State or single persons, is a great
cause of ruin unto States. This was that which brought ruin to the ten
Tribes; who after their revolt from Rehoboam and Judah, being afraid, lest
that, if the people should go up to worship God at Jerusalem, they would again
be thereby induced to return to their old Allegiance, they, upon corrupt
reasons of State, erected Calves at Dan and Bethel; hoping thereby to keep the
people in obedience to Jeroboam, who had usurped the Government. Now this
their politic contrivement in making Religion to subserve their State-interest,
whereby they hoped to preserve their usurped Polity, proved indeed the main
cause of their destruction. So sotish is the solie of those, who endeavor, by
subjecting Religion to State-interest, to secure themselves: which is indeed
the most compendiose way to State-ruine.

2. 2. Luxury and Idleness.
Another great cause of Ruin to politic Bodies is Luxury, Sensuality and
Idleness. Plato assures us, That Polities are composed (...), out of the
manners of Republics, which, whatever way they incline, draw on other things
with them: i. e. if a Republic be given to sloth and sensuality it is near
ruin. Thus Repub. 9. page 564. he says, That idleness and prodigality are
the peste of Republics: and where these two il humors are found, they infeste a
Body politic, (...), as choler and phlegm the natural body. Thence
Aristotle, in his Politics says, That Husbandmen and Sheepherds make the best
Citizens, (...), because such converse according to Laws; for they get their
livelihood by working, neither can they be idle. Whereas other Vocations are
more obnoxious to idleness and luxury.

3. 3. Prosperity and Poverty.
Also excess of Prosperity or Poverty greatly promoves the ruin of
Republics. Prosperity hastens the ruin of Republics; as it often causes
Luxury, Insolence, and Divisions: Poverty, as it produces Injustice and
Idleness. How much excess of prosperity promoveth the ruin of a Republic
Plato, Repub. 9. page 564. illustrates, by the Republic of the Bees, which,
when it abounds with much honey, the Drones come and devour al: (...), Rich men
therefore, according to my opinion, are deservedly styled the Herb of Drones,
which they devour. Thence Plato, Repub. 4. page 421. says, That there are two
things that corrupt and debauch Citizens, and so bring ruin to Republics,
namely (...), Richesse and Penury. And he gives the reason of both. Richesse
makes men idle and factiose: An Artificer, says he, when he grows rich, casts
off his Trade. Again, poverty hinders men from work, in that it deprives them
of necessaries. Whence he concludes, That Magistrates ought to take diligent
heed, that a City be not brought to ruin, by the excess of these two,
Richesse and Poverty: whereof the former breeds (...), Luxury, Sloth, and
Innovation: and the later, (...), Sordidnesse, evil Practice, as also desires
of innovation. Again, Repub. 8. page 552. he says, Excess of richesse or
poverty threaten ruin, because the former makes men Drones; and the later
makes men Thieves, sacrilegious, and addicted to evil practices.

4. Animosities, Factions, and Divisions are a principal cause of State-ruine.
4. Divisions.
It Is a Maxim of Politicians, concordant with Plato's Politics, That the
principal causes of ruin to politic Bodies is from themselves, as in Bodies
natural: And what more potent principe of self-dissolution is there than
Division? Sacred Philosophy teaches us, That a kingdom divided cannot stand,
Mat. 12.25.
as Mat. 12.25. for indeed Division in althings naturally draws on dissolution.
Plato, Repub. 4. assures us, That Unity is the best bond of any Society,
whereas divisions cause dissolution. Thence Repub. 5. page 464. he requires in
his Republic, That there be a Community as well of Goods as Affections, (...),
whence truly it comes to pass, that men are free from al contentions and
divisions.

5. The last cause we shall mention of State-ruine is Injustice. 5. Injustice.
Thus Plato, Repub. 4. page 444. makes Injustice to be (...), the vitiositie,
(...), and the disease of persons and Republics. This is well set forth by
Augustine, de Civit. l. 4. c. 4. Without Justice what are Kingdoms but great
places of Robbery? And what are places of Robbery but little Kingdoms? For
indeed the Pirate taken by Alexander, being asked by the King, What he meant
thus to infeste the Sea, answered elegantly and truly, And what meanest thou
thus to infeste the whole World? But because I play the Pirate in a little
Ship, therefore I pass for a Robber: whereas thou doing the same with a great
Navy, passest for an Emperor. See more of politic Justice and Injustice, in
what precedes,. 7. Parag. 4.

REFORMED PHILOSOPHY. BOOK II.
Of Metaphysic or Prime Philosophy: wherein Plato's Metaphysic Philosophemes
are methodised and improved.
CHAP. I. Of Metaphysic or Prime Philosophy in general.
A general Idea of Metaphysic or Prime Philosophy: Its generic notion,
Sapience: Its Object things most excellent, etc. Its difference from Theology,
as a natural Sapience: Its formal Act, Contemplation.

. 1. Metaphysic or prime Philosophy in general.
BEfore we enter on the body of Metaphysic or Prime Philosophy it will be
necessary that we give some general Notion thereof, thereby to disabuse the
minds of men, who have been so long imposed on by false Ideas, collected out of
Aristotle's supposed Metaphysics. For since Aristotle's Metaphysics possessed
the Schools, al men have endeavored to conform their metaphysic Philosophemes
to them, as the original Exemplar, on a supposition that they were a part of
Aristotle's genuine Works. But I conceive it no difficult thing to
demonstrate, what some Learned men have undertaken, that those Metaphysics,
which pass under Aristotle's name, are spurious, and not to be reckoned among
his genuine Works. For who can imagine, that such a learned and accurate man
as Aristotle was, should be guilty of so great an absurdity, as to stuff up a
great part of his Metaphysics, with the ten Predicaments, and other Logic
Notions, which he had so prolixely handled in his Organ of Logic? May we not
take it for granted, that nothing properly belongs to Metaphysics, but what is
supernatural, as the name importes? Yea does not the synonymous title, that
Aristotle is said to give this Science, cut off above the moitie of his
Metaphysics? For Stobaeus tells us, That it was Aristotle's manner to call
Metaphysic, Theology. And this indeed he learned from his Master Plato, who
seems to attribute unto Metaphysic one and the same Idea with natural
Theology; the object whereof is God and things supernatural, so far as they
may be contemplated by natural light. Hence we may define Metaphysic, or Prime
Philosophic, according to Plato's mind, A natural Sapience or Theology, for
the contemplation of things supernatural and divine.

As for the generic Idea or Notion of Metaphysic the Platonists general term
is (...), Sapience; which is deduced from (...) Sophe, Metaphysic Sapience.
a Speculator or Contemplator; because the ancient wise men were Contemplators,
specially of things divine. Indeed Cicero, Tusc. 4. calls al Philosophy, the
study of Sapience: but the Grecian Philosophers, Socrates, Plato, and
Aristotle seem to confine Sapience to Metaphysic: wherefore they define it, the
knowledge of things most excellent and divine, specially the first Being and
Cause of althings. Whence they make the Object of this Sapience to be in the
general (1) (...), things most excellent and eximious, as the first Being and
Cause: (2) (...), things wonderful: i. e. such oriental Traditions as Thales,
Pythagoras, and Plato brought from the Barbarics, namely the Hebrews, etc.
touching the first Origin of Things, the Wonders of Providence, the Worship of
God, and Mysteries of Religion: which Aristotle estimed (...), things inutile;
because beyond the sphere of his confined corrupt Reason. Whence he styles
those first Philosophers, who traded in such oriental Traditions (...), Lovers
of Fables or Traditions: For, says he, a Fable is composed of things
wonderful. (3) (...), things most difficult to be known, namely Immaterials.
(4) (...), things divine. It was a general Principe among the Ancients, (...),
Sapience is a Science of things divine. Hence they made Sapience to be the same
with Theology. (5) (...), that which essentially is; also (...), that which
always existes; again, (...), Being it self; and lastly (...), Being simply, or
the first Being, namely God. For Plato generally by (...), Ens or Being,
understandes the first independent Being, God, in comparison of whom althings
else are said not to be, or to be mere nothings, as hereafter cap. 3.. 1.
Thence Plato makes Sapience to be (...), the knowledge of Being, i. e. God.
Whence also among the Egyptians, in the Temple dedicated to Minerva, the
Goddess of Wisdom, there was this Inscription: I am that which was, which is,
which shall be. Which is contained in the Mosaic description of God, Exodus 3.14.
Exodus 3.14. and denotes thus much, that God, who is the first, yea only
independent essential Being, is the prime Cause and supreme Object of al
Sapience, of which hereafter more fully. As for the proper act, properties and
effects of Sapience in the general, we have fully handled them, in Philos. Genesis
P. 2. l. 2. c. 4.

. 2. Metaphysic a natural Sapience.
We define Metaphysic a natural Sapience, whereby it is distinguished from
supernatural divine Theology. It Is true, Plato seems to make al Sapience
divine and supernatural. Thus in his Epino. page 989. he makes al true knowledge
of God to be from God. So Repub. 6. page 483. he proves, That the mind of man
needs divine illumination for the understanding things divine, as much as the
eye needs the light of the Sun to see things visible. Hence also Plotinus, En.
5. l. 8. c. 5. page 546. makes God to be the essential Sapience, from whom all the rays of created Sapience stream, as beams from the Sun. But in as much as
these Gentile Philosophers came altogether short of al supernatural knowledge of
God, which since the Fall of man is by God appropriated to the second Covenant,
it necessarily follows, that if we will make Metaphysic a Science distinct from
supernatural Christian Theology, it can be no other than a natural Sapience of
objects supernatural: such as the wiser of the Philosophers, Pythagoras,
Socrates, and Plato attained unto, partly by the advantage they had from
oriental Traditions, and partly from the working of their own inquisitive minds
thereon. So that by Metaphysic here we understand only that natural Sapience,
which Plato and other Philosophers gained by their own inquisitive thoughts,
dwelling on oriental Traditions, and may be further improved by natural
contemplation on objects supernatural. For we see by daily experience what
great contemplations of God and things divine the natural mind of man may
arrive unto, by means of supernatural Revelations, and the workings of his own
thoughts thereon, together with some more commun illuminations of the Spirit;
without any supernatural divine knowledge. We find this fully exemplified in
multitudes of Platonic mystic Divines, who have given us many raised sublime
spiritual notions of some of the highest Mysteries in Theology, without any
supernatural knowledge or sense thereof. The same may be said of many
Schole-men, their contemplations of God and things divine. Again we call
Metaphysic a natural Sapience, as it has for its fundament or proper ground
rational Arguments, whereby it is distinguished from supernatural Theology,
which has for its proper ground and foundation divine Testimony and Authority.
In Metaphysic, as it is a part of Philosophy, Reason is the highest Authority;
but in Theology the Authority of God is the highest Reason. Yet in as much as
Metaphysic ought to be subordinate to Theology, we also may, yea ought
sometimes to explicate and demonstrate several parts thereof by divine
Testimonies. For as Metaphysic at first borrowed its object from Theology, so
some of its best Arguments, Demonstrations and Explications are to be fetched
thence.

. 3. The proper Act of Metaphysic is Contemplation: The proper act of
metaphysic Contemplation.
whereby it is distinguished from moral Prudence, which chiefly regards Action.
Thence in the Platonic Definitions, Sapience is defined (...), a contemplative
Science. Not that Socrates or Plato excluded Action from Sapience and
Metaphysic, or Contemplation from moral Prudence and Ethics: for no active
Science can be well managed without contemplation, neither is any contemplative
Science right, if it end not in Action. So that contemplative and active
Sciences, according to Socrates and Plato, are not to be opposed, but composed,
and made subordinate each to other; at least the former to the later:
Contemplation ought to assist Action in Morals; and Action ought to crown
Contemplation in Metaphysics. When therefore we make Contemplation the proper
Act of Metaphysic, in distinction from Action, which is the proper effect of
moral Prudence, it must be understood, not in Aristotle's sense, who makes
contemplative or speculative, and active or practic Sciences opposite species,
and so inconsistent each with other; but in Plato's, who, Repub. 2. distributes
Disciplines into (...), Music or Contemplative, and Gymnastic or Active: the
former he makes to respect things divine, and the later things human. Whence
the object of Metaphysic being things divine, its proper Act must necessarily
be Contemplation: For the highest and most noble act of the Soul about things
supernatural and divine is contemplation; whence al Affections and Actions
proportionable thereto follow in their course. Hence the formal Beatitude of
the rational Soul is generally placed in vision or contemplation as the
principal part thereof.

This Contemplation, Contemplation of God the most excellent.
wherein the Platonists place the formal Act of Sapience or Metaphysic, is well
described by Alcinous, in his Systeme of Platonic Philosophy: (...),
Contemplation is a vigorous operation of the Intellect understanding things
intelligible. The proper object of this Contemplation they make to be Truth,
specially the first Truth, whereby the life of the Understanding is nourished
and maintained. Thence Plato, Repub. 6. page 485. tells us, That nothing is more
akin to Wisdom or Metaphysic than Truth. And in his Timaeus, page 90. he makes
Contemplation of Truth, principally divine, to be the proper motion of the
Soul. And more expressly, Repub. 5. page 475. he says, Those only are true
Philosophers, who are much conversant (...), in the contemplation of that which
essentially is, namely God: also, (...), such as are most greedy to contemplate
the first Truth. So, in his Phaedrus, page 247. he assures us, That the
contemplation of God with a pure mind, furnishes us with all other convenient
cogitations: for the Soul contemplating that which truly is, and acquiescing
in this contemplation, is thereby nourished and recreated with the highest
pleasures: and then having acquired the genuine Sapience or Science of that
which essentially is, and immutably such, being as it were fested with these
delices, it again enters into the interior parts of Heaven and returns home.
Wherein he gives us a lively description of those satisfactorie pleasures and
delights, which attend the contemplation of God. Thus in the Schools they
usually determine, That a contemplative life is more excellent than an active:
and they ground their determination on the preference that our Lord gives to
Marie, Luke 10.42.
Luke 10.42. And their reasons are such as these: because a contemplative life
is, (1) more tranquille and serene: (2) more desirable for it self: (3) more
permanent and lasting: (4) more self-sufficient and satisfactorie: (5) more
delicious and sweet: (6) more agreeable to man's more noble part, the Soul: (7)
more divine and beatific. Which being understood of the contemplation of God,
holds most true, provided that this contemplation be rightly qualified, namely
that it be real, pure, spiritual, lively, distinct, firm, solid, affective,
effective and influential on the divine life.

CHAP. II. Of Atheism, and the Existence of a Deity.
The Origin of Atheism, (1) from Polytheisme, (2) from vain Philosophy and
carnal Polity, (3) from the carnal Mind, Pride, etc. Three sorts of Atheism:
practic Atheism worst. The pestiferous Influences and punishment of Atheism.
The Existence of the Deity demonstrated from, (1) Universal Consent. (2) A
first Cause: against the Eternity of Matter, etc. (3) A first Mover. (4) The
Order of the Universe. (5) The innate Idea of a Deity in the Soul. (6) Practic
Arguments from [1] Conscience. [2] Religion. [3] The politic World. [4] The
Atheists enmity against a Deity.

. 1. HAving given some summary general Idea of Metaphysic, That there is a God.
we now descend to its principal Object, namely God; who may be considered
either in regard of his Being, or Operations. As for the Being of God, the
first thing to be undertaken, is the demonstration, that there is a God. Plato
abounds with many pregnant and cogent Arguments to demonstrate the Existence of
God, against the Atheists of his Age. We shall reduce the whole to the following
particulars.

First, Plato explicates the original roots of Atheism, The Origin of
Atheism.
which began to spring up in his days, with its prodigiose nature, and
pestiferous malign influences. 1. He expounds to us some of the principal
roots of Atheism. Thus, de Legib. 12. page 967. (...), There are some who
think, that they who are much conversant in the studies of these Arts and
Sciences, namely Astronomy, and other cognate necessary Disciplines, become
Atheists; from an apprehension, that things are made and governed by the
necessities of certain natural Causes, and not by the force and providence of
the divine Will. In which Platonic Philosopheme there are these Propositions
worthy of our contemplation. (1) That there was an opinion abroad, that the
Mathematics and other Sciences made many Atheists. (2) That Philosophy abused
made men Atheists, by resolving all the Products, Events, and Phenomena of the
natural and politic World into natural Causes, not the divine Will and
Providence. (3) That these Atheistic infusions and persuasions sprang not
really from Philosophy, but the abuse thereof. These Platonic notions we shall
endeavor more fully to explicate in the following Propositions.

1. Atheism 1. from Polytheisme.
Atheism was not the firstborn of corrupt Nature, but was ushered into the
World by Polytheisme, its elder Brother, and nursed up by vain Philosophy and
carnal Policy. So long as the Deity maintained an awe and reverence toward
it self in the consciences of men, by a sense of its prodigiose operations in
creating and governing the World, Atheism found no place in Nature. We hear
little of it til the beginning of the Roman Monarchy: at which time God
withdrew the sensible experiments and prodigiose effects of his Omnipotence,
which had so long preserved the old World from Atheism: But beginning now to
govern the World more by wisdom, without those miraculose operations before
vouchsafed to the infant-world, the effects of his power were not so sensible:
whence the brutish sensual World began to call in question the very existence
and providence of God, and that from the many ridiculous Deities which were
idolized by men. For Polytheisme gave a great advance to Atheism: To multiply
the Divinity is to destroy it: he that has power to believe many Gods, is very
capable of falling into Atheism, to believe there is no God. The corrupt mind
of man observing bright impresses and characters of the Deity in the works of
his hands, began very early to worship the Creature instead of the Creator,
Romans 1.19-23. Hence sprang up first Zabaisme or planetary Deities, and then
Hellenisme or Polytheisme, a multiplicitie of al manner of Gods; which laid a
foundation for Atheism: For he that is inclined to believe a plurality of
Gods, may easily be induced to believe there is no God. So intimate is the
cognation and connection between Polytheisme and Atheism: As the Atheist
believes there is no God, so the Polytheist, or superstitiose person wishes
there were none: for all superstition has a legal fear wrapped up in its bowels,
which strikes at the very Being of the Deity. But albeit Polytheisme opened
the door to Atheism, yet it was hatched, nursed up and maintained by vain
Philosophy and carnal Policy, as we have at large proved, Court Gent. P. 3.
B. 2. C. 1.. 4.

2. 2. From vain Philosophy and carnal Policy.
Philosophy abused makes men Atheists, by resolving all the Phenomena of
Nature, and States into natural Causes, exclusively as to the Divine Will and
Providence. This lies evident in Plato's Philosopheme before cited. Who makes
mention (1) of Astronomy, and other parts of Mathematics, as influential on
Atheism. For the Pagan Astronomers then, as many judicial Astrologers now,
held, that there was a natural subordination of al inferior Causes and Effects
to the Stars: whence they reduced al natural effects, yea many politic, to
abstract forms and figures: to some insensible Influences or fatal Necessity.
Again, Mathematicians inuring themselves to ocular sensible Demonstrations,
expect the same in divine matters: a bare Testimony, though never so divine,
signifies little or nothing with them: whence they disbelieve every divine
Mystery, which falls not under certain rational Demonstration. Witness the
great Leviathan of our Age and Nation, (for so he is pleased to title his Book)
who has not been ashamed to make public profession of his Atheism, and
disbelief of althings, which admit not of sensible Demonstration. (2)
Physiologie or natural Philosophy, as also Medicine has had no small influence
on Atheism; in that some of the principal Masters in these Sciences have
endeavored to reduce al natural products and effects, either to the accidental
Concurse of Atoms; or to some hidden virtues and spirits in Nature; or to the
various modifications of matter; or to some mundane Spirit, exclusive as to the
first Cause and divine Providence. Thus we find the first appearance of
Atheism to be among those philosophic Wits of Greece, Democritus, Epicurus,
etc. who did al ways possible try if they could salve the Phenomena of Nature
without a Deity. (3) Eristic Logic has had too great influence on Atheism, as
Plato, Repub. 7. page 539. seems to intimate, telling us, That young men, by
frequent Dialectic litigations and contradictions each of other, at last come
to disbelieve every thing. For Scepticisme naturally tends to Atheism: he that
disputes every thing, at length comes to believe nothing, even in things
divine. (4) But yet the principal Parent and Nurse of Atheism has been in all
Ages carnal Policy. The chief lineaments of Atheism were formed at Rome, when
it became the Seat of State-policie. For the secular Politician ascribes all the
revolutions of States and human Affairs to some politic contrivement or defect
therein. And what makes the present Conclave at Rome and al their adherents so
much to abound with Atheism, but the great confidence they have in their
carnal policy? Neither has this politic Atheism infected Rome only, but also
diffused it self throughout the European World. Hence Machiavel, that great
secular Politician of Florence, lays Atheism at the foundation of his carnal
policy. And it is to be feared there are too many such politic Atheists
amongst us: some are so bold and daring, as that they are not ashamed openly to
profess it: others, by their doutful Scepticisme give cause of suspicion. I
wish we had not too strong motives to force such a belief, that a great part of
those who profess themselves Christians, had they but the advantages of
interest and such like selfish motives, could with as much facility turn
Atheists. It is natural to carnal reason and policy to step up into the Throne
of God, and take the Scepter of his Providence out of his hand, as we find it
exemplified in Nebuchadnezar, Dan. 4.30.
Dan. 4.30. Is not this great Babylon that I have built? i. e. by my wisdom
and power, etc.

3. 3. From the carnal Mind, Pride, etc.
Atheism springs not from true Philosophy, but from the abuse thereof by the
carnal mind of man. This Plato has well observed, in the place forecited, de
Leg. lib. 12. page 967. where he shows that (...), Atheists, who opposed the
existence and providence of God, as also overthrew the main fundaments of
Religion, were but (...), sophistic, spurious Philosophers. Hence that grand
Effate of Sr. Francis Bacon, That a little Philosophy makes a man an Atheist,
but a great deal cures him of Atheism. And indeed, to speak the truth, it is
not Philosophy simply in it self, but the infidelity, carnal reason, and
spiritual pride of man's heart that makes men Atheists. Psalm. 10.4.
This we are assured of by sacred Philosophy; as Psalm. 10.4. The wicked
through the pride of his countenance. The Particle (...) through is causal,
denoting the proper interne impulsive cause of the wicked's Atheism. The
countenance here is brought in, not as the formal subject or proper seat, but
as the Index of his pride: that wherein it does chiefly discover it self;
though the proper subject of it be the heart. Thence the Thargum thus
paraphraseth it: (...) through the pride of his spirit. Thence it follows: will
not seek after God. This notes his practic Atheism, founded in speculative.
Whence it follows: al his thoughts are, that there is no God. (...) signifies
mischievous thoughts, politic designing imaginations. The wicked, through the
pride of his heart, is full of politic Atheistic imaginations that there is no
God. Thus Psalm. 14.1. Psalm. 14.1.
The fool has said in his heart there is no God. The fool here is not such an
one as wants reason, but he that abuses it unto practic Atheism. This I am
bold to assert, that the genuine and proper cause of that overspreading
Atheism, which covers the face of this politic World, is the carnal Reason,
Infidelity, and spiritual Pride of men's hearts, not any defect of evidence in
the objects of our Faith. This is very clear; because the most of your modern
Atheists are as credulous in their way, as any other of the simplest of men:
Why else do they so greedily assent unto any infirm Hypothesis of those they
admire, upon as slight and trivious reasons as may be imagined? Certainly,
this so great credulity in things natural or politic, is a sufficient
demonstration, that it is not so much the want of evidence in matters of Faith,
that makes men Atheists, as the pride and folly of their carnal reasons, which
they idolize. It is a thing most prodigiose, that those who abound with such
soft facile credulous humors and inclinations, to believe, yea idolize false
Deities created by their own lusts, should have their minds prepossest with an
incredulity so obstinate and unpenetrable by all the impressions of the true
Deity.

2. Plato gives us an account not only of the origin of Atheism, Threesorts
of Atheism.
but also of its kinds. Thus, de Leg. lib. 10. page 888. with mild and soft
words he endeavors to convince the proud Atheists of his Age, under the Symbol
of a young man, in these words: (...), etc. My Son, thou art yet young: neither
do I dout, but that progress of time will make thee change thy opinion. Expect
therefore, I beseech thee, that now thou give thy judgment of the highest
points. (...), But that which thou now judge a matter of no moment, is indeed
a point of the highest consequence, namely, that any one, thinking rightly of
God, lives well or il. But first touching this matter, I will signify to thee one
great thing, lest I should seem to thee a liar in this matter, and it is this:
(...), Not thou alone, nor thy friends have been the first who have entertained
this [Atheistic] sentiment of God: but from al memory there have been more or
fewer who have labored under this disease. And I will tell thee what has happened
to them: (...), namely no one of them, who from their youth entertained this
opinion that God is not, has persevered therein even unto old age. We find a
great instance hereof in Bion, (mentioned by Laertius in his Life) who in his
health said: The Gods were nothing: but being worn out by a long disease, and
fearing death, he acknowleged their existence, etc. Plato adds: As for the two
other opinions about God, namely (1) that there is a God, but yet he does not
regard human affairs; or (2) if he does regard them, yet that he is easily
reconciled by the prayers and sacrifices of men, there have been some, though
not many, who have been infected with these blasphemous sentiments of the
Deity. Plato here, as before in the beginning of this Dialogue, page 885.
mentions three sorts of Atheists, which in his days diffused their venomous
blasphemies against the Deity. (1) Such as denied the Existence of God. (2)
Such as held there was a God, but yet denied his Providence and Government of
human affairs. (3) Such as held Gods providence and observation of men's good
and evil acts, but yet withal denied the Justice of God in punishing sin,
affirming that God was easily reconciled by Prayers and Sacrifices. Now Plato
sets himself to refute each of these, of which hereafter. The last of these
three kinds takes in practic Atheism, which is indeed of all the most
pestiferous and diffusive. For when men believe there is a God, and that the
World is governed by him, yet, then to think that he will be pacified by their
hypocritic and imperfect prayers and services, is, in Plato's estime, an high
piece of Blasphemy and practic Atheism: and therefore he spends much force of
Argument to prove, That the righteous God cannot be pacified by the services of
the wicked. Of which we shall discourse more fully, in the Justice of God.
Plato, Repub. 10. page 886. tells us, That those who truly believe the
Existence of God, will not indulge themselves in sin. Whence the Stoics,
following Socrates, held, (...), That every wicked man was an Atheist. For they
held there were two forts of Atheists, (1) Such as were contrary to God. (2)
Such as despised God, by disobeying his Laws, etc. And it was a great Saying of
Picus, Earl of Mirandula, That there was but one thing in the World worse than
a speculative Atheist, and that was a practic Atheist. The roots of practic
Atheism lie low, as an insensible Spring and Principle, which moves and works
al, and yet is not discerned. Some of the greatest Professors of a Deity, may
be the greatest practic Atheists.

3. In what follows Plato manifests a warm zele and passion against these
Atheists and their Atheistic infusions, as the peste of Families, Republics,
yea of human Nature. Thus Leg. 10. p. 890. having mentioned the opinion of some
Atheists, affirming, The monstrose nature and pestiserous influences of
Atheism.
That the assertion of a Deity was not from Nature, but the politic
constitution of Statesmen, to keep men in awe, he replies: What a monstrose
thing, O my Host, do thou relate? (...); and how great a peste, which
invades the minds of young men, to the ruin and subversion of Republics and
private Families? Whereby he demonstrates, that this prodigiose peste of
Atheism tends to the subversion of States, Families, Persons, yea human
Nature. And we have a good observation to this purpose in Campanella, Polit.
cap. 8. When Sects [of Philosophers, or others] shall turn to Atheism, the top
of divine wrath, and ruins of people are near: for when th y are come to deny
the Providence of God, or the Immortality of the Soul, things necessarily
suffer a mutation or reformation: because the bridle is taken off from men's
consciences, and they also are destroyed by impious Princes. Yea, formal
Atheism is repugnant to human Nature, not only morally, but physically, as
hereafter. O! what a servile base thing is Atheism? How does it bow down the
Soul to the basest of conditions! Does it not expose a man to a miserable
venture of al future miseries, but strip him naked of al hopes of future
happiness? Is not every Atheist divided against himself? Do not those remains
of light in Conscience, and those secret fears of a Deity war against his
corrupt atheistic Ratiocinations? Have not his irregular passions full liberty
to captivate him and tyrannise over him without check? Yea, does he not bid
farwell to his best being, his first cause and last end? Would it not be thought
unnatural for the Plant to bid adieu unto its Mother-earth, which bred and
nursed it up? or should the branch renounce and bid defiance to its root, would
not al condemn it of unnatural madness and ingratitude? Did the Earth ever
disclaim its dependence on the Sun for warm influences, light, and heat? Was
the stream ever so foolish, as to bid farwell to its Fountain? And yet is not
this the case of every Atheist? Does he not disclaim his original Fountain,
Root, Sun, Parent and first Cause? Alas! how much does he depose and forfeit
his Reason, yea human Nature! What are al his atheistic Reasonments but
assaults against himself; endeavors to banish himself from himself? O! what
venomous poison does Atheism drop on human Nature! It does indeed commit a
rape on humanity, and plunder it of its native glory, beauty, dignity and
perfection: it does unhinge and separate man from his most laudable, noble, and
best self: it makes him a slave and vassal to Matter and Motion: it robs not
only his Creator of the works of his hands, but himself of human felicity and
tranquillity: yea, it places man many degrees below the Brute animal, which
enjoys some happiness in this present state; whereas the Atheist can enjoy
neither present contentment, nor yet hopes of future bliss. So repugnant is
Atheism to human Nature.

4. The punishment of Atheism.
Thence Plato procedes, Leg. 10. page 890. to show what should be the
punishment of such Atheists. He says: It belongs to the Magistrate to endeavor
their conviction by reason; and if they obstinately persevere, to punish them:
(...), some by death, others by stripes, others by bonds, others by infamy,
others by banishment, others by miserable poverty. And in the conclusion of
this Discourse, page 907. he sums up al thus: We affirm therefore that those
three things that were proposed by us, namely, that there is a God: and that he
takes care of althings: and that he is not inclined by men's services beyond
what is just and equal, have been abundantly demonstrated. And then he adds:
(...), etc. But for the contentions of wicked Atheistic men, we have discoursed
more vehemently and warmely of this matter. Namely for this reason, O Clinias,
we have used greater vehemence, lest peradventure these profligate Atheists,
should, by their disputations, conceit themselves to have the better of us, and
thence to act althings according to the dictates of their lusts, and belch
forth their blasphemous atheistic opinions of God. Wherefore to silence the
madness of those Atheists, we have used the greater vehemence. And after al he
establishes this Law, That if any speak or act any thing atheistically and
impiously against God, he be punished by the Magistrate. If Plato were so
zelose and warm against the Pagan semi-Atheists of his Age, what vehemence and
zele would he express against the bold daring Atheists of this Age? O! what an
ignoble, base, degenerate, uncomfortable thing is Atheism? how repugnant both
morally and physically is it to human Nature? Ought not the Atheist sooner to
dout of his own being than God's? For if he be, God who made him, must needs
be. Thence Padre Paul, that great Venetian Politician, composed a Treatise,
That Atheism is repugnant to human Nature, and is not to be found therein: but
that they who acknowledge not the true Deity, must necessarily feign to
themselves some false ones, as it is mentioned in his Life, page 71. In sum,
Atheism is a proposition so disnatural, monstrose, and difficult to be
establisnt in the mind of man, that notwithstanding the insolence, vanity, and
pride of Atheists, who endeavor by violence to raze out al notices of a Deity
in their Conscience, yet still they give us some evidences of their fears that
there is a Deity, by listing up their eyes and hands toward Heaven, or such
like Indicia in sudden and great calamities.

. 2. 1. Universal consent for the Existence of God.
Plato's zelose Philosophemes against Atheism having been discussed, we
descend to his Demonstration of the Existence of God. First, That there is a
God, he demonstrates from the universal consent of al Times and Nations. Thus,
Leg. 10. page 887. (...), etc. But now giving credit to those Traditions, which
together with their milk they sucked in, and which they heard from their
Motkers and Nurses; who made it their business, to implant these sentiments on
their minds, etc. Wherein he shows, how those that deny the Existence of God
contradict the universally received Tradition, which they sucked in with their
mothers milk, and that which is indeed engraven on their very Beings, as
hereafter. Yea, he makes this Hypothesis, That there is a God, to be (...), a
self-evidencing first Principe, which needs no argument for the confirmation
thereof; because Nature it self instructes us therein, it being that which the
most prostigate men cannot raze out of their Souls. Thence Damascene, Orthod.
Fid. l. 1. c. 3. says, That it never came into Controversy among the most of
Grecians, that there was a God. And he gives this reason for it: (...), The
knowledge or notion of Gods Existence is naturally insite and ingenite to us, or
engraven on our Natures. We may draw forth the force of this Platonic Argument,
in Plato's own dialect thus: Have not al mankind in all times and places given
their assent and consent to the existence of a Deity? Does not all the
Polytheisme of the Pagan World give evident testimony for the existence of a
Deity? What made the Egyptians, Grecians and Romans so fond of their base
multiplied Deities, but a notion engraven on their Beings, fomented by
universal Tradition, that there was some supreme Being they owed Hommage unto?
It Is true, their Hommage and Worship was misplaced as to its proper object, but
does not the act sufficiently argue, that they owned a Deity, albeit not the
true God? Has not the whole World subscribed to the notion of a Deity? Was
there ever any Nation so barbarous, as not to pay Hommage to some supreme
Being? Can we give instance of any part of the habitable World, where professed
Atheism gained place or habitation? Has there not been an universal Tradition
among the more intelligent of men, that God made the World and governes the
same? Yea does not this notion of a Deity run, not only through al Times,
Ages, and Nations; but even through the Principes of human Nature; yea in the
venes and blood of men? Well then might Plato say, That men sucked it in with
their mothers milk. So much for inartificial Argument.

2. 2. From the subordination of Causes to a first Cause.
Plato demonstrates the Existence of a Deity rationally, from the
Subordination of second causes and effects to a first Cause. Thus in his
Timaeus, page 28. (...), Whatever is produced, it is necessary that it be
produced by some Cause: for it cannot be, that any thing should be produced or
made without a Cause. Then in what follows (...) proves the World was made:
(...), The World was made, because it is seen and touched, and has a body: But
it is clear that such things are produced, etc. Whence he concludes, that God
was the Parent and first Cause of the Universe. Plato bottomes his
demonstration on these two Hypotheses, (1) That the World was made. (2) That it
was made by some precedent Cause. (1) That the World was made and not eternal,
was an Hypothesis generally maintained by all the Philosophers before Aristotle;
who asserted, That the first Matter was eternal: and that on a mistaken
Principe, That nothing could be produced out of nothing. But Plato strongly
proves the World could not be eternal; because it is sensible and corporeous:
and therefore the effect of some precedent Cause. And his argument may, in his
own interrogatorie mode, be thus improved: If the World be eternal, must it not
also be immutable and invariable? Can there be any generation and corruption in
that which is eternal? For where there are generations and corruptions, there
must be causes and effects, which implie prioritie and posterioritie: for the
cause naturally precedes the effect: but can there be any prioritie and
posterioritie in what is eternal? If the World was from al eternity, must not
the things that are generated and corrupted eternally have been, and eternally
not have been? Must not the present way of Generation and Corruption correspond
with the World's Eternity? Does not our reason, yea commun sense assure us,
that the Worlds present course of generation and corruption is inconsistent
with its Eternity? Is it not most absurd and irrational to conceive, that one
man should beget another successively from al Eternity? Does not the very
conception of succession in Eternity implie a flat contradiction? Moreover
does not generation and corruption suppose an inequal succession of ascent and
descent? and is not this incompatible with an eternal Being? Again, if there
were an infinite succession of generations and corruptions, how is it possible
there should be any effect or issue? for can there be an end, where there is no
beginning? Against the Eternity of the World, see more largely Derodone,
L'Atheisme convaincu, page 5. where he proves from all the principal parts of
the World, the Sun, Moon, etc. that it could not be eternal: and thence makes
good his Hypothesis, that it was created by God. See also Sr. Charles
Wolseley's Unreasonableness of Atheism, Edit. 3. page 47-64. and 177. (2)
Plato's next Hypothesis to prove God to be the first Cause, The World made by
some prime Cause.
is, That the World was made by some precedent Cause. For, says he, whatever
is produced, is produced by some Cause. We see nothing but what is produced by
somewhat else; and therefore must rationally conclude, there must be some first
Producer. Our reason compels us to look out for some first Cause, that gave
being to althings we see. Does a man beget a man? and was not this man begotten
by some other man, and so upward, til we come to some first man? And how came
that first man to be produced but by some first Cause? In all subordinate
Efficients, is not the first the cause of the middle, and the middle, whether
many or one, the cause of the last? If then there be not a first, can there be
a middle and last? So that may not men as well deny al Effects, yea themselves
to be as deny a first Cause to be? Surely if God had not a Being, nothing else
could be: in things subordinate one to the other, take away the first you take
away all the rest. Therefore it must necessarily be, that the World was made by
some precedent first Cause. This Hypothesis Plato lays down against the
Antithesis of Leucippus and Democritus, which Epicurus afterward espoused,
namely, That there was an infinite vacuitie or emty space, in which were
innumerous Atoms, or corporeous Particles, of al forms and shapes, which by
their weight were in continual agitation or motion; by the various casual
occursions of which, this whole Universe and all the parts thereof were framed
into that order and form they now are in. Against this Antithesis Plato seems
to have framed his Hypothesis, laid down in his Timaeus, page 28. where he
asserts, That the Universe received its origin, (...), (as it is in the
Autographe) not from any casual occursion of Atoms, (...), but from a prudent
potent first Cause, who framed this Universe according to the most accurate
Exemplar of his own divine Ideas. So in his Sophista, page 265 he says:
Natural things were produced, not (...) from a casual cause without
intelligence; but that they were (...), fruits or works of God the supreme
Opificer of althings. We may form his Argument, according to his own dialectic
mode, thus: Is it possible that this beautiful welordered Universe should
emerge out of a casual concurse of Atoms in the infinite Vacuitie? What! were
these corporeous Particles eternally there; or only introduced in time? If
eternally, then is not necessary that they be invariable and immutable? for
does not al variation and alteration belong to time the measure thereof? Can
any thing that is in a strict sense eternal vary? are not eternal and variable
terms contradictorie, as before? Or will they say, that these Atoms were
introduced or produced in this vacuous space in time? must they not then have
some cause of their production? And will it not hence follow, that there is a
first Cause or Deity, as anon? Again, what a world of absurdities, yea
contradictions is this Epicurean Hypothesis clogged with? Is it possible to
imagine that such minute corporeous Particles should, in this imaginary
vacuitie, be invested with an eternal gravitie, whereby an eternal casual
motion is caused here and there, without any tendence to a Centure? Can it also
be imagined, that these poor Corpuscules should continue in perpetual motion,
til by chance they hit one against the other, and so were conglomerated into
this order we find them in the Universe? Is it not a fond sick-brain conceit,
that phlegmatic dull matter, and stupid motion should by chance produce such an
harmonious Universe? Alas! what a systeme of contradictions would follow
hereon? See Sr. Charles Wolseley against Atheism, page 87.

But to descend to the affirmative of Plato's Hypothesis, That the World was
made by some precedent first Cause. This he also inculcates in his Theaetctus:
(...), We must take it for granted, that nothing can make it self. Whence it is
necessary, that at last we come to some first Cause. (1) That in the
subordination of Causes there cannot be a progress into infinite, we are told
by Aristotle, (or who ever were the Composer of that Book) Metaph. l. 1. c. 2.
and the reason is most evident; because what is infinite is incomprehensible,
and impertransible; as also adverse to al order: for in infinites there is no
first or last. Again, if in the subordination of Causes there should be an
infinite Series, then it would follow hence, that there never was any Cause
which was not subsequent to infinite Causes precedent: whence also it would
follow, that there were infinite Causes before any Cause. (2) That nothing ever
did or can make it self is most evident from multitudes of contradictions that
follow this Hypothesis: for then a thing should be said to act physically
before it had a being: to be superior and inferior, dependent and independent,
to exist and not to exist in the same instant and in one and the same respect.
(3) That this Universe was made by some Cause precedent to it self is evident;
because it has a possibility not to be: whence it follows, that once it was
not: for whatever has a possibility not to be, has a passive power at least
metaphysic, if not physic: and where any passive power is, there is something
of the original nothing, out of which althings were made, by him who is pure
Act and perfect Being. Thus Damascene, Orthodox. Fide, l. 1. c. 3. (...), etc.
Al Beings are either create, or increate: truly if create they are altogether
mutable: For it is necessary, that those things which began by mutation, should
be always obnoxious to mutation, either by being corruptible, or alterable,
according to pleasure. But if al Beings be increate, then are they al
immutable. Thence he adds: Who therefore will not conclude, that al Beings
sensible, yea that the very Angels may be many ways changed and altered? Whence
he concludes: (...); Therefore, seeing the Opificer of things is increate, he
must be also altogether immutable. And what can this be other than God? (4)
That God made althings, is strongly demonstrated by Aquinas, contra Gent. l. 2.
c. 15. of which hereafter. See also Mendoza Hurtado, Phys. Disp. 10. Sect. 1.

. 3. 3. The Existence of God from a first Motor.
Another Argument whereby Plato proves the existence of a Deity is taken from
the dependence of al motions on a prime Motor, or first Mover. Thus Leg. 10.
page 893. being about to demonstrate the existence of a Deity against the
Atheists of his Age, he makes this Preface: Let us make this Preface to our
Discourse; sithat it is our purpose to prove there is a God, we ought with
greater study and diligence to call upon him for his aid now, than at other
times. Wherefore being as it were confirmed by these bonds, let us begin our
Discourse -- Therefore if any shall demand of me: (...), whether or no therefore
do althings stand still, and is nothing moved? or, on the contrary, are
althings, or somethings moved, and does nothing stand still? (...), I will
answer, that somethings are moved, and somethings stand still, etc. In which
discourse, to prove his Thesis touching the existence of a Deity, he lays
down this Hypothesis: That God was the (...) the primary and principal Mover in
Nature, (as the Soul in the body) who moves himself and althings that are,
were, or shall be in the Universe. This Hypothesis he calls (...), and as it were
the bonds of the whole disputation. Thence he procedes, page 894. thus: Let
there then be one motion, [ i. e. Motor] which moves it self, but cannot move
other things; being always uniforme: another which always moves both it self
and other things, by conjoining and disjoining, augmenting and diminishing,
generating and corrupting, which motion is distinct from all the rest. By the
former motion he understands that of things natural; by the later that of the
first Motor, who moves himself and althings else; which he thus explicates:
(...), It is necessary, that he, who can move both himself and other things, do
infinitely excel, and that the other Motors are much posterior and inferior
thereto. Whereby he gives an infinite preference and prioritie to the first
Motor, or Mover in comparison of al other second Movers. And then that there
must be one prime Motor he demonstrates in what follows thus: When one thing is
moved by another, and that other by another whom must we acknowledge to be the
first Motor of al these? (...), etc. Him truly that moves himself: for he
cannot be changed by any before, seeing there can be no mutation before him.
Whence he concludes: (...), etc. Therefore we must acknowledge, that the
principe of al motions is be that moves himself, and is the most ancient and
excellent cause of al mutations. Wherein he demonstrates (1) That there is one
prime, Motor, which is not obnoxious to the motion or mutation of any precedent
Motor. (2) That this prime Motor is the principe and cause of al other motions
and mutations. Thus also in his Phaedrus, page 245 (...), etc. Only therefore
that which moves it self, and is the cause of motion to other things, (...),
This is the fountain and principe of moving, but a principe has no origin: for
from it althings arise; but it from nothing else: neither indeed were it a
principe, if it were produced by any thing else. Whereby he proves, that God is
the first Motor and Principe of al motion, who moves althings, but is moved by
nothing. This Demonstration of Plato seems so strong and binding, that
Aristotle his Scholar was not only satisfied therein, but improved the same
very much, Physicor. 8. where he thus argues: Whatever is moved is moved by
some other: whence there is some first Mover, which is immobile; or there must
be a progress into infinite, from which nature abhors: now the first immobile
Mover is simply the first cause of al motions; as the first Mover in every kind
of inferior motions, is the cause of al motions in that kind. This Platonic and
Aristotelic Demonstration may be thus drawn forth: Does not al motion proceed
either from some prime Motor, or else from an innate and self-originated
principe of motion? If from an innate self-originated principe of motion, then
must not such a motion necessarily be eternal? and if eternal, then can a thing
that so moves ever cease to move? Can any thing move, that was not at first
moved by some prime Motor, or that does not infinitely and eternally move it
self? Can we imagine any thing not to have a beginning, but what is infinite
and eternal? And need we a better argument to prove that al motion had a
beginning, than this, that we see it has an end? Do not the several periods,
which al motions as well natural as artificial fall under, clearly evince, that
they are not self-originated, but had some beginning and prime Motor? This
Demonstration R. Moses Maimonides, in summa Talmud. lib. de fund. Leg. c. 1.
thus expresses: The Heaven is always moved: but it cannot be moved without a
Motor: and the Motor is God blessed without hand or body. This Argument from a
prime Motor is well improved by Aquinas contra Gent. l. 1. c. 13. and l. 2. c. 6.

. 4. 4. The existence of God from the Order of the Universe.
Plato demonstrates the Existence of a Deity from the admirable Order,
Harmony, Beauty, and Perfection of the Macrocosme or Universe. Thus, Leg. 12.
page 966. (...), The admirable order of the Universe, namely the reguiar motion
of the Stars and other celestial Bodies ordered by the Divine Mind, demonstrate
a Deity. For he that shall look into these things with a diligent inquisitive
eye, (...), no such one among mortals can be so far an Atheist, as not to
acknowledge the existence of a Deity. So page 967. (...), affirming that the
Divine Mind made and orderly disposes althings. This Argument of Plato may,
according to his own dialectic mode, be thus improved: Is there not an accurate
innate order and rectitude in the World? Do not althings sweetly conspire and
tend to one commun end? Lo! what an exact subordination of things one to
another, and to the whole is there? Can it be imagined, that the Sun, Moon, and
Stars should have such regular motions, course, order, and influences, without
some infinitely wise Director and Disposer? Is it not a most absurd conceit,
that all the regular subordinations of natural Causes and Effects in their
proper dependences and uses should be produced by mere Chance? Is there not a
most beautiful concent and concatenation of al parts in the Universe? And
whence comes it, but from infinite Wisdom and Providence? It Is true, confusion
is a genuine product of Chance, to use the Atheists phrase; but is not al order
the effect of Wisdom and Art? In a curiose Machine or piece of Art does not
the Order, Beauty, and Harmony of different parts speak the skill of the
Artificer? And can we suppose, that the infinite Order and Beauty which is in
the Universe should proceed by Chance, and not from an infinitely wise Agent?
Consider the Sun, that Eye of the Universe; in its own gloriose structure,
situation, conjunctions, regular motions, efficacious influences, and orderly
disposition of seasons, according to the indigence and necessities of this
inferior Word, and can we imagine that all this should be the result and product
of Chance, and not of an infinitely wise divine Mind, as Psalm. 19.1, 2, 3?
Might we not also descend from those celestial Bodies, to the Regions of the
Air and the Meteors loged therein, both ignite and aqueous, their admirable
order, perfection and influences? Likewise as to this inferior World, if we
examine the origin of Fountains, dive into the Ocean and observe its regular
Fluxes and Refluxes, etc. if we rake into the bowels of the Earth, and inquire
into the origin of Stones both preciose and commun, mineral Juices, and
Metals: Lastly, if we destil Plants, or anatomise Animals, what an incomparable
Harmony, Order and Perfection shall we find in each of these, both in reference
each to other, and to the whole Universe? This is well done by Plato, in his
Timaus, page 28, etc. whence he concludes, That there must be an infinitely
wise Mind, who frames al these things into such an admirable order, agreeable to
his own eternal Ideas. Thus also Joan. Damascenus, Orthodox. Fid. l. 1. c. 18.
(...), But that God, who in his own nature is invisible, is made visible by his
operations, we know by the admirable constitution and gubernation of the
Universe. Wherein he demonstrates the invisible Essence and Existence of God
from his visible operations and works, as Romans 1.20.

. 5. 5. Gods Existence from the connate Idea of God in the Soul.
Plato demonstrates the Existence of a Deity from the Microcosme or Man,
specially his Soul, and those innate Ideas of a Deity loged there. Thus Leg.
12. page 966. Do we not know that there are two things which make us believe
that there is a God? one which we before mentioned, touching the Soul, (...),
that it is the most ancient and divine of althings made: I say, of those
things, whose motion admits generation, but so as that it has obtained an
everlasting essence for it self. There are two parts in this Argument which
demonstrate the existence of a Deity. (1) The divine origin and nature of the
Soul. (2) Its Immortality. (1) The divine origin and nature of the human Soul
fully evinceth the existence of God. Thus Plato, Leg. 10. page 899. Let him,
who formerly denied there was a God, prove that we speak not truth, in giving
the Soul the first place; or let him believe us, and so for the future order
his life, (...), that he dout not of a Deity. But let us consider whether to
those that think there is no God, we have not abundantly proved there is a
God. So in his Phaedo, p. 81. Does not the mind thus affected go, (...), to the
divine Being whereunto it is like? This Platonic Argument may be thus improved:
Is there not a connate Idea of a Deity impressed and stamped on the very
nature of the Soul? Does not its immaterial, spirital, impassible nature speak
its physic cognation with some supreme Spirit, that first conferred that
spirital Being on it? Has not the Soul a physic Amplitude, yea infinite
Capacity, albeit only remote and passive of contemplating some first Truth,
and loving some chiefest good? Has not the mind an universal empire and
dominion over al objects, to compound things most opposite, and divide things
most intimately conjoined; to descend from the highest cause to the lowest
effect, and then to ascend from the lowest effect to the highest cause? Has not
the Will an infinite thirst after good, yea is never satisfied without the
fruition of some supreme infinite good? And do not these infinite capacities,
albeit only natural, remote and passive, implie some infinite object adequate
thereto? Was there ever a faculty or power in Nature without an object suited
thereto? Cicero tells us, de Not. Deor. lib. 1. That Nature her self has
impressed a notion of a Deity on the minds of al. As if he had said, according
to Plato's mind, Has not God stamped an Idea of himself on human Nature? May we
not as well abandon our very Beings, our selves, as abandon the notices and
characters of a Deity engraven on our Beings? Does not every human Soul carry
the signature and marque of his Creator impressed on it self? Is there not an
impresse and Idea of a Deity incorporated and contempered in the very
complexion and constitution of the Soul? And albeit man by sin runs away as a
fugitive from his Lord and Maker, yet has he not secured his claim to man, by
his marque and physic Idea stamped on the Soul of man? The Ideas and Characters
of a Deity are more clearly and lively stamped on the Souls of men, than upon
any part of the sensible World. (2) As for the Immortality of the Soul, does
not this also implie an eternal object answerable thereto? Thus Plato, in his
Symposium, page 207. informs us, That man, who is mortal as to his terrene
part, seeks to be immortal as to his more noble part. And if the Soul seeks
to be immortal, must there not be an immortal, eternal, infinite good, in the
fruition of which it seeks immortal Beatitude? Of this see more fully, Philos.
Genesis P. 1. lib. 3. cap. 2. sect. 10.. 5.

. 6. The Existence of God demonstrated by practic Arguments. 1. From Conscience.
Plato has given us some practic and moral Demonstrations of a Deity. As (1)
some moral though imperfect notices of good and evil impressed on Conscience,
with affections of fear and shame on the commission of sin. Plato, in his
Minos, page 317. makes mention of a (...), a royal Law of Nature, some notices
whereof remain on degenerate human Nature. These notions the Stoics term,
(...): the Aristotelians, (...), commun and innate notions. Among which they
reckon up such as these: That there is a God: that this God was the Maker, and
is the Conservator, and Rector of the Universe: that he is infinitely wise,
just, good, etc. That he is to be worshipped: that virtue is to be embraced,
vice avoided, etc. These commun notices they make to be connate and engraven on
the Soul. And indeed sacred Philosophy assures us, that there are such commun
notices of good and evil naturally engraven on men's consciences, as Romans 2.14,
15. which yet are improved by the works of Providence, as Act. 14.17. where
rain and fruitful seasons are said to be Gods witness. Now al Notions of good
and evil clearly demonstrate the existence of a Deity: for the distinction of
good and evil, as to man, refers to some principe above him: were there no
supreme Rector and Judge to reward good and punish evil, the very notions of
good and evil would vanish into smoke and vapor. What can be good, if there be
not some Being originally and infinitely good, to which it refers, and by whole
Law it is measured? Can we imagine how the notions of good and evil should
exist in men's minds, if there were not a supreme Rector to give Laws for the
measure thereof? If man had not some supreme Lord to give Laws to him, how
could he be guilty of any moral transgression? Can he that is his own Law be
guilty of an offense? Who can charge any man with doing il, unless he break
the Law of some Superior? What could be just or unjust, if there were not a
supreme Rector to measure and regulate the same? And could there likewise be
any punishments or rewards, if there were not an infinitely wise and righteous
Judge to distribute the same? Again, we may with facility evince the existence
of a Deity from the Accusations, Tremblements, and Fears of a guilty
Conscience. The Atheist may dispute against a Deity, but does he not sometimes
fear and tremble at a secret apprehension of that Deity he disputes against?
When the Sergeants of Death come to arrest him, what pannic fears, what
convulsions are in his Conscience? Does he not quake and tremble before that
Deity he formerly derided? Thus it was with Bion the Philosopher, who when he
lay under the pangs and terrors of death acknowleged that Deity he before
disclaimed. And would the Atheist be but true to himself, and so ingenuous as
to lay open his breast, would not his own tremblements and fears of Conscience
at times bassie his own infidelity and disbelief of a Deity? Have not al
Nations in all Ages more or less fallen down before the Notion of a Deity? O!
what stings and remorses have there been on the Consciences even of those who
have been exemted from the punishment of human Laws? Have not many Tyrants
trembled on the Throne, as Felix, when the condemned innocent rejoiced, as
Paul? Ask Tiberius and Nero, those potent Emperors, what made them to tremble
and fear? Were these fears the product of false imagination, and not rather of
a guilty Conscience?

(2) Another practic moral Demonstration of a Deity is taken from that sense
of Religion, 2. From the sense of Religion.
which the most barbarous Nations have more or less been possessed with. Thus
Plato, Leg. 10. page 887. It is not possible, but that they believe there is a
God, whiles they see their parents with the greatest care sacrifice for
themselves and their children; and address themselves to God, with earnest
prayers in their behalf. Yea, he adds, That al mankind, both Greeks and
Barbarians, when they are pressed with adversity, or enjoy prosperity, fall
down to the ground and adore some Deity, (...), neither do they give the least
suspicion, but that there is a God. We may draw forth Plato's mind thus: Was
there ever any People or Nation so barbarous, as not to fall down before and
worship some Deity? It Is true we hear of some that live without human Laws,
yea without clothes and other necessaries, to secure them from the injuries
each of other, and of seasons, etc. but did we ever hear of any that lived
without some supreme object of Devotion? May you not as soon find a Nation
without men, as without some Deity? Nay, are not some so superstitiose, as
wherever they see any created impresse of a Deity, to worship that as God?
Are not the Plants in the Garden, the Birds that fly, the Fishes in the Sea,
the Brutes that serve men, worshipped by some as Gods? And lest men should
after al miss of the true God, have they not also framed an Altar to some
unknown God, as Act. 17.23? Have not al men naturally recourse to some supreme
Being in their extremities? When they find themselves past their own
protection, do they not cast their eye upward to some omnipotent Being for
relief? Will the Atheist object, that al these religiose Rites and Actions are
but the politic contrivement of Politicians, to keep men in awe and under
subjection? Plato, Leg. 10. page 889, etc. gives a full answer to this
Objection, assuring us, That it is void of al reason to imagine, that Religion
and al sense of a Deity is the mere comment or figment of men, instituted as
an Artifice, to keep men in their Duty, by overawing them with the conceit of
some supreme Power: than which there cannot be a more capital crime, because
the notion of a Deity is most naturel.

(3) Hence we may deduce another moral Demonstration of a Deity from the
politic World, 3. From the politic World.
and the necessity it has of some supreme Rector to keep it in order. This
Argument is well managed by Plato, Leg. 4. page 713. The primigenious Truth
teaches us, that there is no cessation of evils in those Cities, in which,
(...), not God but some mere mortal presides, etc. In which he makes Religion
the foundation of a Republic, which ought in the first place to be provided
for: and he gives us this description of Religion, That we believe there is a
God, who is the Beginning, Middle, and End of althings; and whose Providence
runs through al parts of the Universe. Thus also, Leg. 10. page 800. he assures
us, That to deny the existence of a Deity is the subversion of al politic
Societies, as before,. 1. The force of this Argument lies in this, That the
Constitution of al Republics, Nations, and politic Societies is such, that the
notices of a supreme Rector and Deity are absolutely necessary for the
preservation of them. Is it possible, that there should be any politic civil
Society, unless there be some bond of Confederation and Consociation? And can
there be any Confederation without some fidelity and confidence each in other?
Who will associate with others, unless they can confide in them, at least be
secure, that they shall not be ruined by them? Who will care to live and converse
with such, as they look on as their enemies, and by whom they expect to be
destroyed? And what ground can there be of confidence and trust in any, if the
notions of a supreme Rector and Deity be banished out of the world? Who will
make conscience of keeping his word, or not violating al bonds and obligations,
if he be not overawed by a sense of some supreme Rector that can punish and
reward him? Let us suppose a City or Republic of Atheists incorporated under
some commun Laws, and consider what confusion, disorders, and inevitable ruin
would follow on such an Hypothesis. Would there be any regard or conscience
made of words or actions? Does not. the Atheist, who denies any God above him,
destroy al conscience within him? And he that knows he makes conscience of
nothing, will also believe, that al his Companions, who are acted by the same
atheistic principes, make no conscience of word or deed toward him: and then
what diffidences, jealousies, and treacheries necessarily follow hereon? Surely
nothing gives men greater confidence and security from inhuman violences than
a conscience and sense of some supreme Deity, who is just to punish offenders.
Would not every man without this be as a Leviathan, ready to devour his
neighbor? Well indeed might that daring Atheist title his Book of Politics
Leviathan, seeing every Atheist is or would be such, if he follow his own
principes? Are not Dissimulation and Violence the two Cardinal Pillars of the
Atheists Republic? O! what Schisms, Seditions, Tyranny, Anarchie and
universal Dissolution must inevitably attend a Republic of Atheists? Who will
ever make conscience or mind Justice, Order or Subjection to men, who are not
overawed with a sense of a supreme Deity? When every man's Will is his Law, who
will mind commun justice and equity? How can the Atheist give cordial
subjection to any Superior, who owns no supreme Rector to punish, and reward
him? Thus we see miserable confusions and dissolutions in States and Republics
follow on the denying a Deity and supreme Rector of the politic World. Does
not then the Atheist in denying the Being of a Deity, deny the wel-being, yea
subvert the very Being of the politic World, and al civil Society?

(4) Lastly, 4. From the Atheists Cavils and Enmity.
all the Atheists Cavils and Enmity against a Deity, do clearly evince the
existence thereof. Were there not indeed a God, the Atheist would not be so
sedulous, industrious, indefatigable, and implacable in his assaults and
attemts against him. We have a good instance hereof given us by Diogenes the
Cynic, cited by Laertius in his Life, thus: Lysia the Apothecarie asking
Diogenes, Whether he believed there were any Gods? Diogenes replied: (...); How
can I but believe it, when I consider what an enemy thou art to the Gods? May
we not make the same reply to the most subtle and proud Atheists? Can we
imagine that Atheistic Spirits would spend their most subtle Ratiocinations,
the vigor of their Spirits and malice to subvert the belief of a Deity, were
there not indeed a God, whom they hate, and therefore would fain pull off his
Throne? If the existence of a Deity were a poor emty shadow, a mere figment or
nothing, would proud Atheists pursue it with such violent passion and vehemence
as they do? No; their enmity against a Deity strongly proves his Existence.

CHAP. III. Of God, his Names, Nature, Attributes, Unity, and Simplicity.
Gods Names. (...) Ens, Being: God only IS in a strict sense. (...) Jehova
explicated. (...) Jah. (...) Ehjeh. (...) Elohim. (...) El. (...) Shaddai.
(...) Elion. (...) Sabbath. The Divine Essence and Attributes. Gods Unity, and
Simplicity.

. 1. THE Existence of a Deity being demonstrated, God styled (...), Ens, or
Being. Exodus 3.14.
we now proceed to explicate, so far as he has reveled himself, his Names,
Nature, and Attributes, both according to Sacred and Platonic Philosophy. As
for the Names of God, Plato, in his Parmenides, page 142. tells us, that
properly, (...), he has no name. This is well expressed by Damascene, Orthodox.
Fid. l. 1. c. 15. (...), etc. The Deity being incomprehensible, he thence is
altogether without Name. Therefore seeing we ignore his Essence, we may not
inquire after the Name of his Essence. For names are manifestative of things.
Yet, adds he, Albeit he be incomprehensible and without Name, as the Author of
althings, he assumes Names from althings, even from a contraries, as from Light
and Darkness, etc. Of these Names some are negative, (...), signifying that
superessential Being; as inessential, without time, independent, invisible:
some are affirmative, which relate to him as the cause of althings: among which
those are most proper which are taken from the most excellent things. Whence
cap. 12. he says, That the best Name that can be given to God, is that Exodus
3.14. (...), who is, which denotes plenitude of essence, as in what follows.
Non nomen Dei quaeras; Deus est nomen. Minut. Foelix.
Thus Plato generally styles him (...), Ens, or Being: whence Aristotle also
makes (...) Ens, the object of his Metaphysics: yet with this difference;
whereas Plato, by his (...), understood God the first Being; Aristotle by his
(...), meant an universal Ens, Being, or rather notion abstracted from al
actual Beings really existent. That Plato by his (...) Ens, or Being understood
God, is evident to any that is acquainted with his Philosophemes: whence he
makes it to be the same with (...), Being it self, and (...), that which really
is: for, according to his Placits, conformable to sacred Philosophy, nothing
in a strict and proper sense can be said to be but the first essential Being:
althings else, if compared with God the first Being, are said not to be, Esa.
40.17. Exodus 3.14.
Esa. 40.17. That (...), who is, Exodus 3.14. or (...) Ens is the most
principal, essential, and proper name of God, Damascene, Orthodox. Fid. l. 1.
c. 12. thus demonstrates: (...), Therefore the most principal of all the Names
given unto God seems to be this (...), WHO IS, as he answered Moses, Exodus
3.14. Who Is sent me. And he subjoins the reason: (...), For comprehending al
in himself, he has Being it self, as it were, an infinite boundless Ocean, or
which hereafter. Hence Damascene, c. 15. tells us, That the best Names we can
give God, are such as are composed of Affirmatives and Negatives: as, (...),
superessential Essence, and the like. Thus Plato, in his Timaeus, makes (...),
that which always is, namely God, to be the only true and proper Being: whereas
althings else are in a continual flux; and therefore cannot be said, in a
strict sense to be existent. This is the reason why he appropriates the name
(...) Being, to God the first Being. And we have an illustrious Commentary
hereof given us by Plutarch, on the (...) name (...), Thou art, engraven on the
doors of Apollo's Temple: who tells us, That he saw written there in golden
Letters two compellations; (1) (...), Know thy self; thereby the God Apollo
saluted those that came to worship him: who resaluted their God with this Title
of Honor, (...), Thou art. He tells you that many gave their Comments on this
Title; but for his part, his sense thereof was this: That the name (...)
signified not either order, or number, or any deficient part, as some
conceited, (...), but is of it self a perfect compellation of God: whereby
those that saluted him declared, That Being properly and strictly belongs only
to him: (...), etc. for truly we are not participant of Essence; but al mortal
nature, being on the confines, yea in the midst of corruption, is but a (...),
or emty shadow of Being, scarce apparent; on which if you fix your thoughts, it
will soon fly from you. For, as Heraclitus well observed, No man ever enters a
second time into the same river; neither can any apprehend the same frail
essence a second time, in the same state: because the celeritie of its mutation
does soon dissipate it: Yea as soon as it existes it perishes: it recedes
as soon as it accedes. Whence that which is made cannot properly be said to be:
(...), nothing of nature is permanent, yea nothing is: because al Creatures
participate more of nothing than of something. But then of God he adds: (...),
etc. But God properly IS, and without regard to time, immobile Eternity: in
which there is nothing first or last: nothing past, ancient, or new; but it
being one present (...), NOW, it fills up al Duration: in which regard, (...),
that which is said TO BE truly IS, not future, not past, not beginning, not
ending. Thus God is with the study of veneration to be saluted: unless thou
had rather reassume the ancient formule, (...), THOU ART ONE, etc. Wherein
Plutarch gives us an incomparable explication of Plato's (...), why this name
must be appropriated to God.

But to run up this Platonic Name to its first origin, it is evident, (...)
from (...) Jehovah.
that it was at first derived from sacred Philosophy, and the proper essential
Name of God, (...) Jehovah. For the demonstration hereof we have both
indubitable testimonies of the Learned, and also invincible reasons from the
thing or name it self. As for testimonies, Eusebius, praepar. Evang. lib. 11.
cap. 9. page 523. assures us, that this name (...), as appropriated to God, was
derived from Exodus 3.14. (...). So Augustine, Civ. Dei. l. 8. c. 11. Where Lud.
Vives shows us the manner how, and reason why (...), was changed by Plato into
(...). The like Steuch. Eugubinus, de peren. Philosoph. l. 3. c. 7. of which
before in Pythagoras's Metaphysics, P. 2. B. 2. C. 8.. 4. But to come to the
reasons of the thing, the very name (...), as the LXX. turn it, or (...), as
Plato, received its origination from (...) Jehovah, and is indeed of the same
import. For we must deduce (...) from the ancient Greek Verb (...), I am: and
this from (...) the name of Juno; or else immediately from (...), which they
derived from Jehovah: otherwise we may deduce (...) and (...) from (...) ho he
is, which is a part of the name (...) Jehovah, which coming from the root (...)
he was, properly and primarily signifies nothing else, but HE THAT WAS, the
same with Plato's (...), and the LXX. (...).

But to explicate this more fully, Jehovah the proper essential Name of God.
we must know, that this Name (...) Jehovah is the most proper and essential
name of God, whereby his infinite Essence and Perfections are most lively set
forth. The Hebrews style this name Jehovah (...), the name of Substance, or
(...), the name of Essence; answerably whereto the Greeks style it, (...), the
name of essence; because it does most properly describe the Essence of God,
who, (...), contains the whole of Being or Essence in himself, as an infinite
immense Ocean. That Jehovah is the proper name of God, Critics prove (1) from
(...) which being prefixed notes a proper name, as in (...) Isaac, and (...)
Jacob, with others. (2) In that it has no Plural Number. (3) In that it is
never put in state of Regiment. (4) In that it is never found with (...)
prefixed. (5) Nor yet with an affixed Pronoun in the end. That (...) Jehovah is
a name most proper to God, is evident from Exodus 15.3. Exodus 15.3.
Jehovah is his name. Thence the Hebrews term it (...), the proper name: also
(...), the separate name; because separate from other names of God, which are
attributed to the Creatures. They likewise term it, (...), the four-lettered
Name; because it is composed of four Letters. Thence the Greek (...), and
Pythagoras's (...), of which before, Part 2. B. 2. C. 8.. 1. page 182. Again,
they call it (...), which the Greeks interpret (...), the name of Remembrance,
Psalm. 30.4.
answerably to Psalm. 30.4. Lastly, they term it (...), the gloriose and
terrible Name, from Deuteronomy. 28.52.

The force and essicace of this name (...) is well expressed by John, The
Explication of Jehova. Rev. 1.4, 8. and 11.17. and 16.5.
Rev. 1.4. (...), He that is, that was, and that is to come, or will be. So v.
8. and 11.17. and 16.5. In which explication note, that (...) is the same with
(...), which Beza places, Rev. 16.5. and that according to the Idiome of the
Hebrews, who express the word future, sometimes by a word that signifies to
come. And Critics draw al these three differences of time from (...) Jehovah.
For, say they, the letter (...) in the beginning denotes the future, he will be:
and (...) in the middle, being a Participle of the Present Tense, He is: and
(...) in the end with kametz underwritten, what is past, He was: which is also
denoted by the Radix (...) havah. This the Hebrew Doctors acknowledge: for R.
Bechai, on Exodus page 65. says, that these three times, past, present, and to
come are comprhended in this proper name (...). And they add, That God reveled
to Moses, Exodus 3.14, 15. those two names (...) and (...); Exodus 3.14, 15.
because out of them may be composed those three, (...) I was, (...) I am, and
(...) I shall be. Hence we may conclude, that this name (...) Jehova is most
sacred, essential, and proper to God, and descriptive of (1) his Eternity, in
that it eminently comprehends al differences of time, as john expounds it,
Rev. 1.4, 8. (2) His simple independent Essence, as he is Being it self, pure,
absolute, perfect Being and Act, void of al passive power, composition, and
imperfection. He being indeed and properly (...), Esa. 44.6.
Esa. 44.6. (3) His Efficacitie and Causalitie in giving Being and Existence to
al his Creatures. He being not only (...), the first independent Essence; but
also (...), He that give Essence and Being to al his Creatures. (4) His
Omnipotence and Veracitie, in giving being and effect to his promises, and
word. In which regard God says, Exodus 6.3. that he was not known to Abraham,
Exodus 6.3.
Isaac, and Jacob by the Name Jehovah, i. e. because he had not fulfilled and
given effect to his promise made to them, and thence not opened this name.
From this name Jehovah, the Greeks framed (...) and the Latins their Jovis, etc.

There are other Names given to God in sacred Philosophy, whereof we sind some
Imitaments in the Grecian Philosophy. As (2) God is styled (...) jah. This is
also a proper Name of God, Jah.
which some of the Hebrews make an abregement and part of the Name (...)
Jehova, as R. Moses Maimonides, de Fundament. Legis, cap. 6. sect. 4. Hence the
LXX. render it by (...), as they do (...): and so it signifies the eternal,
independent Essence of God, who gives essence and existence to al his
Creatures, and Wods. It is seldom used but in Songs and Psalms, as Exodus
15.2. Psalm. 68.5. and elsewhere. Whence the Hebr. (...) Halelujah, praise ye
Jah, is kept by the Greek Rev. 19.1, 3, 4, 6. Rev. 19.1, 3, 4, 6.
Thus also in the Paean, or Song sung to Apollo, they began and ended it with
(...), Eleleu Je, which is an evident imitamen of Halelujah. From (...) jah
also, which some Greeks pronounced (...), was derived Jupiter, i. e. Father
Jah, Juno, Janus, Diana: (...), from (...) the fire of Jah, etc. (3) Another
essential Name, whereby God describes himself, Ehjeh. Exodus 3.12, 14.
is (...) Ehjeh, I shall be, as Exodus 3.12, 14. which the Hebrews also reckon
among the ten Names of God. (4) God is likewise styled (...) Eloah, and (...),
Elohim, (...), Elohim.
?Elohe in the Plural Number, which some derive from the Arabic (...) to
worship: others from the Hebr. (...) to swear: but the most probable
origination is that of Marcus Marinus in Arca Noae, Abarbenel, and others; who
derive it form (...) El, (...) being added, and so it signifies most potent and
soverain Lord. It speaks Gods relation to, Dominion and soverain Authority
over his Creatures; Genesis 1.1.
therefore Moses, Genesis 1.1. treating of Gods Creation and Dominion calls him
(...). Whence Abarbenel makes it to be attributed to God, as the omnipotent
Effector and Productor of althings; because when God is brought in as Creator
the Scripture styles him by this Name. So Nachmanni makes (...) to be q. (...)
El hem, their strength, meaning the Creatures; because he is (...) the force of
forces, i. e. the supreme Virtue and Essicace of al Creatures. The Hebrews
generally make it to signify properly a Judge or Magistrate: Thence it is
attributed to Civil Magistrates as Gods Vicegerents, Exodus 22.8.
Exodus 22.8. From (...) Eloah came (...), as from (...) Elohim. (...) mentioned
in the fragments of Sanchoniathon. El.
(5) (...) El, another Name of God, is derived from (...) Fortitude, force, or
from (...) Fortitude, Virtue, Power, etc. So (...) properly signifies the
potent powerful God, who contains in himself the virtues and efficaces of
althings. Thence, Exodus 15.11. Psalm. 89.6.
says Moses, Exodus 15.11. Who like thee, (...), among the potent, O Lod? So
David, Psalm. 89.6. Who among the sons of (...) Elim, of the mighty can be
likened unto thee, O Lord? Whence God is styled, Genesis 14.20.
Genesis 14.20. (...) the most high El, or mighty God: also Esa. 9.5. Esa. 9.5.
(...) El Gibbor, the most mighty God. Aquila renders (...), according to its
origination, (...). Again, God is styled, Dan. 11.36.
Dan. 11.36. (...) El Elim, the most potent of al potents. From this name (...)
El, the Syrians styled their Saturn (...) and (...), as Damascius, in Photius.
Hence also (...) the Sun received its origination. Shaddai.
(6) God is also called (...) Schaddai; which is most often joined with (...) El,
Genesis 17.1.
as Genesis 17.1. and 35.11. as elsewhere. Some deduce it from (...) to destroy:
others from (...) sufficient q. (...) Scheddai, Adonai.
who is sufficient. (7) (...) Adonai is another illustrious Name of God, which
is first in Scripture given to him by Abraham, Genesis 15.2.
Genesis 15.2. (...) and signifies primarily Lord, from (...) Eden, a basis;
because a Lord is the basis or pillar of a family: according to the
origination of (...), a King, from (...), the basis of the people: So that
according to its origination (...) signifies my bases, stays, or pillars: and
sitly applied by Abraham to God, who, as a basis or pillar, sustained him in all
his infirmities. Some think it implies a Mystery of the whole Trinity. It
properly belongs to God as he is Lord of the Universe, a great house built and
founded by him: thence among the Latins Dominus a Domus. From Adonai came the
Pagan God Adonis. (8) God is styled also (...) Elion, the most high; Elion.
which is an Adjective frequently added to some other name of God, as (...) El
Elion, Genesis 14.19, 22. Genesis 14.19, 22.
El Elion the Genitor of Heaven and Earth. Which in Sanchoniathon's fragments
is thus expressed: (...). Which fully explicates the Hebrew (...) most high.
(9) The Hebrews reckon also (...) Sabbath, Hosts among the Names of God: but,
Zebaoth.
as it is well observed by Buxtorf, this name put absolutely is never attributed
to God, but only as appendent to some other divine Name, (...), or (...), or
both conjunct, and expressed in our Version the Lod of Hosts. (10) The Greeks
call God (...), which some derive from (...) to run, as it denotes the swift
motion of the Sun, which was the first and principal God among the Grecians:
and in this notion (...) may be derived from (...) tha, to come. Others derive
(...) from (...), as it notes to dispose and order the Universe, which is
proper to God: Others derive (...) from (...) to see; because God sees
a'things. These three Originations I find together in Damascene, Orthodox. Fid.
l. 1. c. 12. Lastly, others deduce (...) from (...) dai, it suffices; and so
it answers to (...) shaddai, the Name of God denoting his Alsufficience. But
here we are to take notice, that both Sacred and Ethnic Philosophy ascribe
unto God various Names, not to make any schism or breach in his Unity, but
thereby to express his various Attributes, and Operations, as in what follows
of the Unity of God. 9.

. 2. The various Names of God lead us into the contemplation of his Nature and
Attributes whereby he has reveled himself. The Divine Essence and Attributes.
The Divine Essence, as in it self, by reason of its absolute Simplicity and
Infinitude, can neither be defined by us, nor yet apprehended under any one
adequate conception or notion. Derodone would needs persuade us, that God may
be capable of a definition, as he comprehends himself, etc. But how improper
yea absurd such an Hypothesis is, will be evident, if we consider, either the
nature of a Definition, or of God. (1) The nature of a Definition evidently
demonstrates, that God is not capable thereof: Does not the very notion of a
Definition exclude the Deity from its confines? What is (...) a Definition but
the term of limits of an Essence? Do not al Definitions (...) limit things?
And may God, who has no limits to his Essence, fall under the limits of a
Definition? Whence proceed al terms of Definition but from terms of Essence?
And can what is infinite be limited? Whence, (2) The Nature of God absolves him
from al laws or terms of Definition. As for Derodones reply, That God may be
said to define himself, because he perfectly understands himself, it is very
jejune, and unworthy of so learned a Philosopher. For (1) God is the object of
the Definition, and not the subject: al definitions are said to be perfect or
imperfect in regard of our minds the subjects thereof. (2) May we not as well
say, that God can limit and bound himself, as define himself? for every
definition is (...) the term or Boundary of the Essence. Would it not be
accounted next to blasphemy, to say God can confine himself, or make himself
finite? and yet such is the import of this Hypothesis maintained by Derodone.
And as God cannot be defined, so neither be apprehended by one adequate notion:
For how can a compound finite capacity take in a simple infinite object by one
single apprehension? Hence it has pleased the divine Being to revele his
infinite simple Essence under diverse Names and Attributes, thereby to render
his perfections more apprehensible and intelligible by our finite and compound
capacities. These Attributes are identified both among themselves, and with the
divine Essence: neither are they many in God, but one most simple Essence. Yet,
according to our manner of considering things, which is compound, we apprehend
them as diverse: For we conceive God, (...), according to diverse
considerations, not as if there were any real composition in God, as
Athanasius. Hence Plato compares God to a Circle: (...), God always acts as in
a circle, or makes a circle. Which Symbol he had from the Egyptians, who
defined God, an intelligible Circle, whose Center is everywhere and
Circumference no where. A Circle is of al figures most simple, because without
angles; and yet most capacious and perfect: wherefore a lively symbolic image
of the divine Essence and Perfections. God is the beginning of althings as the
center, and the middle of althings as the Diameter, and the end of althings as
the circumference. Thence Plato. Leg. 4. page 713. says, God is, according to
the old Tradition, the beginning, end, and middle of althings. Again, God gives
being to althings as the Center, governs althings as the Diameter, conserves
althings as the Circumference. God as a Center moves al and yet is immobile; as
the Circumference comprehends al. The Center, as it is one immobile point,
indigitates and illustrates Gods Unity, Simplicity and Immutabilitie: The
circumference, being without beginning and end, most capacious and perfect,
poihnts out Gods Eternity, Infinity, Immensitie, and Perfection. As the
divine Attributes are lively displayed in the Word of God, so also in his
Works. The Omnipotence of God shone forth with most irradiant beams in the
Creation of the World, and its infant state by many miraculose experiments of
divine Providence: The Wisdom of God has been ever most illustrious in the
counterworking all the politic Contrivements and Undertakements of his Churches
enemies: His commun Bounty, in the preservation and support of Mankind since
the Fall: His Justice, in punishing sinners: and al his Attributes in the
Redemtion of sinners. Such are the various Theaters on which Gods Attributes
display themselves.

First, God is an absolute independent self Being or Essence. God an absolute
independent Essence.
This Hypothesis Platonic as well as sacred Philosophy maintains. Thus much all the forementioned essential Names of God, (...) Jehovah, (...), and Ehjeh
demonstrate. So likewise the description of God, Exodus 3.14. (...), etc.
whereto Plato's, and (...) concord, as it has been fully demonstrated in what
precedes. 1. Thus Damascemus, de Fide Orthodoxa, lib. 1. cap. 12. (...), etc.
(...), WHO IS seems to be the most principal and proper of the divine Names: fo
it contains in it the whole of Essence, as it were an infinite Ocean. Thus
Author Lib. de Fundamentis, l. 2. c. 27. Therefore it is manifest, says he,
(...), etc. That the name Ens cannot be properly attributed to any Being, but
God. For of other Beings it cannot be said, that they always are, but only
whiles they exist, not before, or after. But the blessed God, because he
always remains in the same state, therefore his Essence is truly Ens. The
notion of Ens is properly ascribed to him, whose Being depends not on any but
himself. For in that his Being depends on his own Essence, he is no way
contingent -- No Creature can be said absolutely to BE; because it depends on
another: neither is Being due to it, but with relation to its Cause. The like
Eulogus, in Photius: (...), etc. Essence it self is one thing in the
superprincipal Trinity, and another thing in us: for there it is
superessential, but here it is not properly Ens. For how can that be properly
Ens, which is produced out of Nothing, and of its own nature returns to
nothing? Al Creatures have a tincture of their primitive Nothing, yea more of
Nothing than Something; and therefore deserve not the name of Being if compared
with God the first, absolute, independent Being, as Esa. 40.17. Esa. 40.17.
Hence God is styled by Damascene, (...), superessential Essence. And the
Egyptians generally, in imitation of the Mosaic Philosophy, styled God (...),
Ens. Thus Plutarch, in his Isis and Osiris, informs us, That at Sai, in Egypt,
there was a Temple dedicated to Minerva, whom they suppose to be the same with
Isis, which had this Inscription on it: (...), I AM ALL THAT EXISTES, AND IS,
AND SHALL BE: AND MY VEIL NO MORTAL YET UNCOVERED. This Inscription is but a
Periphrase of Exodus 3.14. And by her Veil, with which she was pictured, is
meant the incomprehensibilitie of the divine Essence, which no mortal yet
unveiled, as hereafter. Yea, Aristotle, Metaph. l. 1. acknowlegeth, that
Melissus thought, (...) the one God, to be necessarily (...), Being it self.
But sacred Philosophy gives us the most lively notices of the divine Essence.
Thus Moses inquiring after Gods Name, Exodus 3.14.
he describes himself thus: Exodus 3.14. I am that I am: i. e. absolute,
necessary, simple, independent Being, yea as it were al Being. Esa. 44.6. Rev.
1.8, 11.
So Esa. 44.6. I am the first and the last, besides me there is no God. Which
style Christ assumes, Rev. 1.8. I am (...) and (...), i. e. I am the beginning
and the end, the first and the last, as v. 11. The same c. 21.6. and 22.13.
which descriptions of the divine Essence implie these particulars. (1) That God
is the first Being. Thus Esa. 44.48. Esa. 44.48.
I am he, I am the first, I also am the last. Thus also in Platonic Philosophic
God is styled (...), the first Being. Hence, (2) God is Ens (...), an
independent Being. Thence Plato styles him (...), self-Being: i. e. neither
from any other, nor of any other, nor by any other, nor for any other. That
must needs exist of, and in and for, and from it self, whose Essence is the
adequate reason and cause why it existes. Essence and Existence have one and
the same formal Idea in God; because he existes in and by his own Essence. It
is not so in Creatures: they cannot be said to exist in and by the force of
their own essence, but by the force of their causes, specially the first:
whence it follows, that they are Beings not by essence, but by participation
and reception of essence and existence from the first Cause. Hence, (3) God is
a Being absolutely and simply necessary. For God existing in and by his own
Essence, it is impossible for him not to exist: his Essence is so infinitely
and absolutely perfect, as that it includes existence, yea an impossibility of
not existing. Existence agrees not essentially and necessarily to any Creature,
but contingently: whatever Creature existes, might not have existed, and may
yet not exist, if it seems good to the first Being. But the first independent
Being has Existence absolutely and simply necessary: he is so much in Act, as
Ens in its most universal notion is in power: his Essence being infinite,
necessarily and eminently contains whatever is or may be of perfection in all
Being, either existent or possible. Whatever is once essentially, simply and
absolutely such, is always such; yea necessarily such: if a thing be once
simply and absolutely possible, it is always possible: and if it be once simply
and absolutely necessary, it is always necessary; because what does not once
implie a contradiction, never does. We see in the World some things are
possible, and yet not ac tually existent: now al things that are possible must
be reduced to some first necessary Being, that gave them their possibility,
and must give them their actual existence, or they will never attain to it.
Hence it follows, that the Essence and Existence of the first Being is simply
and absolutely necessary. Whence (4) God is in a sense Al Being; because he is
the first independent self-Being, simply and absolutely necessary, containing
in himself al Being, and imparting to althings al possible essence and
existence. Al Beings by participation do essentially and necessarily depend on
the first necessary self Being. This the spurious Dionysius, according to the
Pythagorean and Platonic mode, expresses by Unity. (...), Unity, says he,
has al number in it singularly and unitely: so the divine Being, al Beings and
Perfections. The same he illustrates by the Center of a Circle, in which all the
lines unite and subsist. Indeed created Beings considered in themselves,
without relation to the first Being, deserve not the name of Essence, but
Privation: for what are they, it abstracted from the first necessary Being, but
mere painted or rather possible shadows of Being? Hence, (5) Nothing is
univocally commun to, or predicated of the first independent Being, and created
dependent Beings. It Is true we call the Creature Ens, as well as God; but it must
be understood not univocally, but analogically; so as the notion Ens primarily,
eminently, and most properly belongs to the first Being; and to the Creatures
only analogically, or as some equivocally. So also Divines make mention of
communicable Attributes, commun to God and the Creatures: yet so, as that they
primarily belong to God, and to the Creatures only secundarily: albeit they are
transferred from the Creatures to God, and so in their formal Idea are
primarily attributed to the Creature. That nothing can predicate univocally of
God and the Creature is most evident; because an efficient, cannot receive a
name, taken from that nature, according to an univocal denomination or
predication: Now nothing made by God can arrive to the same kind of perfection
with God; and therefore nothing can be univocally affirmed of God and the
Creature. And this seems to be the genuine reason why Plato appropriated the
name (...) to God; (though Aristotle gives it to other things) because it
originally, primarily, and most properly belongs to him, in comparison of whom
althings else are deservedly said not to be, as in Job and Esaias. (6) The
divine Attributes are said to be distinguished from the Essence, as also among
themselves, not only ratione ratiocinante, but also ratione ratiocinata, so as
the fundament of the distinction be in God himself, as Amesius. (7) Lastly, we
find the divine Essence and Attributes well described by Damascene, Orthodox.
Fic. lib. 1. cap. 2. out of the primitive Greek Theology thus: (...), etc. But
that God is without cause, without end, sempiterne and e4ternal, increate,
immutable, inalterable, simple, incomposite, incorporeous, invisible,
intangible, incircumscripte, infinite, incomprehensible, good, just,
ommipotent, the Opificer of al Creatures, comprehensive of althings, provident
of althings, the supreme Soverain and Judge, we both acknowledge and confess.
Also that God is one, namely in Unity of Essence; which is known in three
Persons, Father, Son, and holy SPirit, etc.

. 3. The first Attribute that occurs for explication of the divine Being is
Unity, The Divine Unity.
whereof we find great and lively notices both in sacred and Platonic
Philosophy. Thus Moses, Deuteronomy. 6.4. Deuteronomy. 6.4.
Hear O Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord. Mose here first calls for their
solemn attention, and then lays down his assertion touching the Unity of the
divine Essence; which he seems to bottom on the very name (...) subjoined as a
part of the predicate, denoting, that he who is the first independent Essence
and Essentiator of althings can be but one. Thus frequently in the N. T. Mar.
12.32. Romans 3.29, 30. 1 Timothy 2.5, etc. And we find much in Platonic Philosophy
of the same import. Thus Plato, in his Parmenides, (where he lays down his
prime metaphysic Philosophemes) page 142. (...), etc. If there be One, can it
possibly be, but that it should part ache of Essence? Where he seems to make
(...) and (...), Ens and unum convertible, namely that Ens is one, and one Ens.
So he concludes: (...), For ONE always embraces ENS, and ENS ONE with mutual
embraces. His plain naked mind is, that the first Being and One admit of
reciprocation, i. e. God the first Being is the prime Unity. Aristotle also
and his sectators make Ens and Vnum convertible; but in a far different manner
from Plato, who understood both of God. Thus also Pythagoras held, (...), That
Unity is the first principe of althings. It Is true Plato, as others, makes
mention of many Gods; yet he tells us, That it was from the Authority of their
Ancestors, and by reason of the severitie of Laws, (...), without Demonstration
or Oriental Tradition: yea he confesses that (...), Polytheisme was repugnant
to right reason. And this he learned from his Master Socrates, who was so
zelose and warm in this particular, that he was content to suffer a Pagan
Martyrdom for the avouching the Unity of God, against the Laws and Customs
of the Athenians. Plutarch, on the INscription (...) E 1, Thou art, engraven on
the doors of the Delphic Temple, assures us, that the ancient name given unto
God was (...) E 1 (...) EN THOU ART ONE. For there cannot be many Gods but one:
(...), One ought to be Being, as Being one. For (...), Diversity or Alteritie
is placed with the difference of Being: but One is sincere, and without
mixture: for by the mixture of another with another a thing is made compound
and impure. Wherein he strongly proves, that God can be but one, because a
pure, necessary, absolute Being, or Act, without mixture and composition.
Plutarch also, in the Life of Numa Pompilius, assures us, That some learned
Romans, and that not without cause, do attribute the order of the beginning and
end of man's life to one self-God and Power divine. So Laertius, in the Life of
Zeno, informs us, That the Stoics held, (...), that there was one God called
by diverse names, according to his Proprieties, or Attributes and Operations.
Thus Seneca: There are so many Names of God, as there are Offices. Hence they
styled their Jupiter, (...), etc. not that they intended to assert many
Deities; but one and the same Deity, with regard to his various opertions. So
Aristotle, in his Book de Mundo, confesses, There was but one God, called by
diverse names from his effects, Thus also Augustine, de Civit. l. 7. c. 11. Al
these names they imposed on the one God, by reason of his diverse powers and
causalities: not that from the diversity of effects they asserted diverse
Gods. And that almost all the learned Philosopher asserted one God is maintained
by Suarez, Metaph. Disp. 30. sect. 10. page 97.

As for rational Arguments, the Unity of God may be thus demonstrated. (1)
That there is a God, who is a necessary independent Being, has been already
proved: hence it is evident, that he can be but one: For a Being absolutely
necessary, and from it self, has a necessity of Being so far as it is
singular: therefore it is not multiplicable or more than one. For if a singular
is not multiplicable; then whatever agrees to any thing as singular, admits not
of multiplicabilitie. That a Being absolutely necessary and independent has its
necessity of Being as singular is evident; because singularity is essential
and necessary to a Being absolutely necessary as such: for a Being absolutely
necessary is such so far as in act: and it is in act as singular: whence
singularity intrinsecally and essentially belongs thereto, as Suarez, Metaph.
Disp. 30. sect. 10. Thus the Author of the Book de Fundament. l. 2. c. 6.
(...), etc. There is therefore in the World a Being necessarily existing of it
self, which has no cause nor equal; seeing it is the Cause of althings; from
which their substance and existence is, but his existence dependes not on any
thing without himself. This is the blessed God: who is therefore one; because
an Ens necessarily existing. (2) Again, if there be two or more Gods; then they
are al infinite, independent, and self-Beings; or some produced and finite: The
first implies a coutradiction; because there cannot be many infinites: the
later also; because such Beings should be produced by real efficience and yet
eternal; also essentially diverse from the first Being that produced them, and
yet equal, because God. (3) That which is most singularly perfect,
self-sufficient and infinite can be but one. For if there were two things or
more singularly perfect and infinite; then they would differ really, or be the
same. If the same, then they are not two: if they really differ, then one has
somewhat which the other has not: if so, then neither is most singularly
perfect and infinite. For infinite comprehendes al perfection. Thus Damascene,
Orthodox. Fid. l. 1. c. 5. (...), etc. The Divinity is perfect and indeficient
every way -- If then we assert many Gods, they must be different: but if there
be a difference among them, where is their perfection? For if one be different
either in Bonitie, Wisdom, Virtue, etc. he so far comes short of perfection:
See more of Gods Unity, Aquinas contra Gent. l. 1. c. 42.

. 4. Next to the Unity of God follows his Simplicity, The Simplicity of God
explicated.
which is most absolute, as both Sacred and Platonic Philosophy teaches.
Sacred Philosophy expresses the absolute Simplicity of God under the name
(...) Jehovah, as also by the Paraphrase thereon, Exodus 3.14. I am that I am,
i. e. a simple pure Act; Exodus 3.14.
a Being necessarily existent in Act, and therefore most simple, without the
least shadow of Power, either objective, or receptive. So Psalm. 102.27. Psalm.
102.27.
but thou art the same, i. e. a uniforme simple Being. Plato in imitation of
sacred Philosophy, expresses the same by (...), the first, entire, perfect,
uniforme, most simple Being, without the least composition. Thence, in his
Conv. p. 211. he styles God, (...), the sincere and uniforme Beauty; because
without al mixture and composition: The Simplicity of God is described by our
Lord under the notion of a Spirit, Joh. 4.24. God is a Spirit, Joh. 4.24.
i. e. (1) As he is a pure Act, void of al passive power, either physic or
metaphysic. Althings are so far spirital, as they partake of Act: and by how
much the more spirital things are, by so much the more simple. Among the
Elements, the Wind and Fire are most simple, because most spirital; Angels and
human Souls are in an higher degree spirital and simple; because exemted from
al Laws of physic Matter: yet they are in some respect composite of Act and
Power, Substance and Accidents; because they are under the laws of metaphysic
obediential passive power, as Creatures. But God is so pure a Spirit and Act,
as that al metaphysic as well as physic power is denied of him. (2) God is said
to be a Spirit, as most vigorous and active. Our Lord assures us, that the Wind
being of a spirital nature, Joh. 3.8. blows whithersoever it lists. Yet
Angels and human Spirits are much more active and potent: But God infinitely
transcendes al other Spirits in point of activitie and efficacitie: which also
speaks the simplicity of his Being. For by how much the more simple any thing
is, by so much the more active and vigorous: Al matter is dull and phlegmatic.

Plato philosophiseth much of the Simplicity of God. So Repub. 2. page 380. he
says: God does not vary his form or shape, but that he is, (...), a most
simple Being; and of althings least varies from his own Idea or Essence. So
page 381. he says: God remains always, (...), simply one, and in the same
form. Of which more in what follows, of Gods Immutabilitie. But he treats more
fully of the Simplicity of God in his Metaphysics, Parmenid. page 137. If one
[ i. e. God] be any thing, it cannot truly be many, i. e. compound: and he
gives this reason of his Hypothesis: (...), Neither can there be any part
thereof, neither can it be a whole: for a part is the part of a whole: and that
is a whole to which no part is wanting. Whence he concludes: (...), Wherefore
neither will it be a whole, neither will it have parts, if one shall be one. His
meaning is, that God, who is one simple Being, is neither whole, nor has he
parts. This Argument he more fully improves page 138. Simplicity does not add
any real entitie or mode to that which is thereby denominated simple; but only
a negation of composition: For simplicity is the same with perfect and
indivisible Unity. This Simplicity of God is most absolute: For (1) he is not
composed of Logic parts, as of Genus and Differentia; because there is nothing
before God, nor yet a Species contradistinct to him. (2) God is not composed of
physic parts, either essential or integral; because he is a Spirit. Thus
Damascene, Orthodox. Fid. lib. 1. cap. 14. (...), etc. Whatever things are
spoken of God corporally, are spoken symbolically; but they have an higher
mind: for the Deity is simple, and has no figure. (3) Neither is he composed
of metaphysic parts, namely Act and Power; because he is pure Act. (4) He is
not composed of Ens and Essence; or of Essence and Existence; because he is
Being in the abstract, Exodus 3.14. He so lives, as that he is life it self,
Joh. 5.26. and 14.6. (5) He is not composed of Subject and Accident; because
whatever is in God is God. Moreover, God being the most perfect Being, he can
neither admit nor need any accidental perfection. So Damascene, Orthod. Fid. l.
1. c. 18. In us habits come and go; but not in God: for in him nothing comes or
goes: (...), for he is inalterable and immutable; neither is it lawful to
ascribe any accident unto him: for goodness in God is coincident with his
Essence. The same he adds: (...), Neither may we say that there is a Quality
in God, or that he is compounded of Essence and Quality. (6) He is not
composed of Attributes; because they are the same with his Essence. Thus
Damascene, Orthodox. Fid. l. 1. c. 13. having spoken of the divine Attributes
and Relations, he adds: (...), Therefore al these must be considered in the
whole Deity in commun, and as the same, and indistinctly, and unitely. (7)
Neither is he composed of Decrees; because they differ not from his Nature. (8)
He is not composed of Essence and Relation, or Nature and Personalitie; because
the personal relations, albeit they admit some kind of distinction, yet they
give no composition; seeing each Person is the very divine Essence, though with
some incomprehensible modification. Thus Damascene, Orthodox. Fid. l. 1. c. 15.
(...), For the Deity is not a composite; but in three perfect, [Persons] one
perfect, indivisible, and incomposite, [Essence.] So cap. 8. God is both Father
always existing, and ingenite: God is also the Son, who always, eternally,
influxibly, impassibly is begotten of the Father: God also is the holy Spirit,
etc. The Essence and Personalitie are included in the Person of the Father,
Son, and Spirit, in a way not of composition, but of ineffable conjunction and
union. (9) Neither is the Deity composed of Essence and Operation. It Is true,
the operations of God, considered in their passive Attingence, and as they
terminate on create effects, are the same with or at least only modally
distinct from the effect, and therefore really distinct from God; but if we
consider them in regard of their active Attingence, as relating to God the
Principe, so they are the same with the Divine Will, and therefore not really
distinct from the Divine Essence, as in what follows, Chap. 7.. 3. Thus
Damascene, Orthod. Fid. lib. 1. cap. 13. (...), etc. The true word teaches,
that God is simple, and has one simple operation. So Chap. 18. (...), etc. The
divine effulgence and operation is one Essence, both simple, and impartible,
and boniforme in things partible variate [as to operation] and distributing
whatever is constitutive of proper Nature, it remains simple: i. e. albeit it
acts variously, according to the indigence of its subject, yet it remains
invariable and simple. Hence (10) we must, with Plato, deny, that God, the
most simple Being, may be styled a whole; because he can in no regard be said
to have parts.

The absolute Simplicity of God may be demonstrated (1) From the Perfection of
God. The Simplicity of God demonstrated.
Al parts as parts are finite, incomplete and imperfect. Again, every whole is
dependent both on its cause and on the parts whereof it is composed: but there
is nothing incomplete or dependent in God; because he is most perfect. Moreover
al parts are in order of nature before the whole, and therefore need some bond
of union to knit them together: but God is (...), without al cause, prioritie,
or posterioritie. Lastly, in every kind things are by so much the more noble
and perfect, by how much the more simple they are: wherefore God being the most
perfect Being must needs be most simple. (2) From the Unity of God. This
Argument Plato uses, as before. So Parmenid. page 144. We did not therefore
speak truly even now, when we said, (...), that Essence, [ i. e. God] was
divided into many parts: for he cannot be divided into more than one: for unto
him al (as it is most consentaneous) are equal. Neither is Being wanting to
Unity, neither Unity to Being [ i. e. God] but these two are altogether
equal. Wherein he proves the Simplicity of God from his Unity: and it may be
thus improved. Unity is generally described negatively by indivision in regard
of it self, and division from other things. Now the divine Essence is most
indivisible as to it self, but most divided and distant from althings else:
therefore it is most one: and if most one, then also most simple. Thus Aristot.
Metaph. l. 4. c. 6. (...), etc. Those things, whose essential notion is
indivise and inseparable, such are most one and simple. And is not the first
Being such? May we conceive the least divisibilitie in his Essence? This
Argument is well urged by Simplicius, in Epict. cap. 1. page 9. (...), One
Bonitie produces many Bonities; and one Simplicity and Unity, which excels
al others, many Unities; and one Principe many Principes: For One, Principe,
Good, and God are the same. Where he proves the Simplicity of God from his
Unity. Thus also the Author of the Book de Fundamentis, l. 2. c. 10. (...),
etc. The name ONE is truly said of that, which is indivise in it self and
divise as to althings else. And by how much the more proper it is to any thing
tobe distinguished from other things, by so much the more it may be said to be
one. Thence he concludes, That nothing in the world can be said to be so one,
as to be truly distinct from althings else, but God, who is therefore most
simple. So Damascene, Orthod. Fid. l. 1. c. 19. (...), The Deity [or Divine
Unitie] is multiplied in things partible impartibly, drawing and converting
things partible, to his own Simplicity: i. e. The Deity, being in it self the
most simple Unity, is multiplied as to operations in althings according to
their indigence, yet without the least multiplicitie in it self; but it
convertes althings multiplied to its own simple Unity. (3) From the nature of
Composition. What is Composition, but the union of things distinct? And does
not imperfection always attend distinction? Take the most subtle and refined
composition, which they make to be of Ens and Essence, or of Essence and
Existence, and does there not some imperfection attend the same? Does not al
Composition import some efficience, and thence dependence? Can that which is
compounded be eternal? Does it not implie a beginning, and that something was
before it? Is it not a flat contradiction to say, something was compounded from
Eternity? Lastly, where Composition is, there division may be; and so by
consequence dissolution, which to affirm of God is blasphemous. This Argument
is well improved by Damascene, Orthodox. Fid. l. 1. c. 12. (...), etc. The
Deity is simple and incomposite: but that which does coalesce out of many
differences is composite. If therefore we shall say, that increate, independent,
incorporeous, immortal, eternal, good, Creator, and the like, are substantial
differences, and different substances in God, being composed of so many things,
he will not be simple, but composite: which truly to affirm is extreme
impiety. It Is meet therefore to conceive, that each of these, as affirmed of
God, do signify, not what he is in Essence, but either what he is not, or a
certain (...), habitude which he has to those things that are distinguished
from him, or that participate nature and operation from him. Wherein he gives
us the genuine reason, why the divine Essence, which is in it self most simple,
is expressed under various Names, and Attributes; namely thereby to remove al
imperfection from him, or to illustrate some perfection that is in him, by the
habitude which he has to things made by him. (4) From Gods prime Causalitie and
Efficience. That God is the frist Cause of althings is clearly evident from
what has been before laid down of his Existence. Hence it necessarily follows,
that he is most simple: For whatever is composite, is such by some preexistent
cause, which framed its composition. This Argument is well managed by
Simplicius, in Epict. c. 1 p. 9. (...), For God is the first Being and Cause of
althings: But now what is first, is necessarily most simple. For whatever is
composite, as it is composite and multiplied, it is posterior to one. (5) From
Gods Actualitie. That there is one pure Act, which is actuated by nothing else,
but actuates althings else, is most evident to any, that dare not grant a
progress into infinity, as to Acts. Now what partakes of pure Act, but the
first Being, who was never in possibility to be, but always a pure Act as to
his Essence? God the first Being is actually and eternally whatever he may be;
neither can he ever be what actually he is not. Every Creature had a
possibility not to be before it was; and it still retains the same
possibility: but God is such a pure Act, as that not the least possibility,
or potentialitie can be affirmed of him. He is such a pure subsistent Act, as
excludes al state existing in power or potentialitie, either passive or
objective; which speaks the highest simplicity. (6) From the Immutabilitie of
God. Whatever is composite is mutable: for where there is composition, there
may be division, which implies mutabilitie. But God is most immutable, as we
shall, in what immediately follows, demonstrate. This Argument is well managed by
Plato, in his Phaedo, page 78. (...), Therefore it is most agreeable, that those
things which are always and equally the same, be incomposite: but things that
are otherwise, and not the same, that those are composite. (7) From the
Infinity of God. Whatever is compound has parts: If God has parts, they must
be finite or infinite: finite they cannot be; because infinite cannot be
composed of finites: also, there is nothing in God, but what is God. Neither
can God be composed of infinite parts; because there should then be something
greater than infinite; for the whole is ever greater than some one part: also
there would be many infinites, which implies a contradiction.

CHAP. IV. Of Gods Immutabilitie, Infinitude, Eternity, Immensitie, and
Incomprehensibilitie.
Gods Immutabilitie in Nature, immanent Acts of Knowledge and Will; as also in
his Word. Gods Infinitude as to Essence, and Perfection. His Eternity
explicated and demonstrated. Also his Immensitie. Gods Incomprehensibilitie
demonstrated. How far we may apprehend God: Against poetic Figments of God,
Curiosity in our Inquiries after God. Notices of God natural and supernatural.

. 1. NExt follows the Immutabilitie of God, The Immutabilitie of God.
which resultes from his Simplicity, whereof we have great notices and
demonstrations both in sacred and Platonic Philosophy. As for sacred
Philosophemes, the style God assumes Exodus 3.14. I am, fully explicates and
demonstrates his Immutabilitie. For this phrase denotes, that there is no
passibilitie, dependence, succession or variation in God. The same may be
argued from the name (...) Jehovah, which indigitates and points out to us the
necessity, simplicity, Mal. 3.6.
and immutabilitie of the divine Essence. So Mal. 3.6. For I am the Lord, I
change not. Which is explicated, Jam. 1.17. Jam. 1.17.
With whom there is no variableness or shadow of turn. Al these notions are
Astronomic: God is here compared to the Sun, as he is the Father of Lights; yet
so as that he infinitely outshines and excels the Sun in regard of his
immutable Nature and Essence. For the Sun, although it be not so variable as
the Moon, yet, as Plato in his Timaeus well observes, it has its (...) or (...),
Paralaxes and Changes: it appears otherwise at rising, otherwise at noon,
otherwise at setting: but now the blessed God admits not any of these
variations. Again, the Sun has its (...), tropic shadow, or shadow of turning:
it has its annual Tropes, or Turns and Vicissitudes, which they call the
Solstices; whereby it is nearer to, or remoter from us: according to which
Recesses or Accesses it castes various shadows, and causes variety of
seasons, Summer, Winter, Spring, Autumn: such is the (...), or tropic shadow
of the Sun. But now the immutable God admits no such tropic shadows of
variations: he falls under no Eclipse, defect or diminution of light. Indeed the
Sun as to it self is never eclipsed; albeit it be sometimes hid from our sight,
by the interposition of the Moon; yet it then shines with as intense light as
ever, somewhere else. Yea, if we will speak properly, the Stars cannot be said
to rise and set in regard of themselves, or the Heavens, but only as to us. So
the blessed God may vary in his aspects, regards, or providence as to us, yet
in himself, yea in regard of his word he admits not the least variation or
shadow of turning. To express the same more familiarly: when we are in a Ship
or Coach that moves, the earth and hills seem to us to move: namely, because our
vision or sight is made by a Pyramid, the basis of which is in the object seen,
but the point thereof in our eye: Now our eye being swiftly moved by the rapid
motion of the Coach or Ship, and the point of the Pyramid moved therewith,
hence the basis, and thence the object it self seems to move: Just so it is as
to our knowledge of God; our thoughts and conceptions of God being always in
flux, succession, and motion; we foolishly conceit, that the immutable God
moves and varies; whereas all the motion and variation is in us, not in him.

The Immutabilitie of God is greatly explicated and demonstrated by Plato, God
immutable in his Nature.
whose Philosophemes on this Theme may be reduced to the following particulars.
1. God is immutable in his Essence. Thus Plato, in his Phaedo, page 78. (...),
That very Essence, which we defined always to existe, (...); namely that which
is Equality it self, Beauty it self, Singularity it self, does it admit any
mutation? Or truly can any of those, namely that which is uniforme Being,
which existes of it self, and is always the same, and never in any degree
admits the least alteration? Whereby he strongly proves, that God cannot fall
under the least mutation; because he is an equal, uniforme, simple,
self-existent Being. This Argument he more fully prosecutes, Repub 2. page 380.
(...); Do thou think, that God is a Prevaricator, and as it were one lying
in wait, to appear under different shapes? And sometimes to be this, sometimes
that; and so to change himself into diverse forms? or rather ought not thou
to judge, that he is most simple, and of althings least departes from his own
Idea? Then he adds the reason, why it is impossible for God to be mutable or
variable in his Essence: (...); Is it not necessary, if any thing depart from
its own Idea or form, that it be changed by it self or by some other? (1) That
God cannot be changed by any other he thus proves: (...), Truly such things as
have the best constitution are not changed by any other. The same Principe he
repetes, page 381. (...); etc. Whatever is well constituted, either by Nature,
or Art, or both ways, does it admit the least change? On this hand there can no
mutation happen to God. Thence (2) he procedes to demonstrate, that God cannot
change himself: (...), But does he change and alter himself? It is evident he
does, if he be in any sort altered. Then he demonstrates, that God cannot
change himself: (...); Whether does he change himself for the better and more
excellent, or for what is worse and baser than himself? He replies: (...), It Is
necessary that he be changed for the worse, if he be at al changed: For we may
not say, that God wants pulchritude or virtue in any degree. Then he adds:
(...); Do thou think there is any one either of the Gods o men, who will of
his own accord make himself worse in any manner? Thence he concludes: (...), It
is therefore impossible, that God should be willing to change himself, but, as
it is most consentaneous, seeing each of them is most excellent and best, that
he remains one and the same simply in the some form. In which excellent
explication and demonstration of the Immutabilitie of God, we have these
observables. (1) He makes mention of Gods in the Plural Number, by reason of
the severitie of their Laws, and Customs, but intends thereby one only God, as
before in the Unity of God. (2) He demonstrates this one God to be immutable;
because he cannot be changed either by any other or by himself. That he cannot
be changed by any other he proves; because al change is for the better: but God
cannot be changed for the better; because he is best. The same argument he
uses to prove, that God cannot change himself. For such a mutation would be
either perfective or amissive: God is not capable of any perfective mutation;
because he is the best and most perfect Being: neither is it possible, that he
should affect any amissive mutation, because none willingly change for the
worse. Proclus adds, that God is (...) invariable; because al mutation is a
sign (...) of infirmity, as it is (...), which is inconsistent with the
omnipotent Essence. In sum, this Immutabilitie of the Divine Essence is that
Attribute, whereby God is said to preserve his own Being, without the least
power of not Being, or conversion into any other Essence, or increment and
decrement, or alteration and motion.

1. God immutable in his immanent Acts.
God is immutable in all his immanent Acts, and Decrees. There is a twofold
mutation, physic and moral: physic mutation is by Addition or Ablation and
Substraction of some real Entitie. Moral mutation is either of Science and
Knowledge: as when a man judges that false, which he before thought to be true:
or else of Will and Purpose; when a man wills that, which before he nilled, etc.
God is absolutely immutable in all these respects: he is neither capable of
physic nor yet of moral mutation, either as to Knowledge or Will. For all mutation
either of Knowledge or Will implies inconstance and imperfection, if not
imprudence and infidelity; which are al inconsistent with the Divine Being. 1.
Knowledge.
(1) God cannot be said to change in regard of his Knowledge; because his
Knowledge is not distinct from his Being: he knows himself and althings else in
and by himself: he cannot know any thing that he did not know before; neither
can he know any thing otherwise than he did before. He knows things successive
without succession, by intuition: also things complexe by one simple intuitive
act. His Knowledge is as necessary and eternal as his Essence; and therefore
most perfect and immutable, both extensively and intensively. Objects known by
God are variable, but his knowledge of them and of their variations invariable.
Althings are the same to Gods knowledge, as they are in their own Beings: things
past, present, future are present to God in all their circumstances and
differences. If Gods Science should be changed, it would be about things
future, when they are present, and so pass into preterite or what is past: but
this cannot be, because those circumstances of future, present, past are al
determined by the Divine Will, and so present to his Science of Vision. Moreover
no objects are the cause of the Divine Knowledge; but, on the contrary, the
Divine Knowledge and Will the cause of al objects, future, present, and past. In
sum, God knows al particular objects and circumstances intrinsecally in the
glass of his own Essence; and therefore invariably and uniformely. Things both
complexe and simple may vary; but God knows them al invariably, in the
infinite claritie of his own Divine Essence and Ideas. Every thing future, if
we compare it with the prescience of God, it is necessary, and necessarily
known by him. This Immutabilitie of the Divine knowledge Plato often inculcates
under his Divine Ideas, by means whereof he makes God to have the most
accurate, absolute, infinite, eternal, and immutable knowledge of althings. So
in his Timaeus, page 28. as in his Parmenides, page 134, etc. as before P. 2.
B. 3. C. 9. S. 1.. 4. and in what follows, Chap. 4.

(2) God is immutable in all the Acts and Decrees of his Will. 2. Will.
For these also have one and the same Idea with the Divine Essence. Again, if
Gods Will were mutable, his Knowledge must also be so: for God cannot know things
future, but by the determination of his own Will, whence they receive their
futurition. It Is true, God wills al mutations of things, yet his Will admits no
mutation. It Is one thing to change a Will, Deus non mutat voluntatem, sed vult
mutationem rerum. Aquin.
and another to will a change: For God by the same immutable Will decrees that in
such a period of time such a thing shall be, and in another, the contrary;
without any beginning to will what he willed not before, or ceasing to will what
he before willed. God begins to will or nil nothing: al his Wills and Nils are
eternal. He hates nothing that he before loved, nor loves any thing that he
before hated: neither does his Will admit any degrees of some or less. No
immanent Act or intrinsec denomination can happen de nov^ unto God; albeit
many, yea infinite externe relative denominations may be attributed to him.
Thus the externe relative denomination of Creator is given to God in time, not
intrinsecally but extrinsecally: the change of Creation was not in God, but in
the Creature: the very act of Creation taken passively and extrinsecally is in
the Creature, and not really distinguished from it: if we consider it actively
as in God, so it is the same with the Will and Essence of God: in which regard
God may be said to be Creator from al Eternity, as his Will is the productive
cause of athings. Thus al other externe relations and denominations attributed
to God in time, as Lord, Father, etc. are not because of any new thing in God,
but in regard of something new in the Creature from God. There is no new Act in
God which was not from eternity, albeit the effects of those Acts were not
from eternity, but in time. Al mutations are proper to Creatures only, because
Creatures: and the mutabilitie of the Creature can have no influence on the
immutable God. Thus Damascene, Orthodox. Fid. l. 1. c. 18. (...), Therefore God
is altogether immutable and inalterable: for he has determined althings by his
Prescience; every thing according to its proper and convenient season, and
place. Wherein note, (1) That by Gods Prescience, must be understood the Divine
Decree, whence his Prescience resultes, and therefore often put for it: (2) That
by this Divine Prescience and Decree althings though most mutable and variable,
as to their proper times and places, are immutably determined.

3. God is also immutable in regard of his Word. Gods Immutabilitie in regard
of his Word.
God being the first Intellect and Truth, he cannot but speak truth: The Divine
Veracitie is equally immutable in respect of future and past: God cannot but do
what he has said he will do; because his Will is immutable. He is most simple
and true both in his words and works: as he cannot be deceived, so neither can
he deceive. Thus Plato, Repub. 2. page 381. refels the false Ideas and Idols,
which the Poets frame of the Gods, as if they should change themselves into
diverse shapes: (...), and by certain delusions should delude us, that they
might seem various to us. Which he makes to be repugnant to the Nature of God,
who is (...), immutable, invariable, inalterable, and one that cannot lie;
because he is Truth it self. Whence he concludes, page 382. (...), etc.
Wherefore God is simple and true, both in his works and words: neither is he
changed, neither does he deceive others, either by phantastic delusions, or
speeches, or signs, or visions, or dreams. Of which more fully in the
Veracitie of God, Chap. 6.. 2. Only here we are to obviate an objection, which
is made from what is mentioned in Scripture of Gods Repentance, Genesis 6.6. 1 Samuel 15.11. This manner of speech is only after the manner of men, when they
would have that undone which was formerly done: as to God it speaks no
alteration in him, but only in his Dispensations and Actions. According to
propriety of speech God cannot be said to repent, as Number. 23.19.

But to give a more full Demonstration of Gods Immutabilitie, The Immutabilitie
of God demonstrated.
we may consider the Divine Essence and Attributes, which concur al to make
good this demonstration. (1) The Divine Essence and its necessity gives us an
invict argument of Gods Immutabilitie. For that which has a necessity of Being
cannot acquire its Essence by any action or mutation: and if it depend not on
any other for its Being, it cannot lose the same. Thus Plato, Phileb. (...),
The first one necessary Being is not capable of generation and corruption. Thus
Jamblichus: God, says he, necessarily is, not by an externe necessity, but
interne and natural. Now whatever is necessarily such, is immutably such. This
Argument is well improved by the Author libri de Fundamentis, l. 2. c. 5. (...),
etc. Whatever is changed is changed by some other: But that which necessarily
existes of it self has not any cause by which is should be changed: for the
same thing cannot be the changer and changed: for so it should consiste of two
things, one that changes, and another that is changed. Al change arises
either from some externe or interne cause: But God has nothing without that
can make any impression on him: neither is there any thing within him, that can
give or receive any impression or change. There is no active power, either
without or within God, that can make, nor any passive power within God to
receive any impression or mutation. Thus Damascene, Orthedox. Fid. l. 1. c. 3.
(...), etc. Beings therefore create are altogether mutable: it is necessary
therefore that the Opificer and Framer be increate -- and if increate then
immutable. So l. 2. c. 3. (...), for every create Being is mutable: the
increate only is immutable. And he gives this reason of his Hypothesis: (...),
for whatever has beginning may naturally have an end. (2) We may demonstrate
the Immutabilitie of God from his Simplicity. For all mutation properly
considered requires some Composition; because there is required some commun
subject remaining under both terms of the mutation. This Argument is well
managed by Plato, Repub. 2. page 381. It is impossible that God should be
changed; because he remains (...), always the same simply in his own form. So
Phaedo, page 78. he proves, that God being (...), a uniforme Being existing of
himself, and always the same, cannot admit the least alteration, as before
Thence, in his Timaeus, he calls God, (...), one same Being always like himself.
God being one simple Being, without Quantity, Quality, or any Accident,
having nothing in himself but what is himself, it is impossible, that he should
admit any alteration or mutation. Psalm. 102.26, 27.
Thus sacred Philosophy, Psalm. 102.26, 27. They [the Heavens] shall perish, but
thou shall endure -- thou shall change them and they shall be changed. But thou
art the same and thine years shall have no end. Where he foundes and bottomes
the Immutabilitie of God on the Simplicity and Identitie of his Essence. (3)
The Immutabilitie of God may be demonstrated from his Immobilitie. Thus Plato
in his Parmenid^. page 138. (...), Because if he, [the one God] should be
moved, he should be either moved locally, or alterated: for there are only
these motions. Very good. But now if this one God should be altered, he should
not be one: therefore he cannot be moved according to alteration. Thence he
procedes to prove, that he cannot be moved locally; because he has no parts.
Whence he concludes, page 139. (...), The one God therefore is, as to al kinds
of motions, immobile. The force of this Argument lies thus: God being the prime
Motor and Principe of al motion and mutation must necessarily be immobile and
immutable: For all grant the first Motor to be immobile: and al motion and
mutation to be founded in some immobile immutable Principe. Thence Aristotle
held God to be (...), the first, immobile Being. So Philo Judaeus makes God to
be, (...), the immobile immutable Being, who no way stands in need of any
other thing. Again, Plato argues, That whatever is altered or changed, cannot
be primarily, simply, and absolutely one, as God is. (4) We may demonstrate the
Immutabilitie of God from his pure Actualitie and Impassibilitie. The most pure
Act cannot be changed, because passive power, either physic or metaphysic and
obediential, is the root of al mutabilitie and dependence. Thus Jamblichus, a
great Platonist: God, says he, has nothing in himself passible: and this
impassibilitie he has not by acquisition, but by nature. An uniforme Essence,
of it self incorporeous and permanent admits not any passions or divisions
either of alteration or mutation. Where there is perpetual order there can be
no passion. (5) The Immutabilitie of God may be evinced from his Eternity.
Whatever is eternal must necesfarily be immutable; because without beginning
and end. That which was before al time cannot be liable to any changes of time.
Thus Plato, in his Parmenides, page 141. and in his Phaedrus, p. 245. strongly
proves, That the first one Being can have neither beginning nor end, and thence
no alteration or mutation, as hereafter in the Eternity of God. 3. (6) The
Perfection of God demonstrates his Immutabilitie. Thus Plato, Repub. 2. page
381. (...), etc. God, and those things that belong to God are best, and most
perfect; therefore he cannot admit any mutation: for what is best is never
changed. The force of the Argument lies thus: God, by the necessity of his
Being, has a plenitude of Essence and Perfection, and therefore admits not of
any augmentation or diminution: for what by necessity of Nature has a
plenitude of Being and Perfection, that cannot extend it self any further, but
must be infinite: and what is infinite cannot be greater, or lesser; neither
can any thing be taken from or added to it. Hence, God being by a necessity of
Nature most perfect, cannot be more or less perfect: therefore he cannot fall
under any mutation either perfective or corruptive, augmentative or diminutive.

. 2. Gods Infinitude as to Essence and Perfection.
Hence follows Gods Infinitude as to Essence and Perfection. For a Being
necessarily, simply, and immutably such must of necessity be infinitely
perfect. A Creature simply and absolutely finite may be in some limited sense
said to be infinite; as the Soul of man is in regard of its capacity said to
be infinite; because capable of an infinite object: but nothing is absolutely,
simply, and essentially infinite and perfect but God. Infinity really excludes
al negation of Entitie from God, and also includes that God is in pure Act,
whatever Ens in its most extensive universal latitude and notion does include.
For an infinite Essence necessarily contains, either formally or eminently,
whatever is or may be of perfection in all Beings, either actually existent or
possible. But to treat more philosophically and distinctly of this Attribute,
we are to consider, that infinite is a negative notion, which includes a
negation of al terms or bounds: now a thing may be said to be terminated,
bounded, or finite in reward (1) of its Essence and Perfection, (2) of its
Duration, (3) of its Presence, (4) of its Comprehensibilitie. In all these
regards God is said to be infinite. He is infinite (1) in Essence, as most
perfect and independent: (2) in Duration, as eternal: (3) in Presence, as
omnipresent, or immense: (4) as to our Comprehension, in being
incomprehensible. We shall here treat only of Gods Infinitude as to Essence and
Perfection; and of the other, as distinct Attributes resulting from this
Infinitude of Essence.

Gods Infinitude as to Essence and Perfection may be various ways explicated
and demonstrated. Gods Infinitude from his Independence.
Thus Damascene, Orthodox. Fid. l. 2. c. 19. describes God, (...), The
increate, independent, immortal, infinite, eternal, immaterial, chiefest Good
-- the immutable, impassible, incircumscript, immense, indefinible,
incorporeous, invisible -- without indigence, absolute, most free, omnipotent,
and infinitely potent. By each of these divine Attributes the Infinitude of the
Divine Essence may be demonstrated. As 1. By his Independence. The Infinitude
of the Divine Essence consistes in a negation of al limitation and terms. The
terms that limit any Essence are its causes: therefore that which is (...) and
(...) without any cause, must needs be without terms, and so infinite. And is
not the Divine Essence thus independent, without al causal terms and
limitation? Must not God then be infinite in his Essence? This Independence of
the Divine Essence as to al causes and causal limitation is well expressed in
sacred Philosophy, by Gods being the first and the last: as Esa. 41.4. I the
Lord, Esa. 41.4.
the first, and with the last, I am he. So Chap. 44.6. I am the first, and I am
the last: and besides me there is no God. Thuse also Chap. 48.12. I am he: I am
the first, I also am the last. God is said to be the first, as having no causal
principe or efficient that might give limits to his Essence: and the last, as
having no final cause, or end, that might give moral limits or bounds to his
Will. This Infinitude and Independence of the Divine ssence as the first Cause
and last End, is well illustrated, Rev. 1.8, 11. and 21.6. and 22.13. Rev. 1.8,
11. and 21.6. and 22.13.
I am (...) and (...), the beginning and the end, the first and the last: i.e.
as (...) is the first letter and (...) the last of the Greek Alphabet; so God
is the first causal Principe or Efficient, and last End or final Cause, that
gives terms and limits to al created Essences; but receives limits and terms
from none, and therefore is infinite in Essence and Perfection. Hence God is
said to be (...), self-Being, or Being of himself, not by any positive influxe;
for that is impossible, that any thing should give Being to it self: but
negatively, by reason of his independence on any other Cause. For God as the
first, has no efficient, and as the last, has no final Cause; thence by
consequence no causal terms or limitation. This Independence and Infinitude of
God, as the first Efficient and last End is well explicated and demonstrated by
Plato, in his Parmenides, p. 137. (...), Therefore if he [the one God] has no
part, neither truly shall he have any beginning, or end, or middle; for such
are the parts of a thing. Where he proves, that God has no beginning nor end, [
i. e. he is the first and the last] from his simplicity, or not having parts.
And in what follows he gives us the reason of his consequence: (...), But the
end and the principe is the term of every thing: i. e. every thing is
terminated and bounded by its causal Principle or Efficient, and last End:
therefore, to speak in the language of sacred Philosophy, He who is the first
and the last, without a first causal principe, or last end to terminate his
Essence, must needs be infinite. Thus Plato concludes, in what immediately
follows: (...), The one God therefore is infinite, if he has neither principe
nor end. This Argument, which agrees with that of sacred Philosophy, is most
cogent: for that which has no causal terms either of beginning or end, but is
the first causal principe and last end of althings, must needs be infinite.

2. Gods Infinitude from his Unity and Simplicity.
The Infinitude of the Divine Essence and Perfection procedes from and may be
demonstrated by Gods Unity, Simplicity, and pure Actualitie. Thus Plato, in
his Philebus, page 14. (...), One [namely God] is as many and infinite: and
many are as one only. Plato here describes the first infinite Being, under the
commun Pythagorean notion of one and many: as being one in regard of the
simplicity of his Essence, and yet many, in regard of his infinite Perfections
and Ideas or Decrees. So page 16. (...), etc. That the one [God] is many and
infinite. The force of this Argument lies thus: God being one simple pure Act,
must needs be infinite in Essence and Perfection: for that which renders every
Creature finite is its essential constitution and composition of Act and
passive Power, either physic or metaphysic. It Is true Angels and human Souls
have no physic passive power, yet they have metaphysic and obediential, as made
out of nothing, and so reducible thereto, if their Creator please. But now the
first Being God, being one simple pure Act, without the least shadow of passive
power, whereby al Creatures are terminated and bounded, it thence necessarily
follows, that he must be infinite in Essence and Perfection. God actually and
eternally is, whatsoever he may be, and cannot hereafter be, that which now he
is not. Al Creatures are somewhat in possibility, which they are not as yet in
act: whence they have an inclination to or at least a passive power for
something which they have not: which being attained unto makes them more
perfect. But now where there is one pure Act, al perfection is; because there
remains no passive power or capacity of receiving additional perfection. Every
Act is by so much the more perfect, by how much the less of passive power is
mixed therewith: whence the one simple pure Act, which has nothing of passive
power mixed therewith, must necessarily be without terms of Essence and
Perfection. Again, every Essence is so far perfect, as it is in Act: thence the
Divine Essence being (...), in a most transcendent singular and infinite degree
actual, it must needs be infinitely perfect. Thus Aquinas, contra Gent. l. 1.
c. 28. Every thing is so far perfect, as it is in Act; but imperfect as it is
in power, with privation of Act. That therefore which is no way in power, but
pure Act, must needs be most perfect: such is God.

3. We may explicate and demonstrate the Infinitude of Gods Essence and
Perfection by his Transcendence in Being. Thus Plato, Gods Infinitude from his
transcendent Essence.
Repub. 6. page 509. (...), The chiefest Good, [God] is not Essence, but
something greater and more august, and infinitely transcending both in dignity
and virtue the nature of althings created. Wherein he makes God to be the Cause
of al Essences, yet not properly Essence in that manner as the Creature is, but
(...), superessential or transcendent Essence, self-Essence, self-Eternitie.
This transcendent Essence and Perfection of God is termed in sacred Philosophy
Magnitude: as Psalm. 95.3. Psalm. 95.3.
For the Lord is a great God, and a great King above al Gods: i. e. a
transcendent Being. This transcendent magnitude of the Divine Essence and
Perfection must be understood principally intensively, as God contains in him
eminently and transcendently al perfections. Thus Psalm. 145.3. Great is the
Lord, and greatly to be praised; Psalm. 145.3.
and of his magnitude there is no investigation. (...): i. e. the magnitude of
his Essence is an infinite Abyss or Ocean which no mortal finite capacity can
dive into. So the LXX. (...), there is no term or bound to it. This is well
expressed by Damascene, Orthod. Fid. l. 1. c. 19. (...), It [the Deitie] being
above Intelligence, and above Reason, and above Life, and above Essence, etc.
Whence the commun title he gives God, according to the Platonic mode, is (...),
superessential, as before, Chap. 3.. 1. This infinite transcendent Magnitude of
the Divine Essence is also well expressed by Plato, Parmenid. page 137. where
treating of the one God, without beginning and end, he says: (...), It is
infinite: therefore also without figure: neither does it partake of a round
figure, nor yet of a straight: i. e. God being infinite in Essence is not
limited by terms of magnitude or figure. This Argument from the Transcendence
of the Divine Essence may be thus improved: That which is transcendently Ens or
Being, See Suarez, Metaphys. Disput. 30. Sect. 2.
is such per essentiam, essentially: thence it cannot be limited. That which
has Being only by participation from a superior Cause, may be limited either by
the pleasure of the superior Cause, that gives it so much perfection, and no
more; or else from the capacity of the Recipient, which is capable of
receiving so much perfection, and no more. But now the Divine Essence, being
transcendently and essentially such, without participation, cannot be limited
either way; but is invested with an infinitude of essence and perfection
altogether indivisible; not precise and limited to one kind of perfection, as
it is with the Creature, but containing, in a most eminent transcendent manner,
whatever is of perfection in the Creature, Whence it is that the divine
Infinitude and Perfection admit a reciprocation: For Being subsisting of it
self contains in it the whole perfection of essence: and the perfections of
althings belong to the perfection of essence: wherefore God being a pure Act,
and Being subsisting of himself, nothing of perfection can be wanting to him.
Hence God the first necessary, transcendent Being cannot be defined or limited
to any certain degree of perfection, but must be infinite, as is well
demonstrated by Suarez, Metaph. Disp. 29. Sect. 3. Thus also the Stoics held,
(...), That God is invested with all Essence: who also is incorruptible, and
ingenerable, being the supreme Opificer and Creator of the whole structure of
the Universe, as Laertius, in Zeno. The sum of al is this: God being (...),
self-Being, and transcendent superessential Essence, he must needs be
universally and eminently al-Being, and so infinite in essence and perfection,
of which more fully in the following Argument.

4. Gods Infinitude from the nature of Perfection.
The Infinitude of the Divine Essence and Perfection may be further explicated
and demonstrated from the formal Idea of Perfection, and its peculiar
appropriation to God. Al perfection importes some kind of universitie: because
that is perfect, to which there is nothing wanting: whence the more any thing
is contracted to some certain mode of perfection, the less perfect it is: and
the more the universitie of perfection agrees to any thing, the more it
partakes of perfection. Now God having the whole of essence in himself, must
necessarily have an universitie of perfection. God has al kinds, extents, and
degrees of perfection in him either formally or eminently: he has need of
nothing because infinitely perfect in his essence: there is nothing without or
within him that may limit or bound his perfection. The most perfect of
Creatures have much of imperfection in them; because they are limited in their
Beings: one excels in one perfection, another in another: but none in all
perfections: they are al negatively imperfect, if not privatively. Again, the
Creatures perfection is for the most part accidental, and separable; as it
appears in fallen Angels and men: But Gods perfection is essential, absolute
and universal; and therefore infinite. Thus in sacred Philoso-, phie, Act.
17.25. Neither is he worshipped with men's hands, Act. 17.25.
as though he needed any thing; seeing he gives to althing life and breath and
althings. Paul demonstrates, to the curiose Wits of Athens, that God is most
perfect and wants nothing; because he gives al perfection to the Creature:
(...) has a peculiar significance which carries much emphase in it. (...)
signifies simply to want: (...) to be totally indigent: but (...) properly
signifies, to have something, yet to want something belonging to its
perfection. Such an indigence the blessed God falls not under: he needs nothing
as an additament to his felicity, having in himself an universitie of
perfection; and giving forth to al his Creatures according to their indigence.
Hence God is styled by the Hebrews (...), E^ shaddai, God A^sufficient, Genesis
17.1. Thus Plato, Repub. 2. page 381. (...), For we shall not say, that God in
any degree wants either pulchritude, or virtue. Whence elsewhere he makes God
to be (...), self-sufficient, and therefore most perfect. Thus Aristotle, Rhet.
l. 1. c. 7. page 35. (...), And that which is less indigent of any other or
other things, [is best and most perfect] because it is most self-sufficient. So
in his Ethl. l. 1. c. 5. he says, (...), That which is perfect is
self-sufficient and in nothing indigent: such is the Divine Essence. Thence
Plato, Repub. 6. page 509. assures us, That God, who is the Idea of al good,
his (...), an infinite and immense pulchritude.

But more fully to explicate and demonstrate the infinite Perfection of God, it
is apparent by what has been laid down out of Platonic as well as sacred
Philosophy, That a thing is said to be perfect, when it wants nothing: which
may be understood either privatively or negatively. That is privatively
perfect, which wants nothing due to its integrity: that negatively, which
wants nothing of possible perfection. God is in both these regards perfect, and
therefore infinitely such. (1) God wants not any perfection privatively: For as
he is God of himself; so of himself he has al perfection due to himself: The
most simple independent Being cannot be deprived of any perfection due to him,
as Suarez well demonstrates, Metaphys. Disput. 30. Sect. 1. page 42. (2) God is
negatively perfect, as he wants no possible perfection. Possible perfection is
either create or increate. God, as the first Cause of althings, contains in him
al create possible perfection: and as the first most simple infinite Being, al
increate possible perfection: For the first Being is such by a necessity of
Being; and therefore absolutely and infinitely perfect; containing in himself
either eminently or formally al created perfections. (1) God contains in
himself al created perfections eminently, as he has such a perfection in a
superior eminent degree, as virtually contains whatever is in an inferior
perfection. Whence all the perfections of Creatures, as they are eminently in
God, are nothing else but the creatrix Essence of God. The Divine creatrix
Essence is said to be eminently althings, as it can by its own eminent virtue
and efficace communicate those perfection to althings. For the first supreme
Cause existent of it self, and independent contains al possible perfections
simply and eminently in the fontale Unity and infinite Abyss of his own
Essence. God dwelling in the Abyss of his own Infinitude, which the Hebrews
call (...), cannot but contain in himself al created perfections in a most
eminent degree. (2) God contains formally in himself al perfections simply
simple: i. e. such as in their formal reason involve no imperfection, but pure
perfection. It Is true, no created perfection, according to that adequate reason
which it has in the Creature, is formally in God, but eminently only. For
there is not in God any created goodness, etc. but he is said formally to
contain some of those perfections which are in the Creature; because according
to them he has a formal convenience with the Creature, by means whereof the
same perfection is, according to the same name and formal reason, attributed to
God and the Creature, the infinite disproportion which is between God and the
Creature being preserved, as Suarez, Metaph. Disp. 29. Sect. 3. page 39. Thus
God giving perfection to althings has similitude and dissimilitude with all:
Similitude, in that whatever perfection is in the Creature, is formally or
eminently in God: Dissimilitude, in that al those perfections, which agree to
other things according to diverse forms or modes of participation, agree to
God according to the infinite Unity and Simplicity of his Essence. Albeit God
be void of al composition, yet he contains in himself al perfections scattered
up and down among the Creatures in the most simple, united, and eminent degree.
In sum: according to the mode of Essence such is the mode of perfection: for
every thing has less or more of perfection, as it has more or less of
essence: Therefore God, who has al Essence, must necessarily have al perfection.

5. The infinite Bonitie and Beatitude of God.
The Infinitude of the Divine Essence and Perfection may be further explicated
and demonstrated by the infinite Bonitie and Beatitude of God. Sacred
Philosophy every where instructes us, That God is infnitely good and blessed
in himself. So Platok, Repub. 6. page 508. (...), the Idea of al good, i. e.
such a good as contains al good in him: the good of every good. Whence page
509. as elsewhere, he styles God (...), the Good: according to that of sacred
Philosophy, There is none good but God, Mat. 19.17.
Mat. 19.17. i. e. there is no original Idea of good but God. Whence Plato calls
al created goods, not (...), simply goods, but (...), certain forms or kinds
of goods, so far as they participate of the divine good; But, says he, the
Idea of good gives essence to every thing, yet is in it self superessential.
Thus Damascene, a great Platonist, Orthodox. Fid. l. 2. c. 2. (...), Therefore
because God is good, yea transcendently good, not contented with the
contemplation of himself, but from the superabundance of his goodness it
pleased him, that somethings should be made to which he might do good, and
which might participate of his goodness: and so out of nothing he brought them
unto Being, and framed althings. Whence we may conclude the infinite perfection
of God. So Aristot. Eth. l. 1. c. 5. (...), etc. That which is best, is most
perfect; and that which is desired for it self, simply perfect: i. e.
infinitely perfect. Such a most perfect good is God, who is essentially good,
and therefore infinitely good. Hence also springes the infinite Beatitude of
God, which gives us further demonstration of his infinite Essence and
Perfection. Thus in the Platonic Definitions God is defined (...), an immortal
living Being, self sufficient as to happiness. The proper good of every
intellectile Nature is Beatitude: Therefore God being the first Intelligent,
Beatitude must necessarily be his most proper good. Now by how much the more
noble and excellent any Beatitude is, by so much the more perfect is the
subject to which it appertains. This speaks the infinite perfection of God, in
that he is essential Bonitie and Beatitude.

6. Gods Infinite Power.
Gods infinite Power in the production of althings demonstrates his Infinitude
of Essence and Perfection. The magnitude of any virtue or power is measured by
the magnitude of its Action and Effect: An Action is by so much the more
perfect, by how much the more efficace and force it has to produce its effect:
and what actions so efficacious to produce their effects, as the Actions of
Divine Omnipotence? Every Agent is by so much the more efficacious in acting,
by how much the more remote the passive power by it reduced into act is: now
mere nothing, which is as the passive power in Creation, being, as to
existence, infinitely distant from Act, therefore the power that brings it into
act must needs be infinite. Are not something and nothing terms, as to
existence, infinitely distant? Can then any but an infinite power reconcile
them, or bring something out of nothing? And is it possible that an infinite
power should be in any but an infinite Being? Does not the operation follow the
essence? is not every thing such in working as it is in Being? May we not then
hence conclude, that God, who is of infinite activitie as to working, is also
infinite in his Essence and Perfection? Thence Plato makes God to be the
infinite Opificer or Creator, (...), who by his efformative omnipotent words
gave essence to althings, as hereafter, in the Causalitie of God. It is indeed
altogether impossible, that a finite power should create so many degrees of
things, and that out of nothing.

. 3. Gods Etenritie.
From the Infinitude of Gods Essence and Perfection resultes his Infinitude in
Duration, or Eternity. For as things are in Being, such likewise are they in
Duration: as a finite Being cannot have an infinite Duration; so neither can an
infinite Being have a finite Duration. Hence the Eternity of God necessarily
follows from the Infinitude of his Being. The Eternity of God is lively set
forth in sacred Philosophy. Psalm. 90.2, 3, 4
So Psalm. 90.2. Even from everlasting to everlasting thou art God. Being to
treat of the frailty of human life, he briefly touches on the Eternity of
God, that thereby it might appear, how frail man's life is. God is said to be,
from everlasting to everlasting, thereby to denote his absolute Eternity
without beginning and end. The Souls of men and Angels are to everlasting,
because immortal: but they are not from everlasting; and therefore not eternal.
Every eternal is immortal; but every immortal is not eternal. Thence it
follows: v. 3. Thou turnest man to destruction, and say, Return ye children
of men, He alludes to that Genesis 3.19. Thou art dust, and to dust thou shall
return. Then the Psalmist adds, v. 4. For a thousand years in thy sight are
but as yesterday, when it is past; and as a watch in the night. The Particle
(...) some interpret not as a rational conjunction, but as an Adverbe of
confirmation, Truly: so that the sense is: Truly, O God, thou art immortal
and eternal: so that a thousand years of human life, being compared with thy
Eternity, are but as yesterday, or as a watch of the night, which is very
short and full of difficulties and miseries. The Hebrews divided their nights
into four watches, which denote brevitie and danger. So Psalm. 55.19. God is
said to be, he that abides of old, Psalm. 55.19.
or in all eternity. (...) abides, or is permanent. Which denotes Gods
permanent essence and existence without al succession, in Eternity. Indeed
Gods Eternity is but as one permanent fixed (...), or instant, without al
succession. I am not ignorant, that some learned men endeavor to baffle this
Hypothesis, That Gods Eternity is one fixed instant, whose reasons we shall
examine more fully anon, when we come to treat of the Nature of Eternity, 5.
Prop. At present we pass on to confirm it by Scripture. So Psalm. 93.2. Psalm.
93.2.
Thy Throne is established of old: thou art from everlasting. Of old. Hebr.
(...) ante tunc, before then, i. e. before any certain finite time, expressed
by that Particle tunc. The prefixe (...) denoting time signifies before. The
sense is, that Gods Throne was established from al Eternity, before al moments
of time. The like Prove. 8.22, Prove. 8.22, 23.
23. The Lord possessed me in the beginning of his way, before his works of
old. (...) before al time. It Is spoken by Christ as a declaration of his
Eternity with God the Father. So Esa. 43.13. Yea, Esa 43.13.
even before the day was, I am he. (...), before there was any day, [or time] I
am he, i. e. Jehovah the eternal Being. Mic. 5.2.
The like Micah 5.2, Whose goings forth have been from of old, from
everlasting. It is spoken of the eternal generation of the Son of God. From of
old. Hebr. (...) before any principe or beginning. Thence it follows: from
everlasting. Hebr. (...), before the days of time, not of Eternity: for (...),
day of Age, does not properly signify days of Eternity, as our Margin
renders it, but time long before, as Micah 7.14, 20. Amos 9.11. Malach. 3.4.
The Eternity of God is well described by Moses, Deuteronomy. 33.27. The God of
Antiquity: i. e. the eternal God. So David, Psalm. 55.20. God that sits from
Antiquity: and Asaph, Psalm. 74.12. God is my King from Antiquity: i. e.
Eternity. But the Eternity of God is more expressly declared, Esa. 57.15.
Who inhabiteth Eternity. So 1 Timothy 1.17.

As for Plato's Philosophemes touching the Eternity of God, they are indeed
great and illustrious, yea very far conform to sacred Philosophy. So in his
Timaeus, page 37. (...), etc. But al these are parts of time: but we truly do
not rightly attribute to the eternal Essence those distinctions of time, namely
HE WAS, and HE SHALL BE. For we say: IT WAS, IT IS, and IT SHALL BE. But truly
to that Eternity IT IS properly only agrees. IT WAS, and IT SHALL BE belongs to
the articles of time, which is produced: for they are motions, or successions.
But what is always and immutably the same, is not more ancient or young, etc.
Wherein we have these particulars very observable. (1) That the distinctions of
time, Was, Is, and Shall Be, are proper only to things sensible and created,
which fall under the duration and succession of Time. (2) That thence they
cannot properly be attributed to God, who is an Eternal Essence, without
beginning or succession. (3) That HE IS is only properly ascribed to God,
according to sacred Philosophy, Exodus 3.14. (...), as Esa. 43.13. I am he. So
the Inscription on the Delphic Temple, (...), THOU ART. Al which illustrations
of Gods permanent Eternity are included in the Name Jehovah, as before, Chap.
3.. 1. Thus also the Eternity of God is lively explicated and illustrated by
Plato, in his Parmenides, p. 140. (...); But what?: does the one God seem to
have elder or younger, or the same Age, that so he may be? The same page 141.
Therefore the one God is neither younger, nor elder, nor of the same age,
either in regard of himself or any other thing. (...), etc. Therefore the one
God, if such, can never be in time: For that which is in time, is it no
necessarily elder than it self? And is not that which is elder, always elder in
regard of some junior? Therefore that which is always elder than it self, must
be always younger than it self, which is a contradiction. He design is to
prove, that God being always the same, is not senior or junior in regard of
himself, or any thing else: for then he should be always senior, and yet always
junior in regard of himself. Which Argument is indeed demonstrative and cogent.
Then he concludes: (...), If therefore the one God no way participate of time,
truly he was not ever made, or has been, neither is he now made, neither shall
he ever be made, or be. He here proves the Eternity of the one God from his
Independence, of which more hereafter.

But the more fully to demonstrate and explicate the mind of Plato, and sacred
Philosophy touching the Eternity of God, The Eternitle of God demonstrated.
we shall endeavor, (1) to demonstate, that God is eternal; and then, (20 to
explicae what this Eternity of God importes. First that God is eternal may be
various ways demonstrated: As (1) from the Infinitude of the Divine Essence.
The mode of existence always follows the mode of essence: because existence,
according to the confession of the Schools, adds nothing to essence but
Actualitie; neither is it indeed really distinct from essence: Now duration is
nothing else but continued existence: whence it necessarily follows, that if
Gods Essence be infinite, his Existence and Duration must be also infinite. The
Divine Essence necessarily existes of it self, and therefore is always in act,
never in power to be: whence it must necessarily be eternal. That which is
absolutely infinite as to essence, can have no principe of its essence; and
therefore it must be absolutely eternal as to Duration. What is infinite cannot
give Being to it self: for then it should be before and after it self; the
cause and thing cause; independent and dependent in one and the same regard.
Neither can what is infinite receive Being from another: for that other must be
finite, or infinite: it cannot be finite; because it is impossible, that a
finite Principe should give an infinite Being: neither can that other be
infinite; because this would lead us into the labyrinth of a progress into
infinite. Hence we may conclude with Plato, that God is (...), an eternal
Essence. (2) We may demonstrate the Eternity of God from his Independence.
Thus Plato, in his Parmenides, page 141. (...), etc. The one God does not
participate of Essence, i. e. is not Ens by participation, as he explicates
himself, therefore he is eternal. So in his I hadrus, page 245. (...), etc. A
Principe has no origin: for althings arise from a Principe, but the first
Principe arises from nothing: neither were it a first Principe, if it were
originated by some other. And if it has no beginning, it can have no end. The
Argument lies thus: That which is independent as to any first Cause or
Principe, must needs be absolutely eternal: Now that God dependes not on any
precedent Cause or Principe has been sufficiently demonstrated in what
precedes. (3) Gods Eternity may be demonstrated from his Immobilitie and
Immutabilitie. Thus Plato, Tim. page 37. What is always and immutably the same,
is not elder or younger, etc. as before. Whatever begins or cease to be must
sal under motion and mutation: for what has beginning has Being after
not-being: and whatever has end has not-being after Being; and this in a way
of succession and motion. But now the immutable God admits not such a
succession of Not-being and Being. We may not say, that ever he was not, or
that ever he shall not be: he never began to be, neither shall he ever cease to
be; but is always the same immutable indivisible Essence. Thus Plato, in his
Philebus, page 15. (...), He determines, that the one God is not of those
things that have beginning and end. And he gives the reason of his Hypothesis:
namely because it is, (...), always one and the same immutable Being, which
receives not generation nor destruction; but is one Firmitie and Constance: ie.
The one God, having a Firmitude, Constance, and Immutabilitie of Being, cannot
be obnoxious to the Laws of Mutation, Generation, or Corruption; but must be
eternal. Thus Plato, in his Timaeus, page 27, etc. proves, (...), That the
first Being, who is always the same, can have neither beginning nor end. Thus
Plutarch on Gods Name (...) emgraven on Apollo's Temple: (...), Therefore that
which truly is one and the same is eternal, without beginning or end. (4) The
Eternity of God may be demonstrated from his Perfection. The most perfect
Being can never begin to be; because that which gives Being is more perfect,
than that which receives the Being conferred. Again, the most perfect Being
must necessarily have the most perfect mode of Duration, which is eternal.
Lastly, the most perfect Being cannot depend on any other for any degree of
perfection, and therefore it cannot begin to be.

Having demonstrated the Eternity of God, What Eternity is.
we now proceed to explicate the same, so far as sacred Philosophy gives us
light and evidence: For indeed without divine light it is impossible for mortal
man, who is confined by Time, to contemplate immortal Eternity. Have not many
great errors had either origin from proud men's confining the Eternity of God
to the Laws of Time? This is incomparably well expressed by great Bradwardine,
de Causa Dei, l. 2. c. 52. These things, says he, of Eternity I have more
copiosely discussed; because I repute it the most difficult thing for temporal
man, who is always accustomed to measure things by the differences and laws of
fluent Time, to mount up, above the differences of Time, to the contemplation
of Eternity;which is without mutabilitie of succession. And then he gives us
an ingenuous confession, that this was his great error, when young and infected
wih Pelagian infusions: I, says he, when I was young and ignorant of the
Scriptures, and the power of God, being blinded with this ignorance, or rather
borne blind, and deceived with a false imagination, I conceited, that the
Divine Knowledge and Will was changed and otherwise disposed by the vicissitudes
of Times, as human Knowledge and Will. As to such as supersicially read the
Scriptures it may seem, that God is this or that way variously affected, as men
are. And this ignorance I judge to be the cause, why some others like to me,
think that God is otherwise and otherwise disposed intrinsecally, etc.
Therefore to cure these ignorances and errors about Eternity we may consider
the following Propositions.

1. Eternity not to be measured by Time.
Prop. Eternity cannot be measured by any differences or Laws of Time. This
Proposition is laid down in express terms by Plato, Tim. page 37. where he
largely demonstrates, That no differences of Time, either future or past can be
attributed to Eternity, as before. It Is true, he tells us, That God made time
(...), a certain mobile Image of immobile Eternity; yet so as that none of its
differences can properly be ascribed thereto. So Parmen. page 141. (...), The
one God no way participates of time, as before. So Philo Judaeus, de Mundo:
(...), lo Eternity there is nothing past, nothing future, etc. Thus Damascene,
Orthod. Fid. l. 2. c. 3. (...), Whatever has beginning may naturally have an
end: but God only is ever existent, yea rather about ever: for he is not under
time, but above time. And whereas it is said, That the Eternity of God is often
in Scripture described by differences of time, we answer, That these are but
metaphoric modes of speech, wherein the Spirit of God, condescending to our
narrow capacities, describes the eternal infinite duration of God by the
differences of time, yet so, as that he expressly declares, that they do not
properly agree to God, but are only assumed as symbolic Images of Gods
Eternity, which is Plato's own phrase. And Bradwardine, l. 2. c. 51. gives us
the reason of this Translation: The cause of this Transumtion is, because we
have not a word which properly signifies the stable mansion of Eternity:
wherefore we are forced to transfer, by way of similitude, our temporal words,
according to certain temporal differences, to Eternity, and Gods coeternal
intrinsec Acts. That neither God, nor any intrinsec Act of God can be properly
measured by time, or any difference thereof is evident; because Time and al its
differences are a variable, mutable, and divisible measure; but the Eternal God
and al his immanent Acts invariable, immutable, and indivisible. In Eternity
there is no divisibilitie; no majoritie, or minority; no prioritie, or
posterioritie; no accession, recession, or succession; no successive difference
of time; but one indivisible, simple, permanent instant. Thus Suarez, Metaph.
Disp. 50. Sect. 3. page 639. proves, That what is eternal cannot, as to its own
nature, admit the differences of past and future, albeit, by reason of our
imperfection, we so speak of it sometimes. How far time and its differences may
be comprehended by Eternity we shall explicate in what follows, 4. Prop.

2. Prop. Eternity is an interminable Duration, Eternity without beginning or
end.
without beginning or end. In Eternity and al eternal Acts neither first or
last can be properly assigned. This interminable duration of Eternity is
lively illustrated in sacred Philosophy by all those descriptions of God, which
make him to be the first and the last, as Esa. 41 4. and 44.6. and 48.12. Rev.
1.8, 11. He being the First Being, and so without beginning; and the Last, as
having no end. Thus the Stoics held, that (...), God is incorruptible and
ingenerable, i. e. without beginning and end, as Lacertius, in Zeno. (1) That
the Eternity of God is without Beginning, is evident by many Philosophemes of
Plato. As Phaedrus, page 245. (...), A first Principe has no beginning, but it
gives beginning to althings. So in his Parmenides, page 141. he proves, That
the one God had no beginning, etc. as before. Thus Thales, in Laertius: (...),
God is the most ancient of Beings; because without beginning. (2) That the
Eternity of God shall have no end, Plato assertes in his Phaedo, page 106.
(...), But God, says Socrates, the very Idea or Essence of life, (as I judge)
and if any thing be immortal, it is evident to al, that he cannot cease to be.
He makes the Soul to be immortal also; but the Immortality of God, who is the
original Idea and Essence of life, to be of a more transcendent Nature. Thus in
his Timaeus, he distinguishes between the Eternity or Immortality of Angels
and the human Soul, which have no end; and the Eternity of God, which is
absolute, without beginning and end: The Eternity of God he makes to be,
(...), primary, absolute, and independent as to al causalitie, and therefore
not communicable to the Creature: but the Eternity that belongs to the
Creature is, (...), according to a participation of Being, i. e. dependent on
the pleasure of God (...), as that of Angels and the human Soul, which shall
have no end, albeit they had beginning. The best of Creatures have but an
half-Eternitie: albeit they have no end, yet they had a beginning: They may be
to everlasting, but are not from everlasting, as God is, Psalm. 90.2. Besides,
the Eternity of Creatures is not intrinsecal from a necessity of Being, but
dependent on the pleasure of God.

3. Eternity most simple and uniforme.
Prop. Eternity is a measure most simple, uniforme, absolutely indivisible,
without the least composition or succession. (1) When we call Eternity a
Measure, it must not be understood formally, either as to God, or the Creature;
because every measure formally considered speaks relation to the thing
measured: but if the Creature never had been, God had been eternal. Neither can
a measure formally considered be applied to God; because a measure is ever
distinguished from the thing measured; but Eternity is not distinguished from
God. Therefore when we call Eternity a Measure, it must be understood
metaphorically, and according to our manner of speech. (2) We say Eternity is
a simple uniforme measure: i. e. without al parts, divisibilitie, or
succession. The Antithesis to this Thesis is maintained by Vorstius and the
Socinians, contrary to the Dictates both of sacred and Platonic Philosophy.
Thus Plato, Tim. page 37. assures us, That the parts of time IT WAS, and IT IS
agree not to Eternity; because these implie motion and succession; but
Eternity is always immutably the same, as before. The like Aristotle, Metaph.
l. 11. c. 4. where al succession is denied of Eternity. Succession is either
privative or positive: Privative succession is between Being and not-being; as
mutation, corruption, or annihilation attendes the essence of things, which al
Creatures are liable unto. Positive succession is when things remain not in
their Being, without some mutation. The Eternity of God is in neither of these
regards successive: Heraclitus's PHilosopheme, That althings are in flux or
succession, and nothing permanent, is true of althings but God, who by reason
of his Eternity admits not of the least succession. This is implied in his
Name I am, Exodus 3.14. assumed by our Lord, Joh. 8.58. Vorstins makes the
Eternity of God no other than an everlasting duration, consisting of temporal
parts and succession, as time. And the Socinians follow him herein. But this
blasphemous Antithesis is generally impugned by the Orthodoxe, and that with
invincible Arguments. As, (1) Eternity was before al Time, and therefore
cannot be composed of parts of time. (2) If Eternity were a divisible
successive measure, then the parts of which it is composed are either finite or
infinite: They cannot be finite; because no infinite can be composed of finite
parts: They cannot be infinite; because then every part is as great as the
whole: for things infinite admit no degrees. (3) Eternity is the same with God
himself, and therefore admits of no parts, composition, or succession, as
hereafter, 5. Prop.

4. Prop. Albeit Eternity be in it self a simple, How Eternity coexistes to
the parts of Time.
and indivisible Duvation, yet it may be said to coexiste unto and comprehend
al parts of time and things. Eternity in it self has neither succession nor
extension; yet it has a permanence, according to which it is said to coexiste
to althings, that fall under daily succession. In this regard Plato calls Time,
an Image of Eternity, as al its parts and successions are comprehended
thereby. For our Divines acknowledge, that Time is contained in the measure of
Eternity, as the permanent fixed (...), Instant of Eternity coexsistes to all the differences of time, and althings succeding in time, not as together, but
successively as they existe. Thus the whole of Eternity coexistes to this day,
as also to the next day, etc. Yet we may not say that Eternity does attemper
it self to the nature of things temporal, whiles it comprehendes and measures
the same: For by measuring and comprehending things temporal, we only mean,
that Eternity does coexiste to them: whereby Eternity is not more attempered
to the nature of time, than time, by coexisting to Eternity, is attempered to
the nature of Eternity. Eternity may be said to contain successive quantity
or the parts of Time, in the same manner as the Immensitie of God contains the
permanent quantity of things. Now it is well known, that the Immensitie of God
is not otherwise said to contain permanent quantity or Bodies, but as it
coexistes or may coexiste unto, yea infinitely excede al bodies, although most
spatiose: so in like manner the Eternity of God cannot otherwise be said to
contain the successive quantity or duration of things, than as it is
coexistent to althings as they existe, and transcendes al their durations. Not
only things temporary in their vicissitudes coexiste to God and his Eternity;
but also God and his Eternity coexistes to them: which denomination implies no
vicissitude in God, or in his Eternity; but only a vicissitude of the things
temporary, and their gradual succession. It Is true, as we have before proved,
the differences of time past and future are repugnant to Eternity, as to al
intrinsee denomination: for in Eternity there is nothing past or future, first
or last: yet these differences are not repugnant to Eternity in regard of
extrinsec denomination. For in the coexistence of God with things fluent and
successive, there is prioritie and posterioritie, not in God, but in the things
temporary. The coexistence of things with God is other and other, or
successive, according to the vicissitude of the things; and so by consequence
the coexistence of God with the Creatures admits of some kind of succession as
to externe denomination; not as if there were any new existence of God with the
Creatures, but only by reason of the new existence of the Creatures with God.
Hence Christ, Heb. 13.8.
in regard of his Eternity, is said to be, Heb. 13.8. The same yesterday, and
to day and for ever: i. e. in regard of extrinsec denomination, as he coexistes
in one and the same uniforme indivisible Eternity with things and differences
of time, of successive and divisible duration. Thus the Eternity of God is
said to comprehend and measure al differences and successions of times and
things.

5. Eternity a fixed Instant.
Prop. The Eternity of God considered in its genuine Idea, is but one
immutable, permanent, fixed Instant. This in sacred Philosophy the name (...),
Jehovah, and I am, Exodus 3.14. fully indicate. Thus also (...), according to
its origination, primarily denotes, being derived from (...), ever-being, or
existing. Whence God, who is Eternity, is styled by Plato and his Sectators,
(...), ever-being. So also the Poets style their fictitious Gods (...),
ever-Beings, in imitation of sacred Philosophy, which styles God, Jehovah, and
(...), Who Am, thereby denoting, that he is a fixed, permanent, eternal Being,
or an ever-standing Now: For I AM, or HE IS, the sacred Characters of God,
primarily belong to Eternity. Nothing can be said It Is in a strict sense as
having, (...), a standing permanent Being, as Plotinus phraseth it, but what is
eternal. So Plato, Tim. page 37. says, (...), It is, only belongs to
Eternity: i. e. Eternity is only one permanent (...) or Now. Thus Plotinus (a
great Sectator of Plato) Ennead. 3. l. 7. number. 2. page 327. He that
contemplates al these things contemplates Eternity, (...), contemplating life
permanent in the same state, having the whole a ways present: but not now this,
and anon that, but al together: neither now some one part, and afterward some
other, but an indivisible end. Wherein he declares, that the Eternity of God
is one and the same indivisible, interminable state or fixed instant, without
succession. Whence he immediately subjoins: (...), etc. Where, as in a point,
althings are together, without falling under any flux, but remaining there in
the same instant, i. e. in itself, without permutation or succession of past
and future. And then he concludes with this description of Eternity: (...),
That therefore which neither was, nor shall be, but only IS, having a fixed
permanent Being, because it is neither changed for the future; neither by what
is past, that is Eternity. It is therefore about Being in it self, a life
together total and full, and every where altogether without distance. This is
the Eternity we inquire about. In these Platonic Philosophemes about Eternity
we find these observables. (1) That Eternity has no differences of time or
succession of parts, either past or future. (2) That it is but one only fixed
permanent Is or Instant. (3) That it is in it self total and full, without
distance of parts. Whence Eternity is defined by Boethius, an interminable
possession of life total, perfect, and al at once. It is total, not in regard
of parts, but as it includes the most perfect negation of succession. It is al
at once, as it is but one fixed instant. Thus Justin Martyr, in Paraen, calls
it, (...), The eternal and infinite Now, or Instant. But here we must
distinguish (...), an Instant, (...), Nunc, aliud est stans, aliud est fluens.
into that which is permanent or fixed, and that which is fluent: Eternity is
not a fluent Instant, such as they make to be in time, but nunc or instans
stans, a standing fixed permanent Instant; or, as Plotinus styles it, (...), a
standing Being, without past or future, possessing althings at once, totally
and perfectly, without the least vicissitude. Thus Bradwardine, de Causa Dei,
l. 2. c. 50. page 830. Hence it evidently follows, that there is but one and
the same immutable Instant thoroughout al Eternity; and that the whole of
Eternity is not more or greater than its Instant; nor the Instant of Eternity
more simple or less than it; but that Eternity and its Instant are really one
and the same.

But here, before we proceed farther, we cannot, without violence offered to
the Laws of Philosophic Disquisition, let pass unexamined the assaults, which
learned More, in his Divine Dialogues, Dial. 1. S. 15. page 58. makes against
this commun notion of Eternity, That it is a permanent (...) or Instant at
once. This Idea of Gods Eternity he clogges with these Contradictions: (1)
That althings should have been really and essentially with God from al
Eternity at once, and yet be borne in time and succession. This Objection is,
as I conceive, fully answered in what precedes, 4. Prop. To which we may add,
that althings were present with God even before their existence, not in the
Dominicans notion, by reason of any real presentialitie or coexistence to Gods
Eternity, but only by their intentional coexistence in the Divine Decree, as
Twisse has well demonstrated against the Dominicans, Scientiae Med. lib. 2. page
377, 400. (2) Learned More adds: That eternal Duration should be at once, is
also to me utterly unconceivable, and that one permanent instant should be
commensurate or rather equal to al successions of Ages. To which we answer, [1]
as before, That Eternity is not a fluent, successive Instant, but (...), a
standing Instant. [2] That it is not a temporary, finite create Instant, but an
eternal, infinite and increate Instant, and therefore every way commensurate to
all the successions of Ages. But (3) he adds: Besides, if the Duration of God
be al at once, since no Agent acts but within the compass of its own Duration,
God must both create and destroy the World at once. Whence it seems impossible,
that eternal Duration should be indistant to it self, or without continuation
of Intervals. To which it is answered, [1] That this consequence seems very
inconsequent, and unworthy of so learned a man, because not ad idem: for Gods
Eternity, which he makes to be a successive Duration, is really the same with
his Essence; but his Creation and Destruction of the World, as Acts ad extra,
and in regard of their passive attingence, coincident with the Creature, fall
under successive Duration, and so cannot be simultaneous, or at once. [2] His
Conclusion, That Gods eternal Duration cannot be without continuation of
Intervals, seems to me of very dangerous consequence, and that which both Plato
and Plotinus, whom he values, abhor, to say no worse. But [3] to conclude, I
grant, that the notion Instant, as applied to Gods Eternity, is but
metaphoric, and rather negative than positive, to exclude al manner of
succession, or duration by intervals from God, as before. Hence,

6. Eternity the same with the Divine Essence.
Prop. Eternity has one and the same Idea with the Divine Essence. Eternity
is nothing else but the increate Duration of God, or God himself. Whence the
Platonists style God (...), supereternal, and (...), transcendent Eternity.
And Plato's mind herein is incomparable well explicated by Plotinus, Ennead. 3.
l. 7. number. 1. page 325. What therefore must we call Eternity? (...), the very
intelligible Divine Essence. For seeing we conceive of Eternity as most
venerand, there is nothing more venerand than the intelligible Divine Essence.
So page 326. (...), etc. Again the intelligible World and Eternity comprehend
in themselves the same things. By the intelligible World he means, according to
Plato, the ideal World, i. e. God as decreeing althings. So number. 6. (...); What
therefore principally shall that be, by which we say the whole divine World is
eternal and everlasting? Where he makes Eternity to be the first Divine
Essence, as it connotes an interminable state of Identitie and Life. For to
persevere in an Identitie of Essence, with an absolute and intrinsec
necessity, is the most noble and perfect mode of Duration, which differs more
than generically from al other modes of Duration, and therefore most proper to
God, whose Eternity is a permanent increated Duration. Vorstius and his
Sectators make the Eternity of God to be an Accident, and divisible successive
Duration: but this Plotinus refutes, number. 3. page 327. (...), etc. Neither
truly may we imagine, that Eternity happens to that Divine Nature
extrinsecally and as an Accident, but that it is in it, and of it, and together
with it. For it is considered as intimately united to and essentially one with
the Divine Nature. Wherein he clearly proves, that Eternity is not an
Accident, but the same with the Divine Essence. Which argument may be thus
improved. (1) If Eternity in God be an Accident, either it is caused by God,
or not: if it be caused, then it has a beginning, and so not Eternity. If it
be an Accident not caused by God, then it was caused by it self, or without
cause: which are both absurd. (2) If the Eternity of God be an Accident, then
finite or infinite: It cannot be a finite Accident; because a finite duration
cannot be commensurate to an infinite Being. It cannot be an infinite Accident,
because then there would be somewhat infinite besides God. (3) It is apparent,
that Eternity cannot be an Accident, if we consider the very nature of
Duration, which is not really distinct from the subject whereunto it belongs.
For what is Duration, but the persevering of a thing in its existence? And in
like manner Eternity is nothing else but the increate, permanent, adequate
essential duration of God; which essentially includes al perfection of Essence,
and consequently al interne Acts of God, either as to Knowledge or Will. In sum,
Eternity is the perfect duration of the Essence, Perfection, and Operations of
God, as Suarez has well demonstrated, Metaph. Disp. 50. Sect. 3. page 638, 639.

. 4. Gods Immensitie and Omnipresence what.
Next to Gods Eternity follows his Immensitie, or Omnipresence; which denotes
his presence in althings, and al spaces; whereof we have lively notices both in
Sacred and Platonic Philosophy. As for sacred Philosophy it gives us great
illustrations of Gods Immensitie and Omnipresence. 1 Kings 8.27. Psalm. 139.7,
8, 9, 10.
Thus, 1 Kings 8.27. Behold the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain thee. So Psalm.
139.7. Where shall I go from thy Spirit, or whither shall I flee from thy
presence? v. 8. If I ascend up into Heaven, thou art there: if I make my bed in
Hell, behold thou art there. (...), thou art there, i. e. by thy immense
omnipresent Essence. Thence he adds: v. 9. If I take the wings of the morning,
and dwell in the utmost parts of the Sea: v. 10. Even there shall thy hand lead
me, and thy right hand hold me. This is coherent with what precedes, and the
sense of the whole is this: If I should endeavor to fly from the presence even
unto the utmost part of the World, yet must not thy hand of Providence conduct
me thither? and cannot then the same hand apprehend me there, and correct my
foolish infidelity for conceiting that I could hide my self from thy presence?
The like Jer. 23.23, 24. Jer. 23.23, 24.
Am I a God at hand, says the Lord, and not a God afar off? Can any hide
himself in secret places, that I shall not see him, says the Lord? do I not fill
Heaven and Earth? God is said to fill Heaven and Earth, by reason of the
Immensitie of his Essence. For God being infinite as to his Essence and
Perfection, must necessarily also be infinite as to his Presence; so that his
Essence cannot be limited by any finite space. Thus Damascene, Orthod. fid. l.
1. c. 17. (...), Therefore the Deity only is free from circumscription,
existent without principe, without end, comprehending althings, and yet
comprehended by nothing. In that he says, The Deity only is free from
circumscription, he has discovered a truth, which the Aristotelean Schools are
unacquainted with: for albeit Angels and the human Soul are not circumscribed
by corporeous place, yet they are by their Vbi, or definitive space, as
Damascene demonstrates. Thence c. 19. he says: (...), Moreover it belongs to
the Deity to diffuse it self through althing impermixtly, but nothing through
it. This degree of Infinity they call Immensitie; which is prperly estimed by
the regard it has not only to finite space, but to al imaginary space. So that
by Gods Immensitie we understand the intimate presence of his infinite,
indivisible Essence in all space, both real and imaginary, actual and possible.
Not that Gods Immensitie is the same with space, as Derodone in his Physics,
and others would fain persuade us; who make Gods Immensitie no other than an
infinite space: and thence they suppose althings to be in space, as they are in
Gods Immensitie. But what dangerous consequences attend this Hypothesis may
appear from this, That it supposes either that Gods Immensitie is only an
Accident or Mode distinct from God; or, which is worse, that althings formally
and essentially existe in God, as in their proper space or place, and so are
not really distinct from God; which is little short of blasphemy. Some
distinguish between the Immensitie of God, and his Divine Presence; making his
Immensitie to be an absolute propriety, but his Presence relative, as it
relates to the Creature. But I see no necessity of restraining Gods Presence
to the relation he has to his Creatures; seeing it is as infinite as his
Essence, and so has respect not only to finite, but also to infinite imaginary
space, whether actual or possible. Neither does Gods infinite Presence speak
any actual or real habitude to any thing without himself: therefore we may
estime it as absolute as his Immensitie, and not to be distinguished therefrom.
It Is true, God is said in sacred Philosophy to have his Throne in Heaven, as
also in his Churches; but this must be understood only of his gloriose
manifestation of himself, and gratiose operations. So Damascene, Orthod. Fid.
l. 1. c. 16. (...), God is said to be in a place, and a place is said to be of
God, where his operation is manifest. For he diffuseth himself thorough
althings parely and without the least commixtion with them; and makes althings
to participate of his operation, according to their indigence and receptive
capacity. Whence he adds: (...), etc. Therefore that is said to be the place
of God, which most participates of his operation and Grace. Wherefore Heaven is
said to be his Throne; because in it the Angels do his will -- And the Church is
said to be the place of God; because it is his Temple, etc.

The Immensitie and infinite Presence of God may be explicated and demonstrated
by the Infinitude of the Divine Essence. Gods Immensitie demonstrated and
explicated.
For that which is infinite in its Being, must necessarily be infinite in its
Presence: al terms and bounds as to place or space arise from the terms of
Essence: that therefore which has no terms of Essence, can have no terms of
Presence, but must be immense. Thus Plato, Leg. 10. page 899. having proved,
that there is one infinite Being, by whom althings are disposed and governed,
he concludes, (...), that althings were full of God that immense Being. So
Diogenes the Cynic held: (...), For althings are full of God; therefore men
should be reverent.

2. The Immensitie and infinite Presence of God may be explicated and
demonstrated by his absolute Simplicity. Thus Plato, in his Parmenides, page
138. (...), But that which neither has any parts, neither is a whole, much
less can it be, that it should be confined to any place to space, either in
regard of parts or whole. Therefore it neither changes its place by going into
any place, or by remaining in the same place; or by being carried thither,
neither by being altered. Wherein he proves, That the one God is immense and
infinite in his Presence, because he is present in all places and spaces, not by
parts, or as an whole compound Being; but by his simple indivisible Essence. So
Damascene, l. 1. de Fide, c. 16. (...), God therefore being immaterial and not
circumscribed, is not in a place; for he is place to himself, filling althings,
and yet above al, and containing al. Whence he concludes: (...), We must know
that the Deity is indivisible, the whole totally existing every where, and not
part in part corporally distracted, but the whole in all, and the whole above
al. Thence Chrysippus the Stoic said, That the most simple and pure Reing,
(...), which also they first call God, does diffuse himself throughout al bodies
in the Air, and al living Creatures, and al Plants, and throughout the Earth it
self. God is essentially and indivisibly in all Beings and space; albeit al
Beings are not in God as in their proper space; as Derodone and others too
boldly assert: For if althings are in God, as in their proper space, how can we
possibly avoid that blasphemous consequence of the Familistes, who make
althings but particles of God? Is it possible that any thing is or can be in
God, which is not God? If Gods Immensitie be the same with his Essence, as
undoubtedly it is, will it not necessarily follow, that althings, by existing in
Gods Immensitie, existe also in God? I greatly value Derodone's acumen in many
philosophic Contemplations; but yet I find dangerous consequences attending
some of his Philosophemes bordering on Theology; and therefore cannot but
conceive my self under an essential obligation to premonish young Students
thereof.

3. The Immensitie and infinite Presence of God may be explicated and
demonstrated by the infinite power, and operations of God both actual and
possible. This Argument Plato much insistes on, proving, that God is an
universal Spirit, who diffuseth himself throughout the whole Universe,
conserving, somenting, animating and actuating althings. So Leg. 10. page 895.
(...), Therefore the principe of al motions, and the first motion, which is in
those things that are permanent, and those things that move, is, as we must
necessarily confess, he that moves himself, and therefore the mast ancient and
excellent. Whence page 896. he concludes: (...), etc. God is a Soul universally
ruling and dwelling in althings that are moved. Thus Damascene, Orthod. Fid. l.
1. c. 17. having demonstrated, that Angels are confined to some space, he
adds: (...), For it is proper solely to God, to be present every where,
according to the same operation. And he explicates the mode of this divine
Ubiquitie thus: (...). But God existing every where and above every thing,
works differently every where and according to the same, by one simple
operation. To draw forth the force of this Argument; Gods infinite Presence and
Immensitie in althings actual and possible may be demonstrated, (1) From his
infinite Power in creating althings, that are or may be. For God being able to
create 100000 Worlds, 100000 times greater than this World, his Presence must
be infinite; because God works by the Presence of his Essence: Deus immediate
agitimmediatione non solum virtutis, sed and suppositi.
neither can he work where he is not present. God works al immediately, not
only by the Immediation of his Virtue, but also by the Immediation of his
Essence. Aristotle, Phys. lib. 7. tells us, that the mover and moved must be
together: and look as a particular cause is present with its particular effect,
so the universal cause with his universal effect. Now God, the universal Cause
of althings, has no other way of Presence with all effects, but by his Essence:
Hence that of Damascene, Orthod. Fid. l. 1. c. 18. (...), Althings are distant
from God, not as to place, but nature: i. e. God, who is infinitely distant
from his Creature as to Nature, is yet ever present with it in regard of the
Omnipresence of his Essence. (2) Gods infinite Presence is manifested in the
Confervation of althings: as the creatrix Essence was immediately present in
making althings, so the conservatrix Essence is immediately present in the
supporting althings. (3) Gods infinite Presence may be demonstrated from his
immediate actuating al second Causes, as Suarez, Metaph. Disput. 30. Sect. 7.

. 5. Gods Incomprehensibilitie.
The Infinitude of the Divine Essence, Duration, and Presence being discussed,
we now are to proceed to God Infinitude as to our Comprehension, or his
Incomprehensibilitie, whereof we find bright notices both in Sacred and
Platonic Philosophy. Thus Job 11.7, 8, 9. Job 11.7, 8, 9.
Caust thou by searching find out God? Can thou find out the Almighty to
perfection? This Rhetoric interrogation implies a vehement Logic negation.
Thence it follows: It is as high as Heaven, what can thou do? deeper than
Hell, what can thou know? The measure thereof is longer than the Earth, and
broader than the Sea. Psalm. 145.3.
So Psalm. 145.3. Great is the Lord and greatly to be praised, and his
greatness is unsearchable. Where he makes the infinite magnitude of Gods
Essence the cause of his Incomprehensibilitie. Comprehendere proprie est
arringere rem secundum omnem modum and omnem rationem qua res est
cognoscibilis, etc. Aquinas.
For to comprehend an object is to apprehend it according to every mode and
reason as it is intelligible, thereby to define it, or give terms and bounds
to it: For a definition is but the boundary of an Essence: he that perfectly
comprehends and defines a thing gives limits and bounds to that thing in his
intellect. Now that which has no bounds or terms of Essence, can have no
bounds or terms as to our comprehension or definition. Hence properly and
strictly God cannot be said positively to comprehend himself, though negatively
this Attribute may be given to him, as he knows himself perfectly. Whence that
Hypothesis of Derodone and some others, who assert, That God may be defined by
himself, is too presumtuous and during; seeing al definitions give terms and
limits to the essences of things: whence if God cannot be limited, he cannot be
defined: for terms of definition follow terms of essence. Much less can God
be defined by a created intellect unto which al definitions refer, as before,
Chap. 3.. 2. Thence it is said of God, 1 Timothy 6.16.
1 Timothy 6.16. That he dwells in the light, which no man can approach unto. The
Divine Essence, by reason of its Immensitie and Infinitude, is infinitely
elevated in Splendour and Glory, beyond the capacity of our finite intellect.
Thus Plato held, God to be (...), a celestial light ineffable, etc. So in his
Timaeus, page 28 (...), and truly it is very difficult to find out that Parent
of the Universe: and when he is found out, to declare what he is unto al, is a
thing impossible. So in his Parmenides, page 134. (...), Therefore Beauty it
self and Bonitie it self is unknown as to us, and al these things which we
estime Ideas. And more fully, page 142. he thus speaks: (...), Wherefore he
[God] is neither named, nor declared, nor conceived, nor known, neither
perceived by any of those things that are. Which indeed are lively
illustrations of the Incomprehensibilitie of God. And that Parmenides himself,
(whose name Plato affixeth to this his metaphysic Dialogue) had the like
notices of Gods Incomprehensibilitie, seems probable, by what Lacrtius relates
of Melissus his Scholar, who said, (...), That men should not attent to
describe God; because there is no comprehensive knowledge of him. This is well
expressed by Damascene, de Fide, l. 1. c. 4. (...), The Divinity therefore is
infinite and incomprehensible; and this only of him is comprehensible, that he
is infinite and incomprehensible. So again, c. 13. he says, That God has
given us a participation of his Bonitie, by producing us out of nothing, and
investing us with a faculty of knowledge, yet (...), as he has not made us
participant of his Essence, so neither has he given to us the knowledge of his
Essence. For it is impossible that Nature [human] should perfectly know that
Nature which is infinitely above it. Whence he concludes: (...); How can that
which is superessential be known? The like he adds, c. 17. God, says he,
comprehendes althings, but is comprehended by nothing: (...), for he solely is
incomprehensible and infinite, known by none; but he solely is the Contemplator
of himself.

But the more distinctly to explicate and demonstrate the Incomprehensibilitie
of God, we must consider, that a thing is then said to be comprehended, when it
is perfectly known so far as it is cognoscible or intelligible. For
comprehensive knowledge is that whereby the whole of an object, so far as it is
intelligible, is known either intuitively or discursively. This manner of
speech is taken from the dimension of bodies, which are said to be
comprehended, when their whole quantity and extension is so contained in
another, as that nothing of their quantity is beyond the comprehension of the
continent. Hence Zeno and the Stoics his sectators called first Principes
(...), Comprehensions; because they fully and perfectly comprehend al
conclusions. Now that God is, as to al finite capacity, incomprehensible is
evident, (1) from the nature of Comprehension, which denotes an adequate
perfect penetration and definition of a thing, as to al its essential
Differences, Predicates, Proprieties and Parts: But now God having no Genus or
essential Difference cannot be defined, neither can his Essence be penetrated
by any finite capacity. (2) From the infinite disproportion between a finite
capacity and the infinite Essence of God. An object is comprehended when it is
understood by the intellect so far as it is intelligible: now God being
infinitely intelligible, is also infinitely distant from, and so not to be
comprehended by a finite intellect. God, as he is of infinite Essence, so also
of infinite cognoscibilitie and truth: whence he is not comprehensible by any
but himself. (3) From the comparation of things intelligible. The more abstract
things are from matter, and remote from sense, the more difficult to be
understood. Thence Aristot. Metaph. 2. says, That our Intellect is disposed,
(...), toward first Beings most manifest by Nature, as Bats toward the light:
i. e things by how much the more pure and spirital they are, by so much the
more difficult to be understood. Thus Bradwardine, lib. 1. cap. 1. page 27. If
there be something difficult to be fully understood, and something more
difficult, and something yet more difficult, and so forward; must there not be
something most difficult to be understood, which is God? For as in Mathematic
Conclusions, so in the Creatures, the later is more difficult than the
precedent, but nothing most difficult to be understood, but God: which his
Immensitie and Infinity both extensive and intensive clearly demonstrate. (4)
From the Operations and Providence of God. How little does the most sagacious
Philosopher understand, much less comprehend of the Works and Providence of
God? How impossible then is it for poor mortals to comprehend the Essence of
God? Paul cries out, Romans 11.33. Romans 11.33.
How unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out! And if
Gods works, which are finite and so bear some proportion to our understanding,
are so unsearchable, how unsearchable then is his Essence? (5) From our
ignorance and incomprehension of the least things in Nature. Alas! how little
do we know of the least of Beings? Is not our ignorance much more than our
knowledge in the commun products of Nature? How little then must we needs know
of the God of Nature? This Argument is incomparably well improved by
Bradwardine, l. 1. c. 1. page 27. against the prond Philosophers of his Age,
presuming they could by their reason give an exact model of the divine Decrees
and Operations; whom he thus seriously derides: Prithee, O Philosopher, tell me,
what do thou fully know? I suppose thou dare not say the least Creature. I
know, thou do not perfectly know the least Atome in the Sun, the least dust
of the Earth, nor the least drop of water. For in every corpuscule there are
infinite figures linear, superficial, and corporal, etc. Thence he concludes
thus: If therefore thou know not the least things, yea thou art infinitely
ignorant of more than thou know, how caust thou fully know the greatest
Being? Presume not, but acknowledge thy self to be a man, and that thou art
infinitely ignorant of more of God than thou know. So Aquinas contra Gent.
lib. 1. cap. 3. proves from our ignorance of things sensible, how ignorant we
are of the supreme Being. (6) From the mutable variable nature of human
Knowledge. In those things whereof we conceive we know most, how much are we
contradicted by others, who are as confident of their Antithesis, as we are of
our Hypothesis? Yea, how often do we contradict our selves, and that in those
very things, wherein we thought our knowledge well grounded? And if our
comprehension in things natural be so superficial, variable, and contradictory,
how much more is it such in the comprehension of God? That God is
incomprehensible as to any created intellect, albeit supernaturally elevated,
see Suarez, Metaph. Disput. 30. Sect. 12. page 118.

Although man cannot attain to a comprehensive Knowledge of the incomprehensible
God, How for we may apprehend God.
yet an apprehensive Knowledge he is capable of. For the Infinitude and
Incomprehensibilitie of God hinders not, but that he may be apprehended by a
finite understanding, so far as he reveles himself in his word or works. It Is
true, al knowledge implies some proportion between the object known and the
apprehensive faculty: and to speak strictly there is no proper proportion
between an infinite object and a finite subject; yet such is the condescendence
of the infinite God, as that he has not left us without some means, both
natural and supernatural, which have an illative proportion to himself, whereby
we are enabled, as by so many gradations, to ascend up to the knowledge of
himself. And we find not only in sacred Philosophy, but also in Plato many
good rules to conduct us in our inquiries after and contemplations of the
incomprehensible God.

1. Against Poetic figments of God.
Plato severely prohibits al his Sectators the entertaining any fabulose Poetic
figments of God, whereby he is transformed into various shapes and forms,
according to the proud daring conceits of men. Thus Plato, Repub. 2. page 377.
condemns Hesiod and Homer for those Fables they coined touching the Gods: and
then tells us what those Fables were: (...), etc. When any one does importunely
and wickedly forge and represent the nature of the Gods, and Heroes; neither
does duly describe them as they are: just as a Painter, who without the least
ressemblance paintes those things which he intendes to imitate. Thence he
procedes to aggravate the crime of those, who coin such unworthy Fables of God:
(...), etc. First truly, the greatest lie is in the greatest matters: whereof
Hesiod is the Author, who feignes such false stories of Heaven, etc. He makes
Hesiod's Fables about the Gods to be of the blackest guilt; because in the
greatest matters. Thence he concludes, in the end of this lib. 2. page 383.
thus: Albeit therefore we may commend many things of Homer, yet this we do not
commend, that he feigned such things of Jupiter -- When therefore such things
are spoken of the Gods, let us be filled with indignation, and banish the
Poets: (...), Neither let us permit the Professors of Learning to make use of
such fabulose Poets for the instructing of Youth: If truly the Magistrates of
the City be religiose and divine, they will, so far as men may, take care
hereof for us. An excellent Law for the expelling al fabulose Poets. Thus in
the 12 Tables it is reckoned as one of Romulus's Laws: That men believe not the
Fables of the Gods. Laertius relates of Pythagoras, That descending down to
Hell, he saw Hesiod's Soul bound to a brazen Pillar making a lamentable noise;
and Homer's Soul hanging on a Tree, with Serpents about it, for those things
which they feigned of the Gods. And Zenophanes Colophonius writ against Homer
and Hesiod, deriding them for their Fables of the Gods. So much did the wiser
Heathens abominate those fabulose narrations of God. It was a great Saying of
Bias, mentioned by Laertius, (...), Speak of God as he is.

2. Plato forbids al curiosity in our inquiries about God. Against Curiosity
in our inquiries after God.
Thus Repub. 6. page 506. having undertaken to discourse of God, under the
notion of the chiefest Good, he gives a caution, that we be not too curiose in
prying into the incomprehensible things of God. Do thou, says he, conceive
it consentaneous, that any discourse of a thing whereof he is ignorant? No
surely, so far as he is ignorant. Do thou not know, that opinions without
science are base; of which opinions the best are truly blind? Do thou judge,
that they who opine, or measure things by their own opinions, without
understanding, differ any thing from those who being blind yet conceit they go
in a right path? no surely. (...); Will thou therefore contemplate base, blind,
and oblique opinions (of God) when thou may hear clear and excellent
discourse from others? An excellent rule for the confinement of our notions and
contemplations touching God to sacred Revelations. Then he adds in Socrates's
name: But truly, as for me, I am no way fit for this so great an affair;
[namely to discourse of the chiefest Good] and therefore lest going beyond my
capacity I should come short of what I aim at, and make my self rediculous, I
again and again tremble at my task. But, blessed Sirs, what that chiefest Good
is, let us now let pass: for the Majesty hereof, believe me, greatly
transcendes the terms of our knowledge: but let us now consider what are the
effects of this chiefest Good, which have most similitude to his nature.
Wherein Socrates winds off his Auditors from the curiose prying into the
Nature of God, and exhortes them rather to contemplate God in his effects,
specially such as partake most of the Divine Nature. Thence he adds: (...),
And I wish I were capable of unfolding, and you of receiving so great a
Mystery, that ye might perceive not only some effects and issues, but also the
nature of the Parent: i. e. God himself. What an excellent remedy does Plato
here afford us against al presumptuose and daring inquisition into the Nature
and Secrets of God? Magnitudinem Dei qui se putat nosse minuit: qui non vult
minuere non novit. Minut. Foelix.
Indeed he that attemts to comprehend the Divine Essence and its magnitude,
does but diminish it, and confound himself: no one conceives aright of God, but
he that conceives him to be incomprehensible. Plato gives us good advice, that
the Nature and Secrets of God ought to be held in a Mystery, farther than he
reveles himself. How soon are volatile and curiose Wits unhinged by the wingy
Mysteries of the Divine Essence? He that indulgeth his curiositle herein, does
but thrust himself into a Labyrinth, out of which he can never extricate
himself. The Socratic modesty is very becoming Christians, not to dive into
the Myseries of the Deity, farther than he has discovered himself in his
works or word. He that affectes to be a curiose Scrutator of the Divine
Majesty shall soon be swallowed up by his Glory. And how many have lost their
Religion and Devotion, by a seeming religiose and devote prying into the
Secrets of God? It was opportunely said of that serious Christian, who, being
by a curiose Wit in way of derision, demanded, What God did before the World
was made? replied, He made Heks for curiose Wits, who busy themselves about
such vain questions. And indeed such as now indulge their curiosity in such
frigid jejune speculations about God, shall one day, to their dreadful torment,
feel and know how much better it had been for them, with a learned pious
ignorance, to pass by the incomprehensible Secrets of God, than by a proud
blasphemous ignorant curiosity to dive into them. Lastly, what profit is it to
use curiose conjectures in those things, which transcend al human conjectures?
To conclude, as for our contemplations about the Divine Perfections of God, we
have a good caution given us by Naxianzen, (...), Be not curiosily inquisitive
about the mode. To which we may add that of Pluto, (...), to be modesely and
temperately wife, is to be greatly wife. Which agrees with sacred Philosophy,
Romans 12.3. (...). Romans 12.3.


3. Plato instructes us, The least notice of God of great moment.
That the least notices of God and his Divine Perfections ought to be of great
moment and estime with us. So in his Critieas, page 107. by an allusion taken
from Painters he illustrates this Hypothesis thus: When Painters draw the
Pictures of the Gods, etc. we think it sufficient if they give us but any
dark representation of them, neither do we being unskilful animadvert with a
censorious eye on their work; but rest abundantly satisfied in what
representation they give us. But when they come to draw our own picture, or the
picture of any that belong to us, we more severely animadvert and censure them,
if they err in the least point. The same is to be observed in the explication
of these things, (...), etc. When we discourse of things celestial and divine,
we think our selves abundantly satisfied, if there be the least evidence
brought for the explication of their nature; but on the contrary in our examens
of things mortal and human, we are wont to use greater diligence. Wherefore if
those things, which we are now about to discourse of, be not so exactly, as
their dignity requires, represented by us, you will pardon us. An excellent
preface to a discourse of things divine touching God, which Plato is here
entering on. Hence,

4. Al notices of God by Divine Revelation.
Plato advises us not to expect or desire farther discoveries of God, than his
own revelation and illumination shall afford to us. So in his Timaeus, page 29.
(...), It must be remembered both by me that speak, and by you who are Judges of
my discourses, that we have but human Nature, and therefore if we can but
attain unto some Oriental Tradition or probable relation of these things,
[touching God, etc.] we may not inquire farther about them. That by his (...)
we must understand some Oriental Judaic Tradition originally of divine
revelation, I think, will appear evident to any that considers the use of this
phrase in Plato. Indeed in our contemplations and discourses of God it is
neither profitable nor safe to proceed further than divine Revelation and
Illumination shall conduct us. Neither need we be ashamed to be ignorant of such
Secrets of God, the humble ignorance of which argues more solid knowledge, than
curiose and vain speculations thereof. These are the best bounds for our
inquiries about God, not only to follow God learning, but also to leave off
inquiring when and where God leaves off to teach: as we may not neglect what
God has reveled of himself, so we may not search into what God has kept secret:
for as the former argues too much sloth and ingratitude, so the later too much
pride and curiosity. It was a great Saying of Augustine: We may safely follow
Scripture, which as an indulgent mother goes softly, that she may not go beyond
our infirmity. A believing ignorance in things not reveled about God is much
better than a rash science. Al natural reason and investigation about God,
ought to follow not precede faith. Hence,

5. The Gradation of our ascent to God.
Plato informs us, That our ascent in the contemplation of God musk be by the
same degrees, by which he descendes to us, either in his works or words. Thus
Repub. 6. page 509, etc. he informs us, That it is above al human capacity to
comprehend the Majesty of the chiefest Good, as it is in its inaccessible
splendour, yet we may ascend thereto by certain (...) or (...), Gra es or
degrees: which Grades of Ascent must be taken from Gods Grades or degrees of
Descent unto us; that so we may, by a certain Analogy and similitude, ascend
up to the knowledge of God, so far as it is possible for man. Yet he gives us
this needful caution, That we must speak soberly of these so great Mysteries,
and take heed that we ascribe not (...) a spurious birth to the Parent of the
Universe. The grades or degrees whereby God descendes to us, and we ascend to
him are either natural or supernatural. 1. Natural Grades of knowing God.
The natural Grades or Degrees, whereby God descendes down to us, and we ascend
up to him, are all the Effects, Products and Works of God, with all their
Virtues, Efficaces, Orders, Varieties, and al manner of Perfections. So Plato,
Repub. 6. treating largely of Gods Causalitie, he says, Al natural Causes and
Effects are but (...), and (...), Works, Artifices, and Children of God the
great Parent of the Universe, whereby we may ascend up to the knowledge of God.
This is more natively and clearly laid down in sacred Philosophy, Romans 1.19,
20.
as Romans 1.19, 20. where he says, the visible works of God, as so many
ascents, lead us up to the contemplation of the invisible perfections of God,
specially his eternal power and Godhead. That there is a natural knowledge of
God gained by the Book of Nature is most evident, albeit the Socinians, to
serve their Hypothesis, deny it. This natural knowledge of God is either insite
or acquisite. So Dion Prusaeensis said, that our (...), persuasion of God was
either innate, or (...), acquisite. Our insite and innate knowledge of God
consistes in those commun notices of God, both speculative and practic, which
are impressed on the Conscience. Our acquisite natural knowledge of God is that
which is gained by actual comparation and discourse from the works of God.
This acquisite knowledge may, according to the distribution of that spurious
Dionysius, (who was indeed a great Platonist) cap. 2. de Mist. Theolog. be
acquired and promoved three ways: by way of Causalitie, by way of Eminence, by
way of Negation.

(1) By way of Causalitie, when by the Effects of God, 1. By way of Causalitie.
which are either little Images, or at least Vestigia, Footsteps of God, we
mount up to the knowledge and contemplation of God, the original Parent or first
Cause of al. For indeed the effect carries with it the signature, impresse, and
ressemblance of its Cause; as you frequently see the Parents complexion or
conditions in the Child. Thus Plato, Repub. 6. page 507. having laid down this
preface, that it was impossible to comprehend, yea to apprehend any thing of
the Divine Majesty in himself, he tells us, That he would inquire after him in
his offspring or effects: and then he adds: (...), but take heed lest I
should against my will give you a spurious Idea of the Child of this great
Parent. He speaks in the language of Aratus, cited by Paul, Act. 17.28. we are
al his offspring; Act. 17.28.
and applies this notion to al lower goods, which he makes to be the offspring
or issue of the chiefest Good; and therefore by them we ascend up to the
contemplation of their Parent. So Damascene, Orthod. Fid. l. 1. c. 15. (...),
But those things that are spoken [of God] affirmatively, are predicated of him
as the cause of althings. And he adds: (...), But he shall be more properly
named from things more excellent and more akin to himself: now things
immaterial are more excellent. Wherein he instructes us, (1) That our
affirmative notices of God are chiefly drawn from his effects. (2) That among
his effects those give us the most lively Ideas of God, which are most
excellent and akin to him; namely things immaterial, as the human Soul, etc.
God so manifestes himself in the whole opifice of the Universe, that we can no
sooner open our eyes, but may behold the gloriose Ideas of his Divine Wisdom,
Power, and Goodness: which ever way we turn our eye, there shines forth some
ray of the Divinity. What is the whole Universe, but a visible Map or Picture
of the invisible Deity? Is not the Creators Name written in golden Characters
on every page of the Book of Nature? It Is true, some want eyes to see and read
their Creators Name in the Book of Nature, but it follows not hence, that there
is no natural knowledge of God, as the Socinians would needs persuade us: For
that a thing be called natural, it is not necessary, that it be actually in all
men; but it suffices if it may be derived from a natural principe: because
some men are blind, we may not thence conclude, that sight is not natural to a
man.

(2) Another natural grade or way of knowing God is by way of Eminence. 2. By
way of Eminence.
These Notices of God by way of Eminence are best when composed both of
Affirmatives and Negatives, as also of terms most simple. Thus Damascene,
Orthodox. Fid. l. 1. c. 15. (...), The sweetest notion of God is that
complexion of both [Affirmatives and Negatives] as superessential Essence,
superdivine Divinity, supercausal Cause, and the like. When we see any
perfection in the Creature, we attribute the same to God in a more eminent
degree and manner. And here we are to remember, that the more general notions
of created perfections, albeit they are more imperfect as belonging to the
Creature, yet they are more properly attributed to God, than more special
notions; because the former are more abstract and simple, the later more
concrete and composite: For by how much the higher we ascend to the generic
notions of things, by so much the more simple our notions are. Hence it is,
that Knowledge is more properly ascribed to God, than Sense or Reason; because
it is more generic and simple: so Life, than Vegetation; Spirit, than Soul:
hence also (...), Being, as Jehovah which denotes the same, are the most proper
Names we can give God; because the most generic and simple notions. And the
reason of the whole is this: Seeing the Divine Essence is more aptly and
familiarly expressed by Abnegation or Remotion, than by Affirmation, hence it
follows, that by how much the more concrete and special our notions are, by so
much the less they agree to God; and on the contrary, by how much the more
simple and general they are, by so much the more they agree to God; because
they are by so much the more remote from the imperfections of the Creature, as
Twisse, Scient. med. page 309. Hence,

(3) The best natural way or degree of knowing God is by Negation or Remotion:
for the Divine Essence, 3. By way of Remotion.
by reason of its Immensitie and Infinitude, exceeding all the Ideas or notions
our Intellect can form of it, cannot better be apprehended, than by removing
al imperfections from it. So Aquinas, Sum. 1. Quaest. 10. Art. 1. Things simple
are best defined by Negation; not as if negation were essential to them, but
because our Intellect, which first apprehendes things composite, cannot arrive
to the cognition of things simple, but by the remotion of al composition. The
same he more fully explicates, contra Gent. l. 1. c. 14. In the consideration
of the Divine Essence the way of Remotion is chiefly to be used: for the Divine
Essence, by reason of its Immensitie, excedes al form that our Intellect can
attain unto; wherefore we cannot apprehend it, by knowing what it is; but we
have some notices thereof, by knowing what it is not. For we by so much the
more draw near to the knowledge of God, by how much the more we can by our
Intellect remove imperfections from God: for we by so much the more perfectly
know every thing, by how much the more fully we contemplate its differences
from other things: for every thing has in it self its proper essence, whereby
it is distinguished from al other things. But because in the consideration of
the Divine Essence we cannot conceive what it is, or its Genus, nor its
distinction from other things by affirmative differences, it is therefore
necessary, that we conceive of it by negative differences. Indeed the most
simple, spirital, divine, and excellent things are best set forth by negatives.
Hence God himself is best expressed and apprehended by way of negation. We know
rather what he is not, than what he is.

2. The supernatural grades or degrees whereby God descendes to us, and we
ascend to him are either Graciose or Glorious. The supernatural Grades whereby
we ascend up to God.
(1) The grades of Grace whereby we ascend up to God are either objective or
subjective. [1] The supernatural objective grades of Grace are either simple or
complexe. 1. Christ.
(1) The simple objective grade of Grace, whereby we ascend up to God and the
contemplation of him, is Christ, the Mediator, who is the essential Glass,
wherein all the Glory of the Deity is most resplendent, as 2 Cor. 3.18. He is
the image of God, 2 Cor. 4.4.
2 Cor. 4.4. (...) an image is an express ressemblance or imitamen of an
exemplar, according to its form or kind; and so it differs from Ves^igium, or
a Footstep, which gives only some dark notices of a thing, by its causalitie.
There are some vestigia or footsteps of God impressed on the sensible world;
yea an accidental Image of God on the renewed Soul; but Christ is an essential
Image of God, in whom all the invisibile perfections of God become visible to an
eye of faith. Thence he is said to be, Col. 1.15.
Col. 1.15. the image of the invisible God: i. e. God who is invisible in
himself becomes visible in his Son. Whence also he is styled, Heb. 1.3.
Heb. 1.3. the effulgence of his glory, and character of his person. (...), is
(...), the splendour or effulgence of the Sun communicated in and by its rays,
specially as they fall on a cloud, and so make (...), Parelius, or a reflexe
image of the Sun, which seems to be another Sun: so Christ he is the Parelius
or reflexe Image of God, who is in himself a Light inaccessible and full of
Glory, as 1 Timothy 6.16. Thence it is added: and the character of his person:
(...) notes an Effigies or express figure engraven, or impressed: All the
Divine Attributes and Perfections of God are impressed or engraven on Christ's
human Nature, in legible and golden Characters: whence he is styled Emmanuel
God with us. He is indeed the golden Arc wherein the Deity lies couched; a
visible Image of the invisible Deity: whose mediatorie Offices and Relations
seem imperfectly expressed in Plato's Demons, of which before. 2. The Scripture.
(2) The complexe objective grades of our ascent up to God are al divine Words
or Revelations, both preceptive and promissive, whereby the Divine Nature and
Will is reveled to us, as 1 Cor. 13.12. 1 Cor. 13.12.
For we now see thorough a glass darkely. We see the face of God in the glass
of divine Words and Ordinances, yet only enigmatically and obscurely. And Plato
makes mention of (...), a Divine Word, whereby things divine are reveled to us:
which, 3. The light of Grace.
if I mistake him not, alludes to the sacred Scriptures. [2] The subjective
grades whereby we ascend up to the knowledge of God are al Divine Illuminations,
whereof we find great notices and Philosophemes in Plato, 4. The light of
Glory.
as hereafter Chap. 10.. 1. (2) There are also Grades of Glory, whereby
glorified Spirits ascend up to the beatific Vision of God, of which elsewhere.
These are the various descents of God to man, and the ascents of man to God,
whereby his incomprehensible Being is in some degrees apprehended, though never
comprehended by poor mortals.

CHAP. V. Of Gods Life, Knowledge, Will, and Power.
The Life of God in the Actualitie of his Essence: Gods Life most spirituose,
self-moving, Life it self, immortal, and the Cause of al Lafe. Gods Science,
its Perfection; Object both complexe and incomplexe; particularly the human
Soul: The Mode of Divine Science by the Divine Essence and Ideas: Gods Science
most simple, intuitive, immutable, certain, absolute, eternal, and perfect.
Simple Intelligence, and Science of Vision: Middle Science what. The Will of
God, its Object, Actualitie; Independence, Immutabilitie, Absoluteness,
Antecedence, Perfection, Liberty, Efficace, Distinctions. Gods Power, and its
Identitie with his Will: Its Object things possible: Its Infinitude.

. 1. HItherto we have considered the Essence of God as existent, The Life of
God.
we now proceed to consider it as actuose, which is usually termed the Life of
God, whereof we find great notices in Sacred and Platonic Philosophy. In
sacred Philosophy Life is ascribed to God on various reasons: (1) (...) in
opposition to al false Gods, or Idols; and so it denotes the Verity and Truth
of his Essence and Existence, as Mat. 16.16. (...), Mat. 16.16.
of the living God, i. e. of the true very God, in opposition to al false Gods.
So Act. 14.15. 1 Timothy 4.10. as in the O. T. Deuteronomy. 32.40. Psalm. 84.23. Jer. 5.2.
(2) (...), by way of Eminence, to distinguish his Actualitie and manner of
acting from that of the Creature: for all life consisting in a spirituose
actuositie; every thing is said to live, so far as it is (...), a self-moving
Principe, as Plato phraseth it: now God being the most pure Act and Spirit, and
the prime (...), self-moving Principe, which moves althings, but is moved
by-none, hence Life in the most eminent degree belongs to God, as Joh. 1.4. and
elsewhere. (3) (...), effectively, as he gives life to al, either natural, Act.
17.28. Deuteronomy. 30.20. or spiritual, Hos. 1.10. 2 Cor. 4.11. Ephesians. 4.18. or
gloriose, Joh. 14.9. (4) (...), essentially, as the Divine Essence is in and of
it self actuose. For the Life of God is God himself: hence when he swears by
his life, as Deuteronomy. 32.40. Deuteronomy. 32.40.
he swears by himself. And so men, when they would swear by God, they swear by
his life, 1 Samuel 14.39.
Ruth 3.13. 1 Samuel 14.39. And because Gods Essence is ever actuose, therefore
he is said to live for ever, Dan. 4.34. Dan. 4.34.
who lives for ever. So Rev. 4.9.

This Life of God essentially considered is well described by Plato, in his
Phaedo, page 106. (...), But that God, says Socrates, who is (as I take it)
the very species, form, or idea of life, if any thing else be immortal, can
never die, is confessed by all. In which description of the Life of God we may
consider, (1) the mode of life he ascribes to God, in that character, (...),
the very species, form or idea of life, whereby the Life of God is essentially
differenced from al other Life's. For no created life can be said to be the
form or idea of life: The Angelic life is of al created life's the most
actuose, spirituose, and noble; yet it cannot be said to be the species or idea
of life; because it contains not the whole of life: for the species and form
contains the whole essence. But now the Life of God is the species, form, or
idea of life, because it contains in it self eminently and essentially al life:
whatever Spirituositie or Actuositie there is in any created life, it is in a
transcendent eminent degree comprehended in the essential Life of God. (2)
Plato makes this Life of God to be (...), immortal. So Aristotle, lib. 2. de
Coelo, cap. 3. (...), The Energie or Actuositie of God is Immortality: and
this is life eternal. This Immortality of the Divine Life is (...), 1. Tim.
6.16.
natural, absolute and essential, as 1 Timothy 6.16. but the immortality of
Creatures is only (...), acquisite, as Plato in his Timaeus: or in the phrase
of sacred Philosophy, (...), by grace and free donation. Angels and human
Spirits are immortal by divine donation, but they possess not Immortality, as
the Divine Life does.

But to explicate the Life of God more fully, Of Life in its generic notion.
according to the Analogy it bears to the Animal and Rational Life, we must a
little examine what Life in its generic notion importes. And here indeed we can
give only some poor conjectures; in as much as nothing is more difficult to be
understood than Life, albeit nothing more commun. This is one of the Mysteries
of Nature; which not falling under the perception of sense, farther than by its
effects, we can only give some probable conjectures of it. But thus much we
find by the effects to be included in the generic notion of Life: (1) a
spirituose Principe, or Spirituositie. So among Animals, by how much the more
spirituose they are, by so much the more perfect and noble their life is. The
animal life is indeed composed of vital and animal Spirits in agitation: Hence
vigor, health, strength, sense, vegetation, and all the issues of life proceed.
And by how much the more potent and vigorous the Spirits are, by so much the
more active and perfect is the life. So in the rational Life, the more
spirituose the exercices of Reason, and Will are, the more perfect the life is.
(2) Life in its generic notion importes also Actuositie. Life consistes not in
a mere spirituose principe, but in the agitation of that principe. And the more
actuose the spirituose principe is, the more perfect the life is. (3) But the
main character that seems most essential to life in the general is (...),
self-motion. This Plato makes commun to al life, as well create as increate:
Brutes they have an animal self-motion, men rational, Angels intellectile, but
God absolute, essential, and independent. Thus much being premissed of Life in
its generic notion, we now proceed to explicate how far the Life of God
participates hereof.

1. The Life of God carries in it the most perfect Spirituositie, The Life of
God most spirituose.
as he is the most simple pure Spirit, without the least shadow of Matter either
physic or metaphysic. The less any thing has of matter, the more spirituose it
is: Angels and human Souls are called Spirits; because they are void of al
physic matter: but yet they have metaphysic matter, or passive obediential power,
and therefore are not pure simple Spirits metaphysically considered. Though I
cannot without inhuman violence to mine assent take in that notion of a Spirit
given us by Learned More, in his Divine Dialogues, Dialog. 1. Sect. 24. page
94, etc. where he makes extension agreeable to a Spirit, and so not proper and
essential to Matter solely, according to the Cartesian and ancient Hypothesis.
For if a Spirit be capable of extension in a strict and physic notion, which he
seems to defend, I cannot imagine how it should be exemt from physic matter, and
al those laws of physic corporeitie, dissolution, and corruption which attend
Matter: yet I can easily persuade my self and grant that learned Author, that al
Spirits have, according to the degree of Spiritalitie, an Amplitude of Essence,
which is not confined to the narrow space of a Needles point, as the Schools of
old dreamed. As for create Spirits both Angels and human Souls we may justly
allow them, without injury offered to their spiritalitie, metaphysic
accidental extension, according to the space they occupy; as also metaphysic
matter, as composed of Act and passive obediential power, without the least
physic extension or matter. But now God being void, not only of physic, but also
of metaphysic Matter, or al passive Power whatsoever; therefore he is said to be
a pure, simple Spirit in the most eminent transcendent degree, Joh. 4.24.
as Joh. 4.24. God is a Spirit, i. e. the most simple spirituose Being, and
therefore the most living Being. Hence Christ, in regard of his Deity, is
styled a quickening Spirit, Joh. 6.63.
or Spirit that gives life, Joh. 6.63. (...), It is the Spirit [ i. e. the
Deity which they were ignorant of] that quickens, or gives life. Althings
give and have life so far as they are spirituose: Christ as God being the most
pure Spirit, he must therefore necessarily be the most living and lifegiving or
quickening Spirit. 1 Cor. 15.45.
So 1 Cor. 15.45. Christ as Mediator is called (...), a quickening, or
life-giving Spirit, as he is the Fountain of al spiritual life, and gives out
al to his Members. Again, Heb. 9.14.
Heb. 9.14. it is said, that Christ (...), by the eternal Spirit, [ i. e. by the
infinite efficacitie of his Deitie] offered up himself. So that the Life of God
consistes much in his Spiritualitie, or Spirituositie.

2. 2. The Life of God most actuose.
The Life of God carries in it the most pure and perfect Actuositie. This
Character of the Divine Life follows on and flows from the former: for by how
much the more spirituose things are, by so much the more actuose they are: and
by how much the more actuose they are, by so much the more living. Nothing can
be said to live farther than it is actuose: when it cease to act, it cease
to live. Life may be considered either in actu primo, the first act, or in actu
secundo, the second act: the first Act of life consistes in the spirituose
Principe or Spirituositie of the Agent, before mentioned: the second Act of
life consistes in the Actuositie or Operation, that flows from the first Act or
Principe. But in the Life of God, which is most perfect, the first and second
Act are one and the same; because he is a pure Act, without the least
composition of Act and Power, or first and second Act. In all created life the
Principe or first Act is distinct from the Operation or second Act; and both
together make an accidental composition of Cause and Effect, or Act and Power:
but in the Life of God there is an Actuation without any true causalitie or
proper motion. We must conceive therefore of the Life of God as having the most
perfect Actuositie and Actuation, yet so as to exclude al real Causalitie,
Composition, and Imperfection, which attendes every create life, by reason of
the distinction between its first and second Act, which God admits not; because
he is pure Act without al Power, either essential or accidental, active or
passive: his Esse and Agere are the same: his Act is his Essence: which can be
said of no create Being: but of God it must be affirmed, because he is the
first, most pure, and perfect Act, without al power either objective or
receptive. The pure Actualitie of God is demonstrated by this, that pure Act is
more perfect, than Act and Power: but God is most perfect, therefore pure Act.
Every power is indigent, needing an Act to actuate the same: whence it
necessarily follows, that we must either admit a progress into infinite, or
grant some first pure Act, which needs no other Act for its actuation, as
Bradwardine acutely demonstrates, l. 1. c. 2. page 163, etc. Whence we
conclude, that the Life of God is most actuose and perfect; because it is a
pure Act, without al potentialitie. Hence,

3. The life of God is of al most (...), self-moving. The Life of God
self-moving.
Plato aboundes much in this Character of Life, which he makes to be most
essential thereto. So in his Phaedrus, page 245. (...), Every body that is
moved by an externe pulse is inanimate: but that which is moved by it self from
an interne Principe, is animate. Wherein he makes (...), self motion from an
interne Principe the essential character of life. And by how much the more
perfect this self-motion is, by so much the more perfect is the life: Plants
are said by some kind of Analogy to live, because they have a shadow of
self-motion, which appears in their Vegetation; yet they cannot be said
properly to live; because they rejoice not in any true (...), self-motion, or
spontaneitie. Brutes are said properly to live; because they have a true
self-motion and spontaneitie, arising from the actuation of their animal and
vital spirits: yet their life is much short of the rational life; which
consistes in a rational (...), self-motion or spontaneitie of moving toward
the last end. And yet the Angelic life is higher than the rational, in that the
Angels have no dependence at al on physic matter. But the (...), self-motion of
the Life of God is of al most perfect, in that it is absolutely independent.
The most noble Creatures have but imperfect self-motion: Angels move
themselves, but not primarily, and independently as to God the prime Motor: yea
their being moved by God, the first Motor, is in order of nature before their
own self-motion: so that they are but, as man, moved self-movers. But God being
independent in his Being, is also independent in his self-motion: he moves
himself and althings else, but is moved by nothing. This is excellently
illustrated by Plato, Leg. 10. page 894. where he proves, That God, who is the
prime Motor, moving himself and althings else, does infinitely excel, of which
more largely before, Chap. 2.. 3. Thus also Aquinas, contra Gent. l. 1. c. 97.
Life is in this respect attributed unto things, as they are said to be moved by
themselves and not by another: hence those things which seem to move themselves
are said, by way of analogy, to live, as living Springs, and Quicksilver. But
properly those things are said to move themselves, which are composite of mover
and moved, as animates. But nothing operates from it self so much as God;
because he is the first Cause of althings, etc. Hence,

4. God Life it self.
God is Life it self. For Gods Life being his Essence as actuose and
independent, he does not only live, but is Life in the abstract. Whence Plato,
Phaedo, page 106. calls God, (...), the very species, form, or idea of life, as
before. Creatures live, but they are not life it self; because they have their
life by participation: and every Being by participation must be reduced to
somewhat that is such of it self: therefore the life of the Creature must be
reduced to God, who is life it self. Thus Aquinas, sum. part. 1. Quaest. 18.
Art. 3. God being Essence it self and Intelligence it self, therefore life does
chiefly belong unto him. For the clearing whereof we are to consider, that
seeing things are said to live so far as they operate of themselves, and are not
moved by others, therefore by how much the more perfectly this mode of
self-operating does belong to any thing, by so much the more perfect its life
is -- Hence those things that have understanding have the most perfect mode of
living; because they have the most perfect mode of self-moving: but albeit our
Intellect does in somethings act it self, yet in somethings it is acted by
others -- Therefore that which in its own nature is Intelligence it self, and
is not determined or moved by any other, that obtains the highest degree of
life, and is indeed life it self. Hence,

5. God is eternal immortal life. Thus Plato, Phaedo, Gods Life immortal.
page 106. proves, that Gods life is (...), immortal; because he is the Idea of
life. So in his Phaedrus, page 245, (...), That which is ever moved is
immortal: but that which moves another and is moved by another, because it has
an end of its motion, it must necessarily have an end of its life. His design
is to prove, that the Soul being a self-moving principe must necessarily be an
ever-moving principe; and so immortal. And his Argument is this: (...),
Whatever is moved by it self, i. e. rationally or intellectually, that is ever
moved, and therefore immortal. Thence he adds: (...), Seeing it is manifest,
that what moves it self is immortal. So Johan. Grammaticus: (...), That which
is moved of it self ( i. e. intellectually) is ever moved: and what is so, is
immortal. That Gods Life is immortal, is most evident; because, (1) it has no
beginning; therefore no end. (2) God being the prime Motor, must necessarily be
immobile, without succession or mutation. (3) Al death importes dissolution:
and where there is dissolution, there must necessarily be composition and
parts: But God is most simple.

6. God is Life effectively, God the Cause of al Life. Act. 17.28.
as he is the first cause of al life to his Creatures. Act. 17.28. In him we
live and move and have our being: i. e. we receive al life from him, because we
receive al motion from him: and we receive al motion from him; because we
receive our being from him. So Damascene, Orthod. Fid. l. 1. c. 19. (...), And
it, [the Deitie] gives to althings Being as their Nature requires: and it is
the Being of Beings, and the Life of things living, and the Reason of things
rational, and the Intelligence of things intellectile. Thus Plato, Phaedr. page
245. Therefore that only that moves it self, because it is never deserted by it
self, can never cease to be, (...), yea to al other things that are moved this
is the fountain and principe of motion. The first self moving Principe or Cause
cannot cease to move, because it gives motion to althings, but receives motion
from nothing. It is the fountain of al motion, and therefore of al life. Of the
Life of God; that it is intellectual, self-sufficient, most blessed, etc. see
Suarez, Metaphys. Disput. 30. Sect. 14. page 116.

. 2. Gods Science or Knowledge.
Having discoursed of the Life of God in the general, we pass on to explicate
the modes and ways, in which this life is said to be actuose. For as the
Actuositie of the Rational life is manifested by Acts of Intelligence and
Volition, so proportionably the Actuositie of the Divine Life is explicated by
Acts of Divine Intelligence and Volition. We shall begin with the divine
Intellect, Intelligence, Science, and Sapience; which are one and the same in
God, and no way distinct from his Essence. For God being a pure Act, the
Intelligent, Intellect, intelligible Species, Act of Intellection, and
objective Idea, are but one in him. God is the prime Being, the prime Life, and
the prime Self-mover; and therefore the prime Intelligent. His Intellect is
that whereby he understandes himself, and althings without himself, which
either are, or were, or shall be, or may be; together with the various Modes,
Orders, and Habitudes of althings; and al these, not by any abstract Ideas,
Species, or Images taken from the externe objects; but in the glass of his own
Essence; not successively and by discourse, but intuitively; not in time, but
his own Eternity. All this will be evident by what follows.

First, Gods Intellect and its Perfection.
as for the Intellect of God and its infinite Perfection above al Human or
Angelic Intellect, we find great notices thereof both in Sacred and Platonic
Philosophy. We find the perfection of the Divine Intellect lively described,
Psalm. 139.1-16. which we shall more fully explicate, when we come to Gods
knowledge of the heart. Mic. 6.9.
So Micah 6.9. The Lords voice cries unto the city: and the man of wisdom
shall see thy name. The last clause is rendered according to the Hebrew, by
Tarnovius and others, For thy name shall see that which is, i. e. thy most
sacred Majesty and Essence sees althings as they are. So (...) may be rendered.
Plato describes the Perfection of the Divine Intellect, in his Parmenides, page
134. where he assures us, that (...), etc. With God there is the highest and
most exquisite Domination, and the highest and most exquisite Science: for
otherwise he could not know human affairs. Then he concludes: Were it not an
insolent and importune discourse, (...), if any one should spoil God of his
knowledge? The Perfection of Gods Intellect, beyond al Human and Angelic
Intellect, will appear by a view of its nature, object, and mode of
apprehending. The Intellect of God, as to its nature, has one and the same Idea
with the Divine Essence; neither is it invested with any abstract Species,
Forms or Ideas of things, either habitual or actual, distinct from the Essence
of God. It Is true, man's Intellect is not, as I conceive, distinct from his
human Soul; yet it cannot understand any object but by species or ideas actual
and habitual distinct from its Essence. Man's Intellect, as to the Act of
Intellection, is passive, receiving the intelligible species from its object:
which imperfect mode of Intellection appertains not to God, who sees althings
in the glass of his own Essence, as anon. Gods infinite Science admits not any
intelligible species, whereby the object is united to the faculty in us: such
intelligible species belong only to Human and Angelic Intellects, which receive
impression and causalitie from their objects. But the Intellect of God receives
no impression or causalitie from its objects, it being the cause of althings.
In human knowledge the thing understood is the measure of our understanding; but
the divine knowledge is the measure of althings known. Again, the Divine
Intellect understandes things complexe incomplexely; but the human Intellect
understandes things most simple and incomplexe, complexely. But of these things
more in what follows.

As for the object of the Divine Knowledge, it is most universal, The Object of
Gods Knowledge.
(...), althings intelligible. But more particularly the object of Divine
Science is either primary, or secundary: The primary object of Divine Science
is God himself, the Divine Essence, Persons, 1. God himself. 1 Cor. 2.11.
and Relations, 1 Cor. 2.11. That God is the prime Intelligible is evident,
because he is the prime immaterial Being. For althings are so far intelligible,
as they are immaterial: therefore God being the first immaterial and most
simple Being, he must necessarily be the first Intelligible. And if God be the
first Intelligible, then there must be an Intellect and Science proportionate
to him: which can be no other than himself; who is both Intelligible,
Intellect, Intellection, and intelligible Species. Again, God being a pure Act,
of supreme Immaterialitie, he cannot but understand himself by himself. For God
having nothing of potentialitie, it is absolutely necessary, that the Intellect
and intelligible species be in him the same: whence he cannot but understand
himself by himself. For in Creatures the thing understood being brought into
the Intellect by its intelligible species or idea, hence the perfection of
Intellection dependes on these two particulars: (1) That the intelligible
Species or Idea be perfectly conform to the thing understood. (2) That it be
perfectly united to the Intellect: which is by so much the more perfectly
accomplished, by how much the more efficace the Intellect has in understanding.
But now the Divine Essence being both Intellect and intelligible Species, it
cannot but understand it self, and althings else in the most perfect manner.
Hence it is that God perfectly understandes himself, so far as he is
intelligible: he also knows himself to be of infinite Power, to have a Will
soverain, omnipotent, and universally efficacious. Whence he knows althings
else in himself, his infinite Essence and omnipotent Will.

The secundary Object of the Divine Science is althings else besides God: 2.
God knows althings.
Althings possible and future, complexe and incomplexe; althings past and
present; universal and singular, necessary and contingent, good and evil: with all the Modes, Orders, (...) or relations, which things have among themselves.
That Gods Science is really omniscient, or universally, yea infinitely
extensive to al objects intelligible is positively affirmed both in Sacred and
Platonic Philosophy. As for sacred Philosophy we find therein illustrious
notices of Gods Omniscience: as Psalm. 139.1-16. Heb. 4.13. But to give a more
particular demonstration of Gods knowing althings, we may argue it, (1) from
the infinite power of God thus: Gods knowledge is as extensive as his power: but
his power extendes to althings: therefore his knowledge. Thus Job 42.2. Job 42.2.
I know thou can do every thing: and that no thought can be withholden from
thee. Or as some render the last clause, no thought of thine can be hindered.
Which-ever way we read the words, the sense will be much the same, namely that
Gods Omnipotence is the ground and argument of his Omniscience. He that can do
althings, Psalm. 147.5.
cannot but understand althings, that he can do. The same Argument is insisted
on, Psalm. 147.5. Great is our Lord, and of great power: his understanding is
infinite. The later is a consequent of the former: The Power of God being
infinite, therefore his Understanding is infinite. Heb. (...), of his
understanding there is no number. This may be understood both extensively and
intensively: his Understanding is most perfect in it self, and most extensive
as to al objects. (2) The Omniscience of God may be demonstrated from his
Immensitie and Omnipresence: Gods Science must necessarily extend so far as his
Essence; Jer. 23.23, 24.
because his Knowledge is his Essence. Thus Jer. 23.23, 24. Am I a God at hand,
says the Lord, and not a God afar off? Can any hide himself in secret places,
that I shall not see him, says the Lord? Do not I not fill Heaven and Earth,
says the Lord? Wherein God demonstrates his Omniscience from his Omnipresence.
So Heb. 4.13. Heb. 4.13.
Neither is there any creature that is not manifest in his sight, because he is
present with all. Suppose there were a body, (as they fancied Argus) full of
eyes, or al eye, would it not discern althings round about it, without the
least turn or mutation of its posture? So God being full of eyes, or al eye,
and present with all Beings, is it possible that any thing should be hid from
him? Hence Plato held, (...), althings are full of God, and therefore nothing
could he hid from him. (3) Gods Omniscience may be argued from the Divine
Ideas, or Decrees. Althings were the object of Gods knowledge before they were
in being, by reason of his Divine Ideas, which were the original Exemplar of
althings. This Plato much insistes on, both in his Timaeus and Parmenides, as
hereafter. (4) Gods Omniscience may be demonstrated from his universal
Causalitie in giving Being unto althings. So Act. 15.18. Act. 15.18.
Known unto God are al his works from the beginning of the world. (5) Gods
Omniscience may be argued from his preservation of and providence over
althings. Plato, Leg. 10. page 901, etc. proves, That Gods Providence extendes
to the vilest and least of things, whereof he has an accurate knowledge, being
(...), the most wise Opificer and Framer of althings. For every intelligent
Worke-man must have a full knowledge of his own work; in as much as the idea or
knowledge of the Worke-man gives form to the work: whence God being the most
intelligent Framer and Disposer of althings, he cannot but have an accurate
knowledge of al.

But to descend to the particular objects of Gods Science, The Object of Gods
Omniscience.
we may distribute althings intelligible into complexe, or incomplexe. Complexe
Intelligibles are propositions and discourses: Incomplexe, 1. Complexe
Intelligibles.
real things. 1. The Divine Science has a full comprehension of al complexe
Intelligibles, or propositions and discourses, both divine and human, mental,
oral, and scriptural. Complexe Intelligibles are either antecedent to the Will
of God, or subsequent. (1) Complexe Intelligibles antecedent to the Will of God,
are such as belong to the Divine Essence: as that there is a God: That God is
eternal, immutable, etc. These God knows by his Essence alone, and not by his
Will, because antecedent thereto. Complexe Intelligibles subsequent to the
Divine Will, are al such, whose truth is caused by, and so dependes on the
Divine Will. These God knows not by his Essence simply considered, nor by the
things themselves concerning which they are affirmed or denied, but by his own
Will. For as Gods Will gives Being to althings, so al propositions that belong to
them depend on, and are known by the same Divine Will. In which regard that
commun Saying, The Reasons of good and evil are eternal, if understood as
antecedent to the Divine Will, it is most false. For there is no natural or
moral Verity belonging to any created object or term, that can be said to be
antecedent to the Divine Will. That al complexe Intelligibles or Propositions
subsequent to the Divine Will are known thereby, see Bradwardine, de Cause. l. 1.
c. 18. page 200. and Greg. Ariminensis, Sent. l. 1. Did. 38. Quaest. 2. page
135.

2. 2. Incomplexe Intelligibles.
Create incomplexe Intelligibles are either things possible, or future. (1)
Things merely possible to God are known in his Divine Essence. (2) Things
future in his Will, which gives futurition to althings. Things future as to us
are distinguished into necessary and contingent: but things contingent as to
us, are necessary in regard of the Divine Will; and therefore necessarily known
by God. That things most contingent are necessary in regard of Gods Will, and so
certainly known by him, is most evident, because they are al present to God.
For what makes a thing contingent uncertain as to us, but because it is future?
When it is present, it is certainly known what it is: wherefore althings being
present to God by reason of his Divine Will, which gives suturition to althings;
therefore they must be al, even things most contingent as to us, certainly
known by him. Even among men, those that understand the causes of things, and
their certain coherence with the effects, may have a certain knowledge of an
effect long before it is in being: so an Astrologer foresees an Eclipse: and
shall not the omniscient God, who gives Being to al Causes, and actuates them in all their causalities and causal influxes, be allowed a perfect knowledge of al
effects? Thus Homer, Iliad. (...), Who knows things present, to come, and past.
There is nothing so vile, so inconsiderable, but it falls under the omniscient
eye of God, Prove. 15.3.
as Prove. 15.3. The eyes of God are in every place beholding the evil and the
good. God knows whatever is good by his Divine Will, the productive Cause
thereof, and whatever is evil, by its opposite good, as also by the positive
Entitie or Act wherein the evil is seated, which also falls under the
determination of the Divine Will, so far as it is a real positive Being. For he
that perfectly knows a thing, must needs know all the accidents, modes, and
appendents thereof: now al Evil being but a privation of what is good, it
cannot be hid from the divine Omniscience: otherwise he should not perfectly
know the good whereof it is a privation. Again, Evil being but a privation
cannot exist but in some positive subject, neither can it be known but by the
form whereof it is a privation: which being known to God, thence the evil also
must necessarily be known to him.

The principal object among incomplexe simple Intelligibles is the heart of
man: if this be known by God, Gods Omniscience as to the human Soul.
then surely nothing can be hid. Now that the human Soul, and al its Principes,
Habits, Cogitations, Inclinations, Ends, Designs, and Acts are al known to
God, is evident both from Sacred and Platonic Philosophy. As for sacred
Philosophy, it is in nothing more positive and express. To begin with that
great series of Demonstrations, Psalm. 139.1, etc. O Lord thou have searched me
and known me. Psalm. 139.1.
(...), thou have searched me narrowly, sifted me to the bran: thou so know
me, and all that is in me, as he who knows a thing exactly, after the most
diligent and accurate inquisition. So much (...) importes, v. 2. Thou know
my down-sitting and uprising, v. 2.
thou understandest my thoughts afar off. The sense is, there is no part of my
life hid from thee: whether I sit or rise, thou know it: al mine actions and
enterprises are known by thee, as 2 Kings 19.27. al my thoughts are present to
thee, long before they are existent. Lyra interprets afar off of Eternity: my
thoughts were in thy Eternity apprehended by thee, before they were mine.
Thence it follows, v. 3. Thou compassest my path, v. 3.
and my lying down, and art acquainted with all my ways. Thou compassest, (...),
thou winnowest, or huntest my paths. And art acquainted with all my ways. (...),
thou have been accustomed, or, thou so know, as one who by long custom and
familiar acquaintance understandes a matter. In these two verses he enumerates
all the postures of the body, sitting, rising or standing, going and lying,
whereby, according to sacred Philosophy, al human actions are expressed, as
Deuteronomy. 6.7. Then he adds, v. 4. For there is not a word in my tongue, v. 4.
but lo, O Lord thou know it altogether. The sense is, before my word is
formed in my tongue, thou apprehendest it in my thought. v. 5. v. 5.
Thou have beset me behind and before; and laid thine hand upon me. (...), thou
have besieged me, or taken hold of me with a strong hand, so that I can by no
artifice fly thy presence: or, thou have arrested me, v. 6.
and seized on me as thy prisoner. v. 6. Such knowledge is too wonderful for me:
it is high I cannot attain unto it. (...), thy knowledge is mavelous above me:
i. e. this thy knowledge is so admirable and so far above my capacity, as that
I can by no means reach unto it: albeit I know thou know althings, yet I am
altogether ignorant of the mode how thou know althings, by one and the same
simple intuitive act, without discourse or succession. Thence. v. 7, 8, 9, 10.
he proves the Omniscience of God from his Omnipresence. v. 11, 12.
And v. 11. adds: If I say surely the darkness shall cover me: even the night
shall be light about me. v. 12. Yea the darkness hides not from thee, but the
night shines as the day: the darkness and the night are both alike to thee:
i. e. the most obscure things are as well known to thee, as the most evident.
Whence he adds, v. 13.
v. 13. For thou have possessed my reins, i. e. my most secret thoughts and
affections: thou have covered me in my mothers womb: i. e. thou gave me
being, and therefore can not but fully understand every thought of my heart.
How can it possibly be, but that thou should understand me fully, seeing all that I have or am was from thee? Psalm. 7.9.
So Psalm. 7.9. For the righteous God tries the hearts and reins: i. e. the
most abstruse and hidden thoughts, affections, inclinations, and movements of
the heart. Psalm. 33.13, 15.
Thus Psalm. 33.13. The Lord looks from Heaven: he knows all the sons of men.
And he gives the reason of this divine Omniscience, v. 15. He fashioneth their
hearts alike: he considers al their works. (...), who forms, frames. An
excellent reason of Gods infinite knowledge and its extent to all the thoughts,
inclinations, intentions, and affections of the Soul. As if he had said: Has
not God framed the hearts of al men? Can any thing then in the hearts of men be
hid from God, as Psalm. 34.5? The Hebrew (...) which we render alike, properly
signifies here together, i. e. al of them universally, none excepted: neither
is it to be referred to the Verb frames, but to Hearts; and so denotes Gods
exact knowledge of al men's hearts, and that upon this account, because he made
them. So Psalm. 94.11. and elsewhere. But so much for the Object of Gods Science.

As for the Mode of Divine Science, God knows althings by his own Essence.
both Sacred and Platonic Philosophic informs us, that God knows althings, not
by images, or species received from externe objects, but in and by himself, the
essential glass of the divine Intelligence. It Is true we poor mortals, who
have only a composite successive knowledge of things, cannot apprehend any
externe object, but by some abstract idea or image conveyed in and by the
senses, and impressed on the mind, as the stamp of the seal on the wax: but
the Divine Essence being most simple, without the least shadow of passive
receptive power, is not capable of such an imperfect successive mode of
understanding things. God being a pure Act contemplates in his own eternal
omnipotent Essence the Archetype of althings possible, and in his own Will, the
efficient of al future evenements. If Gods eternal Knowledge should arise from
any intelligible species or representation distinct from himself, then there
must be something eternal besides God; also passive Power, and Accidents; which
to assert is a dangerous error. One and the same Divine Essence is the
universal Exemplar or Idea of althings. For look as in Nature the more noble
and perfect Beings are the exemplars of the less noble and perfect; so the
Divine Essence, being most perfect, containing in it, in a most eminent manner,
the seminal Reasons or Ideas of althings, it thence becomes the most perfect
exemplar and glass to the Divine Understanding, wherein it sees althings. It Is
true, al Ideas of things in us, who acquire our science and knowledge by
Analysis, are taken from the objects understood, and thence impressed first on
our senses and fantasy; which is as a glass to the human understanding,
according to which it forms al its intelligible ideas, forms, or notions of
things: but it is not so with the Divine Intellect; which understandes althings
by Genesis, without analyzing of things, and therefore has althings preexisting
in himself, before they existe in themselves. In us the Ideate or thing
understood is before the Idea, and the original exemplar of al our knowledge;
but in God, his Idea is the original Exemplar, and the Ideate in the create but
a Parelius and reflexe image or similitude of the Divine Idea. Al perfections
in the Creature flowing from the efficacious Will of God, must necessarily
preexiste in the Divine Will and Essence, before they existe in themselves: as
the effect ever preexistes in its cause: hence the Divine Intellect
comprehendes in the glass of the Divine Essence al Creatures, and their proper
essences, perfections, distinctions, respects, and operations; and that in a
way not of composition, but perfect intuition. These Ideas of althings in the
Divine Essence considered absolutely are but one; yet if we consider them in
the various (...) and regards they have to the several Creatures, so we may
look on them as many: for we may conceive the Idea of a man in the Divine
Essence, as distinct from the Idea of any other Creature, though in truth it be
but the same essence. Hence that famous Essate among the Pythagorcans and
Platonistes, mentioned by Plato in his Parmenides, That God (...), one and
many, i. e. one, as to his most simple Essence, and yet many, as to the divine
Ideas, considered in their relation to the particular Ideates they refer unto.
These divine Ideas, as they are the original Exemplar of althings made, and so
the object of Gods Science, are well expressed, Heb. 11.3.
Heb. 11.3. (...), So that we may determine, that those things we see, were not
made of things apparent: or were made of those things that appear not: i. e. all the visible things of time were made according to the invisible Ideas of
Eternity: there is nothing extant in this inferior sensible world, but what
had its Idea in the superior intelligible world of Divine Ideas. Thus Plato, in
his Timaus, page 28. treating of the Origin of the Universe, says, God in the
framing thereof, (...), had an eye on the eternal Exemplar, or Idea, which as a
seal impressed its similitude on althings made. Whence that commun Saying among
the Platonistes: Plato Ideas vocar, ex quibus omnia quaecunque videmus fiunt,
and ad quas cuncta formantur. Grosseteste.
This Universe is but the imitamen of the Divine Mind. That by Plato's Ideas,
we are to understand the divine Decrees as the Exemplars of althings future,
Robert Grosseteste, that great Impugnator of the Papal Tyranny, in his acute
Tractate de Libero Arbitrio, (which is to be found in MSS. in Exeter College
Library, Oxon.) proves out of Augustine super Genesis Augustine says, Plato calls
Ideas those by which althings we see are made, and according to which althings
are formed: these are immortal, immutable, invariable. Hear what an Idea is:
(according to Plato) An Idea is of those things that are necessary: it is an
eternal Exemplar: such infinite Exemplars the natures of things, of Men, of
Trees, of Fishes, etc. have, according to which whatever ought to be made is
expressed. These Exemplars of althings God has in himself, and thereby
contains in his mind the numbers and modes of althings that are to be made or
done. He is sul of these figures or forms, which Plato calls Ideas, immortal,
invariable, infatigable. These Ideas in the Divine Mind Plato, in his
Parmenides, page 134, etc. discourses more fully of, and the sum of al his
Philosophemes about them is this, That these Ideas are most simple, immaterial,
eternal, infinite, and immutable, etc. as we have more fully explicated and
demonstrated, Court Gent. P. 2. c. 9.. 4. and Philos. Genesis P. 1. l. 1. c. 2.
sect. 5.. 3. and l. 3. c. 2. sect. 1.. 2. and c. 4. sect. 1.. 9.

Thus we see how God contemplates and knows althings in the glass of his own
Divine Essence and Ideas; How the divine Ideas represent the Creatures.
not as if the divine Ideas were to be considered as a formal concept, but only
as objective: whence they are properly styled by Plato, (...), an Exemplar,
which always importes an objective concept, according to which this or that is
framed. Thus also Bradwardine, de Cause. Dei, l. 1. c. 19. page 225. Things
understood by God move the Divine Intellect, not properly, but only
metaphorically, [or objectively,] because the Ideas and similitudes thereof are
in God, i. e. his Divine Essence, which most distinctly representes al
Inteligibles -- And because God has al these Ideas and similitudes from
himself only, and not from the things understood, which are posterior, he is
not said to be moved by them to understand, but very metaphorically and less
properly. Things future are, according to their proper existence present unto
God, yet not simply but in some respect only, namely in the Divine Will and
Prescience. So Aquinas assures us, That the Essence of God as understood by God
is the Idea of things. The Essence of God albeit it does not formally contain
things create, by a formal convenience and similitude, yet it does contain them
according to their formal representation. The very Essence of God is the
objective Exemplar of understanding himself, as also of understanding the
Creatures. The Divine Essence representes althings according to their proper
reasons: which reasons of things in God are the very creatrix Essence, which is
the exemplary representation of al Essences; as the sufficience of God is of al
things possible, and the Will of althings future. The divine Essence, which
representes althings; as an Exemplar directes the operation of God in producing
the Exemplates or things formed according thereunto. For there is something in
God that correspondes to all the perfections of Creatures: not as if there were
a formal similitude between the Idea and Ideate; but there is something
formally existing in God that representes all the perfections of Creatures. Thus
all the Creatures are in the Divine Mind representatively, albeit they are not
as to their own formal essences really the same therewith. Some over and above
this Representation, make these divine Ideas to be also energetic and operative
causes of things: but this must be understood (1) either as they are conjunct
with the divine Will, which is the prime Efficient of althings; or (2) not of a
proper efficience; but only exemplary. For an Idea in the mind of an Artificer,
albeit it work not as a proper efficient cause, yet it does work as an
exemplary cause, which is reduced to the efficient. Thus the divine Ideas may
be said to operate, as they are the grand (...) Exemplar, according to which
the divine Wisdom directes it self in the production, conservation, and
disposition of althings. These Ideas, as was hinted, are either of things
merely possible; and so they are represented by the divine Sufficience or
Essence nakedly considered, and belong to the simple Intelligence of God: or
else they are of things future; and so they are represented by the divine Will,
which is the Efficient of althings future. For look as an Artificer has an Idea
of his work; so God contemplates in his own Will the original Exemplar of
althings future, as Plato, Timeus, page 28. One and the same knowledge of God
receives diverse denominations, according to the various state of the things
known: For if the things known be only possible, then God contemplates them in
his divine Essence; but if they are future, present, or past, then he
contemplates them in the determination and decree of his Will. Hence God, by
means of these his divine Ideas, the original, universal, and perfect Exemplars
of althings, has the most perfect comprehension of althings, whether possible
or future, past or present, complexe or simple, necessary or contingent,
absolute or conditionate.

The mode of Gods Science in the general being thus explicated, Particular
Characters of Gods Science.
we hence may draw several particular essential and proper characters thereof.
1. Most simple.
As 1. hence it follows, That the Divine Science is but one simple Act, without
the least shadow of composition or division. Gods Science having one and the
same Idea with his Essence, it thence necessarily follows, that in God the
Intellect, intelligible Species, Object understood, and Act of Intellection be
one and the same. The divine Essence is a spiritual light, most intelligible,
and most intelligent of it self and althings else, in the most simple manner.
Hence Plato makes his divine Ideas (...) immixed or pure Act, without the least
mixture of Act and Power. Thus Damascene, Orthod. Fid. l. 1. c. 19. Moreover,
says he, it belongs to the Deity, (...), to know althings by a simple
knowledge, and simply to contemplate althings by its divine, omniscient, and
immaterial eye, both things present, past, and future, even before they are.
Our intellection passes from habit or power into act: but Gods intellection
admits not either habit or power, but is pure act. Where there is habitual
knowledge, there is composition of Act and Power; but the divine Essence and
Intellection being the same, there can be no such composition in either. This
is well expressed by Maximus Tyrius, that famous Platonist, Dissert. 1. where
discoursing, what God is, according to Plato, he thus describes him, page 10.
It remains, that we place God, in the principal Intellect as in a supreme
Tower. But here I see a double Intellect: (...), For one can understand, [ i.
e. it has an habit or power of understanding] albeit it does not understand, [
i. e. actually:] but the other does understand: [ i. e. always, actually: for
so he explains himself in what follows] who is not yet perfect, unless he
understand always and althings, not one after another. Wherein he assertes, [1]
that Gods Intellect is always in act, without habit or power. [2] That he
understandes althings. [3] That he understandes althings at once, not by
succession, and one thing after another. Hence,

2. Gods Science is not discursive but intuitive. 2. Gods Science. 1. Intuitive
not discursive.
For it being most simple, and the same with the divine Essence, it cannot
admit of the least succession or discourse. Our intellect takes things in, not
at once or together, but one after the other by composition, division, and
succession: as when we contemplate a man, we consider, (1) his Animalitie, then
(2) his Rationalitie, and (3) his Risibilitie. So in complexe notions, we, (1)
make a Proposition, (2) then a Syllogism, thence (3) a series or method of
discourses: And all this we do by composition and division, passing from what is
more known, to what is less known; and so taking in one after another: which
argues much imperfection in us. But now the divine Knowledge is free from al
these imperfections; it admits neither composition nor division, nor yet the
least succession; but takes in all objects by one simple intuitive act. This is
very well illustrated by Maximus Tyrius, Dissert. 1. page 10. thus: If it
pleases, we will illustrate what we have spoken by a similitude: (...), etc.
Compare the Divine Intellect to the sight, but the human to speech or
discourse: for the cast of the eye is of althings most swist: which presently,
even in the same moment, draws its object to it: but the operation of discourse
is like unto a soft pace. Or, that we may use another comparison: (...), Let us
compare the Divine Intellect with the irradiation of the Sun, which views one
whole Hemisphere of the Earth at once: but the human Intellect with the motion
of the Sun, which visits one place after another successively and gradually.
Two lively Metaphors to express the perfection of the divine Intellect beyond
the human. For first, as the eye does in a moment take in the most remote
objects, so does the divine Intellect: whereas al discourse, whereto he
compares the human intellect, is but successive and slow. Again, as the Sun
does irradiate one whole Hemisphere of the Earth in a moment, but is many hours
in its moving through it: so the divine Intellect does in a moment of Eternity
comprehend al objects; but the human is very slow and successive in its
apprehension of things. To these Platonic illustrations we may add that of
Aquinas, P. 1. Quaest. 14. Art. 13. where he compares the Intuition of God to
the vision of such as are on an high Tower or Mountain; who in a moment view a
series of objects very remote: but the human ratiocination to such as walk in
an high way, who see only things nigh and before them. It Is true, the mind of
Christians has some imperfect intuition of God here by faith, as 2 Cor. 3.18.
but it is only reflexe and in a glass: but God comprehendes althings by direct
intuition, without the least reflection. Again, Angels and glorified Souls have
some kind of direct intuition of God, without those imperfect glasses of
instituted ordinances; but yet their Intuition is only apprehensive, not
comprehensive and simultaneous as the divine Science. Lastly, Angelic and human
intuition, if real, necessarily requires the actual existence of the object;
but Gods intuition requires only the intentional existence of the object in the
divine Will: for things future are the object of Gods intuition, not as actually
existent in Eternity, as the Dominicans avouch, but only as intentionally
existent in the divine Decree or Will. Of which see more fully Twisse Scientia
Media, page 41-58. That Gods Science is not discursive may be demonstrated, (1)
because it is not successive: there is not (...), as Max. Tyrius. Al discursive
science or ratiocination procedes from Principes to Conclusions; but God views
althings in his own Essence. (2) Al discursive knowledge is composed of Act and
Power: for the Conclusions are potentially in the Principes, and drawn into
act by ratiocination: But Gods Science is pure Act. (3) In our mode of knowing
things, the more distinctly we can apprehend any thing by its own evidence and
light, the more evident and perfect is our knowledge; as in our apprehension of
first Principes: wherefore Gods mode of knowing things being most perfect, it
must necessarily be without ratiocination. (4) In all discourse the assent is
the effect caused, and the Argument is the cause: but Gods Science is not
caused. (5) In all discourse there is prioritie and posterioritie, composition
and division; which implies much imperfection, and may not therefore be
ascribed to God. (6) In all discourse there is much of ignorance mixed with our
knowledge; because it is a progression from that which is more known to that
which is less known: But Gods Science has nothing of ignorance mixed with it.
Hence,

3. Gods Science is immutable and necessary. 3. Gods Science immutable and
necessary.
This follows on the former Characters: for in as much as the divine Science is
not dependent on the objects known, but the same with his own Essence, hence it
must be necessary and immutable. Al human knowledge, being caused by Ideas
collected from the objects, is mutable and variable, as the objects are; at
least so far as it regardes singular sensible objects: for if the object be
contingent and mutable, the Science cannot be necessary and immutable: But now
the divine Science being no way dependent on the object, it is not obnoxious to
those laws of mutation and variation which the object necessarily falls under.
The Truth of our Understanding is mutable, because dependent on externe objects
and Mediums; but the Truth of the Divine Understanding immutable, and therefore
the measure of al Truth, as Aquinas well notes. This is incomparably well
illustrated by Bradwardine, l. 1. c. 24. page 244. God, says he, by reason of
his most infinite claritie comprehendes althings, and al particles of time, as
they are most truly in himself: for he needs not comparation or relation of
things past or future to the present instant, according to the manner of our
human infirmity; but he understandes althings together and most clearly by his
own Essence and Will, which represences althings uniformely and invariably. As
if there should be an immobile eye in the Center of the Heavens, which should
see by extramission and actively, as God sees, it would then always see
uniformely without al mutation every part of the Heavens turning round; and the
same part now in the East, and anon in the South, and then in the West: Thus
God in like manner sees al variable objects and parts of time, with their
distinct vicissitudes and successions, without the least variation or
succession; because he sees althings, not passively, by species and impressions
received from the things themselves, but actively in his own Essence, and Will,
the active Principe of al. We poor mortals, by reason of our infirmity, cannot
distinctly apprehend all the particles of time, always fluent and succeding each
other, and therefore we take the present instant, which of al time is most
actual and best known to us, and make it the measure of past, present, and
future time: whence our knowledge also is successive and mutable; but God, who
knows althings in his own Eternity, is not liable to such succession and
mutation: his Science being a pure necessary Act, must needs be immutable and
invariable, albeit it terminates on objects in themselves most mutable and
variable: the mutation of the object makes no mutation in the divine Science;
because the mutable object is only the secundary object of Gods knowledge: the
primary object is the divine Essence, which is immutable; and therefore the
divine Science such also. Should Gods knowledge depend on the objects known,
then it would be mutable as they are, but not otherwise. God necessarily knows
every Entitie both actual and potential: wherefore (1) he can never know any
thing that he is ever ignorant of. (2) He can never be ignorant of what he ever
knows. (3) He cannot know more of fewer things than he knows. (4) He cannot
begin to know what he before knew not, or not to know what before he knew,
because nothing begins to be future. This immutabilitie of the divine Science,
as to things future, arising from the determination of his own soverain Will,
and not from any thing in the object, is nervosely demonstrated by pious and
learned Robert Grosseteste Bishop of Lincoln, in his elaborate MSS. De Libero
Arbitrio, which lies buried in Exeter College Library, Oxon. Wherein he
copiosely demonstrates, That the Causes, Origines, and Reasons of althings
future, though in themselves never so instable, are most stable, immutable,
necessary, yea eternal in the divine Decree and Will: whence also the Divine
Science is most certain, necessary, and immutable. This he confirms by Plato's
Ideas, which are immutable and invariable exemplars of althings future, as
before. That the Divine Science is immutable and necessary, so Greg. Ariminens.
Sent. l. 1. Did. 39. page 130, 140. Hence,

4. The Divine Science is most certain and infallible. 4. Divine Science most
certain.
Thus Plato, Repub. 2. page 382. (...), etc. I judge no mortal would be really
willing both to deceive, and be deceived, or to be ignorant of supreme Beings,
much less God. The Science of God being necessary ad immutable, it cannot but
be most certain and infallible. To know things certainly, is to know them in
their causes: now Gods Will being the Cause of althings, he thence knows them
perfectly. Gods Science is as certain as the future events: for where there is
a determinate effect, there must be a determinate cause: and where the cause is
determinate, there the science also may be determinate. The knowledge of things
future in God is as certain, as the knowledge of things present: for every
future, compared to God the first Cause and his Science, is necessary and
necessarily future; albeit as compared to the second causes, some effects may
be contingent, or contingently future. The primary object of the divine Science
being infinitely perfect, namely the divine Essence, it cannot but be most
certain and infallible: if there be any certainty and infallibility in human
Science, how much more in divine Science, which penetrates al Essences and
Truths with the most perfect light, and most simple intuition, contemplating
every Being and Truth, as it is in it self, in the glass of the divine
Essence? The divine Intellect sees althings as existent in themselves, by the
infinite light of the divine Essence, and therefore most certainly and
infallibly, as Esa. 40.13, 14. Hence,

5. The D^^^^e Science is absolute and independent, not conditionate and
dependent on any create Object. Thus Plato, 5. Gods Science absolute and in
dependent.
in his Parmenides, page 134, etc. makes his divine Ideas to be (...),
self-subsistent, and independent, as to al externe objects and condition: For
otherwise, says he, God should not have a certain knowledge of and soverain
dominion over human affairs. It Is impossible, that any effect should be, or be
understood as future in any case, but dependently on its efficient cause: Now
what is the first and universal Essicient of al effects, but the Decree of the
divine Will, on which every effect dependes, more than on its proxime cause?
Therefore as nothing is antecedent to the divine Will, so no Hypothesis or
condition is cognoscible or knowable antecedently thereto. Gods knowledge as it
dependes not on the existence of created objects, so neither on any Hypotheses
or conditions that are appendent unto such objects, placed in such
circumstances. For all futures, whether absolute or conditionate, are known by
God, not from the determination of second causes, but from the determinatin of
the divine Will, which is the first Cause. For whence springs the futurition of
things, but from the determination of the divine Will? And must not then the
determination of the divine Will be precedent to the determination of the second
CAuse? And if so, may we not then hence conclude, that Gods Science arising
from the determination of his own Will dependes not on the existence of, or any
conditions that belong to future objects? If the divine Essence be (...) and
independent, must not the divine Science, which is identified therewith, be
also (...) and independent? Or if the divine Science should depend on the
mutable conditions of its object, can it be any other than conjectural? Where
any science dependes on its object, it cannot be more certain than the object
is: whatever contingence belongs to the object, will also influence the Science
and make it contingent: whence if the divine Science be certain, as without al
dispute it is, then it cannot depend on its mutable contingent object, but must
be absolute and independent. Is it less than blasphemy to conceive, that the
infinite Science of God should depend on any finite object, or finite mutable
conditions appendent thereto? Yea, is not such a conditionate Science
altogether impossible as to God? For must not the object as such be before the
act? And may we suppose any created object or condition appertaining thereto in
any regard to be before the divine Will and Science? Is not the futurition of
althing^ both objects and conditions, the effect of the divine Decree,
^^^refore in order of Nature subsequent to the divine Will? And if so, then are
not al objects and the conditions appendent thereto foreseen by God, in his
divine Decrees, without the least dependence on the things themselves or their
contingent conditions? Indeed a conditionate Science, to speak properly, is
that which as yet never existed, but will follow on the position of the
condition: whence truly such a Science cannot existe even in men, before the
condition be performed: and therefore where the condition is never performed,
it can never existe. How impossible then is it, that such a Science should be
found in God, who no way dependes on externe objects for his Science? We must
therefore conclude, that God, in the absolute and efficacious Decree of his own
Will, has predetermined al futures both contingent, free, and necessary in
particular, and thence certainly and infallibly knows them to be future, both
as to their substance and circumstances. As for sins future God certainly and
infallibly knows them both as future and present, in the determination and
permission of his own Will, whereby the create Will is determined to the entitie
of the sinful act, as a real act, and permitted as to the moral pravitie of the
act, as before, in the object of Divine Prescience. Hence,

6. The Divine Science is eternal. Thus Plato, 6. Divine Science eternal.
both in his Timaeus and Parmenides, makes his Divine Ideas to be, (...),
eternal and sempiterne. And the reason is most evident; because the Divine
Science is the same with the Divine Essence. If God should begin to know any
thing that he knew not before, his Intellection should depend on the object
known, which is impossible. Again, if God should begin to know what he knew not
before, then he should be composite or compounded of Act and Power, and so not
a pure Act: then also he should not be most perfect, and most blessed: for
every Act adds to the perfection of the habit or power. All the successions and
vicissitudes of time or things in time are foreseen by God in his Eternity, by
one simple intuitive Act. Thus Maximus Tyrius, Dissertat. 1. page 10. The
Divine Intellect is not perfect, unless it be added to it, (...), always to
understand. Thus also Aquinas, Part. 1. Quaest. 14. Art. 13. God knows al
contingents not only as they are in their own causes, but as they are each of
them actually in themselves. And albeit contingents are brought into act and
existence successively, yet God does not know them successively as they are in
their own Being, as we do, but al at once; because his knowledge is measured by
Eternity, as also his Being: but now Eternity being existent al at once, does
compass about al time: whence althings that are in time are present to God
from al Eternity, not only as the reasons of althings are present with him,
but because his intuition is from Eternity cast on althings as they are in
their presentialitie. This presentialitie must be limited to the Divine Will,
which gives futurition to althings, and so makes them present to the Divine
Understanding. Hence,

7. The Divine Science is infinitely perfect. 7. Divine Science infinitely
perfect.
Thus Plato ascribes to God, Parmenid. 134. (...), the most exquisite perfect
Science: otherwise he could not be Rector of the Universe. So Maximus Tyrius,
Dissert. 1. page 10. (...), That he be most perfect who understandes both at al
times, and althings, and at once. Psalm. 147.5.
God knows althings, always, and at once; therefore most perfectly. Thus Psalm.
147.5. Great is our Lord and of great power: his understanding is infinite: or
of his understanding there is no number: i. e. his Understanding is every may
perfect: he knows althings, and that in the most perfect manner. And it is
observable, that the Psalmist grounds the Infinitude of Gods knowledge on the
Magnitude or Infinitude of hsi Essence and Power: whereby we are informed, that
Gods knowledge dependes not on the objects known, but arises from his own
omnipotent Will and Essence. The perfection of the Divine Science may be
considered essentially, intensively, extensively. (1) Essentially, as Gods
knows himself perfectly, in himself and by himself; and althings else in
himself. God knows althings distinctly in the claritie of his own Essence:
those things that are diverse and multiplied in the Creatures, are most simply
and unitely in God: Man according to the diversity of objects, has diverse
notices or apprehensions of things. As he understandes first principes, so his
knowledge is styled Intelligence; as Conclusions flowing from first Principes,
so his knowledge is called Science; as the highest Cause, so Sapience; as things
practic and moral, so Prudence: But al these God comprehendes by one simple Act
of Intuition in his own Essence. (2) Gods knowledge is most perfect intensively.
For every Intelligent is so far perfect as to degrees of knowledge, as he
partakes of Immaterialitie. Brutes have some degree of apprehension, as they
have spirituose Souls; but these their animal Spirits being but the purer parts
of matter, therefore their apprehension is most imperfect, and not reckoned
among the species of true knowledge. Man's apprehension depending very far upon
his senses and material objects, it is therefore more imperfect than that of
Angels: yea, the Angelic Intelligence being made up of act and power, which is
a kind of metaphysic matter, hence there is much of imperfection mixed
therewith, if compared with Gods Intelligence; which being pure Act and exemt
from al matter, as well metaphysic as physic, hence it is most perfect
intensively as to al degrees of knowledge. (3) Gods Science is most perfect
extensively; not as to kinds or parts of Science, (for it is most indivisible
and simple, without al extension of parts) but as to objects; because it
extends unto al objects. God, by reason of his most infinite claritie,
comprehendes al particular things, with all the particles of time in and by
himself. God being in the highest degree immaterial, it necessarily follows,
that his Science is most ample and extensive as to its object: for every
faculty is by so much the more extensive, by how the more immaterial it is:
hence the human Intellect by its act of understanding is said to become
althings: how much more true is this of the Divine Intellect, which is in the
highest degree spiritual? The Divine Science albeit it be one most simple Act
in it self, yet it is most universal and infinite as to its object. Thus
Aquinas, contra Gent. l. 1. c. 78. proves that Gods knowledge extendes to an
infinity of things; because God perfectly knows his own Virtue and Power,
which is infinite. Again, by how much the more efficacious and clear any
Intellect is in knowing, by so much the more able it is from one to gather many
things: But now the Divine Intellect being infinitely efficacious, it must
therefore necessarily extend to an infinitude of objects. So Bradwardine, l. 1.
c. 1. page 7. proves, That the Scientivitie of God and his Intellect is never
satisfied with any finite or infinite number of existent singulars, of any one
species, or al; but infinitely excedes each of them, yea, a whole multitude of
al, if they could be congregated together. That the Science of God is most
perfect essentially, intensively, and extensively, see Suarez, Metaph. Disp.
30. Sect. 15. page 121.

Having largely discussed the essential Modes or Characters of the Divine
Science, we now proceed to its distinctions, Gods simple Ditelligence.
with relation to its objects. For albeit the Divine Science be in it self one
simple Act, identified with the Divine Essence, yet this hinders not but that
we may, by some inadequate conception of reason, distinguish this Science, by
reason of its object, into different kinds. The commun distribution of Gods
Science is into simple Intellience, and Science of Vision. 1. Gods Science of
simple Intelligence is of althings possible; which he contemplates in the
Alsufficience of his Essence. For God being in the highest degree Intelligent,
he must necessarily understand althings that are intelligible: but now whatever
may be, may also be known: wherever there is a possibility of existence,
there is some intelligibilitie. Again, God perfectly knows his own Essence and
Power: therefore he perfectly knows not only what is future, but also whatever
is possible. Not that the existence of things possible is known by God, but
only their Essence, which he contemplates in his own EssEnce. Hence this
Science of simple Intelligence is called by some Abstractive; because it
abstractes from the actual existence of its object.

2. Gods Science of Vision, Gods Science of Vision as to things future.
is that whereby he knows things as future, in and upon the Decree of his Will.
Here we must premit, that when we say, Gods Science of Vision terminates on
things as future, the conjunctive Particle As, must be taken not formally, as
if it denoted any reason of the Divine Cognition taken from the futurition of
the thing, but only materially; and so it denotes only thus much, that Gods
knows things future to be future, and that by the determination of his own Will.
Bradwardine, de Cause. Dei, l. 1. c. 18. page 220, etc. largely demonstrates
these Propositions. (1) That God does not know things future merely by his
Essence, without the determination of his Will; because nothing is in its own
nature future, but by the Decree of the Divine Will. (2) That God does not know
things future by the Divine Intellect only: because the Divine Intellect
considered in it self is not practic, but only as subsequent to the Divine Will.
(3) That God does not know things future by the Infinity of the Divine
Science: because the Infinity of the Divine Science being supposed, it does
not thence necessarily follow, that this or that thing be future. (4) That God
does not know things future by the knowledge of their second Causes: For such a
knowledge implies discourse from the cause to the effect: again, such a knowledge
would be contingent when the second causes are such. (5) That God does not know
things future by the Infinity or Immensitie of his own Scibilitie or
Scientivitie. (6) That god does not know things future by the sole permission
of his own Will: because then Gods knowledge should not be certain. Hence he
positively concludes, God knows things future by his Will.
(7) That God knows things future by that which gives them their futurition,
namely by his Divine Will. For, as Aristotle 1. Post. 2. instructes us, To know
a thing is to know it by its cause: and is not the Will of God the first Cause
that gives futurition to althings? Again, how can God certainly know future
contingents, such as al human acts are, but in and by some necessary certain
cause? And what certain necessary cause can there be of future contingents but
the Divine Will? We may not then search for the causes of Divine Prescience in
things future, but in the cause of their futurition, the determination of the
Divine Will. Not as if the decree or determination of the Divine Will, whereby
things become future, did in any moment of Nature precede the Divine
Prescience; but in one and the same moment of Nature God decrees what shall be
future, and foresees it future. Thence he takes the reason of his knowing
things future, not simply from his Essence, or sufficience; nor yet from their
presentialitie to God, as the Dominicans persuade us, but from the
determination of his own Will. Certainly Gods Will is most efficacious,
omnipotent, immutable, and most known to himself: and therefore it is
necessary, that whatever he wills should be future, be so, and known to him to
be so: for he wills not only the things themselves, but also al their modes and
conditions of contingence, necessity, liberty, etc. Whatever gives any thing
its futurition must necessarily also give it its cognoscibilitie or
intelligibilitie as future: wherefore the Divine Will giving the former, it
cannot also but give the later. Damascene, Orthodox. Fid. l. 1. c. 12. tells us,
that (...) God may be deduced from (...) to see: (...), for nothing can be hid
from God, yea he is the Inspector of althings. And then he gives us the mode
how God comes to know althings: (...), For he beholds althings before they
are produced, eternally understanding every thing, according to his voluntary
eternal Intelligence: i. e. his eternal Intelligence grounded on his own Will.
Thus Bradwardine, de Cause. Dei. l. 1. c. 19. page 226. But here we must know,
that a thing as future in the Divine Will and Predestination causally, and not
extrinsecally in its own proper nature, is the cause [or object] of the Divine
Science or Prescience: For God no way needs extrinsec things as objects of his
knowledge; but he has althings future with himself intrinsecally cognitive,
causative, intuitive, seu scientifice, cognitively, causatively, intuitively,
or scientificly from himself only; and so he knows althings, etc. So also Cap.
18. page 223. God, says he, knows things future, by that whereby they are
future, namely by his Divine Will. And he urges for this that Principe of
Aristotle, 1. Post. 2. To know a thing certainly is to know it by its cause:
But now God knows al futures certainly, therefore by their most true cause,
even that which virtually contains al other causes and causations; and this is
no other than his own will. That God knows althings future in the determination
of his own Will was the commun Hypothesis of the ancient Scholastic Theologues,
as of Augustine before them. So Robert Grosseteste in his M. SS. De Libero
Arbitrio.

Thus Scotus assures us, That the Root of the Divine Science as to future
Contingents is the determination of the Divine Will: which determination is not
only necessary to cooperate with the free Creature, but also to determine the
Will of the Creature to act freely. This Hypothesis is also excellently well
explicated and demonstrated by Alvarez, de Anxil. Great. l. 2. Disp. 7. p. 106.
God, says he, in the absolute efficacious Decree of his own Will,
predetermining in particular al future Contingents, as also free acts, knows
certainly and infallibly those to be future, as to al circumstances, as well as
to their substance. Therefore from this Decree there may be assigned a
sufficient Reason of the certitude of Divine Science as to al futurs, which are
not morally evil. And he thus proves his Hypothesis; A determinate cause, which
is so efficacious as that it cannot be hindered by any other cause, must needs
infallibly produce its effect: but such is the Divine Decree. Ergo. Then p.
108. he explicates how God knows sin: God certainly and infallibly knows al
future sins in that Decree, whereby he decrees to predetermine the create Will
to the entitie of the act of sin, so far as the act is ens, and to permit the
moral evil of sin as sin, etc. as before.

3. The Jesuits superadde to the two former Sciences of simple Intelligence
and Vision, Scientia media.
Scientia Media, a middle Science, whereby God is supposed to foresee such or
such events to be future, on condition that such or such causes he so or so
constituted. This Middle Science (1.) supposes that some events are certainly
future independently as to the Will of God; which is altogether impossibly: for
a thing merely possible cannot pass from its state of possibility to a state
of Futurition, without some cause of that transmutation: now there can be no
cause of futurition but the Divine Will, as we shall prove hereafter. Nothing
can be future either absolutely or conditionately, but what the Divine Will has
decreed shall be future: therefore the object of this Middle Science cannot be
things future, but only possible. Does not this Middle Science, by feigning
that future which is only possible, overthrow the very foundation of the Divine
Science as to things future? Is it not impossible, that the prescience of a
thing future should precede the decree of its futurition? So Avarez, de Auxil.
l. 2. cap. 7. Nothing can make a thing cognoscible as future, but what gives
futurition thereto: And what gives futurition to any thing, but the decree and
determination of the Divine Will? (2) It supposes Gods Science to depend upon
its object, which also is impossible; because then it should be variable and
mutable as the object is. Yea, to speak properly, the object of this Middle
Science is not at al cognoscible or knowable: For nothing is knowable farther
than it is clothed with some degree of necessity, at least as to essence or
existence: what is not either necessarily existent or future, cannot be known:
now the object of this Middle Science is not either existent or future:
therefore not cognoscible. Again, God takes not the reason or idea of his
cognition from the things themselves or any Hypotheses they fall under, which
are al variable, but from the invariable determination of his own Will, as
before. It Is true, our Intuition and Cognition is formed by a passive reception
of species from its object; Nostra intuitio fit patiendo abobjectis, non sic
intuitio divina.
and therefore it is murable and variable, according to the variations of the
object: but can we imagine, that this imperfect mode may attend the Divine
Intuition and Cognition? Should the principe and reason of the Divine Cognition
proceed from and depend on its finite object, must not God also be finite,
passive, and dependent? Is not the Divine Idea before its Ideate, yea eternal?
How then can it depend thereon? (3) This Middle Science supposes the Divine
Science to be only conjectural and uncertain. For such as the object is, such
is the Science thereof: a contingent object cannot give a necessary certain
Science: al Logic scientific necessity is founded in physic necessity: That
which may otherwise be, cannot be necessarily known: as Gods knowledge would be
false, if he knew those things to be future which shall never be; so would it be
uncertain, if the object be not certainly future: if the object be certainly
future, it must have a certain cause of its futurition, which can be no other
than the Will of God. But now, according to this hypothetic Middle Science, God
cannot divine which way man's Free Will will incline it self, before it has
inclined to this or that object. and does not this render the knowledge of God
only conjectural, yea no knowledge at al? For how can a thing be certainly known
to be future, without some cause determining it to be such? That Gods knows
althings future, though never so contingent in themselves, most certainly in
the determination of his own Will, see Greg. Ariminens. Sent. l. 1. Did. 38.
Quaest. 2. also Grosseteste, de Libero Arbitrio. Wherefore if God has a certain
prescience of future contingents, as without al peradventure he has, we must
search for the causes of this Divine Prescience, not in the extrinsec objects,
which can never give it, but in God himself, and in the determination of his
own Will, in regard of which al future contingents are necessary; not
absolutely, but hypothetically, on supposition of the said determination. (4)
This Middle Science enervates and destroys the Grace of God. [1] It destroys
the Grace of Election; in that it supposes, that Peter could from his own
free will, consent to the Call of God, provided he were put under such
circumstances, and invested with such commun aides, even antecedently to his
Election to Grace and Glory; which they make to follow the prevision of his
Faith by this Middle Science. And thus the whole of Election dependes on the
improvement of Free Will, and the prevision thereof by this Middle Science. [2]
It enervates and dispirits the whole of Christ's Redemtion; in that it makes all the efficace of Christ's Death dependent on the prevision of man's assent and
consent to him as Lord. It supposes that Christ died for no man absolutely,
but only on condition that men by their corrupt Will embrace him. [3] It
overthrows efficacious Grace in the vocation and conversion of sinners; in that
it resolves al into a moral capacity or power in corrupt Nature to convert it
self. [4] It subvertes the Covenant of Grace; in resolving the whole of it into
a Covenant of Works. [5] It destroys the Grace of Perseverance; in that it
makes the perseverance of the Saints dependent on their own mutable Free Will.

. 3. As for the Will of God, The Will of God.
although it be not really different from his Understanding and Essence, yet we
may, in regard of its effects, conceive of it as in some manner distinct. The
Will of God is taken either properly, for the Divine Volition, Intention, or
Decree, whereby althings receive their Futurition and Existence; or else
improperly, for the legislative, declarative, significative Will of God; which
is the measure of our duty. The former is that which we are first to discourse
of, whereof we find lively notices in Sacred Philosophy; and something also in
Plato, Phileb. p. 16. where being about to Philosophise of the Divine Will, as
the original Exemplar or Idea of althings future, he makes this Preface: (...),
For althings that ever were invented, being joined together by a certain
affinity and cognation with Art, by means hereof are declared. His meaning
seems to be this, that look as althings made by Art have their Idea in the mind
of the Artificer, according to which they are framed; so althings of Nature
have their Idea in the Divine Mind and Will, according to which they are
accurately formed. Thence he adds: And truly the Ancients, who were better
than we, and lived nearer to God, delivered to us this report or Tradition,
(...), That althings consist of ONE and MANY, which are said ever to be. (1)
That by these Ancients, whence this Oriental Tradition came, we must understand
primarily the Hebrews, has been sufficiently demonstrated, P. 2. B. 3. C. 2.
and elsewhere. (2) That by this ancient tradition of One and Many, we must
understand the Divine Essence and Ideas or Decrees of the Divine Will seems also
manifest. Whence he subjoins; (...), That we ought, things being thus
constituted, always to inquire after one Idea of every thing in particular,
and accurately to observe the same, etc. That by this ONE IDEA, which we are to
inquire after, must necessarily be understood the Decree of the Divine Will, I
think will be evident to any, that seriously considers Plato's Philosophemes of
the Divine Ideas, delivered in his Timaus, and Parmenides, of which before, P.
2. B. 3. c. 9.. 4. And indeed he seems positively to assert, Parmenid. p. 134.
That the Origin of these Ideas cannot be in the object, but must be in the
Divine Essence and Will. We shall reduce the whole of our Philosophemes about
the Divine Will to the following Propositions.

1. Prop. God primarily Wills himself, and althings else in subordination to
himself. The Object of the Divine Will.
(1.) That the Divine Essence is the primary object of the Divine Will. is most
evident; [1.] because the principal thing willed is to every one the cause of
willing: if therefore God should have any other principal object of his Will
besides himself, he should have something besides himself as the cause of his
willing; which is impossible: for nothing can move the Divine Will but his own
Bonitie. [2] The Divine Essence is most amabile and appetible for it self,
therefore the primary object of the Divine Will. [3] The primary object of the
Will ought to be equally proportionable thereto: for the virtue and efficace of
a faculty is measured by its commensuration and Adequation to its primary
object: and what is equally proportionable to the Divine Will, but the Divine
Essence? Hence, (2) God by willing himself, wills althings else in subordination
to himself. For he that wills an end, wills althings else in order thereto. God
wills althings in order to his own Bonitie: The Will of God terminates on other
things so far as they relate to the Divine Bonitie, and participate thereof:
God wills himself Necessarily, but althings else so far as they relate to
himself. Hence (1) God wills al singular Goods, so far as they partake of
goodness. For God willing himself as his last end, wills althings so far as they
conduce to himself: but every thing so far as it is good participates of, and
tends to the Divine goodness: therefore as such it is willed by God. Hence,

2. Prop. The Will of God considered in it self is but one, simple, indivisible,
pure Act. The Divine Will one pure Act.
Thus Plato, Phileb. 16. says, we ought always to inquire after, (...), one
idea of althings. Whereby he notes, that the Divine Will, as the origin of all
things, is but one. The multitude of objects willed is no way repuguant with
the Unity and Simplicity of the Divine Will: for God by one simple act wills
himself and althings else. Althings are one in the Divine Will and Bonitie; in
as much as the Divine Bonitie is the exemplar of al Bonitie; and the Divine Will
by one and the same act wills both the Divine Bonitie and al other Bonitie. It
is otherwise with the Humane Will, which by one act wills the end, and by
another, the means conducing to the end: whence the willing the end is the
cause of willing the means: but in the Divine Will there is no such causalitie
of end and means to be found; in as much as by one and the same simple act it
wills both end and means: and al grant, that the same thing cannot be the cause
of it self. Thence Suaxez Metaple. Disput. 30.. 16. p. 127, etc. proves, That
Gods Will is not a real power, but the last pure Act: for there is no receptive
power in God: althings that are in God are as actual as his effence, and as
pure from all Potentialitie. Hence,

3. Prop. The Divine Will is most Soverain and Independent. The Divine Will
Independent.
Thus the Platonistes generally assert, that the Divine Will is (...), without
cause, and Independent: and Plato makes his Divine Ideas to be (...),
Self-subsistent and Independent; because althings else depend on them, but they
on nothing else. This Independence and Self-subsistence of the Divine Will is
set forth in Sacred Philosophy under the notion of a Foundation, 2 Timothy 2.19.
2 Timothy 2.19.
The foundation of the Lord stands sure, the Lord knows who are his. (...)
notes the firm purpose of the Divine Will: As those that build great Palaces lay
a firm foundation, which dependes not on any part of the Structure, but the
whole Structure dependes on it; so God being to build a Celestial House, lays
the eternal purpose of his own Will as a self-subsistent independent foundation,
on which the whole dependes. This Soveraintie and Independence of the Divine
Will the Hebrews expressed by the name (...) Adonai, which denotes Gods Soverain
Dominion over the Creature, from (...) a pillar or basis, on which the whole
Fabric dependes, but it dependes not on the Fabric: so althings depend on the
Soverain Will of God, but it on nothing. Thus Plato, Epist. p. 312. (...), About
the King of althings, althings are: and althings are for his sake (...) and he
is the cause of althings beautiful. Wherein note, (1) th^^e styles God (...),
The Sovereign King or Lord of al, i. e. according to the origination of the
word, (...) the basis of al answerably to the import of Adonai, Lord. (2) He
says althings are for God, i. e. to be disposed of according to his Soverain
Will and pleasure. And (3) he adds the Reason, because he is the cause of
althings. i. e. God, by virtue of his prime causalitie and efficience, has an
universal Dominion over al things, to dispose of them as he pleases for his
Glory. The light of Nature teaches, that every one ought to be the supreme
moderator of his own work: Hence what ever God wills is just, because he wills
it. This Soveraintie and Independence of the Divine Will is lively expressed,
Psalm. 135.5. Psalm. 135.5, 6.
For I know that Jehova is Great, and that our Lord is superior to al Gods,
Jehovah, i. e. the first Supreme Being, who gives being to althings, but
receives nothing from any Creature. Is Great, i. e. Infinite in being, and
therefore most Soverain and Independent in his Will and Pleasure. Whence it
follows: and superior to al Gods: i. e. infinitely above Angels and Men, though
never so potent; who al depend on his soverain independent Will. Thence he
adds, v. 6. Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that did he in Heaven and in Earth.
(...), whatsoever the Lord wills: which notes the Soveraintie, Independence,
and Omnipotence of his Will. Jonah 1.14.
So Jonah 1.14. For thou O Lord have done as it pleased thee (...), according
to thy soverain independent Will. The greatest Notions or Attributes that our
shallow judgments can invent, are infinitely too short to express the
Soveraintie of the Divine Will.

But the more fully to explicate and demonstrate the Soveraintie and
Independence of the Divine Will, God independent physically and morally.
we are to consider that as causes, so dependence on those causes is twofold;
physic, or moral: Physic Dependence is that whereby an inferior dependes on a
superior Cause for real efficience: Moral Dependence is that whereby an
inferior dependes on its superior for moral influence. And there is this commun
to both: as in Naturals inferior causes dependent on superiors in acting, have
no power to act contrary to the efficace of their superiors; so in Morals. But
now God is neither physically nor morally dependent on any superior cause. (1)
He has no physic dependence on any superior cause; because he is the first in
the order of physic Causes: Again, he is superior to al Gods, as Psalm. 135.5.
and therefore cannot be influenced by any. So Plato, Repub. assur^^ (...),
(...), That an hypocrite is neither able to hide himself from God, nor yet to
force him. The Divine Will receives no real efficience or influence from the
human Will, but the human Will is really influenced by the Divine Will: God wills
not things, because we will them; but we will things, because God wills them. (2)
Neither is God morally dependent on any other. Moral dependence is founded in
natural: where there is natural independence in an absolute degree, there
cannot be moral dependence in any degree: The rational Creature having a
twofold relation to God, as a Creature, and as rational, hence he has a twofold
dependence on God, one natural, the other moral: but God being independent as
to his Essence, must necessarily also be independent as to Morals. Moral
dependence is either Legal, or Final: Legal dependence is, when an inferior
dependes on the Laws, Remunerations, or Distributions of any Superior. Final
Dependence is, when an inferior dependes on some supreme last end. The Divine
Will is in neither regard dependent. [1] It is not legally dependent; because
not subject to the law of any. The Divine Will gives Laws to al Creatures, but
receives Laws from none: yea, it has no legal dependence on any meritorious
acts of the Creature: God wills nothing without himself, because it is just;
but it is therefore just, because he wills it: The reasons of good and evil
extrinsec to the Divine Essence are al dependent on the Divine Will either
decernent or legislative. [2] The Divine Will has no final dependence on any
superior end; because its own Bonitie is its only end. The End is the Cause,
Reason, or Motive of willing althings that conduce to the End: but now nothing
can move the Will of God, but his own Bonitie; which indeed is the same with his
Will and Essence: wherefore it cannot be properly said to be the cause of his
Will; because nothing is said to be the cause of it self. When Theologues
affirm, That God wills one thing for another, they mean not, that the other
thing is the cause or motive of the Divine Will; but that God wills there should
be a causal connection between the things willed. As God willed the Sun, Moon,
and Stars should be for the production of fruits, and these for the use of man,
etc. Gods willing one thing for another notes a causal connection between the
things willed, but no causal influence on the Divine Will: Deus vult hoc propter
hoc: non autem propter hoc vult hoc. Ephesians. 1.4, 5.
God wills this for that, yet for this he does not will that: i. e. God wills
effects and causes; and that the effects are for the causes; yet he does not
will the effects for the causes, as if the causes were the motives of his Will.
Thus we must understand that Text, Ephesians. 1.4. According as he has chosen us in
him before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and without
blame before him in love. How are the Elect chosen in Christ? (1) Negatively,
they are not chosen in Christ, as the meritorious Cause of Election; nor from a
prevision of their Faith in Christ, as the motive of Divine Election, according
to the Pelagian Hypothesis. But (2) They are said to be chosen in Christ, as
their commun Head, that by him they might be made new Creatures, and so
partakers both of Grace and Glory. Christ and Faith have no causal influence
on the Divine Will; but the Divine Will decrees, that Christ and Faith should
have a causal influence on Salvation. Thence it follows, v. 5. Having
predestined us unto the Adoption of Children by Jesus Christ unto himself,
according to the good pleasure of his Will. Here Christ is brought in as the
meritorious, antecedent Cause of our Adoption, but as an effect and consequent
of Election: For so much the Particle (...) by denotes, namely that Christ as
Mediator is the effect of Predestination or Election, but the cause of our
Adoption. This is strongly argued by Augustine in his Book, De Praedestinatione
Sanctorum. And surely if the Merits of Christ have no causal influence on the
Will of God, much less can man's Faith or Merits influence the same. Thence he
adds: according to the good pleasure of his Will: which argues the Independence
of his Will. Thus we see how God wills Christ and Faith for the Salvation of the
Elect, and yet does not will the Salvation of the Elect for Christ and Faith as
the moving causes of his Will, which is most independent. So God wills both the
means and the end; and the means for the end; yet he does not for the end will
the means, as if the end did move him to will the means. For in God the volition
of one thing is not the cause of his willing another; because there can no
efficience of cause on effect, or dependence of effect on the cause be affirmed
of the Divine Will, which is but one simple indivisible act both as to end and
means; and therefore neither one nor the other can be said to move or influence
the Divine Will; albeit the same Divine Will does will a causal connection between
the things willed: in which regard Scholastic Theologues assign reasons of the
Divine Will, affirming, That the passive attingence of the Divine Will in respect
of one thing, is the cause of its passive attingence in regard of another
thing, albeit neither the cause of the Divine Will: i. e. to speak natively and
properly, God wills that one thing shall depend on another, yet the Divine Will
neither dependes on nor is moved by either Gods soverain independent Will is full
of reasons, as to the admirable dependence of the things willed, according to
their subordinations, yet there may not be the least reason or shadow of reason
assigned as the cause or motive of the Divine Will. Thus Ephesians. 1.11. Ephesians.
1.9, 11.
Who works althings according to the counsel of his Will. (...). There is the
highest counsel and wisdom in the Divine Will, and yet no reason or cause can
be assigned of it. So v. 9. Having made known to us the mystery of his Will,
according to his good pleasure, which he has purposed in himself. The Divine
Will is here said to be (1) full of mysterious wisdom, whereof no reason can be
assigned without it self. Thence, (2) it is styled good pleasure, which denotes
its Soveraintie and Independence. Hence (3) it is said to be in it self: i. e.
no reason or cause extrinsec to it self can be assigned thereof: though it be
full of mysterious wisdom and sublime reasons, yet they are al within it self.
That there can no cause either physic or moral, legal or final be assigned of
the Divine Will is evident; (1) because the Divine Will is one simple, pure Act;
and therefore not capable of any Passion, Impression, and Causalitie from any
extrinsec object. (2) Because althings else are the effects of the Divine Will,
and therefore cannot be the cause thereof: because the same thing cannot be the
cause of it self. (3) Because the Divine Will is eternal; but althings else of
finite duration: and is it possible, that what is temporal and finite should
influence what is eternal and infinite? That there can be no cause of the
Divine Will, see Aquinas, Part. 1. Quaest. 19. Art. 5. and contra Gent. lib. 1.
cap. 87. Hence,

4. Prop. The Divine Will it immutable. The Divine Will immutable.
This Immutabilitie of the Divine Will arises from the Independence,
Simplicity, and Immutabilitie of the Divine Essence, with which it has an
essential connection, yea identitie. Plato discourses accurately of the
Immutabilitie of the Divine Will, both in his Philosophemes of Divine Ideas, as
also in his Phaedo, page 78. where he proves, that the Divine Essence and Will
is (...), etc. one uniforme Being, which existes of it self, and is always the
same, without the least degree of mutation, etc. of which more fully before, in
Gods Immutabilitie, cap. 4.. 5. But this Immutabilitie of the divine Will is
more clearly illustrated and demonstrated in sacred Philosophy. Thus Psalm.
33.10. Psalm. 33.10, 11.
The Lord brings the counsel of the Heathen to naught. (...), he has
infringed, dissipated, made void: from (...) to break. Thence it follows: He
makes the devices of the people of none effect. (...), he has broken: from
(...) to break, properly the mind or purpose. The divine Will delights to break
and dash in pieces the strongest resolutions and most fixed purposes of proud
men. But then follows the Immutabilitie of the divine Will, v. 11. The counsel
of the Lord stands for ever; the thoughts of his heart to al generations.
(...), the fixed counsel, or determinate purpose of Jehovah. Stands for ever:
i. e. is inviolable and immutable. This verse contains the Antithese of the
precedent; whereby David teaches us, that the divine Will makes void the proud
will of man, but no human will can frustrate or alter the divine Will, as Job
12.13, 14. Thus Psalm. 119.89. For ever O Lord thy word is settled in Heaven.
Psalm. 119.89.
(...) is fixed, established. R. Ezora understandes this of the decrees or
purposes of the Divine Will, which are firm, stablished, and immutable. So
Malach. 3.6. I am the Lord, I change not; therefore the Sons of Jacob are not
consumed. I change not: This regards the Will of God, as well as his essence; so
much the subsequent inference importes: for the reason why the Sons of Jacob
are not consumed, must be resolved into the immutable Will of God, as the
original cause. It Is true, the things willed by God are often under mutations;
and God wills those mutations; but with an immutable will: the mutation reaches
not the will of God, but only the things willed by God; who wills this thing shall
be now, and the contrary afterward, without the least alteration in his will. A
will is then said to be changed, when any begins to will that, which he before
nilled; or to nil that, which he before willed: which cannot be supposed to
happen, but in case of some mutation in knowledge, or disposition: but neither
of these can be affirmed of God. (1) God is infinitely wise, and foresees al
contingences, circumstances, and accidents that may happen; and therefore
cannot alter his thoughts or purposes for want of wisdom, as we poor mortals
frequently do. (2) Gods disposition toward al objects is ever the same. (3)
The human will is obnexious to mutations, from impotence and want of power to
accomplish what we will: but the Divine Will is omnipotent and irresistible, as
Esa. 46.10. (4) If the Divine Will were mutable, God could not have a certain
prevision of future contingents: because the certainty of Gods prevision
supposes a certainty of Divine Ideas and Decrees in the will of God: for Gods
Science of Vision or foresight of things future arises from his Will, which
gives althings their futurition. But it is objected from Scripture, That God is
said sometimes to repent: and al repentance denotes a change of the will. The
Response is sacile: when Scripture ascribes repentance to God it is only
improperly and in condescendence to our fragile capacity, thereby to denote a
change, not in the Will of God, but in his dispensation toward the Creature,
upon some change in the Creature: So upon the repentance of the Ninevites God
repented, i. e. changed his dispensation toward them. Otherwise, when the
Scripture speaks properly of Repentance, it says expressly, That God is not
as man, that he should repent, Number. 23.19. 1 Samuel 15.29.

5. Gods Will Absolute, not conditionate.
Prop. Gods Will is Absolute, not conditionate. The Divine Will receives no
conditions from the human Will, but gives al to it. So Jam. 4.15. For that ye
ought to say, If the Lord will. Jam. 4.15.
This was an ancient saying mentioned by Bensyra, Sent. Moral. xi. Let man
never say, he will do any thing, before he has prefaced this, If the Lord Will.
And we find something answerable hereto, in Plato, Alcibiad. p. 135. where
Socrates instructs Alcibiades, that he must say, he will do so and so, (...). If
God will. So in his Laches: (...), But I will do this, and come to thee to
morrow, if God will. By which it is evident both from Sacred and Platonic
Philosophy, that our Will must expect and receive al conditions from the Divine
Will, but impose or ascribe none to it. There are several Textes of Scripture
which some urge to prove a conditionate Will in God: as Psalm. 81.13, 14. Ezech.
33.11. Mat. 23.37. Joh. 3.16. (1) As for the two first Textes, Psalm. 81.13, 14.
and Ezech. 33.11. Ezech. 33.11.
it seems most probable, that they refer primarily to temporal deliverance and
destruction, specially that of Ezech. 33.11. as it appears by v. 2, 3. (2) If
we understand these Scriptures as referring to matters of Salvation, then they
note only Gods Will (...) of complacence, not his Will (...) of Beneplacite. So
(...) which Ezechiel uses, signifies not simply to will, but to acquiesce in a
thing. And then the sense is, that Gods (...) or complacence is not in the
Death of sinners simply as such, but in this, that men turn from their sins
and live. But (3) our principal response is this: God declares by these and
such like Scriptures his gratiose propensions and inclinations toward penitent
sinners: [1] Hereby to demonstrate that intime and indissoluble connection,
which he has, according to his Evangelic Constitution, established between
sincere Reppentance and Salvation. [2] That so these general Declarations and
Invitations of Sinners to repent might prove an efficacious instrument of
particular vocation and conversion to the Elect. For Gods Free Grace albeit it
be in it self absolute and particular; yet it is proposed to sinners in
Indefinite and Universal Propositions, thereby the more efficaciously to allure
and draw their hearts to the embracement thereof. [3] Hereby impenitent Sinners
are left without al excuse; in as much as God has so freely and cordially
offered Mercy to them, would they but embrace the same. All this implies no
proper conditionate Will in God, but only some conditions in the externe
propositions and offers of his Grace; which God confers on the Elect. There are
many Scriptures that speak Gods Will to be Absolute. Romans 9.11.
So Romans 9.11. That the purpose of God according to Election might stand, not
of Works, etc. Where (...) notes Gods free absolute purpose or Decree, no way
dependent on any merits or conditions in the Creature: which Romans 11.5. he
terms, (...), according to the election of Grace: i. e. Gods free absolute
Will. The like, 1 These. 1.4. and 3.5.

That God wills nothing conditionally is evident (1) from the impossibility of
such a Will in God. For if God wills any thing conditionally, he wills that
condition also, or not: if he does not will the condition, then it is impossible
that it should be; and so God is said to will things on impossible conditions;
and then by consequence to will things impossible; which is too great a reproach
to be cast on the Deity: If God wills the condition, then he wills it either
absolutely or conditionally: if absolutely, then his will is absolute: for to
will a thing conditionally, and yet to will the condition absolutely, is to will
the thing it self absolutely. If God wills the condition conditionally, then the
condition of this later condition, conditionally: which opens the door for a
progress into infinite. (2) If Gods Will should be conditionate, then it would
hang in suspense, and depend on the humane will; and so it should be in the
power of the human will to make void and frustrate the Divine Will: yea the
Divine Will should be more in the power of man's will, than the will of the most
miserable slave is in the power of his Lords will. This destroys the Soveraintie
and Independence of the Divine Will. (3) To suppose the Divine Will to be
conditionate takes away the futurition of that thing it wills: for nothing can
be future of it self, without some cause of its futurition: and there can be no
cause assigned why a thing should pass from being only possible to future, but
the Divine Will. (4) To suppose a conditionate will in God destroys the
certainty of Divine prescience: for if the condition hang in suspense, and be
not willed by God, the thing willed cannot be certainly known. (5) A
conditionate will ascribes to God imperfection, in that it supposes his will to
be incomplete, inefficacious, passive, dependent, mutable, etc. But yet take
notice, that albeit we exclude al conditions from the Divine Will, yet we do not
exclude them from the things willed: The things willed may be conditionate, and
yet the Divine Will absolute. Hence,

6. Prop. Gods Will is Antecedent not Consequent. Gods Will antecedent, not
consequent.
The distinction of Gods Will into Antecedent and Consequent, albeit it were by
some of the ancient Scholastic Theologues made use of as to the things willed,
yet as it is now generally used by the Jesuits and their Sectators, and
applied to the immanent will of God, it is most injurious to him. That Gods Will
is ever Antecedent, is plainly evident from Sacred Philosophy. So Act. 13.48.
Act. 13.48.
And as many as were ordained to eternal life believed. (...) ordained here
cannot signify disposed or prepared, as the Remonstrants and their Sectators
would persuade us: for (...) differs much from (...), neither is it any where
in Scripture or any Greek Author, as I can learn, used to signify an interne
Quality or Disposition; but it generally signifies to Ordain, primarily in
military affairs; and thence in any other matters. So Act. 22.10. (...). And
that (...) cannot be here taken nominally, but must signify Ordained, is most
evident from the sense: For it is said, they were ordained to eternal life, as
the term; not unto faith only, as the means: wherefore if (...) should
signify disposed, the sense must be, they were disposed to eternal life, as
many as were disposed: for what is faith but a disposition to eternal life?
It Is most evident therefore, that (...) must signify not nominally, but
participally such as were ordained unto eternal life as the term, and unto
faith as the means, by the absolute and antecedent will of God. That Gods Will
properly so termed is ever Antecedent and never Consequent may be demonstrated,
(1) From the Eternity of Gods will. According to Plato, the Idea or Decree of
the Divine Will is ever (...), eternal and sempiterne: Now if the will of God and
its Ideas be al eternal; then not any one of them can be consequent to any act
of the Creature, which is in time. (2) From the Simplicity, Independence, and
Immutabilitie of the Divine Will. A consequent will in God supposes his Divine
Will to hang in suspense, and dependent on the mutable ambulatorie will of man:
and is it possible, that the prime cause should depend on, or be influenced by
the inferior second cause? What? must the Supreme Soverain Will attend, yea
subserve the nods and becks of human created will? The act of willing in God
cannot depend on any act of the creature as something consequent thereto;
because then as often as the act of the creature is changed, the will of God must
be changed. (3) From the perfection of the Divine Will. A consequent will in God,
as stated by the Jesuits and their Followers, supposes an Antecedent
imperfect will, consisting only in a natural Velleitie or imperfect inclination,
which is unworthy of the most perfect will. (4) From the Omnipotence of God. If
God wills a thing antecedently to the act of the creature, which shall never be,
then the will of God is not Omnipotent; but in the power of the Creature, either
to fulfill or frustrate the same. And Oh! how incongruous are such Sentiments to
the Divine Omnipotent Will? If Gods Will be in the power of the Creature and
dependent thereon, then it may be wholly frustrated as to al its counsels and
decrees touching the rational world. (5) This distinction of the Divine Will
into Antecedent and Consequent is contumelious to the Beatitude of God. For
every one is so far blessed, as he has his will fulfilled: To have our wills
crossed or frustrated is accounted by all no small portion of misery: may we
then imagine; that the Divine Will properly so termed is ever frustrated? (6)
This distinction of Gods will into antecedent and consequent is also injurious
to his Bounty and goodness. Sacred Philosophy compares God to a liberal
Prince, who devises liberal things, Esa. 32.8.
and thereby establishes his Throne, Esa. 32.8. But the liberal devises
liberal things, and by liberal things he shall stand. It Is spoken of Christ as
Mediator, or the great King of Sion, as appears, verse. 1. who devises al
manner of liberal things, and thereby stands, or is established on his Throne,
as the word denotes in the Hebrew. Did not Christ keep open house and
distribute al his gifts and good things liberally and freely, his Throne would
not be established; he would have no Subjects to fill up his Kingdom. But now
the distinction of the Divine Will into Antecedent and Consequent cuts asunder
all the nerves and ligaments of Christ's Liberality, in that it makes him to
have an imperfect Antecedent will toward al, but a Consequent Will toward none,
but those who can by their good merits purchase his favor. This distinction of
Gods Will into Antecedent and Consequent is excellently well refuted by Gregor.
Ariminensis, Sent. 1. Distinct. 46, 47. where he concludes thus: All the good
things that we have are given us by God out of his Bounty and Grace: and this
speaks, that God wills them to us by an Antecedent Will; because no cause
antecedes in us, but al our good things flow from his Bonitie.

7. The Divine Will most perfect.
Prop. The Divine Will is most perfect. This Adjunct of the Divine Will is but
the result of the former, and that which makes way to what follows. The
perfection of the Divine Will may be considered intensively, extensively, or
effectively. 1. Intensively.
(1) The perfection of the Divine Will considered intensively consistes in its
not admitting any intension and remission, or latitude of degrees; but being
always intense in the highest degree. For the Divine Will having one and the
same Idea with the Divine Essence, it is one simple pure Act, without the least
gradual remission, or intension. Hence it is styled by Plato, (...), the
perfect Idea of good, which admits no latitude of degrees, no velleitie or
incomplete will. That Gods Will is always perfect and complete, without the least
velleitie or conditionate volition may be demonstrated, [1] from the
Simplicity and pure Actualitie of God. For all composition and latitude of
degrees is inconsistent with a pure Act. [2] From the Identitie of the Divine
Will with the Divine Essence, which admits not the least latitude of degrees.
[3] From the Immutabilitie of the Divine Will. For all Velleitie being but an
imperfect will denotes a progression to a more perfect, and so mutation. [4]
From the Wisdom of God. For all Velleitie implies ignorance: and supposes that
God understandes not fully what the issues and events of the human will may be.
[5] From the Omnipotence of God. Al Velleitie notes impotence to accomplish
what we will. We may not therefore imagine, that Gods Will is capable of any
Velleitie, or conditionate incomplete volition, either formally or eminently;
but that it is ever most perfect as to degrees; because it is the same with the
Divine Essence. (2) The Divine Will is most perfect extensively, 2. Extensively.
as to Objects, in that it extendes it self to al objects. So in sacred
Philosophy, Act. 17.26. Acts 17.26.
And has determined the times before appointed, and the bounds of their
habitation. It is said, that God has determined, (...), i. e. by his soverain,
perfect Will given terms, bounds, measures, and limits to althings: the Divine
Will is infinite and unlimited; it receives limits and terms from nothing, but
gives bounds and terms to althings. Hence God is said by Plato always (...),
to play the Geometer, i. e. to measure out to althings their just essences,
virtues, perfections, and limits: for Geometry, according to its primary
notation and use among the Egyptians, (from whom Plato borrowed the notion)
signifies to measure the bounds and terms of land. And it is most appositely
applied by Plato to the divine Will, as it gives measures and terms to
althings. (3) The divine Will is most perfect effectively, 3. Effectively.
as it is the efficacious Efficient of al effects; of which hereafter in the
divine Causalitie, where we hope fully to demonstrate, That the Divine Will is
the prime Efficient and efficacious Cause of al effects. The perfection of the
divine Will may be demonstrated either absolutely or comparatively, as compared
with the human will. (1) If we consider the divine Will absolutely, so its
perfection may be demonstrated, from its Simplicity, pure Actualitie,
Eternity, Immutabilitie, Omnipotence, etc. as before. (2) If we consider the
divine Will relatively, or comparatively, as compared with a create human or
Angelic will, so its perfection appears, (1) in this, that the divine Will gives
al Bonitie and goodness to things; whereas every create will presupposes
goodness in things that it wills: every create will dependes on, because it is
moved by, the goodness of its object; but every create good dependes on the
goodness of the divine Will. Hence there can be assigned no cause of the divine
Will, but what is in it self: whereas every create will has a formal reason,
cause and motive without it self, whereby it is moved and influenced. (2) In
the human will the volition of the end is the cause of its willing the means:
but in the divine Will, both end and means are willed by one simple indivisible
pure Act. (3) In man's will, Volition and Nolition are distinct Acts: not to will
in man implies a negation or suspension of the wills act: but in God, by reason
of the pure actualitie of his Nature, Nolition and Volition are the same. We
may not imagine, that the divine Will is capable of any suspension or negation
of Act; but whatever he wills not that it be, that he wills that it be not: also
whatever he wills not that it be not, that he wills that it be. (4) Man's will is
circumscribed and limited by justice: he may not will but what is just; but Gods
Will is not circumscribed by any Laws of Justice: he does not will things,
because just; but they are therefore just, because he wills them. Quicquid Deus
non vult ut fiat, illud etiam vult ut non fiat: item quicquid non vult ut non
fiat, id ipsum etiam vult ut fiat.
(5) Man's will is limited as to the sphere of its Activitie: he wills what he
does, but he cannot do all that he wills: terms of essence suppose terms of
power and activitie. But God does not only will what he does, but also do what
he wills: his power is as extensive as his will: he can do what he will: his Will
is omnipotent; because the same with his Essence, as Psalm. 115.3.

8. Prop. The divine Will is most free. The Divine Will most free.
Liberty being one of the supreme perfections that belong to an intelligent
rational Creature, it may not be denied to the divine Will. Yea nothing else
could be free, if the divine Will were not free; because this is the first
Principe of al Liberty: as take away the first Cause, you also destroy al
second Causes; so take away liberty from the divine Will, you take it away also
from al create wills. Liberty in the divine Will is absolute, precedent, and
regulant; liberty in the human will is conditionate, subsequent, and regulated.
The first in every kind is the measure of al in that kind: now the divine
Liberty is the first in that kind, and therefore the grand Exemplar of al
create Liberty. The most perfect Cause must necessarily have the most perfect
mode of acting: but now God is the most perfect Cause: therefore he must have
the most perfect mode of acting: which is to act freely. Yea, the divine Will is
so infinitely free, as that it is moved by nothing without it self: it has not
so much as an end extrinsec to its own Bonitie, whereby it is moved: which kind
of independent liberty no create will may challenge. For every create will, as
it has a first Cause, whereby it is moved physically; so a last end, whereby it
is moved morally: but the Liberty of the divine Will is independent in both
these regards; and therefore most supreme and perfect. The Liberty of the
divine Will may be considered as relating to the operations ad intra, or to
those ad extra. (1) The Liberty of the divine Will as relating to the
operations ad intra is only concomitant; not antecedent: for all the operations
of God ad intra, i. e. such as terminate on himself, namely loving himself,
etc. they are al from a necessity of Nature, not from election and choice. God
cannot but love himself: he necessarily adheres to his own Bonitie and enjoys
himself, without the least indifference either of Specification, or Exercice.
And yet even in these Acts ad intra, which terminate on the divine Essence, and
are attended with a natural necessity, the divine Will has a concomitant
Liberty or divine Spontaneitie; which is sufficient to denominate those Acts
free. For as the human will adheres to its last end by a kind of natural
necessity, which yet is attended with a rational spontaneitie; so in like
manner the divine Will adheres to and enjoys it self by a natural necessity,
and yet with a concomitant liberty or divine spontaneitie. This is well
expressed by Jamblichus, a Sectator of Plato, de Myster. Egypt. It is, says
he, necessary, that God be as he is, not by an extrinsec violent necessity,
but by a natural and most voluntary; seeing he never would be other than he is.
Here we see the highest necessity conspiring and according with the highest
liberty. (2) If we consider the Liberty of the Divine Will as relating to its
operations ad extra, such as terminate on the Creature, so it is not only
concomitant, but also antecedent: i.e. the Divine Will terminates on the
Creature, not from any necessity of Nature, but by election and choice. For all
Creatures, as referred to the Divine Bonitie, are but means: wherefore the
Divine Will has an antecedent liberty either for the electing or refusing of
them. This some call Liberty of Election; because al election properly regards
the means. Again, God in willing his own Bonitie necessarily, wills althings so
far as they participate of his own Bonitie: Now the divine Bonitie being
infinite, there are infinite ways whereby the Creatures are participable
thereof; but al dependent on the election and determination of the Divine Will.
Lastly, if the divine Will should terminate on the Creatures from a necessity
of Nature, and not from free election, there could nothing be contingent, as
Suarez and others prove.

But here occurs a knotty objection, What indifference may be ascribed to the
Will of God.
which is thus urged: How can the Divine Decrees admit of an antecedent
liberty of election, when as they are the same with the Divine Essence, and so
attended with the same natural necessity? This objection has greatly perplexed
the acutest Wits among Scholastic Theologues. Bradwardine, de Cause. Dei, l. 1.
c. 14. page 212. answers thus: That between the state of possibility and the
futurition of things in the divine Decree there is a prioritie of origination;
not of time, but of nature. But more fully lib. 2. cap. 52. page 834. he
explicates, in what sense it may be said, that God could before nil, what he
now wills: It is manifest, says he, that God could not, either in regard of
Time or Eternity, before nil privatively or positively what he now wills; but
only by a prioritie of Nature or Cause, namely by a prioritie of the volutive
power in relation to its act. By the volutive power we must understand Gods Will
as the effective Principe, not that it is really a power in God. So Gregor.
Ariminensis, Sent. l. 1. Did. 45. page 161. answers sundry objections relating
to this Hypothesis, and at last concludes, That the Will of God, as the first
Cause of things, may be said to be both necessary and contingent: necessary, as
the same with the divine Essence; and yet contingent, as it might not have
willed the futurition and existence of things. Alvarez, de Auxil. l. 2. Disp.
7. page 114. says, That we may conceive signum rationis, a moment of reason
before the Decree of the divine Will determing what should be future. And
Disput. 116. page 913. he distinguishes indifference into privative and
negative: Negative Indifference he makes to be that, which in it self is not
more determined to this object than to that; or to act than not to act: and in
this regard, adds he, the divine Will was, before it determined to create the
world, in that [signo rationis] moment of reason indifferent to create or not
create the world, etc. which negative indifference importes no privation of
perfection in God. Al these solutions are much of the same import, and may be
resolved into this: That the divine Decrees may be considered as they are in
themselves and with respect to the divine Essence; and so they are necessary:
or as they terminate on the Creatures, and are the cause both of their
futurition and existence, and so we may ascribe to them a moment of reason,
nature, or causalitie, in which they might not have been. And this we style
Antecedent Liberty, or Liberty of Election, which importes no mutabilitie in
the divine Will, but only a prioritie of Causalitie, which very well accordes
with the necessity of the divine Will. To conclude this Adjunct touching the
Liberty of the divine Will, Suarez, Metaph. Disp. 30. S. 16. page 134. grantes,
That a necessity of Immutabilitie agrees to the Divine Will, and no way
prejudiceth the perfection of its Liberty.

9. Prop. Gods Will is most efficacious and irresistible. Gods Will irresistible.
This Adjunct of the divine Will is expressly laid down in sacred Philosophy.
So Esa. 46.10. My counsel shall stand, Esa. 46.10.
and I will do al my pleasure. The like we find in Homer, Iliad. (...), The
counsel of Jupiter was fulfilled. Thus also, Romans 9.19. Who has resisted his
Will? By which the Apostle excludes al manner of resistance, not only actual,
but also possible. That the divine Will is most efficacious and irresistible may
be demonstrated (1) from Gods prime universal Causalitie: God, according to
Plato, is (...), the most soverain Cause; and (...), the Cause of al second
Causes; which are but (...), ministerial instrumental Causes of God, (...), who
gives essence to althings. Now the first universal Cause of althings cannot be
resisted by any second particular cause. For herein lies the difference between
the first universal cause and second causes: these may fail of their effect by
reason of some other cause impeding; but the first universal cause can never
fail of his effect; because he contains under his Jurisdiction and Soverain
Power al other causes: he that gives Being and Power to althings can be
resisted by nothing. Now how is God the first universal cause of althings? Is
it not by his Divine Will? We may not conceive any other causal executive Power
in God but his Divine Will: he effects and operates immediately by his will,
without any distinct executive power, as we shall prove anon. (2) From the
Omnipotence of the Divine will. The Psalmist informs us, Psalm. 115.3. Psalm.
115.3. and 135.5, 6.
That God does whatsoever he pleases. So Psalm. 135.5, 6. Gods Soverain will
backed with Omnipotence is invincible. The Psalmist shows the transcendent
universalitie and efficace of the Divine will above the human: men will what they
can do, but God can do what he will; because his will is omnipotent. If Gods will
were not Omnipotent, he could not do whatever is possible: for he works
althings by his will: neither is he on any other account styled in the Creed,
Omnipotent or Almighty; but because he can do what he will. The Divine
Omnipotent will always obtains its effect, because its volition is its
operation: its fiat, is its factum esse, its word, its deed. Thence that of
Augustine: Gods will is most certain, because most potent. Of which see more
fully Ariminensis, Sent. 1. Did. 46, 47. and Bradwardine, l. 2. c. 29. I will
not, says he, have him for my God, who is not Omnipotent in Acting; who has
not a most Omnipotent Dominion over my infirm will; who cannot in the most
Omnipotent manner make me to will and do, what he wills; who has not a will
universally efficacious, infrustrable, indefectible, and necessary in causing;
yea, whose will is not to me necessity. (3) From the Beatitude of God.
Aristotle, as reason, assures us, that al men do what they will, if they can;
because herein their Beatitude seems to consist. So Rhet. l. 2. c. 20. p. 138.
(...), etc. And if he could, and would, he has also done it: for all, when they
can and will, act; for there is no impediment. Beatitude is the supreme end of
al rational Appetition: therefore what men desire, they do, if they can, as
Aristotle subnectes. Hence the Divine will, if it could not do what it would, it
should not be blessed; because Beatitude is the ultimate term of al volition.
So Bradwardine, l. 2. c. 27. Yea, I constantly and freely avouch, I will not
have him for my God, whose most blessed will poor, miserable, sinful I can, when
I please, pull down from the Throne of his Dignity, and subjugate, etc. (4)
From the Infinitude of God. An Infinite Agent can neither be hindered from doing
what he would, nor forced to do what he would not: a Passive Subject cannot
resist an Active Principe or Agent, unless it has at least equal power: How
then is it possible, that a poor, infirm, impotent Creature should resist the
Divine Will? Thus Bradwardine, l. 1. c. 10. Now it remains to show, that the
Divine Will is universally efficacious, insuperable, and necessary in causing;
being not to be hindered or frustrated any manner of way. For who knows not,
that it altogether follows, if God can do any thing, and will do it, he does it,
etc. But of this more when we come to the Causalitie of God, C 7.. 4.

Having explicated the Adjuncts of the Divine Will, Gods Will 1. Decernent or
preceptive.
we now descend to treat briefly of its Distinctions: and to omit that spurious
Jesuitic distribution of the Divine Will into Antecedent and Consequent, which
is most injurious and repugnant to the perfection of the Divine Will, as has
been demonstrated, we may distribute the Will of God in regard of its object and
our apprehensions, 1. into Decernent or Decretive, and Legislative or
Preceptive. Gods Decernent or Decretive Will is usually termed in the Schools
his Voluntas Beneplaciti: and his Legislative Preceptive Will, Voluntas Signi.
This distribution has its foundation in Sacred Philosophy: for God is often said
in Scripture to will things that are never offected, as the salvation of
Reprobates, or the like, which cannot be understood of his decernent decretive
Will, but may very well, of his preceptive Will. But to clear up this distinction,
we are to consider, (1) That Gods decernent or decretive Will is univocally and
properly said to be his Will; but his voluntas signi or preceptive Will is only
equivocally, or analogically, and figuratively such. Gods decretive Will is the
Divine essence decreeing althings, and so properly and univocally styled his
Will; but his preceptive Will is only analogically or figuratively termed his
Will, [1] Metaphorically, as Princes signify their interne will, by their
externe commands, which are thence termed their Will. [2] Metonymically, as Gods
Precepts are effects or adjuncts which partly revele his interne will and
pleasure. Yet they are not in a strict proper univocal sense the will of God, as
Sanderson, De Obligat. Conscient. p. 132. Davenant against Hoard, p. 392. and
Ruiz prove. Hence (2) Gods Decretive and Preceptive Will are disparate or
diverse, but not opposite: The things decreed by God and the things commanded
by him may oppose each other, but the will decreeing, and the will commanding do
not oppose each other; because they are not ad idem: the Decretive Will of God
is as it were his Law, or the measure of his operation and permission; but the
preceptive Will of God is our Law, or the Rule of our operation and offices. The
Decree of God determines what he will do, or not do; the Precept what we ought
to do or not to do. Gods Decernent Will or good pleasure is the sole Rule and
Reason of al his actings toward the Creature; but his Reveled Will is the sole
Rule, Reason, and Measure of all the Creatures actings toward him. (3) The
Decretive Will of God is ever Absolute, efficacious, and particular; but the
preceptive will of God is sometimes absolute, sometimes conditionate; sometimes
universal, sometimes particular; sometimes efficacious and sometimes not. (4)
Gods decretive will is interne and immanent, called in Scripture his (...) good
pleasure, which is the measure of his own Affects, and Effects: But Gods
preceptive will is externe, and therefore not the measure of Gods Affects or
Effects, but only of our Duty.

2. Gods secret and reveled Will. Deuteronomy. 29.29.
Hence follows another distinction of the Divine Will into Secret and Reveled;
which is much the same with the precedent, mentioned, Deuteronomy. 29.29. The secret
things belong unto the Lord our God, but things which are reveled, unto us. i.
e. Gods secret Will is the measure of his operation, but his reveled will of
ours. So Prove. 25.2. It Is the Glory of God to concele a thing. Gods will is
styled secret (1) as the things he wills are unknown to us: (2) as the causes
and reasons of his Will cannot be penetrated by us: (3) as it is as it were the
Law, Rule, or measure of his Divine operations. Gods reveled will is so termed;
because it is his pleasure reveled either in his Word, or Works: every act of
Gods Providence shows somewhat of his Will, as well as his Word. (1) Gods Will
reveled in his Word is either promissive or preceptive: Reveled promises are
the measure of Gods Benefices toward us: Reveled precepts are the measure of
our Offices or Duties toward God. (2) Gods reveled providential Will is either
directive or afflictive. There is a conformity, which the rational Creature
owes to each of these reveled wills of God: To the will of God reveled in his
word there is an active conformity or obedience due; to the promissive reveled
will there is an obedience of faith due, to the preceptive an obedience of love
and subjection. To the providential will of God both directive and afflictive
there is a passive obedience of Submission, Resignation and Dependence due.
Lastly, this reveled will of God is never opposite to, albeit it be often diverse
from, his secret will; and the reason is, because they are not about the same
object: Gods secret will regards the events of things, his reveled will the duty
of man, either active or passive.

3. Aquinas and others distinguish Gods Will into Complacential, Gods Will
Complacential, Providential and Beneplacite.
Providential, and Beneplacite. (1) Gods Complacential Will, is his simple
complacence in all the good Actions, Habits, and Events of men; yea it extendes
not only to moral, but to natural goods, as Genesis 1.31. There is a perpetual
necessary volition in God, which takes pleasure in all good, whether create or
increate. Such is the infinite Bonitie and Purity of the Divine Nature, as
that it cannot but take infinite complacence in all good. This they call Gods
Love of simple complacence, of which see Ruiz, de Volunt. Dei Disp. 6.. 2. p.
38. and Disp. 19. p. 214. (2) Gods Providential Will is that, whereby he is said
to will and intend an end, when he in his providence, either graciose or commun,
affords such means which have an aptitude to produce it. As where God sends his
Gospel, he may be said really to intend the salvation of those to whom it is
sent, albeit they are not al saved; because he vouchsafes them those means
which have a real aptitude to produce the same, were they but really embraced
and improved. In this regard Davenant and others affirm, that Christ's death
is, (...), an universal remedy applicable to al, and that God, by his Voluntas
Providentiae (as Aquinas styles it) intended it as such. This intention or will
of God is measured by the nature of the means, and therefore reducible to Gods
Legislative Will, which gives constitution and measure to all the means of man's
salvation. (3) There is Gods Beneplacite or Decretive Will, which is only
strictly and properly styled the will of God, as before: So Ruiz de Volunt. Dei,
Disp. 18.. 4. p. 185.

. 4. Next to the Will of God we are to treat of his Power, Gods Power.
which as executive and effective has one and the same formal Idea with his Will,
as will appear by what follows. The Divine Power is in Sacred Philosophy
illustrated by several names of God, specially by (...) el, and its
derivatives, (...) and (...), which signify most potent and soverain Lord.
Therefore Moses being about to treat of Gods infinite Power in creating
althings, styles him Genesis 1.1. (...). which Nachmanni makes to be derived from
(...) el hem, their strength, noting the Creatures: and Abarbenel makes this
name to be given to God, as the omnipotent Effector and Productor of althings,
as before. (...), from (...), or (...), properly signifies the potent, powerful
God, who contains in himself infinite force, energie and power. Whence God is
styled, Genesis 14.20. (...) the most high potent. And Esa. 9.5. (...), el gibbor,
the most mighty potent. And Dan. 14.20. (...), the most potent of al potents.
In the N.T. God is styled (...), omnipotent, 2 Cor. 6.18. Rev. 1.8. and 4.8.
and (...), the sole potentate, 1 Timothy 6.15. which terms signify both his
Legal Power and Authority, as also his energetic efficacious power. The Power
of God is elsewhere frequently inculcated in Scripture: as Job 26.14. Job 26.14.
But the thunder of his power who can understand? Gods power is compared to
Thunder, because nothing more terrible and potent in this inferior World. Psalm.
65.6. Which by his strength sets fast the mountains being girded with power.
So Psalm. 77.14. Thou art God that do wonders, thou have declared thy
strength among the people. And Psalm. 93.1. The Lord is clothed with strength,
wherewith he has girded himself: the world also is established, that it cannot
be moved. And Psalm. 62.11. Twice have I heard this, that power belongs unto
God. Twice: i. e. frequently. That Gods power does infinitely transcend al
create power may be deduced from that of Plato, Leg. 5. (...) whereby he
proves, that Gods power is above al create force.

But to discourse more distinctly of the Power of God, Gods Power his Essence.
we must remember, that God being a pure Act, active Power cannot in a proper
strict notion be ascribed to God, as it denotes a first Act, or Principe of
operation, distinct from the second Act, or Operation it self; but only as it
respects the Creature, which is properly said to receive the impressions and
influences of Gods Power. God is said to have an active Power, in regard of the
effects produced by him, as Suarez, Metaph. Disput. 30. Sect. 17. page 144.
Thus Aquinas, Part. 1. Quaest. 25. Seeing God is most in act, and simply
perfect, it is most agreeable to him, that he be the Principe of Acts, and active
Power, but not passive. And more fully, contra Gent. l. 2. c. 10. he informs
us, That power in God is not as a Principe of Action, but only as a Principe of
Fact. And because al power importes respect to another as a Principe, it is
manifest, that al power is affirmed of God with respect to Facts or things
made, according to truth; and with respect to Action, only according to our
manner of understanding; as our Intellect does, by diverse conceptions,
consider both, namely the Divine Power, and its action. Whence if any actions
agree to God, which pass not into some fact or effect, but remain in the
Agent; there can no power be affirmed as to such actions; more than according
to our manner of understanding, not in truth. Such as are the actions of
Understanding and Willing, which implie no power in God. The Power therefore of
God, to speak properly, respects not such actions, but only effects. And the
reason is evident; because power in God is the same with his Essence, and
therefore a pure Act, not distinct from the second Act, but only from the
Effect.

Albeit the Power of God be in it self one and the same, Gods absolute Power.
yet for our more distinct conception of it we may distinguish it into
absolute, and ordinate or actual. (1) Gods absolute Power is that whereby he is
considered as simply potent to effect althings possible, although they never
shall be: as Mat. 3.9. and 26.53. Mar. 10.27. Ephesians. 3.20. This has one and the
same idea with the Sufficience and Essence of God; and is looked on by us as
antecedent to the Science of Vision and Will of God: whence it is styled by
Bradwardine Gods precedent Power. Gods ordinate Power the same with his Will.
(2) The ordinate and actual Power of God, is that whereby God is said to
execute what he wills or decrees: which some term Gods Volutive Power, partly
because it is executive of Gods will, but principally, because it has the same
formal idea with the Divine Will. For that the executive Power of God admits not
the least formal difference from his Divine efficacious Will, is an Hypothesis
which both sacred Philosophy and the greatest Scholastic Wits greatly persuade
us. As for sacred Philosophy it assures us, that Gods executive Power is the
same with his effective Will. So Genesis 1.3, Genesis 1.3.
etc. Moses makes Gods fiat, or Will the prolific Principe of al productions.
Thence Psalm. 33.9. Gods Word or Will is said to give existence to althings. So
Psalm. 115.3. Psalm. 115.3.
He has done whatsoever he pleased (...) whatsoever he willed. The like Psalm.
135.6. Psalm. 135.6.
The Lord does (...), whatsoever he pleases, or wills. Romans 9.19. Romans 9.19.
Who has resisted his will? which denotes the will of God to be irresistible,
omnipotent, and the same with his executive Power. And more particularly, Rev.
4.11.
Rev. 4.11. (...), And by thy will they are, and were created. Our Version
renders (...) for, which is true, but not primarily intended here: yea,
therefore althings are For Gods pleasure, because By it, as the first effective
executive Principe. By which it is evident, that Gods executive Power is the
same with his actual will; he actually does what he wills: and his mere Will is
the effective Principe of his doing. Hence we find, that those who came to our
Lord for any effect of his power, drew an argument from his will to his power,
Mat. 8.2.
as Mat. 8.2. Lord, if thou will thou can make me clean: as elsewhere:
whereby not only the Deity of Christ is acknowleged, but also the Identitie of
his power with his will; that his power is as extensive as his will: or, that his
will is omnipotent. This Hypothesis, touching the Identitie of Gods executive
Power with his Will, has been avouched and defended by the most acute Scholastic
Theologues. Thus Bradwardine, de Cause. Dei, l. 1. c. 10. page 197. where he
proves, That Gods Will is of it self operative; neither may we place in God any
other executive power. And his reasons are cogent. For (1) if there were any
thing more required, to the production of an effect, than the Divine Will, it
would thence follow, that the Divine Will is not of it self sufficient to act,
contrary to the forecited Textes. (2) It Is evident, that the Will of God is in
some manner operative of it self, even as our wills are in moving our own
bodies. And if the Divine Will be in one degree operative, why not in every
degree? Does it need any executive virtue for the supply of its deficience? Is
it not omnipotent? (3) If any such executive power be placed in God, it must
naturally mediate between the Divine Will and effect: but this cannot be,
because the effect necessarily follows upon the Divine Volition. The same
Hypothesis is defended by Alvarez, de Auxil. l. 2. p. 129. conclus. 1. We may
not place in God, besides his Intellect and Will, any third executive power
eminently or formally distinct for the production of things. But of this more
in Gods Efficience, Sect. 4.. 3. Prop. 2. and. 5. Prop. 4.

The object of Gods Power is every thing possible: The object of Gods Power
every thing possible.
For every power must have some object adequate thereto: and by how much the
higher and more universal the power is, by so much the more universal is the
object: and is not the active power of God the first Cause most supreme and
universal? Must it not then comprehend under its object al possible Entitie?
And the more fully to understand this, we are to understand, that a thing may
be said to be possible two ways: (1) Positively: and so that is possible, which
may be produced by a power. Things possible are not said in this sense to be
the object of Gods power: for then the same thing would be explicated by it
self: for to say the power of God is extended to althings positively possible,
is the same as if we should say, it is extended to al such things as are by it
denominated possible. Wherefore (2) a thing may be said to be possible
negatively, in a way of non-repugnance, as it implies not any repugnance of
existing: and so althings are possible which implie not a contradiction. And in
this sense things possible are said to be the object of Gods infinite Power;
What things are impossible.
which extendes it self to whatever implies not a contradiction or repugnance
of existing. For, in as much as nothing is more repugnant to Ens than non Ens,
Ens and non Ens being contradictories, it thence follows, that whatever
involves a contradiction cannot come within the comprehension of Ens possible,
possible Being, but must be simply and of it self impossible. God cannot
verify contradictions; because they have not a passive power or possibility
of being verified: for the affirming of the one is the denying of the other:
they cannot be both true; because they should not be contradictions, if the
truth of the one did not necessarily make the other false. That what involves a
contradiction comes not within the latitude of the object of Gods power, is not
from any defect of power in God; but because the thing has not in it self any
possibility of existing, or of being reduced into act: for no power can be
denominated such in relation to a term or effect, which implies an
impossibility of existing; as what is contradictorie does. Al power extendes
it self to that which can be actuated thereby: as al sensitive power is
conversant about sensible objects, so far as they may be actuated thereby: so
the power of God is conversant about al possible things, so far as they are
capable of being actuated thereby. Whence it appears, that the impossibility
of contradictions arises from the incapacitie of the matter, not from any
defect in the power of God.

Now the impossibles which implie a repugnance of being done by God, are either
such as regard God himself, or the Creature, or both. 1. The Impossibles that
regard God himself are either absolutely such, or only in some limited sense.
(1) The Impossibles, which regard God himself absolutely, are al such as are
simply repugnant to the Divine Essence. As God cannot deceive or be deceived:
he cannot sin, or be the moral cause of sin: he cannot condemn or punish,
(though he may afflict yea torment) the innocent, or justify the wicked
without a satisfaction. (2) The Impossibles that regard God in a limited sense,
are such as implie a certain mode of acting, or a certain Hypothesis repugnant
to the Divine Essence. [1] Such as implie a certain mode of acting; as God
cannot exert the natural or vital acts of an animal body: he cannot eat,
drink, speak, etc. in that mode we do, etc. [2] The Impossibles under a
certain Hypothesis repugnant to the Divine Essence, are such as these: not to
do what he has decreed, or promised. 2. The Impossibles which regard the
Creature, or the externe object of Gods power, are such as destroy the essence
of the object. Thus God cannot make a Creature independent, or not to depend on
himself, both as to Being and Operation. For dependence is essential to a
Creature: and therefore to suppose a Creature not to depend on God as well in
Operation as Being, is to suppose a Creature not to be a Creature, as Suarez
strongly demonstrates against the Hypothesis of Durandus, who denies Gods
concurse to the material act of sin. Again, to suppose that God in the
Eucharist should Transubstantiate or commute the Bread into the Body of
Christ, and yet the Quantity and visible Accidents of the Bread still remain,
implies a contradiction; because Quantity or Extension is essential to a
body. Besides, this Popish Hypothesis of Transubstantiation implies other
contradictions, in that it supposes two bodies to be in the same place or
space, and the same body of Christ to be in two places at once, etc. In like
manner we say God cannot, according to the Lutheran Consubstantiation, make the
body of Christ to be at the same time in the Heavens, and circumscribed
thereby, and yet in and with, and under the Bread. 3. Things impossible both in
regand of God and the Creature are such as are repugnant to the Essence of
both. Thus God cannot, by his infinite Power, produce an effect equal to
himself, infinite in Essence: For by making an effect infinite, he should make
his own Essence finite: it is as essential to al products of God to be finite,
as it is to God to be infinite, as Suarez, Metaph, Disput. 30. Sect. 17. page
147. That, notwithstanding al these impossibilities, arising from the
incapacitie of the thing, the Power of God extendes universally to althings
possible, see Suarez Metaph. Disput. 29.

Hence the Power of God is, in regard of its object and its extent, Divine
Power Omnipotence. Genesis 18.14.
said to be, as really it is Omnipotence. This is frequently inculcated in
Sacred Philosophy, as Genesis 18.14. Is any thing impossible for Jehovah? Heb.
(...), Is any thing, or word [ i. e. whatever can be spoken of, or whatever God
has promised] Impossible, or Mavelous for Jehovah: i. e. above or beyond his
power. It is spoken by the Angel, upon Sarah's unbelieving smile, and conceit
that it was impossible for God to give her a Son, in her old age. Again, the
manner of the speech being in a way of Rhetoric Interrogation implies in it a
most vehement Logic Negation. We find the very same character of Gods
Omnipotence given by the Angel to Marie, the Mother of our Lord, in relation to
her miraculose conception, Luke 1.37.
Luke 1.37. For with God nothing shall be impossible. (...), which we translate
thing, primarily notes a word; and so it answers exactly to (...), Genesis 18.14.
which signifies primarily Word, and then Thing, specially as applied to God;
because al his Words are omnipotent and so equivalent to things. Mark 10.27.
With God althings are possible. Hence God is styled in Scripture (...),
Omnipotent, he being indeed (...), as elsewhere. The Omnipotence of God was
generally recognized by the most sage Pagans. So Homer, (...), This to thee O
God is but a small thing, albeit to me it be great. i. e. Thy omnipotence can
with the greatest facility atchieve it. So in his Il. speaking of God, he
says -- (...), his power is the greatest, or omnipotent. This omnipotence of
God, or the extension of his Divine Power to althings possible, may be thus
demonstrated: (1) Every perfect Virtue does extend it self to those things,
unto which its proper effect can extend it self: but now the effect of Gods
Power extends it self to whatever is possible: therefore the Power of God must
be as extensive. (2) Every Passive Power has some Active Power adequate and
commensurate thereto: for every Power is for its act; as the matter is for the
form, according to the Aristoteleans. Whatever therefore is in the passive or
obediential power of a create Being, all that God can by his active power
actuate, and accomplish. (3) The mode of Virtue or Power in every Agent, is
according to the perfection of its nature or essence: But now Gods essence
being the most perfect pure Act containing in it al perfection, hence it
necessarily follows, that his active virtue must extend it self to althings
capable of any perfection, i. e. which implie not a contradiction or repugnance
of existing. See Aquinas, Contra Gent. l. 2. c. 22.

Hence it follows, Gods Power infinite.
that Gods Power is Infinite. (1) The magnitude of power answers in proportion
to the magnitude of essence: whence, where there are no terms of essence,
there can be no terms of power. Essence and Power in God are the same:
wherefore his Essence being infinite, his Power also must be so. Crea tures are
limited in their Essence, and therefore in their Power: but the great God
having no terms to his Essence can admit none as to his power. What can be too
difficult for the Divine Power, which brought al things out of nothing? When
the Sadducees douted of the Resurrection, our Lord resolves their Error into an
ignorance of the Power of God, Mat. 22.29.
Mat. 22.29. intimating thereby, that the Power of God was Infinite, and could
extend it self to al effects. Thus Aquinas, Part. 1. Q. 25. a. 2. It Is
necessary that the Active Power of God be Insinite: for by how much the more
perfect the form of any Agent is, by so much the greater is his power in
acting: whence the Divine Essence (whereby God acts) being Infinite, his Power
also must be Infinite. The like he adds, Contra Gent. l. 1. c. 43. Every thing
acts according to its form, which is its Essence, or a part thereof. Whence
Gods Essence being Infinite, his Power also is such. (2) The Infinitude of Gods
Power may be demonstrated from the manner of his working in creating things:
where the passive Power is infinitely low, the active Power must be infinitely
high: but now in Creation the passive Power is in a laxe sense infinitely low,
in that it is purely nothing; thence Gods active Power must be infinitely high.
(3) It must, according to Natural Reason, be granted, that there is in the
Universitie of Beings a power, than which nothing can be conceived greater: and
to whom does this Prerogative belong but to God? And if we can conceive nothing
greater than God, must we not also conceive him to be Infinite in Power? for
may we not conceive something greater than al finite Power? (4) Reason also
instructes us, that there are somethings simply possible, which cannot be
produced, but by a power intensively insinite, etc. That Gods Power is simply
infinite, see Suarez, Metaph. Disp. 30. Sect. 17. p. 144. Greg. Ariminens.
Sent. l. 1. Distinct. 42. p. 152.

CHAP. VI. Of Gods Justice, Veracitie, and Sanctity: also of the Trinity.
Gods Justice, Absolute and Ordinate. How far Gods punitive Justice is
necessary. How far Gods Justice regards the Qualities of its object. Gods
Veracitie explicated and demonstrated. Also his Sanctity. Platonic
Philosophemes of the Trinity, with their Use and Abuse in Theology.

. 1. THe next Attribute, that occurs to be discoursed os, The Justice of God.
is the Justice of God; whereof we find great characters both in Sacred and
Platonic Philosophy. As for Sacred Philosophy it sets forth the Justice of
God in lively colors, Psalm. 19.9. The Judgments of the Lord are true and
righteous. Psalm. 36.6. Thy righteousness is like the great mountains: Psalm.
119.137.
and Psalm. 119.137. Righteous art thou O Lord, and upright are thy judgments.
Here are two distinct particulars assigned to the Justice of God. (1) He is
righteous, and (2) his judgments are upright. Men may be just, and lovers of
Justice, and yet their Judgments not upright. But it is not so with God. The
like Psalm. 50.6. and 96.10. and 98.9. and 99.4. Thus also Esa. 28.17. Judgment
also will I lay to the line, and righteousness to the plummet. Esa. 28.17.
A Metaphor taken from the practice of Masons or Carpenters, who, when they will
have a thing done exactly, are wont to do it by line and level, as Amos 7.8. so
accurate and exquisite are the Judgments of God. Romans 2.2, 11.
So Romans 2.2. But we are sure that the judgment of God is according to truth.
(...). Reason it self dictates so much to us: were he not just, he were not
God. (...), according to truth, or justice: for so (...) here importes: and it
is opposed to the Roman Judgments, which were at this time most unjust. And he
adds the reason, v. 11. for there is no respect of persons with God. (...)
signifies the face; from (...) aph the face, or from (...): Thence (...)
signifies, (1) That which, (...), is admoved to, or bound about the face: a
Larve, Person, or Masque. For persona, q. (...), from (...) and (...),
according to its primary notion signifies a visard, or one that wears it. (2)
The face, that part (...), which was covered, (...), with the larve or visard.
Thence, (3) The whole man, or person, considered essentially and substantially.
(4) Also the externe Figure, Form, Quality, or Disposition of a person
considered accidentally. Whence (...), to accept the person, is to accept or
regard any externe Qualities, Relations, Dispositions, or Conditions of the
person, which ought not to come under consideration in Judgment. Mat. 20.21.
So Mat. 20 21. (...) answers to the Hebr. (...), lifting up the face: and
(...), to lift up the face is the same with (...) to accept the face or person.
For in those times, the ancient gesture of salutation was by casting the face
down on the earth: and he that was saluted lifted up the face of him that
saluted; as David Saul. Which custom yet continues in those Oriental parts.
And from this custom of Salutation (...) was traduced to signify the
acceptance of the person, contrary to the merits of the cause or thing. For to
respect a person is when that in judgment is respected, which ought not to
come into judgment. When God is said, not to respect persons, the notion
Person does not denote a man, but the condition of a man, which ought not to be
regarded. Acceptance of persons is only when favor or affection, or the like
extrinsec considerations prevail, contrary to Equity: in which regard God
cannot be said to accept persons, because he is under no obligation or Laws of
Justice, more than what his own Free Will has brought him under.

Plato discourses accurately of Gods Justice, Leg. 10. page 904. There being
an Objection raised by a juvenile Wit, That albeit God regards Human Affairs,
yet it were an easy matter for wicked men, by gifts and favors, to gain his
favor. To which Plato thus replies: (...), etc. But neither thou, nor cory
other may be thought ever so far to prevail with God by prayers, that he should
exemt himself from Divine Judgment, or decline the Tribunal of God: for he
has firmly determined, that no mortal shall escape it. For thou art never
neglected by this Judgment; no, albeit thou were so small as to creep into the
profunditie of the earth: nor yet if thou were so sublime, as being elevated
with wings to fly into the Heavens: but thou shall suffer deserved punishment,
either here or in Hell. Then he adds, p. 906. This Oration is usurped by him,
who affirms, that God can be easily reconciled to unjust men, as if he should
cousent to divide the spoil with sinners, even then when they sin: just as if
the Wolves should give a small portion of their prey to the dogs; and these
being pacified with their gifts, should give the Wolves leave to devour the
sheep. Is not this the import of their Oration, who conceive God to be easily
reconciled to wicked men? Then he concludes, page 907. (...); Is not God of al
keepers the greatest, and employed in the greatest affairs? Can we then
imagine, that he, who keeps the best things, and does infinitely excel in the
Art and faculty of keeping, is worse than Dogs or poor Mortals, who yet cannot
be bribed by rewards from wicked men, given with an il intent, to do what is
unjust? Plato here compares God to a Sheepherds Dog, which cannot be bribed by
the Wolves to deliver up the Sheep for a prey: much less, says he, can God be
bribed to do unjustly. So Leg. 4.716. (...), Justice is the avenger of those
that come short of the Divine Law.

The more fully to explicate the Justice of God, Gods Absolute Justice
we must distinguish between his Absolute Justice, and that which is Ordinate.
1. Gods Absolute Justice is founded on the infinite perfection of his Essence,
and has one and the same Idea with his Soverain Dominion over his Creature. For
so great is the Majesty of God, and so Absolute his Dominion, as that he is
obnoxious to no Laws, Obligations, or Ties from his Creature: this Absolute
Justice or Dominion regards not any qualities or conditions of its object; but
God can by virtue hereof inflict the highest torments on his innocent Creature,
and exempt from punishment the most nocent. as to afflicting the Innocent.
(1) By this Absolute Justice and Dominion God can inflict the greatest
torments, even of Hell it self, on the most innocent Creature? For every
Creature as such is subordinate to God both in suffering, as well as doing what
he pleases, as Suarez in 1. 2ae. Tract. 5. Disp. 7. p. 418. We must deny,
says he, that God, as Supreme Lord, cannot inflict on an innocent man all that
Evil that is in the torments of Hell. Thus in his Metaphys. Disput. 31. Sect.
14. God has a full Dominion over his Creature, to use it as it pleases him,
for any use that involves not a contradiction. For that Dominion is not in all
regards perfect, which includes not a Power to dispose of its object unto every
possible use. Again, God cannot make a Create Being, whereof he has not the full
and perfect Dominion. To this full and absolute Dominion in God there
corresponds a full and absolute subjection in the Creature: for these two are
correlatives. Hence, there is no Justice properly so termed in respect of the
Creatures, whereby God stands obliged to them, antecedent to the constitution
of his own Will. Nothing more unjust than to deny unto God an absolute Dominion
to dispose of the Creature made by him as it pleases him. And that God did de
facto inflict the highest torments on an innocent pure spotless Creature, even
the human Nature of his own Son is most evident. They who deny Gods absolute
Dominion over the Creatures, deny him to be their Creator. Must we not allow
God, who made althings, a power to order al to the ends he made them for? Does
not God give to every Creature what shape he pleases? and may he not then
appoint them to what end he please? Is it not an end sufficient for the Being
of a Creature to be the objective glory of any Divine Attribute? And therefore
if God should make an innocent Creature to destroy it, thereby to illustrate
the Glory of his Power, who can say he is unjust? The greatest notions that
our minds can frame are too narrow to express the absolute Dominion of God
over his Creature.

(2) God, How far Gods punitive Justice is necessary.
by reason of his absolute Justice and Dominion, could, if it had-seemed good
to him, have freely pardoned sinners without satisfaction. And here I find my
self involved in that grand Question, Whether the vindictive or punitive
Justice of God, as to its egresses, be necessary? I am not ignorant that great
and holy Divines are divided in their thoughts and determinations hereof: Some
strongly defending the Affirmative; others the Negative. I may not be so far
mine own flaterer, as to presume my self to be capable of reconciling such
extremes, yet may I not humbly offer somewhat tending thereto? And first we
must distinguish the terms, and then we shall with more facility determine the
question so as to include the sense of both extremes. We must distinguish, (1)
between the merit of punishment, and the actual adjudging sinners unto
punishment. (2) Between the obligation on God to punish, and the obligation on
the sinner to receive punishment. (3) Between Natural Necessity and Moral. (4)
Between natural Congruitie and natural Necessity. (5) Between Gods absolute
Justice or Dominion, and his ordinate Justice. These distinctions premissed, we
offer these following Propositions for the determining the question and
reconciling the extremes. (1) Prop. Al sin necessarily merits punishment,
albeit actual punition be not an effect absolutely and physically necessary for
the vindication of Divine Justice. Al sin has guilt necessarily appendent
thereto: and al guilt necessarily implies a merit of punishment: for guilt is
but a middle between sin and punishment; it necessarily follows sin, and binds
over the sinner, or makes him obnoxious unto punishment: yet actual punition is
not absolutely necessary for the vindication of Divine Justice. (2) Prop. There
is a necessary debt or obligation on the sinners part to receive punishment,
albeit there be not a debt or obligation absolutely and physically necessary on
Gods part to punish the sinner. Guilt is not a physic but moral Accident; or
mode, or debt improperly so termed, whereby the offender is bound over to
suffer such punishment, as the merit of the sin requires: whence on Gods part
it implies a certain moral right or power of punishing: not that God is bound
by a necessity of nature to punish, although the sinner be bound by a
necessary obligation of his nature to receive and suffer punishment. Hence, (3)
God has a natural right to punish sin, yet he does not punish it from a
necessity of nature, but freely. God most justly punishes sin, yet he would
not be unjust, if we consider his absolute Justice, if he did not punish it. If
Gods punishing sin be from a necessity of nature, and not from the free
constitution of his Will, he must punish sin as necessarily, as he loves
himself: and then it will follow, that God cannot relaxate his penal Laws, as to
the time, measure, and manner of punishing: yea he cannot accept of the
satisfaction of a Mediator: for that is a degree of relaxation. It Is true, God
necessarily loves his own Glory which is darkened by sin: but yet it is not
Gods essential Glory, but only his manifestative Glory which is hurt by sin,
as Elihu, Job 39.6. Hence Gods punishing sin is not from a necessity of
nature, such as that whereby the fire burns, or God loves himself: For in all
the Acts of God ad extra there is not only a concomitant but also antecedent
Liberty, or Liberty of Election, which supposes some possibility of
rejection, at least according to the prioritie of reason or nature, as before,
Chap. 5.. 3.8. Prop. Whence Gods punishing sin being an act ad extra dependent
on the free constitution of his Will, it cannot be from a necessity of nature.
(4) Albeit, God be not under a natural necessity of punishing sin, yet he is
under a moral necessity to punish the same. By moral necessity I understand
that moral obligation he is under for the vindication of his Justice as Rector
of the World. This some call a natural congruence or condecence, which obliges
God to vindicate his own Justice, and declare his infinite displeasure against
sin, by punishing of it. (5) Lastly, Albeit God might, by his absolute
Dominion, considered antecedently to his Will, let sin pass unpunished, yet by
his ordinate Justice, he necessarily punishes the same. In the consideration
of Gods moral efficience on his Creature, we are not to consider what God can
by his absolute Justice or Dominion do, but what by his ordinate Justice and
moral Constitution he can do. And in this regard it is most true, that God is
under a necessity of punishing sin, without a satisfaction: and he were
inevitably unjust, if he should not punish it. And thus, as I humbly conceive,
both opinions, though seemingly opposite, may be easily reconciled. And indeed
we find this very Controversy on foot many hundred years since. For Augustine
held, That God could save sinners without a satisfaction: and Anselme held, he
could not. And Bradwardine, l. 2. c. 52. page 841. undertakes my task, to
reconcile both, by the distinction of Gods absolute Power, and his ordinate
Power, as Rector of the World. In the former sense he can, but in the later he
cannot save sinners but by Christ. Hence,

2. We pass on to Gods ordinate Justice, Gods ordinate Justice from his Will.
which has a necessary relation to some quality in its object, in this or that
manner affected or constituted; which quality being supposed, its egresse to
or execution on its object is necessary, not by any physic necessity of
nature, but by a moral necessity or natural congruitie, subsequent to the free
constitution of the Divine Will, in order to the manifestation of the Divine
Glory. And in this sense the Justice of God, in sacred Philosophy, is usually
taken, namely for that Attribute whereby God executes the Decrees and
Constitutions of his own soverain Will and Word, for the manifestation of his
own Glory. So that this ordinate Justice of God implies several particular
Ideas, which we shall endeavor to explicate in the following Propositions.

1. Prop. Gods ordinate Justice arises from the free Constitution and
Determination of his own Will. Antecedently to the Will of God nothing is so far
just, that it ought to be, but only that it may be justly and conveniently
done, if God will it: there is no Law of Justice in the actions of God, but what
his own Will prescribes: the Will of God is not circumscribed by his Justice,
but his Justice by his Will: for nothing is just in Divine Actions, but what he
wills, yea because he wills it. Thus Carthusianus, in 4. Did. 46. Quaest. 1. The
whole order of Justice is originally reduced to the Divine Will: whatever God
wills is just, neither is his Will properly restrained by Justice. So Scotus, l.
4. Did. 46. Quaest. 1. That is always just, which is actually willed by the
Divine Will; and because it is actually willed by the Divine Will. The Rule of
Justice, whereby men are to act, ties them up to one part of the contradiction,
so that they are unjust if they act not so; but there is no such Rule of
Justice to be affixed to God, farther than the free constitution of his own Will
has tied him up. Gods Will reveled is a Rule of Justice to us his Creatures, but
his absolute soverain Will is that alone that regulates him in all his actions.
Therefore learned Davenant says, That God cannot will any thing but salva
justitia, i. e. he can do nothing contra justitiam; yet he may will and do many
things praeter justitiam: i. e. he may freely decree and do many things, where
salva justitia, he might as freely have decreed and done the contrary. So
Lombard. l. 1. Did. 43. God could have omitted what he does, and have done
what he omits, without injustice. Hence,

2. Prop. Gods ordinate Justice toward the Creature has one and the same Idea
with his Veracitie or Fidelity. Gods ordinate Justice the same with his
Veracitie. Psalm. 119.123.
Thence in sacred Philosophy the Righteousness of God is often put for his
Veracitie and Fidelity in making good his word. So Psalm. 119.123. For the word
of thy righteousness: i. e. the word of thy promise, which thy righteousness
or fidelity is obliged to make good. So Psalm. 31.1. and 89.14. There is indeed
in God no Justice properly so termed, in which respect he may be said to be
obliged to his Creature: but that which we style the Justice of God toward his
Creature, is no other than his Fidelity, which presupposes some constitution
of the Divine Will: wherefore, abstracting such a constitution, God cannot be
said to do any thing repugnant to his Justice. For what is Justice, according
to its general Idea, but to give every one his own? And what has the Creature
that it may claim as its own, but what it receives from the Divine Will? Again,
Justice is a Conformity or Equality, according to the obligation or debt
which every one falls under: Justitia Dei est agere secundum condecentiam
Bonitatis aut Veracitatis suae. Albert. p. 1. tract. 19. q. 77.
and what obligation or debt can there befall God, with relation to his
Creature, but what his own goodness and will lays upon him? How can God be
obliged to any, but by his own will and word? What then is his Justice, but to
act according to the condecence or congruitie of his own Veracitie or Bonitie,
as the Schole-men determine? Hence in things where there is no express
declaration of the Divine Will, Covenant, or Promise on God part, if he should
pretermit that which he does, or do that which he pretermits, if he should deal
more severely, or more mercifully with any than he does, there could be no
injustice fastened on him. Hence,

3. Prop. There can be no (...), No acception of persons with God.
or Acception of persons charged on God. This is expressly laid down, Romans
2.11. of which before: And the reasons are most evident, (1) Because Acception
of persons has place only in him, who is under an obligation to distribute
justice, not according to his pleasure, but according to certain Qualities,
Reasons, or Conditions inherent in or appendent to the persons, to whom the
said justice is to be distributed. But now God is under no obligation, but what
flows from his own soverain pleasure, to distribute rewards or punishments to
any. (2) Acception of persons cannot have place in the distribution of good
things merely gratuitous and free; but only in such as are of debt: But now
Gods distributions of good things are merely gratuitous. Thus Aquinas:
Acception of persons is only of a thing due; and therefore it cannot be
ascribed to God. None can owe any thing to another, but by this, that he does
in some manner depend on, or has received something from another: but God
dependes on no one, neither does he receive any thing from any other. Acception
of persons has place only where, in the dispensation of things due, any favors
one more than another, with respect to some circumstance of the person,
contrary or beside the merits of the cause. Therefore, albeit God give, out of
his mere liberality, inequally to persons equal, yet this is not Acception of
persons; because there is nothing due. Hence,

4. Prop. There is an infinite distance between the Justice of God, The
difference between the Justice of God and Men.
and of men. (1) Al human Justice arises from an obligation and debt; but Gods
Justice from the mere free constitution of his Will: Man wills things, because
they are just; but things are therefore just with God, because he wills them.
(2) Many things that are injust with men, are just with God. The rule of
Justice which tieth men to do justly, does also render them injust, when they
do otherwise: But now God, where he has not brought himself under an
obligation by his own free constitution and promise, has a liberty of acting
or not acting, of doing this or the contrary in the distribution of rewards,
and gifts. If he should not do what he does, or if he should do what he does
not, his Justice were the same. If God spoil the Egyptians to enrich his
people, or if he enrich the Assyrians by the spoils of his people, he is just
still. Where God has not obliged himself by his own Word, he has a liberty of
doing one thing or the contrary without injustice. Yet,

5. Prop. So far as God has obliged himself by the constitution of his own Will
and Word, Gods Justice regards the Qualities of its object.
his ordinate Justice ever regardes the Constitution and Qualities of the
object. Gods ordinate Justice being the same with his Veracitie and Fidelity,
it always respects such Qualities and Conditions as its object, by reason of
his own constitution, is invested with. For God, in the executions of his
ordinate Justice, assumes the quality of a Judge: and a Judge cannot duly
abstain from the administration of Justice: neither is Justice duly
administered, unless the Qualities of the objects, and merits of the cause be
fully inspected and considered. Gods ordinate Justice as Rector and Judge of
the Al is chiefly exercised in the reduction of althings to that equality and
order, which his Divine Wisdom and Will has prescribed unto them. Hence these
two things necessarily follow this Divine ordinate Justice: (1) It never exerts
it self, but where those Qualities and Conditions, which it has prescribed its
object, be found. As it never punishes any but for sin; so it never rewards
any but the Godly, etc. (2) Wherever these Conditions or Qualities are found,
it necessarily exerts it self. It cannot but punish sin wherever it be;
neither can it but reward holiness if sincere. There is a necessity, not
Physic but Moral attendes al its egresses; and that from the free Constitution
of the Divine Will.

. 2. Next to the Justice of God we are to discourse of his Veracitie and
Fidelity, Gods Veracitie and Fidelity.
which is not really distinct from his Ordinate Justice. Thence we find the
Justice of God frequently put for his Fidelity. So Psalm. 31.1. Deliver me in
thy Righteousness, Psalm. 31.1.
i. e. according to thy Righteousness, whereby thou do declare thy self
just in making good thy promises. Some make this distinction between Gods
Verity, Fidelity, and Justice: Gods Verity obliges him to this, that he
promise sincerely: his Fidelity, that he keep his promise: and his Justice,
that he perform his promise by giving the thing promissed. Touching the
veracitie of God we find lively Illustrations and Notices both in Sacred and
Platonic Philosophy. As for Sacred Philosophy, it is most express in the
asserting Gods Veracitie. Genesis 22.16.
So Genesis 22.16. By my self have I sworn, assuredly says Jehovah. Assuredly
says: or, the faithful saying. (...) neum is peculiar to Gods Oracles, which
are al faithful sayings, 1 Timothy 1.15. and 3.1. Of the same letters transposed
comes also (...) Amen, which notes the faithfulness of God. Thus Esa. 25.1.
Esa. 25.1.
For thou have done wonderful things, thy counsels of old are faithfulness and
truth. (...) In faithfulness and firmness. Gataker conceives the word here to
note firm or firmness, rather than true or truth; because the word, in the
singular no where else found, is used in the plural for pillars, 2 Kings 18.16.
The Veracitie of God is farther explicated, 1 Samuel 15.29.
1 Samuel 15.29. The Eternity or strength of Israel will not lie. (...) signifies
both eternity and strength, which are both great pillars of the Divine
Veracitie. So Psalm. 33.4. Psalm. 33.4.
The Word of the Lord is right, and al his works are done in truth. (...) in
truth, veracitie, or constance. So Psalm. 18.20. Psalm. 18.20.
As for God, his way is perfect. This seems to be meant of the veracitie and
constance of his promises. Thence it follows: The Word of the Lord is tried.
(...) examined, i. e. pure, sincere, like Silver well refined, neither do they
ever fail, as Psalm. 12.6. Psalm. 36.5.
So Psalm. 36.5. Thy faithfulness reaches to the clouds: i. e. it is Immense
and Infinite. The space between us and the Clouds is vast, Psalm. 89.1, 8.
and seemingly immense. Thus Psalm. 89.1. I will sing of the mercies of the Lord.
By Mercies Kimhi and Ezra understand Gods free Constitution antecedent to his
promise. Whence it follows: With my mouth will I make known thy faithfulness.
Mercy makes the promise, but Fidelity is engaged for the performance of it.
So v. 2, 3. and v. 8. O Lord God of Hosts, who is a strong God like unto thee?
or, to thy faithfulness round about thee? He styles God most potent, in regard
of his Veracitie and Fidelity in making good his promises: and then he adds,
that Gods faithfulness is round about him, which is a Poetic description,
denoting that God is always and in every posture or regard most faithful. And
he procedes, in the following Verses, lively to describe the Fidelity of God:
v. 33, 34, 35.
particularly v. 33. Nor suffer my faithfulness to fail. (...) Neither will I
lie against my Truth, or in my Truth: i. e. I will not violate my Veracitie, by
not performing my promise. So v. 34. My Covenant will I not break. (...), I will
not profane my Covenant, or offer violence to it. Again, v. 35. Once have I
sworn by my Holiness, that I will not lie unto David. (...) once, i. e.
irrevocably, as Kinthi and Ezra. (...), if I lie to David. The particle if,
being used as a formule in swearing, does greatly deny. For the ancient
Patriarchs were wont, under this formule, by a kind of Aposiopesis, silently to
couch an Imprecation of evil on the head of him that swore, if he did violate
his faith. The great God assumes this formule of swearing from human custom,
thereby to declare the firmitude of his Veracitie and Fidelity in performing
his oath. All this is lively explicated, Hebr. 6.17, 18. Heb. 6.17, 18.
God being willing more abundantly to show to the heirs of promise, the
immutabilitie of his counsel, engaged his fidelity by an oath: That by two
immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to lie, or to deceive: for
so Grotius conceives (...) ought to be rendered, which signifies an event that
frustrates expectation, as Lev. 6.2. Jos. 24.27. Esa. 58.2. Hos. 1.2. Hab.
3.17. Gods Providence ost seem to cross his Promises, and so to frustrate
our expectations, but really there is not the least mutabilitie on Gods part:
he cannot lie or deceive, being bound by two immutable things, his Word and
Oath, which give abundant assurance of his Fidelity.

Plato also gives very great and illustrious notices of the Veracitie of God,
and those not a little consorme to Sacred Philosophy. Thus Repub. 2. p. 382.
(...); Do thou not know, that both God and men do truly hate a lie? And
then he adds the Reason: (...), That there is no mortal who would in his soul
either deceive, or be deceived, or be ignorant, or be involved in the darkness
of a lie, as to Supreme Beings. Thence he subjoins: (...), Truly a lie should
be hated, not only by God, but also by men. Then he adds: shall we imagine,
(...); that a lie is utile to God? What, therefore because he understandes not
ancient things, etc.? Whence he concludes: (...), etc. Wherefore God is both
simple and faithful, both in work and word: neither is he himself changed,
neither does he deceive others, neither by phantastic delusions, neither by
words, neither by signs, neither by visions, neither by dreams. Plato here
enumerates the several ways, whereby God reveles himself, in each of which his
Veracitie is most illustrious. Whence p. 383. he makes this Law for the right
establishment of Religion, That men speak and believe touching God, that he is
no Deceiver, or Seducer of others, either by Words, or otherwise.

But to discourse more Philosophically of the Veracitie of God, we must first
distinguish of Verity in the general; which is either simple or complexe. (1)
Simple verity is either in the mind, or in things themselves. [1] Simple Truth
in the mind consistes in the conformity of our Notions unto things. And in
this regard the Truth of God importes the verity of his Ideas, or knowledge of
things. [2] Simple Truth in Things, is nothing but their conformity to their
specific Idea, or formal definition and nature. So we say, that is true Gold,
which conformes to the specific Idea of Gold. This some Aristoteleans style
Metaphysic or transcendental Truth: others Physic Truth; it being no other than
the real existence of things. For, as Aristotle, (or whoever were the
compilator of that Book) Metaph. min. l. 1. c. 1. observes, (...), every thing
has so much of truth, as it has of existence. Now the verity of God in this
regard, is nothing else save the simple pure actualitie of his essence and
existence. (2) Complexe Truth is either Mental, or Oral. [1] Complexe mental
Truth is the conformity of complexe mental Ideas, Notions, or Propositions
unto things: which cannot be ascribed to God, because he has no complexe
knowledge, but only simple: albeit he knows al propositions, yet it is not by
any complexe notions, but in the most simple glass of his own essence. [2]
Complexe Oral Verity is either Logic or Ethic: Logic Oral Verity is when
Propositions or Discourses agree with things: Ethic Oral Verity is when our
words agree to our thoughts, which is termed Sincerity; or our deeds to our
words, which is Veracitie.

This Veracitie as to God regards al his words; Gods Veracitie in fulfilling
but in a more particular manner his Comminations or Threats, and Promises;
yet with this difference. (1) Promises.
(1) Promises give a right to the persons to whom they are made, which cannot
be taken from them without injury: for albeit it be free to any to make a
promise; yet having made it, his fidelity is obliged to see it performed. So
that in Promises there is no room for Relaxation or Dispensation; but the
words must be taken in the largest sense, and as most favorable for the persons
to whom the Promise is made: according to that commun maxim in Civil Law,
Favors must be amplified. And that which adds to the obligation of promises
is when they are confirmed by an Oath, which renders them every way Immutable
and Irrelaxable. Such are all the Promises of God, as Hebr. 6.17. Heb. 6.17, 18.
Where God is said to confirm his promise by an Oath, whereby it became every
way immutable, as verse. 18. (2) But now as to Comminations or Threats, (2)
Threats.
there is no right or debt accrews to the persons, to whom they are made, save
only a debt or merit of punishment: the threat renders them obnoxious to
punishment, if they break that Law whereto the threat is appendent: yet in many
Cases, 'specially as to circumstances, the Superior, who made the Law and
affixed a threat thereto, has a liberty of relaxing, or dispensing with the
penalty of his Law. The Commination declares the Merit of punishment in the
offender, and the Power of punishing in the Superior offended; but yet it does
not always suppose a necessary egresse or execution of vindictive justice for
the punishing the offender; at least not as to al circumstances threatened; but
still there remains place in the breast of the Judge, or Superior, 'specially if
he be Absolute, and Soverain, either to relaxe or dispense with the penalty of
his Laws, either in whole or part. Thus in Gods Threats and penal Laws, he
reserves to himself a liberty of Relaxation or Dispensation in many Cases,
thereby to make way for his Clemence or Mercy, without the least violation of
his Veracitie or Justice. So in the first commination or penal Law, Genesis 2.17.
Thou shall surely die. Genesis 2.17.
Heb. in dying thou shall die. Which Hebraisme denotes a certain, immediate,
perfect, and constant death. And yet our Soverain Lord, out of his Soverain
rich Mercy, was pleased very far to relaxe and mitigate the rigor of this
commination or penal Law, as to many circumstances, by admitting of a Mediator,
and new Evangelic Covenant. In this regard God is said to repent or turn from
the siercenesse of wrath, as Jonah 3.9. Who can tell if God will turn, Jonah 3.9.
and repent, and turn away from his fierce anger, that we perish not. God by
reason of their legal imperfect faith and repentance, turned away his fierce
wrath for that time, albeit afterward it came down with vengeance, as History
assures us. Neither is it to be feared, lest the Veracitie of God should
receive any injury, if al his Threats are not always in all circumstances or
parts fulfilled: because al comminations and threats, which have not some
character or sign of irrevocabilitie assixt to them, are, according to their
own nature, so to be understood, as not to diminish the right of the Superior,
who makes them, to relaxe the same. Thus we see what latitude the Divine
Veracitie admits in the fulfilling Comminations and Threats, beyond what can be
admitted in fulfilling Divine Promises, as Grotius well observes.

Gods Veracitie and Fidelity in fulfilling his word, Gods Veracitie
demonstrated.
is founded in and may be demonstrated by, (1) his essential Verity. Plato
makes God to be (...), the first Truth, yea, (...), Truth it self; whence he
cannot but be true and faithful in his words. God is Truth essentially, not
participatively, therefore nothing but Truth can pass from him. Again, God is
pure Truth or Verity, with whom not the least shadow of Falsitie, Hypocrisy,
or Fraud in word or deed can mingle. Pure Truth and falsitie are incompatible.
There are no thoughts or ideas of man's heart so true, but there is some mixture
of error or falsitie in them: no words or deeds so sincere and faithful, but
something of hypocrifie and falsitie mixed with them: because there is no pure
truth in man's thoughts or words. But God being the first, pure, essential
Verity, his Veracitie is most pure and perfect, without the least shadow of
falsitie. (2) Gods Veracitie is founded on, and may be demonstrated by his
Eternity and Omnipotence. Thus in sacred Philosophy, 1 Samuel 15.29.
1 Samuel 15.29. The Eternity or strength of Israel will not lie. Al lies are
from impotence and infirmity: Truth and Veracitie is ever potent and strong;
but falsitie most impotent. (3) From the Holiness of God, of which we shall
immediately discourse. I shall conclude this Divine Attribute with a pleasing
observation I long since met with in the Life of Jansenius, Bishop of Ipre,
that great Patron of Divine Grace, who being demanded, What Attribute of God
was most in his heart, whereby he was most awed? Replied, The Truth or
Veracitie of God. And he that writes his Life, prefixed to his Augustinus,
assures us, That in his Garden-walkes, and solitary Meditations, with his eyes
fixed on Heaven, he was often seen and heard to break forth into this
acclamation: O Truth! So great an Admirer was he of Divine Verity and
Veracitie: and indeed no wonder, seeing it is the great Spring of the Divine
life and consolation both here and hereafter.

. 3. The last Divine Attribute, The Sanctity of God.
we are to discourse of, is the Sanctity or Holiness of God, whereof we find
great and illustrious Characters in sacred Philosophy. (1) We find the
Sanctity of God set forth in Scripture in a way of eminence and distinction
from al created Sanctity. Exodus 15.11.
So Exodus 15.11. Who is like unto thee, O Lord, amongst the Gods, or mighty
men! Who is like unto thee gloriose in Holiness, etc! Where he places Gods
transcendent Eminence and Elevation above al Creatures, as that wherein his
essential Sanctity chiefly consistes. And indeed the peerlesse Eminence of
Gods sacred Majesty is that wherein his Sanctity chiefly consistes, as we
intend anon more fully to demonstrate. Thus 1 Samuel 2.2. There is none holy as
the Lord: 1 Samuel 2.2.
for there is none besides thee: neither is there any Rock like our God. Hannah
here, as Moses before, places the Sanctity of God in his Supereminence above
al Creatures. (2) Hence God is frequently brought in, as an object of Divine
Worship, with regard to his Holiness. So Psalm. 30.4. Give thanks at the
remembrance of his Holiness: i. e. of his peerlesse Eminences. And Psalm.
71.22. Unto thee will I sing with the harp, O thou holy One of Israel. Also
Psalm. 92.12. Psalm. 92.12.
And give thanks at the remembrance of his Holiness: or celebrate the
memorial of his Holiness: i. e. Lift up his (...), or transcendent
Excellences. Again, Psalm. 98.1. O sing unto the Lord a new song; for he has
done mavelous things: his right hand and his holy arm has gotten him
victory. His holy arm, or the arm of his Holiness: i. e. of his holy power
so much above al other powers. The like Psalm. 99.3. Let them praise thy great
and terrible name; for it is holy. Also v. 9. Exalt the Lord our God, and
worship at his holy hill: for the Lord our God is holy. The like v. 5. As God is
a transcendent superlative Majesty, exalted above al other Gods, or Majesty's,
as Exodus 15.11. so in all Acts of Worship we must exalt him, by giving him a
singular, incommunicable, peculiar Worship. Whence in Scripture those that give
that Worship which is due to God, to any besides him, or in conjunction with
him, by way of object, either mediate or immediate, are said to profane his
holy Name, Ezech. 20.39. and 43.7, 8. because Gods Holiness, consisting in a
superlative incommunicable Majesty, admits no corrival in point of Worship.
Hence, to sanctify the holy Name or Majesty of God, is [1] to serve and
glorify him; because of his transcendent (...) or Eminence; and [2] to do it
with a peculiar, separate, incommunicated Worship; because he is holy and
separate above althings else. Not to do the former, is Irreligion, Profaneness
and Atheism; not to do the later is Idolatry and Superstition, as judicious
Mede well observes. Hence (3) God is said to sit on a Throne of Holiness, Psalm.
47.8. God sits upon the Throne of his Holiness. Psalm. 47.8.
Alluding to the Thrones of Princes, which were in the midst of the people,
exalted and lift up, that so their Majesty might appear more illustrious. God
being, by reason of his transcendent Eminences, exalted infinitely above al
Creatures, he is therefore said, to sit on the Throne of his Holiness. (4) We
find Gods Holiness, in a most eminent manner and with emphatic Characters,
proclaimed by such as have any views of God. Thus Esa. 6.3. Holy, holy, holy is
the Lord of Hosts. So Rev. 4.8. (5) The Sanctity of God is sometimes described
by purity. Hab. 1.13.
Hab. 1.13. Thou art of purer eyes than to behold evil, and can not look on
iniquity. (...) prae videndo. (...) here is comparative: as if he had said; O!
how pure are thine eyes? how impossible is it for thee to behold sin, with the
least delight or approbation? So 1 John 3.3. As he is pure. (6) The Sanctity
of God is sometimes described by Rectitude. Psalm. 25 8. Good and upright is the
Lord. So Psalm. 92.15. To show that the Lord is upright.

We find also in Plato many great notices of the Sanctity of God, conformable
to those of sacred Philosophy. So Theaetet. page 176. (...), Evils find no
place with God. Again, (...), God is in no manner unrighteous, but as it seems
most righteous. So Repub. 2. page 379. he says, That in Theology we should
use such modules, as come nearest to the Nature of God, and demonstrate what
God is. Thus we must constantly ascribe to God things consentaneous to his
Nature. Whence he subjoins: (...); Must we not determine then, that God is
indeed good? (...), But no good is noxious. (...); But that which hurts not,
does it do any evil? No surely. Whence he concludes: (...), Good therefore is
not the cause of althings; but of those things that are good it is the cause;
but of evils it is not the cause: i. e. God is the first Cause and Author of al
natural and moral good, but as for moral evil he is not the Author or Cause
thereof as it is evil; because moral evils as such have no efficient cause but
only deficient. Thence he adds: (...), Of good things we must own no principal
cause but God: but as for evils we must inquire after some other causes of
them; for God must not be estimed the cause of them. His mind is, that God must
be owned as the cause of al good, both Natural and Moral; yea, of the materia
substrata, or the material entitie of sin, which is a natural good: but as for
the proper Moral cause of Sin, as Sin is a deordination or difformitie from the
Divine Law, that is proper to the sinner: for God must not be thought to be the
Author or Moral cause of sin. This he farther explains, p. 380. Either we must
not at al attribute evils to God, or if we do, it must be in that manner as
before, namely, (...), we must say, that God has acted well and justly, and has
inflicted those punishments on them, that thereby he might bring some profit.
Wherein he informs us, that God is the cause of penal evils, not as evils, but
as conducing to good. Whence he concludes: (...), etc. That God, who is good,
should be the Author or Moral Cause of Evil to any, this we must with all manner
of contention refute, and not suffer any in the City to speak or hear such
things. Plato strongly assertes, that God is (...), the principal cause of al
good, but not of sin as sin; i. e. he neither commands, invites, encourages,
nor by any other Moral causalitie produces sin: albeit God does concur to the
material act or physic entitie of sin, which is naturally good, yet he does not
at al concur to the moral production, obliquitie or deordination of sin, which
has indeed no real efficient cause, but only deficient, according to that of
Proclus: There is no (...), Idea of moral evils. But the more distinctly and
yet concisely to explicate the sanctity of God, we are to know that his
original Essential and Absolute Holiness is nothing else but the incommunicable
superlative (...) or supereminence of his Divine Majesty, as separate from
althings else. For all Sanctity, and all the notions thereof, specially Grecanic
and Hebraic, implie separation and discretion. Whence the Sacred Majesty of
God, being, in regard of its infinite Perfection and Dignity, infinitely
exalted above al Beings and Dignities whatsoever, it must necessarily be the
prime sanctity. Yea, Holiness is so far appropriated to the first Being, as
that the Heathens ascribed a fictitious sanctity and eminence to al their
spurious Deities: whereby they generally acknowleged, that the prime Holiness
belongs only to the first Being. It Is true, good Angels and Men are Holy by
participation and derivation; but they are not Holiness in the abstract: this
appertains only to he prime, original, essential Holiness, who is infinitely
separate from al other Dignities and Eminences: in whom al Holiness is in the
abstract and essentially; from whom also al Holiness flows as from the source
and spring.

. 4. We find in Plato not only Characters of the Divine Essence and Attributes,
Platonic Philosophemes of the Trinity.
but also some dark notices of the Trinity; which, I no way dout, were
originally traduced from the Sacred Fountain of Hebraic Philosophy. We have
Plato's Sentiments about a Trinity mentioned more expressly in his Sectators,
Plotinus, Porphyrie, Iamblichus and Proclus. And the whole is well explicated by
Cyril Alexandr. Contra Jul. l. 1. p. 34. Edit. Paris. 1638. thus: (...), For
Porphyrie, expounding the Sentiment of Plato, says, that the essence of God
procedes even to three Hypostases; but that the Supreme God is, (...), The
Supreme GOOD; and that after him, the second is, (...), the prime Opificer or
Creator; moreover, that the third is, (...), the mundane Soul: (or Universal
Spirit:) For the Divinity extended it self to the Soul of the Universe. This
Platonic Trinity Cyril refutes, as that which gave Spawn and Seed to
Arianisme, as hereafter. I am not ignorant, that Learned Cudworth, in his New
Book, against Atheism, B. 1. C. 4.. 34. p. 590, etc. endeavors to apologize
for this Platonic Trinity, and reconcile it with the Christian: Yet he
ingenuously acknowledges, page 580, and 601, etc. That the most refined
Platonic Trinity supposes an Essential Dependence and Subordination of the
second Hypostasis, to the First, and of the Third to the Second: Yea, he
grantes, that the Platonists generally held these three Hypostases to be three
distinct Gods, as in what follows. I conceive those endeavors to reconcile the
Christians Trinity with the Platonic, to be of most dangerous consequence, and
that which proved Origen's Peste, as Part. 3. B. 2. c. 1.. 8.

The chief place I find in Plato, wherein he gives us some dark adumbration of
a Trinity, is Epist. 6. p. 323. Let this Law be constituted by you, and
confirmed by an Oath, not without obtesting, (...), both God, the Imperator of
althings, both which are, and which shall be; and the Father of that Imperator
and Cause: whom indeed, if we truly Philosophise, we shall al distinctly know,
so far as that knowledge may fall within the power of blessed men. This
description of God Clemens Alexandrinus and others interpret of God the Father,
and God the Son, who is indeed the Imperator of althings. We find also in
Plato's Epinom. mention of (...), as elsewhere of (...), which they attribute
to the second person in the Trinity. Whence the Poets make Minerva to be
(...), the mind of Jupiter, or his Wisdom, produced out of his head, without
Mother: as the true Messiah was styled by the Hebrews, The wisdom of God,
without Mother. Plotinus, Ennead. 5, Lib. 1. Philosophiseth copiosely of this
Platonic Trinity; the Title of which Book runs thus: (...), Of the Three
Principal or Causal Hypostases. And he begins, Cap. 2. with the (...), the
Mundane Soul, its Dignity and Office: and Ennead. 5. l. 5. c. 3. speaking of
(...), Mind, the second Hypostasis in the Platonic Trinity, he says, that he
is, (...), the Second God. And En. 5. l. 1. c. 7. p. 489. he says, That this
Second God, the First Mind, (...), etc. Being now begotten [by the first God]
begot also al entities with himself, namely the whole pulchritude of Ideas;
which were al intellectile Gods. Furthermore we must conceive that this
[Begotten Mind] is full of althings begotten by him, and does as it were swallow
up althings begotten. Thence he adds: (...), But the progeny of this Mind is
a certain (...) and Hypostasis consisting in cogitation, etc. Proclus, in Plat.
Timae. p. 93. calls this Platonic Trinity, (...), the tradition of the Three
Gods; and he makes, according to Numenius, the First God, to be the
Grandfather, the Second to be the Son, the Third to be the Grandson: i. e. the
Second God to be begotten by the First, and the Third by the Second. Porphyrie
also, explicating Plato's mind, calls God the Creator of althings, (...), the
Pattern Mind: who also makes three subsistences in the essence of the
Divinity; the first he calls the Supreme God; the second, the Creator; the
third, the Soul of the Universe. The like Iamblichus his Scholar, concerning
the Egyptian Mysteries: The first God, the prime being, the Father of God whom
he begets, remaining in his solitary unity, etc. And Plotinus writ a Book of
the three Persons or Subsistences: whereof the first he makes to be the Supreme
Eternal Being, who generated the second, namely the eternal and perfect Mind,
as before. So in his Book of Providence, he says, That althings were framed
(...), by the Divine Mind. Thus Plato in his Phaedo says: (...), The Divine
Mind is the framer and cause of althings. That these Platonic Philosophemes
were the Seminary of Arianisme, we have endeavored to demonstrate, Part. 3. l.
2. c. 1.. 9. And this is well observed by Cyril, contra Jul. l. 1. p. 34. Edit.
Paris. 1638. where speaking of Plato, and his Trinity, he says: (...), Truly
he contemplated not the whole rightly, but, in the same manner as they who
follow Arius, he divides and supposes Subjects, inducing Hypostases
subordinate among themselves, and conceits the Holy and Consubstantial Trinity
to be three distinct Gods. And albeit Learned Cudworth, B. 1. C. 4. p. 590.
against Atheism, endeavors to wipe off this aspersion, yet he grants the
conclusion, as hereafter. But to speak the truth, I find no express mention of
a (...) Trinity in Plato; only he speaks confusedly of a (...) Father Lord,
and of (...) the Mind, etc. But among the later Platonistes of the Schole of
Alexandria, 'specially those of the golden succession, the Sectators of
Ammonius, Plotinus, Porphyrie, Iamblichus, Proclus, we find frequent mention
and notices of a Trinity, which they thus distinguish. (1) (...) the Supreme
self-being: whom also they style (...), the one, and (...), the Good. (2)
(...), the Divine mind, the Creatrix or Framer of althings: who is also termed
by them, (...), the Word, and (...), the seminal Word or Reason, that gives
Being to althings. (3) (...), the Soul of the Universe: and (...), the first
Soul, as c. 8.. 2. These more distinct notices of a Trinity, I am very apt to
persuade my self they received not so much from Plato, but from Ammonius, the
famous Head of that Succession; who was either a Christian, or a friend to
their Sacred Philosophy, out of which he stole most of his choicest
Philosophemes, and incorporated them into the body of his Platonic
Philosophy, in order to a refinement thereof: which, albeit his design might
be good, yet it proved the peste and subversion of the Christian Theology, at
least among those of that Schole. For Origin, his Scholar, following in his
steps, out of too fond a love for Platonic Philosophy, reduced Sacred
Philosophy to Platonic Dogmes: which proved the original cause of the greatest
Errors that befell the Church in succeeding Ages. Thus he makes the Three
Persons in the Trinity, to be, according to the Three Platonic Hypostases,
One, not in Essence, but Will only. So Origin. contra Celsum, l. 8. p. 386. (
Edit. Cantabr. 1658.) Where having cited that, Act. 4.32. There was of all the
Believers one Heart and one Soul, he brings it to prove what our Lord affirms,
Joh. 10.30. I and the Father are one. And thence in what follows concludes
thus: (...), etc. Therefore we religiosely worship the Father of Truth, and the
Son who is Truth, as being truly two in Hypostase, but one in concord,
consent, and identitie of Will: So that whosoever sees the Son, -- shall in him
see God, as in the Image of God, etc. Hence Origin, in imitation of these
Platonistes supposed an essential dependence of the Son, the second Hypostasis,
on the Father; as also of the Spirit, the third, on the Son: of which essential
dependence and subordination, see Cudworth against Atheism, L. 1. C. 4. p.
581, etc. Yea Origin, in his Comments on John will needs persuade us, That the
Word in Divine things is taken only metaphorically. How far Origen's Platonic
Philosophemes laid the foundation for the Arian and other Heresies touching the
second and third Person in the Trinity, see Court Gent. p. 3. l. 2. c. 1.. 8,
9. Samosatenus also had his pestiferous infusions from Plotinus's Philosophemes
about the Divine (...): and Arius his from the same Schole, as we have more
fully proved in our Discourse of the Vanity of Philosophy, B. 2. C. 1.. 8.
But whereas Amelius of old, and some late Socinians would fain persuade us,
that John borrowed his (...), Joh. 1.1. from Plato, it is evident, that he had
it from the Sacred Philosophy among the Hebrews: for in the ancient Chaldaic
Thargum we find frequent mention of (...) the Word of Jehovah, whereby they
understood the Messiah, as Genesis 3.8. Psalm. 2.12. and 27.1. as elsewhere. Yea
Celsus would needs persuade us, That the Christians came to call their Jesus,
(...), THE SON OF GOD, from their Pagan Ancestors, who called the World made by
God, the Son of God: But this is refuted by Origin, Contra Celsum, l. 6. p.
308. Edit. 1658. Where he proves, that this Character of Jesus was to be found
in the Writings of Moses and the Prophets, who writ long before the Grecian
Philosophers. That al those confused notices of a Trinity among the
Platonistes were originally traduced from Sacred Philosophy, see Clem.
Alexandr. Strom. 5. p. 436. Eusebius, praepar. Evangel. l. 11. from cap. 14. to
23. Philos. General. Part. 1. l. 1. c. 2. sect. 5.. 2. and l. 3. c. 4. sect.
1.. 13. also Court. Gent. P. 1. B. 3. c. 5.. 7.

Learned Cudworth, in his Book against Atheism, B. 1. C. 4. sect. 35. p. 548.
says: We may reasonably conclude, that which Proclus asserteth of this
Trinity, as it was contained in the Chaldaic Oracles, to be true, that it was
at first (...), a Theology of Divine Tradition or Revelation, or a Divine
Cabala, viz. amongst the Hebrews first, and from them afterward communicated
to the Egyptians and other Nations -- However, adds he, we freely acknowledge,
that, as this Divine Cababa was but little understood by many of those who
entertained it among the Pagans, so was it by diverse of them much depraved and
adulterated. For (1) the Pagans universally called this their Trinity, a
Trinity of Gods, (...), and (...), the First, the Second, and the Third God.
(2) Whence, p. 557. he procedes to demonstrate, that the direct design of this
Platonic Trinity was nothing else but to lay a foundation for infinite
Polytheisme, Cosmolatrie, and Creatureworship. Where by the way he well
observes, That these Pagans (who so much cried up this Platonic Trinity) were
the only public and professed Champions against Christianity, and the
Christian Trinity. (3) He adds, p. 559. That the Three Hypostases or persons
asserted by the Christians are truly and really one God; and not one only in
Will, as Origin and the Platonistes avouch. (4) He informs us, p. 564. That
Proclus and other of the Platonistes intermingle many particular Gods with
those three Universal Principes or Hypostases of their Trinity; as Noes, Minds
or Intellects superior to the first Soul; and Henades and Agathotetes, Unities
and Goodnesses, superior to the first Intellect too; thereby making those
particular Beings, which must needs be Creatures, superior to those Hypostases
that are Universal and Infinite. So great confusions, yea contradictions
attendes the Platonic Trinity, which yet is too much admired.

CHAP. VII. Of Gods prime Causalitie, Efficience, and Concurse in general.
God the first Cause demonstrated. The Object of Divine Concurse. Gods Concurse
not merely conservative of the Principe. Durandus's Objections answered. Divine
Concurse as to the human Will, and al create Objects. Gods Concurse principal.
How second Causes are Instruments. Divine Concurse as to its Principe the same
with the Divine Will. No executive Power in God distinct from his Will. The
Divine Will of it self omnipotent and operative. Gods Concurse (1) Immediate
both as to the second Cause, its Act, and Effect. (2) Independent. (3)
Previous. (4) Total. (5) Particular. (6) Efficacious. (7) Connatural.

. 1. HAving explicated the Divine Nature and Attributes, God the first Cause of
althings.
we now descend to the explication of the Divine Causalitie and Efficience;
which properly belongs to metaphysic or prme Philosophy. Thence Sapience,
which takes in the generic notion of metaphysic, according to Aristotle,
consistes in the contemplation, not only of most excellent Beings, but also of
the prime Cause of althings. That God is the prime Cause of althings, not only
sacred, but also Platonic Philosophy does assure us. As for sacred
Philosophy, it gives frequent and great demonstrations of our Hypothesis. Thus
Esa. 66.2. For all these things have my hands made, and al those things have
been. So Psalm. 104.24. of which more in Gods Creation. Plato also has left us
great notices of Gods prime Causalitie and Efficience. So in his Phaedo, page
96. he demonstrates, how great the ignorance and folly of such is, who wholly
busy their thoughts in the contemplation of second Causes, but neglect to
inquire after and into the first Cause, who is not only (...), the principal
supreme Cause, but also (...), the Cause of causes: whereas al second Causes
are only (...), Concauses and Instruments of the first Cause. Thence page 97.
he adds: But when I sometime heard some one reading and relaeting out of a
certain Book, as he said of Anaxagoras, (...), etc. That the Divine Mind does
orderly dispose and govern althings, and is the cause of althings; I was
indeed greatly recreated with this Cause, and it seemed to me to be rightly
determined, namely that the Divine Mind was the Cause of althings: and thus I
reasoned with my self: if it be so, that the gubernatrix and dispositrix Mind
do thus dispose althings, it does therefore place each particular in that
place, where it may be best constituted. If therefore any one be willing to
inquire after and into the cause of every thing, both of its existence and
corruption, he must also inquire, in what regard it may be best, either as to
being, or as to suffering or doing any other thing. Upon this account there is
nothing more needful for man to inquire after, either concerning himself or
other things, (...), than what is best and most excellent: for it is necessary,
that such an one also know what is worst; because the science of these things
is the same. When I pondered these things in my mind, I much pleased my self in
this, that I had got a Master, who would instruct me in the causes of things,
according to mine own mind, namely Anaxagoras. In these great Philosophemes of
Socrates we have these observables. (1) These contemplations about the first
Cause, were some of his dying thoughts, and therefore such as his mind were
most intent on. (2) He greedily imbibes and closes with that great Tradition
of Anaxagoras, derived originally from sacred Philosophy, That the Divine Mind
was the first cause of althings. (3) That the Divine Mind disposed, ordered,
and governed althings in the best manner. (4) That he who would inquire into
the causes of this, must have his eye on those two, the matter and efficient.
For Plato makes but two Principes of things, the Matter, out of which things
were made, and the Efficient that formed the matter into shape or that
particular form or essence. This Efficient he elsewhere styles (...), Idea,
making (...), the Idea and matter the two Principes of althings. So the Stoics
made two Principes of althings, the Efficient and Patient. Plato sometimes
makes (...), Efficient and Cause terms synonymous: so (...), the efficient
precedes and the effect follows. (5) That as to efficients, we must always
inquire after the best and most excellent, namely God the first Cause: for he
that knows the best, i. e. God, may easily know the worst, i. e. second Causes.
So Plato, Leg. 4. p. 715. makes God to be (...), the Principe and End of
althings. Thus in his Sophista, page 265. (...); Namely, does Nature, by the
force of some casual fortuitous cause, without the efficacitie of the Divine
Mind, produce these things? Or, on the contrary, shall we not determine, that
these things have their existence with Divine Wisdom and Science from God?
Wherein note [1] that he lays down an Hypothesis, contrary to that of
Leucippus and Democritus, That things existe not by the casual fortuitous
confluxe of Atoms. [2] That althings existe by the Divine Mind. Hence, [3]
That althings are framed and disposed in the best order, with the highest
wisdom. [4] He makes mention of (...), the Word; which some would understand
of the second Person in the Trinity, but I should rather take it here for
wisdom, as (...) must be understood of Science. The like in his Theaetetus:
(...), We must remember, that nothing can be of it self; therefore althings are
from some first Cause, of which more fully before, C. 2.. 2. So Repub. 6. he
makes God to be the First cause (...), giving essence to althings: for (...),
every thing receives essence from the efformative words of the great Opificer.
Again, Repub. 2. page 379. he says: (...), And of good things there is no
other supreme cause to be acknowledged besides God. So page 380. he proves,
That God is the cause of al good, whether natural or moral. And Epist. page
312. he expressly says, That God is (...), the cause of althings good or
beautiful. Thus Damascene, (out of Dionysius Areopagita, who does much
Platonise) Orthod. Fid. l. 1. c. 15. (...), etc. God is the cause and principe
of althings, the essence of Beings, the Life of things living, the Reason of
things rational, the Intellect of things intellectile, the Restitution and
Resurrection of them that fall from him, but of those things that naturally
perish the Renovation and Reformation: of those things which are moved with a
strong impetuositie the great confirmation, of such things as stand the
stabilitie, of those things that ascend up to him the way and reductive
manuduction. Thence he adds: (...), Of the illuminated the splendour, the
perfection of the perfect, the Deification of the deified, the peace of the
discordant, the simplicity of the simple, the union of the united, the
superessential and superprincipal Principe of every Principe.

For the more distinct demonstration, that God is the prime Cause of althings,
these Platonic Philosophemes may be thus formed into Arguments. (1) That which
is such by Essence, is necessarily before that which is such by Participation:
but now God is a Cause by Essence; whereas al other causes are such only by
participation. God gives essence to althings, but receives it from nothing.
Thus Plato, Leg. 6. page 509. God the supreme Good gives efficace and force to
things, not only for their being known, but also for their existence: (...),
when yet that chief good is not properly Essence, but superessential; because
greatly transcending the whole nature of things create, both in dignity and
virtue. (2) Al Imperfectes receive their origin from that which is more
perfect: and is not God the most absolutely perfect of al Beings? Must not
althings then receive their origin from God? (3) That which is the last end of
althings must needs be the first Cause of al? For the first Cause is of equal
latitude and extent with the last end: nothing can terminate and bound the
appetite of man, but that which gave Being to him: that which is last in order
of final causes, must needs be first in order of Efficients: And is not God the
last End of althings? Are not althings so far good, as they participate of the
Divine Goodness? Is not God, to speak in Plato's language, (...), the
universal Idea and measure of al good? And must he not then necessarily be
(...), the chiefest Good? It Is true, there are other (...), inferior derivative
goods, but is there any universal, essential, independent good but God? And
must not the order of Efficients answer the order of Ends? If God as the last
End gives blessed Being, must he not as the first Efficient give natural Being?
Can any thing return to God as the last end, but what flows from him as the
first Cause? Thus Simplicius, a Sectator of Plato, in Epictet. cap. 1. page 9.
(...), The Fountain and Principe of althings is the chiefest Good: for that
which is desired by althings, and unto which althings are referred, that is the
Principe and End of althings. Whence he concludes: (...), For the one first
Being, Principe, chiefest Good and God are one and the same: for God is the
first and cause of althings. (4) Must not every multiforme, variable,
defectible Being be reduced to some uniforme, simple, invariable, indefectible
Being as its first Cause? And is there any uniforme, simple, immutable Being
but God? Thus Simplicius, in Epictet. cap. 1. page 9. (...), etc. It Is
necessary, that the first Being be most simple: for whatever is composite, as
composite it is after one, and multitude, and so produced, etc. Whereby he
proves, that the first Cause is most simple. (5) Do not al finite, dependent
causes need some infinite independent cause to conserve and actuate them? And
is there any infinite independent cause but God? Can any thing be the first
cause, but he who is (...) without al cause? (6) Is not the order of causes
proportionable to the order of effects? Where then there is an universalitie of
effects, must there not also be an universal first Cause, which gives Being to
al those effects? Is it possible, that the universitie of effects which are in
Nature should existe, but by the universal efficace of the first independent
Being and Cause? Thus Simplicius, in Epictet. cap. 1. page 10. (...), It Is
necessary, that the first cause have the highest and universal influence; for
there is an amplitude and abundance of efficace in him, so that he can produce
althings of himself.

. 2. Having demonstrated God to be the First Cause of althings, The Object of
Divine Concurse.
we now proceed to explicate the mode and nature of his Causalitie, Concurse,
and Efficience. The prime Causalitie and Concurse of God may be considered with
respect to (1) Its Object, (2) Its Subject or Principe, (3) Its Mode of
Operation, (4) Its Terms or Effects produced. First, we may consider the prime
Causalitie, Concurse and Efficience of God as to its Object, and that (1)
Negatively. (2) Positively. We shall state and determine both in the following
Propositions.

1. Prop. Gods concurse, as to its object, Gods Concurse not merely
conservative of the Principe.
consistes not merely in the communication of force and virtue to the second
cause, and conservation of the same. The Antithesis hereto was anciently
maintained by Durandus (contrary to the Hypothesis both of the Thomistes and
Scotistes) in Sent. l. 2. Distinct. 1. q. 5, who supposed, That the concurse of
God conferred nothing more on second causes, than a virtue or power to act, and
the conservation thereof; without any immediate actual influence on the second
cause or its Act in order to the production of the effect. The (...), or
principal motive, ground, and reason of this Antithesis is this; If we make God
to concur immediately to the Acts and Operations of second causes, he must then
concur to the sinful Acts of the will, and so be the cause of sin. This
Antithesis of Durandus was generally exploded by the ancient Schole-men, both
Thomistes and Scotistes, and is still by the more sober Jesuits. Only in this
last Age one Nicolaus Taurelius, in his Book, De rerum aeternitate and triumpho
Philosophiae, has undertaken the patronage of Durandus's Antithesis, with this
advance, even to the subversion not only of the concurse, but also of the
conservation of God. And since there has started up another, Lud. A Dola, a
Capucine Friar, who has taken greater pains to defend and promove this
Antithesis of Durandus; pretending this as the only expedient for an
accommodation between the Thomistes and Jesuits. And for the confirmation of
this Hypothesis they give this commun instance: On the supposition that a stone
should hang in the air, and God withdraw al his concurse for the actuating the
stone, yet if the force which suspendes its motion downward were removed, it
would, notwithstanding the substraction of Divine concurse, move naturally
downward, or to the same purpose. Albeit I am no friend to those vexatious
disputes, which the Schools of Theology, as well as Philosophy, now ring of,
yet this Antithesis being, as I conceive, of dangerous consequence, I cannot
but, with modesty, express my just aversation from, yea indignation against
it; with the reserve of that respect and honor, which is due to that learned
and pious Divine among our selves, who has undertaken the defense of
Durandus's Opinion. I shall not now enter on the solemn ventilation and debate
of this Antithesis, having reserved this task, if the Lord favor my desires,
for another subject and style, which may be of more public use to foreign
Nations; but only touch briefly on such arguments as may confirm mine own
Hypothesis, with brief solutions of the contrary objections.

That Gods concurse is not merely conservative of the Principe, Virtue and
Force of second causes, without any influence on the Act, is evident; (1)
because subordination and dependence of second causes on the first, not only
for their Beings and Virtue, with the conservation thereof, but also in their
Acting and Causing, does formally appertain to the essential Reason and
Constitution of a Creature as such. For the Dependence of a Creature on God,
not only in Being, but also in Operation, is, not extrinsee to its essence, but
involved in the very intrinsec limitation thereof, as Suarez strongly argues,
Metaph. Disp. 31.. 14. Hence God, by his Absolute Power, cannot make a
Creature, which should be Independent, and not subordinate to him in operation:
for this implies a contradiction, namely, that a Creature should be, and should
not be a Creature. For if it depend not on God in all its Operations, it is not
a Creature. (2) If the Created Will cannot subsist of it self and maintain its
own Virtue and Force, much less can it Act of it self, or by its own power.
The force of this Argument lies in this: If the Create Will cannot of it self
conserve its own Act in Being, when it is produced, how is it possible, that it
should produce the same of it self? Yea, is not the very conservation of an Act
in Being the same with the production thereof? Do not Divines say, that
Conservation is but continued Creation? how then can the Will produce its own
Act of it self, if it cannot of it self conserve the same? Or, why may it not
as well conserve its Being and Virtue, as conserve its Act of it self? If we
then, as Durandus does, allow God the conservation of the Being, Principe and
Virtue; must we not then also allow him, by a paritie of Reason, the
conservation of the Act? and if the conservation of the Act, why not also the
production thereof? This Argument is well managed by Bradwardine, l. 2. c. 24.
and 32. (3) Whatever is independent in Acting, must also necessarily be so in
Being: for terms of Essence always bring with them terms or bounds of
Activitie: a limited cause necessarily is limited in its Operations: and where
there are limits and terms, there must be Subordination and Dependence.
Nothing can operate of it self independently as to all Superior Cause, but what
has Being in and from it self: for Operation and its limitation always follows
Essence and its limitation, as Aristotle assures us. (4) What ever is variable
and mutable necessarily dependes on somewhat that is invariable and immutable:
but every Act of a Create Will is variable and mutable; therefore dependent on
the immutable first Cause. See more fully Suarez, Metaph. Disput. 22. Sect. 1.
Hurtado de Mendoza, Phys. Disput. 10. Sect. 10.. 17.

But here it is objected by Durandus and his Sectators, Durandus's Objections
answered.
(1.) That this destroys human liberty, etc. This objection is fully answered
in what precedes of the Wills Liberty, Part. 2. B. 3. c. 9. sect. 3.. 11, 12.
and B. 4. C. 1.. 28. also Philosoph. General. p. 1. l. 3. c. 3. sect. 2.. 8, 9.
Where we fully demonstrate, That the necessary concurse of God is so far from
destroying human liberty, that it does confirm and promove the same; in that
it produces not only the Act, but its mode also, determining the Will to act
freely. (2) Durandus objectes, That God can enable the second cause to produce
its effect, without the concurse of any other: As it is manifest in the motion
of a stone in the air, which would move downward without a concurse. To which
we reply, [1] That this supposition is not to be supposed: for as the concurse
of God is necessarily required to conserve the Being and Virtue of the second
cause, so also as to its motion: neither is it more repugnant to the nature of
a stone to conserve it self, than to move it self, on supposition that the
Divine concurse be abstracted. [2] Suarez well respondes, That it involves a
repugnance and contradiction, to suppose the creature potent or able to act
independently as to the Creators concurse. And the contradiction arises both
on the part of the second cause, as also of the effect; which being both Beings
by participation, essentially depend on the first cause. And God may as well
make a Being Independent in Essence, as an Agent Independent in Acting: both
being equally repugnant to the perfection of God, and imperfection or
limitation of the creature. (3) Durandus objectes: That it cannot be, that two
Agents should immediately concur to the same action, unless both be only
partial and imperfect Agents. The solution of this Objection will be more
completely manifest when we come to treat of the Immediation of the Divine
concurse,. 4. 1. Prop. at present let it suffice, [1] That where total causes
differ in kind, it is no impediment or obstruction to either, that both act
immediately in their kind: for the whole effect is totally produced by each.
[2] That it implies no imperfection in God to act immediately in and with the
second cause; because it is not from any Insufficience or Indigence, that he
makes use of the Creature, but only from the immensitie of his Divine Bounty,
that he communicates a virtue to the second cause, and together therewith
produces the effect.

(4) But the main objection of Durandus and his Sectators is taken from sinful
Acts, unto which, if God immediately concur, Gods concurse to the substrate
matter of sin, what.
he cannot but be the Author of Sin. [1] This Objection, albeit it may seem to
favor the Divine Sanctity, yet it really destroys the same, in that it
subvertes the Sacred Majesty, his Essence and Independence as the first cause,
wherein his Essental Holiness does consiste, as before. [2] We easily grant,
that God is the cause only of good, not of moral Evil as such, as before, c.
6.. 3. out of Plato. For indeed moral Evil as such has no real Idea or Essence;
and therefore no real efficient cause, but only deficient. But yet, [3] we still
aver, that God does concur to the whole entitative Act of sin, without the
least concurrence to the moral obliquitie thereof. For the entitative Act of
sin is of it self (abstracted from the moral deordination) physically or
naturally good. Whence that commun saying in the Schools, Al evil is founded in
good, as in its subject. There is no pure Evil, but what has some natural good
for its substrate matter or subject: Now al good, that is not God, must be from
God, as the prime cause: if God were not the immediate essicient of the
entitative Act of evil, he were not the cause of al good. Yet, [4] Gods
immediate concurse to the material Act of sin, does no way render him obnoxious
to that imputation of being the Author of sin: For he concurs to the material
Act of sin, not as a moral cause, but only as a physic cause. God neither
commands, nor invites, nor encourages any to sin, but prohibits the same; and
therefore is not the Author thereof. An Author, both according to Philosophy
and Civil Law, is he that Persuades, Invites, Commands, or by any other moral
influence promoves a thing: But God by no such ways does cause sin. [5] Albeit
God concurs with the deficient cause to the material entitie of sin, yet he
concurs not as a deficient cause. For the Soverain God is not tied up by the
same Laws that his Creature is. The same sinful Act, which is a Deordination in
regard of man, as it procedes from God is a conformity to his Eternal Law or
Will. The great God breaks no Law, albeit the Creature is guilty thereof. (6)
God, as the first cause, brings good out of that very Act, which is evil in
regard of the second cause. The crucifying of our Lord, which was a sin of the
first magnitude in regard of the Instruments, was yet by the wise God turned to
the greatest good: Thus the Moral Evils of men, which are opposed to the
Creatures good, are yet so wisely ordered by God, as that they are made
subservient to the good of the Creator. As wicked men often extract evil out of
good, so the blessed God extractes good out of evil. Touching Gods concurse to,
and gubernation of sin, see more copiosely, Chap. 9.. 2.

2. Prop. The prime cause does by his concurse influence not only the Effect,
The Divine concurse reaches the Will.
or Act of the human Will, but also the Will it self. This Hypothesis is
expressly laid down both in Sacred and Platonic Philosophy. In Sacred
Philosophy we find great demonstrations hereof. So Psalm. 110.3. Thy people
shall become very willing in the day of thy power: and Phil. 2.13. It Is God that
works in us, (...), both to will and to do. Thus also Plato, Alcibiad. 1. p.
135. brings in Socrates instructing Alcibiades, that God alone could change the
will. And the reasons which enforce this Hypothesis are most demonstrative. (1)
To suppose the Will to Act, without being actuated and influenced by God, is to
suppose it Independent and not subordinate to God in such acts. (2) Either the
will of man must be subordinate to and dependent on the will of God in all its
acts; or the will of God must be subordinate to and dependent on the will of man.
For in causes that concur to the same effect there must be subordination on the
one part, if there be no room for coordination; as here is none. (3) If God by
his concurse produce the act of willing, as our Adversaries the Jesuits and
others grant, how is it possible, but that he must influence and actuate the
will? Does not every efficient cause, in producing an Act in a subject
connatural to the power or faculty of the said subject, influence and actuate
the same power? (4) Al grant, that the effect of the will is produced by God:
and may we not thence strongly argue, that the volition or act of willing is
also produced by God, and that by immediate influence on the will? Is it not
equally necessary, that the concurse of God reach, as well the active as passive
efficience of the will? What reason can there be assigned by the Jesuits and
Arminians our Antagonistes, why the will should not as much depend on the
concurse of God for its act of volition, as for its effect? If the effect of
the will cannot be produced, but by the immediate concurse of the first cause,
how can the will it self act, without being actuated by God? (5) Can any act
pass from the will, but by the concurse of the first cause? and if so, must not
also the same first cause influence the will for the production of such acts?

3. Prop. Gods Concurse is universally extensive to al create Objects. Gods
Concurse universally extensive. Romans 11.36.
This Hypothesis is frequently inculcated in sacred Philosophy, as also in
Platonic. Thus Romans 11.36. Of him, and by him, and for him are althings. (...)
of him, notes Gods Operation in framing althings; (...) by him, his Cooperation
in and with all second causes; (...) unto or for him, his final Causalitie, as
althings are for him. This universal Causalitie is termed by Cyril Alexandr. in
Esa. (...), the multiforme Energie; because it produces al manner of effects.
Plato also mentions God's universal Causalitie as to al objects. So Repub. 6.
he makes althings, not only visible, but also intelligible, as Sciences, etc.
Yea al moral goods, as (...), things righteous, honest, and good, to fall under
the prime Causalitie of God, who is (...), Righteousness it self, Honesty it
self, and Bonitie it self; and therefore (...), the cause of al goods. Thus
also in his Parmenides, page 144. (...), Essence therefore [ i. e. God] is
diffused throughout al variety of Beings, and is absent from nothing, neither
from the greatest, nor yet from the least of Beings. Thence he adds: One
therefore [ i. e. God] is not only present to al essence, but also to all the
parts thereof, being absent from no part, either lesser, or greater. Wherein he
assertes, that God is diffused through and present with all parts of the
Universe, and al create Beings, giving Essence, Force, Perfection, and
Operation to al Beings. Aquinas makes the Concurse of God to extend universally
to althings, (1) As it gives forces, and faculties of acting to al second
causes. (2) As it conserves and sustains them in Being and Vigor. (3) As it
excites and applies second causes to act. (4) As it determines al second causes
to act. (5) As it directes, orders, governes and disposes them so, as that
they may in the best manner reach their ends. See Aquin. Part. 1. Quaest. 105.
and contra Gent. l. 3. c. 70. That the Concurse of God the prime universal
Cause is universally extensive as to al objects, may be demonstrated, (1) From
the subordination of al second causes to the first cause. Are not al causes,
not only efficient, but also final, subordinate to God? Yea do not al material
and formal Principes depend on the Concurse of God for all their operations? Of
which see Suarez, Metaph. Disp. 21. Sect. 1. (2) From the comprehension and
perfection of God. Does he not, in his own Simplicity, Actualitie, and
Infinitude, comprehend al perfections both actual and possible? Is he not then
virtually and eminently althings? And does not this sufficiently argue, that
his Concurse is universally extensive unto althings? (3) From the Superiority
and Altitude of God as the first Cause. Is not God the most supreme and
highest, because the first Cause? Must not then his Concurse be most extensive
as to al effects? Does not every cause, by how much the higher it is, by so
much the more extend it self to variety of effects? Must not God then, by
being the first Cause, necessarily extend his Concurse to al effects? (4) From
the Providence of God. That althings fall under the Providence of God Plato, as
well as Scripture, greatly proves, as we shall hereafter Chapter 8.. 2. show: and if
so, must not then the Concurse of God universally extend to althings, so far as
they partake of Being, either natural or moral?

4. Prop. Gods Concurse in regard of al second causes and objects is principal.
Gods concurse principal.
The Principatie and Soveraintie of Divine Concurse, specially as to gratiose
effects, is frequently asserted in sacred Philosophy. Esa. 53.11.
So it is said of Christ, Esa. 53.11. He shall see the travel of his Soul. Which
assures us, that Christ is the principal Parent of the New Creature, as well as
of the old: and that al Ministers, or other Instruments are but, as it were,
Midwifes unto Christ. Thence Plato, in his Theaetetus, page 151. brings in
Socrates using the same phrase touching himself and his Philosophemes. Socrates
being about to instruct Theaetetus, one of his Disciples of great ingenie, the
more effectually to engage his attention and diligence, he professes, That for
his part he was but (as his Mother) a Midwife, to assiste the Soul in the
bringing forth of moral virtue: (...), God compels me to play the Midwife, but
forbids me to generate. Whereby he ascribes the principal efficience of al
moral virtue to God, reserving only a ministerial subservience to man. So great
was the modesty of this poor Philosopher, beyond many that profess
Christianity. Thus Plato, Repub. 6. makes God to be (...), the first and most
soverain cause of althings; whereas al second causes are but (...), yea (...),
as it were children, or effects and products; and therefore al their efficience
and causalitie is only (...) by commistion with, and participation from God the
first Cause. Thence in his Phaed^, page 99. he affirms, that second causes, if
compared with the first, deserve not the name of causes: (...), to call these
causes is very importune, or absued. Thence he adds: (...), That which is a
cause indeed is one thing, and that without which a cause is not a cause
another. Plato here makes mention of two sorts of causes. (1) One, which is
truly a cause, i. e. the First cause. (2) Another, which is only causa sine
qua non, a cause without which the effect is not produced: such are al second
causes, whose ministry the First cause makes use of; yet so as that the
principal efficience belongs only to the First cause, in respect of which
second causes are only (...), concauses, or subservient causes, employed by God
for the production of things. So in his Timaeus, page 46. (...), These are
concauses, whose ministry God uses to perfect, so far as it may be, the idea
and form of what is best. But very many estime these to be not concauses, but
causes of althings. But, he subjoins: Such have no reason or sense for what
they assert: (...), For we must say, that there is a Soul of althings that
existe, to whom only belongs the power of Understanding: but he is invisible.
Whence, in what follows, he expressly distinguishes between the first and
second causes, ascribing principal causalitie to the former, and ministerial or
instrumental to the later. There are in these Philosophemes of Plato
observable, (1) That God is the principal prime cause of althings. (2) That al
second causes, if compared with God, deserve not the name of causes; but are
only concauses, or instruments to transfer the efficience of God unto the
effect. (3) That such as ascribe any causalitie to second causes, more than
what as instruments they receive from the First cause, have neither sense nor
reason on their side. (4) That there is an universal Spirit or Soul, which
diffuseth it self throughout al create Beings, and gives vigor, determination,
and motion to al second causes and effects.

But now the more fully to explicate Plato's mind touching the principal
Concurse of God the first cause, How second Causes are Instruments of the first.
and the ministerial or instrumental causalitie of second causes, we must first
distinguish, and then state and determine our Hypothesis. We must distinguish,
(1) between principal causalitie simply considered, and that which is such in
its kind, and in some respect. (2) Between the second cause its respect to the
first, and its respect to the effect. (3) Between an instrument taken in a laxe
notion, and in a strict: also between a moral and a physic Instrument: again,
between an active and passive Instrument: lastly, between a pure Instrument,
and a vital elevate Instrument. (4) Between effects natural and supernatural.
These distinctions being premissed, we shall state and determine our Hypothesis
in the following Propositions. (1) The Causalitie of God is simply and
universally principal, yet that of second causes may be principal in its kind.
The concurse of God is so far principal, as that it can and often does produce
its effect without the concurse of second causes; but second causes can never
produce their effects, without the concurse of God the first Cause. Hinc est,
quod omnes operationes hominis bonas, quantumcunque fiant a libera voluntate,
tribuere solet augustinus ipsi Deo, tanquam qui per voluntatem ut per
instrumentum, quod pro libero suo beneplacito agit, impellit, flectit, vertit,
inclinat quoliber motus ipsius voluntatis operetur. Ipse, inquit, cantat in
nobis, cujus gratia cantamus. Nempe dicuntur ista, non ut homini libera
voluntas, sed ut gloriatio de sua voluntate tollatur, ne puter a se esse quod
Deus donat. Jansenius, August. Tom. 3. l. 2. c. 24.
There is no effect which the second cause produces, but the first cause can
produce it alone: for his omnipotent concurse reaches to al effects that
implie not a contradiction, without the least dependence on any second cause:
the second cause needs the first in all its operations, but the first cause
needs not the second in any. Yea, where the first and second cause concur to
the same effect, the concurse of the first cause is infinitely more principal,
than that of the second: because the second cause acts not, but as acted by
the first cause: The Excitation, Application, Determination, and Actuation of
the second cause is from the first. Yet we may not deny a principal efficience
to some second causes, so far as the first cause has communicated to them a
virtue of their own to be communicated to their effects, as it will appear by
what follows.

(2) Al second Causes, if compared with the first, are but instruments of his
principal concurse. Thus not only Aquinas, Bradwardine and the more sane
Scholastics, but also Averroes, de Somno and Vigilia; where he affirms, That
second causes are moved by the first, as instruments by the Artificer. But here
occurs a spinose knotty question much ventilated in the Schools, Whether the
Will in the reception of supernatural habits be an instrument or principal
cause? According to the former distinctions I should answer, [1] That,
according to the general notion of an Instrument, the Will may be termed such in
the reception and acting of Grace. As it receives Grace it is a passive
instrument, yet as it acts Grace it is an active instrument. [2] That the Will
in the receiving and acting Grace is a vital instrument. Hence it is termed by
Greg. Nazianz. Orat. 8. (...), a Divine Instrument, a rational Instrument, an
Instrument composed and knocked at by that preclare Artificer the Spirit of
God. In receiving the first Grace the Will is only naturally, remotely and
passively vital, as it is a piece of human Nature; but in the actuating what
Grace is received, it is a spiritually vital instrument. Grace received
elevates the human Soul to a spiritual Vitalitie and Instrumentalitie for the
acting of Grace. Hence, [3] the Will may, as to the acting of Grace, so far as
it is clothed with Divine habits, be termed in some respect a principal Agent,
under God, specially if compared with the effect produced. It Is true, if the
Will be compared with God, even in the acting of Grace received, it is but a
mere instrument; because both Habit and Act are received from God: yet if we
consider the Will as invested and qualified with supernatural habits, which are
the same to the Soul that it is to the Body, whereby it is informed and
capacitated to produce such or such supernatural Acts and Effects, in this
regard we may style it a principal cause: though, I must confess, the notion
of an Instrument, used by Aquinas and others, seems more adequate and genuine
to express its causalitie by, in as much as al is from God by supernatural
infusion.

. 3. Having inquired into the Concurse of God in regard of its object, Divine
Concurse as to its Principe the same with Gods Will.
we now proceed to consider it as relating to its Subject or Principe, which
will afford to us great notices of its genuine nature. The Scholastic
Theologues, in their debates about the concurse of God to the supernatural Acts
of the Will, are greatly divided: some placing it in a certain efficacious
impulse or motion of God, whereby the Will is determined to consent and act:
others, in a certain actual premotion in the manner of a transient quality,
together with the operation of the Will: others, in the very operation of the
second cause or Will, as it procedes from the influxe of God premoving. These
make it to be an efficacious premotion or physic predetermination, whereby the
first cause makes the second to act: others place this concurse, as to gratiose
effects, in certain pious inspirations, cogitations, and indeliberate motions
of love injected by God. Albeit some of these scholastic sentiments may have
their place, if we consider the concurse of God with relation to its passive
Attingence, or as it terminates on the second cause and effect, yet if we take
it strictly, according to its formal Idea, I conceive, no one of these opinions
explicate the true nature thereof. Therefore to explicate the genuine nature of
the Divine concurse we must consider what relation it has to the Divine Will,
whether it be really distinct therefrom, or not. And here we must in the first
place reflect on what was asserted and proved in the former C. 5.. 4. touching
the ordinate or executive power of God, and its Indentitie with the Divine Will:
which being supposed, as it has been demonstrated, it naturally follows, that
Gods concurse, as to is active Attingence and effective principe, is nothing
else but the omnipotent efficacious volition of God. For Gods executive power
being the same with his Effective Will, it thence necessarily follows, that his
concurse is the same also. Hence Sacred Philosophy every where makes Gods Will
the Effective Principe whereby althings are made, and governed, or directed to
their proper Actions and Ends. As Psalm. 39.9. and 115.3. and 135.6. Mat. 8.2,
3. 2 Chronicles. 20.6. and elsewhere, as before C. 5.. 4. Thus also Plato, Alcibiad.
1. p. 135. brings in Socrates dialogising with young Alcibiades, that Athenian
Gallant, in this manner: Do thou know, says Socrates, by what means thou
may avoid this inordinate motion of thy mind? Alcibiad. Yes. Socrat. How?
Alcibiad. If thou will, O Socrates, i. e. by thy precepts and institutes.
Socrat. Thou may not say so. Alcibiad. How then? Socrat. (...), if God will.
Meaning, that Gods will was omnipoten, and so could without more ado, merely by
his act of volition, work virtue in young Alcibiades. But now to explicate and
demonstrate this Hypothesis, namely, That the Divine Will is of it self
operative, we shall resolve the whole into the following Propositions.

1. Prop. God as the first cause of althings does not concur by his Essence
absolutely considered. Gods concurse not his essence absolutely considered.
For, (1) If God should concur by his Essence absolutely considered, he should
act althings by a natural necessity, not with any precedent Liberty: and then
Gods making the world, yea things most contingent would be as absolutely and
naturally necessary, as his loving himself. It Is true, Gods loving himself and
al other immanent Acts have a concomitant Liberty or Divine spontaneitie
attending them, yet they admit not any Antecedent Liberty or Indifference of
any kind. But now Gods works ad extra, such as terminate on the Creature, have
not only a Concomitant, but also Antecedent Liberty, or some kind of
Indifference; so that God could, according to a signum rationis, or prioritie
of nature, not have willed them. (2) If God should work althings by his
Essence absolutely considered, things possible should have one and the same
Idea with things future; and so Gods Science of simple Intelligence should be
the same with his Science of Vision. And the reason of the consequence is most
evident; because the Essence of God absolutely considered is equally
indifferent to things possible, which shall never be, as to things future, which
are to be. (3) Again, Gods Absolute Power should be the same with his Ordinate,
and his Sufficience the same with his Efficience, if he wrought al things by
his Essence absolutely considered. (4) Hence also it would follow, that God
should always work and put forth his Omnipotence to the utmost extent in all
operations. For Causes that work from a Necessity of Nature work to the
utmost of their power.

2. Prop. Gods concurse procedes not from any executive Power in God. No
executive power in God, distinct from his Will.
This Proposition has been already demonstrated, C. 5.. 4. Yet for more
abundant conviction, let us examine the Origin, Necessity, and Use of an
executive Power in the Creature; and then we shall see what little ground there
is to ascribe the same to God. The great Assertors and Promotors of executive
power have been Aristotle and his Sectators; who, on false Hypotheses, presume,
That a substance cannot act immediately without some executive power; which
they make a species of Quality. Albeit such kind of Qualitative Powers are now
generally exploded by all, who resolve not to serve an Opinion of Aristotle, yet
there still remains a place for executive powers in nature, when the principal
Agent cannot reach the effect immediately. Thus the Soul of Man puts forth al
Acts of sense and motion by some executive powers. Yet the human Soul can and
does often act immediately, specially in its immanent acts, without any executive
power. And thus God in all his Effects acts immediately by his omnipotent will,
without any executive power: For he is present in and with all effects, and
therefore needs no executive power to supply his absence. Again, the Will of
God is Omnipotent, as c. 5.. 3. and we shall anon prove it more fully, and
therefore it needs no executive power to execute what it wills. Is not the
Divine Will proposed to us in Sacred Philosophic as Irresistible? and if it be
so, can it not then execute its own pleasure, without any executive power?
Indeed the greatest Scholastic wits have espoused and defended this Hypothesis,
namely, That the Will and Executive Power of God are really the same, and not so
much as rationally or formally distinct. Thus Joan. Major, 2. Sent. Did. 1. q.
1. proves, That God Created the World by his Intellect and Will, without any
executive Power formally distinct, of which hereafter,. 5.4. Prop. Thus
Bradwardine, l. 2. c. 29. Alvarez de Auxil. l. 2. p. 129. with others, of whom
in the next Proposition. And indeed Suarez Metaph. Disp. 22. S. 2. p. 555. does
in part grant our Hypothesis, in that he acknowlegeth, That the concurse of
God, as it regardes the effective principe, is the same with the Divine Will,
which concurs with the Creature to its act. This he calls concursus ad intra,
the interne concurse, which he makes to be the principe of al Acts adextra. Yet
I must confess elsewhere, namely Disp. 30. S. 17. he makes mention of an
executive power in God, the same with his Essence, containing in it eminently
al create perfections. And so some Divines, as well as Philosophers, assert an
executive power in God. Thus Heereboord, Select. Ex Philosoph. Disp. 8.
endeavors to prove, that Gods concurse, whereby he influenceth things ad extra,
is not simply his volition; because Gods volition simply is an immanent Act,
but his concurse is a transient Act ad extra. But this Argument seems to be of
no weight; because we easily grant, that the concurse of God, quoad
Attingentiam passivam, as to its passive Attingence is distinct from God, and
the same with the concurse of the second cause or effect; but that which we are
now discoursing of is the concurse of God in regard of its active Attingence,
as it regardes God the Principe, and in this respect we only assert, That the
concurse of God is the same with his volition simply considered. This will be
further evident by the next Proposition.

3. Prop. The Divine Will is of it self Omnipotent and Efficacious. The Divine
Will Omnipotent.
This Proposition is most evident; (1) because the Divine Will cannot be
frustrated. Thus Suarez, 1.2 ae. Tract. 3. Disput. 11. Sect. 2. p. 311. We must
say, says he, that when God wills absolutely and efficaciously that man will
somewhat, the human Will cannot discord from the Divine. The reason is clear;
because the Divine Will efficacious and simply absolute cannot be fruitrated,
seeing it is infinite. So Bradward. l. 1. c. 10. Now it remains to show, that
the Divine Will is universally efficacious, insuperable, and necessary in
causing, nor impedible and frustrablein any manner. Who knows not that it
necessarily follows: if God can do any thing and wills, it, he does it? (2) The
Divine Will being the universal first cause of althings, it cannot but be most
efficacious. For is not this the main difference between the first and second
cause, the universal and particular cause, that this may fail of its effect,
but that can never? A particular cause often comes short of its effect, by reason
of the interposition of some other particular cause, that may impede the same:
but the first universal cause can never come short of its effect; because there
is no other cause can interpose to hinder it. (3) The Will of God is infinite:
therefore Omnipotent and Irresistible: for where the power of the Patient does
not excede or equalize the power of the Agent, there can be no prevalent
resistance: what then can resist the Divine Will which is infinite? (4) If the
Divine Will were not omnipotent God were not infinitely happy. For every one is
so far happy, as his Will is fulfilled, as Aristor. Rhet. l. 2. c. 20. (5) It Is
a common Hypothesis in the Schools, grounded on the highest Reason, That it is
impossible but that the Divine Will should attain its effect. So Aquinas, Part.
1. q. 19. a. 6. as others, Hence,

4. Prop. The Divine Will is of it self operative and influential on al second
causes and effects. Thus Augustine, De Trinit. l. 3. c. 4. The Will of God
operative of it self.
The Will of God is the first and supreme cause of althings. Again, A thing is
said to be done by God acting, when it is done by God willing. Apud Dominum hoc
est velle quod facere; qura ex ejus voluntate res habent esse Augustine. in
Psalm. 144.
And the reasons of this Hypothesis are most manifest: For (1) if Gods Will were
not of it self Operative and Effective, it were not the first principe and
cause of althings. (2) The will of man is in some things Operative of it self:
and must we not allow the same Prerogative to the Will of God? And if it be in
somethings operative of it self, why not in althings? May we not then hence
conclude, That there is no active operation or motion received from God into
the Will, or any other second cause; but from the simple volition of God the
motion of the human Will or any other second cause necessarily follows? This is
evident in the first Creation of althings: for by Gods fiat or volition, which
is eternal, althings were made in time, without any other impression or
concurse received: and if Gods first Creation of althings was by his simple
volition, without any transient concurse, what hinders, but that al other
efficience of God should in the same manner consiste in the simple volition of
his will, without any transient concurse? Thence in sacred Philosophy the
Divine Efficience is frequently expressed by the Word of God, as the Word of
Creation, Genesis 1.3. Conservation, Psalm. 107.20. Gubernation, Destruction,
Restitution, etc. thereby to denote the efficacitie of the Divine Will, as man's
Will is expressed by his word, of which hereafter. 4.6. Prop. See this
Hypothesis well demonstrated in Bradward. Cause. Deil, l. 1. c. 9. p. 190. and c.
10. p. 196. Ariminensi^, Sent. 1. Distinct. 45. Joan. Major Sent. 2. Quaest. 3.

. 4. Having discussed the Concurse of God, The Adjuncts of Gods Concurse. 1. It
is immediate
as it relates to its Object and Subject or Principe, we now come to treat of
it in its Adjuncts and Modes of operation, which will give us great indications
and notices of its nature. 1. The concurse of God is as to its Mode of
operation immediate. This Adjunct or Mode of operation follows immediately on
the origin or principe of Divine Concurse: for it being nothing but the simple
volition of God, Particularly as to gratiose effects.
it thence necessarily follows, that it must be immediate as to al objects and
effects. Esa. 55.10, 11.
This immediation of Divine Concurse is frequently inculcated in sacred
Philosophy. So Esa. 55.10, 11. For as the rain comes down and the snow from
Heaven, and returns not thither, but waters the earth, and makes it to
bring forth and bud, that it may give seed to the sower, and bread to the
eater; so shall my word, that goes forth out of my mouth; it shall not return
unto me void, but it shall accomplish that which I please, and it shall prosper
in the thing whereto I sent it. (1) This must be understood not only of Gods
reveled word, but also of his efficacious word of concurse, productive of
things. Psalm. 72.6.
So Psalm. 72.6. (2) Gods effective operative word or concurse is compared to
the Rain, which by Gods ordinance falls to water the earth, straining it self
through the liquid Air, as through a Sieve, dividing it self into millions of
drops, and immediately watering every inch of earth, that so every herb may
receive its proportion of moisture, gradually and immediately according to its
exigence: just so proportionably does the efficacious concurse of God
immediately insinuate it self into al second causes, operations, and effects,
specially such as are gratiose. Hos. 14.5.
The like allusion we find, Hos. 14.5. I will be as the dew to Israel: he shall
grow as the lilly. Esa. 26.19.
The like Esa. 26.19. For thy dew is as the dew of herbs. The dew, you know,
falls in a silent quiet night, in millions of small imperceptible drops; and
being of a gentle insinuating nature, gradually and insensibly sokes into the
earth, tempers and allays the heat thereof, specially in those hotter countries,
and immediately insinuates it self into the roots of plants; which, by reason
of its moist benign nitrose quality, it comfortes, refreshes, and
encourages; calling forth the fruits hereof, and causing the face of things to
flourish with beauty and delight, much more efficaciously than sudden great
shours, or land-flouds; which are more violent, but less beneficial: Thus
Christ's gratiose concurse and influence falls like dew on the Believers heart,
in millions of drops; which grad^aly, insensibly, and immediately insinuate
thereinto, causing it to fructify and flourish much more effectively, than all the shours of Divine wrath, or Land-flouds of spiritual Bondage, which suddenly
break in on the consciences of many convict legal consciences; but soon dry up
again, and leave them more barren and hard-hearted than before. The Greek
Theologues express this immediation of Divine Grace various ways: sometimes
they term it, (...), the inhabitant or indwelling Grace: sometimes, (...), the
inhabitation of the holy Spirit; because it is wrought by the Spirit of God
immediately as dwelling in the Believers heart.

But to treat more generally of Divine Concurse and its immediation as to al
Objects, Operations, and Effects, Plato, Leg. 4. page 715 assures us, That,
according to the ancient Tradition, God has not only, (...), the beginning and
the end, but also (...), the middle of althings: i. e. God by his efficacious
concurse penetrates althings, and is more intimate and immediate to them, than
they are to themselves. So also in his Parmenides, he tells us, That the prime
Idea or cause is intimately present with althings, influencing al both small and
great. Whence he terms al second causes, (...), Concauses and Cooperators with
God. But before we come to the demonstration of our Hypothesis we must premit
somethings by way of explication and limitation. (1) When we say, Gods concurse
to al second causes and effects is immediate, we do not thereby exclude al
means, as if God did so concur as not to make use of second causes and
instruments; but that God concurs immediately in and with all means. As in order
to health God prescribes and uses means, yet he concurs immediately in and
with those means; so in supernatural effects, God uses Ministers and
Ordinances, yet concurs immediately in and with them. (2) God concurs
immediately to al second causes and effects, not only by the immediation of
Virtue, but also [ immediatione suppositi] by the immediation of his Essence:
for indeed the virtue of God is nothing else but his Essence, or Will as the
effective Principe of althings. The Divine Supposite is not so much as ratione
or formally distinguished from his Virtue, which is his effective omnipotent
Will. These premises being laid down we proceed to explicate and demonstrate
the Immediation of Gods Concurse in the following Propositions.

1. Prop. God concurs immediately unto every Act of the second Cause. God
concurs immediately to every Act of second Causes.
This Proposition is asserted not only by the Thomistes, but also by the
Jesuits, Suarez, Metaph. Disp. 22. sect. 1. and others. And the reasons are
invincible: (1) From the subordination of al second causes to the first.
Aristotle, in his Physics, l. 8. c. 5. and Metaphys. l. 2. c. 12. assures us,
That in Agents per se and properly subordinate, the inferior cannot act without
the influxe or concurse of the superior cause. And the reason is evident:
because if the inferior cause could act without the influxe of the superior, it
were not subordinate unto the superior in that act. Neither is it sufficient to
say, that the second cause is subordinate to God, as its Essence and Virtue is
conserved by God, according to the sentiment of Durandus and his Sectators: for
such a subordination of the second cause to the first is only accidental and
remote as to its acting: And who knows not, that an accidental remote cause is
not properly a cause? Al proper subordination implies dependence of the
inferior cause on the superior, not only quando but quatenus agit, both when
and as it acts. (2) From the limitation and dependence of al second causes.
Every Being by participation is limited: and where there are limits of essence,
there necessarily are limits of Activitie and Operation. A Creature can as well
give Being to it self, as actuate it self independently as to the First cause:
whatever receives its Being by participation, receives also its Operation in
the same mode of Participation. Dependence on God in Operation is as essental
and intrinsec to the nature of a Creature, as dependence on God in essence and
conservation of that essence. Yea, it is no less than an implicit
contradiction to say, that a Creature acts without dependence on God for that
act, as Suarez and others prove. And the reason is most demonstrative: for, as
Aristotle tells us, The mode of operating always follows the mode of essence:
If the essence depend on God for its production and conservation, so must the
operation. Whatever is a Being by participation, must also be an Agent by
participation. Yea, the very Act of the second cause is a Being by
participation; and therefore it requires the concurse and influxe of the First
cause for its production, conservation, and promotion. (3) From the nature of
the First cause and its perfection. If God concur not immediately to every Act
of the second cause, he is not the universal cause of althings, neither is he
omnipotent, and most perfect. For that very Act is a real Being, or if you will
a mode of Being, and so reducible to real Entitie: it cannot be pure nothing;
because pure nothing cannot be the term or effect of a real production: If
then the Act of the second cause be a real positive Entitie or Mode, and yet
God not the First cause thereof, then it necessarily follows, that God is not
the universal cause of althings: neither is he omnipotent; because he cannot
produce that real Act: neither is he most perfect; because there is something
in nature physically perfect, which he is not the cause of. Dependence on God
as the First cause, albeit it implies something of imperfection in the Creature
as a Creature, yet it importes perfection in God: neither can his absolute
perfection as the First cause be preserved and maintained without it. (4) From
the Providence of God. If God as the First cause concur not immediately to al
Acts of second Causes, how can he order, direct, and govern them, so as they
shall al determine in his own glory? Again, how can he hinder such Acts as
impugn his own ends and designs? Does not this Antithesis of Durandus and
others, who deny God to concur immediately to al Acts of second causes, cut
off the chiefest part of Divine Providence, which consistes in the ordering and
directing al human Acts for his own glory?

2. Prop. God as the First cause immediately concurs, not only to the Act, but
also the second cause it self, and its will, if it be a free Agent. God
immediately concurs to second Cause self.
This Proposition may be demonstrated, (1) by all the fore mentioned Arguments,
which prove Gods immediate concurse to the Act of the second cause: for every
efficient cause producing in a subject an Act connatural to the power of he
subject, must needs influence and actuate that power: wherefore God the First
cause producing in the will of man an act connatural thereto, must necessarily
actuate and influence the said will in such a production. (2) That gods
immediate concurse reaches the human Will, and not only its Act, is evident,
because it determines the Will to act. For grant but this, that the human Will is
not the First cause of its own act, but dependent on God for the production
thereof, which the Jesuits grant; it necessarily follows, that it is actuated
and determined by God in all its Acts. It Is true, the human Will is a free Agent
and so a self-determining power; but yet this hinders not but that it is also
determined by God as the First cause: God determines the Will to determine it
self; as he moves the Will to move it self. If God did not determine and move
the Will, it could not determine and move it self. (3) Sacred Philosophy is
express herein, that God works immediately on the Will, as well as on its Acts
and Effects. So Philip. 2.13. God is said to work (...), to will and to do. And
how can he work to will unless he work upon the will? Can there be any way
assigned how God should work to will, and yet not immediately determine and
move the will? Psalm. 139.9, 10.
So Psalm. 139.9, 10. If I take the wings of the morning, [ i.e. sly most
swiftly as the morning] and dwell in the utmost parts of the Sea: even there
shall thine hand lead me, and thy right hand shall hold me. His mind is, that he
cannot fly from the immediate presence of God; because wherever he goes, his
immediate hand or concurse must lead him. To lead a man by the hand, and to
hold him here denotes Gods immediate concurse on the Will and its Acts.

3. Prop. God concurs immediately to the effect by one and the same act with
the second cause. The Act of the first and second cause the same.
For the explication of this Proposition we are to note, that the causation of
the first cause is not the same with that of the second, but only the action
whereby the first and second cause concur to the production of the effect. For
albeit the influxe of the first cause be distinct from that of the second, yet
the Act whereby the first and second cause produce the effect is one and the
same. Duo individuo opere operantes necessario agant unum and idem, cum
indivisa sit little actio: si autem agerent diversis actionibus, oporteret
operata esse divisa: ficut e contra actio indivisa non potest sacere divisa
opera. Grossetesle, de Libero Arbitrio.
This is incomparably well demonstrated by our Learned and great Grosseteste,
Bishop of Lincoln, in his Tractate, De Libero Arbitrio, in M. SS. where he
acutely proves, That the Action of God and the second cause, whereby the effect
is produced, cannot be deverse; because the Effect is but one and the same;
which procedes totally from God as the first cause, and totally from the second
cause, as hereafter, Prop. 4. For the more full explication whereof we must
distinguish between the Active and Passive Efficience of God: Gods Active
Efficience is nothing else but the immanent efficacious Act of his Will; which,
without al peradventure, differs infinitely from the efficience of the second
cause: yet Gods Passive efficience, as it relates to the Act of the second
cause, is not really distinct therefrom: for it is no way incongruous or
inconsistent, that one and the same act proceed from two different total causes
of different kinds, such as the first and second cause is. Whence it follows,
that one and the same act both of first and second cause immediately and
essentially depend on both in their kind. That the first and second cause
immediately concur to the same effect, by one and the same indivisible Act may
be demonstrated, (1) from the Dependence which the Act of the second cause has
on the active causation of the first cause. The Act of the second cause does
not, as some conceive, depend on any real influxe or concurse transient from
the first cause, and distinct from the act of the second cause, but on the mere
efficacious volition of the first cause; which is the effective principe of al
effects. This is acutely demonstrated by Suarez, Metaph. Disput. 21. sect. 3.
p. 568. where he proves. That the action of God is not the way or flux to the
action of the Creature, but to the effect: neither is an action the term of an
action. Therefore to the universal influxe of the first cause there is no more
required, but that the action of the second cause proceed from his Will -- not
that it proceed by another externe action; but it can proceed immediately by it
self from the will of God. Whence, when the action of the Creature is said to
depend on the influxe of God, either this influxe must be taken for the
immanent interne Act, as it influenceth the externe Act of the second cause; or
the manner of speech must be taken not transitively, save according to some
rational conception. If we would speak properly, it must be said, that the
action of the Creature is from God. Whence he concludes, in the same page thus:
By comparing the action of the Creature to the interne action of God, it is
clear, that the action of God is in order of nature before the action of the
second cause. Whence it is said, that the concurse of the first cause is before
that of the second; because the second cause does not act but in the virtue of
the first. Hence, (2) we may farther demonstrate the Identitie of the act,
whereby the first and second cause concur to the effect, by the Independence
which the act of the second cause has as to al transient acts of the first
cause distinct from it self. For if the action of the second cause be from God,
by some transient influxe distinct from it self; then that influxe being a
Creature will necessarily require some other transient influxe for its
production and preservation: and so into infinite. (3) That the action, whereby
the first and second cause concur to any effect, is one and the same may be
demonstrated from the Inutilitie and needless supposition of any distinction
between them. For if there be supposed two distinct actions, one of God,
another of the second cause, as necessarily concurring to the production of one
and the same effect, then the action of the second is from God, or not: It
cannot be said, that it is not from God, but only from the second cause;
because then it would be said, that the Effect of the second cause is from God,
but not the Act, which is against the nature of a finite limited Being, as we
have proved in the precedent Propositions: If it be said, that the act of the
second cause is from God, then there is no necessity of supposing any other act
of God distinct from this, whereby he concurs to the production of the Effect.
Is it not every way superfluous and unnecessary to suppose two distinct
actions, one of the first and another of the second cause, as concurring to the
same effect, when as it is granted, and cannot rationally be denied, that the
very act of the second cause is from God? This Argument is well managed by
Suarez, Metaph. Disp. 21. S. 3. p. 567. The sum of al is this: Both the first
and second cause concur immediately to the production of the effect by one and
the same action; yet the influxe or concurse of the first and second cause
considered formally as to the effective principes is really distinct.

2. Having dispatched the Immediation of the Divine concurse, Gods concurse
Independent and Absolute.
we now proceed to a second Adjunct or mode of operation appendent thereto,
namely its Independence and Absoluteness. That the concurse of God is
Independent and Absolute we are assured both by Sacred and Platonic
Philosophy. The Absolute Independence of Divine concurse, as to gratiose
effects, is frequently inculcated in Sacred Philosophy. Psalm. 51.10.
Hence we find a creative efficace asscribed to Independent Medicinal Grace.
Esa. 43.1.
So Psalm. 51.10. Create in me a clean heart. Esa. 43.1. The Lord that created
thee O Jacob, etc. So Esa. 57.19. as elsewhere. Now what more Independent and
Absolute than a Creative concurse? (1) Works of Creation are out of nothing;
and so their Efficient must needs be Independent as to matter. (2) Works of
Creation require an infinite independent Agent, which admits no social cause:
for Creation being the production of something out of nothing, which are
terms, as to Efficience, infinitely distant, none but an Infinite independent
cause can effect the same: who can reconcile something and nothing, but he who
has al Being in himself? (3) Works of Creation are in an instant, and
therefore depend not on any Preparations, or material Dispositions of the
subject. (4) Works of Creation are Perfect, and therefore require the most
perfect independent absolute concurse. How Independnet and absolute efficacious
Grace is in its manner of working, is farther evident from that Royal
Prerogative which it uses in the conversion of sinners. Does it not often let
some run on in full career, til they have one foot in Hell, and then snatch them
as flaming torches out of that sire? Thus Ezech. 16.6. Ezech. 16.6
I said unto thee when thou wast in thy blood, Live. Christ's Omnipotent,
Independent Word carries a vivisie efficace in it. How many Lions has this
Omnipotent Word turned into Lambs? What timber or heart is there so crooked,
knottie, and crabbed, out of which he cannot frame a Vessel of Mercy? What
heart so stony, so rocky, out of which he cannot raise up a Son to Abraham, as
Mat. 3.9? Mat. 3.9.
Now to change one species or kind of Creature into another, a Lion into a
Lamb, a stony heart into a Son of Abraham, does not this argue Independent,
Absolute and Omnipotent Efficace? So little is this gratiose concurse tied to,
or dependent on the least Moral Dispositions, Obligations, Merits, Causes,
Conditions, or moving Considerations without it self: it is the freest thing in
the world, and therefore compared to the motion of the wind, which blows
where it lists, Joh. 3.8. Can we suppose, Joh. 3.8.
that any thing the Creature performs should lay the least obligation on
Soverain Free Grace? Is it not a childish thing to suppose, that the infinite
occan of Independent Grace should ebb and slow, according to the various
changes and conditions of Man's Free Will, that most mutable Moon? But that not
only Essicacious Grace, but al Divine concurse is Independent and Absolute, may
be proved by these invincible Reasons. (1) From the Independence of the Divine
Will, the first cause of althings. The first cause, according to Sacred and
Platonic Philosophy, is (...), without al cause and dependence. Thus Plato,
Repub. 6. p. 509. where bringing in God, under the notion of the chiefest good,
and the first cause of althings, he gives him this character, (...), He is not
mere essence, but somewhat more august than essence, transcending al finite
essence both in Dignity and Virtue. So elsewhere he makes God to be (...), the
supreme effective cause of althings, and therefore Independent as to al
subservient instrumental causes. Yea, he will have God the first Cause to be
(...), Being it self and Eternity it self; and thence no way dependent on
second causes. And the Platonistes generally make God to be (...),
superessential, and so most independent. And, alas! how absurd and monstrose is
it, that the concurse of the first Cause should depend on the second cause? Is
not the Divine Will the first effective Principe of althings, the same with the
Divine Essence? May we not then as well make the Essence of God to be dependent
as his Will. (2) From the pure actualitie and simplicity of the Divine Will. Al
dependence implies a passive receptive power as to that on which it dependes:
there is no dependence without some passive power either physic or metaphysic:
But now Gods Will as it is the effective Principe of althings has not the least
passive power: therefore no dependence. (3) From the Primatie and Superiority
of the first Cause. Thus Damascene, Orthod. Fid. l. 2. c. 1. (...), God solely
being without Principe, or independent, he is the Framer of althings, etc. God
being the first Cause of althings must necessarily be independent in his
Causalitie and Essence. For where there is dependence, there is inferioritie
and subordination: And may we presume, that the concurse of the first Cause is
inferior and subordinate to that of the second cause? Does it amount to less
than a contradiction, to say the first Cause dependes on or is subordinate to
the second cause? What! can it be first and yet subordinate? What is this but
to be first, and yet not first but second? For dependence and subordination is
an effential mode of the second cause, as independence of the first. (4) As the
concurse of the first Cause is independent, so also absolute; yea therefore
absolute, because independent: for that which dependes on nothing without it
self, must needs be absolute. That the Concurse of God is absolute and no way
dependent on any conditions of the subject, or object it works upon, specially
as to gratiose effects, is most evident from sacred Philosophy. Ephesians. 2.8, 9,
10.
So Ephesians. 2.8, 9, 10. He says, v. 8. For by Grace ye are saved through faith,
and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God. It Is true, it works
through faith; but yet not as a condition in the power of Free Will to perform,
but only as Faith is the Organ or Canal through which medicinal Grace is
conveyed into the Soul: the whole is the Gift of God: and why? v. 9. Not of
works, lest any one should boast. As if he had said: Alas! if this medicinal
Grace should be suspended on any moral or Evangelic conditions to be performed
by us, then there were indeed room for boasting: which Christ will not allow of.
Are the derivations of the fountain suspended on any conditions the streams can
perform? does not the stream owe all that it has to the free, independent, and
absolute communication of the spring? Thence it follows v. 10. For we are his
workmanship created in [or by] Christ Jesus unto good works: i. e. look as
God created and formed the first rude confused Chaos, not for any foreseen
goodness in it, but out of a pure nothing; so Christ frames the New Creature,
not for any foreseen conditions it can perform, but unto al conditions or good
works, as Esa. 19.25. We have an excellent discourse against conditional
Grace, in Jansenius, August. Tom. 3. l. 2. c. 24. page 83. By the predication
of this conditional Grace, which enables us to act if we will, there is nothing
gained but the total subversion of Christ's medicinal Grace, and the
substituting in the room thereof the Grace of a sound Will, such as Adam had and
Angels now have: and thus Christ has died in vain: for the proper Grace of
Christ, which he by his Passion has brought to heal our infirmities, Gratia
medicinalis non est talis, quae dominatrici samulando voluntati, vel influit,
vel non influit, prout imperanti sese determinare, vel haerere placet; sed
prorsus talis, quae simulac pulsat fores rumpit ostia, repugnantemque domat
voluntatem, tollit omnem ejus resistentiam, rapit eam secum, and ex invita
volentem ineffabili suavitate facit. Jansen. August. Tom. 3.
is such as does not only work the effect if we will, expecting when our Wills
will move, but it enables us to will: for herein lies the precise difference
between a sound and sick Will. That the influxe and concurse of God is absolute
may be demonstrated from the absurdity, yea impossibility of a conditionate
concurse in God. How absurd is it to conceit, that God will concur with the
human Will in the act of willing upon condition that it will! Yea, how impossible
is such a conditionate influxe! For if there be any condition required to Gods
Concurse, then he concurs to the working of that condition, or not: if not,
then there is some act of the Creature produced without the Divine Concurse: If
God does concur to that condition, then absolutely, or on some other condition:
if absolutely, then his former concurse is not conditionate: for he that
requires any condition of his act, and gives that condition may be said to act
absolutely: besides if God concur absolutely to the later condition, why not
also to the former act? If God concur to the second condition conditionately,
then also to the third, etc. and thus there will be a door open to a progress
into infinite, which Nature, but much more the God of Nature abhors. Hence,

3. Gods Concurse is previous and antecedent. Gods concurse previous and
antecedent.
For the explication of this Adjunct or Mode of Operation we are to consider,
that he Prioritie here meant is not of Time but of Causalitie, as the
causalitie of the First cause is in order of nature antecedent to the
causalitie of the second cause: for therefore the second cause cooperates;
because the First cause operates. The Prioritie and Antecedence of Divine
Concurse is most evident in gratiose Operations and Effects. Thus Isidorus
Pelusiota, lib. 2. Epist. 72. ( Edit. Commelin. 1605.) page 121. An evil tree,
says he, cannot bring forth good fruit, Mat. 7.18.
Mat. 7.18. How did Paul, when he was a Persecutor, become a Preacher? How did
Peter, when he had abjured Christ, get off this spot? By what means was the
wild Olive implanted into the good Olive, Romans 11.17.
Romans 11.17? How did the Thief get admission into Paradise? (...), having
perceived therefore the force of precedent Divine aid, every one that wills
both labors, and moves althings, (for a naked will suffices not) and learnes,
and attains Salvation. Wherein he assertes, (1) (...), that supernatural
antecedent aid or Grace works al in matters of Salvation. (2) That the naked
will suffices not to perform any good. Chrysostom, in Genes. Hom. 9. calls
this prevenient Grace, (...), the Grace that seeks what is lost, and is found
by such as seek it not. Basil terms it, (...). Anticipant Grace. So de Baptis.
lib. 1. (...), By the prevenient Grace of God we work and confer our duties,
according to says, by love. This antecedence and Prioritie of Divine Concurse
may be demonstrated, (1) From its effective Principe the Divine Will, which
necessarily precedes the Act of the second cause; because eternal and
independent, as before. (2) From the efficace of the Divine Concurse, as it
infallibly determines the second cause to act, and so must be necessarily
antecedent thereto, not only. simultaneous, as the Jesuits hold. (3) From the
Dependence and Subordination of the second cause to the First. Al second causes
are but (...), Concauses, dependent on and subordinate to the First cause, as
Plato: now where there is dependence and subordination, here must necessarily
be Prioritie and Antecedence of that on which the subordinate dependes. Thus
Suarez, Metaph. Disp. 21. Sect. 2. page 568. By comparing, says he, the action
of the Creature to the interne action of God, it is clear, that the action of
God is in order of nature before the action of the Creature: whence it is said,
that the first cause does first influence or concur; because the second cause
acts not, but in and by its virtue. Yet it cannot be denied, but that the
Jesuits generally allow God only a simultaneous Concurse as o the acts of the
Will; because otherwise, as they conceit, the liberty of the Will cannot be
preserved. This simultaneous concurse they make to be nothing else but the very
action of the second cause, as it procedes from God. Burgersdicius, Metaph. l.
2. c. 11. grants, that Gods Concurse in supernatural Acts is previous; but yet
in naturals he allows it to be only simultaneous. But that Gods Concurse not
only in supernaturals, but also in naturlas is previous the Dominicans strongly
prove from the very nature of the First cause, and dependence of the second:
for where there is subordination and dependence in causalitie, there is
posterioritie, etc.

4. Gods Concurse to and with second causes is total. Gods Concurse total.
This Totalitie of the First cause does not exclude the Totalitie of the second
cause in its kind, but only its partiality and coordination in the same kind.
For it is a trite Rule in Philosophy, that in causes subordinate there may be
diverse total causes in different kinds concurring to the same effect, but not
in the same kind. So we say that God, and the Sun, and Man are al total causes
in the production of a Man; because they al have different kinds of causalitie.
When therefore we say, that Gods Concurse is total, we do only deny the
Coordination or Copartialitie of the second cause. We allow the second cause to
cooperate with God in a way of subordination, but not to be a coordinate,
social, or copartial cause with God. Divine Concurse, specially as to gratiose
effects, works al totally and solitarily: it admits not of a Corrival or
Copartner: it is no partial cause, but works the whole effect, though not
without the subservience of inferior causes and instruments. As in natural
causes, you ascribe the whole efficace and causalitic of the instrument to the
principal cause; specially if the instrument be purely passive, without any
inherent virtue of its own. As you ascribe not the victory to the Generals
Sword, but to his Valor: so here the instruments which Christ uses in the
works of the new Creation are purely passive; they have no efficace, but what
is imparted to them by him the principal Efficient; and therefore they cannot
be partial, social causes. This Totalitie of Divine Concurse is well
demonstrated by that great and pious Witness against Antichrist, even in the
darkest times of Popery, Robert Grosseteste Bishop of Lancolne, in his MSS. de
Libero Arbitrio: Efficacious Grace so works with the Freewil, that at first it
prevents the act of the Will, and afterward concurs; yet not so, as if part
were wrought by Grace and part by Free Will, but each in its kind works the
whole: for two individual Agents must necessarily work one and the same effect
when their action is indivise -- This Augustine illustrates by a Rider and the
Horse; by whom one and the same act or motion is totally produced: so the
Action of God and of the Will concur totally -- And so in every effect of every
Creature, God and the next second cause produce the same conjointly not apart,
or one this part and that the other part, etc. This Totalitie of Divine
Concurse as to gratiose effects is frequently and lively illustrated and
demonstrated by the Greek Theologues. Thus Chrysostom, Hom. 12. ad Hebr.
(...), etc. We see houses beautifully built, Hoc, inquit Bonaventura, piarum
mentium est, ut nihil sibi tribuant, sed totum Gratiae Dei: unde quantumcunque
aliquis det Gratiae Dei a pietate non receder, etiamsi multa tribuendo Gratiae
Dei aliquid subtrahit potestati Naturae: cum vero aliquid Gratiae Dei
subtrahitur, and Naturae tribuitur quod Gratiae est, ibi potest periculum
intervenire. Cassandri Consuloat. Art. 18.
and we say; the whole is the Artificers: albeit he has work men under him: so
the whole of good must be ascribed to God. So in Genes 715. (...), The whole is
from the Grace of God. So ad Ephesians. Hom. 18. speaking of Paul, he says, (...).
Thou see how in althings be conceles what is his own, and ascribes al to God.
So Greg. Nazianz. Orat. 31. speaking of Paul, says, (...), he ascribes al to
God. Thus also Cyril Alexandr. and others, as Court Gent. P. 2. B. 3. Chapter 9.
Sect. 3.. 12. This partial concurse supposes God and the Creature to act
together in the same kind of causalitie, which is repugnant both to the nature
of God, as also to the condition of the Creature. (1) This partial Concurse is
repugnant to the independent, simple, perfect nature of God, as also to his
prime, soverain, efficacions causalitie. What more incongruous and unbecoming
the supreme infinite Being, than to be yoked with his Creature as a partial,
social, coordinate cause? (2) This also is inconsistent with the Subordination,
Dependence, and Inferioritie of the second cause. For all social, partial causes
are as such coordinate and equal: the effect dependes on each, but they depend
not each on the other. To make the second cause social and coordinate with the
first, what is it but to make it a first cause? (3) This also is inconsistent
with the prioritie and antecedence of Gods concurse: for a partial causalitie
is only simultaneous, which has been already refuted. (4) The sober Scholastic
Divines have ever owned and approved a Totalitie of Divine concurse. So
Aquinas, contra Gent. l. 3. cap. 70. It Is manifest, says he, that the same
effect is ascribed to the natural and second cause and to the Divine Efficace;
not as if it were partly from God, and partly from the natural Agent; but the
whole effect is from both in a different mode: as the same effect is attributed
totally to the Instrument, and yet totally to the principal cause. The like
Alvarez, Disput. 85.

The Totalitie of Divine concurse, as to the new Creature and Gratiose Effects,
is lively illustrated and demonstrated in Sacred Philosophy. Thus Esa. 43.7.
Esa. 43.7
Even every one that is called by my name: for I have created him for my
Glory, I have formed him, yea, I have made him. Here Christ assumes to
himself, as the sole, total, principal Agent, the Creation, Formation, and
Consummation of the New Creature. As in the old Creation, God made first the
rude Chaos out of nothing: then out of the rude Chaos he formed the several
species of the Universe, and particularly the Body of Man out of the dust of
the Earth; which was Formation: thence in the last place, he breathed into Man
a Rational Soul; which gave Consummation to him: So proportionably hereto
Christ here assumes to himself a threefold concurse, and each total, in the
framing of the New Creature. he says, (1) I have created him. (...). I have
educed or called him out of nothing, as I did the first rude Chaos. The new
Creature is not educed out of the potence of corrupt Nature, but out of nothing
by Divine Omnipotence. But if this be not enough to express the Totalitie of
his efficacious Essicience, he adds, (2) I have formed him (...). This also is
a term whereby the formation of Creatures out of the first chaos is expressed:
The sense is; I have not only given him some first lines, a rude mass, or
shape of a new Creature; but I have fashioned and formed him, as I at first
formed Adam out of a piece of Red Earth or Clay: For so the word signifies, to
form or shape a thing, as the Potter does his Clay, to this or that form. And
if all this will not suffice to demonstrate, that Christ is the total Creator and
Formator of the New Creature, he adds yet farther, (3) Yea, I have made him,
(...). i. e. I have perfected and completed the whole work: I have made him
such as I would have him, conform to mine eternal Idea concerning him: he has
no part wanting or misplaced; not a finger or little toe defective: he is a
complete, perfect new Creature, and that by virtue of my Creation, Formation,
and Consummation. Thus the whole of the new Creature, as well as of the old, is
to be ascribed to Christ totally and solely as the Creator, Fictor, and
Effector thereof. And here we are also to note, that it was usual with the
Hebrews, to express the works of the interne new Creation, under the symbol
of the externe old Creation. The Totalitie of the Divine concurse is also we
expressed, Esa. 63.5. and Psalm. 94.17.

5. Gods concurse particular not general only.
The concurse of God as the first cause is particular and proper, not only
general. This Adjunct or mode of operation may seem novel, but really it is not
so. Before we come to the demonstration of it, we must premit some Distinctions
and Limitations. (1) We must distinguish between a general providence, and
general concurse: we deny not but that Gods Providence, as it extendes to
althings universally, may be termed general, which yet does no way induce or
suppose a general concurse, i. e. such as is alike commun to al effects and
determinable thereby; as the concurse of the Sun is determinable by the effects
it works on. Such a general concurse is unworthy of the first cause, who
determines al effects, but is determinable by none. Bradwardine de Causd Dei,
l. 3. c. 7. p. 668. undertakes to give us the origin of this general influxe
or concurse, which he makes to be from the Pagan Philosophers, 'specially the
Astrologers, who asserted an emanation or irradiation of general influxes from
celestial Bodies, which they supposed to be Gods, on al subjects or matters. (2)
We must distinguish between a particular cause, and a particular concurse. We
do not affirm that God is a particular cause, but an universal cause
concurring in a particular manner to al second causes and their effects. And
here Heereboord, Select. Disputat. Vol. 1. Disput. 10, and 11. whiles he justly
opposes his Master Burgersdicius, for denying Gods concurse to be particular,
he himself false into this easy mistake of making God a particular cause. For
the obviating of which, as also for the taking away the foundation of all the
objections urged against our Hypothesis, we say, that God is an Universal
Cause, and yet his concurse, as to the mode of its operation is particular. God
is said to be an Universal Cause, in regard of the extent of his causalitie, as
it extendes to al objects, effects, and second causes universally: and yet his
concurse is particular, as it is not, like that of the Sun, determinable by its
object, but does in a particular manner, according to the exigence and
condition of the subject, determine the same. These things being premissed we
proceed to demonstrate, that the concurse of God is not general but particular,
as to its manner of working with all second causes. (1) From the nature of a
General concourse; which is of it self indifferent, but modified and determined
by the matter it works on: So the influxe of the Sun is only general and
indifferent; because modified by the matter it works on, as it is evident by
the colors in a Rainbow, as also by the opposite effects it has on the wax
and clay. To suppose Gods concurse to be thus General and Indifferent is every
way unworthy of the first cause, which determines al second causes, but is
determined by none. To assert, that the concurse of God is in the power of the
second cause or matter it works on, what is this but to suppose the second
cause to be first and the first second? (2) From the manifold imperfections
that are hereby imposed on God. For if the concurse of God be only General and
Indifferent, it then hangs in suspense, and has not efficace enough to reach
its effect, unless it be so or so disposed. Whence also it follows, that it is
in the power of the second cause to resist or frustrate the concurse of God, so
that it shall not reach its effect. Hence lastly it follows, that the concurse
of God is not efficacious and omnipotent, which we shall anon prove. (3) That
the concurse of God as to its manner of working is not general but particular
is asserted and demonstrated by some of the most acute of the Scholastic
Theologues. So Bradwardine l. 1. c. 4. and l. 3. c. 7. Joan. major in Sentent.
2. Did. 28. q. 1. p. 122. Alvarez de Auxil. Disput. 23. with several others.

But here it is objected, 1. by Burgersdicius and others: Objections against
Gods particular concurse.
(1) If God concur by a particular concurse to the specification of the action,
then he may be said to walk, discourse, eat, etc. To this Objection we
respond, [1] by denying, that God concurs to the specification of the action,
albeit he concurs by a particular concurse: for an action is specified from its
particular cause, not from the first universal cause. So that here is that
which they call a fallacy of many interrogations, whereof one is true the other
false. Or, we may call it a begging of the Question, in that they suppose, That,
if God concur by a particular concurse, he concurs also to the specification of
the action, which is an inconsequent consequence. [2] Those Animal acts of
walking, eating, etc. ascribed to the second cause, cannot be ascribed to God
the first cause, albeit they more principally belong to him; because they
proceed not from pure efficience, but from information, (to use the
Aristotelean phrase) or a body so organized. Those actions signify a relation
to the particular subject whence they slow, and therefore cannot be properly
attributed to God, as Bradward. l. 1. c. 4. p. 178. and Suarez Metaphys.
Disput. 21. S. 3. acutely reply, showing that ambulation, eating, etc. do not
denote pure efficience, but a subject informed by such motions, which are
therefore proper to the said subject. (2) But the main objection of
Burgersdicius and others against Gods particular concurse is taken from sinful
actions, unto which, say they, God cannot be said to concur by a particular
concurse, unless we make him the author of sin. This objection makes a great
noise, but has little of weight in it. For (1) The deordination of any sinful
act can only be ascribed to the second cause, who is the Author of it, not unto
the first cause, who only produces the physical entitative Act. [2] That which
is most sinful in regard of the second cause, is so ordered by God, as that it
shall conduce to the greatest good, as before, and hereafter in the providence
of God.

6. Gods Concurse Efficacious.
Gods concurse is most Potent and Efficacious. This Adjunct and Mode of
operation is most express in Sacred Philosophy, specially as to gratiose
Influences, which are most potent. Sin is a mighty strong poison, ay but
medicinal Grace is a much stronger Antidote. The powers of darkness and Hell
are very strong; but Christ the Captain of our Salvation, has Samson-like
carried away the Gates of Hell upon his shoulders and led captivity captive:
His Grace is most potent, irresistible, and victorions. Thus Jansenius,
Augustine. Tom. 3. l. 2. c. 24. p. 43. having in what precedes sufficiently
refuted the Conditional Grace of the Molimstes, he adds: This therefore is the
true reason, why no medicinal Grace of Christ ever wants its effect, but al
works both to will and to do; because with Augustine Grace and the good work
are so reciprocated, that as from Grace conferred the effect of the work may
be inferred, so on the other hand, from the defect of the work, it may be
inferred, that Grace was not given. By which manner of reasoning it appears,
that Grace as the cause, and the operation of the Will as the effect are, as the
Philosophers speak, convertible, and mutually inseparable each from other. For
so Augustine speaks of the Conflict against Tentations: Agis si ageris, and
been agis, si a^bono ageris: so efficacious is medicinal Grace. Yea Jansenins a
voucheth, that there is no manner of speech among the Scholastic Theologues so
efficacious to express, that the determination, or predetermination of the Will
is from the Grace of God, but Augustine assumes the same, to demonstrate, that
the Grace of Christ is not such, that the effect should be suspended or
dependent on any condition to be performed by the human Will, but that the
effect is most potently produced by it, not if the Will wills, but by working
and determining the Will to will. So Habak. 3.4. Habak. 3.4.
And his brightness was as the light: he had bornes coming out of his hand:
and there was the hiding of his power. And his brightness was as the light.
The brightness of Christ was exceeding gloriose, even like the brightness of
the Sun, in its meridian glory. Thence it follows: he had horns coming out of
his hands. (...) properly signifies, to send forth beams as horns, to
irradiate and shine forth. Beams and horns have some analogy and
ressemblance, and therefore the same word among the Hebrews signifies both.
Hence the vulgar Version renders (...) Exodus 34.29, horns, whereas it
signifies there beams, as here. Whence it follows: out of his hands. Hands here
denote Christ's power, as Act. 11.21. (...) hand signifies power, the hand
being the instrument of the body, whereby it puts forth its power. Thence he
adds: There was the hiding of his power: i. e. his secret power lay wrapped up
in his efficacious rays, or concurse, which is exceeding influential and potent,
like horns. We find something analogous hereto in Plato, Repub. 6. page 509.
where treating of God as the first Cause of al good, he compares him to the
Sun, and his concurse to the rays thereof, in this manner: Thou will say, I
presume, that the Sun does not only cause that things are seen, but also that
they are generated, do grow, are nourished: although it be not the generation
of those things. Thus therefore determine, that the chiefest good, [namely God]
does give to those things that are known not only that they are known, (...),
but also force and efficace for their existence, etc. Wherein he compares the
efficacious Concurse of God to the spermatic potent influxe of the Sun, which
gives life, sense, motion, nutrition, angmentation and vigor to al manner of
Insects. Whence those blind Gentiles made the Sun, under the fictitious names
of Apollo and his Son Esculapius, the supreme God of Medicine; because the
Virtues of Plants depend on the Sun, See Court Gent. P. 1. B. 2. C. 8.. 11.
its heat and influence: whence they consecrated the Laurel to Apollo, which
signified with them the heat and influence of the Sun: the Laurel being a
Plant, as they say, hot and always green. Such a soverain efficace did the
Grecian Philosophers ascribe unto the Sun, in regard of its influence, not only
on Plants, but also on animal Bodies; and therefore it is deservedly made by
Plato a symbolic image of Gods efficacious Concurse on al create Beings and
Operations. Thus in sacred Philosophy we find Christ, as the first cause of al
Grace, compared to the Sun, and his gracious influxe to the beams of the Sun.
So Mal. 4.2. Mal. 4.2.
But unto you that fear my Name shall the Sun of righteousness arise with
healing in his wings, and ye shall go forth and grow up as calves of the stal.
Christ here, as the first original Spring of al Grace, and compared to the Sun:
whence he is said, to arise with healing in his wings: i. e. his Beams: for the
Beams of the Sun are its wings, whereby it conveighs an healing prolific
influence to althings that have life. The Sun indeed vouchsafes warm
efficacious influences to al natural bodies, both vegetable and animal: it has
an universal prolific influence on al sublunarie bodies. Thence it is said Psalm.
19.6. Psalm. 19.6.
And there is nothing hid from the heat thereof: i. e. its warm benign
influxe reaches, as some conceive, unto al natural effects, even to the very
Minerals and Metals. But certain it is, that Vegetables and Plants are greatly
influenced by the Sun. Job 8.16.
Hence that Job 8.16. He is green before the Sun. Whence is the beauty of
Roses, the delicious suavities of Fruits, the medicinal virtues of Herbs, the
nourishment of Corn, the fatness of Olives, the cordial and heart-reviving
influences of Grapes, but from the Sun? So for the animal life, are not al
Insects produced by the Sun? Yea does not the health, strength, vivacitie, and
comforts of man's body receive much influence from the efficacious beams of the
Sun, as Job 30.28. Eccles. 11.7? Is not then the Sun, both in Sacred and
Platonic Philosophy, made an apt Symbol to represent the efficacious Concurse
of God as the first cause of althings, but more specially of supernatural
effects? O! what Soul-reviving influences are there in the warm beams of
Divine concurse? What universal, inexhaustible, infinite treasures of Divine
light and heat are there in the Sun of Righteousness? Are not his beams the
light of life, as Joh. 8.12. Psalm. 84.11? Such is the efficace of Divine
concurse. There is moreover a great emphase and elegance in that phrase, Mal.
4.2. And ye shall go forth and grow up as calves of the stal: i.e. as weak,
feeble Calves, which in the winter, by reason of the cold, are kept in the
stal, at spring, when they go forth and sport themselves under the warm
healing beams of the Sun, how greatly do they grow and thrive: so the sick,
infirm friends of Christ, when they lie under the warm, refreshing,
corroborating influences of his medicinal Grace. Yea, this efficacious soverain
Grace does not only cure infirm consumtive Souls, but also give life to dead
Souls. Thus Esa. 9.2. The people that walked in darkness have seen a great
light, Esa. 9.2.
they that dwell in the land of the shadow of death, upon them has the light
shined. (1) This Prophecy refers to our Lords first Preaching among those that
inhabited the land of Zabulon and Nephthali, mentioned v. 1. and so applied
Mat. 4.14, 15, 16. who were indeed, at the coming of our Lord, under very black
Egyptian darkness: whence they are said, to walk in darkness. (2) They are
said, to dwell in the land of the shadow of death. [1] (...) they that dwell
denotes a fixed immobile state, not only of such as travel or pass throwo a
country, but of inhabitants. Then [2] we have the place of their habitation,
the land of the shadow of death. (...) of the shadow of death, whereby we may
understand either a deadly shade, such as by the dampe thereof strikes dead;
which is very frequent in some dark cavernes of the Earth: or else, by the
shadow of death, we may understand the Grave, which is the dark shadowy
habitation of the dead; as Job 10.21. the Grave is styled the land of
darkness, and the shadow of death. And look as dead men are loged in the
dark, shadowy Grave; so were these dead Souls in the land of Zabulon and
Nephthali loged in the Grave of sin, under the dark, deadly shade thereof;
which implies a total privation of spiritual light and life. Now (3) on these
dead Souls dwelling in the Grave of sin the light shined, i. e. Christ the Sun
of Righteousness arose with healing under his wings, or warm beams of
efficacious Grace. Yea, how often does this omnipotent heart quickening Grace
pick out the worst of sinners as fit matter to exert its soverain efficace on?
Esa. 19.18.
Thus Esa. 19.18. In that day [ i. e. when the Sun of Righteousness shall arise
on Egypt with healing under his wings] shall five cities in the land of Egypt
speak the language of Canaan, [ i. e. be converted to God] and swear to the
Lord of Hosts: [ i. e. bind themselves inviorably to Christ, by an Oath of
Allegiance and Supremacie] one shall be called the Citre of Destruction. (...)
which we render the City of Destruction is rendered by Grotius, Gataker and
other Critics, the City of the Sun, called by the Grecians who possessed it,
Heliopolis; which the Hebrews expressed by Bethsenes, the house of the Sun, i.
e. consecrated to the Sun, their principal God, which was with all manner of
idolatric Rites worshipped in this City. For Herodotus assures us, that this
City Heliopolis was one of the six, unto which the Egyptians used at some
solemn times to repair out of al parts, to celebrate the Worship of the Sun;
because here was their renowned Temple of the Sun; as also Mnevis one of their
sacred Bulls, which they worshipped as God, of which see Court Gent. P. 1. B. 2.
C. 8.. 9. Now this Heliopolis so much addicted to and immersed in Idolatry is
made one of the principal objects, on which the Sun of Righteousness should
arise with healing under his wings or beams of efficacious medicinal Grace. So
v. 22. And the Lord shall smite Egypt, he shall smite and heal it, and they shall
return even unto the Lord, etc. What! shall Egypt, yea the most idolatrous
City of Egypt, Heliopolis, be healed by the soverain Grace of the Sun of
Righteousness? O! what a potent demonstration is this of the omnipotent
efficace of medicinal Grace? May not this Argument be further promoved by a
reflection on these Britannic Isles and their prodigiose Idolatry, when the Sun
of Righteousness at first arose on them with healing under his wings of
Evangelic medicinal Grace?

But for the more full explication and demonstration of the officacitie of
Divine Concurse, we are to consider, that there is a twofold Concurse of God,
one moral; the other efficacious; which some term physic Concurse, because it
works according to the manner of physic Efficients. For a physic Cause is that
which really and properly influenceth the Effect: but a moral Cause, as
dictinguished from physic, is that which contributes not any real and proper
influxe for the production of the effect, yet he does so far morally concur, as
that the effect is imputed to him, as it is well determined by Suarez, Metaph.
Disput. 17. Sect. 2. page 402. A moral cause does not reach the effect
immediately, neither does it properly move and determine the Agent, but only
objectively and remotely, by Commands, Arguments, Incentives, Motives, and such
like moral influences: which is only a metaphoric, indirect, remote, improper,
and inefficacious kind of efficience. But now a physic Cause, is that which
alone deserves, and therefore in the Schools has appropriated to it self the
name of an efficient Cause; because it does by a proper, real, direct, and
efficacious influxe or causalitie reach its effect. God has both a moral and
physic or efficacious concurse in and for the production of moral good. He
commandes, propones arguments, invites, persuades what is good; as also
efficaciously works the same in those he intendes to do good to. But as for
sinful acts God does not by any moral concurse concur thereto, and therefore
they may not be imputed to him as the Author of them.

This being premissed, we proceed to demonstrate the efficacitie of Gods
Concurse. (1) From its soverain nature and omnipotent manner of working,
specially in supernatural, gratiose effects. The efficacitie of actual Grace in
the Infusion, Conservation, Promotion, and Actuation of Habitual is lively
illustrated by the Grecanic Fathers of the Primitive Churches; who style this
efficacious medicinal Grace, (...), the superne or supernatural vocation and
motion: they term it sometimes, (...), the operant and cooperant Grace: also
(...), the Energie, Aid, and Assistence of God: (...), the ineffable Virtue of
God; (...), the assistent Power. It Is termed also by them, (...), the superne
and Divine impulse, or inclination; also (...), the Divine hand; (...), the
Grace of protection; (...), the universal Spring of Energie; (...), of it self
perfect and sufficiently operative: Chrysostom terms it (...), a gift above
nature overcoming nature: also (...), insuperable Assistence. But none among
the Greek Theologues seems more lively to describe it, than Cyril Alexandr.
lib. 1. de Adorat. Tom. 1. where he assertes, That men are turned from sin,
(...), not only by words injected into the Soul; [ i. e. according to the
Pelagian persuasion, by moral suasion only] but that God puts forth (...), an
energetic efficacious Aid, whereby the infirm Will is led as by the hand.
Clemens Alexandr. l. 1. Paed. c. 3. calls it (...), the Inspiration of God: also
(...), the subtle and spirituale instructive force of Divine words. And
Athanas. contr. Gent. (...), the power communicated from God. Again he says,
(...) (...), the Grace of God has overcome. Whence the Greek Theologues termed
it, (...), the invincible Assistence. And Chrysostom says expressly, that
(...), al good comes from the Grace and efficacious Virtue of God. (2) From its
effective Principe, the Divine Will. We have before,. 3. demonstrated, that the
Divine Concurse supposes not any transient influxe form God, but only the act
of the Divine Will: which being omnipotent, it thence necessarily follows, that
his concurse is also omnipotent and most efficacious. Whence it is worthy our
notice, that the Concurse of God is in Scripture expressed by his fiat or word,
as Genesis 1.3, etc. And what is this Word of God but the omnipotent Act of his
Will? Hence in sacred Philosophy, the Hebrew (...), and Greek (...), signify
both Word and Thing, denoting to us, that there is an intimate reciprocation
between Divine Words and Things: whatever God speaks and says shall be done,
is done: and whatever is done, is but the effect of his Word or Will: every Word
and Will of God, which regardes the event and issues of things, is omnipotent
and operative. (3) From the Determination of the second cause by the first.
Gods Concurse is not only moral, by propounding objects and persuading thereto;
but really operative and productive of things. Now in all cooperation the causes
cooperating are either coordinate or subordinate: the first and second cause
cannot be coordinate, but the later must be subordinate to the former: and if
subordinate to, then it must be determined by the first Cause. It Is certain,
that either the second cause determines the first, or the first the second: and
is it not more likely, that the first cause should determine the second, than
that the second should determine the first to act? Can we imagine, that the
concurse of the first cause is in the power of the second? Is it not more
agreeable to the Nature of God, and the condition of a Creature, to determine,
that the causalitie of the second cause is subordinate unto, and therefore
determinable by the concurse of the first cause? This argument is more fully
managed by the Dominicans and Jansenistes. See Bradwardine de. Causa Dei, l. 3.
c. 7. p. 669. Alvarez, de Auxil. l. 3. Disp. 18-21. and l. 4. Disput. 32.
Jansenius, August. Tom. 3. l. 2. c. 22.

7. Gods Concurse connatural.
Lastly, Gods concurse, albeit it be most potent and efficacious, yet is it
also most Connatural and Congenial: there is not more of force, than Divine
suavitie mixed therewith. So Psalm. 110.3. Psalm. 110.3.
Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power. Willing. (...)
willingnesses. (...) nadib signifies (1) Free, ready, cheerful, spontaneous.
(2) Metonymically, a free gift or oblation. (3) Princes, who ought to be
free-spirited, generose, liberal, as Luke 22.25 (4) The word is here used in
the abstract, which carries a great emphase: for abstractes speak essences. (5)
It is here also in the Genitive case plural; [of thy willingnesses] which the
Hebrews use as expressive of a superlative degree. So that the meaning is: thy
people shall be in the most superlative degree free, ready, willing, as Noble
and Freeborn Princes, to offer up themselves a Free-wil-offering, gift, or
oblation unto thee. Hence efficacious Grace was termed by the Greek Fathers,
(...), the interne philtrum or charm: by Basil, (...), the Grace which is
sweetly received: by Chrysostom, Hom. 31. in Mat. (...), an opportune
vocation. Of which see more Court Genesis P. 2. B. 3. c. 9. S. 3.. 12. Nihil
Augustino certius est, quam in Scripturis S. Gratiam illam efficacem, per quam
solam operamur quicquid. boni operamur, nominedulcedinis, suavitatis,
delectationis, nempe spiritualis and coelestis esse significatam. Delectationi
Dilectionem, Ardorem, Inflammationemque subnectit. Sunt emim effectus qui
immediate ex illa coelesti suavitate germinant. Jansen. August. Tom. 3. De
Great. l. 4. c. 1. Ubi fusius de suavitate hac spiriruali Gratiae Medicinalis
tractat.
So sweetly does Medicinal Grace Work. And yet it works nevertheless
omnipotently: for so it follows: in the day of thy power. (...) signifies (1)
force, and strength of body, or mind: and thence, (2) Metonymically, richesse
or military Forces; because in them men place their strength, job 21.7. Psalm.
49.6. We may understand it in both senses: (1) of Christ's powerful,
efficacious, heart-conquering Grace; which is the cause: or (2) for his
powerful Forces and Armies; which are the effect of this Omnipotent day of
Christ. Thus we see what an admirable combination here is of Divine
Omnipotence, with human Liberty: how powerfully this medicinal Grace acts,
and yet how sweetly: it acts so Omnipotently, as if there were no room left
for human Liberty; and yet so connaturally, and so sweetly, as if there were
not the least dram of Omnipotence, and Force in it. Oh! what an omnipotent
Suavitie, or sweet Omnipotence is there in this Medicinal Grace? Who would not
come under such a silken, soft, sweet violence as this is? Need we then fear,
that any prejudice can befall human Liberty, so long as this Wise, Soverain,
Soul-physician works upon the Will? Does he not understand perfectly what are
the proper ansae, or handles of the Soul, and so suit his Medicinal Grace
thereto? Has he not a key exactly sitted to every lock, yea, to every ward in
the lock of the will? Is not his Medicinal Grace full of the deepest and highest
reason, so that the Mind sees all the reason in the world, why it should
embrace the offers made to it by Christ? And does not the Will, upon this
Divine, heart-logic infused by Christ, move as freely, as cheerfully, as
connaturally, as if there were no power mixed with medicinal Grace? Does not
Christ take the Will by the hand and teach it to go, as he did Ephraim, Hos.
11.3? and does he not also draw it with cords of a man, Coelestis illa suavitas
mollit viam ut voluntas ex carnaliu rerum visco emergere possit, and seipsam in
justitiam diligendam figere. Cum enim non possit morus nisi ab immobili fieri,
suavitas illa immobilem quodammodo reddit animum, ut possit in motu liberum
spiritalis voluntatis, ac dilectionem erumpere. Ex quo fit consequenter, ut si
illa desit, voluntas veluti emortua sit. Jans. August. Tom. 3. de Great. l. 4.
c. 7.
and hands of love, i. e. with rational arguments, and moral persuasions, as
Hos. 11.4? Thus Esa. 10.21. The remnant shall return, even the remnant of Jacob
to their mighty God. Here is a spontaneous cheerful return of back sliding
Israel; and yet it is to their mighty God, (...) the name given the Messiah,
Esa. 9.6. Christ draws them by a mighty power, and yet they return as freely,
as if there were no power and efficace put forth. So Esa. 11.6, 10, 11. The
like Esa. 44. Having spoken v. 3. of the effusion of the spirit of Grace, he
adds what followed thereon, v. 5. -- and another shall subscribe with his hand
unto the Lord, etc. A Metaphor taken from such Volunteers as do freely and
spontaneously with their own hand list and enrol themselves under a General. So
ineffable and admirable is the suavitie of efficacious Grace. Yea may we not
conclude hence, that look by how much the more powerfully and invincibly this
Medicinal Grace acts on the Will, by so much the more connaturally, and sweetly
it acts? For hereby it determines, confirms, and preserves the Will in its
highest Liberty, both of State, and Act. For what more natural to the Will,
than to adhere to its chiefest Good? Or when does it act more freely, than when
it is most peremtorily, most inviolably, and most immotably determined to love,
and enjoy its best friend, and choicest Good? Thus the Omnipotence, and
Efficace of Medicinal Grace, is so far from destroying the Liberty of the Will,
as that it does most effectually preserve, confirm, and promote the same.

CHAP. VIII. Of Creation, and Providence in the General.
Creation proper to God: the production of something out of nothing: Active
Creation the same with the Divine Will: Passive Creation what. Gods Providence
demonstrated: The Explication of it: The Wisdom and Eternal Law of Providence.
Providence an Act of the Divine Will. The Spirits Efficience in Providence.
Providential means. Fire the create mundane Spirit. The Object of Divine
Providence. Its Adjuncts: (1) Efficacitie. (2) Immobilitie. (3) Connaturalitie.
(4) Perfection. (5) Mysterious. Miracles. Providential Conservation, immediate
and mediate; Ordinary and Extraordinary.

. 1. HAving examined Divine concurse in its object, Gods Creation demonstrated
and explicated.
effective principe, and Adjuncts or various modes of operation, we now descend
to the contemplation of it in regard of its Effects. The Efficience of the
first Cause in relation to its effects is usually distributed into Creation and
Providence. Creation is the Efficience of the first Cause, whereby he made
althings at first, and still continues to make some things out of nothing. What
lively Notices we have of Gods Creating althings out of nothing, both in Sacred
and Platonic Philosophy, has been sufficiently explicated and demonstrated in
Plato's Physics, Court Gent. P. 2. B. 3. Chap. 9. S. 1. and. Our present task
will be to give some general Ideas of the Creation as it appertains to Gods
prime Efficience. 1. It Is most evident, that no finite Being can be eternal or
from eternity. All the Philosophers before Aristotle generally asserted the
production of althings by God: but he, from a confined mistaken notion of Gods
infinite Effcience, fondly conceited the first matter to be eternal; because he
could not imagine, how something could be educed out of nothing. But true
Philosophy, as well as Divine Revelation teaches us, that althings were made
by God, and nothing besides himself is eternal. That the world was not from
eternity we have sufficiently demonstrated, in what precedes touching the
existence of God, C. 2.. 2. This Argument is well managed by Derodone,
l'Atheisme Convaincu, C. 1. And Suarez, Metaphys. Tom. 1. p. 536. strongly
demonstrates, That it is intrinsecally repugnant to Creation that it be
eternal. Yet the Jesuits generally grant, That it is possible for the world to
be from eternity. Which Hypothesis comes not short of a virtual contradiction:
for what difference can be rationally imagined between being eternal, and being
from eternity? Is not that which is without beginning eternal? And can we
imagine that to have a beginning, which is from eternity? Can any effect and
product of the Divine Will be commensurate to it in point of Duration?

2. To Create is the sole Prerogative of God. For (1) the order of actions must
be according to the order of Agents: the most Noble and Supreme Action cannot
agree to any but the most Noble and Supreme Agent: And is not Creation the most
Noble and Supreme of al Actions? Can it then agree to any but the most Noble
and Supreme Agent, God? Creation is the most perfect of al actions, by which a
participate Being may be communicated; because it primarily speaks the
production of the whole entitie in its full latitude:. whence it is manifest,
that this action cannot be appropriated or attributed to any, but the first
cause, who is Being essentially and of himself: no participate being has force
enough to produce the whole of Being. (2) That Creation is proper to God may be
argued from the Mode of Efficience. For Creation supposes an Omnipotence and
Independence in the Creator; in as much as he has no passive power or matter to
work on, but only an objective power or possibility of the object to be
Created, which requires an infinite active power in the Agent. For by how much
the more remote the passive power is from Act, by so much the greater ought the
active power of the Agent to be: whence where there is no preexistent matter to
work upon, but a mere obediential objective power or nothing, there the
distance between the Power and Act is, as to efficience, infinite, and
impertransible by any finite power: therefore nothing but an infinite power can
bring the extremes Nothing and Something together. (3) From the Nature of
Creation; which is, not a successive but a momentaneous Action: but all the
productions of second causes, as they are inferior to, and Instruments of the
first cause, are successive motions: for all Instruments act and move in a way
of succession. (4) From the limitation of al second causes. For the most
perfect of Creatures have only a precarious and Participate Being; and
therefore have not in themselves virtue or force enough to Create the least of
Beings. To Create requires a virtue of the most Supreme Order, invested with an
Active Power in the most universal latitude. And the reason is evident; because
the Creative Power extendes it self to every thing creable: neither does it
expect on the part of its object any thing, but a non-repugnance or obediential
power that the effect may be. This will more fully appear from the following
Thesis.

3. Creation the production of something out of nothing.
Creation is the production of Something out of Nothing. When we say Creation
is the production of Something out of Nothing; the particle out of must not be
understood as denoting any succession of one thing after another, (for Creation
is but an instantaneous eduction) but only the negation of a material cause.
Now that God Created althings without any preexistent matter may be
demonstrated, (1) From his Independence and prime efficience as the first
cause. For the first Independent Cause being a pure simple act, must
necessarily precede al matter, and thence be the cause thereof: that which is
the first in Beings must necessarily be the cause of all the rest: whence it
follows, that the first matter was produced by God out of no preexistent matter
but out of nothing. (2) From the universal efficience of God, as the first
cause. Every Agent, so far as it is confined to matter, so far it is particular
and limited: for to be confined to matter in acting, is to act in order to some
determinate species, whereunto that matter refers: wherefore that Agent which is
universal, and commensurate to al effects possible, cannot be confined to
matter: such is the first cause. (3) From the universalitie of Effects produced
by Creation. By how much the more universal the effect is, by so much the
higher the cause is: and by how much the higher the cause is, by so much the
more it is extended to al effects. Whence the effects of Creation being of al
most universal, and the cause most high, there cannot be supposed any
preexistent matter out of which they are educed. (4) Al productions out of matter
suppose successive motion and Transmutation: but Creation is not a successive
but momentaneous motion all at once. Al successive motion and mutation must
necessarily precede, as to Duration, the effect produced by such a mutation or
motion: but Creation does not by any kind of Duration precede the things
created: therefore it cannot be successive, out of preexistent matter.

4. Active Creation is nothing else but the Act of the Divine Will, Active
Creation the Act of the Divine Will.
as the effective principe of althings. This Hypothesis has been fully
explicated and demonstrated, Chap. 5.. 4. of Gods executive power, as c. 7.. 3.
And albeit it may seem to carry a novitie with it, yet it has sufficient
foundation both in Sacred and Scholastic Philosophy. As for Sacred
Philosophy, its very mode of expressing Gods active efficience in creating
althings plainly shows that it was no other than the Act of the Divine Will.
Genesis 1.3.
Thus Genesis 1.3. and God said, Let there be light. Which Word or saying of God
can be understood of no other than the Act of his Divine Will. For Speech is
(...) here, and elsewhere ascribed to God, thereby to express the efficacions
efficience of his Divine Will in the production of althings. Thus Maimonides,
More Nevochim, Part. 1. c. 65. demonstrates, That this Speech or Word, whereby
althings were made, must be understood of the Divine Will, not of any proper
Speech; because al Speech, whereby any thing is commanded, must necessarily be
directed to some Being existent, and capable of receiving such a command: but
there was no Being then existent; therefore it must be understood of the Divine
Will. Thus Hebr. 11.3. The world was framed by the Word of God. So 2 Pet. 3.5.
By the Word of God the Heavens were of old. An why is the efficience of the
Divine Will in creating althings expressed by the Word of God, but to show, that
as we, when we will have any thing done, express our Will by our word of
command; so God expressed what he will have accomplished, by his Fiat or Creative
Word. See more of this effective Word in the Providence of God,. 3. This
Hypothesis of Gods Creating althings by his Will has found Patrons not a few
among the most accurate Scholastic Theologues. Thus Joan. Major, Sentent. 2.
did. 1. q. 3. proves, That God produced the World by his mere Intellection and
Volition, without any other productive power. And his Arguments are these: (1)
The Human Will does not want any other executive power to execute its commands,
unless it be in such things as it cannot by it self reach: but the Divine
Omnipotent Will reaches althings: therefore it can execute its own commands,
without the mediation of any executive power. (2) The Efficacious Will of God
touching A. gives existence to A. otherwise the Efficacious Will of God were
impedible; and so some one might resist his Will. (3) Our Will can by its mere
volition produce some effects, namely Habits; it can also move other Powers by
its Empire: Therefore the Divine Will can by its sole volition produce al
effects. Thus Augustine, on Psalm. 144. With God to Will in to do; because
althings receive Being from his Will. The like Damascene, Orthod. Fid. l. 2. c.
29. (...), Althings that the Lord has willed, he has done, and no man has
resisted his Will: he willed that althings were made, and they were made: and he
wills that the world consistes, and it consistes: and all that he wills he can do,
and they are done. From this Active Creation of the Divine Will God is said by
some to be a Creator from al Eternity. Thus Gregor. Ariminensis, Sent. l. 1.
did. 28. q. 3. fol. 122. This denomination is not extrinsec but intrinsec to
the Divine Essence and Will. Hence Plato styled the World in regard of this
active Creation, Eternal, as it lay, from al Eternity, in the Divine Will and
Ideas. For the Active Efficience of the Divine Will is every way sufficient to
denominate the Passive Power of the World as creable.

5. Passive Creation is something in the thing created, not really, Passive
Creation a Mode of the thing Created.
but mentally or modally only distinct from it. For the explication of this
Proposition we are to note, (1) That Passive Creation does not so much regard
God as the thing Created. God in Creating the World was not reduced from Power
to Act, as al Creatures are when they act: for Gods Active Efficience was, as
has been demonstrated, from al Eternity, and no other than his Divine Will:
neither was there, at the passive Creation of the World, any new act in God,
which was not before in him: but there was an accession of an act or existence
to the things Created, which was not before: whence, by an extrinsec
denomination, God is said to be Creator at the passive Creation of things; as,
by an intrinsec denomination, he was Creator from al Eternity in regard of his
Active Efficience or Decree. (2) Albeit we conceive and express Passive
Creation under the notion of a mutation, yet it is not properly such; because
al proper mutation implies a succession of one thing after another; which
Creation admits not, being momentaneous and al at once, without any term from
which, or flux, which al mutation includes. (3) Some, and those not vulgar
Scholastics hold, That passive Creation is no way really but only mentally
distinct from the Creature. So the Passive Creation of a Man is really and
essentially the same with a Man. Thus Ocham, in Sent. 2. q. 9. and Greg.
Ariminensis, in Sent. 2. did. 1. q. 4, and 5. with the Nominals generally; who
presume that Action is not a middle thing between the Cause and Effect. And
their Arguments in this Case are not to be contemned; for they prove it, [1]
From the special Reason of Creation, which is not an Accident, but the very
substance or Essence of the thing Created: for if it were some middle thing
between God and the Creature, distinct from both, it must be a Creature, and so
the term of some other Creation; and this of some other: which would open a
door for a progress into Infinite. [2] From the Essential Reason of a
Creature: for Dependence on the first Cause is of the Essence of the Creature;
therefore it is in the Creature, and not really distinct from it: Now the prime
and essential dependence of the Creature on the first Cause is Creation:
wherefore it can be no more distinguished from the Creature, than the Essence
of a thing is distinguished from it self. That the Dependence of a Creature on
its Creator is not distinct from its Essence, they prove by many and strong
Arguments, of which hereafter, C. 11.. 6. (4) Suarez, Metaphys. Disput. 20. S.
5. p. 529. with others, assert, That Creation is somewhat in the thing Create,
not really distinct, as a proper entitie, yet, ex natura rei, as a mode
thereof. But this Controversy is not material, neither does it want an easy
way of reconcilement: for Suarez's modal distinction in effect, as he limits
it, amounts to little more than a mental distinction, at least that which they
style rationis ratiocinatae, which has some foundation in the things
distinguished. However they both agree in this, that Passive Creation is in the
thing Created. Hence it follows,

6. That the Relation of the Creator to the Creature does not-suppose any
mutation in God. For Creation may be considered either actively or passively:
if we consider it actively; so it is attributed to God by an interne
denomination, it being the same with the Will of God: if we consider it
passively; so it is the same with, or not really distinct from the Creature,
and ascribed or attributed to God only by an extrinsec denomination and
relation, which speaks no mutation in God. See what precedes of Gods
Immutabilitie, C. 4.. 1.

. 2. The Providence of God demonstrated.
From the Creation of God we pass unto his Providence, whereof we find
Illustrious Ideas and Notices both in Sacred and Platonic Philosophy. As for
Sacred Philosophemes touching the Divine Providence we shall give the mention
thereof in the particular Ideas of Providence; we shall here begin with Plato's
demonstration of Gods Providence, which he gives us largely, De Leg. 10. p.
900, etc. where he proposes the blasphemous Antithesis. of an Atheistic Spirit
denying the Providence of God in this manner: But thou indeed being carried
away with a certain blind and rash madness, because thou can not belch forth
thine Indignation against God himself, neither can the venom of thine enraged
Mind reach him, therefore thou fallest into this Affection, (...), That albeit
thou grantest there is a God, yet thou deniest that he takes care of Human
Affairs. This Antithesis, which Epicurus afterward espoused, Plato greatly
opposes, as that which is most unworthy of the Divine, Infinitely wise,
Bountiful, and Soverain Being. In the general he affirms, That it is not
difficult to demonstrate this, (...), That Gods Providence is as well occupied
about the least, as about the greatest and most excellent things. But p. 901.
he descendes to particular Arguments: (...); Wherefore whether it be God, or
whether it be Man that neglectes any affair, is it not for one of those two
causes? (...); Either because he conceives it no way refers to the whole, if
small things are neglected: or, if he thinks it does refer, yet, his Mind being
detained by supinitie, sloth, and delicace, he neglectes it? In what follows he
amply demonstrates, (1) That Providence even about the smallest things greatly
conduces to the good of the whole. And (2) that the least sloth, ornegligence
of human affairs may not be imputed to God. Of which see more fully Philosoph
General. P. 1. l. 3. c. 4. S. 2.. 1. The more fully to demonstrate the
Providence of God, against the Epieurean Antithesis, we shall draw forth Plato's
Arguments into the following particulars. (1) The Providence of God may be
demonstrated from his pure Actualitie and Activitie. Every thing is so far
perfect as it is Active: to suppose a first perfect Being, and yet to conceit
him to be an idle spectator of human affairs, it no less absurd than
sacrilegious. So Plato, Leg. 10. p. 901. (...), God cannot be corrupted with
sloth or negligence: for a remiss timiditie can no way befall God. Contrary to
this Platonic Demonstration Epicurus held, (...), The blessed immortal Being
neither has any employment of his own, neither does he trouble himself with
the affairs of others. But what more absurd than this Hypothesis of Epicurus,
asserting a Deity and yet denying his Providence? Does he not hereby discover
the infirmity of his Reason, in supposing a most Supreme blessed Being, who
yet stands as an idle spectator of al natural and human occurrences? May we
not justly conclude, that Epicurus, by denying the Providence of God, had a
secret design to undermine the very existence of the Deity? For he could not
but know, that if the persuasion of Divine Providence were rooted out of men's
minds, the thoughts of a most blessed immortal Being would little overawe or
influence men's hearts. Well therefore might Plutarch, Tullie and other
Moralistes degrade him from the Title of a Philosopher, sithat by denying Gods
Providence he cut the sinews of al Morality. Do but grant then that there is a
God, and it will necessarily follow, that his Providence extendes to althings.
(2) The Providence of God may be demonstrated from that admirable Order,
Concent and Harmony which is most illustrious in all parts of the Universe.
Thus Plato, in his Philebus, tells us, that God put into althings, (...), a
symmetrie and concent, or (...), a Right Communion, Harmony and Agreement,
whereby they are admirably chained together. The admirable order of althings
and affairs both Natural, Politic, and Moral strongly evinceth a most wise
Providence ordering al. Is not one thing ordered and disposed for some other?
Does not the Sun by its warm influences shine on the earth, that so it may be
fruitful? And why is the earth fruitful but to feed the Bestes? And are not the
Bestes fed to nourish and serve Man? And why does the wise God take such care
of Man, but that he might be more capable to serving his God? Hos. 2.21, 22.
Thus Hos. 2.21, 22. I will hear the Heavens, and they shall hear the Earth: and
the Earth shall hear the Corn, and the Wine, and the Oil: and they shall hear
Jesreel. Here, besides the gratiose Benediction of God, the harmonious
connection of the first and second causes is set forth by a lively Prosopopoeia;
Jesreel, i. e. the People of God, they call on or expect relief from Corn, Wine,
and Oil: these call on, or expect nourishment from the Earth: the Earth calls on
or expects supplies from the celestial bodies: and these call on and expect
supplies from God. Now where there is such an exact subordination between
variety of things, which understand not themselves, is it not necessary, that
there be a wise Mind, that sets al these things in order? If there be Order in
things that have no Understanding, must not the ordering of them come from an
Understanding infinitely wise? Is there not an admirable Intelligence even in
the Natural and Animal world? What a wonderful Instinct is there in the little
Be, as in other Animals? And yet these silly Animals understand not
themselves: must there then not be an higher understanding that orders al? And
that which yet adds to the Order of althings and proves the Providence of God,
is, that al these various parts of the Universe sweetly conspire to promove the
Glory of their Creator. Is there not an infinite variety of different
species, and those of different orders, in the Universe? And do not al these
tend to, and in their ranks subserve the honor of their Creator? Is there not
a world of Plants and Vegetables, which subserve Brutes? And is there not a
world of Brutes, which serve man? And is there not a world of men, which either
actively or passively subserve the Glory of their Maker? And does not this
Tendence and Conducence of althings to one first Being sufficiently demonstrate
an infinitely wise Providence ordering al? Indeed al order presupposes
intelligence and sapience: For order being nothing else but a convenable or
agreeable disposition of things, according to the dignity of each, it is
necessary for the disposing of things agreably, to compare them among
themselves, and to understand their dignity and rank, which is proper to
intelligence, and then to range them according to their dignity, which is
proper to sapience or prudence: Whence the most perfect order presupposes the
most perfect intelligence and prudence. (3) Plato proves the Providence of God
from his wise and potent Gubernation of althings, even the least, to their
respective ends, of which hereafter. (4) From Gods Justice in punishing the
wicked, and rewarding the righteous. (5) From Gods Benignity and Liberality
toward al. (6) Lastly he concludes, that to deny Gods Providence toward the
least things, (...), it a cogitation both nefarious or blasphemous and
erroneous, as Leg. 10. page 903. Thus also the Rabbines term him. (...) an
Epicurean, or a profane person (...), who says, that the holy and blessed God
does not take care of human affairs. And indeed we have reason to believe,
that most of those, whether ancient or modern Atheistes, who have espoused
this Epicurean Hypothesis, whereby the Providence of God is denied, have taken
it up rather out of prejudice or passion, than from any rational conviction. So
it is said of Diagoras, that he took up this persuasion, out of a mere humor,
because the perjured person was not struck dead by God.

. 3. Having given the Demonstration of Gods Providence, The Wisdom of Divine
Providence.
we now proceed to the Explication thereof. The Divine Providence in the
general is that efficience of God, whereby he conserves and governes althings,
according to the eternal most wise counsel of his own Will. Thus Damascene,
Orthod. Fid. l. 2. c. 29. (...), Providence is the Will of God, whereby althings
receive their most exact Order and Regiment. In our definition of Divine
Providence there are many things considerable. 1. It includes an eternal
Wisdom and Counsel as the origin thereof. Thus Damascene, Orthod. Fid. l. 3.
c. 29. explicates the precedent definition: (...), Butaf al Providence be the
Will of God, it is necessary, that althings ordered or made by Providence be,
according to right Reason, best and most becoming God, and that nothing may be
better done. In the Schools, Providence, according to its generic Idea, is said
to be the Reason of Order, whereby al means are duly disposed toward their
end: what then is the Providence of God, but a Divine Reason eminently
subsisting in the supreme Rector of althings, whereby althings are most wisely
disposed to their last end, by most apt means? Thus in sacred Philosophy the
Providence of God is described as invested with infinite wisdom and counsel.
Psalm. 139.1, 2.
So Psalm. 139.1. O Lord thou have searched me. (...), thou have sounded me, and
penetrated into my most intimate parts. Whence he adds: and known me: i. e.
most intimately. Thence he procedes to particulars, v. 2. Thou know my
down-sitting and up-rising, etc. Of which before in the Divine Science, Chapter 5..
2. We find Gods providential knowledge as to Celestial bodies well illustrated,
Psalm. 147.4, 5.
Psalm. 147.4. He tells the number of the stars: he calls them al by their
names. Terms borrowed from Generals mustering or taking an account of their
Soldiers: or else from Masters of Families taking account of al their
Domestics: or from Kings numbering their Subjects. And what mean these
expressions, but to illustrate and express the most particular Providence of
God, founded on his infinite knowledge of althings, which are in appearance
innumerable as the Stars in the Firmament, Genesis 15.5? So v. 5. his
understanding is infinite. Heb. (...), of his understanding there is no number.
The reasons of his Providence are more in number than the things he provides
for, yea every way infinite. These infinite Reasons and Intelligences of Divine
Providence are expressed by Plato under the term (...), Intelligence. Thus in
his Philebus, page 28. All the wise consent in this, (...), that the Divine Mind
it King of Heaven and Earth. So in his Phaedo, page 97. (...), etc. It is the
Divine Mind that disposes and directes althings according to their due orders,
and is the cause of althings. And that this providential Intelligence and
Wisdom extends to althings, even to the most minute and least Beings, Plato
assertes, Leg. 10. page 902. (...), etc. To conceit that God, who is most wise,
and both will and can provide for his own creatures, should take care only of
greater matters, but not of the least, whereof the care is more facile, how
absurd is this!

But to treat more accurately and philosophically of the infinite Reasons and
Wisdom of Divine Providence, The eternal Law of Providence.
we must run it up to the Springhead of that eternal Law, consisting in those
Divine Ideas loged in the mind and will of God. The Schools philosophise much of
the eternal Law, whereby althings are governed to their respective ends: yet
they speak so confusedly, as that it is difficult to understand what they mean
thereby; whether the Law of Divine Decrees, or the Law of Nature inherent in
the things governed. Plato seems to speak more intelligibly than many
Scholastics touching this eternal Law, making it to be no other than the (...),
the eternal Exemplar of Divine Ideas or Decrees, according to which God frames
and governes althings. So in his Timaeus, page 28. he says, That God in the
framing the World had his eye (...) on the eternal Law or Exemplar. Hence Plato
calls Fate, (whereby the Ancients expressed Providence) (...), the Law of
Adrastie: which Cicero interpretes, the eternal Law. And Apuleius, a great
Explicator of Plato, says, Fate was that by which Gods inevitable cogitations
and undertakements were accomplished. And Pindar sang: (...), That the eternal
Law was Queen of althings both mortal and immortal. This eternal Law, as it
regardes Providence, is nothing else but that order, method, purpose or
counsel, which the most wise God has from al eternity determined with himself
in his Divine Decrees, as the rule of his Gubernation and Disposition of
althings for his own Glory. Have not althings that are some operation, and
that not violent or fortuitous, but regular and orderly? And can any thing
exert any regular operation, but in order to some end preconceived by some
intelligent Agent? And what is that which directes, moderates, regulates and
orders althings to their respective ends, but the eternal Law? Thus Augustine:
The eternal Law, says he, is nothing else but that increate Divine Reason or
Will of God, commanding that the natural order be conserved. Every action will
not serve for every end: therefore there must be (...), a Rule or Law to suit
actions to their ends: Do not then althings so far as they tend to their last
end act and move by some Law? And what is the supreme Law, whereby all the
Divine operations of Providence are regulated, but the eternal Exemplar of
Divine Ideas or Decrees? It Is true, every particular singular Creature has a
Law impacted and impressed on its Being, which is an irradiation or beam of the
eternal Law, and therefore called by some, though improperly, the eternal Law;
by others more properly the Law of Nature. For the eternal Law properly
respects the works and operations of God; who is both Worker, and the Law of
his working: the perfection of the Divine Essence and Will gives perfection and
measure to al his works: al Gods providence and works own him, not only for
their Worker, but also for the Law whereby they are wrought: his Divine Will and
Decrees being the measure of al his Operations. So that by this eternal Law
althings are bounded and limited not only in their Essences, but also in their
Operations: and all the Divine reasons of Providence are to be resolved into
this eternal Law, which is full of infinite Reasons, Wisdom, and Counsel;
albeit our shallow capacities cannot comprehend, no nor apprehend the same
always, in all works of Providence.

Hence it follows: The Wisdom of Providence active.
that the Divine Reason, Wisdom, and Counsel, that attendes the Providence of
God, is not merely speculative, but practic and active: for all Laws properly
and primarily tend to action. Whence in sacred Philosophy the wisdom of
Divine Providence is illustrated by that of a wise Builder, skilful Physician,
expert discreet Master of a Family, etc. Thus also Plato, Leg. 10. page 902,
etc. istustrates the same by much the same ressemblances, namely by the wisdom
of a skilful Physician, also of an expert Gubernator of a Ship, of a prudent
Imperator, of a discreet Master of a Family, of a skilful Architect, and of an
expert Artificer: al which denote active Science, as it will hereafter appear,
when we descend to the Gubernation of Providence. And that the wisdom of
Divine Providence is indeed most active is evident, in that God by his
Providence directes althings to their proper end, namely the Divine Bonitie,
which is the last End and first Principe in Morals. Hence it is that all the
works of Divine Providence are said to be disposed in Measure, and Number, and
Weight, i. e. in the most exact order and manner that may be. That Providence
belongs to practic cognition Aquinas largely demonstrates, contra Gent. l. 3.
c. 75. and 97. Hence, Providence is an Act of the Diviue Will.


2. Divine Providence includes also the Act of the Divine Will Yea, if we will
speak formally and distinctly, the Providence of God primarily regardes the Will
of God: for all the Divine Reasons, Ideas, Decrees, and the eternal Law of
Providence must be resolved into the Divine Will, which is the sole measure of
Gods Operations toward his Creatures. Thence Providence is defined by
Damascene, Orthod. Fid. l. 2. c. 29. (...), etc. the Will of God, by which
althings that are receive their convenient Gubernation, as before. And he
demonstrates it thus: It Is necessary, that he who made althings, should provide
for them, in the same manner as he made them, i. e. by his Will. Whence he
concludes: (...), God therefore is the Maker and Provisor: and his good Will is
the effective, contentive, and provisive Virtue. (1) Indeed the whole of Divine
Efficience procedes immediately from the Divine Will, as we have before once and
again demonstrated. (2) That Providence belongs to the Divine Will is manifest
from its very nature, which consistes in a wise ordering althings for its last
end: now there can be no disposition or ordering of means for an end, without
the volition of the said end. Divine Bonitie being the end unto which althings
are directed by the Providence of God, it is necessary, that both end and means
be willed by God. Yea, (3) It belongs to the intrinsec Reason of Divine
Providence, as Divine, not only to intend and order al means toward its last
end, but also infallibly to attain its last end: which implies an absolute,
efficacious, omnipotent Will. For albeit Providence, in its generic notion
regardes not so much the end as the means, it being the ordering of means to an
end, yet it includes an absolute efficacious volition of the end: but now it is
simply impossible, that God should will any end, and yet that end not be
attained. Wherein Divine Providence greatly differs from human, which often wills
an end and provides means in order thereto, and yet falls short of its end. (4)
That Providence belongs to the Will of God is evident from the formal parts
thereof, Conservation and Gubernation, which are Acts of the Divine Will. (5)
The Mode of Divine Providence, as expressed both in Sacred and Platonic
Philosophy, clearly evinceth, that it formally belongs to the Divine Will. In
sacred Philosophy the Mode of Divine Providence is expressed by the Word of
God. Deuteronomy. 8.3.
So Deuteronomy. 8.3. Man does not live by bread only, but by every word that
proceeds out of the mouth of the Lord does man live. By Word here, (as
Vatablus well observes) we may not understand any preceptive or reveled word,
but the providential Word of God, or good pleasure, which provides means,
either ordinary or extraordinary, for the sustenance of man. And that this is
the genuine sense seems apparent from the design and scope of Moses; which is
to show, that when bread failed, God by his omnipotent Word, or Will, in a
miraculose manner, provided Manna for them, as an experiment to testify in all
Ages, that man lived not by bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of
the mouth of God: i. e. by the soverain pleasure and providential will of God,
which is frequently in sacred Philosophy termed, the Word of God. In this
sense this Text is cited and interpreted by our Lord, Mat. 4.4.
Mat. 4.4. But by every word, etc. Moses's words are repeted by our Lord, and
opposed to Satan's tentation, to show, that man lived not by bread only, but by
the providential word or will of God, who provides means either ordinary or
extraordinary for the relief of man, specially of such as trust in him; and
therefore there is no reason why we should distrust his Providence, or make use
of any unlawful means. In this sense the Word of God is taken, Psalm. 107.20.
Psalm. 107.20. he sent his word and healed them: i. e. his providential Word,
or his omnipotent efficacious Decree and sentence. Psalm. 147.15, 16.
So Psalm. 147.15. He sends forth his commandment upon the earth: his word
runs very swiftly: i. e. his providential Word, or the efficacious
efficience of his Divine Will. Heb. 1.3.
Whence it follows: v. 16. He gives snow like wool, etc. the effects of his
providential word. Thus Heb. 1.3. Upholding althings by the word of his power:
i. e. by his providential word, or omnipotent efficacious will. So 2 Pet. 3.5,
7. In all which Textes, with some others, we must understand Gods providential
word; which is no other than the efficacious Decree and efficience of the
Divine Will, for the sustentation, conservation, and gubernation of althings; as
the same efficacious efficience of the Divine Will, put forth in the creation of
althings, is in like manner expressed by a word, Genesis 1.3, etc. And it is well
observed by Maimonides, More Nevoch. Part. 1. c. 65. that by Word here, as
elsewhere, must be understood not any formal word, but the Act of the Divine
Will, as before of Creation,. 1. Thus we find other Decrees and Acts of the
Divine Will expressed by the Word of God. So Genesis 1.26. And God said, Let us
make man. Genesis 8.21. And God said in his heart, I will not again curse the
ground: i. e. God decreed and determined with himself, and declared this his
Decree to Noah. The efficience of the Divine Will, in governing althings is
expressed in Sacred Philosophy by the Word of God, to denote the efficace of
his Will: man's word is often Preceptive, but not Operative: we declare our wills by
our words, but cannot effect what we will thereby: but Gods Providential Word is
ever operative: whatever he wills, does immediately existe, in that time and
manner as he wills it: his Words and Deeds are reciprocal: and therefore he
expresses his Divine Providential Efficience by his Providential Word. Thus
also Plato sometimes expresses the efficience of Divine Providence by (...),
the Word of God. So Plotinus his Sectator: (...), from one Mind and Word, which
sprang from it, this whole Universe was constituted and disposed. Which
possibly may relate to the Increate Word, or Second Person in the Trinity, who
made althings, as John 1.1-4. and whereof the Platonistes in the Schole of
Alexandria, who succeeded Ammonius, had great notices, as before in the Platonic
Trinity, C. 6.. 4.

3. But yet the immediate Efficience of Divine Providence is in a more peculiar
manner, both by Sacred and Platonic Philosophy, The Spirit the immediate
efficient of Providence.
ascribed to the Spirit of God. For the clearing whereof we are to consider,
that albeit al Divine Operations are usually ascribed to God absolutely,
because the same Divine Nature is the individed principe of al; yet sithat, as
to the manner of subsisting, there is some Distinction, Relation, and Order
between the three Persons, hence the Divine Operations are in Sacred
Philosophy distinctly assigned to each person, and eminently to some one. And
in as much as the Order of Operation among the distinct persons dependes on the
Order of their Subsistence, thence the Conclusive and perfective Efficience in all the great Divine Operations is assigned to the Spirit of God, as peculiar to
him, according to the mode of his subsistence in the Trinity. Thus in the
Creation, the completive and perfective efficience of althings is ascribed to
the Spirit. So in the Fomentation and Formation of althings out of the rude
Chaos, it is said, Genesis 1.2. The spirit of God moved on the face of the waters:
i. e. in order to the Eduction and Efformation of althings: for (...) properly
notes the fomentation and gentle motion of an Hen, communicating vital heat to
its eggs: and it is applied, Deuteronomy. 32.11. to the motion of an Eagle over its
young ones, for their protection and perfection. This efficience of althings is
well expressed, Psalm. 33.6.
Psalm. 33.6. By the Word of the Lord were the Heavens made, and all the Host of
them by the breath of his mouth. By the Word of the Lord, we may understand,
(1) The Creative Efficience of the Divine Will, as before. 1. or (2) Christ, by
whom althings were made, as Joh. 1.3. Thence it follows: by the Breath of his
mouth: whereby we must understand the Spirit of God, who is called the Breath
of his mouth, to note the manner of his procession, which is in a way of
Spiration, as the Scripture assures us. Job 26.13.
Thus Job 26.13. By his Spirit he has garnished the Heavens. Or, according to
the Hebrew, His spirit has garnished, [or adorned, beautified] the Heavens, i.
e. decked them with those eye-pleasing gloriose lights. Psalm. 8.3.
Hence Psalm. 8.3. the Sun, Moon, and Stars are said to be the work of Gods
fingers, i. e. curiosely wrought by the Spirit of God. For by the finger or
fingers of God, the spirit of God is in a more peculiar manner denoted, as is
evident by comparing Mat. 12.28. with Luk 11.20. where the spirit of God in
Matthew is called the finger of God by Luke, as Owen, On the spirit, B. 1. C.
4. Neither did the Spirit's efficience extend only to the production of the
Inanimate and Animal world, but also to Man and his more noble part the Soul,
as Job assures us, Job 33.4. The spirit of God has made me, and the breath of
the Almighty has given me life. Answerable to Genesis 2.7. And as the first
Efformation and Perfection of althings in the Creation is ascribed to the
Spirit of God, so the Sustentation, Conservation, and Gubernation of althings
in the course of Divine Providence is in a peculiar manner assigned to the same
Spirit. Thus Ps. 104.27. Psalm. 104.27-30.
These wait al upon thee, that thou may give them their meat in due season.
28. Thou openest thine hand, they are filled with good. 29. Thou hidest thy
face, they are troubled: thou take away their breath, they die, and return
to their dust. Thou hidest thy face: i. e. withdrawest the providential
influence of thy Spirit, and althings return to dust: the Earth it self, the
commun Mother of al corporeous Creatures, seems to be dead, 'til the spring
come, and althings receive a new face. Thence it follows, v. 30. Thou sendest
forth thy Spirit, they are created: and thou renewest the face of the earth.
Thou sendest forth thy Spirit: whose office it is to conserve, foment, actuate,
and to give vivific heat, life, and influence to althings. Whence it follows:
they are Created. This Creation is not to be taken strictly of the Eduction of
things out of nothing, as at first; no, nor principally of the production of
new individuals, though this be included in the Spirits Providential
Efficience; but of the Spirits fomenting, vivifying, and renewing things under
a kind of natural death or decay. Thence it follows: and thou renewest the face
of the Earth. i. e. Whereas the Earth in the winter season is as it were dead;
the Trees and other Plants divested of their verdure, flourishing beauty,
leaves, fruits; yea the very juice and radical moisture is retired unto the
root; so that the whole seems dead: And as for Animals and Brutes, the greatest
number of those we call Infects are either really or seemingly dead, being
without motion: and as for the more perfect Brutes, they are likewise under a
kind of partial death; yea the human body also in the more cold Northern
Climate: Yet when the Spring comes, the Spirit of God, that Supreme Increate
Universal Spirit, making use of the warm benign influences of the Sun,
together with subterraneous fire, that great create mundane Spirit, renews
the face of the Earth: i. e. puts new vital Spirits and vivific heat into al
parts of the Universe, both inanimate and animate, 'specially Plants and
Animals; so that there is a new face, or verdure, flourishing Beauty,
Vivacitie, Activitie and Fructification in things. Thus, according to Sacred
Philosophy, the Spirit of God is said to be that Universal Spirit, by whose
Providential Efficience and Concurrence al Creatures are conserved, sustained,
actuated, propagated, animated, fomented, disposed, and governed to their
proper ends and usages.

And we find Philosophemes not a little conformable hereto in Platonic
Philosophy. What Plato's Contemplations were concerning (...), the Soul of the
World, we have before examined, Part. 2. B. 3. C. 9. S. 1.. 5. We shall now
treat of the same Universal Spirit, or Spirit of the Universe as to his
Providential Influence and Concurrence. Plato in his Cratylus, p. 396. calls
this Mundane Soul, or Universal Spirit, (...) Zena, Jupiter from (...) Zen, to
animate or vivifie: and he gives this reason of the Origination: (...), There
is no other cause of life to us Men, and other Animants, than that Prince and
King of althings. Whence he adds: Rightly therefore is God honored with this
name; because it demonstrates, (...), That God is he, by whom Life is
communicated to al Animals. This notion of the Mundane Soul answers to Job
33.4. and Psalm. 104.30. of which before. Thus Plato, Leg. 10. p. 896. (...),
But it has been sufficiently demonstrated, that the Soul is more ancient than
althings, sithat it is the principe of motion. His design is to demonstrate
the Providence of God from the Soul of the Universe, which moves, agitates,
foments, vivisies, influenceth, orders, and governes althings. And he
demonstrates this Universal Spirit or Soul of the Universe to be more ancient
than althings, i. e. Eternal and Increate; because it gave form, life, and
motion to althings. Thence he adds in the same page: (...); Therefore shall we
not necessarily acknowledge, that the Soul does universally govern and inhabit
in althings that are moved, yea that it governes Heaven? Whence he concludes:
(...), etc. This Soul therefore actuates and impels by its motions, althings
that are contained in the University of Nature, namely of Heaven, Earth, Sea,
etc. So page 898. (...) etc. Sithat this Universal Soul moves the Sun. Again he
adds: That the Soul of the Universe, which is in that round splendid body of
the Sun, moves it every where, as the Soul which is in our body leads it every
where. He gives us in these three pages several great Philosophemes to prove,
That God is the Soul of the Universe, who actuates, vivisies, conserves and
governes althings, as our Souls do our Bodies. Thus Proclus, in Plat. Timae. p.
93. explicates the Platonic Mundane Spirit: After Amelius, says he, Porphyrie
thinking to agree with Plotimes, (...), etc. calls the Supermundane Soul, the
Opificer or Framer of the world. The Spirit of God is called by these
Platonistes, (...), the Supermundane Soul of the Universe, as being elevated
above the Universe, yet animating, actuating, and influencing the whole, and
each part thereof. Others term him, (...), the Mundane Soul, or the Soul
inhabiting the Universe. Al these Platonistes make the Universe to be as it
were a great Animal, and the Spirit of God to be the Soul that animates,
vegetates, actuates, and perfectes this Animal. Thus Origin, (...), l. 2. c. 1.
As our Body is made up of many members and contained by one Soul; so do I
conceive, that the whole world is to be looked on as one huge great Animal,
which is contained as it were by one Soul, the Virtue and Reason of God. And so
much seems to be intimated in Scripture. Thus also the Pythagoreans held, as we
are assured by Minutius Foelix, That God was the Soul diffused throughout the
whole Universe, from whom althings received Life, Being and Motion. So the
Stoics said; That the Divine Mind is diffused throughout al parts of the
Universe, as our Soul throughout our body, as Laertius in Zeno. And that these
Philosophemes touching the Spirit or Soul of the Universe, must be understood
of the Spirit of God, and were so intended, though imperfectly, by the wiser
Heathens, we are assured by Cyprian, Sermo, de Spiritu Sancto, p. 329. Edit.
Basil. 1558. This Holy Spirit from the beginning of the World is said, Genesis
1.2. to be superfused on the waters: not as if he needed the material waters as
a vehicle, which he rather sustained, and gave congruous motion, and fixed
limits to what comprehended the firmament. The Eternal Virtue and Divinity of
this Spirit, albeit the Ancient Philosophers, those Inquisitors of the
Universe, could not find him out, in his proper nature, yet by their subtle
conjectures they conceived him to be present with althings, giving Life,
Motion, Terms, Stabilitie and Use to every thing. This Life, this Motion, this
Essence of things the Philosophers styled THE SOUL OF THE WORLD: conceiving,
that al Celostial Bodies, I mean, the Sun, Moon, and Stars, yea the very
Firmament was moved and governed by the virtue of this Soul; and, that the
Waters, Earth and Air were impregnated by the Seeds hereof. Who if they had
believed that this Spirit is both Lord, and Creator, and Vivificator, and
Nutritor of althings that are under him, they might have had some convenient
access to life. But the Majesty of so great a Mystery was hid from the wise
and prudent of this world; neither could the pride of human Ingenie concern it
self in such celestial secrets, and penetrate the altitude of this
superessential nature: and albeit they understood, that the Divinity was the
Creatrix and Gubernatrix of things, yet they could no way distinguish what was
the Trinity of the Deity, or what was the Unity, or what the propriety of
persons -- This is the Spirit of Life, whose Vivific heat does animate, foment,
advance and make fruitful althings, and. See Philosoph. General. l. 1. c. 2.
sect. 3.. 3. and l. 3. c. 2. sect. 1.. 4.

4. Albeit the Efficience and Concurrence of the Spirit in all Providential
Operations be, as to its manner of working Immediate, Providential means used
by the Spirit.
yet this hinders not but that ordinarily he makes use of means for the
execution thereof, not from any defect of his Divine Efficience, but from the
abundance of his Benignity, that so in and by the mediation of Instruments he
might render his own Efficience more illustrious and conspicuous, and leave
some marque of honor on the means. Whence often times the Spirit of God uses the
most unapt and unlikely means for the production of the most Noble Effects.
Yea, often God brings about the Issues of his Providence by contrary means, which
carry in them a seeming contradiction to what God intends. By how much the more
potent the virtue of any Agent is, by so much the more does it extend its
operation unto things remote. Now is not the virtue of Divine Providence most
efficacious? May it not then extend its efficience to means and effects most
remote? Does it not belong to the Majesty, Splendour, and Dignity of a Prince
to have many Ministers of State under him, for the execution of his Soverain
Will and Commands? And does it not in like manner appertain to the Majesty of
God, the Supreme Lord, to have variety of instruments and means for the
execution of his Providence? Al Providence, according to its formal Idea,
includes two things Ordination and Execution: The Ordination, being an Act of
Intelligence and Sapience, belongs to the Supreme Ordinator; who, by how much
the more judicious and prudent he is, by so much the more capacious he is to
order al means and affairs in subservience to his end and design: But the
Execution, requiring only Force and Power, may as well and often more aptly be
transacted by inferior Agents or Ministers, invested with executive force in
order thereto. Thus in Divine Providence the Ordination and Disposition of al
means the most wise God reserveth to himself, as a Prerogative peculiar to his
Imperial Crown; but the execution he frequently commits to second causes and
instruments, furnishing them with executive Forces for the production of the
effect, and moreover working immediately, both by the immediation of Virtue and
Essence in and with those means. Hence Esa. 28.26. God is said to teach the
Husbandman to plough, i. e. how to cultivate and manage his Ground, as also to
sow his Seed, etc.

That no inferior Agent or second cause can execute any piece of Divine
Providence, No second cause can act, but in subordination to God, and by his
Providence.
but in Virtue received from, and subordination to God the prime Cause, is most
evident: (1) Because, where diverse Agents subserve one Supreme Agent, it is
necessary that the effect be produced by them in commun, as they are united in
the participation of motion and influence from the Supreme Agent: For many
cannot produce one effect but as one: Now the subservient Agents of Providence
are so far one in their executions, as they are subordinate to and influenced
by God the Supreme Agent. (2) The complement of the Virtue and Efficace of the
Second Agent is from the Virtue and Influxe of the First Agent: and is not God
the first Agent in all executions of Providence? (3) Al Operation consequent to
any influence is ascribed to that which gave the influence, as the proper cause
thereof: And do not al second Causes receive their influence from God? Must not
then al their Executions and Operations be ascribed to him as the prime Cause?
(4) Al Actions that cannot subsiste without the Impression and Influence of
some Agent must be attributed to that Agent as the cause thereof: Now can any
executions of second Causes subsist without the impression of the first Cause?
must they not then al be attributed to him? (5) Whatever applies the active
Virtue or draws it forth to act, may be said to be the cause of that Act: as an
Artificer, by applying the virtue of any natural thing to any action, is said
to be the cause of that action: Now is not al application of any Virtue in
providential executions from God? Is he not then the cause of al such
executions? (6) Does not the Virtue of every inferior Agent depend on the
Virtue of the Superior Agent as such? And are not al second Causes in
providential executions inferior Agents as to God the Supreme Agent? (7) Is not
every Worker by its operation ordained to its last end? And who, in all
Providential Operations, ordains things to their last end, but God the first
cause of al? (8) As particular Causes are referred to particular Effects, so
the universal Cause to universal Effects: and is not God the Universal Cause of
al Effects? (9) To substract or withdraw any providential execution from Gods
Ordination and Efficience, what is this but to subvert the best Order, even the
subordination of second Causes to the first? (10) God is intimely present with
and in all providential executions; and therefore cannot but influence the same.
The mover and moved are always together: God is the prime mover in all motions,
and therefore present with all: the application of Actives unto Passives is by
him. That there is not the least execution of Providence but what is influenced
by God, see Aquinas, contra Gent. Lib. 3. Cap. 67, 68, 70, 76, 77.

Not to mention the various means, Fire the Create Universal Spirit.
instruments and second causes, which God employs in his Providential
Efficience, there is one which deserves a particular disquisition, namely Fire;
which is in its kind an Universal Mundane Spirit, the most potent Instrument of
Nature and Art, and that which subserves the Spirit of God (the Supreme
increate Universal Spirit) in all material productions of Providence. As for the
Origin of this create Mundane Spirit, Genesis 1.3.
Moses gives it us, Genesis 1.3. under the notion of (...) Light or Fire, part of
which was dispersed among the Celestial Lights or Fires, and part diffused into
the bowels of the Earth, for the Conservation, Animation, Vivification, and
Nutrition of al parts of the Universe. Plato makes frequent mention of Fire, as
the most potent natural principe or Mundane Spirit, whereby althings are
fomented, agitated, animated, and perfected. So in his Timaeus, p. 31. (...),
etc. Nothing seems void of Fire, etc. So p. 56, and 58. he makes Fire to be the
Universal Spirit diffused throughout al parts of the Universe. And elsewhere he
calls Fire (...), the great Opificer of various effects. And not only the
Chemists, but also the Stoics and most of the Ancient Philosophers ascribe to
Fire an Universal Efficience, as to al corporeous Effects. Whence do al
Minerals, Metals, and Stones receive their Origin but from subterraneous
Fires? What gives rise to al Vapors and Fountains but Fire? Whence proceed the
Fluxes and Refluxes of the Sea, with its saltness, but from Fire? What gives
Life and Motion to al Insects, but Fire, either Celestial or Terrestrial?
Whence springs the fermentation of humors in the bowels of the Earth at
Spring, with the vegetation and fructification of Plants, but from Fire? What
are the Animal Souls of Brutes and of Man's Body, but a more pure aethereous
Fire? These things are more largely demonstrated in our Philosoph. General. P.
1. l. 3. in Plato's Physics. May we not then hence conclude, That Fire is a
second Mundane Universal Spirit, under the Spirit of God most Efficacious and
Potent in all natural corporeous productions and executions of Providence?

. 4. The Object of Divine Providence Universal.
Having finished the principal and instrumental effective Principes of
Providence, we now proceed to its Object, which, according to sacred
Philosophy, is of the most universal latitude, according to the extension of
Divine Omnipotence and Efficience. There is nothing so high, as to be above
Divine Providence; nothing so low, as to be beneath it; nothing so ample and
extensive, as that it cannot be limited by it; nothing so free as to second
causes, but it is necessarily determined by it; nothing so natural and
necessary, but its operation may be suspended by it, as the fiery Furnace,
wherein the three Children were; lastly, nothing so evil, but this Divine
Providence can bring good out of it. Among the ancient Philosophers there were
different persuasions about the object of Divine Providence, and its latitude.
Epicurus and some before him altogether denied the Providence of God, as
before: Aristotle, as Grotius affirms, confined the Providence of God to
Celestial bodies; yet Laertius says he held, That the Providence of God did
reach (...), etc. even to things celestial, and that he disposed things
terrestrial according to the Sympathy they have with things celestial. Some
among the Hebrews held, that Gods Providence extended to men, but not unto
bestes: which sentiment some impute to Pythagoras, who much imitated the
Hebrews. Some also among the Arabians asserted a Providence about Universals,
or things in commun, but not about Singulars: which sentiment Justin Martyr, in
the beginning of his Colloque with Tryphon, reprehendes in some of the Grecian
Philosophers as impious. But Plato strongly demonstrates, That the Providence
of God extendes to althings, even the most minute. So Leg. 10. page 902. But
what? if a Physician be willing and able to cure the whole body, if he should
provide for the greater distempers, but neglect the lesser, would the cure be
successeful? No surely. So in like manner neither Gubernators of Ships, nor
Imperators of Soldiers, nor Masters of Families, nor Ministers of State, nor
any sort of men can well manage their affairs, unless they provide for small
things as well as greater. Thence Architects deny, that great stones can be well
cemented, or joined together in a building without small. (...), etc. Let us not
then conceit, that God is more vile than mortal Opificers; who, by how much the
more skilful they are, by so much the more exquisitely and accurately, by the
benefit of their own Art, they consider both great and small things, in such
works that belong to their Art. Thence he concludes, page 903. It seems to me,
(...), that God does most easily and opportunely provide for althings. This
also the Stoics generally asserted, whereof we find an excellent account in
Arrianus, his Collections of Epictetus's Philosophy, l. 1. c. 12. page 118.
There are some, says he, who assert there is no God: others, that grant there
is a God, but, (...), that he is slothful and negligent, and provident of
nothing: [I suppose he means the Epicureans:] a third sort, who hold that there
is a God, and that he is provident, but only of greater and celestial things,
not of terrene: a fourth sort allow him a Providence over terrestrial as well as
celestial, but only in commun, not as to singulars and particulars: a fifth
sort, of which number was Ulysses and Socrates, asserted, that a man could not
so much as move without God. Thence he goes on to demonstrate Gods Providence
over al things. That Gods Providence extendes it self universally to al and
singular Beings, Actions, Substances, Accidents, Modes, etc. may be
demonstrated, (1) From the infinite Omniscience and Prescience of God, which
extendes it self to the most minute singulars. (2) From the omnipotent Will of
God, which gives Futurition, Determination, Limits, Activitie, and Operation to
althings. (3) From the prime and universal Efficience of God as the first cause
of althings. Whatever is Ens by participation must proceed effectively from
God, who is Ens by Essence: and if it proceed from him, it must necessarily fall
under his Providence. (4) From the certain Determination, Futurition, and Order
of al effects. Either althings must fall under the Providence of God, or
somethings must happen merely by chance, without any certain cause of their
Futurition. (5) From the Justice of God in rewarding what is good, and
punishing what is evil: for the executions of Divine Justice depend on his
Providence. That Gods Providence extendes to al singulars, even to things most
contingent and minute is acutely demonstrated by Aquinas, contra Gent. l. 3. c.
71, 72, 73, 75, 76. So De Potentia Dei, Quaest. 20. he proves, that God is the
cause of every action both natural and voluntary five ways: [1] By giving
virtue to act. [2] By continued conservation of that virtue. [3] By moving the
Agent to act, and applying the virtue to the action. [4] As he is the principal
Agent in every Act, and al other Agents but Instruments. [5] As he acts
immediately in all Acts of second Agents.

As for the particular Objects unto which Divine Providence extendes it self
they may be thus distributed. The particular Objects of Providence.
(1) Al natural Beings even the most minute and imperceptible fall under the
Providence of God. Sacred Philosophy makes mention of the hairs of the head,
which are vile and contemtible even to a proverb. Yea, al natural Generations,
Corruptions, Alterations, Motions, and Actions are subject to Gods Providence.
Not only the Generic natures, and Species of things, both Substances and
Accidents, are determined by God, but also al Individuals and Singulars, with all their Circumstances and Modes, yea things most minute. Thus Bradwardine,
page 7, 25, 291. proves, That the least things come under Gods Prescience and
Providence. (2) Althings necessary or contingent. There is nothing so
contingent or free as to any second cause, but it is determined and
foreordained by Divine Providence, as Aquinas accurately demonstrates, contra
Gent. l. 3. c. 71, 72, 73. So Bradwardine, page 271, 274. What more contingent
than the Lot? and yet this false under the Providence of God, as Prove. 16.33.
The lot is cast into the lap; but the whole disposing of it is of the Lord. (3)
Althings politic. Al Revolutions, Alterations, Advances, Declinations with all
other politic Concerns of State are ordered and governed by Divine Providence.
(4) Althings human. Al man's thoughts, inclinations, interests, designs, and
undertakements are subordinate to Providence. Hence, (5) Al sinful acts fall
under the same. (6) Ecclesiastic Affairs and supernatural Acts, Ends and
Effects are ordered by Divine Providence, of which hereafter. In sum, Gods
Providence extendes itself to al those things, unto which his omnipotent Will,
Efficience and Causalitie extendes: i. e. unto whatever comes within the notion
of real Entitie: it reaches al natural, preternatural, supernatural and moral
actions and events. When men contradict Gods Will of Precept, do they not obey
or sulfil his Will of Providence? Is any thing so great, that it comes not
within his power, or so small, that it comes not within his care? I am not
ignorant how much some of late, as well Divines as Physicians, have essayed to
exemt the period or term of human life from the immutable determination of
Divine Providence: but how much this Hypothesis contradictes both Pagan and
Sacred Philosophy, will be more fully evident by what follows.

. 5. From the effective principes and object of Divine Providence, The Adjuncts
of Providence.
as before stated, there follow many essential Adjuncts and Characters thereof.
As 1. Providence is not merely permissive, 1. It is efficacious.
but energetic and efficacious. For (1) Divine Providence necessarily supposes
not only an intention of an end, and the ordering or disposing of means, but
also the assecution and attainment of the end. It Is true, human providence as
such may provide means most proper and expedient, and yet, by the interposition
of other second causes, come short of its end; but Divine Providence always
reaches its end. Thus Homer: (...), Gods Counsel and Decree is always
fulfilled. (2) Al second causes are subject unto, and therefore can no way
impede or hinder Divine Providence. Whence arises al active and passive virtue
in second causes, but from Divine disposition? Is it possible then that the
executions of Divine Providence should be hindered by the force or defect of
any inferior Agent or Patient? Are not al natural Agents instruments of Divine
Providence? And can the instrument act without the concurrence of the principal
Agent? What then can we suppose should impede Divine Providence? (3) Al
providence supposes an Act of the Will: and are not al Acts of Divine Volition
efficacious? Bradwardine frequently assertes and demonstrates, That God permits
nothing but what he wills. It Is true, man often permits things, that he neither
wills nor does, because he cannot hinder them; but there is no mere permission
with God, without some Act of his Will. This is proved from the infinite
Actualitie, Efficacitie, and Omnipotence of the Divine Will. Thus Bradwardine,
l. 1. c. 32. page 282, etc. spends a whole Chapter to prove, That althings fall
out and are governed by the Providence of God, not only permitting, but
actually disposing al. And his arguments are demonstrative. As [1] Otherwise
the Universe should not be disposed and ordered in the best manner. [2] The
Scripture gives God active names as to al parts of providence, etc. And then
Cap. 33. he demonstrates, That wherever there is any permission of God, there
also is his actual Volition. Hence,

2. 2. Immobile and fixed.
Gods Providence gives to al second Causes and Events a most immobile,
immutable, fixed and certain order: things most contingent and free, as to
second causes, are necessary and fixed as to Divine Providence. Hence the
Stoics, as also Plato, expressed this fixed order of providence by Fate, which
they made to be an immutable connection or series of things determined from
eternity, whereby althings are infallibly directed to their ends, of which
hereafter in the Gubernation of Providence. That providence puts into things a
fixed, immutable order is evident; because, (1) nothing falls out, but what was
foreordained from al eternity by infinite Wisdom and an omnipotent Will. (2)
Al particular causes and effects are contained under and subservient to the
Universal Cause; and therefore subject to his Order. Yea, this Order must
necessarily be most indissoluble and certain; because it is founded in the
Efficacitie of the Divine Will, Efficience and Gubernation, as more fully anon.

3. Divine Providence is most Connatural and Agreeable to the exigence and
condition of the second causes or subjects it works upon. The Necessity and
Immobilitie, 3. Connatural and agreeable.
that attendes the Providence of God, does no way infringe or impair the
Contingence and Liberty of second Causes, but confirm the same. Therefore men
act freely, because the Providence of God determines them so to act: So that
nothing more conduces to the natural liberty of the Will, than the necessary
Determination of Divine Providence, because it determines althings to act
according to their Natures: it offers not the least force or violence to the
Human Will, but sweetly, though necessarily moves it to the end appointed. Gods
manner of ordering and conducting second Causes is without the least prejudice
to their proper manner of working: he guides them sweetly according to the
principes and instincts he has put into them. For (1) Does not Divine
Providence furnish every second Cause with its Power, Virtue, and Efficacitie
to work? (2) Does not the same Providence maintain and conserve that Power and
Vigor imparted? (3) Is not also the actuation of that Power from Providence?
(4) Does not Providence also most wisely and sweetly, yet powerfully order the
manner of working, as also perfect the same? Is it not then most sweet and
connatural in all its Executions? Hence,

4. Divine Providence is most Beautiful and Perfect: 4. Beautiful and perfect.
al its executions are in Number, Weight and Measure. Does not the Wise Man
assure us, Eccles. 3.11. That every thing is beautiful in its season? Is not
every execution and particular event of Providence most beautiful and proper at
the season allotted it by God? What are all the travels and births of time, but
the Eternal and wise Decrees of Providence brought forth into light? Have not
al issues and events, not only natural and necessary, but also the most
contingent and voluntary their fixed time and limits constituted by Divine
Providence, which renders them most beautiful and perfect? Are not those very
products, which in their own nature seem most monstrose and deformed, most
beautiful in their time and place, as they relate to Divine Providence? Is not
God infinitely wise to order althings in the best manner? And is he not also
infinitely powerful to execute whatever he ordaines and decrees? Is not that,
which in regard of man's Providence and Execution is most sinful and deformed,
in regard of Gods Providence and Execution most beautiful, as Christ's
Crucifixion? What must we say of all that confusion that seems to be in States
and Churches, Persons and Things? Does it reach the Providence of God? Is it
not only in regard of second causes, and our mistakes as to the first cause?
Cannot, yea, will not Divine Providence bring a beautiful order out of all this
confused chaos? It Is true, Sacred Philosophy tells us of evil days, which
should come to pass in this last Scene of the World: but whence springs the
evil of these later days? Is it not from the Lusts of Men, not the Providence
of God? Are not the worst of days Naturally good, yea Morally also to those who
are good and do good? Is it not the Moral Evil of Men that makes al Times Evil?
If Men were better, would not the Times soon prove better? Yea, are not those
very Disorders and Confusions, that arise from the Lusts of Men, ordered by
Divine Providence in the best manner for the good of the whole? As in Nature
variety adds Beauty, so in the Providence of God variety of changes renders
it more beautiful. It was a great saying of a Stoic: He that will take upon him
to mend things, let him first take upon to mend God. Certainly nothing is done
by God, but that which to leave undone were not so good: Many things that seem
disorderly and confused as to parts, are not so if we consider the whole. Thus
Damascene, Orthod. Fid. l. 2. c. 29. having proved, that God provides and
governes althings according to his most wise Will, he adds: (...), Therefore
God solely is good and wise by nature, or Essentially: As therefore he is good,
he provides: for he that provides not, [for such as are under his care] is not
good: but as he is wise, he takes care to provide the best things. Therefore it
becomes us, attending to these things, to admire al, to praise al, to receive,
without curiose inquisition, all the works of Providence, albeit they may seem
to many injust; because incognite, and incomprehensible, as in what follows.
That the Providence of God is most perfect, see Aquinas, contra Gent. l. 3. c.
94. Alvarez, de Auxil. Disput. 28. p. 270.

5. Divine Providence is most mysterious and incomprehensible. 5. Mysterious.
The Providence of God are much like his Being, very full of mysteries. So
Psalm. 36.6. The Judgments of God are said to be a great deep. And Psalm. 97.1.
The Lord reigns, let the Earth rejoice: Psalm. 97.1, 2.
because al his Judgments and Executions of Providence are most Equal and
Righteous. Yet it follows, v. 2. Clouds and darkness are about him. i. e.
Albeit his Government is most Righteous, yet much darkness and mysterious
Providence attend it: there are deep mysteries in his Providential Procedures,
albeit Righteousness and Judgment are the habitation or establishment of his
Throne, as it follows. Gods Providence are always matter of our Admiration, but
not of our Comprehension, or Imitation: To measure Providence by our shallow
Reason, what is it but to set the Sun by our false Dial? It Is well observed in
the Life of Padre Paul, p. 114. In the success of human things Divine
Providence is ever to be admired, where human prudence vanishes out of sight:
it being most certain, that in actions there is an eternal force, and a long
chain of Causes, so far without us, that neither our knowledge, or any
consideration of ours can ever come near. The works of Providence are much
like many curiose pieces of Nature and Art; whereof we see the frame and
operations, but that which is the interne moving principe, and gives the
greatest force to the operations we see not: So in the works of Providence, we
see the Executions and Effects, but O! how mysterious are the interne Reasons?
Is there not a particular though mysterious Providence ordering and directing
the Operations of every individual and single Essence? And is there not in
every work of Providence something Divine, which does puzle the most
sharpe-sighted Reason, and has more in it, than the most acute Philosopher can
discover? And why is it that the most of men mistake and censure Providence,
but because they cast their eye on some few particulars, but consider not the
whole frame and complexe? It Is above our narrow Capacities to contemplate the
whole frame of Providence, and is not this the genuine reason, why we misjudge
and mistake the parts? That is not disorder in the whole, which seems so in
some one particular, as in the motions of a Watch. These mysteriose procedures
of Divine Providence are well expressed by Damascence, Orthod. Fid. l. 2. c. 29.
We must, says he, admire all the works of Providence, (...), albeit they may
appear to many injust; because Divine Providence is unknown and
incomprehensible; and our cogitations, and actions, and things future are known
to it only. Thence he adds, toward the close of the Chapter: (...), But we
must know, that there are many modes of the Divine Providence, which can
neither be explicated by speech, nor comprehended by mind.

. 6. The distributions of Providence.
From the Adjuncts of Divine Providence we pass on to its various
Distributions, which are for the most part Modal only, not Specific. As (1)
Providence in regard of its Object is distributed into General and Special:
General Providence is that which respects althings in general: Special
Providence, that which respects some under a special relation to God, as his
people. (2) Providence in regard of its manner of working is distributed into
Mediate and Immediate: Mediate Providence is that wherein God makes use of
Means for the execution thereof, of which before. Immediate Providence is, when
God produces Effects without the use of Means. (3) Providence is distributed
into Ordinary and Extraordinary: Ordinary Providence is, when God in the
production and governing of things observes that Order, which was constituted
at first by himself. Extraordinary Providence is when God in the Production,
Conservation, or Gubernation of things breaks that natural Order constituted
by himself. Of Miracles.
The Effects of such extraordinary Providence are, by a Metonymie of the
Effect, termed Miracles. A Miracle properly is a Specimen of Creation; because
the constituted order of Nature being broken, the Matter has only an Obediential
Power for the production of the Effect. Hence nothing but Omnipotence or
Infinite Power can properly and physically, in a way of principal efficience,
produce a Miracle. It Is true the Ministers of God have, when called to it by
him, been Instruments of doing Miracles; yet their concurrence or efficience
was only Moral and Instrumental: they wrought al in the Name of God, in a way
of faith and dependence on him, and for the manifestation of his Glory.
Wherefore our Lord Christ, by working Miracles in his own Name and Authority,
without any moral dependence on another, gave an evident Conviction and
Demonstration of his being God. For no Creature can work a Miracle by its own
Principal and Physical Efficience: No; this is the Prerogative of the first
Cause and Omnipotent Deity; because every Miracle is educed out of nothing,
either as to the thing it self, or at least as to the mode and manner of its
being wrought. In Nature, and according to the ordinary course of Providence
every passive power has an active power suited to it: and by the application of
Actives to Passives the effect is produced: where therefore there is a defect
of passive or active power, and yet the effect is produced, that we call a
Miracle: which may be said to be wrought out of nothing three manner of ways.
(1) When there is no substrate matter at al to work on. (2) If there be a
substrate matter, yet when the matter is so inhabile and unapt, as that it has no
natural passive power or capacity for such an effect. Or (3) when there is a
natural passive power and capacity in the substrate matter, yet there wants an
active Principe or Efficient for the educing the effect out of that matter. In all these regards a Miracle may be said to be produced out of nothing, and so
the peculiar effect of Divine extraordinary providence. And indeed the very
names, both Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, import a power extraordinary and Divine.
To let pass the origination of the Latin, which is obvious, Miracles are
called by the Greeks, (1) (...), as they are Signs of the Divine Efficience
and Presence, given for the succur of our Faith; (2) (...), Powers, as they are
manifestations and demonstrations of Divine Omnipotence, which is most
illustrious therein; (3) (...), Hebr. (...), Prodigies, or tremendous Signs,
such as not only ravish men into admiration, but leave also a terror and
astonishing stupor on the mind. So Phavorinus: (...), A Prodigy is a thing
that leaves an astonishment on the Beholders, by reason of the Miracle that is
wrought. Whence (...) is deduced from (...), q. (...), that which terrefies and
astonisheth. Al which note, that Miracles are the peculiar effects of
extraordinary Providence.

The former Distributions of Providence seem only modal, Providential
Conservation proper to God.
its formal, essential, and specific distribution is into Conservative and
Gubernative. Conservation and Gubernation are usually estimed the proper
adequate species of Providence. Providential Conservation is that Act of Gods
Will, whereby he makes things to persist and persevere in their individual
Existence, Vigor, Acts, and specific Essences or Species. As for the particular
Ideas of providential Conservation we shall draw them forth in the following
Proposition. 1. Prop. God is the necessary Conservator of althings. No Creature
is sufficient to conserve it self, or any thing else: no particular Agent as
such can be properly styled a conservant Cause; because conservation is but a
kind of continued Creation. That no Creature is sufficient to conserve it self,
without the immediate conservative influxe of God, is evident, (1) because
every Creature has but a fluid transient nature: wherefore it needs the
conservative concurse of the first cause to fix its fluxible Being. It was a
great and good Effate of Heraclitus, (...), Althings are in flux, nothing is
permanent: i. e. the natures of things create are like a river, the parts
whereof are always in flux; neither does the same part ever return again, but
emties it self into the Sea, where it is swallowed up: so al Creatures are in
continual flux; and if God, who alone is pure Act and immutable, did not fix
their Beings by his conservative influxe, they would soon drop into their
primitive nothing. (2) It implies a contradiction, that a Creature should
persevere in its being without Gods conservative concurse. Does it not implie a
contradiction, to say, that God made a thing, and yet that thing was not made
and caused by God? Now to say God has made a Creature, which needs not his
conservative influxe, what is this but to say, that God made a Creature, which
yet was not made by him? So essential is Divine Conservation to the very
essence and existence of a Creature, as Bradwardine, page 162. Thus also
Aquinas, 1. Quaest. 104. demonstrates, That it is not a thing communicable to
any Creature, that it should conserve it self in Being without God. (3)
Whatever is Ens by participation necessarily dependes on that which is Ens by
essence for its existence and subsistence. Al create Beings in their very
essence depend on Divine Conservation; because every effect that dependes on
any cause directly and of it self primarily for essence, must necessarily also
depend thereon for conservation: But now God is so the cause of al effects,
that they from their very nature and by an intrinsecal necessity depend on him
for Being; therefore also for conservation, as Suarez, Metaph. Disput. 21. page
540, etc. God is (...) Jehovah, in some sense Al Being, as Exodus 3.14. I am: i.
e. nothing has essence, existence, and persistence in Essence, but from the
pure Actualitie and Efficience of God. (4) If God educed althings out of
nothing by his efficacious Will, then it necessarily follows, that the Will of
God must be the Conservatrix of althings: For althings are so far, and so long
existent, as God wills they shall be. Indeed what is conservation but continued
creation, or the continuation of a thing made in Being? Is it not necessary
then, that the same Divine Will, that at first gave Being to any thing, conserve
the same thing in Being? Thence Aquinas, 1. Quaest. 104. proves, That God
conserves every thing by the same virtue and operation, by which he produced
it, i. e. by the efficience of his Will. (5) There is great proportion and
Analogy in point of conservation between the works of Art and Nature. For
look as every work of Art does presuppose a principe and work of Nature, as
well for its conservation as first production; so every work of Nature does
presuppose a Divine Efficience for its conservation as well as for its first
production. Is it impossible that a piece of Art should conserve it self
without matter? and is it possible, that any work of Nature should conserve it
self without Divine Efficience? (6) No impression can remain on any effect,
longer than the vis impressa, or force and action of the Agent continue: and
what is the essence of any Creature but vis impressa, or force impressed by God
thereon? Al create Essences are but impressions or participations from God, and
therefore essentially require new force and efficience every moment for their
conservation and continuation. (7) Unless God conserve althings, how can he
order, dispose, and govern them to their respective ends? Not only the
operations, but the very essences of things are ordered by God to his own
Glory: and how can this be, if the essences of things are not conserved by
God? That God is the necessary Conservator of althings, see Aquinas, contra
Gent. l. 3. c. 65. Bradward. l. 1. c. 2. page 146, etc.

2. Prop. Gods conservative Influxe and Efficience is most intime and immediate
in althings. This Proposition is most evident, Gods conservative Influxe
immediate.
(1) From Gods power to annihilate althings. For if things were conserved by
God only mediately, he could not annihilate them so long as that intermediate
conservant Cause should concur to their conservation, as it is well demonstrated
by Ariminensis, Sent. 1. Did. 45. page 160. (2) From the passive power or
potentialitie of al Creatures. For every potential or thing in power must be
actuated by some Act immediately: now every Creature in respect of God is but a
potential Being; and therefore must be actuated immediately by God, who is a
pure Act, and that not only in its operation, but also for the conservation of
its Being. (3) From the Omnipresence of the Divine Essence. God being not
circumscribed or defined to any space, but immense in his Being, it thence
follows, that he is intimately and immediately present to al Beings, and by
this his immediate presence and volition conserves the same. As the creatrix
Essence was immediately present by the Divine Volition in the first Creation of
althings; so the conservatrix Essence is also immediately present in the
conservation of althings. God is not more distant and remote in the
conservation, than he was in the first causation of things: God is more
intimate to every thing, than the most intimate part of its own Essence is.
Thus Suarez, Metaphys. Disput. 30. Sect. 7. page 70. proves, That God does not
diffuse his creative or conservative Action, but is intimately in every thing,
conserving of it, etc. So Bradward. page 164. (4) From Gods prime Causalitie,
and the subordination of al Creatures to God. Every second cause, whether
causant or conservant, cannot cause or conserve any effect, but in dependence
on and subordination to God, the first Cause: Hence the Efficience of God must
intervene between it and the effect, whether it be for causation or
conservation: whence it follows, that the Divine Efficience, both in causation
and conservation, is more immediate than the efficience of any second cause.
Again, the causalitie of the first Cause is more essential and necessary than
that of the second cause: there is no effect, which the second cause produces,
but the first cause can produce it by itself. So also as to conservation. The
first cause works by its own proper virtue, and therefore more intimely and
immediately than any second cause: The virtue of an inferior cause is not
conjunct with the effect, but in and by the virtue of the superior. (5) From
the efficacitie and vehemence of Gods conservative Influxe. By how much the
more vehemently and efficaciously any cause works, by so much the more
penetrant, intime, and immediate is its influxe. Now God, as the first
conservant Cause, does more vehemently adhere to and efficaciously influence
the effect, than any second cause can do. Concerning the immediate Conservation
of God, see an excellent Discourse in Bradwardine, de Cause. lib. 1. cap. 2.
page 164, etc.

3. Gods Conservation by his Word or Will. Heb. 1.3.
Prop. God conserves althings by the word of his Power or immediate Volition.
Thus Heb. 1.3. Upholding althings by the word of his power. The Apostle
ascribes unto God infinite power in and for the conservation of althings,
whether great or small. It is infinite power that upholdeth the Earth, that
stretches out the Heavens, etc. And yet the same infinite power is put forth
in the conservation of the least things, as also for their motions. The same
power that moves the Heavens, is also exerted in causing a feather to move: the
same power that shakes a leaf, can shake yea rend the mountains: the same
strong arm that upholds a dust or atome, can and does uphold the Earth. And he
says all this is by the word of his Power: i. e. by his omnipotent Volition. So
2 Pet. 3. having old us, v. 5. That by the word of God the Heavens were made:
he adds, v. 7. But the heavens and earth, 2 Pet. 3.7.
which are now, by the same word are kept in store: i. e. by the omnipotent Will
of God. Gods Word being put for his Will, because we usually express our wills
by our word. That Gods Word or Will is the immediate cause of althings and their
conservation, we have before fully demonstrated,. 3. of this Chapter.

4. Prop. Albeit the conservative Influxe of God be immediate, Gods
Conservation by means.
yet in the ordinary course of Providence he makes use of means for the
conservation of his Creatures, at least such as are corruptible. So Hos. 2.21,
Hos. 2.21, 22.
22. I will hear the heavens; and they shall hear the earth; and the earth shall
hear the corn, and the wine, and the oil; and they shall hear Jezreel. (1) In
this gradation we have a lively description of Divine Conservation, both as to
the whole Universe, as also in regard of the principal part thereof, man, and
more specially the Church of God. (2) Neither does this Prosopopoeia only point
out to us the Divine Conservation of althings, but also their causal connexions
and subordinations each to other. Jezreel [ i. e. according to its proper
origination, the seed of God] calls on corn and wine and oil for sustenance and
food: and these liquors call on the Earth for fructifying juices and vigor, in
order to their production: and the Earth calls on the Heavens, i. e. [1] on the
Aereous inferior Heaven, where the Clouds, Snow, Rain, Dew, and Vapors are, for
moist influences; [2] on the Ethereous Heaven, where the Sun and Stars are, for
warm influences: And then lastly the Heavens call on God; who gives out both
vigor and heat to the Celestial Bodies; and these influences to the Earth;
which thence gives juices and vigor to the Plants; whence Corn, Wine, and Oil
is given forth to Jezreel. Such is the admirable gradation and subordination of
althings, as means of Divine Conservation. Thus Psalm. 65.9, 10, 11, 12, 13.
Psalm. 65.11, 12.
Thou visitest the earth, etc. Thence v. 11. Thou crownest the year with thy
goodness. i.e. Thoroughout the whole year thou do abundantly do good to thy
poor Creatures, and so do as it were adorn, beautify, and make glad the
year. Whence he adds: and thy paths drop fatness. Thy paths, orbitae, i. e.
the clouds, which are the paths wherein the chariot of thy Providence moves.
Drop fatness: i. e. Rain and Snow, which by their sulphurous nitrose
efficaces make the Earth fat and flourishing, whereby Man and Bestes are
conserved. Whence it follows: v. 12. They drop on the pastures of the
wilderness, and the little hills rejoice on every side. Or are girded with joy.
Some understand this of metallic venes, which are in the bosom of the Earth,
and do as it were gird it with joy, or metals that cause joy. We find mention
also of the providential provision that God makes for his Creatures, Psalm.
145.15 The eyes of al wait upon thee, Psalm. 145.15.
and thou give them their meat in due season. 16. Thou openest thy hand and
satisfiest the desire of every living thing. We have here a lively Image of
Gods providential conservation, who is brought in as a great Master of a
Family, largely distributing Food, even from his own hand, to al under his
care. Such abundant provision does the Benign Lord make for the conservation
of his Creature. Whence some derive (...) Shaddai the name of God from (...) a
dug or teat that yields milk, implying that God feeds al, and supplies them
with nourishment. Others deduce Shaddai from (...) dai sufficient, q. (...)
Scheddai, who is sufficient: because God is Alsufficient to supply al his
Creatures.

5. Prop. When ordinary means fail, God often provides extraordinary for the
relief of his Creatures. Gods extraordinary provision for some.
Thus God provided for Eliah, and many other of his Servants in their
exigences, whereof we find abundant instances in Sacred Philosophy and
History. Yea how often does our liberal Lord make extraordinary provision for
mere Brutes in their indigent cases? Psalm. 147.9.
Thus Psalm. 147.9. He gives to the Best his food, and to the young Ravens
which cry. The last clause, Job 38.41.
and to the young Ravens which cry, is taken out of Job 38.41. Luke 12.24.
Who provideth for the Raven his food? When his young ones cry unto God, they
wander for lack of meat. So Luk 12.24. Our Lord makes mention of Gods feeding
the Ravens. Which places put together seem to note some more than ordinary
provision that God makes for them. The Rabbines, Rasi and Kimhi, with some
others tell us, that the young Ravens, by reason of their white color, are left
by their Parents to shift for themselves; whence the Providence of God, in an
extraordinay manner, causes flies or worms to arise out of their dung, by
which they are nourished. Pliny and Albertus Magnus incline much to this
Opinion of the Hebrews. Others refer this not to the young Ravens newly hatched,
but to such as are ready to fly: which being cast out of the neast by their
Parents, and very much affected with hunger sly up and down the Air, making
loud cries. Which seems to agree to that of Job 38.41. Thus Aristotle and Elian
tell us, that the young Ravens are expelled from their neast by the old ones. To
this sense Vossius, Mcy, and others incline. The former sense of the Hebrews is
refuted by Calvin, as also by Bochart, de Animal. Tom. 2. p. 203, etc. who
makes this case of the young Ravens the same with that of the young Lions, Job
39.39. Psalm. 34.10. and 104.21. both of which by reason of their vehement
appetite, and unskilfulnesse to acquire food suffer great hunger, and are in a
more than ordinary manner supplied by the Providence of God. What extraordinary
provision God makes for the conservation of his own People will hereafter occur
in the Gubernation of God.

6. Prop. The Conservation of a Creature and its first Creation or Production,
as they refer both to God, differ only mentally. Conservation continued
Creation.
Creation gives Being and Existence unto things, Conservation, Continuation in
Being. Somethings are conserved immediately by God, becuase subject only to
him, as Spirits: That the conservation of such differs only mentally from their
Creation is evident: Other things are conserved by God not so immediately as to
exclude Means, yet so as that God conserves them immediately in and by those
means. Now that the conservation of such things also, as to Gods immediate
conservative influxe, differs not really, but only mentally from their first
production is manifest; because conservation as to God, whether it be by means
or without means, is but one act continued from the first instant of its
Creation or Production: not that there is any real intrinsec succession in Gods
Active Conservation, which is no other than his most simple volition; but we
conceive Gods Passive Conservation as successive in regard of the Creatures
Duration. Thonce Aquinas and his Sectators hold, That Conservation is a
continued Creation. Which must not be understood of proper continuation, but
according to our manner of understanding, or by reason of its coexistence to
true continued succession: For continuation properly so termed is only in
things divisible: but Creation and Conservation are one indivisible act,
without any successive duration or real continuation as to God, but only a most
simple indivisible permanence, as Suarez, Metaphys. Disput. 21. Sect. 2. p.
343. demonstrates. Hence we may easily understand, how Creation or the first
production of things, and their Conservation as to God differ only Mentally.
For the difference is only according to the different mode of our conception,
and expression: Things are not said to be conserved in the first moment of
their production, nor to be Created in regard of their subsequent continuation:
For Creation connotes a negation of precedent Being, but conservation on the
contrary connotes the possession of Being before produced. Creation includes a
Novitie of Essence, which conservation excludes; and conservation includes
precedent Existence, which Creation excludes. Nehem. 9.6.
Thus Conservation is continued Creation, as Nehem. 9.6. where God is said to
preserve althings made by one and the same Act. John 5.17.
So John 5.17. My Father hitherto works and I work: i. e. for the
Conservation as well as the first production of things; neither are these Acts
as to Divine Efficience really distinct, albeit we may distinguish them as to
second causes and means used by God, for the production and conservation of
things.

7. Prop. Divine Conservation as to its Objects and Effects is various. The
Object of Divine Conservation.
Albeit the Conservation of God be in it self one simple Act, not different
from the first production of things, save by some connotation only, yet it
admits various Objects and Effects. (1) God conserves Individuals, some to al
Eternity, without the least corruption or alteration: as Angels and Human
Souls: Other Individuals shall be conserved for ever, yet not without some
alteration and resinement, as the celestial Bodies, etc. 2 Pet. 3.10, 12. (2)
Such Individuals as are the effects of Natural Generation or Production God
conserves in their Species, and in the whole: for the corruptions and defects
of some parts belong to the Constitution and Continuation (...) of the whole
Universe, unto which there is more regard to be had, than to any part: albeit
the parts also are conserved in their Species, when they decay as to their
individual Natures. (3) God conserves also the vigor, virtue and efficacitie of
al second causes, together with their Operations so long as they are existent.

CHAP. IX. Of Divine Gubernation in general; and as to Sin.
God the Supreme Gubernator. The end of Divine Gubernation. Its Order most
perfect, and immobile. It has the force of a Law. Its use of means. Its extent
to althings. Gods Gubernation as to Men: particularly as to Sinners, and Sin.
The Origin of Sin, and its causes. God not the Author of Sin. How God is the
cause of the material act of Sin. How far Sin falls under the Divine Will. Gods
Will about Sin Permissive; not merely Negative, but Ordinative. Gods Judicial
Gubernation of Sin. What Attributes of God are most illustrious in the
Gubernation of Sin.

. 1. HAving discussed the Conservation of God, Divine Gubernation.
we now descend to his Gubernation, whereof we find illustrious notices both in
Sacred and Platonic Philosophy. As for Sacred Philosophemes touching Divine
Gubernation they are very many and great, as it may appear in the particulars
thereof. I shall at present give only the mention of Platonic Contemplations
concerning it. Thus Plato, Phileb. p. 28. What, O Protarchus, may we determine,
that althings, and this which is called the Universe, are governed by a certain
temerarious power void of Reason, as Fortune will? Or rather on the contrary,
should we not affirm with our Ancestors, (...), that the eternal Mind, and a
certain admirable Wisdom, ordering al in the most accurate manner, does
govern? He says, that according to the Opinion of the Ancient Wise Men, the
Providence of God governes and moderates althings in the wisest manner, and
with the best order. Thus also Iamblichus says, That the Egyptians, when they
introduce God under the Symbolic Image of one that governes a Ship, thereby
signify his Domination and Empire as Gubernator of the Universe. For as a
Gubernator of a Ship in one moment does easily move, govern, and direct the
Ship; so does God the world. We find the same similitude used by Plato, Leg.
10. p. 902, as before. Hence, this Gubernation of God is that act of Divine
Providence, whereby he directes, governes, and brings al his Creatures to their
proper ends, in the most orderly manner. This general Idea of Divine
Gubernation may be resolved into the following Propositions.

1. Prop. God is the Supreme Moderator, God the Supreme Gubernator. Eccles. 8.4.
Soverain Gubernator, and absolute Rector of althings. Thus we may apply
Eccles. 8.4. Where the word of a King is, there is power; [or Domination] and
who can say to him what do thou? i. e. by how much the more Soverain any
person is, by so much the greater is his Domination. God being King of Kings,
and Lord of Lords must necessarily be most Absolute in Power and Domination.
This is often inculcated by Plato, and carries with it its own Evidence. For (1)
althings receiving their Being, Perfection, Virtue and Operation, from God, it
cannot be, but that he should have an Absolute Dominion and Soverain Empire
over them. (2) Althings tend to God as their last end: therefore he is the
Supreme Rector of al. For when many things tend to one last end, it is necessary
that there be some Supreme Rector and Moderator that ordaines them thereto. For
Gubernation is nothing else but the directing the things governed to their last
end. Thus Aquinas, 1. q. 103. a. 3. Seeing the end of the Gubernation of the
world is the best good, it is necessary, that the Gubernation of the world be
best: But now the best Gubernation is that which is by one, etc. (3) God is
infinitely wise to order althings, and potent to bring them to their ends;
therefore he is the Supreme Moderator of al. So Plato, Leg. 10. p. 902. (...),
But that God who is most wise, both can and will take care of his own Creatures,
etc. (4) The Bonitie of God argues him to be the Absolute Rector of althings.
For it belongs to Divine Bonitie to reduce althings made by him to those proper
ends for which they were made. Whatever flows from God as the first Cause, must
return to him as the last end. (5) This is the great concern of Divine
Gubernation, to see that althings reach the end for which they were made. For
things will never certainly and infallibly reach the end for which they were
made, unless they be directed and governed by the same power which made them.
It argues imperfection in an Artificer not to direct the work he made, to the
end for which it was made. And may we impute such an imperfection to the first
Framer of althings? Hence,

2. Prop. Divine Gubernation proposes the Glory of God as the last end of a
things. The last end of Divine Gubernation.
What is al Gubernation but the directing althings to some last end? And what
is the last end of althings, but the Glory of God? Thus Plato, Leg. 10. page
903. (...), Let us persuade this young man, that he, who by his providence
takes the care of the whole, that he may conserve and adorn it with necessary
virtue, does wisely dispose and order althings to this end: the force and
efficace of whose Providence does diffuse itself into al parts of the Universe,
according to their nature. Whereby he explicates to us, how God does order and
dispose althings for the good of the whole and his own Glory. This he more
fully lays open in what follows: (...), etc. But thou know not, that al
generation of singulars is for this, that the life of the whole may be blessed:
his Essence is not for thy sake, but thou were made for his sake. For every
Physician, and every skilful Artificer, makes al for the sake of the whole,
aspiring after the commun utilitie. Thence he makes not the whole for the sake
of the part, but the part for the sake of the whole. But thou art full of
indignation, because thou can not see, how that which is best may accord with
the commun good, and thy proper interest. Here are several things remarquable
for explication and demonstration, that the Glory of God is the last end of
Divine Gubernation. (1) He says, Al singulars are for this, that the life of
the whole may be blessed. Why may we not by (...), the whole understand God?
That Plato sometimes understandes God by this notion, specially in his Timaeus,
page 90. (...), the contemplations of the whole, etc. I could easily persuade
my self. (2) But grant, that we must understand this of the Universe strictly
taken, yet it must at last be resolved into God: for is not the Universe and
althings else for Gods sake, not God for the sake of the Universe? (3) Plato
illustrates this by the Symbol of a wise Physician and skilful Artificer, who
works al for the sake of the whole: and is not the Divine Bonitie and Glory
that great University or whole, into which al lower ends must be melted? (4)
Plato blames his young Atheist, and in him the most of men, for preferring
their private good before the good of the whole; which Theology teaches is no
other than the Glory of God. That althings are ordered and disposed by Divine
Gubernation, for the Glory of God is manifest, (1) From the prime motion and
causalitie of God. For God being the prime Motor of althings, and moved by
nothing, it thence necessarily follows, that by his Providence he govern and
move althings to himself, as the last end. The order of ends necessarily
answers the order of Agents: the first Cause and Motor must needs be the last
end of althings. (2) From Gods Dominion over althings. Every Agent has power to
use his own works for the end he made them: and are not al Creatures the
works of Gods hands? Has he not then power to use them for his own Glory? (3)
From the perfection which althings acquire by subserving the Glory of God. By
how much the nearer any Creature approaches to the Divine Bonitie, by so much
the more perfect it is: and is not every thing by so much the nearer the Divine
Bonitie, by how much the more subservient it is to the Glory of God? It was a
good Saying of the spurious Dionysius: The supreme Bonitie convertes althings
unto itself, which al desire as their last end, and by which they al subsist as
their most perfect end. Hence,

3. Prop. The order whereby Divine Gubernation disposes and reduces althings
to their last end is most fixed, The Order of Divine Gubernation fixed. Esa.
40.26.
immobile, and perfect. This according to sacred Philosophy is well expressed,
Esa. 40.26. Lift up your eyes on high, and behold who has created these
things; that brings out their host by number: he calls them al by name: by
the greatness of his might: for that he is strong in power not one fails.
Observe here; (1) he calls on mankind to lift up their eyes for the
contemplation of the Creatures thereby to instruct themselves in the
Gubernation of God. (2) He founds Divine Gubernation on omnipotent Creation.
(3) He expresses Gods fixed admirable order in governing things, specially the
Celestial bodies, by bringing out their host by number. O! what an accurate
order do all the Celestial bodies observe in their motions! Is not every one
numbered and ranged in its proper place by Divine Gubernation? Does not every
one keep its rank and slation, perform its office, and move most regularly,
according to that Law which Divine Ordination has appointed it? Thence it
follows: And calls them al by name: i. e. has an accurate knowledge of and
command over al, as a wise General that can call al his Soldiers by name, whose
beck and nod every one obeys. Such is the admirable Dexterity and Domination
of Divine Gubernation. But whence springs all this? that follows: By the
greatness of his might. The magnitude of Divine Power is the cause of his
admirable fixed Gubernation: because he is omnipotent, therefore it is
impossible that he should fail in his Gubernation. Thus it follows: For that he
is strong in power not one fails. (...), fails, or is deprived, i. e. of
that fixed order and station, which Divine Gubernation has allotted to it:
there is not one that detractes its office, but al subserve the Divine order.
Thus Plato, in his Phado, p. 97. (...), It is the eternal Mind that disposes
althings in the best order, and is the cause of al -- And thus I determined
with my self, if it be so, that this gubernative dispositive Mind does thus
dispose althings, then althings are placed in that station and rank, where
they may be most rightly constituted. The Stoics also, as Laertius in Zeno
assures us, held, (...), That the world was governed and ordered by the Divine
Mind and Providence, which disposes althings in the best manner. This
gubernative Providence, as it includes a fixed order and series of causes and
effects, they called Fate; which they made to be a connexe series of things, or
reason, whereby the world was governed. So Chrysippus said: (...), etc. That
Fate was a natural Syntaxe or regular connection of althings, mutually following
each other from al eternity, by an immutable and inviolable complication.
Whereby indeed they seem to understand no other than the series and order of
Divine Gubernation, decreed by God from al eternity. So Stobaeus, in his
Physics explicates their mind: (...), The reason of those things, which are
governed in the world by Providence. And that this was the original import of
the Stoic Fate we are assured by Seneca, Minutins Faelix, Lud. Vives, and
others. Thus Robert Grosseteste, that great Philosopher as well as Divine, in
his Tractate de Libero Arbitrio, (to be found in MSS. in Exeter College
Library:) We must know, says he, that Fate may be taken for Providence,
according to Boethius, Lib. Consol. Philos. 4. who says, that Fate is the same
with Providence, yet they may admit different considerations; because
Providence is that Divine Reason in the Soverain of althings, which disposes
althings; but Fate is the disposition inherent in things mobile, by which
Providence knits them together in their proper orders. In what follows he
proves out of Cicero, Boethius, and others, that Fate is really the same with
Providence: of which see Philos. Genesis P. 2. l. 1. c. 3.. 5. Hence,

4. None can avoid Divine Order and Gubernation.
Prop. No second cause can totally decline the order prefixed by Divine
Gubernation. And the reason is evident; because this Gubernation of God
intrinsecally includes, not only a prudent provision of the best means, but an
efficacious execution of them, so as they shall infallibly reach their end. It Is
true, wicked men often do substract and withdraw their neck from the obediential
yoke of Gods preceptive Gubernation, but yet they cannot totally withdraw
themselves from the order of Gods providential Gubernation: whiles they violate
the moral and sacred order of Divine precepts, do they not fall into the penal
order of Divine punishments? Yea, often do not those very means, which they use
to violate the Divine order, Genesis 11.4.
promove the same? Thus Genesis 11.4. And they said: Go to, let us build us a
city, and a tower, whose top may reach unto heaven; and let us make us a name,
lest we be scattered abroad upon the face of the whole earth. You see their
design in building the Tower of Babel was to prevent the judgments of God, or
to secure themselves against a dispersion and scattering: and yet, lo! the wise
Gubernation of God made this very Tower of Babel, v. 8.
which they intended as a means to prevent their dispersion, the cause thereof,
as v. 8. So the Lord scattered them abroad, etc. And yet out of this very
dispersion which they feared and felt, Divine Gubernation brought another
sacred order, even for the peopling the whole Earth. Thus the most unnatural
confusions are ordered by Divine Gubernation: the order of Divine Providence is
frequently advanced by that which may seem to obstruct or pull it down: whiles
men endeavor to escape one order of Divine Gubernation, they fall into another.

5. The Order of Gods Gubernation a Law.
Prop. The order of Divine Gubernation, whereby althings are appointed and
reduced to their end, has the force and efficace of a Law. Thence Plato terms
this Order of Divine Gubernation, (...), the Law of Adrastie, i. e. Gods fixed
Order. So Pindar: (...), the Regal Law of althings: i. e. that Order which the
Eternal Law of Divine Decrees has constituted for the Gubernation of althings.
This Law, whereby Divine Gubernation orders and disposes things, as it refers
to things inanimate and Brutes, comprehendes in it al those Natural Instinctes,
Instigations, Inclinations, and Propensions, whereby they are conducted to
their proper ends and usages. Do not things Natural, which are not invested
with rational notices, or spontaneitie certainly observe some Laws and Dictates
of Nature, which, you may as soon banish them from their Natures, as divest them
of? Are not the several kinds of their Operations constantly framed and
determined according to this Order or Law of their Natures? And do they not
hereby follow Divine Gubernation toward their end, albeit they know not what
they do nor why? Does not the silly Bird curiosely frame its neast, and the
simple Be its cel always after the same form and figure? and so in all other
natural operations and productions of mere Brutes, what a fixed Order is there
agreeable to the Law of their Beings? And whence comes all this, but from the
infinite Wisdom and Gubernation of the Divine Mind, who conductes things most
irrational in the most intelligent prudent manner to their ends? May we not
then conclude, that the Natural Generations and Operations of althings proceed
from that Universal Law engraven on their Beings, whereby they are, by the wise
Conduct of Divine Gubernation, directed to their respective Ends? In sum, this
Natural Law of Divine Gubernation consistes, (1) In the Natural Principes of
things. (2) In their Natural Inclinations. (3) In all Natural Instinctes, and
Impulses of Nature. (4) In their Obediential Capacities or Powers, whereby they
are ready to receive any extraordinary Impressions, which Divine Gubernation
shall offer to them.

6. Prop. Gods Gubernation by second Causes.
The Executions of Divine Gubernation are often committed to second Causes and
Instruments, yet so as it acts immediately in and with them, yea sometimes
contrary to their natural Inclinations. Thus Plato, Leg. 10. p. 903. speaking
of Gods Soverain Providential Gubernation, says: That albeit God takes the
care of the whole Universe himself, yet (...), And over al these parts [of the
Universe] are set Rulers and Moderators, who constantly govern althings, even
the most minute parts; that so by these they may govern al, even to the last
part, unto their end. By those Rulers under Divine Gubernation, I presume, he
understandes al second Causes made use of thereby. Divine operations do not
exclude the operations of the second causes, but these include subordination to
Divine operations. Divine Gubernation orders and governes Inferior Creatures by
Superiors, Corporals by Spirituals; and Inferior sublunary bodies by Superior
and Celestial. Thus he governes althings immediately as to the manner of Order,
and yet many things mediately as to the execution thereof: So that nothing can
fall out against or beside the Universal Order of Divine Gubernation, albeit
many things do contrary to the order of particular Causes. Touching the
Executions of Divine Providence, see. 3. Prop. 4.

7. Gods Gubernation reaches althings.
Prop. The Object of Divine Gubernation is althings in their most extensive
latitude. Thus Plato Leg. 10. p. 902, 903. proves, That nothing is so minute
and inconsiderable, but it falls under Divine Gubernation. But to descend to
particulars. (1) Divine Gubernation disposes of al Seasons, both Natural and
Politic. [1] Natural Seasons, Eccles. 3.1.
as Eccles. 3.1. To every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose.
A Season: i. e. a certain fixed, determinate time. [2] Politic Seasons, for
Human and Politic Actions. (2) Gods Divine Gubernation orders al Vicissitudes
and Changes in the world, without the least vicissitude or change in himself.
Dan. 2.20, 21.
So Dan. 2.20. For Wisdom and Might are his: i. e. for the Gubernation of
althings. Whence it follows, v. 21. And he changes the Times and the Seasons:
he removes Kings, and sets up Kings. (3) Divine Gubernation orders all the
Meteors, Snow, Job 37.6, 7.
Rain, etc. So Job 37.6. For he says to the Snow, be thou on the earth:
likewise to the small Rain, and to the great Rain of his strength. Whence it
follows, v. 7. He seals up the hand of every man, that al men may know his
work. He seals up the hand of every one. Elibu's meaning is, that when God
sends his Snow and shours of Rain, he thereby seals up, or shuts up the hand
of the Husbandman, that so he may retire out of the fields home, and consider
his work. Then the Bestes go into Dens, as v. 8. (4) God governs al motions
of second Causes, even such as are most contingent and voluntary, in the most
certain manner. (5) God governes al Events of things. It was a great saying of
Julius Caesar, which he gained by experience, That Fortune, (whereby the
Ancients expressed Divine Gubernation) has great force in althings; but more
particularly in the affairs of war: wherein often the most inconsiderable
rencontres or occurrences produce the greatest changements. Such is the wise
and potent Gubernation of God in Military Affairs.

. 2. Divine Gubernation as to Man.
Having dispatched the Gubernation of God in the general notion thereof, we now
descend to consider it in its special relation to Man, both in his sinful and
renovate State. Gubernative Providence does reach the whole Universe; but in a
more special manner Man and his Affairs. So Plato says, Leg. 4. p. 709.
(...), That God truly, and with God Fortune and Opportunity govern al human
affairs. By Fortune and Opportunity we must understand Divine Gubernative
Providence, which in a more peculiar manner regardes Man; because he is capable
not only of Natural, but also of Moral Gubernation. God governes every Creature
according to its capacity, whether Natural or Moral: but now al Creatures
inferior to man are capable only of Natural Gubernation and Passive Reduction
to their last end: they may be governed and directed to their last end, but
they cannot govern or direct themselves thereto. But Man being invested with a
Natural, Passive, remote capacity of understanding and Will, can, when in a
special manner aided and assisted by supernatural Gubernation, actively conduct
and direct himself to his last end. Hence Divine Gubernation as to Man is
either Moral, 1. Moral by Law.
or Efficacious. (1) Gods Moral Gubernation is by Laws and Institutions. Look
as irrational Creatures are governed by natural Instinctes, and Inclinations,
which are to them a Law directing them to their end; so Rational Creatures have
a more express formal Law, which was at first impressed on their Beings, but
now under a new Edition by Divine Revelation, whereby they are directed to
their last end. For a Law being nothing else but a certain Reason or Rule of
operating, it properly only can belong to intellectual rational Creatures, who
alone can understand the reason of their operations. And that this Law is given
to Man principally to direct him to his last end is evident, because the
Supreme Intention and Efficace of the Divine Law is, to bring Man into
subjection to God: and who are subject to God but those, who refer al to him as
their last end? Is it not the Intendement of every Lawgiver to make those good,
to whom his Laws are promulgated? And wherein consistes the goodness of Man,
but in subjection to God, and adhering to him as his last end? So that the main
end of al Laws both Positive and Moral is to direct man to his last end. (2)
This also is the main design of Divine Efficacious Gubernation, 2. Efficacious.
namely to reduce man unto to a subordination and subservience to his last end.
Only it has a different ay of operation as to wicked and pious men. Wicked men,
if they persevere in their wickedness, are by Divine Gubernation reduced to
their last end only passively, by penal executions, in order to the vindication
of Divine Justice: but elect pious Souls are actively reduced and directed to
their last end, by the supernatural Gubernation of the Divine Spirit. Of both
these in their order.

That wicked men, Wicked men fall under Gods Gubernation.
and al their sinful Acts and Deeds are, by Divine Gubernation, reduced to the
last end of al, the Glory of God, will appear evident, if we reflect on what
was before hinted, that if the Creature withdraw it self from one order of
Divine Gubernation, it immediately falls under another: if lawless irregular
men substract and withdraw themselves from Gods gracious and easy yoke of
obedience in order to life, they deservedly fall under Gods Iron Yoke of
vindictive Justice, and Eternal Death: and so whiles they violate one Will and
Order of Divine Gubernation, they fulfill another: If they will not willingly do
Gods Will of Precept, which brings happiness with it, what more just, than that
they suffer Gods Will of punishment, against their Wills? Thus wicked men fulfill
Gods providential Will, whiles they break his preceptive Will. Yea, Satan himself
is under chains of irresistible Providence: He is not an Absolute, much less a
Lawful Monarch, but Usurper; who has a restraint upon his Power, though not
upon his Malice: He cannot Act as he would.

And as the persons of the wicked, Gods Gubernation about sin.
both Men and Devils, fall under the Providential Gubernation of God, so also
their Sins. And here we are inevitably engaged in that grand Philosophic and
Scholastic Question, How far Sin falls under the Providential Gubernation of
God? For the solution whereof we shall first premit some Distinctions: and then
resolve the whole into certain Propositions. As for Distinctions, (1) We may
consider Sin [1] in regard of its Causes, Essicient and Final: or [2] in regard
of its Essential and Constitutive parts, Matter and Form. (2) We may consider
the Permission of Sin; which is either merely Negative or Positive: and both,
as belonging to a Legislator, or to a Rector. (3) We may consider the
Providence of God as to its Natural Efficience or Judicial Gubernation. These
Distinctions being premissed, we shall resolve our Question in the following
Propositions.

1. Prop. Al Sin, as other things, has its Origin, Causes, and Constitutive
parts. The Causes and parts of Sin.
The Ethnic as well as the Christian Schools have admitted many Debates,
touching the Origin of Evil, or Sin: and we have this copiosely ventilated by
Simplicius, an acute Philosopher, in his Commentaric on Epicterus, C. 34. p.
175. etc. And he seems to state it thus: That Sin, being a privation, has no
proper principe or cause, though as to its substrate matter it may fall under
some causalitie. Thus Plato, Repub. 2. p. 380. and Proclus on him, deny, that
there is, (...) and (...), any Cause or Idea of Evils; because, (...), Evil is
an irregular passion, or (...) a privation of Being; which must be understood
of the formal Reason of Sin: for as to is substrate matter, Plato and his
Followers grant, that al good has its Causes. Suarez, Metaphys. Disp. 11. Sect.
3. p. 251. proves well, (1) That al Sin must have some Cause: [1] Because
nothing is Evil of it self: therefore from some Cause. [2] Because nothing is
Evil, but as it recedes from some perfection due to it: but nothing fails of
its due perfection, but from some cause either Agent, or Impedient: Now (2)
this being granted, That al Sin has some Cause, it thence necessarily follows,
That some Good must be the Cause of Sin. For in as much as we may not proceed
into Infinite, nor yet stop at some Sin that has no Cause, we must necessarily
stop at some Good, which is the cause of Evil. Hence, (3) to explicate in what
kind Sin may be said to have a Cause, we must know, [1] that Sin formally as
Sin requires not a final Cause, yet it may admit the same in regard of the
extrinsec intention of the Agent. That sin formally as sin requires not a final
Cause, is evident; because consisting in a privation and defect, it is not
properly and of it self intended in things. Thus Simplicius in Epictet. C. 34.
page 174. tells us, That al Act, (...), does participate of Good, and therefore
Evil can have no end. And yet that Sin may have a final Cause, in regard of the
extrinsec intention of the Agent, is as evident; because the Agent may intend
what is Evil for some end: for what is Evil in one kind, may be conducible, or
utile in some other. [2] As to the Efficient Cause, al Sin has some Efficient
Cause, yet not per se, of it self and properly, but by Accident, and beside the
primary, intrinsec intention of the Agent. Man is said to be Efficient or
rather the Deficient Cause of Sin, by producing that Action, to which Sin is
appendent or annexed. God is said to be the Efficient, not Deficient Cause of
the material Act of Sin, by reason of his immediate Universal Efficience to al
real Entitie. (4) As for the constitutive parts of Sin, namely its Matter and
Form; [1] Al Sin as sin has a Material Cause, or Substrate Matter, which is
always naturally Good. Whence that great Effate in the Schools: Al Evil as
Evil has for its fund or subject some good. Thence Augustine said, That Evil
cannot be but in some Good: because if there were any pure Evil, it would
destroy it self. And the Reason is manifest; because Sin, as to its Formal
Reason, is not a thing purely Positive, neither is it a pure Negation; but a
privation of debite perfection: therefore it requires a subject to which such a
perfection is due: And must not this subject then be something naturally good?
Is not every real positive Being naturally good; because the Effect of Divine
Efficience? Can any perfection be due to any Subject, unless that Subject be
naturally good? [2] As for the Form of Sin, such as it has, it consistes in
the privation of that moral Rectitude which is due to the Substrate Matter or
Subject. Thus Damascene, Orthod. Fid. Lib. 1. Cap. 15. (...), Evil is the
privation of Good, or substance. So Lib. 2. Cap. 30. (...), Sin is nothing else
but a secession from Good, as Darkness is a secession from Light. Of which see
more, B. 1. C. 4.. 1. and Philosoph. General. P. 1. L. 3. c. 3. sect. 4.. 2.
Indeed, to speak properly, Sin has no Formal Reason or Cause; because it is a
privation. Thus Plato, Rep. 2. and Proclus, deny, that Sin has any Formal
Idea, as before: Yet, according to the commun acceptance of a Formal Cause or
Reason, we make its Deordination, or Difformitie from the Law the formal reason
thereof. Hence,

2. God not the Author of Sin.
Prop. Gods providential Efficience and Gubernation about sin does no way
denominate him the moral cause or Author of sin. Thus Plato, Repub. 10. says,
That God is the principal cause of al good: but as to sin he is, (...), no
cause thereof: because (...), he is properly the cause of sin that chooses it.
So Repub. 2. page 380. (...), etc. We must with all manner of contention refute
that opinion, that God who is most good, is the Author, or moral cause of sin:
neither must we concede, that any speak or hear any such opinion in the City,
if we desire to have it well constituted and governed. That this Platonic
Sophisme cannot be well understood of Gods natural Efficience to the substrate
matter of sin, but only of a moral Causalitie as an Author, is evident from the
very reason that he gives thereof; namely, because God is most good: which only
excludes Gods moral Efficience from sin as sin, not his natural Efficience from
the substrate matter or entitative act of sin, which is in itself good, and
therefore from God, the Cause of al good. So that Plato's argument is so far
from denying Gods natural Efficience to the entitative act of sin, as that it
confirms the same. The holy God, in all his providential Efficience and
Gubernation about sin, whether it be permissive or ordinative, is gloriosely
vindicated from being the Author or moral cause of sin; because he does nothing
deficiently, as failing from that eternal immutable Law of Righteousness. This
is incomparably well explicated by Simplicius, in Epictetus, cap. 1. page 24.
Our Souls whiles good desire good: but when they are sinful, sinful objects:
(...), And both, [i.e. good and bad] act from their own election, not as being
compelled by any violent necessity. Wherefore God may not be said to be the
Author of sin: for he made the Soul, which is naturally capable of evil -- as
being good according to the riches of his Bonitie. In which he clears God from
being the Author or moral cause of sin; because al his providential Efficience
about sin is only as he is good. An Author' properly, as the Civil Law teaches
us, is he that gives command, Is a quo consilium accepimus, Auctor noster
translate dicatur. Unde Tutor proprie Auctor pulillo dicitur cui consilium
impartit. Justin. Institut.
counsel, or encouragement to an Act. So a Tutor is said to be the Author of
what his Pupil does, by giving him counsel. So again he is said to be an
Author, who does approve what another does. In Philosophy, he is said to be an
Author, who by suasive or dissuasive reasons, does exhort the principal Agent
to, or dehort him from any action. The same they call a Moral Cause, as opposed
to effective. Now in no one of these respects can God be said to be the Author
or moral Cause of sin: for he neither commands, nor counsels, nor encourages,
nor approves sin, nor yet dissuades from virtue. Neither does God violently
necessitate or compel men to sin; but concurs only to the material entitative
act of sin, as the prime universal Efficient, not as a particular deficient
moral Cause.

3. God the prime Cause of the entitative Act of Sin.
Prop. Albeit God be not the moral deficient Cause or Author of sin, yet he is
the efficient and prime cause of the material entitative act of sin. This is
evident both from Sacred and Platonic Philosophic. Thus Amos 3.6. Shall there be
evil in the city and the Lord has not done it? I acknowledge this primarily to
be understood of the evil of punishment; yet we are to remember, that evils of
punishment in regard of second causes are evils of doing: Gods punishing
Israel, albeit it were good as from God, yet it was usually sinful as to the
instruments made use of therein: and yet in this very regard God was the prime
Efficient of the material entitative act, albeit he were not a moral deficient
cause of the obliquitie. Thus Plato, Repub. 10. page 896. (...); Must it not
then necessarily be conceded, that the Soul [of the Universe] is the cause of
althings good, both honest, and evil, and base: of althings just and unjust,
and of al contraries; in as much as we assert him to be the cause of althings?
Wherein observe, (1) That he philosophiseth here of God, as the universal Soul
or Spirit of the Universe, influencing and governing althings. (2) He says,
this universal Spirit or Soul is the prime Efficient of althings good. Yea, (3)
not only of things honest or morally good, but also of things evil, base, and
unjust, i. e. as to their entitative material act: because in this regard they
are good. (4) He grounds this Hypothesis on the universal Causalitie of God, as
the prime Cause of althings. Thus also Plato, in his Timaeus, page 28. (...),
It Is necessary, that whatever is produced, be produced by some cause. If so,
then al natural products must be produced by God, the first Cause of althings:
and is not the entitative act of sin a natural product? That the substrate
matter, or material entitative act of sin falls under the providential Efficience
of God, as the first universal Cause of althings, has been universally avouched
and maintained in all Ages of Christians, both by Fathers and Schole-men,
Papists and Protestants, excepting only Durandus, and two or three more of his
Sectators. Thus Augustine, de duab. Anim. contra Manich. c. 6. about the end,
where he proves against the Manichees, [who held two first Principes, one of
good and another of evil] That whatever really is, as it is, must proceed from
one God. Thus also Bradward. de Cause. Dei, page 739. where he strongly proves,
That God necessarily concurs to the substance of the act of sin, albeit not to
its deformity. The like page 289, 290. Gregor. Ariminensis, Sent. 2. Distinct.
34. Art. 3. page 110, etc. gives us potent and invict demonstrations, That God
is the immediate cause of the entitative material act of sin. Not to mention
Alvarze, de Auxil. l. 3. Disp. 34. and other late Dominicans, who, as I
conceive, are unjustly loaded with prejudices, by a Divine of name, in this
particular. Indeed the very Jesuits and those of their Faction concur with us
in this Hypothesis. Thus Suarez, Metaph. Disput. 22. Sect. 1. page 551, etc.
where he strongly demonstrates, That every action both natural and free, good
and evil, as actions, are produced immediately by God, as the first cause. This
Hypothesis he maintains stoutly against Durandus and his sectators, and as I
judge with arguments never to be answered. Thus also Ruiz, de Voluntate Dei,
Disput. 26, 27. Yea Penottus, de Libertat. l. 8. c. 11. assures us, that al
Divines accord, That God is the cause of the natural Entitie of Sin. Among
Reformed Divines this Hypothesis is generally maintained. I shall mention only
Davenant (who was not rigid in this way) in his Answer, to Gods love to
Mankind, page 143, 147, 174, etc. also de Reprobat. page 113. where he greatly
explicates and demonstrates our Hypothesis.

But to explicate and demonstrate our Proposition by force of reason, take
notice, that we say not, that God is the cause of sin, Gods Concurse to the
entitative Act of Sin demonstrated.
but that he is the cause of the material entitative act of sin. For the
clearing of which we are to consider, That many things, which are true under an
Hypothesis, and in a limited sense, are not so absolutely. Thus here we may not
say simply and absolutely, that God is the cause of sin: yet we may not deny,
but that he is the cause of the substrate matter, or material entitative act of
sin. This was long ago well observed by Aquinas, who tells us, that al locutions,
in which it is signified, that God is the cause of sin, or of moral evil, ought
to be avoided, or very cautelously limited; because names that implie
deformity conjunct with the act, either in general, or in particular, it
cannot be said of them, that they are from God: Whence it cannot be said of sin
absolutely and simply, that it is from God; but only with this addition or
limitation, that the Act, as it is a real Entitie, is from God. This being
premissed, we proceed to demonstrate our Proposition, That God is the prime
efficient cause of the material, entitative Act of Sin. This may be
demonstrated, (1) From the subordination of al second causes to the first
Cause. Whatever is produced must have some cause of its production, as Plato,
Tim. 28. and if it have a cause, must it not also have a first cause? And what
can this be but God? unless we will, with the Manichees, asset two first
Causes, one of good, and the other of evil. (2) From the Participation and
Limitation of every finite Act and Being. Must not every participate, finite,
create, dependent Being be reduced to some essential, infinite, increate,
independent Being, as the prime Efficient thereof? (3) From the conservation of
the material entitative Act of Sin. Is not the material entitative act of sin a
create Being? And can any create Being conserve itself? Does not Durandus and
his sectators grant, that the conservation of Beings is from God? And if Gods
providential Efficience be necessary to the conservation of the material
entitative act of sin, is it not as necessary to its first production? What is
conservation, but continued production, as to God? This argument is well
improved by Ariminensis, Sent. 2. Distinct. 34. Art. 3. page 110. and by
Suarez, Metaphys. Disp. 22. Sect. 1. page 552. (4) From the Determination of
the second cause of its particular effect. Every second cause being indifferent
to variety of effects, cannot be determined to any one individual effect, but
by the immediate cooperation of the first cause. Thus Suarez, Metaphys. Disp.
22. Sect. 1. page 552. (5) From the substrate Matter of al evil, which is
physically and naturally good. There is no moral evil, which is not founded and
subjectated in some natural good: even hatred of God, albeit the highest moral
evil, yet as to its entitative material act it is naturally good: which is
evident by this, that if that act of hatred were put forth against sin, it
would be morally good. (6) From the Ordinabilitie of al evil to some good.
There is no act so evil, but the wise God can turn it to some good: the
Crucifixion of our Lord, which was one of the highest evils, what good was by
Divine Gubernation brought out of it? Does it not much exalt the skill of a wise
Physician so to order poison, as to make it medisinal? So it exalts Divine
Gubernation to bring good out of evil: as it aggravates the impiety of wicked
men, that they bring evil out of good. (7) Does it not take from God the main
of his Providence, to deny his Concurse to the substrate matter of sin? What
more conduces to the Amplitude of Divine Providence, than to allow him a
Concurse to and Gubernation of al real Acts and Events? (8) To deny Gods
Concurse to the material entitative Act of Sin, does it not, by a paritie of
Reason, subvert the supernatural concurse of God to what is good? For if God
can make a Creature that shall be Independent as to any one natural Act, why may
he not also make a Creature that shall be independent as to good Acts? Hence,

4. Prop. The substrate matter, How Sin falls under the Divine Will.
or material entitie of Sin falls under the Divine Will. This follows on the
former; because the whole of Divine concurse or efficience must be resolved
into the Will of God, as before once and again. But more particularly, (1) The
Futurition of Sin, as to its substrate matter, falls under the Eternal Decree of
the Divine Will. Whatever Good or Evil there is under the Sun, as to its real
Entitie, must have its futurition from the Divine Will. Immo and peccatum,
quatenus a Deo just permittitur, cadit in legem aeternam. Augustinus, de
civitat. Dei, L. 19. C. 22.
sin it self so far as it is justly permitted by God falls under the Eternal Law
of the Divine Will, as Augustine well observes. Sin in its own nature, as
Antecedent to the Divine Will, was only possible: now how could it pass from a
condition of mere possibility to a state of futurition, but by some
intervening cause? And what can we imagine to be the cause hereof, but the
Divine Will? May we not then hence conclude, that Sin was future; because the
Divine Will determined, for just ends, to permit its futurition? (2) The Divine
Will is not only the cause of sins futurition; but it has moreover a
providential Gubernation and Efficience about the actual existence of sin. [1]
As for the Natural Entitie of Sin the Divine Will is the total immediate
efficient thereof, as Ariminensis, Sent. 2. Did. 34. Ar. 3. page 110. [2] The
Divine Will also physically permits the moral pravitie and obliquitie of Sin, as
that which may conduce to the advance of Divine Glory. For this greatly
conduces to the illustration of Divine Providence, to permit some defects that
may render the whole more beautiful, as Aquinas at large demonstrates, contra
Gent. l. 3. c. 71. of which hereafter. Hence,

5. Gods will about the Obliquitie of Sin permissive.
Prop. Gods Will about the formal reason or obliquitie of Sin is not effective,
or defective, but only permissive. (1) That Gods will about the obliquitie of
Sin is not effective is evident, because Sin as to its obliquitie has no
effective cause. (2) That the Will of God is not a defective cause of Sin, is as
evident; because the same act which is defectuose and sinful in regard of the
second cause, is not such in regard of God: Man breaks a Law, and therefore
sins, but God breaks no Law: al his Actions are conform to the Eternal Law.
Whence, (3) Gods Will about the obliquitie of Sin is only permissive. But now to
clear up Gods permissive Will about Sin, we are to consider [1] That permission
properly as to men is not an action of the Law, but a negation of action: when
any permits another to do, what he might hinder, but is under no obligation to
hinder. Hence no man may permit Sin; because he is under an obligation to
hinder it: but God may; because he is under to obligation to hinder it; as also
because he can bring good out of it. [2] That Permission is either of a
Legislator, or Rector. Gods permission of Sin is not as he is Legislator, but
only as Rector and Governer of the World. God gives no man a legal permission
of sinning, but as Rector he does providentially permit Sin. [3] That Gods
permission of Sin as to the event is nothing else, but the privation of that
assistance, which being granted would efficaciously impede and hinder the
existence of sin. [4] That Gods permission of Sin can be no way sinful; because
he has an absolute Dominion over his own Influences, and may exert them as he
pleases, without injury to his Creature: whereas al Mankind are bound
together by such a mutual sraternitie and cognation; as also by that obedience
they owe their Creator, as that they cannot permit Sin without being partakes
thereof. Al men are under a communion of Natures, and therefore bound by the
Law of Nature to afford relief and aid each to other so far as they may for the
avoiding of sin. Again, al men are under an essential obligation of subjection
to their Creator, and so far as they may to prevent sin in others: therefore
they cannot permit sin, without being guilty thereof. But the Supreme Rector,
being under no Law or obligation of subjection, may, for the illustration of
his own Glory, permit Sin.

6. Gods permissive Will about Sin Efficacious.
Prop. Gods permissive Will about Sin, is not merely Negative, but Efficacious,
Bradwardine, l. 1. c. 33. p. 289. demonstrates, That unto whatever Gods
permission extendes, unto that his actual volition extendes also. And his
Reasons are invict; because God permits nothing, but what he wills to permit,
etc. So again, C. 34. he thus argues: (1) either God wills or nils the
permission of Sin: he does not nil it; for then it cannot be: therefore he wills
it. (2) God voluntarily provides for all voluntary works with all their
circumstances: therefore he voluntarily orders and permits sin. (3) That Sin
is, is a true Proposition: and whence comes the truth of this Proposition, but
from the first truth? Thence does not God will, that this Proposition, Sin is,
be true? Whence God wills the permission of Sin. He gives us many other
Arguments to demonstrate, that God has an actual Efficacious Will about the
permission of Sin, p. 295, etc. In the permission of Sin God does not only nil
to hinder it, but he also wills not to hinder it. Divine permission in this
regard differs much from human: Men therefore permit things to be; because they
neither will that they be, nor yet will that they be not: whence many things fall
out besides what they intend or will. But it is not so with Divine Permission:
nothing falls out, but what God intendes shall be; and therefore there can be no
Negative Permission ascribed to his Providence about sin. To ascribe unto God a
mere Negative Permission about Sin, what is this, but to make God a mere idle
spectator of Human Affairs? And is not this unbecoming the Supreme Rector of
the Universe, to stand and look on, but not to concern himself about the
Gubernation of sinful Acts? Surely if the permission of God be merely a
negation of Will, it will necessarily follow, that those things that fall out by
the permission of God, be either against, or beside his will: if against his
Will, then he nils them: if beside his Will, then he wills them not: But now Sin
falls out neither against the Will, nor beside the Will of God, but according to
it. Yea indeed to speak properly and strictly there is no such thing as a
Negative Will of God: the Will of God taken properly for his immanent volition is
always efficacious.

7. Prop. Gods Providential Gubernation of Sin is not only Permissive, Gods
Gubernation of Sin Ordinative.
but also Ordinative. Thus Plato, in his Politicus, tells us, there is a twofold
motion of the Universe, one Uniform and Regular: the other difforme,
irregular, and defectuose. And he expressly faith, that these (...),
Parallaxes or (...) circumvolutions and irregularities are governed and ordered
by God. i. e. (...). Albeit Sin be in regard of the second Cause a defect, yet
Gods Gubernation of those defects, so as that they may subserve his own Glory,
argues no defect in him: al defects as such belong to the particular cause as
defectuose, not to the first Universal Cause, who orders al those defects to
the best end: And that the Ordination of those defects belongs to the
Gubernation of God is most evident, (1) because this greatly conduces to the
Order and Beauty of the whole Universe. There would be no perfect Bonitie in
things create, unless there were an order of Bonitie: now the order of Bonitie
in things human does suppose worse and better; and that the worse be ordered
for the Better: And to whom does it belong to order the worse for the better,
but to the most wise God the Supreme Rector of al? It Is a great Platonic
Philosopheme, That Lust never uses Lust well, but Reason does. Meaning the
Divine Reason in the Gubernation of Evils. May we not then allow this wise and
potent Gubernator of althings this Prerogative, to order al sinful defects to
the best end? Libidine non been utitur Libido, sed Ratio. Jansen. August.
(2) Are there not many Heroic Virtues and good Qualities, which would find no
room in the universe, were there not some human sinful defects? What room would
there be for the patience of the Just, if there were no malignitie in the
unjust, as Aquinas observes? As in Naturals, the corruption of one thing is the
generation of another, so in Morals, often the corruptions of wicked men are so
ordered by Divine Gubernation, as that they tend to their Regeneration.
Therefore if Sin were totally excluded from the Universitie of Nature the
wisdom of Divine Gubernation, in the bringing good out of evil, would not be
so illustrious and refulgent. (3) The best and most perfect mode of Gubernation
is, so to provide for the things governed, as that they be permitted to act
according to their natures: for herein consistes the due order of Regiment. Now
Divine Gubernation in permitting men to sin, and ordering the same to the best
end, does but leave men to act according to their natures. See this Proposition
more fully demonstrated by Aquinas, contra Gent. L. 3. C. 71.

8. Judicial Gubernation of Sin.
Prop. Gods Providential Gubernation of Sin is not only Permissive and
Ordinative, but sometimes also Judicial. Gods Judicial Gubernation of Sin
consistes in the leaving men to judicial Occecation and Induration in, and by,
and for Sin. Of this Judicial Blindness and Hardness in and by Sin we find
frequent mention in Sacred Philosophy, and somewhat also in Platonic. So Plato
in his Gorgias; p. 472. (...), The Injust Man is of al most miserable; yet he
is more miserable, who acting injustly avoids punishment. So in his Theaetetus,
he tells us, that a license to Sin is the greatest punishment of Sin: for a
power to do Evil is the worst destruction. Now this Judicial Gubernation of Sin
consistes of these several particulars. (1) God suspendes and withdraws the
Celestial Influences of Divine Grace, and means of restraint. Thus Genesis 6.3. My
Spirit shall not always strive with man. How soon will the softest heart grow
harder than the Adamant, if God withdraw his celestial dews of Grace, as Zach.
7.12. and 14.17, 18? Hence, (2) God leaves men to the plague of their own
corrupt hearts, which is, Plato notes, is the worst judgment. (3) God leaves
Sinners to the heart-betwitching allurements and blandishments of this World.
Thus Balaam, Number. 22, etc. 2 Pet. 2.14, 15. (4) God delivers Sinners up to the
power of Satan, 2 Cor. 4.3, 4. 2 Timothy 2.26. (5) God so orders and disposes his
providence, as that al do accidentally, by reason of their corrupt hearts,
tend to their induration. Romans 11.9, 10, 11. (6) Yea, God permits that the very
means of life be to them the savor of death, 2 Cor. 2.16. Esa. 28.12, 13, 14.
(7) Yea, the Prince and Mediator of life is to such a strumbling-stone and
occasion of death. Esa. 8.14, 15, 16. and 38.13. (8) God leaves them to a
spirit of slumber, or spiritual occecasion. Romans 11.8. Esa. 19.11-14. and
44.18, 19. and 60.1, 2. 2 These. 2.10, 11.

9. Prop. In the whole of Divine Gubernation about Sin his Wisdom, Justice,
and Sanctity, Gods Attributes illustrious in his Gubernation of Sin.
with other Attributes are most illustrious and resplendent. (1) Gods Wisdom
is eminently manifest in his gubernation of Sin, in that he brings the greatest
good out of the greatest evils: those very sins whereby wicked men endeavor to
darken the Glory of God, he turns to the advance of his Glory. We have a
good Philosopheme to this purpose in Plato, Theaetet. page 167. (...), A wise
man makes those things which are in themselves evil turn to good, and to seem
such, as a wise Physician turns poison into a medicament, which similitude he
uses. (2) The Justice of God is most resplendent in the punishing that sin he
permits to be. (3) Gods Sanctity is also most conspicuous, in that those very
acts, which are morally evil in regard of God, are both morally and naturally
good in regard of Divine Gubernation. The sin which God governes is not sin in
regard of God, but of the Creature, that comes short of the Divine Law. The
holy God violates no Law by concurring as an universal Cause with the Sinner,
that violates his Law. The sinful quality of a moral effect may not be imputed
to the first universal Cause, Duo cum faciunt idem, non est idem, Proverb.
but only to the second particular cause. Here that commun Proverb holds true:
When two do the same, it is not the same: i. e. the same sinful act, whereto
God and the Sinner both concur, is not the same as to both; but morally evil as
to the Sinner, and yet naturally yea morally good as to Gods concurrence. Sin
as to God speaks a negation of his concurse, not a privation of any thing due:
neither does God will sin simply as sin, under that Reduplication, but only as
good and conducible to his Glory. The reason of Gods willing and governing
sin, both in the Elect and Reprobate, is univocally one and the same, namely
the advance of Divine Glory: For the greatest evil of sin has something of
good mixed with it; which God wills and orders for his Glory. There is nothing
in the world purely, simply, and of it self evil: if there were, God, who is
the chiefest good, could not will it. Lastly, man only is the proper and formal
cause of sin or moral evil; because he alone comes short of the rule of moral
good: so that Divine Gubernation both as permissive, ordinative, and judicial
about Sin is sufficiently vindicated from the least imputation thereof.

CHAP. X. Of Divine Gubernation about Virtue, Virtuose men, and Angels.
Supernatural Illumination from God. The Infusion of Virtues. Gods care of
virtuose Men. Gods Gubernation of the Angelic World. The Angels, Law, Obedience
and Disobedience. Good Angels their Communion with Saints. The Ministration of
Angels. (1) At the giving of the Law and Christ's Incarnation. (2) For the
Protection of Saints. (3) For their Conduct. (4) Their Sympathy with Saints.
Their Ministration at the final Judgment. Divine Gubernation as to evil
Angels. Satan's power to temt, and his Limitation.

. 1. Supernatural Illumination from God.
HAving discussed Gods Divne Gubernation about Sin, we now pass on to his
supernatural Efficience and Gubernation of Virtue and virtuose Men. We intend
not to treat hereof, as it belongs to Christian Theology, but only as it falls
under metaphysic or prime Philosophy, termed by some Natural Theology. 1.
Plato gives us frequent and great notices of Divine Illumination, which is the
Origin of al supernatural Virtue. Thus in his Theages, he says, (...), If it
please God, thou shall profit much and speedily: otherwise not. So in his
Philebus, he assures us, That the cognition of the supreme infinity Being is,
(...), the gift of God to men. The like, Epinom. (...); How is it, that God
should be accounted the cause of al other good things, and not much more of
wisdom, which is the best good? But to treat more distinctly of Divine
Ilumination, we are to know, that as there is a twofold spiritual Darkness,
the one objective, in the things to be known, the other subjective, in the mind
that is to know them; so proportionably there is a twofold Light, the one
objective, whereby God reveles the things to be known, the other subjective,
whereby God takes off the veil from the mind, and thereby inables it to
apprehend supernatural Objects. Now by this twofold Light Divine Gubernation
conductes the Rational Creature to his supernatural end. (1) God conductes the
Rational Creature by an objective Light, or Divine Revelation of his Will,
whereby he reveles man's supernatural end, and the means conducing thereto. Some
imperfect fragments, or broken notices of this Divine Revelation were gleaned
up by the wiser Heathens, Pythagoras, Solon, Socrates, Plato, which gave them
sufficient cause to admire, and in some superstitiose manner to imitate the
Judaic Institutes and Laws, as the Fountain of the best Wisdom, as it was
foretold by Moses, Deuteronomy. 4.5, 6, 7. and as we have sufficiently demonstrated in
the precedent Parts. Whence we find mention in Plato, Minos, page 317. of
(...), the Royal Law; as elsewhere of (...), a Divine Word: which, if I mistake
not, refer to Divine Revelations vouchsafed the Church of God, for its conduct
unto eternal life. (2) As God governes and conductes the Rational Creature by
an objective, so also by a subjective Light, which is essentially requisite for
the acquirement of its supernatural end. Of this also we find some and those
not vulgar notices in Plato. So in his Repub. 6. page 507, 508. where he makes
an incomparable parallel between natural Vision, and Divine Illumination. In
natural Vision, says he, there must be a visive Faculty, an Object visible,
and Light to discern the Object. This Light is derived from the Sun, which is
the principal and next cause of Vision. For, adds he, as often as the eyes are
converted to such things as are illustrated by the Sun, vision in the eyes is
very apparent. Then he draws up his parallel, page 509. (...), Thus also think
of the mind: For when that in which Truth itself, and Being itself shines
forth, inheres in it, it does consider and understand the same, and then it
seems to have an illuminated Mind and Divine Intellect. Wherein observe (1)
That God, who is Being itself, as also Truth itself, or the first Truth. (2)
That before there can be any true light in the mind, this first Truth must
shine forth and irradiate the same. (3) That when God illuminates the mind,
there is not only a transient, but a fixed light firmly impressed on it. This
Divine Light does become one with the mind, and so forms, conformes, reformes,
yea transformes it into the things known. (4) That the Intellect thus
illuminated becomes truly Divine. Thence he subjoins: (...), That therefore
that gives truth to those things that are known, as also a faculty to know
them, call thou the IDEA OF GOOD, namely the cause of Science, and Truth, which
is understood by the Intellect. Note here, that (1) he calls God, considered as
the Fountain of al Illumination, the Idea of Good, i. e. the supreme Idea of al
Perfection and Truth, in whose light alone we can see light. (2) He says, that
this Idea of good gives truth to those things that are known: i. e. al
objective wisdom impressed on things, as also al objective Revelation, whereby
things mysterious are reveled. (3) Also a faculty to know things intelligible:
i. e. subjective Illumination and Light both habitual and actual. (4) Hence
this Idea of good is the cause of al Science and Truth, which is understood.
The sectators of Plato thus explicate his mind about Divine Illumination. [1]
They make God to be the true essentia Wisdom. Thus Plotinus, En. 5. l. 8. c.
5. page 546. (...), The true Wisdom is Essence: and again the true Essence is
Wisdom: i. e. God who is Essence itself, is Wisdom itself. [2] This essential
Wisdom or Light does illuminate al, but is illuminated by none: as the Sun
gives light to althings, but receives not light from any thing. [3] The create
finite Intellect being irradiated by this essential light of life, is invested
with true forms and Ideas of things, and is thereby conducted into the
knowledge of things mysterious and Divine.

This Divine Illumination is every where inculcated in sacred Philosophy, and
generally acknowleged by the Greek Theologues. Chrysostom styles it, (...),
The illuminant Intellect, the superne Grace, the gift of the Grace of God, not
of human Nature. Greg. Neocaesar. Orat. Panegyr. (...), The greatest gift of
God, and the illustrious afflate from Heaven. And the reasons which enforce the
necessity of such a Divine Illumination for the apprehending of supernatural
Truths are taken from the sublimitie of the Object, and the imperfection of the
human Intellect: we find both conjoined, 1 Cor. 2.14. The animal man is not
capable of the things of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 2.14.
etc. By the animal man we are to understand every man void of supernatural
light, by which alone things spiritual are discerned: for all knowledge supposes
some proportion between the Object and the apprehensive Faculty: now what
proportion is there between the natural Intellect and supernatural Truths? Can
an animal faculty take in spiritual objects? Is it possible then, that the
natural mind may, by its own force without Divine Illumination, reach
supernatural Mysteries? Thence says Augustine, de Trinit. l. 14. c. 7. Tho
human intellect cannot apprehend sublimer intelligibles, unless it be
fortified and perfected by a stronger light. And Greg. Nyssenus, 2. in Eunom.
assures us, That it appertains to the Father, Son, and holy Spirit, (...), to
illuminate minds with the light of Divine knowledge. Whence this Divine
illumination is styled by the Greek Theologues, (...), illumination, (...),
irradiation, (...), illustrant Grace.

2. Having explicated Divine Illumination, The Infusion of Virtues.
we now proceed to treat of the infusion of al other supernatural Habits or
Virtues, whereby the Rational Creature is governed and conducted to his last
end. That al true moral and supernatural good is no way attainable but by
Divine infusion, is every where inculcated in sacred Philosophy. Thus also in
the Theology of the Grecians, it was frequently inculcated, (1) That no one
could (...), avoid the snares of sin, but (...), he who was assisted and
fortified by God, as Basil, Eth. c. 3. So Greg. Nyssen. Orat. 3. in Orat.
Domin. Tom. 1. (...), He that will avoid domineering sin must call God for his
succur, always having him in his eye, who exercises him by tentations. (2)
That al true moral or supernatural good comes from God, by Divine infusion.
This gratiose infusion of Virtue by God was by various and emphatic notions
illustrated by the Greek Fathers, who term medicinal efficacious Grace, the
Spring of this supernatural Infusion, (...), the salutarie Grace; also (...),
manuducent and assistent Grace. Again, (...), the Divine infusion, or
inspiration: For, say they, (...), that we can do any thing morally good, is
from the impulse of God. Yea they make, not only the first infusion, but also
the prosecution and conservation of al moral good to be from God. Whence Divine
Grace is termed by them, (...), persequent, or actuating and conservant Grace.
Hence, (3) the Act, whereby the Soul is turned from Vice to Virtue, is termed
by the Greek Theologues, (...), Restoration, (...), Revocation, (...),
Discession, (...), putting off the old man, (...), Progress from a bad state
to a good, (...), Transmutation of Soul. Of which see more in what precedes of
efficacious Concurse, c. 7.

It was a great Question among the ancient Philosophers, Whether Virtue came by
institution; or by Divine afflation and infusion? The Cynics and Stoics held,
(...), That Virtue was teachable, as Laertius: But Socrates, and Plato his
sectator held the contrary. So Plato, Protag. page 361. (...), Virtue is not a
thing that may be taught, or gained by institution. This he more copiosely
demonstrates in his Meno, page 89. where he proves, (1) That men are not good
or virtuose from the power of Nature: For (...), etc. if men were good by
Nature, then certainly some would be so in their tender years. (2) Then he
procedes to another Question: Therefore seeing men are not good by Nature, may
they not yet be such (...), by Discipline and Institution? This also he denies,
demonstrating, That Virtue is not a Science, such as may be taught by Precepts:
If Virtue, says he, may be taught, then there must be Masters and Disciples of
it. On the contrary, may we not rightly conjecture, that what has neither
Masters nor Disciples, that (...), cannot be taught? Whence Socrates assumes
thus: (...), Truly I have often sought diligently, whether there were any
Masters to be found, who could teach Virtue, but I could never as yet find any.
Thus page 93. Now let us consider, whether good men can communicate that Virtue
they have unto others: (...), Or, whether virtue be such, as that it can be
delivered to no one by Institution, nor yet be received by any one in such a
way. He demonstrates the later, and exemplifies it by Themistocles, who, says
he, was, according to commun estime, a good man, and a skilful preceptor of
Virtue, if any ever were. And can thou think he would make others good, and
not his own Son Cleophantus? But this, adds he, he could not do. Whence he
concludes, that Virtue could not be taught. Thence he procedes to make
inquisition into two sorts of men, who professed themselves Masters of Virtue,
namely Sophists and Politicians, and demonstrates that neither of these could
indeed teach men to be virtuose. Yea, p 99. he says, That God often makes use of
the most unapt Instruments for the producing Virtue: (...); Is it not meet,
Meno, to call those Divine Men, who being without understanding, excellently
perform many of those things they both do and speak? Whence he concludes: But
if in this whole Disputation we have rightly found out the case, (...), Virtue
is acquired neither by Natures force, neither by any Institutes of Discipline
or Doctrine; but it comes to those who have it by Divine Afflation, or
Infusion, without the active concurrence, providence, and industry of the
human soul. Lastly he closes up his Dialogue with this, That supposing any
should by Institution acquire somewhat of Virtue, yet this is but (...), to be
adorned as it were with a shadow; whereas Virtue is a thing real and solid: i.
e. All the forces of natural power or artificial Institution give men only a
shadow, form, or semblance of Virtue; whereas the truth and real power thereof
comes from God. Whence Bias, as Laertius informs us, advised: (...), What Good
thou shall perform, refer to God, as the Author of it. We have already
demonstrated, that the supernatural infusion of Virtue by God was generally
asserted by the Greek Fathers: (albeit too many of them inclined to favor
Origen's corrupt infusions about Free Will.) Thus Damascene, (who gives us a sum
of the Greek Theology) Orthodox. Fid. L. 2. C. 3. (...), But we ought to know,
that Virtue is given to human nature by God; and that he is the Principe and
Cause of al Good; and without his cooperation and aid, it is impossible that
we should will or act any good. And this he demonstrates from Gods prime
Causalitie, L. 3. C. 1. (...), God, who gives Being, is he that gratiosely
vouchsafes Wel-Being. And John. Climacus, scal. Parad. grad. 23. assures us,
That, (...), etc. the extremity of pride consistes in the negation of Divine
Aid; and the lifting up of our own Virtue is a Demonic Affection: for he that
thinks he can of himself, without supernatural Grace, perform any good,
denies God to be his helper in althings. And Greg. Nyssen. says well, That the
Grace of God is, (...), the sum of Virtue. That supernatural Good and Virtue
comes from God by Divine Infusion is generally asserted and demonstrated by the
Sectators of Augustine and Aquinas. Thus Gregorius Ariminensis, 2. Did. 29. q.
1. where he demonstrates these Conclusions. (1) That no just person, invested
with habitual Grace, can avoid any one sin, without Divine special assistance:
because no just person can by Grace received avoid any one tentation, or
persevere in good. (2) That Adam, before he fell, could not by his own forces,
with the general insluence of God, without special assistance, perform any one
good act. Touching the necessity of habitual and actual Grace for the
performance of any action really morally and spiritually good, see Jansenius,
August. Tom. 3. de Great. L. 2. C. 2. and 22, 23, etc.

. 2. Gods care of virtuose men.
As al Divine Knowledge and Virtue come under Gods supernatural Efficience and
Gubernation, so in like manner al virtuose men. Sacred Philosophy every where
inculcates, what a paternal and special Providence God vouchsafes his peculiar
people. Thus Psalm. 17.7. Psalm. 17.7.
Show thy mavelous loving kindness, O thou that savest by thy right hand
them which trust in thee. (...) Separate thy Benignities, or make thy
Benignities mavelous. So the LXX. (...), make wonderful: i. e. exert thy
wonderful Benignity, as thou art wont to do, toward those that trust in thee.
So v. 8. Keep me as the apple of thine eye. (...) as the pupil the daughter of
the eye. There is an elegance in the similitude. As the Pupil or Apple of the
Eye, being like a tender delicate Daughter, the darling of the Eye, is the main
of its care; so are the Children of God his darlings. Whence he adds: Hide me
under the shadow of thy wings. Which seems to allude to the providence of an
Hen, which hides her young under her wing, thereby to protect, foment, and
nourish them. It may also allude to the wings of the Cherubims, which spread
themselves over the Propitiatory, Exodus 25.20. thereby pointing forth Gods
protection of his People. Thus, Psalm. 91.1. Psalm. 91.1.
He that dwells in the secret place of the most high. It seems to allude to
the Holy of Holies, which, in Scriptural phraseologie, is termed the secret
place of God, where he dwelt. The meaning is: whoever commits himself to the
Tuition of God, by flying unto his Sanctuary, he shall be safe. So it follows:
shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty. (...) shall sojourne, or
continually loge. Of the Almighty. (...), Shaddai is one of Gods names, which
signifies Self-sufficient, as containing al sufficience in him, from (...) who
and (...) dai sufficient: or it may signify, potent to destroy al, from (...)
to destroy. God is both Alsufficient to provide for his People, and Omnipotent
to destroy all that oppose them. Thence, v. 4. He shall cover me with his
feathers, etc. i. e. He shall overshadow me with his wings, and defend me from
al injuries of weather, or birds of prey, even as an Hen protectes her Chicken.
So v. 10. There shall no evil befall thee. (...), There shall be no evil impelled
to thee, or there shall no evil fortuitously occur to thee: but al be governed
and ordered by a pattern hand of Providence. Thus, v. 14. Because he has set
his love upon me, therefore I will deliver him, etc. The like description of
Gods pattern providence we find Psalm. 121.4, 5, 6, 8. as elsewhere.

As for Plato's Philosophemes touching Gods pattern providential Care and
Gubernation of virtuose persons, they are many and great. So in his Apology
for Socrates, having proved at large, That Death was no way to be feared by a
wise virtuose man, he gives this reason for it, (...), because there can no
evil happen to a good man, either living or dead: neither are his affairs ever
neglected by God. So Repub. 10. he says: Whatever happens to a friend of God
is best for him. The same he inculcates elsewhere. So Pindar, Od. 1. (...), God
thy keeper provides for these cares, taking this solicitude on himself. And
Pythagoras held, Charior est illis [Diis] homo quam sibi. Juven. Sat. 10.
that Man, so far as he had cognation to God, fell under his special Providence.
Yea Plato made virtuose men (...), the possessions of God, according to Sacred
Dialect. Indeed Gods pattern Providence toward the righteous determines al
events sweetly and for the best: it extractes good out of the most bitter
crosses: they shall need nothing, but what they can better need than enjoy: If
God keep them not from misery, he will keep them in it: the less they have of
human help and provision, the more they shall have of Divine. God reserves to
himself the care of Temporals, that they might be the more obliged to mind
Spirituals. Thence said Socrates: Seeing God is so careful for you, what need
you be careful for any thing your selves? There is not any Attribute or
Relation assumed by God, but his People have it engaged for them.

. 3. Next to the Rational follows the Angelic World, which is the Supreme
Object of Divine Gubernation. Gods Gubernation of the Angelic world.
As for the Creation of the Angels Sacred Philosophy gives us but few if any
notices thereof; because its design chiefly is to describe unto us the state
of the Church collected out of men and redeemed by Christ, in which the Angels
have no share: yet in as much as they are used by God as Ministers of his
Church, so they belong to Divine Gubernation; on which account we find frequent
mention of them in the Scriptures. As to their natures they are said to be
Spirits Intelligent and Wise, 2 Samuel 14.20. excelling in strength, and in all
ready and swift execution of the Divine Will, Psalm. 103.20. The Life of blessed
Angels consistes in the beatific Vision and Contemplation of the face of God,
as Mat. 18.10. In Heaven the Angels do always behold the face of my Father: i.
e. They always contemplate the infinite Beauty of the Divine Essence, the
gloriose Majesty of his Throne, the transcendent splendour and brightness of
his Wisdom, Bonitie, and other gloriose perfections. And the sood of Angels,
whereby this their Intellectual Life is recreated and strengthened, is that
ineffable delight and satisfaction, which attendes this their beatifie
Intuition and Contemplation of the face of God together with the contemplation
of whatever else has any conformity to God, or subservience to the
illustration of his Divine Wisdom, Power, Goodness, Grace, Justice, with his
other gloriose perfections. Thus Damascene, Orthod. Fid. L. 2. C 3. (...), they
see God, and are fed hereby, etc. As for the Ministry of Angels, we find
mention thereof, Psalm. 103.4. Psalm. 103.4.
Who makes his Angels Spirits: his Ministers a flaming fire. They are called a
flaming fire by reason of their Spiritalitie and Activitie in serving God: for
nothing in the sensible world is so pure, spirital, and active as fire; it
being the most potent Minister or Instrument of Nature and Art. Thus Damascene,
Orthod. Fig. L. 2. C. 3. makes an Angel to be, (...), a spirit or immaterial
fire. For which he cites Psalm. 103.4. where (...), flaming fire, says he,
(...), denotes Agilitie, Ignition, Fervor, Penetrabilitie, and Acumen about the
Divine Desire and Ministry; as also their elevate refined nature and freedom
from al material intelligence. Whence he gives us this description of an Angel:
(...), An Angel therefore is an intellectile substance, ever-mobile, free,
incorporeous, by Grace obtaining immortality in nature. As to their
Illumination, he adds: that they are, (...), Secondary intellectile lights,
receiving illumination from the first independent Light. Their vast Wisdom and
Science is also mentioned, Matthew. 24.36. Mark 1.3.32. Their mighty Puissance,
Force and Power is described, 2 Pet. 2.11. Their Glory, Dignity, and
Excellence above other Creatures is frequently inculcated. As to their Dignity
and Office, they are styled, Col. 1.16. Thrones, Dominions, Principalities,
Col. 1.16.
and Powers. They are also said to be Dan. 10.13. the Chief Princes, above all the Princes of the Earth; and the Title of Gods is given to them, Psalm. 8.5.
and 97.7. in as much as God imparteth to them his Counsels, 1 King. 22.19, 20.
Zach. 1.11, 12. and uses their Ministry in the Gubernation of the world, but
in a more particular manner of his Church, as Hebr. 1.14. Are they not al
ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for them, who shall be heirs of
salvation? In which description we have (1) Their Nature signified by Spirits.
(2) Their Office, to minister. (3) The main Object of their Ministry, the
heirs of salvation. We find no particular mention in Plato, or the more Ancient
Philosophers touching Angels; yet we find frequent and great notices both in
Plato and others touching Demons, and their Ministerial Office between the
Supreme God and Men, for the Gubernation of human affairs; which Mede
understands partly of Angels. Plato discourses at large of Demons, in his
Cratylus, page 397. in his Symposium, p. 202, 203. and in his Repub. 5. p. 468,
469. He makes them to be a kind of Mediatorie Gods, between the Supreme God and
Men, to transporte the Sacrifices and services of men to God, and the gifts and
favors of God to men; as also to govern human affairs. Which it is possible
may be partly but a broken Tradition of the Ministration of Angels; yet I
conceive the Office of these Demons primarily refers to the Mediatorie Office
of the Hebraic Messiah, and was but a corrupt Imitamen thereof, as we have more
fully demonstrated, in what precedes, B. 2. C. 8.. 11. and Vanity of
Philosophy, B. 2. C.. 4. also Philosoph. Genesis P. 1. l. 3. c. 4.. 4.

As al Divine Gubernation begins with a Law, either natural or moral, The
Angelic Law, Obedience and Disobedience.
so the Angels those intelligent, celestial, gloriose Creatures had their Law,
whereby they were to be directed and ordered to their supreme end. What the
particulars of the Angelie Law are is not specified; but it is supposed they
are for substance the same with those moral Precepts impressed on Adams Soul,
excepting such as relate to the gubernation of the human body, which Angels
are not invested with. It Is most certain, that those immaterial gloriose
Creatures, as they are in nature more pure, and in power more potent than man;
so likewise those of them that have kept their station, are in the
Contemplation, Admiration, Affection, Adoration, Imitation, and Obedience of
their Creator perfectly conformed to that Law imposed on them. Whence our Lord
makes their obedience the Idea and Exemplar of what we are to pray for, Mat.
6.10. and 18.10. Yet part of those gloriose Creatures, through the voluntary
breach of that Law, whereby they were to be governed, soon fell from their
blessed station, even before the Fall of Man. What their sin was cannot be
peremtorily determined; yet it s generally conceived to be spiritual pride in
the reflection on their own sublimitie, dignity, and excellence, which ravished
their understandings into such an exorbitant degree of self-admiration, that
they lost the sense of their subordination to, and dependence on their Maker:
whence their Contemplation, Admiration, Adoration and Imitation of God
immediately vanished: and of gloriose pure Spirits they became most impure and
unclean, as Luke 8.2. and 9.42.

As for the elect blessed Angels their offices as to God and Men are various.
The good Angels ministry as to Gad.
1. As to God, (1) they serve him, by standing before his Face, and observing
al his Commands. So Gabriel, Luke 1.19. Luke 1.19.
I am Gabriel that stand in the presence of God. To stand in the presence of
God, denotes a posture for the observation of al his Commands, and a promtitude
to execute the same. The allusion is taken from Courtiers, who stand in the
presence of their Prince, ready to observe and obey al his dictates and
commands. The like Mat. 18.10. Their Angels do always behold the face of my
Father. So Rev. 8.2. Rev. 8.2.
And I saw the seven Angels that stood before God: i. e. to observe and execute
his pleasure for the destruction of Babylon. (2) They minister to the Sons of
God, Mat. 4.11. Joh. 1.51. (3) They laud and adore God the Father and his Son
Jesus Christ, Luk 2.13, 14. Rev. 5.11, 12. and 7.11. of which hereafter. And
these praises they perform with so much eloquence and suavitie, as that it
became a Proverb, To speak with the tongue of Angels, whereby they understood
the highest Divine eloquence and suavitie of speech, as 1 Cor. 13.1. 1 Cor.
13.1.
Though I speak, with the tongue of men and Angels, etc. (4) They also serve
God in the executions of his Threats and Punishments on wicked men, specially
the Enemies of his Church. As Act. 12.23. Rev. 7.1, 2. and 8.7, 8, 10, 12. and
9.1, 13. (5) They shall attend and subserve Christ at his second Coming to
Judgment. As Mat. 16.27. and 25.31. Luke 9.26. 2 These. 1.7. (6) They ministered
to Christ in the first promulgation of the Law and Gospel, as in what follows.

2. But our supreme Lord intending the Angels as ministering Spirits for the
heirs of Salvation, Heb. 1.14. Good Angels, converse with Saints.
he has also joined them as Parties in the Communion of Saints, under one Head,
who is Christ, Col. 2.10. But because they are Spirits and have no flesh,
therefore under the Old Testament, whiles the Church was in its Infant-state,
they frequently appeared in corporal visible shapes, thereby to strengthen
their Faith and assure them of their commerce with and ministration to the
Elect of God. Mede drives this notion much higher than I dare extend it, who on
Genesis 3.13. supposes, that the Law of Converse between Spirits and men
requires, that the Spirit always presents himself under the shape of some
visible thing; yea, of some such thing, as may less or more ressemble its
condition. But I conceive, that the highest Communion between Angels and Men is
spiritual, without the assumtion of human shapes, specially in these last
times: Yet we must not deny, but that the Patriarchs and Saints under the Law
had frequent Apparitions of Angels in visible forms of men, who conversed with
them, eating and drinking, and discoursing familiarly with them, touching the
affairs they were sent about, as Genesis 18.1. and 19.1 and elsewhere. Sometimes
they appeared in more gloriose shapes, like winged Creatures, Esa. 6.2, 6.7.
Dan. 8.15, 17. and 9.21, 22. Sometimes they appeared, but spoke not, as Genesis
18.12. And sometimes they spoke, when no mention is made of their Apparition,
Act. 8.26.

As for the subordination and subservience to Divine Gubernation, Angels
employed at the giving of the Law.
in ministering to the Heirs of Salvation and Churches of Christ, we find very
great and illustrious notices thereof in sacred Philosophy. 1. Divine
Gubernation made use of Angels and their ministration to usher in both the
severe Law on Mount Sinai, as also the Mediator of the new Convenant, who
reigns on Mount Sion. (1) That God made use of the ministration of Angels at
the giving of the Law on Mount Sinai, is evident, from Act. 7.53. Gal. 3.19.
Act. 7.53. Deuteronomy. 33.2.
This also seems to be the import of Moses's words when he blessed the people,
Deuteronomy. 33.2. And he said, The Lord came from Sinai, and rose up from Seir unto
them: he shined forth from mount Paran, and he came with ten thousands of
Saints: from his right hand went a fiery Law for them. By the ten thousands of
Saints, we must understand the holy Angels, that attended Gods Divine
Gubernation in giving out the Law. Heb. of Sanctity: i. e. Spirits of
Sanctity, which Jonathan, in his Thargum, interpretes, holy Angels. Heb. 2.2.
Whence the Law is called, Heb. 2.2. the word spoken by Angels. So Zech. 14.5.
and all the Saints with thee: this may be understood, at least in part, At
Christ's birth and for the propagation of the Gospel.
of holy Angels. (2) Thus also the Lord of Glory and Mediator of the New
Covenant, when he came into the World, was ushered in by a Chorus of Angels,
Luke 2.13, 14. And suddenly there was with the Angel a multitude of the
heavenly Host, praising God and saying, Glory to God in the highest, and on
earth peace, good will toward men. These Angels still sing loud the praises of
the Lamb about the Throne of God, as Rev. 5.11, 12. (3) These blessed Spirits
were employed also in the solemn Declaration of Christ's Resurrection, Mat.
28.2, 5. Luke 24.4. Joh. 20.12. (4) They also serve the Church in the promoving
and propagating of the Gospel, Luke 2.9, 10. Act. 8.26.

2. Divine Gubernation makes use of the ministry of Angels for the
Conservation and Protection of the Heirs of Salvation. 2. For the conservation
and protection of Saints.
(1) They are sometimes employed by God for the healing of sicknesses and
diseases, as it appears by that famous instance at the Pool of Bethesda, Joh.
5.4. where an Angel went down, at a certain season, putting a medicinal virtue
into the waters, or drawing forth and applying what virtue was there. (2) They
are employed as Watchmen and Gardians to keep the Heirs of Salvation, and
succur them in their ways. So Psalm. 91.11, 12. For he shall give his Angels a
charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways: they shall bear thee up in their
hands, lest thou dash thy feet against a stone. Hence they are styled Watchers,
Dan. 4.13. Yea their commission and care extendes to little children, Mat.
18.10. This protection over the Church of God was symbolicly pictured forth by
the Cherubines, which environed the Tabernacle, Exodus 26.1. as the Life-gard of
Angels environs the Church. Hence, (3) They are made use of by Divine
Gubernation as an Host of Warriers, to defend the Church from its Enemies,
Psalm. 34.7. Psalm. 34.7.
The Angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear him, and delivers
them: i. e. from al their enemies. They are Gods powerful Hosts to smite his
enemies with sore diseases, Psalm. 78.49. Act. 12.23. So at Hezekiahs prayer, an
Angel came and killed 185 thousand of his enemies, Esa. 37.21, 22, 36. They
being most vigorous and active Spirits sight against the Enemies of Gods
Church, pursue and scatter them as chasse before the wind, Psalm. 33.1, 5, 6.
Dan. 10.20. whence they are called Gods Host, Genesis 32.1, 2. (4) They provide
food for the Heirs of Salvation, when there is need. Thus Eliah, 1 Kings 19.5,
6, 7. was by an Angel supplied with food, in his flight from Jezebel. (5) By
Angels the people of God have been delivered out of impendent or present
sufferings. So Lot from the flames of Sodom, Genesis 19.1, 2. Sadrach, Mesach, and
Abednego from the fiery Furnace, Dan. 3.28. Daniel from the Lions mouths, Dan.
6.22. and Peter out of Herod's Prison, Act. 17.8, 9. (6) Angels attend on the
Heirs of Salvation at the very moment of their Souls departure out of their
bodies, and thence conveigh them into Abraham's bosom, as Luke 16.22. And was
carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom.

3. Divine Gubernation makes use of the Ministry of Angels for the
Information, Counsel, Conduct, 3. For Information, Counsel, Conduct, and
Consolation.
and Consolation of the Heirs of Salvation. (1) God by Angels informs his
people of mercies intended for them. Thus Abraham, of the Birth of Isaac, Genesis
18.10. Manoah and his Wife of the birth of Samson, Judge. 13. Zecharie of the
birth of John Baptist, Luke 1.13. Mary of her Conception, Luke 1.30, 31. and
the Sheepherds of the Nativitie of our Lord, Luke 2.10. The Women of his
Resurrection, Mark 16.1, 5, 6. and the Apostles of his second Coming, Acts
1.10, 11. (2) Yea not only particular mercies, but Church-Restaurations and
Deliverances have been imparted to the Heirs of Salvation by Angels. Thus
Daniel was informed of the state of the Church from his time to Christ, Dan.
7.10, 16, etc. and 8. 13, 15, 17, etc. and 9.21, etc. and 10.5, 6, etc. And
Zecharie was certified of the Restoration of Jerusalem, Zech. 2.3, 4. And John
of the state of the Church from his time to the end of the World, Rev. 1.1. (3)
The People of God have been informed by Angels, touching Gods Judgments on the
wicked. Thus Abraham of the Destruction of Sodom, Genesis 18.17, 20. And John of
the Destruction of Antichrist. (4) the Heirs of Salvation have been conducted
in their ways by Angels. Thus Abraham's Servant was conducted in his journey by
an Angel, Genesis 24.7, 40. Philip to go and preach to the Eunuch, Acts 8.26, 29.
Paul to the Macedonians, Acts 16.9, 10. (5) The Heirs of Salvation have been
counseled and comforted in their sufferings by Angels. Thus Jacob was
comforted and encouraged in his going to, and returning from Mesopotamia, Genesis
28.12. and 32.1, 2, 11, 21. Joseph was counseled to fice with Christ from
Herod's persecution, Mat. 2.13. The Lord of Glory was comforted in his Agony
in the Garden by an Angel, Luke 22.43. And there appeared an Angel to him from
Heaven strengthening him. So Paul was comforted against the peril of shipwreck
by an Angel, Acts 27.23, 24. Yet we are to remember, that God does not use the
good Angels to excite, much less to infuse grace; because this is the proper
office of the Spirit of Grace.

4. Many Acts which implie Inspection, Angels Communion with Saints.
Affection, and Communion with the Heirs of Salvation are ascribed to the holy
Angels. (1) They are said to be present in and spectators of the Assemblies of
Saints, Heb. 12.22.
Heb. 12.22. to the innumerable company of Angels. Hence Paul requires of
women modest and submissive attire in Church Assemblies, 1 Cor. 11.10.
by reason of the Angels being present, 1 Cor. 11.10. (2) Thence also they are
said to be not only spectators of the affairs of Churches, but also in a
spiritual manner to be affected therewith, yea to join in the celebration of
the Lambs praises, Rev. 5.11, 12. Rev. 5.11, 12.
And I behold and heard the voice of many Angels round about the Throne, and
the Bestes, and the Elders -- saying with a loud voice, Worthy is the Lamb,
that was slain, to receive power, etc. The like, Revev. 7.11, 12. They seem to
have a great sympathy with the Heirs of Salvation; which they manifest by
their glorifying the Lamb, who was slain for them, as also by the Joy they
have in their Conversion, as Luke 15.7, 10. (3) They desire to look into, and
to be instructed in the manifold wisdom of God, reveled in and unto the
Churches, Ephesians. 3.10. 1 Pet. 1.12. (4) They are witnesses with the Lord of
those charges laid upon the Servants of God, in order to their service, 1 Timothy
5.21. 1 Timothy 5.21.


5. The Angels shall be the Ministers of God, at the final Judgment, The final
Service and Communion of Angels with Saints.
to reap the Earth, to sever the wicked from the righteous, and thence shall
live for ever with the Saints, praising and enjoying God. (1) They shall be
employed in reaping the earth, and severing the wicked from the just at the
last day, Mat. 13.39, 41. Mat. 13.39, 41.
And the Reapers are the Angels -- The Son of Man shall send forth his Angels,
and they shall gather althings that offend, etc. So Mat. 24.31. And he shall send
his Angels, with a great sound of a Trumpet, and they shall gather together his
Elect from the four winds, etc. (2) The Heirs of Salvation shall at last day be
made conformable to, and equal with the Holy Angels; and together with them
shall praise, serve, and enjoy God in all manner of intime communion, unto al
eternity, Luke 20.36. For they are equal to the Angels. Thus some interpret
Zech. 3.7. And I will give thee places to walk, Zech. 3.7.
[or walks] among those that stand by: i. e. the Holy Angels, that minister
before God. This may include Service both in the Church Militant on Earth, as
also the Church Triumphant in Heaven: for Angels stand by, and minister in
both. How potent, promt, and agile the holy Angels are to execute every Will of
God, is well expressed by Damascene, Orthod. Fid. L. 2. C. 3. The Angels, says
he, are (...), The Angels are potent and promt to fulfill the Divine Will, and
are by the agilitie of their nature, found every where present, as the Divine
beck commandes them. So much for the Gubernation of the Holy Angels.

. 4. Divine Gubernation extendes it self not only to the good Angles, but also
to the Evil. Satan, by Gods providential permission, Gods Gubernation as to
Evil Angels.
is the God of the wicked world, who rules in the Children of disobedience. 1.
Satan is the Prince of this World, Joh. 12.31. (1) He is not a Lawful Prince,
but Usurper. he usurpes Christ's Crown, and intrudes himself on his Throne. He
affectes a Deity, to be God over the noblest part in Man, his Mind, as 2 Cor.
4.4. (2) He is not an Absolute Prince, but limited: his Power is much narrower
than his Will and Malice: He can do nothing but by Divine Permission and
Gubernation. (3) He is not a Free Prince, but Vassal: confined by Chains of
Providential Gubernation, Jude 6. (4) The main of his Kingdom consistes in the
Free Election of wicked men. Evil men electively put the Crown on his Head, and
bow the knee before him: His Crown is supported by the voluntary subjection of
wicked men. Ephesians. 2.2. Ephesians. 2.2.
According to the Prince [ Arbitrio Principis: i. e. according to the Soverain
pleasure of the Prince] of the power of the Air, [(...), here notes his
Dominion and Soveraintie in the Air, i. e. in this inferior part of the
Universe.] The Spirit that now works [(...) notes his working with
efficacitie] in the Children of Disobedience: i. e. Such as are addicted and
have given up themselves to the disobedience of God, but obedience unto Satan:
such as are his voluntary slaves. (5) Satan is a Magnificent Prince, having
Legions and vast Armies under his command, Ephesians. 6.12. Rev. 12.6, 7. (6) He is a
Prince of great Wisdom, Experience, and Subtlety, to deceive all that listen
to him. His Prudence as a Spirit is vast, and his Experience of more than 6000
years greatly adds thereto. 2 Cor. 2.11.
So, 2 Cor. 2.11. Lest Satan should get an advantage of us. (...), lest we
should be overreached or circumvented by Satan. It answers to (...), and
signifies primarily to have more than we ought; thence, to cheat, defraude,
etc. The Metaphor seems taken from avaricious Merchants, who take al occasions
to circumvent. Thence he adds: For we are not ignorant of his devices. (...),
answering to (...), notes here Stratagemes, Machinations, Plots, Fallacies,
etc. which he terms, Ephesians. 6.11.
Ephesians. 6.11. (...), the wiles of Satan. (...), says Chrysostom. is,
artificially to circumvent, to cheat by rules of Art, by a compendiose method
to reduce persons or things under our power. So that Satan it seems, has got
the art and method of deluding and cheating souls. Whence he is styled, Joh.
8.44. The Grand Old Liar, 2 Timothy 2.26.
or Cheater. We read also, 2 Timothy 2.26. of the snare of the Devil, whereby he
takes men captive at his will. (...) is a military word and signifies to take
alive, from (...). So 2 Chronicles. 25.12. Satan has such a snare, as he can thereby
take sinners captive alive, and at his pleasure. (7) As he is a Prince of Power
and Prudence, so also of great malice and rage against the good of Souls. 1
Pet. 5.8.
Thus 1 Pet. 5.8. he is termed a Roaring Lion, [which notes his rage] seeking
whom he may devour. (...), drink up at a draught. Yea, so great is his Rage
against the good of Souls, that he counts it a torment to be curbed or hindered
in the execution of his malitiose designs, as Matt. 8.29. Mat. 8.29.
(...), to torment us. O! what a torment is it to him to see a Soul delivered
out of his snare? Hence,

2. Satan, being the Prince and God of this World, has, Satan's Power to temte.
by providential permission a great power to temte and draw men unto sin. (1)
Satan as to us is not a mere Creator of his own Tentations, but he takes the
matter from those whom he temtes, or from some circumstances that environ them.
Satan is often the Father, but Sin the Mother of Tentation. (2) Satan cannot
reach the human Soul or any Act thereof immediately. The heart of Man is a
privy Chamber, into which none can enter but the King of Kings: The thoughts
and inclinations of the Soul have a covering over them, which none can take
off, but he that made the Soul. Satan may cast in Fire bals, or send in
Messengers, and Letters, by the mediation of the Fantasy, but he cannot enter
into the heart directly, nor compel it to sin. (3) Satan, by Gods permission,
can work curiously and efficaciously on the Organs of the Body, Spirits,
Blood, and other Humors, as Melancholy, etc. which are united to the Soul, and
have no small indirect influence thereon. (4) Though Satan cannot work
immediately on the heart, yet he can work immediately on the corporeous
sensitive Soul, particularly on the fantasy, by making impressions thereon,
and forming such Ideas there, as may affect the mind. Satan may temte and
persuade to Sin not only Morally, by false suggestions and Images offered; but
also in some sense Physically, by impressing and fixing those Images on the
fantasy, and coloring them over with the appearance of good. (5) Satan has a
very great and intime access unto the spirits of men, not only as he is a
Spirit, but also as he is an unclean Spirit, and his Kingdom a Kingdom of
darkness. Hence he is said, Luke 22.3.
Luk 22.3. to enter into Judas. (...), notes an intime access into Judas, as
into his proper house. He had been casting in darts into Judas's heart before,
as John 13.2. The Devil having now put into the heart of Judas -- to betray
him. (...), the Devil having now injected, or cast in this Tentation into his
heart to betray his Lord. Now Judas having yielded to the suggestion, or
injection of Satan, it is said Luke 22.3. Satan entered into him, i. e. as into
a conquered forteresse or Castle; he now takes possession of him, as one
devoted to his service. The Spirits of wicked men being very much like unto
Satan, by reason of Sin and impuritie, as also they being his Children devoted
to his obedience, thence he comes to have a far greater access to and power
over them, than he had at first by Creation. Satan being the Prince of
darkness stirs up that darkness that is in the heart of man to oppose
Divine Light, as he stirs up Lust to oppose the Will of God. It is difficult but
not necessary to know all the Mysteries of Satan's Power, whereby he ensnares
poor Souls, as Birds, 2 Timothy 2.26. (6) Satan has a very great Power over the
Air, and al sensible parts of the Universe. He is said, Ephesians. 2.2. and 6.12.
Ephesians. 2.2. to be the Prince of the Air, which is the Seat of his Empire.
Whence Ephesians. 6.12. those impure Spirits are termed, spiritual wickednesses in
heavenly places: i. e. in the inferior Heaven, or Regions of the Air. According
to the sentiments of the Hebrews, all that vast space between Earth and the
Astriferous Heaven, which we call the Air, is full of these impure Spirits.
Thence Satan can, by reason of his great sagacitie and skill in the mysteries of
Nature, together with his Power as a Spirit do wonders, though not Miracles, in
and by the Air: He can so apply Actives and Passives together, as that thence
shall follow various and strange transmutations in nature; whereby he kept the
Old Pagan World, as now the Indians, in great bondage. (7) Lastly he can temte
extrinsecally, by visible Species and Representations, or without, as Mat.
4.1-8.

Albeit Satan be the Prince and God of this World, Satan's restraint as to the
Elect.
yet as to the Heirs of Salvation, he is cast out, and remains under chains of
irresistible Providence and Restraint, John 12.31. 2 Pet. 2.4.
as John 12.31. 2 Pet. 2.4. Satan and al his Host are in prison, under the
bolts and chains of invincible obduration and eternal despair. It Is true, he
often accuses the Heirs of Salvation, and winnows them by his Tentations; but
never prevails finally and totally, to bring them under his Empire and
Jurisdiction. Luke 22.31, 32.
Thus we are assured, Luke 22.31, 32. Simon, behold Satan has desired to have
you, that he may sist you as wheat^: But I have prayed for thee, that thy faith
fail not. (...) signifies not merely, has desired, but as an Accuser, has
demanded. For (...) among the Grecians, notes to demand a Malefactor, for
Inquisition or torment. Thus Satan demanded Job 1.11. So Revel. 12.10. he is
said, to accuse them before God day and night. He accuses them as Hypocrites,
and demandes power to temte and torment them. So it follows, Luke 22.31. that
he may sift you as wheat. (...) is not a Verb of frequent use, yet to be found
in Classic Authors. (...) is a cribe or sieve; so Hesych. (...). whence (...)
is (...), the chafe of the wheat. Thence (...) is expounded by Hesych. (...),
to sift or winnow with a sieve, as you winnow the chafe from the corn.
Satan's demand was, that he might winnow Peter and the rest of the Disciples as
chafe, or Hypocrites: But Christ's prayer prevails, as v. 32. I have prayed
forthee, as for all other believers. Hence al Satan's maliciose plots and
undertakements against the Heirs of Salvation are so ordered by Divine
Gubernation, that they al tend to his torment, but to their Salvation. But so
much for Divine Efficience and Gubernation.

CHAP. XI. Of Creatural Dependence, both Natural and Supernatural.
Creatural Dependence in the general. Every Being Dependent or Independent. One
prime Independent Being. Every Dependent Being by participation. The Origin of
Dependence; (1) Passive Power: (2) The Dominion of God. Every Creature
Dependent. The Dependence of a Creature not distinct from its Essence.
Creatural Dependence in Subordination, Posterioritie, and Inferiorities
Creatural Dependence (1) as to Futurition. (2) As to Essence and Conservation.
(3) As to Operation. The human wills Dependence on God. Dependence Natural, or
Moral and Supernatural: Supernatural Dependence for Habitual and Actual Grace.

. 1. Creatural Dependence.
AS appendent to Divine Efficience we may add Creatural Dependence, which also
appertains to Metaphysic and prime Philosophy. Paul being to discourse among
the Philosophy Wits at Athens, and to demonstrate the Unity of God, and
thence the simplicity of his worship, he bottomes his Argument on the
Creatures Dependence on God, Act. 17.28. Act. 17.28.
For in him we live, and move, and have our being. Dependence on God for Being,
Life, and Motion is essential to every Creature as such: For all Creatures
receiving whatever they have, (...), by participation from God, it thence
necessarily follows, that they depend on him for all. Plato also gives us
frequent and good notices of this creatural Dependence. So Leg. 4. page 715.
(...), etc. God, having in himself the Principe, Middle, and End of althings,
goes straight on, expanding his force and power throughout the whole Universe,
and al its parts. Wherein we have, (1) The Dependence of althings on God, as
their first Principe, Middle, and End. God is the first Principe, as he gives
Being to althings; the Middle, as he conserves the Being conferred and moves
it; the End, as he gives consummation and perfection to althings. Thence that
Platonic Effate, That althings move from infinite, upon or by infinite, and to
infinite: i. e. from God, as the Principe of their Beings; upon, or by God, as
the Principe or Cause of their conservation and motion; to God, as their last
end. (2) Gods expansion and diffusion of his force and power throughout the
Universe and al its parts, as it were an universal Soul or mundane Spirit,
(which Plato often inculcates) whereby the dependence of althings on God is
emphaticly illustrated. Whence he adds, page 716. That he who is puffed up by
spiritual pride, or swollen with self-confidence, as though he were
independent, and needed not Divine conduct, (...), is deserted by God and left
destitute as to al Divine Efficace and Influence; and being deserted, disturbes
al. A lively image of a self dependent Creature. We find the whole of this
creatural Dependence well expressed, according to Plato's mind, by Proclus thus:
(...), Althings depend on the ONE, by MIND, and SOUL: i. e. to speak plainly,
althings depend on God, that supreme Unity, by Christ, the Eternal (...), or
Mind, and by the Spirit, that universal Soul, or mundane Spirit, as before, c.
8.. 2. But to give a more full and convictive demonstration and explication of
the Necessity and Nature of creatural Dependence, we shall resolve the whole
into the following Propositions.

1. Every Being dependent or independent.
Prop. Every Being is dependent or independent. That this distribution of Ens
into independent and dependent is adequate and commensurate, is generally
confessed by such as discourse of Metaphysics. And for the demonstration and
explication hereof we are to consider, That a dependent Being, and that on
which it dependes do really differ in number. And the reasons are
demonstrative: (1) Because nothing as such can be said to depend to itself. (2)
The dependent is in order of Nature, at least, posterior and inferior to that
on which it dependes. (3) Dependence importes subordination to that on which
the dependence is. Hence Divines say, that the Son of God, albeit he be, as to
Origin, from the Father; yet in as much as he partakes of the same Essence
with the Father, he cannot be said to be dependent on him: For he being in the
form [or Essence] of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God, Phil.
2.6. (...), Phil. 2.6.
here is generally rendered by all Rapine or Robbery; and we may take it
properly; and so make (...) the same with (...), he did not unjustly assume or
arrogate to himself this title and character of being equal with God. For that
is accounted Rapine or Robbery in a proper sense, when any injuriosely assumes
or takes to him, that which belonges to another: Thus the fallen Angels and
Adam committed rapine or robbery against God, by endeavoring or affecting an
equality with God. Thus also should a Creature affect or arrogate an
independence, either in Essence or Operation, it may justly fall under the
imputation of Robbery against God; because it thereby equaliseth itself to
God. But our Lord Christ accounted it not robbery to be equal with God, i. e.
independent as God is. For one person in the Trinity is not essentially
divided from the other; but the Son is so generated by the Father, as that he
is not (...), another essence or thing, albeit he be (...), another person. The
Son has the same numeric independent Essence with the Father, and the Spirit.
So that although one person be really distinct from the other, yet this
distinction being involved in one most simple Divine Essence, it implies a
contradiction to say one person dependes on the other, which was the great
error of Origene, imbibed from Platonic Philosophy, as before Chapter 6.. 4. and
P. 3. B. 2. C. 1.. 8, 9.

. 2. One prime independent Being.
An independent Being is that which needs not any other Being essentially
precedent to itself, as the cause of its Being and Operation. This Proposition
may be demonstrated and explicated by its parts thus. (1) There is one prime
independent Being. This is evident from the series of causes, in which we find,
that althings obey the superior Power, from which they derived their origin:
whence it necessarily follows, that to prevent a progress into infinite, we
stop in one prime, supreme, infinite Power, which received no this Being from
any other, but is truly (...), Self-being and Self-sufficient, or Independent.
Again, that there can be but one prime independent Being is manifest; because
wherever there is Participation, Limitation, Potentialitie, and Contingence,
there must needs be Dependence: But now al Beings, except the first Cause,
admit Participation, Limitation, Potentialitie, and Contingence as to their
Essence: and therefore none but the first Being can be independent. Hence it
follows, (2) That the first independent Being admits not any precedent Being,
as the cause of its Being. For whatever presupposes the efficience of some
precedent cause, supposes also Participation, Posterioritie, and Inferioritie:
which the prime independent Being excludes. Whence also it follows, (3) That
the prime independent Being is (...), Self-being, or from himself. When we say
the prime independent Being is from himself, it must not be understood
positively, as if he did effectively produce himself; for that is (...) and
impossible; but negatively, that he receives not his Being from any other.
Hence we conclude, (4) That Independence is as essential to the first Being and
Cause, as Dependence is to second Beings and Causes. As it is essential to the
Creature to be defective, indigent, limited, receptive and dependent; so it is
as essential to the Creator to be infinite, alsufficient, and without al
deficience, indigence and dependence either actual, or possible. Hence,

. 3. Dependent Being by participation, etc.
Whatever is dependent is Ens or Being by participation, finite, potential,
contingent, and defectible. (1) Every dependent is Ens by participation. For
whatever is not Being by Essence and independently, must necessarily be such by
participation: where there is not self-Being, there must be a reception of
Being from some other, which connotes participation. (2) Whatever is dependent
is also finite and limited, both in Being, Virtue, and Operation. [1] Whatever
is dependent is finite in Being; because its Being is by participation, and
according to communication of the superior Cause. (2) Every dependent is also
finite in virtue and efficace: For whatever is limited in its essence must
necessarily also be limited in its virtue and efficace. Hence, [3] every
dependent is also finite in its Operation: For the sphere of Activitie cannot
be larger than the sphere of Essence: if the principe be limited, the operation
cannot but be limited. (3) Whatever is dependent is also potential. To
explicate and demonstrate this Attribute of a dependent Being we must consider,
[1] that nothing is pure Act, but the first most simple independent Being: no
Creature is pure Actualitie: where there is dependence, there is somewhat of
Potentialitie or passive Power, either physic or metaphysic. Al matter has a
physic passive power, or natural possibility of being corrupted: Spirits have
not a physic passive power, or natural principe of corruption, yet they have a
met a physic passive power of being annihilated, or cast back into their
primitive nothing. [2] Besides the natural power, which a dependent Being has,
there is an obediential power appendent to its nature. For the explication of
which we are to know, that it is essential to a create Being to be subject and
subordinate to the first, increate and independent Being so far, as to obey it
in receiving al impressions, and acting under it whatsoever implies not a
contradiction. Hence the Schools distribute the power of the second cause, or
dependent Beings into natural and obediential: their natural power of receiving
influences from the superior cause, or acting is that which is appendent to
their natures, and whereby they naturally receive or act, and produce effects
proportionate to their natures. But the obediential power of dependent Being
is, that whereby they are, according to the Law of their natures, apt to obey
the first independent Cause, namely God in the receiving or acting any possible
effect, that implies not a contradiction; albeit it may excede the natural
capacity, force, or efficace of their Beings. So that this obediential power
regardes supernatural effects, which the second cause cannot reach by its own
Virtue and Activitie; but only as elevated by the efficacious Concurse of God.
Thus the Humanity of Christ had an obediential power to the Hypostatic Union,
unto which it was elevated by the supernatural efficacitie of the Spirit of
God. This obediential power which is essential to every dependent Being, is
founded in the participation and limitation of a Creature, and its
subordination to the absolute Dominion of God, of which more anon. Hence, (4)
every dependent Being is contingent. For whatever has any passive or
obediential power, is obnoxious to the soverain pleasure and concurse of its
first cause, to which it owes absolute obedience, even to annihilation. Hence,
(5) every dependent Being is defectible. For as it is essential to the first
independent Being to be indefectible; so also to al second dependent Beings to
be defectible. The supreme God being (...), self-being, and self-sufficient, a
pure simple Act, without the least matter or passive power, it is impossible
that he should ever fail in any thing: but every Creature being Ens, or Being
by participation, and so composed of Something and Nothing, or of Act and
Pfassive Power, it cannot be but that it should be Defectible, or apt to fail,
which is the root of its Dependence, as it will appear by the next Proposition.

. 4. The Origin of Dependence. 1. Passive Power.
The Root and origin of al Creatural Dependence is the creatures passive
power, and Gods Absolute Dominion ever it. 1. One Root and Origin of al
creatural Dependence is that passive power, which every Creature is invested
with. For the explication whereof we are to consider, that all Creatures, being
educed by God out of Nothing, still retain a tincture or mixture of their
Primitive Nothing: so that no Creature can be said to be pure Being: for this
is an attribute peculiar to the first Independent Being, whose name is, Exodus
3.14. (...), who is, or according to Plato's Phraseologie, (...), Being. Every
Creature has something of Nothing contempered with its Being; yea more of
Nothing than of Being, which makes it obnoxious to Limitation, Contingence,
Mutabilitie, Defectibilitie, and Dependence. Thus Damascene, Orthod. Fid. L. 2.
C. 3. (...), The increate being solely is interminate or unlimited in nature:
for every Creature is terminated or limited by God who created it. Now al
limits as to Nature and Essence speak a mixture of Nihilitie, Passive Power,
and Dependence resulting therefrom; whence Damascene adds: (...), The Deity
only is impassible: namely because exemt from Nihilitie, Passive Power, and
Dependence. This Nihilitie or Nothingnesse of the Creature is the same with its
Passive Power either Physic or Metaphysic; Natural or Obediential, whereby it
is limited, and confined to such or such a degree of Entitie, Existence, and
Operation. For wherever there is any matter or passive power of any kind,
there is ever coarctation, and confinement: Nothing is or can be Infinite but
the first pure simple Act, who is void of al power and composition; and
therefore of al finitude and limitation. But every Creature being compound of
Something and Nothing, i.e. of Act and Power, it is thereby rendered finite and
limited to such a degree of Essence and Activitie: and according to the Degree
of its Entitie and Actualitie such is the Degree of its Amplitude and
Perfection. Angelic and human Spirits have of al Creatures least of Nihilities
or Nothing, and most of Entitie and Actualitie: and therefore they have least
of passive power and confinement: But yet because they retain something of
their Primitive Nothing, and Passive Obediential power, therefore they have
something also of limitation and confinement. So for all other Creatures, which
are by so much the less or more limited and confined in Essence and Operation,
by how much the more or less they partake of matter or passive power. So that
al Dependence arises from the Nihilitie, Passive Power, and limitation of the
Creature. Hence,

2. Another main root of Dependence is the Dominion of God the first cause of
althings. For all Creatures having been educed, 2. The Dominion of God.
by the Omnipotent Power of God, out of Nothing, and invested only with a
finite limited Being, composed of Something and Nothing, or Act and Passive
Power, hence it necessarily follows, that al are subject to the Absolute
Dominion of their Creator, and impedible, according to his pleasure. Where ever
there is passive Power, there is impedibilitie: There is nothing (...),
unimpedible but God, who is Pure Act, and Lord of all. God has an Absolute
Dominion over his Creature, for all uses that implie not a contradiction: This
plenary and absolute Dominion of God appertains to his Infinite Omnipotence and
Supremacy, as the first Cause of althings: For no Dominion is complete and
perfect, unless it include a Power for all possible use. May we estime that a
perfect Dominion, which has not an absolute dispose of al under its Dominion?
And to this absolute Dominion of God must there not correspond an absolute
subjection in the Creature? Are not these two correlates? And does not this
absolute subjection of the Creature to God, speak its absolute dependence on
God? Is it possible that any Creature made by God should be exemted from his
Absolute Dominion? And does not Absolute Dependence on God necessarily follow
hence? Neither does this absolute Dependence on God regard only the Essence and
Conservation of the Creature, but also al its operations: for otherwise the
Creature were (...), unimpedible, which is against the Law of its Creation and
Dependence, as. 11, 12. Thus every Create Being is under the Absolute Dominion
of God, both as to its Essence, Existence, Activitie and Operation: God can
deprive it of each of these as he pleases, yea reduce it to its first Nothing.
Hence Dependence on God as to each of these is essential to every Creature, as
in what follows.

. 5. Every Creature as such is Dependent on its Creator or first Cause. Every
Creature Dependent.
For the Demonstration of this we shall lay down this Hypothesis, which I
conceive al will grant, That it is impossible the same thing should be, and not
be. This being premissed we proceed to demonstrate our Proposition thus. (1)
Dependence both in Essence and Operation is so essential to a Creature, as that
the negation of it supposes the Creature not to be a Creature. The force and
evidence of this Argument will more fully appear in the explication of the next
Proposition, wherein we are to demonstrate the intime connection between
Dependence and the Essence of a Creature. At present it may suffice, that we
assert, that Dependence is so intrinsecally, essentially, and formally included
in the very notion and essence of a Creature, that the negation of it implies a
contradiction in the Adject, or an Opposite in an Apposite. For what does the
notion of a Creature importe, but its eduction out of nothing, by the Infinite
Power of its Creator? And he that educed althings out of nothing, is it not in
his power also to reduce althings back to their primitive nothing? And does not
this speak an obediential power in althings as to their Creators Soverain
pleasure? And where there is an obediential power, is there not also
subordination and subjection? And does not all this formally speak Dependence?
Thus Aquinas, contra Gent. L. 2. C. 25. demonstrates, That God cannot make a
thing, which shall want any essential principe: for upon the remotion of any
essential principe follows the remotion of the thing it self: So that if God
should make a thing without any one essential principe, he should make a thing
to be, and not to be. And in what follows he proves, that dependence is an
essential principe, or mode of a Creature, as Suarez, and that not only as to
Essence and its Conservation, but also as to operation, of which,. 10. (2) The
Creatures absolute subjection and subordination to God demonstrates its
dependence on God. That God has an absolute Dominion over the Creature has been
demonstrated in the precedent Proposition: and if the Dominion of God be
Absolute, then the Creatures subjection to and dependence on God must also be
absolute and necessary. It belongs to the Being of a Creature as such to be
subject to and dependent on God for the receiving and acting whatever implies
not a contradiction. As it is impossible, that God should make a Creature,
whereof he has not a full and absolute Dominion; so it is as impossible, that a
Creature should be made, which may not depend on him, as Suarez, Metaphys.
Disput. 31. Sect. 14. p. 215. (3) The Indigences and Exigences of the Creature
demonstrate its dependence on God. Is not every Creature Multiforme, Mutable
and Defectible? And must not every Multiforme, Mutable and Defectible Being be
reduced to some Uniform, Immutable, and Indefectible Being, as the Original
principe of its dependence? is there not a natural levitie and vanity in every
Creature, which renders it fluxible, variable and inconstant? was it not a
great and most true saying of Heraclitus, That althings are in flux or motion?
Do not althings then need some first Being and Cause to fix their Beings and
Motions? Again, does not every potential Being need some pure Act, to actuate
the same? And is not every Creature a potential Being, which needs God, the
most simple pure Act, to actuate the same? Does not every Recipient as
Recipient need the active influxe of that principe from wom it receives al? And
is not every Creature a mere passive recipient as to God, who is the first
influential Cause of its existence, motion, and al? Yea, is not every Creature
a mere passive Instrument in regard of the Divine Influxe? Can it subsist or
act without Divine concurse? Cut off the dependence of a Creature from its
Creator, and what an endless Agitation, yea Annihilation would it fall into?
See Aquinas, contra Gent. L. 3. C. 91. and Bradwardine, L. 2. C. 20. p. 541.
(4) The Dependence of the Creature on God may be demonstrated from its
Connaturalitie. What more connatural to the Creature than dependence on its
Creator? Does not the Stream naturally depend on its Fountain for derivations?
and is it not a violence to it, to be cut off from this dependence? Where does
the infirm member go for animal Spirits in order to sense and motion but to
the Head? And is it not most natural to the Ray to hang on the Sun, which gave
it existence? O then, how natural is it to the Creature to depend on its
Creator, the prime Cause of its existence and operation! What a violence is it
to the Creature to be taken off from this dependence? Hence,

. 6. Creatural Dependence is not really distinct from the Essence of the
Creature. Dependence the same with the Essence.
That the Creatures Dependence is not really distinct from its Essence is
evident; because every Creature being Ens by participation, it must necessarily
follow, that dependence on the first cause, from whom it participates of Being,
is most essential to it. As it is essential to the first cause to be Being by
Essence, and so Independent; so it is also essential to the second cause to be
Being by Participation, and so Dependent: So that the very notion and Idea of a
Creature does inseparably, essentially, and formally include Dependence on God,
as that which is not really distinct therefrom. This is incomparably well
demonstrated by Suarez, Metaphys. Tom. 2. Disput. 31. Sect. 14. p. 214. As to
the root of this Dependence, it must be said, that it is really nothing else
but the very essence of a create Being as such; because if we, by the force of
our Intellect, remove whatever is superadded to such an essence, we shall find
that of it self it has Limitation and Imperfection; so that of it self it is
not sufficient to act or cause any thing: and therefore, according to the
absolute power of God there cannot be such a create Being, which should not
have such a subordination to the increate Being: Therefore it is a sign that
is founded in the very essential Reason of a create Being. Wherefore albeit we
may, by the precision of Reason, and some inadequate conception of mind
apprehend Dependence in Essence in regard of some moment of reason before
Dependence in causing, -- yet this later really superaddes nothing to the
Essence of a Create Being. Wherein note well, that he makes not only dependence
as to Essence and its Conservation, but also as to Causation and Operation the
same with the Essence of the Creature. Which Hypothesis he demonstrates and
establishes against Durandus and his Sectators, who assert, the Creatures
dependence on God, as to Essence and Conservation, but yet deny it as to
causation and operation, specially as to the substrate matter of sin. It may not
be denied, but that Suarez, in his first Tome of Metaphys. Disput. 20. Sect. 5.
p. 530. says, That this Dependence of the Creature on the Creator is not
altogether the same with the Creature, but a mode distinct therefrom. Yet these
thing he grants. (1) That this Dependence of the Creature on God is something
really and intrinsecally existing in the Creature. For all confess, that
passive Creation is in the Creature: But now Dependence is nothing else but
passive Emanation or Creation, if we speak of the first Creation, from God. (2)
That this Dependence is a substantial or essential mode affecting the substance
of the Creature, albeit it constitute not the same. (3) He limits this modal
distinction to the dependence of the Creature in its first Emanation or
Creation, but grants, that its dependence in operation is really the same with
the Essence of the Creature. (4) Suppose we allow a modal distinction between
the Creatures dependence and essence, yet who knows not, but that the most
awakened Philosophers now generally grant, that Modes, specially such as are
substantial and essential, do not really differ from the things modified. Thus
Calovius, Metaphys. page 434. Dependence, says he, is a mode of a create
Being, agreeing to it by reason of its imperfection, which is not the very
Essence of the Creature, nor yet a new Entitie distinct from the Essence; but
something affecting the create Essence. And he cites Suarez for this his
Hypothesis. Hence,

. 7. Creatural Dependence, according to its formal Idea and notion, Dependence
importes Subordination.
importes a presupposition of influence, or subordination, posterioritie, and
inferioritie. (1) Creatural dependence importes a presupposition of influence,
or subordination to the first Cause. This is primarily and formally included in
the very notion of Dependence, neither does it add any real entitie or mode
distinct from the Creature; but explicates only the intrinsec condition and
habitude of the Creature relating to the omnipotent causalitie and influence of
God. This subordination to God as the first cause arises from the imperfection
of the Creature, and the absolute Dominion of God. And as to its latitude and
extent, it regardes both natural and supernatural Influences and Beings. By
supernatural Beings and Influences I mean such as being above the sphere of
Nature, are not connatural to or producible by its force and power. These
supernatural Beings have causalities proportionable to their Entities, in which
they are subordinate to God and dependent on him, as natural Beings in their
kind. And in this respect the Creatures subordination to, and dependence on God
in the whole of its causalitie, is commun both to natural and supernatural
Beings. Yea, supernatural Beings, by virtue of their subordination to God, may
be elevated and raised to act and cause somewhat beyond that causalitie which
is connatural to them. For even in this regard they are not less subordinate
and subject to God, than natural Beings are in their kind, as Suarez well
urges, Metaph. Tom. 2. Disput. 31. Sect. 14. page 215. Such is the
subordination both as to Naturals and Supernaturals, which creatural Dependence
on God as the first cause formally includes. Hence, (2) follows Posterioritie.
2. Posterioritie.
Every dependent as such is posterior to that on which it dependes: so the
Creature as to God. Aquinas tells us, That al second causes act by virtue
received from the first cause, as instruments act by the direction of Art;
wherefore it is necessary that al other Agents, whereby God fulfils the order
of his Gubernation, act by virtue from God; and thence that they are posterior
to him And this I think, if well understood, might satisfy al those, who with
so much vehemence oppose al kind of predetermination by Divine concurse, as to
the human Will: For if we grant, That God is the first cause of the Wills motion,
I cannot see how we can deny him the predetermination of the Will. Though to
avoid needless (...), I generally abstain from the term predetermination; yet
without that prejudice which some, I conceive, undeservedly lode it with. For
if the Concurse of God be previous to the causalitie of the Will, so as to
determine the same to act, as we have demonstrated Chapter 7.. 4. I as yet cannot,
according to my shallow capacity, see any cogent reason, why the said previous
concurse may not be termed predeterminant. But to return to our Argument,
Creatural Dependence implies a posterioritie, [1] as to Nature and Causalitie.
[2] As to Origination and Order. [3] As to Dignity. 3. Inferioritie.
Whence (3) Creatural Dependence importes also Inferioritie: For every
dependent as such as inferior to that it dependes on. Thus Alvarez, de Auxil.
Great. Disput. 90. page 714. Dependence properly in causes efficient importes a
certain subordination and inferioritie of him who dependes to him on whom he
dependes: therefore the Divine operation of the first cause does not depend on
the cooperation of the second cause; but on the contrary, the cooperation of
the second cause dependes on the operation of the first cause which is
previous, as Chapter 7.. 4.

. 8. Althings create depend on God as to their Futurition. Creatural Dependence
as to Futurition.
For the explication and demonstration of this Proposition we may consider, (1)
That althings future must have some cause of their Futurition. Nothing future
is of its own nature, or by its own force future, but indifferent to Futurition
or Non-futurition. If things were in their own nature and of themselves future,
then they would be always future and never present: for that which agrees to
any thing of its own nature, agrees to it inseparably. Hence it follows, that
Futurition cannot agree to things of their own nature, but by some cause, which
brings them from a state of indifference and possibility, to a state of
Futurition. And assuredly that which has not a certain determinate cause of its
Futurition, cannot be certainly and determinately future, but only possible.
(2) That which gives futurition unto althings is the Divine Will, and Decree.
It Is impossible, that any thing should pass from a state of pure possibility
to a state of futurition, but by the will of God. Things are not foreseen and
decreed by God, because future, as some would needs persuade us, but they are
therefore future, because decreed by God. Thus Wiclef held, That the
Determination of God gave the highest firmitie in the futurition of his work,
as Walden, Tom. 1. L. 1. C. 23. page 37. and Bradwardine asserted, That every
Proposition of what is future is subjected to the Divine Will, and originated
thereby: So that indeed no Create Being, either simple or complexe, can be
future antecedently to the Divine Will. Whence it necessarily follows, (3) That
althings future depend on God for their futurition. Every thing may as well give
Being to it self, as Futurition. Of this see more, Chapter 5.. 2. Of Gods Science.

. 9. Al Creatures depend on God as to their first Production and Conservation.
(1) Al Creatures depend on God as to their first Production and Existence.
Plato, in his Timaeus, p. 28. says, Creatural Dependence as to Essence and
Conservation.
(...), That every thing produced, is necessarily produced by some Cause. For
nothing can be the cause of it self: As Novitie of Essence is essential to the
Creature, so also Dependence on God for that Essence. Yea, every mutation and
state of the Creature, with all its various modifications are from God. Yea,
Suarez, Metaphys. Tom. 2. Disp. 31. sect. 14. p. 216. tells us, That a create
Being as such, considered precisely and abstractly, requires no other cause but
the increate Being, in whom it has a sufficient cause both Efficient,
Exemplar, and Final. For albeit some create Beings require other efficient
causes besides God, at least for their more connatural production, yet the
reason of a create Being as such requires them not. And in what precedes he
says, that the dependence of an effect on any create second cause is not so
essential, as its dependence on the increate first cause. (2) Al Creatures
depend on God for their Conservation. This has been sufficiently demonstrated
in what precedes, C. 8. and it ma be further argued from the impossibility of
a Creatures being conserved, but in a way of dependence on Gods conservative
influence: For if a Creature should be conserved by it self, or any other
cause, without dependence on the first cause, God should not have an absolute
Dominion over it, neither were it in his power to annihilate the same.

. 10. Every Creature dependes on God as to Operation. This Hypothesis, though
denied by Durandus, Creatural Dependence as to Operation.
and some very few more, yet it is generally owned by Scholastic Theologues,
and that on invict evident grounds. For (1) Operation is the Index of the
Essence: what is dependent in Essence cannot be independent in Operation. (2)
Let us consider the series of causes, and we shall find, that every Inferior is
obedient and subordinate to its Superior in acting. (3) What is an Action but
that special Dependence, which the effect has on its efficient cause? And is
not God the prime efficient of althings? (4) No Virtue or Efficace of any
second Cause can actuate itself, but necessarily requires for its actuation the
Divine Concurse, which gives al Virtue, as also the conservation and actuation
of the said Virtue. The Virtue of the Inferior Agent always dependes on the
Virtue of the Superior, in as much as the Superior gives Virtue to the
Inferior, as also the conservation and actuation of the same Virtue. (5)
Whatever is limited in its Essence, is also limited in its Activitie and
Operation: and where there is limitation, there is subordination and
dependence, as well in operation as in essence. (6) If every second cause depend
not on its first for all its operations, then it is impossible, that the first
cause should hinder such operations, for the exerting whereof the second cause
dependes not on him. Who can hinder that Action, which he cannot by any
influence reach? And if this be granted, what will become of the Providence of
God? Must we not, with Epicurus, allow God to be only a Spectator, no way a
Rector or Gubernator of the most considerable part of Human Affairs and Acts?
That no Creature is (...), unimpedible in operation, we have demonstrated in
what precedes,. 4. of this Chapter. (7) It implies a contradiction that the
second cause should act, and yet not be actuated and influenced by the first
cause.

And here, whiles under the review of these Sentiments, I may not let pass,
without some Animadversion, the Reflection of a Learned Author (in a new Piece
about Gods Prescience) on this Argument, namely, That it can never be proved,
that it implies a contradiction, for God to make a Creature, which should be
capable of acting without an immediate concurse; if I apprehend his meaning, as
laid down, p. 35, 36, 37. But because that Learned Author gives us only his
Supposition, without any Demonstration thereof, or solution of those Arguments
which the Schools both of Thomistes, and Scotistes, as also the Jesuits,
Suarez and others have urged against the Hypothesis of Durandus, which he seems
to espouse, I do not conceive my self obliged to superadde any Arguments for
the re-enforcement of this Hypothesis, which as been already copiosely
demonstrated,. 5, 6, 7. also Chap. 7.. 2, 4. and Chap. 9. I shall only add thus
much, that I cannot, according to the utmost extension of my narrow
apprehension, conceive any medium between the extremes of this disjunctive
Proposition: Either the Human Will must depend on the Divine Independent Will of
God for all its natural motions and operations; or God must depend on the Human
Will in it self Independent, for all his Prescience, motives of Election, and
all discrimination as to Grace, and gratiose operations. I am not ignorant of
the general reply, That this Hypothesis I oppose only cuts off Gods concurse
as to sinful Acts. But I would willingly be satisfied in these Queries: (1)
Whether there be any Action of Man on Earth so good, which has not some
mixture of Sin in it? And if God concur to the substrate matter of it as good,
must be not also necessarily concur to the substrate matter of it as sinful? Is
not the substrate matter of the Act both as good and sinful the same? (2) Again,
as there is no Action in this imperfect state so good, but it has some sin
mixed with it; so is there any Action so sinful, which has not some natural
good as the substrate matter thereof, as we have largely proved, Chap. 9.. 2?
(3) Lastly, if we cut off the material entitie of sinful Acts from Dependence
on Gods immediate concurse, do we not indeed thereby cut off the most
illustrious part of Divine Providence in governing this lower world? But of
these sufficiently in what precedes, specially C. 7. 9. Hence,

. 11. The Will of Man is necessarily subordinate to and dependent on the Will of
God in all its Operations. The Dependence of the Human Will in all its Acts.
The Will of Man cannot be the solitary cause of its own Act, so as to exclude
the efficience of the prime cause, as C. 7.. 4. It Is true, the Will is a total
cause in its own kind, yet not so as to exclude the total influxe of God as the
first cause. Yea, God is not only the total, but also the immediate cause of al
voluntary Acts; which argues the Wills total and immediate Dependence on God in all its Acts, as C. 7.. 4. Thus Aquinas: Seeing every mutable and multiforme must
be reduced to some immobile principe, as unto its cause; and the Intellect and
Will of Man appear to be mutable and multiforme, it is necessary, that they be
reduced to some superior, immobile, immutable, and uniforme cause. Yea, he
says, that God is most intimely present to the Will, and as it were acting in
it, whiles he moves it to act. And Scotus, in 2. Sent. Did. 37. Q. 2. Queries,
Whether the Create Will be so far a total and immediate cause of its own Act, as
to exclude the immediate Efficience of God? And he proves the Negative,
because, (1) If so, then it would necessarily follow, that God does not
certainly know the future evenements and acts of the Will: because his knowledge
of things future dependes on the determination of his own Will, as Chap. 5.. 2.
(2) If so, then God were not the best and most perfect Being; because he should
not have Dominion over the Human Will, as chap. 5.. 3. (3) Again, if the Human
Will could produce its own Act without the immediate concurse of God, it could
also intend the same even to the highest degree of merit without Divine
assistence. (4) The Understanding cannot produce its act, without Gods
illumination, therefore neither can the Will its, without Gods concurse. See
this more fully in Bradwardine, L. 2. C. 20. p. 541. Also Philosoph. General.
P. 1. L. 3. C. 3. S. 3.. 4. Prop. 1. p. 524. and what precedes, in this Part 4.
C. 7. and 9.

. 12. Lastly, Dependence Natural, Moral, and Supernatural.
Creatural Dependence, as to its parts, is either Natural, or Moral and
Supernatural. Natural Dependence is that whereby al Creatures as Creatures
depend on God for Essence, conservation and operation. Moral and Supernatural
Dependence is that whereby the Rational Creature dependes on God as to Morals
and Supernaturals. We find both these dependences conjoined in Man: for he
having a double (...) or habitude to God (1) as a Creature; and (2) as a
Rational Creature: he has also a double dependence on God, Supernatural
Dependence on Christ.
(1) Natural, of which in what precedes. (2) Moral and Supernatural. And as in
Naturals Inferior Causes depending on their Superiors in acting, can do nothing
without, much less contrary to the efficace and concurse of their Superiors,
so also in Morals and Supernaturals. Supernatural Elevation is the total, next,
and formal Reason of acting supernaturally: and by how much the nearer the
receptive Soul is to God, its supernatural influencing cause, by so much the
more it partakes of his influence: as in Nature by how much the nearer the
thing moved is to the mover, by so much the more efficaciously does it partake
of its Impression. God does most potently, and yet most sweetly influence the
Affect, Act, and Effect of the virtuose Soul, Phil. 2.13. Al effusions of
virtuose Acts are proportionate to the Souls dependence on the efficacious
infusions of God. Yea the natural Will, by virtue of its Supernatural
Dependence, is elevated to act above Nature.

This Supernatural Dependence of the New Creature on Christ, as Mediator and
Spring of al Grace, is lively illustrated in Sacred Philosophy. Thus Psalm.
87.7. As well the singers, Psalm. 87.7.
as players on instruments shall be there: Al my springs are in thee. Glassius
renders the words thus: And they shall sing as those that lead the Dances: Al my
springs are in thee. The Psalmist having given us, in the foregoing Verses, a
Prophetic Description of the gloriose Reign of the Messiah on Mount Zion, or
in Evangelic Churches, and the great number of Converts who should sing forth
his praises there, he concludes with this as the burden of their Song: Al my
springs are in thee: i. e. All the Springs of my Divine Life are in thee, O
great Mediator: Thou alone art the prime cause and object of my dependence. The
New Creatures dependence on Christ for supernatural Grace, is Universal, Total,
Absolute, and Immediate; and that both for Habitual and Actual Grace. For
Habitual Grace.
1. Christians have an Universal and Absolute Dependence on Christ for Habitual
Grace. So John 1.16. And of his fullness have we al received, Joh. 1.16.
and Grace for Grace. (...) here signifies, either the same with (...) upon;
and then the sense is: Grace upon Grace, i. e. abundant Grace, and that freely:
or it may note the Analogy which is between the Grace received from Christ,
and Nature received from Adam; and then the meaning is this: Grace for Grace,
i. e. as the Child receives from his Parents Member for member; or as all the
Sons of Adam receive from him Lust for lust; for there was no lust in his
heart, but what was communicated to his Posterity; so the Children of Christ,
the second Adam, receive from him Grace for Grace, i. e. al manner of habitual
Graces, answerable to those in his Human Nature. This Supernatural Dependence
on Christ for Habitual Grace is also well expressed by the Disciples, Luke 17.5.
Luke 17.5.
And the Apostles said unto the Lord, Increase our Faith: (...), Add Faith to
us, i. e. some additional degrees of Faith. The Apostles had been often rebuked
by their Lord for their Infidelity, and therefore now, having by their
frequent relapses gained some sense of their own insufficience, they depend
wholly on him for supplies: their own impotence engages them to depend on his
Omnipotence. Grace is a Celestial Plant fed by an invisible Root in Heaven, and
by Juices derived from a Principe above it self. As the strength of Adam's
Habitual Grace could not preserve him when he trusted thereto, and did not
depend on his Creator; so the impotence of the New Creature cannot hurt it, so
long as it dependes on Christ.

2. The New Creature has an Universal, For Actual Grace. Psalm. 141.8.
Absolute, Total, and immediate Dependence on Christ for Actual Grace. Thus,
Psalm. 141.8. But mine eyes are unto thee, O God the Lord: in thee is my trust;
leave not my soul destitute. Hebr. make not my soul naked, or emty. (...)
signifies to evacuate or make naked. So the Targum (...). It notes his total
dependence on god. We find the Churches absolute and immediate dependence on
Christ for Actual Grace lively described, Cant. 8.5.
Who is this that comes up from the Wilderness, leaning upon her Beloved? Who
is this? i. e. this Woman, or Church, that comes up out of the Wilderness.
This shows her abandoning her own forces and strength. Leaning, or Cleaving to.
The Original word is no where else found in the Old Testament. The LXX. render
it by a word that signifies, confirming her self: which denotes her dee sense
of her own insufficience, with absolute and total Dependence on Christ for
Actual Grace. Christians ought to live immediately and totally on that Grace
which is in Christ, and not on habitual Grace received from him. Members and
Branches live on life, but the life of their Head and Root: So Christians ought
to live not in the strength of their own Graces, but in the strength of that
Grace which is in Christ, as Paul, Gal. 2.20. When men are more ready to act in
the force of Grace received, than in dependence on Christ, they soon fall into
sin. This Dependence on Christ for Actual Grace is well illustrated, Phil. 2.12,
13.
Phil. 2.12. Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling. This fear and
trembling does not implie douting, as the Papists would needs persuade us; but
a modest, humble, self-abasing sense of our own insufficience, with an absolute
dependence on Gos All-sufficient Grace. Thence it follows, v. 13. For it is God
that works in you to will and to do, of his good pleasure. This is a strong
inducement to work the Soul to an holy self-despair and humble trembling
Dependence on Divine Grace, because God works both to will and to do of his
good pleasure. Heb. 12.1, 2.
So Hebr. 12.1, 2. Let us run with patience the race set before us, looking to
Jesus the author and finisher of our faith. This looking implies absolute
constant dependence, as Esa. 45.22. Look unto me, and be ye saved, etc. This
Evangelic Supernatural Dependence on Christ for Actual Grace is very
comprehensive, taking in the whole of the life of faith as to Sanctification.
(1) It includes dependence on Christ for Actual Grace in order to Divine
Conduct in all our ways. So Cant. 1.4. Draw me, Cant. 1.4.
we will run after thee. This drawing notes impotence in them that are drawn,
but Omnipotence in Christ that draws. So Hos. 11.3, 4. I taught Ephraim also to
go, etc. This Divine Conduct is also lively expressed, Psalm. 119.133. Order my
steps in thy Word. (...) confirm, dispose, etc. (2) It includes dependence on
Christ for Actual Grace, in order to the fortifying and corroborating the
Spirit under al Infirmities, and against al Tentations. Psalm. 61.2. Psalm. 61.2.
When mine heart is overwhelmed: lead me to the Rock that is higher than I.
This representes one tending to some place of safety, whose own forces fail
him to bring him thither. Whence he adds, to the Rock that is higher than I:
i. e. too high for me to mount up unto, by mine own strength., So Psalm. 27.13.
I had fainted, unless I had believed: Psalm. 27.13, 14.
i. e. being surrounded with so many difficulties, I had been quite
overwhelmed, had I not depended on, and encouraged mine heart in my God. Thence
he adds, v. 14. Wait on the Lord, be of good courage, and he shall strengthen
thine heart. Be of good courage, (...) confirm thine heart by dependence on
God. LXX. (...) play the man: and then it follows: (...), and he shall make
thine heart strong. The like Psalm. 73.26. Psalm. 73.26.
My flesh and mine heart fails, but God is the strength of mine heart. (...),
the Rock of mine heart; or the firm Adhesion and Dependence of mine heart is
on God. We find all this exemplified in Paul, 2 Cor. 12.9. 2 Cor. 12.9, 10.
Most gladly therefore will I glory in mine infirmities, that the Power of
Christ may rest upon me: (...), that the Power of Christ may tabernacle or dwell
on me, and frequently manifest it self. And he gives the reason of it v. 10.
For when I am weak then am I strong: i. e. Christ is never so strong in me, as
when, being most weak in my self, I depend most on his strength. How often are
the strongest Christians foiled by the least Tentations, when they endeavor to
overcome them in their own strength? And on the contrary, how often do the
weakest Christians overcome the greatest tentations, when they depend on Divine
Grace? (3) It includes also dependence on Christ for Quickening Grace, in order
to the performance of al Duties and Services. Psalm. 119.25. Quicken thou me
according to thy word. (...) put life into me. The like v. 37, 40, 88, 107.
Look as worms that are dead in the Winter, live again at Spring, when under a
warm Sun; so the dead heart, when dependent on the warm beams of Actual
Grace, as Mal. 4.2. Dependence on Actual Grace brings sweet Inspirations of
Grace into the heart, whence flow Divine Respirations of the heart toward God.
(4) It includes also Dependence on Christ for Actual Grace in order to Divine
Fructification. Psalm. 52.8.
So Psalm. 52.8. But I am like a green Olive Tree in the House of God. the
Olive Tree being full of an unctuose juice, is always green and flourishing with
fruits; so was David's heart, by Dependence on Divine Grace. So it follows: I
trust in the Mercy of God for ever. To conclude this Subject, it is well
observed by Suarez, That the Dependence of a Supernatural Being on God agrees
with the Dependence of a Natural Being, the due proportion being observed: i.
e. as Natural Dependence is Absolute, Immediate, and Total; so Supernatural.
See more hereof in what precedes, Chap. 10.. 1. also B. 1. C. 3.. 3.

FINIS.

