A WORD to SINNERS, And a WORD to SAINTS.

The Former tending to the awakening the Consciences of secure Sinners, unto a
lively sense and apprehension of the dreadful condition they are in, so long
as they live in their Natural and Unregenerate Estate.

The Latter tending to the directing and persuading of the Godly and Regenerate
unto several singular Duties.

As also a Word to Householders stirring them up to the good old way of serving
God in and with their Families, from Ioshuah's resolution, Josh. 24.15. As for
me and my house, we will serve the Lord.

Set forth especially for the Use and Benefit of the Inhabitants of St.
Sepulchers Parish, London By Tho. Gouge, Late Pastor thereof.

LONDON, Printed for George Sawbridge, living on Clerkenwell-Green. 1668.

To my dearly beloved Friends the Inhabitants of St. Sepulchers Parish, London.
Beloved Friends,
TO further the salvation of men's souls, as it is a most excellent work, so it
ought to be the study, and endeavor both of every Christian in his place and
calling, and especially of the Ministers of the Gospel, whose office and
function calls upon them more importunately to labor therein. Now since
Regeneration is absolutely necessary to Salvation, and that there can be no
entrance into the new Jerusalem, without a new birth. I have according to that
ability which the Lord has given me, set forth in this small Treatise the
nature and necessity of Regeneration, together with the Means on your part to
be performed for the better attaining thereunto.

Most of these truths have been Preached in your hearing, and now they are
presented to your sight; that thereby you may be put in remembrance of them,
and more thoroughly affected with them. Though I cease to be your Minister, yet I
shall not cease to do what in me lies to further your eternal happiness. It
was my hearty desire of your everlasting welfare that first put me upon
Preaching on this Subject: and the like desire has engaged me to present the
same to your view.

Herein have I set before you Heaven and Hell, Happiness and Misery. Oh that
you would be so wise as to choose Heaven rather than Hell, Happiness rather
than Misery.

That I should adventure these Notes into the World, is not out of any conceit
that there is any thing extraordinary in them, being Conscious to my self of
much Weakness: but merely out of that strong affection I bear to your souls
welfare. For my hearts desire for you is that you may be saved. And will the
Lord but bless this small Treatise to the Regeneration, or Edification of any
of your Souls, I have the end of all my pains and cost.

Avoiding all affectation of Words, I have used plainness of speech: it being
always my chief design in the whole course of my Ministry, to affect the
Hearts and Consciences of my Hearers, rather than to tickle their Ears, and
please their Fancy.

That I may not detain you longer, I shall close this Epistle with three
requests unto you,

1. That you kindly accept of this small Book which treats on a subject so
necessary to your everlasting happiness. 2. That you would be pleased as to
peruse it your selves, so to take some time to read it to your Families. If you
cannot find leisure on the week days, than to read some part thereof on each
Lords day, till you have read it through. 3. That you would not lock it up in
your closets, but suffer it to lie in your houses, where your Children and
Servants may peruse it as they find opportunity. Who knows how successful
and fruitful this plain Treatise may prove, if the Lord shall be pleased to
accompany it with his blessing?
That the Lord therefore would so bless these my poor and weak endeavors, that
such as are yet in their natural state may be converted, that Converts may be
improved and built up in that grace wherein they stand, is the unfeigned desire
and hearty Prayer of

Your Servant in the Work of the Gospel, who has been, and still is desirous
of your Spiritual welfare. Tho. Gouge.

THE CONTENTS.
THE Exposition of the first verse. Page 1. The Observation thence raised, The
greatest of sinners are oftentimes received to mercy. 3. The Exposition of the
second verse. 4. The Observation thence raised, True faith may be exceeding
weak. ibid. The Exposition of the third verse, wherein Christ declares to
Nicodemus the Necessity of Regeneration 7.
The Observations thence raised,
1. Christ is ready to entertain those that in truth, and uprightness seek unto
him, though their weakness and infirmities be many. 8.
2. Regeneration is necessary to Salvation. 15.
For the Explication of which point, is showed,
1. The Nature of Regeneration, what it is. 16. 2. The Parts of Regeneration.
19. 1. Mortification. ib. 2. Vivification. 20.
3. The causes which concur to the work of Regeneration, which are four. 21.
1. The Efficient. 2. The Material. 3. The Formal. 4. The Final. 22.

The Reasons proving Regeneration necessary to Salvation. 23. Use of
Exhortation, 1. To the Unregenerate. 2. To the Regenerate. 28. 1. To the
Unregenerate, that they earnestly desire and industriously labor after a
saving change in the use of all means God has sanctified thereunto. ib.
Quickening Motives thereunto, drawn
1. From the Excellency of Regeneration. 29. 2. From the Vtility of
Regeneration. 30. 3. From the Necessity of Regeneration. 31.
The Means to be performed for the better attaining thereunto, brought to two
heads,
1. The Embracing some truths. 2. The Practicing some duties.
The Truths to be Embraced are these,
1. That every man in his state of unregeneracy is in a miserable estate, and
dreadful condition. 33. 2. That there is hope of mercy for the greatest
sinners. ib. The miseries of the Unregenerate in this life. 34. 1. They are
Servants to their Lusts. ib. 2. They are slaves to the Devil. 35. 3. They are
under the curse of God which continually hangs over their heads. 36. 4. They
are under the guilt of all their sins. 37. 5. They are liable to all sorts of
Judgments, viz. Temporal, Spiritual, and Eternal. 38. The miserable condition
of the Unregenerate at their deaths, in several particulars. 39. The dreadful
estate of the Unregenerate after their deaths in several particulars. 47. Of
the particular Judgment that immediately follows after death. 48. Of the
General Judgment at the end of the World. 49. The Person who shall be the
Judge. 51. The Manner of Christ's coming to Judgment, which will be, As in
great Glory and Majesty, 53. So in great terror to the wicked and impenitent.
54. The Order of Christ's proceeding in Judgment. 56. The doleful condition of
the Vngenerate after the Day of Judgment, which in general, is most cursed.
72.
That Cursed estate is manifest,
1. By privation of all felicity. ib. 2. By subjection to all misery. 73.
Which misery is set out,
I. By sundry resemblances, as 1. Darkness, yea, outer Darkness. 76. 2.
Torment, which is the extremity of pain. 77. 3. Fire, which is the fiercest
kind of torment that is, and most intolerable. 78. 4. A Worm, which sets
out the sting, or torment of an evil Conscience, which shall lie eternally
gnawing, and griping the hearts of the damned. 80.
II. By the place where the Damned abide, which is Hell. 81. III. By the
Perpetuity and Eternity of their torment there, which is the very Hell of
Hells, that which most of all breaks the hearts of the damned. 82. II. Another
truth to be embraced in order to the work of Regeneration is, That there is
hope of mercy for the greatest Sinners. 88.
Which appears from a due consideration,
1. Of Gods Power to save the worst of Sinners. 90. 2. Of Gods willingness to
save them. 91. 3. Of the all sufficiency of Christ's Sacrifice. 103. 4. Of
Christ's readiness to embrace all Sinners who will come unto him, and receive
him upon the terms of the Gospel. 105. The Duties to be practiced in order to
Regeneration. 110. Several Objections of carnal, and unregenerate men, against
the use of the formentioned Means, answered. 132.
The second branch of the use of Exhortation unto the Regenerate, which
consists of diverse heads,
1. To admire and adore Gods special mercy and goodness in the work of
Regeneration. 146. 2. To be thank full unto God for the same, with Arguments
thereunto. 156. 3. To walk worthy of that dignity, by living singular and
exemplary lives. 158.
The singular duties incumbent upon the Regenerate,
1. To make Conscience of their precious time, and to improve it to the best
advantage. 162. 2. To embrace every opportunity of doing, and receiving good.
164. 3. To be careful of the manner of performing good duties. 167. 4. To walk
circumspectly and exactly, which consists, 1. In walking by rule. 173 2. In
having respect to the inward and spiritual part of the Law, as well as to the
outward and external. ib. 3. In a careful avoiding all occasions of evil, and
temptations thereunto. 174. 4. In abstaining from appearances of evil, as well
as from apparent and direct evil. 175. 5. In a moderate use of lawful things.
177.
5. To beware of Covetousness, and overloving the World, as being the root of
all evil. 180. 6. To live by faith. 186. 7. To be spiritually minded by a
frequent contemplation of Spiritual and Heavenly things. 193. 8. To labor in
the use of all good Means for the mortification of the whole body of sin, with
all its affections and lusts, especially those which are most praedominant.
John 3.1, 2, 3. 1. There was a man of the Pharisees, named Nicodemus, a ruler
of the Jews.

2. The same came to Jesus by night, and said unto him, Rabbi, we know that
thou art a teacher come from God: for no man can do these miracles that thou
do, except God be with him.

3. Jesus answered, and said unto him, Verily, Verily I say unto thee, except a
man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God.


CHAP. 1. The Exposition and Observations arising out of the first and second
verses.
FRom the beginning of this third Chapter to the 22. verse is set forth the
conference between our blessed Savior, and Nicodemus. In which are three
things observable.

1. A description of Nicodemus, verse 1. 2. The occasion of the conference,
which was Nicodemus his coming unto Christ, expressed verse 2. 3. The
conference it self, from verse 3. to 22.
I. Nicodemus is thus described, verse 1. There was a man of the Pharisees,
named Nicodemus, a ruler of the Jews: He is here set forth,

1. By his name, Nicodemus, which is distinctly set down as for the truth of
the history, so for the honor of the man. It is observable that in the holy
Scriptures there is most care of setting' down the names of good men, that have
in their life time, some way or other, set forth Gods glory, and made
themselves examples worthy of imitation. ^ Sam. 2.30.
For God will honor such as honor him, he will have their memorial blessed.
As therefore we desire to have our memorial blessed, let us now labor to
honor God in our several places, callings, conditions and relations, by a
conscionable discharge of the duties belonging to them: and then we may rest
assured, God will some way or other honor us.

2. By his Sect, He is expressly said to be a man of the Pharisees: who were a
select Sect among the Jews, of highest account for their seeming sanctity and
strict profession. Whereas in truth they were very hypocrites: for they did all
to be seen of men. Mat. 6.1.
Which because Christ discovered, and made known to the people, they proved his
greatest enemies and persecutors.

3. By his Office. It Is in general said, that he was a ruler of the Jews. Which
is not to be taken, as if he, were the only, or chief governor of the Jews,
but to show that he was none of the common sort, but one of those who had
authority and government amongst the Jews.

It is observable, that few of the Pharisees and Rulers received Christ's
Doctrine, and believed on him, as appears by their own expression, Joh. 7.48.
Have any of the Rulers, or of the Pharisees believed on him? which
interrogation imports a strong negation; implying, that none or few of the
Rulers or Pharisees believed on Christ. They were so puffed up with the pride
of their high places; so swollen with conceitedness of their strict profession
and seeming sanctity; and so possessed with prejudice against the spiritual and
heavenly doctrine of Christ, that their hearts boiled with much envy and
indigna^ion against him: and thereupon sought many ways to entrap, and ensnare
him. Yea out of very malice they thirsted after his blood, and never ceased
till they took away his life. Yet here we find one who was both a Pharisee and
a Ruler become a Disciple of Jesus Christ, whom Christ instructs as in the
doctrine of regeneration, so in other main principles of Religion, and
thereupon became a true believer; whence we may observe:

Observe. That the dew of Gods grace often falls on the most graceless. That
the greatest of sinners are ofttimes received to mercy, and embraced in the
arms of free grace.

This God does, as for the magnifying the riches of his grace, so for the
encouraging great and notorious sinners to return from their sins, and to look
up unto him for mercy. For are the greatest sinners ofttimes received to mercy?
then there is hope of mercy for thee, how many and heinous soever thy sins are.
St. Paul speaking of Gods mercy to him, who was not only an heinous sinner, but
the chief of sinners, declares how God showed mercy to him, that he might be a
ground of hope, and encouragement unto other great and heinous sinners, For
this cause, 1 Timothy 1.16.
says he, I obtained mercy, that in me first, Jesus Christ might show forth
all long-suffering, for a pattern to them which should hereafter believe on him
to life everlasting. Intimating, that one special end Christ aimed at, in
showing mercy to such a sinner as himself, was to stir up and encourage other
great and heinous sinners to go unto Christ, and that with hope of acceptance,
casting themselves and the burden of their sins upon him. Yea questionless the
conversion of so many notorious sinners is recorded in Scripture, not only as a
memorial of what God has done for others, but also as a sign and token what he
is now ready and willing to do for the greatest sinners, upon their turning
from their sins unto him by unfeigned repentance, and closing with Jesus Christ
by a true and lively faith. Oh therefore let those admirable and s^upendious
patterns of mercy held forth in Scripture, be encouragements unto thee, to
abandon thy sins, to turn over a new leaf, and to close with Jesus Christ upon
the terms of the Gospel.

II. The Occasion of the conference betwixt Christ and Nicodemus follows in
verse 2. and that was his coming unto Christ; which is farther amplified by the
time when he came, and that was by night: The same came to Jesus by night.
Nicodemus his going unto Christ for farther instruction in the way and means of
salvation, did evidence the truth of his faith; but his going by night, did
evidence the weakness of his faith. He believed upon the hearing Christ Preach,
and seeing the miracles which he wrought, that he was a Teacher sent from God.
Yet because he was a Pharisee and a Ruler, thought it a disgrace to go openly
unto Christ, to be instructed by him: but went by night, and thereby discovered
the weakness of his faith; whence we may observe:

Observe. True Faith may be exceeding weak. This title, Mat. 6.30. Mat. 8.26.
Mat. 14.31.
O ye of little faith, (...).
wherewith Christ often upbraideth his Disciples, is an evident proof thereof.
So likewise that expression of the poor man, who cried out unto Christ, Mark
9.24.
Lord I believe, help thou my unbelief. The former word, I believe, shows the
truth of his faith; but the latter word, unbelief, shows the weakness of his
faith, which was so weak, that he calls it unbelief.

Art thou conscious to thy self of the weakness of thy Faith?

1. Be thankful unto God for that measure and degree which thou have, though
it be but as a grain of mustard seed for quantity; for the least dram of true
faith is of greater value than Mountains of Gold and Silver.

2. Content not thy self with a small measure of faith, for contentedness with
a weak faith is an argument of no faith: and besides the greater and stronger
thy faith is, the greater and stronger will be thy comfort and consolation. For
the stronger thy faith is, the clearer will thy apprehension be of thine
interest in Christ, and of the pardon of thy sins, in and through the merits of
his death and passion: The more virtue and strength will thou draw from Christ
for the mortifying thy lusts, and for the quickening thy graces; yea with the
greater cheerfulness will thou go on in thy Christian course.

3. Labor and strive after a greater measure and degree of faith, to grow from
faith to faith, from one degree of faith unto another, till thou attain unto
the highest degree thereof, even to a full assurance. To this end be earnest
with God in prayer for the increase of thy faith. For every grace depends upon
him, not only for birth, but also for growth and increase: but of this grace of
faith, he is in a special manner styled, as the author, Heb. 12.2^
so the finisher thereof.

Though thy faith at present be weak, yet know for thy comfort, That the
weakest faith, if true and sincere, is sufficient to salvation. For though God
gives not to all believers a like measure and degree of faith, but to some
more, to others less: yet he gives to none of his less than may suffice to
their salvation. So that the least faith has this in it, that it is sufficient
to salvation, in that it does interest us in Christ, and in all the promises of
the Gospel.

III. The Conference it self follows, which is a Dialogue between Nicodemus,
and our blessed Savior; wherein Nicodemus begins, saying Rabbi, we know that
thou art a Teacher sent from God: for no man can do these miracles that thou
do, except God be with him. Wherein we may Observe,

I. The Title be gives to our Savior, (...)
Rabbi, which signifies Master, and so our Evangelist expounds it, Ioh.
1.38. (...) Qui multis praefectus est, aut multos doctrina and dignitate
antecelli^.
It is a compound word, and signifies, my Master, For RAB implies a man of
excellency, one that excels others in knowledge and learning, and therefore
may well be accounted a Master, or Teacher.

This being a title of great esteem and renown, the Pharisees did exceedingly
affect it: whereupon their flattering followers to please them would double the
word, and call them Rabbi, Rabbi. Hence it is that Christ upbraids to them th^s
their ambitious affectation, and reckons it amongst the badges of their pride,
Matthew. 23.7. where speaking of the Pharisees, he says, they loved to be called
of men, Rabbi, Rabbi.

The truth is, that this title rightly taken in its proper sense, is due only
to Christ, who is the great Prophet and Teacher that came from God, as
Nicodemus here acknowledges. Whence we may observe:

Observe. That Jesus Christ is the great Prophet, and Teacher of his Church:
being alone able to declare his Fathers will, and to open the mysteries of the
Gospel. And indeed all other Prophets were but types of this great Prophet.
Joh. 1.18.
He lay in the bosom of his Father, and so understood the mind and will of
God; and was thereby enabled to make known the Oracles of God, and the
mysteries of Salvation. Yea as the Apostle expresses, In Christ are hid all
the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. Col. 2.3.
Not only wisdom and knowledge are hid in him, but treasures of wisdom and
knowledge: yea all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge are hid in him. And
all these graces he has in the highest degree; in which respect he may well be
termed the great Prophet and Teacher of his Church.

To him let us give ear and hearken, preaching unto us both in his Gospel, and
by his Ministers, who make known unto us the mysteries of the Gospel.

II. The next thing that follows in the conference, is the profession which
Nicodemus makes of Christ, we know, says he, that thou art a teacher come
from God: for no man can do these miracles that thou do, except God be with
him. In which we may observe,

1. The Profession it self, we know that thou art a Teacher come from God.

2. The reason thereof in the next words, For no man can do these miracles that
thou do, except God be with him. As if he had said, whosoever works
Miracles, comes from God, but thou workest miracles, therefore thou come
from God. This clause, these miracles that thou do, carries a great
Emphasis, and shows that they were very great miracles which Christ did, and
so confirm the argument the more. This reason is sound, and affords this
point of doctrine.

Observe. Miracles cannot be wrought but by divine power. For miracles alter the
order and course of nature; which none can do, but he which has appointed, and
set that order, namely God. I will not insist on this, that I may hasten to
that which I mainly intend in this Treatise.

CHAP. II. The Exposition and Observations arising out of verse 3.
IN verse 3. follows Christ's answer to Nicodemus* which is continued to verse
22. In which Christ first declares the necessity of Regeneration, in these
words, Verily, verily I say unto thee, except a man be born again, he cannot
s^e the Kingdom of God.

Before we come to the substance of Christ's discourse, observe we his manner of
entertaining Nicodemus.

You have heard from the foregoing verses, that Nicodemus was both a Pharisee
and a Ruler; both which sorts of men most of all opposed Christ. And you have
heard of his weakness, how through fear and shame he went to Christ by night;
being loath to be seen with him. Yet Christ re^ects him not, but kindly
entertains him, and instructs him in such points, whereof he was ignorant,
though they were fundamental points necessary to salvation. Whence we may
observe:

Observe. Christ is ready to entertain those that in truth, and uprightness seek
unto him, though their weaknesses and in^^rmities are many. He rejects not
such as are weak in faith for their weakness. We read in the History of the
Gospel, that when Christ lived upon the earth, he rejected none who came unto
him in uprightness of heart. Some indeed went away of themselves, but he turned
away none. Only he seemed once not to regard the Woman of Canaan, But why?
Surely not out of any purpose or intent to reject her, or turn her away, but
only to make known the greatness and strength of her faith. For in the close
Christ says unto her, Mat. 15.28.
O Woman great is thy Faith. And can any imagine, that now Christ is in Heaven,
he has not the same bowels of compassion toward those that come unto him,
which he had, when he was upon the earth! Questionless though he be there free
from passion, yet not from compassion toward weak believers. That which was
long before Phrophesied of him by Isaiah, ever was, and will be found true in
him, namely, A bruised reed shall he not break, and the smoking flax shall be
not quench: Isa. 42.3.
that is, He shall not deal roughly and rigorously with weak Christians, such
as are weak in grace, but mildly and gently.

Luke 19.10.
For the end of Christ's coming was to seek and save that which was lost. And can
we imagine that Christ who seeks after those who go away from him, will
reject any who do in truth seek after him?

Yea Christ is naturally very merciful and tender: as he has beams of Majesty,
so likewise bowels of mercy, pity and compassion. His tenderness over weak
Christians is set forth in Scripture, by a Mothers compassion over her sucking
child, Isa. 49.15.
the Son of her Womb: and by a fathers pitying his children. Psalm. 103.13.
So that I may upon good ground conclude; that Christ will not cast away or
reject such as are weak in faith, because (but) children; but most willingly
and readily embrace them, because Children.

What encouragement should this be unto all poor believers, how weak soever
their faith is, to go unto Christ, as for the strengthening their weak faith, so
for the subduing their strong lusts, and for the reviving their drooping souls?
For your further encouragement, you have Christ's gracious invitation, come unto
me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Mat. 11*28.
Has he bid thee come, and will he reject thee when thou come? Has he
called, come ye holy ones, come ye righteous ones, come ye strong ones, and you
only shall have rest? Has he not invited the weak, and the weary also, the
drooping and fainting soul? Go poor weak soul, go unto Christ, behold he
calls thee, go unto him, and thou may expect thy cure. Questionless, one
special reason why Christ showed himself so willing and ready to hearken unto
the cry of those who came unto him for the cure of their bodily distempers,
when he was upon the earth, and to heal the same, was to stir us up to go unto
him for the healing of all our spiritual maladies and diseases. For Christ came
not into the world to heal bodies, but souls. And therefore when the name Jesus
was given him, the reason is said to be this, Because he shall save his people
from their sins. Mat. 1.21.
Not their bodies from sicknesses, but their souls from sins.

Art thou bound under any spiritual infirmities? Do as those sick and diseased
persons did, when Christ was upon the earth, who are said to go unto him in
faith, believing he was both able and willing to cure them; whereby they drew
virtue from him for their healing.

Art thou troubled for the weakness of thy faith, complaining thou have no
assurance of thine interest in Christ, no assurance of the pardon of thy sins?
Go unto Christ by prayer for increase of faith, believing that he is as able,
so willing to strengthen thy weak faith. And fear not, thou shall find such
measure of strength added to thee, as Christ sees best, and as shall be
sufficient for thee.

Art thou sensible of the working and stirring of corruption in thee, fearing
lest it should get dominion over thee? Romans 6.14.
Lay hold on that promise, Sin shall not have dominion over you. And in
confidence of his faithfulness that spoke it, apply thy self to Christ by
prayer, for his making good that good word to thee: and then stand still and
see the salvation of God. Lust as strong as it is, will not be able to stand
before the prayer of faith: only be careful that when thou have made thy
Prayer, thou set a watch. Art thou assaulted with the temptations of Satan, and
fear that he may get the victory over thee? Go unto Christ by prayer for
strength and support against them, believing there is as a power in Christ, so
a willingness in him to succor, and strengthen thee; and thou shall be sure to
find, if not deliverance from temptations, yet grace sufficient to resist them,
and power to overcome them.

Lastly, Art thou troubled with an hard and obdurate heart? with a filthy and
unclean heart? with a worldly, and covetous heart? with a proud and barren
heart? Go unto Christ by prayer, believing there is as a power, so a
willingness in him to mollify thine hard and obdurate heart; to purify thy
filthy and unclean heart; to spiritualize thy worldly and covetous heart: to
humble thy proud heart; to make fruitful thy barren heart. And doubt nor but
thou shall find thine hard and obdurate heart in some measure softened, thy
filthy and unclean heart in some measure purified, thy worldly and covetous
heart in* some measure spiritualized, thy proud heart in some measure humbled,
and thy barren heart in some measure made fruitful.

And certainly one special reason why many go drooping and groaning so long
under the bondage of corruption, under the weight and burden of their spiritual
maladies, and diseases, is, because they do not go unto Christ by prayer for
freedom from the same: or through the weakness of their faith, they do not
believe Christ is, as able, so willing to help and deliver them. For what
Christ said to the poor man who came unto him in behalf of his possessed child,
the same he says to thee, Mark 9.23.
If thou can believe, all things are possible to him that believes.

Obj. Some are apt to say, I have often gone unto Christ by Prayer, earnestly
begging of him to strengthen my weak graces, to subdue my strong lusts and
corruptions, to mollify my hard heart, etc. but I cannot pray in faith: I
cannot believe that he is, as able, so willing to grant my requests.

Answ. 1. Thou may pray in faith, even then when thou think thou do not
believe. Weak Christians are often mistaken here, supposing that if they be not
confidently persuaded that God will hear them, they do not pray in faith.
Whereas it is not a confidence that God will hear us, but a dependence upon
Christ in hope of audience, that is our s^^et evidence of faith in prayer. Thou
say thou prayest, and prayest, but can not be persuaded that the holy God
will hear the prayers of such a vile and unworthy wretch, and thereupon
concludest that thou do not pray in faith. But let me ask thee, Do thou
offer up thy prayers in the name of Christ? do thou depend upon him in hope
of an answer for his sake? this is praying in faith.

2. Mourn and weep for the weakness of thy faith.

3. Be earnest with God in prayer that he would strengthen it.

4. Know that thy corruption neither is, nor will be utterly destroyed, so long
as thou live here in this World; neither will thy spiritual maladies and
diseases be quite cured, but they do and will continue in some measure and
degree; partly to bring down thy pride, which of all sins is the most odious
and abominable unto God; and to advance thy humility, which of all graces is
most pleasing and acceptable unto God: and partly that thou may have
frequent occasion of going unto God by prayer for help and strength against the
power of thy lusts and corruptions.

5. Know, that power against sin, increase of grace, an humble, tender, clean
heart, are mercies as worth the praying for, so worth the waiting for. Christ's
delays are no denials: thou can not say, he will not, because yet he has not
given thee thy desires. Be not weary of seeking; in due season thou shall reap,
if thou faint not.

Before I leave this point, I shall add one word by way of caution. Beware thou
mistake not thy self.

Take not thy self to be one of little faith, whilst thou have no faith. Let
not unbelievers catch at the comforts and encouragements that belong to the
least of Saints; that which is their meat, will be thy poison. Comforts falsely
applied, though they be sweet in the mouth, will prove curses in the belly.
Have thou no faith? Oh tremble, this is the word that belongs to thee, Mark
16.16.
He that believes not shall be damned. Though to him that has shall be given,
yet to him that has not, shall be taken away, even that which he seems to
have.

He that has the least faith, is a resolved enemy of all sin, a resolved
friend of holiness, is resolved to hang upon Christ, to cleave unto Christ, to
follow him to the death in righteousness and holiness of life, though he still
do question whether Christ be his or no.

Is it not thus with thee? Beware how thou catch at the forementioned comforts.
Yet this let me say to thee also, if thou have not faith, will thou go to
Christ for faith? If thou can not go to Christ as a Believer, will thou go to
him as a Sinner? If thou art not yet in a state of salvation, art thou willing
to be saved? Art thou willing to learn of Christ, to ask his counsel, what must
I do to be saved? will thou go thus to Christ, Lord came thou not into the
world to save sinners? to make intercession for transgressors? to seek and to
save them which are lost? Oh will thou save this sinner, my sinful soul, Lord?
I fear I am none of thine, but will thou make me thine? I come to thy door, I
lie at thy feet, a poor lost soul, an undone creature; Oh will thou take me in,
and make me one of thy Disciples? Will thou thus come to Christ? Even thou also
art one of those that he calls to; Man. 9.13.
He came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.

Thus much of Christ's entertaining Nicodemus.

Come we now to the first general point whereof Christ discourses with
Nicodemus, and that was the Doctrine of Regeneration, in these words, Verily,
Verily, I say unto thee, except a man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom
of God. In which we may note, 1. The manner of propounding it. 2. The matter
and substance of it.


For the manner it is propounded with a double asseveration, Verily, Verily, I
say unto thee. In the Greek it is Amen, (...).
Amen, which in the Hebrew signifies truth. The asseveration is doubled, to
stir up attention in Nicodemus, who being yet in great measure ignorant of the
fundamental principles of Religion, might happily have lightly esteemed this
doctrine of Regeneration, and therefore to stir up his attention, Christ uses
this double asseveration, verily, verily, I say unto thee. Which was a form of
speech often used by our Savior when he would solemnly avouch any weighty
truth. He never used it but in matters of great moment. By it therefore our
Savior gives us to understand, that the truth here delivered is a weighty
truth, not lightly to be regarded, and slightly passed over. For he who gave
this commandment, Mat. 5.37.
Let your communication be yea, yea, nay, nay, would never have added this
double asseveration, if there had not been need thereof. Christ therefore
having prefixed this preface to the following truths, does thereby stir us up
to give, as the more credit, so the more diligent heed thereto. Yea and thereby
shows the doctrine of Regeneration to be a most important point; necessary to
be known and learned of all.

The matter or substance of the Doctrine of Regeneration, as Christ has said
it down, follows in these words, Except a man be born again, he cannot see
the Kingdom of God.

For the more profitable handling whereof, I shall, 1. Clear the words by
giving you the sense and meaning of them. 2. Raise and prosecute such points of
Doctrine as they afford unto us.


For the clearing of the words. Except a man. In the Greek it is, (...)
Except any. This indefinite particle joined with an exclusive has the force
of a general. As if our Savior had said, No man can enter into heaven except
he be born again; so as he speaks not only of notorious sinners, as
adulterers, drunkards, swearers, etc. but of all who are in their natural
condition, though they live never so unblamably, free from all scandalous sins,
if they be not born again, their civil righteousness will do them little good,
for they shall never see the Kingdom of God.

Be born] Except a man be born, This is spoken metaphorically and spiritually,
in allusion to our natural birth, which Nicodemus not observing, clean
misconstrued Christ's words.

Now this word born, or begotten, is used to show that the whole nature of man
must be changed, and in a manner new framed, not in regard of the substance,
but of the qualities of it. Secundum qualitates ^o^ secundum ipsam vel ani-nae,
vel corporis (...).
The natural essence and substance either of the soul or body is not destroyed,
but still remains, only it is divested of the old, and invested with new
qualities. He that is regenerated has a renewed understanding, a renewed will,
renewed affections, yea new desires and a new conversation. So that the meaning
is, No man can enter into heaven unless by the spirit of God he be first
altered and changed from what he was, even brought out of the state of nature
into the state of grace, and so become a new creature, as in regard of his new
manner of creation, so in regard of his new manner of conversation, leading
another manner of life than he did before.

Born again] The original word translated again, is as well attributed to
place, as to time, and signifies above, as well as again, as verse. 31. (...)
And indeed this is the most usual signification of the word, and therefore
some translate it so here, (...)
except a man be born from above, as it is in our old translation. And though
our new translators of the Bible have altered it, yet have they put in the
Margin from above.

But questionless in this place the word signifies again: (...) here
signifies as much as (...)
for so Nicodemus takes it, verse 4. how can a man be born when he is old? can
he enter the second time into his Mothers Womb, and be born? So that the word
here has respect to the time more than to the place, and implies the
necessity of a second birth, that a man be born of the spirit, as well as born
of the flesh, otherwise it had been better for him, he had never been born at
all.

He cannot see the Kingdom of God] Kingdom is here taken for that happy estate
whereunto God brings his elect in Christ, the entrance thereunto is in this
life, which is commonly called the Kingdom of grace. The full possession, is in
the life to come, called the Kingdom of glory. These are not two distinct
Kingdoms, but two degrees of one and the same Kingdom. Now whereas Christ
faith, He cannot see the Kingdom of God, it is in effect as much as, He cannot
enter into the Kingdom of God, as our Savior clearly explaineth, verse 5.
Except a man be born of water, and of the spirit, he cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God, that is, He cannot be saved.

Having thus cleared the words, by showing you the sense and meaning of them;
They afford unto us this point of Doctrine:

Doct. Regeneration is necessary to salvation: Or, To make a man a member of
the invisible Church, and so a^ heir of Gods Kingdom, it is necessary that he
be regenerate and born again, and thereby brought out of the state of nature
into the state of grace.

This very Doctrine for substance is again inculcated, verse 5. Verily, Verily,
I say unto thee, except a man be born of water and of the spirit, he cannot
enter into the Kingdom of God. Now our Saviors twice repeating this Doctrine,
both in verse 3. and verse 5. and in both places prefixing a double
asseveration, Verily, Verily, does notably confirm the truth of it, and
therefore there needs no farther proof thereof.

But for the better conceiving, and right applying this Doctrine, I shall show
you, 1. The Nature of Regeneration, What it is. 2. The Parts of Regeneration.
3. The Causes which concur to the work of Regeneration. 4. The Reasons proving
the necessity of Regeneration to Salvation. 5. The uses of the point.


CHAP. III. Of the Nature of Regeneration, What it is.
I. REgeneration, is that grace whereby a natural man is made a spiritual or
new man. Even he that by sin was a Child of the Devil, is made a Child of God.
For as by virtue of our natural birth, that which was no man is made a man, or
Son of man. So by this Spiritual birth, he that was a natural man is made a new
man, even a spiritual man, a child of God, So that to speak properly,
Regeneration is another birth after the former. A spiritual birth after our
natural birth, whereby a man is as it were another man. As it is said of Calch,
that he was a man of another spirit. So may it be said of a regenerate man, 1
Cor. 6.11.
that he is of another spirit, being quite altered and changed from what he was
before.

(...), Regeneratio.
The notation of the Greek and Latin words imports as much. Not unfitly called
regeneration, because by it we are restored to that image of God, wherein we
were at first created.

Now this regeneration, or new birth cannot be meant of a birth after the
flesh, Secundum carnem.
for no natural or carnal thing is to be conceipted in regeneration. But
regeneration is a spiritual birth, a birth of the spirit, as is evident by
those words, Joh. 3.6.
that which is born of the spirit is spirit. So as by the work of Regeneration
flesh is turned into spirit, that is, the carnal, corrupt disposition of man,
is changed and altered into a renewed and sanctified disposition; whereby it
appears that Regeneration is as it were a new creation, and a regenerate man is
called a new creature, being renewed throughout, both through his soul with all
the powers and faculties thereof; and through his body, with all the parts and
members thereof. So that the blind understanding is in some measure enlightened
with the knowledge of God, and the knowledge of Jesus Christ. The stubborn and
contumacious will is in some measure obedient and conformable to the will of
God. The seared and benumbed conscience is now quickened and awakened. The hard
heart softened, the unruly affections crucified: And the body with all the parts
and members thereof are made ready instruments to put in execution the good
intentions of the mind. Thus by Regeneration men are wrought upon throughout,
being wonderfully altered and changed from what they were before: in relation
to which alteration they are said to be born again. Which may inform us of the
wonderful depravation of our nature, which was such, as mending and repairing
would not serve the turn, but God must new make, and new create us, we must be
born again, made new creatures.

Which consideration should methinks take away all ground of boasting from any
man, and stir up every regenerate person to give unto God the praise and the
glory of his happy change, saying, Not unto us, not unto us, but unto thy name
be the praise and the glory of this great work.

Quest. Does Regeneration admit any degrees?

Answ. Yes verily. For Regeneration may be considered in the beginning, and
progress of it: or in the consummation and perfection of it.

It is begun and increases in this life; it is consummate and perfect in the
life to come.

In this life there is spirit mixed with flesh, that is, grace with some
corruption of nature, as is evident by the Apostles complaint in these words,
Romans 7.21, 22, 23.
When I would do good evil is present with me. For I delight in the Law of God
after the inward man; But I see another law in my members warring against the
law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity to the law of sin, which is in
my m^mbers. So that sin and corruption does remain in all the regenerate,
Habitat sed non regnat, manet sed non dominatur, dejectum sed non ejectum
tamen, etc. Benard. in Sermon. 10. on Psa. 90.
as long as their souls remain in their mortal bodies, it remains though it
does not reign in them. It is in this life cast down, but not cast out.

And this God in great wisdom is pleased to permit, to keep us humble and low
in our selves, and to drive us unto Jesus Christ, that as long as this flux of
blood runs, we should always be desirous to touch at least the hem of his
garment.

But at death that corruption will be utterly consumed, and body and soul clean
freed from it: insomuch as at the resurrection when body and soul shall be
again united, the regeneration begun in this World, will be manifested to be
most perfect. Whereas in this life the most regenerate are imperfect, through
the Relics of sin and remainder of corruption, which will abide in them so
long as they abide, and continue in this World.

Now seeing the work of Regeneration is imperfect in the very best here in this
life, and that there remains flesh and corruption in them, so long as they
remain in this World, Do not thou look too high, I mean, after a greater
measure and degree of grace than here is to be had. Many there are who being
regenerate by the spirit of God, and so brought out of the state of nature into
the state of grace, presently look for a freedom from all sin and corruption,
which because they find working and stirring in them, thereupon question the
work of Regeneration and truth of grace in their souls. But let such know, that
they look for more than here is to be found, or than God expects from them.

For God does not expect or require of us here, freedom from sin and
corruption, but that we should endeavor to subdue and mortify it more and
more, according to the measure of grace and strength which we have received
from him. He does not require of us that we be without sin, but that sin do not
rule nor reign in our mortal bodies, Romans 6.12.
according to that of the Apostle, Let not sin reign in your mortal bodies.
Neither does the Lord require of us exact and perfect righteousness, which is
impossible to our corrupt nature, but only that we strive and labor after it,
that we sincerely endeavor to serve him after the directions of his Word. And
that for our failings and imperfections we do in an humble confession bewail
the same, and then beg the pardon and forgiveness of them, in and through the
merits of Jesus Christ. And this God will accept of, for he esteems more of
our affections than of our actions, and accepts the will for the deed,
according to that of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 8.12.
If there be a willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man has, and
not according to that he has not.

CHAP. IV. Of the Parts of Regeneration, and Causes concurring thereunto.
HAving showed you what regeneration is, and how it does admit degrees. I shall
show you the Parts of Regeneration, which are two: 1. Mortification. 2.
Vivification.

Mortification is employed under the phrases of casting off, Ephesians. 4.22. Romans 6.6.
and crucifying the old man, and destroying the body of sin. This is a duty
expressly enjoined in these words, mortify your members which are upon the
earth. Col. 3*5.
By members on the earth, he means all sorts of lusts and sins whereunto a
natural man is given, as is evident by the particular instances which he
himself reckons up in the words following, as fornication, uncleanness, etc.

These must be mortified, that is, put to death. It is not enough to curb, and
hold in sin, but the life of it must be let out. And indeed it is not possible
to put on the new man, till the old man be cast off. Therefore there is a
necessity of mortification first, before vivification. For the bringing in of
one form presupposes the putting out, Inductio unious formae est destruction
alterius.
or destroying of the other. Wherefore after Mortification follows
Vivification.

2. Vivification is the begetting of the life of grace in us, whence we live in
holiness and righteousness. It is set forth in Scripture by Gods quickening us,
and by our walking in newness of life. Ephesians. 2.5.


Vivification then implies a new spiritual life, which God by his spirit
works in us, which is clean contrary to our former natural, Romans 6.4.
corrupt course of life. For the effects of this life are holiness and
righteousness, and all manner of good works.

Now it is absolutely necessary that this part of regeneration, namely
Vivification, be added to Mortification, which is the other part, even as
necessary as that Christ being dead should be raised. Where had been the
benefit of Christ's death, if he had not risen from the dead? And what can be
imagined to be the profit of mortification without vivification? It is
therefore the accustomed course of Sacred Scripture to infer the following of
holiness, upon the flying of sin: the doing of good, upon eschewing of evil.
Now the things which God has joined together, let no man put asunder.

Let us therefore prove our regeneration not only by ceasing from sin, but
following holiness, and working righteousness. Content not thy self to say, I
am not what I was, unless thou can also add, I am what I was not. It will be
but little boot to thee to say, I am no drunkard, nor swearer, nor covetous,
nor a walker after the flesh: unless thou can also say, By the grace of God,
I now walk after the spirit, in faith and love, and holy obedience, watchful
unto, and endeavoring after a fruitfulness in every good work. Thou art not
unjust, (thou say) but do thou show mercy? Thou art no longer earthly;
but art thou heavenly minded? Thou art no longer contentious, or quarrelsome:
but art thou a peacemaker? Thou have no longer fellowship with the ungodly,
but art thou a familiar of the Saints? Thou will not now curse, or swear, or
lie, or scoff, but do thou pray and bless? Do thou hear and read, and
meditate on God? Do thou study thine heart, and govern thy thoughts and
affections? Do thou bridle thy tongue; set a watch over thine eyes, and ears,
and steps? Is it thy care to please, and in all things to walk worthy the Lord?
Look to thy self, that thou be not deceived. Cast off the works of darkness,
and put on the armor of light. Cast off the old man, and put on the new man,
which as it is created after the image, So will it carry thee on according to
the will of God in righteousness and true holiness.

Having showed the Nature of Regeneration, and the parts thereof. I come now to
show what Causes concur to the work of Regeneration.

1. The efficient Cause, or primary Author is God. For in this respect we are
born of God. 1 Pet. 1.3.
God has begotten us, Jam. 1.18. Even God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

2. The procuring causes are Gods will, and Gods mercy. There could be nothing
out of God to move him. It must needs therefore arise from his own mere will.
Jam. 1.18.
So faith the Apostle James, Of his own will begat he us. And there could be
nothing in man to move God hereunto; for man by nature is most miserable. It
must needs therefore arise from Gods mere mercy. For misery is the proper
object of mercy. On this ground it is justly said that God according to his
abundant mercy has begotten us again. 1 Pet. 1.3.


3. The immediate worker of Regeneration is Gods Spirit: Joh. 3.4.
In this respect we are said to be born of the spirit; Tit. 3.5.
and regeneration is styled the renewing of the holy Ghost. For it is a divine
work above humane ability.

4. The ordinary instrumental cause is Gods Word. Of his own will begat he us
by the word of truth, Jam. 1.18.
whereby is meant the Gospel. In this respect the Word is styled incorruptible
seed. 1 Pet. 1.23.
The Gospel is that part of Gods Word which is most effectual hereunto, and it
is thereupon styled the Gospel of salvation. Ephesians. 1.13.
And the power of God unto salvation. Romans 1.16.


5. Ministers and preachers of the Gospel are Ministerial causes of
Regeneration, who are in relation to their Ministry said to beget us, 1 Cor.
4.15.
and styled Fathers.

Philemon verse 10.
All these are comprised under the Efficient cause, and are so far from
thwarting one another, as they sweetly concur to produce this divine work of
Regeneration, being subordinate one to another, and may in this order be placed
together. It being the will of God to show mercy to man, he ordained Ministers
to cast the seed of his Word into men's souls, which being quickened by the
Spirit, men are thereby born again.

II. The material cause of Regeneration, is the parts whereof it does consist,
which are two, I. Mortification. 2. Vivification, of both which I have spoken
in the foregoing Chapter.


III. The formal cause of Regeneration is Gods Image planted in us, which
consists in holiness and righteousness. After this Image we are said to be
renewed. This makes an essential difference betwixt a natural and a regenerate
man. Ephesians. 4.24.


IV. The final causes next and subordinate to the glory of Gods free grace and
rich mercy, are especially two;

1. To make men able to do good: namely such good as may be acceptable and
honorable to God, profitable to other men, and truly advantageable to
themselves. The Apostle therefore speaking of Regeneration (which we have
showed to be a kind of Creation) thus expresses this end, Ephesians. 2.10.
we are created in Christ Jesus unto good works.

2. To make men fit for glory. For corrupt flesh cannot partake of Celestial
glory. Whereupon faith Christ, Except a man be born again, he cannot see the
Kingdom of God: Joh. 3.3.
So far shall he be from being admitted into it, as he shall not come so near
as to see it. God will not take a sinner reeking in his lusts, and presently
invest him with a Crown of glory. And therefore that we may be fitted for
Heaven, the Lord is pleased by his spirit to regenerate us, making us
new-creatures,, and thereby making us meet to be partakers of the inheritance
of the Saints in light.

Behold the Riches of Gods mercy and goodness, that he not only created us at
first in a most happy estate, even after his own image and likeness: But when
we wittingly and wilfully fell from the same, and plunged ourselves into
misery, wherein he might justly have left us, as he did the evil Angels. Yet he
has not only restored us again to that former estate, by renewing his image in
us: but thereby fitted us for a more glorious and excellent estate: wherein his
goodness appears to be as his greatness, infinite, incomprehensible. Who can
sufficiently set it forth? Psalm. 103.11.
For as the Heaven is high above the earth, so great is his mercy toward them
that fear him.

CHAP. V. Shows the Reasons why Regeneration is necessary to Salvation.
HAving spoken of the point by way of explication; I come now to speak of it by
way of confirmation, To this end I shall show you the reasons of the point, why
Regeneration is necessary to Salvation.

Reas. 1. From the immutability of Gods purpose. God who has chosen us to
life, has chosen us also to holiness, as our way to it. We are bound to give
thanks to God for you, 2 These. 2.13.
brethren, beloved of the Lord, because God has from the beginning chosen you
to Salvation, through the Sanctification of the Spirit. Whoever will pass into
glory, must take grace in his way. You ask, why may I not be saved, unless I be
regenerated? Why! because God is resolved on the contrary. 1 These. 4.3.
This is the will of God, your sanctification first, and then your salvation.
Now the purposes of God shall stand. With him is no variableness nor shadow of
turning. All the world shall sooner be damned, then the purpose of God shall be
made void. The Lord God must cease to be the unchangeable God, if thou ever be
saved, who wilt not be sanctified.

Reas. 2. From the stability of Gods Word. God has said, Except a man be born
again, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. Is the word of God yea and nay?
does he say and unsay? Mat. 24.35.
Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but his word shall not pass away. Count upon
it sinner, as sure as God is true, thou shall never see the salvation of God,
unless thou be first made partaker of the renewing of the holy Ghost.

Reas. 3. From the respect that Regeneration has to Salvation. Regeneration is
a degree and part of Salvation. Grace is glory begun, holiness is the beginning
of blessedness, the perfection whereof will be in Heaven hereafter, Ephesians. 4.24.
where the image of God, which consists in knowledge, holiness, and
righteousness will be perfected in our souls, where we shall perfectly love
God, and delight in him, and be ever praising him with the Heavenly host. Now,
how can thou expect the participation and enjoyment of this blessed estate
without regeneration and renovation here? Unless the image of God be renewed
upon thee in holiness? and thou do truly love God, and delight in communion
with him here? Can thou expect the consummation without a beginning! to be
perfectly holy hereafter, and not initially holy here! to live with God in
glory hereafter, and yet here live and lie in thy filthiness and uncleanness!
Can thou expect hereafter to live in the everlasting love of God, and yet
here have no true love to him at all? Can thou expect hereafter fullness of
delight in the presence of God, and yet here have no delight in him at all? But
take thy whole delight either in satisfying thy covetous humor by heaping up
riches, or in gratifying, thy sinful lusts and affections, by yielding to the
solicitations of the flesh?

Be not deceived, as I said before, so I must say it again, Grace is a
necessary beginning of glory; As sin is death begun, and hell begun, so is
grace the first fruits of life and glory. And as certain as it is, that he
shall never find an hell hereafter, who is purged from his sins here; so
undoubtedly certain is it, that he shall never come into the divine presence
hereafter, who is not here made partaker of the divine nature; he shall never
enter into the Kingdom of glory, who is not first born into the Kingdom of
grace. Be a convert in this World, or thou will be a reprobate in the other
World. Thou may as well expect a birth where there has been nothing formed
in the Womb; a Noontide where there has been no dawning, as ever look to see
the daylight of glory, who have never known the morning of grace.

Reas. 4. From that corruption of man's Nature in which he is brought into the
World. For our first Parents having by their fall defaced that image of God in
which they were at first created, and being thereupon corrupted and polluted,
in every power of their soul, and part of their body; all that come from them
are in like manner corrupted and polluted, an unclean offspring from unclean
progenitors. Job 14.4.
For who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? not one, as Job speaks.
And says our Savior, That which is born of the flesh is flesh; Joh. 3.6.
that is, Every one that is born of man, every mothers Child is carnal and
corrupt: every man by his first birth is polluted and unclean: Now no unclean
person can enter into Gods Kingdom. Rev. 21.27.
Believe it Sinner, God will never take thee from the dunghill reeking in thy
Lusts, and set thee down by him in the Throne. The holy land was never intended
for a Sepulcher, to bury the dead in, to be filled with filth and rottenness,
it is no den for Dragons, nor nest for Serpents and Vipers, nor was ever
designed to be peopled with Dogs and Swine. Rev. 22.
Without shall be Dogs. Corruption shall not inherit incorruption, nor shall
flesh and blood inherit the Kingdom of God. Bastards may not inherit. Thou must
first be a child, and have the spirit of a child in thee, and then thou art an
heir, an heir of God, and a joint heir with Christ.

Reas. 5. From the holiness of Gods nature, which is such that no unclean
person can stand in his presence. The Prophet Habbakkuk sets him forth to be of
purer eyes than to behold evil, Hab. 1.13.
neither can be look on iniquity. And says the Psalmist, Evil shall not dwell
with thee, neither shall the foolish stand in thy sight. Psalm. 5.4.
Where by the foolish may be meant the wicked and profane, as it is often taken
in Scripture; (wicked men are fools) and such shall not stand in the sight and
presence of God. There is a contrariety between the holy nature of God, and the
unholy nature of carnal and unregenerate men. And therefore what communion can
there be between them? Between an holy God, and unholy creatures? Between a
pure God, and impure creatures? Surely none at all. So much the Apostle
expresses where he says, 2 Cor. 6.14.
what fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? Or the righteous God
with unrighteous men? What communion has light with darkness? which
interrogation implies a strong negation. Believe it sinners, if ever you look
to enjoy communion with God in glory, you must have union with him in grace;
you must here be regenerate, and become new creatures: yea holy as he is holy,
that you may be such as he may dwell withal, and delight in. For as the
Apostle speaks, Heb. 12.14.
Without holiness no man shall see the Lord. He shall be so far from enjoying
the presence of God, that he shall not so much as see him.

Lev. 10.3. Says Moses to Aaron, God will be sanctified in them that come nigh
him, that is, that draw near unto him in any of his Ordinances. Now to the
sanctifying God in his Ordinances, there is required; 1. That his Nature be
renewed and sanctified. An unsanctified heart cannot sanctify God. Psalm. 50.5.
Gather my Saints together unto me. 2. That he have holy and awful
apprehensions of God. God is greatly to be feared in the assembly of his
Saints; and to be bad in reverence of all them that are about him. Psalm. 89.7.
3. That he bring holy affections. Every ordinance of God, as it requires our
affections to be employed and exercised in it, so holy affections: such
affections as do arise from an holy heart, and are suitable to an holy God.


Now can carnal men thus sanctify God? they pollute and profane his holy name,
they cannot sanctify it. Can they not sanctify God, and can they be accepted
of God? or find any pleasure in his presence? If God be not sanctified in them,
he will be sanctified upon them: his wrath will break forth upon them, so far
shall they be from enjoying any comfortable communion with him.

Now if such sanctity and holiness be necessary in those who draw near unto him
in his ordinances: How much more to the enjoying immediate communion with him
in Heaven? will not God meet thee at a prayer, and will he suffer thee to meet
him in Paradise? will he not let thee see his face at his Table, and will he
let thee sit down with him in his Kingdom? May thou not come into his Courts,
and shall thou enter into the holy of holies? Was the man without a wedding
garment thrust out from his presence here below, and shall he be received into
his mansion above? How can these things be?

CHAP. VI. An Use of Exhortation to endeavor after Regeneration; with
quickening Motives thereunto.
HAving thus done with the Explication and Confirmation of the point; Come we
now to the use and Application thereof.

I. The first may be an use of Exhortation, both to the unregenerate and to the
Regenerate.

First to the unregenerate: Is Regeneration absolutely necessary to Salvation?
Oh then how does it concern you who are yet in your sins, and under the power
of corrupt nature, earnestly to desire, and industriously to labor after this
saving change, in the use of all mea^s God has sanctified thereunto? Let y^^r
outward condition be what it will, be ye never so rich, never so honorable,
yet far be it from you to sit down satisfied in any condition, till you be
renewed, and sanctified by the spirit of God. A^as, how many be there in the
World; who though in their natural and carnal estate, yet live as securely and
merrily, as if their condition were as safe and good as the best! Ask them one
by one, Whether the work of Regeneration be wrought in their souls? and some
will answer, they hope it is, others that they never doubted it; though none of
them know what Regeneration is, nor ever minded any such thing. And yet these
men have not only read, but do likewise believe the words of our Savior, who
has told them, Joh. 3.3.
that except they be born again, they cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

Ah sinner, I beseech thee for the sake of thy precious and immortal soul, to
stir up in thy self an hearty desire, and sincere endeavor after this blessed
work. (...).
As it is the one thing necessary to salvation, so let it be the main thing of
thy desire and endeavor. There is nothing deserves precedence in thy thoughts,
aims, and labors before this. Psalm. 132.4.
David resolved not to give sleep to his eyes, nor slumber to his eyelids,
till be found out an habitation for the Lord. The habitation which pleases God
most, is thine heart, but it must be a renewed heart. Oh how dare thou sleep
a night in that house, where God does not dwell? and he dwells not in thee,
unless thou be Regenerated by his holy Spirit. In the fear of God therefore,
see thou give no rest to thy soul, no ease to thy mind, till thou find a
blessed change wrought in thee, till thou find thou art brought out of the
state of nature, into the state of grace. Neither sit down satisfied in the
enjoyment of any worldly comfort, without the enjoyment of this mercy. And
indeed how can thou live merrily or sleep quietly, so long as thou live in
thine unregenerate estate? in which if thou should die, thou would perish
for ever, even to all Eternity. Especially considering the uncertainty of thy
life, whether thou shall live a day, or an hour longer.

For the more profitable handling this Use, I shall, 1. Give you some Motives
to quicken up your desires and endeavors after the work of Regeneration. 2.
Show you the Means to be performed for the better artaining thereunto.


The Motives may be drawn to these three heads: 1. The Excellency. 2. The
Utility. 3. The Necessity of Regeneration.


I. For the first, the Excellency thereof will appear from these four
particulars:

1. Regeneration does enoble a man, raise him up toward his Original
perfection. Man was made the noblest of all creatures in this visible World, in
the image and likeness of God. Sin defaced the Image of God, and stamped the
Image of the Devil upon him. A sinner is a man degenerated into a beast; Psalm.
49.12.
Man being in honor abides not, but is like the beasts that perish. He lives
like a beast, and dies like a beast, not knowing whither he goes. Every man is
brutish in his knowledge. Jer. 10.14.
He has a brutish heart, lives a brutish life. By grace man comes to himself,
is raised up from a beast to a man again, renewed after the Image of God; The
spirit of glory and of God shines forth in him. There Is more of the glory of
God seen in a Saint, than in all the works of God under the Sun: nay than in
the glorious Sun in the Heavens. In illis tantum sunt opera Dei, in hac est
imago D^i. Aug.
The Sun, Moon, and Stars fall short of the glory of the new creature.

2. The Excellency of Regeneration appears, in that it makes a man a true
Christian. A man is not really a Christian, because he has been Baptized,
bears the name, and frequenteth the ordinances of Christ: but because he is
Regenerated by the Spirit of Christ, and thereby translated out of a state of
sin and death, into a state of life and peace. Romans 2.28, 29.
For as under the law, he was not a Jew, who was one outwardly, being
circumcised in the flesh. But he was a Jew who was one inwardly, being
circumcised in his heart and spirit, as the Apostle expresses. In like manner,
he is no true Christian, who is only outwardly Baptized, but he who is inwardly
Baptized by the Spirit, and whose heart is changed and renewed.

3. The Excellency of this new birth appears in this, that it is the beginning
of eternal life and happiness: even of the same life which we shall live
hereafter in Heaven with the Saints, and glorious Angels to all Eternity. Grace
here is not only an evidence of glory hereafter, but it is the beginning of
that glory, which hereafter we shall more fully enjoy in Heaven: Grace and
glory differ only in degree: for grace is glory begun here, and glory is grace
consummated, and perfected hereafter. Now considering that this is such an
excellent state, how does it concern you as earnestly to desire, so
industriously to endeavor after it, in the use of all means God has
sanctified.

II. Another Motive may be taken from the Utility of Regeneration. If it be
demanded What is the profit thereof? we may answer (...) the Apostle did of
Circumcision, Much every way. 1 Timothy 4.8.
For this is that Godliness, which is profitable unto all things, having
promises of the life that now is, and of that which is to come, that is, it
has Heaven and Earth entailed on it, and therefore must needs be profitable.
The Regenerate therefore are called heirs of the Promises. Heb. 6.17. Jam. 2.5.
Such only have the true riches, being rich in faith, as the Apostle James
calls them. As Laodicea was poor, though abounding in outward fullness. So
these are truly rich, though destitute of many outward things, having an
interest in God, who is the fountain of all blessings. How should the
consideration hereof stir you up, as earnestly to thirst, so sincerely to
endeavor after this blessed state!

III. Another Motive may be taken from the necessity of Regeneration. It is
absolutely necessary to Salvation. It had been better for thee never to have
been born, than not to be born again. It is as necessary as Heaven and
happiness. For says our Savior himself, Except a man be born again, he cannot
see, much less enter into, the Kingdom of Heaven. So that there is no hope of
the Salvation of any unregenerate man, or woman: but if they live and die in
that estate, their portion will be death and damnation with the Devils and
damned to all Eternity. And in regard of the uncertainty of their lives, they
are not sure to be out of Hell one day longer.

Ah sinner! What do thou mean then to continue in thy carnal and unregenerate
estate? As sure as the word of God is true, if thou dye therein, thou art shut
out of all hope of mercy for ever: and shall pass into easeless, and endless
misery. In the fear of God therefore, when thou risest up in the Morning,
consider with thy self, that thou art uncertain of being out of Hell till the
Evening. And when thou lie down, consider how uncertain thou art of being out
of Hell till the next morning. Surely this consideration is enough to amaze any
poor Christian who is indeed Regenerate, but makes some question thereof in
himself. How much more should it amaze, and startle thee who art yet in thy
carnal and sinful estate; and stir thee up without any farther delay to escape
for thy life, and make out in have after thy Redemption from this dreadful
condition.

I would ask thee this question, Whether if thou should put off thy seeking
after the great work of Regeneration and conversion till another year, week, or
day, thou art sure to be then on this side the grave, or on this side hell?
Certain it is, thou have no assurance of thy life for one day longer. Nay, I
dare boldly say, thou thy self know and believe as much. Ah sinner, what
folly, yea what madness is it then for thee wilfully to live one day longer in
such an estate, in which if thou should dye, thou art, without hope of
recovery, undone for ever.

Obj. Happily thou will say, though I am not sure to live another day, yet I am
likely, being in good health and strength of body.

Answ. How many as strong and healthful as thy self, have suddenly by death
been snatched away? And why may not thou be as soon taken away, having no
Lease of thy Life? who then but a fool or a madman would adventure his eternal
happiness upon such an hazard? Oh therefore as thou tenderest the everlasting
good of thy precious soul, put not off this great and weighty work a day
longer: Prove. 27.1.
for who knows what a day may bring forth?

Had thou been taken away in the state thou art in, how sad had thy case
been? where had thou been at this hour? Certainly thou art not able to
conceive the dreadfulness of that misery thou should now have been in. And
have thou lived all this while in so great danger, and will thou live in it
still? God forbid! Has a miracle of mercy kept thee out of hell so long? and
will thou yet continue securely in such danger of it? Oh ungrateful wretch!
Questionless if thou had any ingenuity in thee, thou would be ashamed thus
to abuse the patience, and long-suffering of God toward thee; which should
have led thee to repentance. Thou should rather take up a resolution, and
say, though I have hitherto abused the patience and long-suffering of God, I
will abuse it no more. Though I have often slighted and rejected the gracious
invitations of Jesus Christ, yet through the grace of God, I will reject them
no more, but close with them, and give up my self unto Christ from henceforth
to be ruled and governed by him.

God has allotted to every man who lives in the bosom of the Church a certain
day of grace, and time of repentance; which whosoever neglects, can never be
saved. Ah sinner, as therefore thou would not neglect thine own Salvation,
neglect not the day of grace, neither let slip the season of mercy; but as the
Apostle exhorts, Heb. 3.15.
To day if you will hear his voice, harden not your hearts. Behold now is the
accepted time, now is the day of Salvation; if that be once past there is no
recovering it.

CHAP. VII. Shows the miserable and dreadful condition of the Unregenerate
in their lifetime.
HAving given you some Motives to quicken up your desires and endeavors after
the work of Regeneration. I come now to show you the Means on your part to be
performed for the better attaining thereunto; which may be brought to these two
general heads; 1. The Embracing some truths. 2. The Practicing some duties.


The Truths to be embraced are these; 1. That every man in his state of
unregeneracy is in a miserable state, and dreadful condition. 2. That there is
hope of mercy for the greatest sinners.


That you may the better understand the miserable condition of men in their
state of Unregeneracy, I shall show you their miseries: 1. In this life. 2. At
death. 3. After death.


Their miseries in this life are briefly these;

I. They are Servants to sin, and slaves to their lusts; making it their main
work and design to serve their sinful flesh with its affections. The baseness
of this slavery under sin will appear the more, if we shall consider,

1. What it is we do inthrall thereby, even our precious souls, which at first
were created after the Image of God, and fitted for his noble service, and
communion with himself. Now for this immortal Being to be a drudge to base
pleasures and profits, to the vain and vile things of this World, is a most sad
degeneration.

2. What are the fruits of this spiritual bondage and slavery.

1. At the best a little seeming pleasure, or profit, that lasts but for a
moment, Heb. 11.26.
which the Apostle calls, the pleasures of sin for a season: they are but of
little worth, and but of short continuance. And sure it must needs be a point
of folly eagerly to pursue these sinful lusts and pleasures, which are but
light and temporary, which do but appear and vanish, to the hazard of those
durable riches and eternal pleasures which are at Gods right hand.

2. Another fruit which usually follows upon our slavish subjection to our
lusts, Romans 6.23.
is death eternal; according to that of the Apostle, the wages of sin is death,
and that eternal, as appears by the opposition of eternal life: for says the
Apostle, The wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life. So
that as eternal life follows an holy life, so eternal death follows a
sinful life. This is the reward, sinner, that thy God whom thou servest will
pay thee at last, thou must dye the death.

Oh the folly and madness of this sensual enslaved World! Surely were there
nothing in sin but the present slavery, it were enough to dissuade any
ingenuous spirit. Who would be a slave? a slave to a lust? at the command of
every unclean motion? at the beck of every brutish affection? But if the
vileness of the work will not deterr thee, will not the dreadfulness of the
wages neither? which is eternal death and condemnation. Oh consider this you
who make so light a matter of sin, and take such pleasure in obeying the lusts
thereof.

II. All men in the state of unregeneracy are servants and slavos to the Devil.
Which necessarily follows upon the former, for such as are in subjection to
their lusts, must needs be under the bondage and slavery of Satan, in that the
chief power he has over us, is, by lust to allure us unto sin. I know all men
are apt to say, that they hate and defy the Devil, and abhor to be his slave
or servant: but yet in the mean time, they obey his sinful commands, and
thereby declare themselves to be his servants, for as the Apostle speaks,
Know ye not, Romans 6.16.
that to whom ye yield your selves servants to obey, his servants ye are to
whom ye obey. And says the beloved Disciple, 1 John 3.8.
He that commits sin is of the Devil, that is, he who gives up himself to
the committing of sin, is a servant and slave to the Devil, for he does his
drudgery.

Oh that the eyes of poor sinners were opened to see who it is that puts them
upon all manner of sin and wickedness! Certainly they would not then be so
ready and forward thereunto. Oh that they did but know in what a miserable
bondage and slavery they are! Certainly then they would not be so merry, and
jovial, neither would they sleep one night quietly in such a state and
condition, but they would be casting about, how they might be freed and
delivered from the same.

III. All men in their state of unregeneracy are under the curse of God, which
continually so hangs over their heads, that they are cursed in every thing,

1. In their estate. Wealth and Riches are in themselves good things, even the
good blessings of God: but yet all the wealth of carnal and unregenerate men
are accursed unto them; their very blessings are turned into curses, as the
Lord threatens by his Prophet Malachy, saying, I will curse their blessings.

Cursed they are, and shall be in the City and in the Field; in their Basket
and in their Store; in the increase of their Kine, and in the flocks of their
Sheep, as you have it expressed, Deuteronomy. 28.17, 18. Though thou enjoyest
abundance of this Worlds goods, yet so long as thou live in thy wicked and
ungodly courses, be it of lying, swearing, couzening, whoring, drinking and the
like, the curse of God is in thy store and abundance, which makes way for thine
eternal misery.

2. In their names. Their very name is cursed, for as the Wise man speaks,
Prove. 10.7.
The memory of the just is blessed, but the name of the wicked shall rot; that
is, the just and righteous shall leave a sweet scent behind them, so that they
shall not be mentioned without some commendation. But the wicked shall leave a
stinking savor behind them; so that their very names shall be loathsome and
abominable; like a rotten carcass they shall for ^a while stink above ground,
and at last be utterly forgotten.

3. In their houses. For as the Wise man speaks, The curse of the Lord is in
the house of the wicked. Though their houses be never so well furnished, Prove.
3.33.
yet what comfort and content can there be found therein, when the curse of God
is in them? which is enough to blast the beauty and glory, and to eat up the
timber and the stones thereof. Zech. 5.4.


4. In their religious exercises. The word which they hear, is cursed unto
them. That which to others is the savor of life unto life, to them is the
savor of death unto death, being a means to ripen their sins, and hasten their
ruin. The prayers which they make are accursed unto them: oft-times bringing
down a curse rather than a blessing. Yea the Table of the Lord is likewise
accursed unto them, so that instead of feeding on the body and blood of Christ,
they eat and drink their own damnation. Oh how sad and lamentable must thy
condition needs be, when those things which are not only blessings in
themselves, but likewise blessed unto others, should be cursed unto thee, and
heighten both thy sin and sorrow. And if thy blessings become curses, O what
will thy curses be!

IV. As the ground and foundation of the curse, All men in their state of
u^regeneracy are under the guilt of all their sins, which must needs make their
condition sad and dreadful. Psalm. 32.1.
For as the man is blessed whose iniquity is forgiven, and whose sin is
covered: So is he most wretched and miserable, who lies under the guilt of sin
without pardon: His Conscience b^ing ofttimes tormented with such restless
horrors and perplexities, that though life be most sweet, and hell most
dreadful, yet it makes a man wilfully to cast away the one, and willingly to
embrace the other, that he may be freed from the horror of his guilty
conscience. Thus Judas sought ease by an halter, and preferred hanging, yea the
torments of Hell before the anguish of his guilty conscience. Now thou may
make light of unpardoned sin, thinking it no great matter. But the day is
coming, when thou would give all the world, (if thou had it) for a pardon,
wh ich then cannot be had. Therefore as ever thou would stand before Christ's
judgment seat with comfort, and not be cast into everlasting burnings, now
turn from thy sins, and be earnest with God in Prayer for the pardon of them in
and through the merits of Christ's bloody death and passion. Art thou a sinner,
and not a pardoned sinner? O tremble! What conscience have thou that can let
thee sleep, and sing and laugh in such a dismal state?

V. Every man in his state of unregeneracy is liable to all sorts of judgments.

1. To temporal judgments, as pains, sicknesses and diseases, losses, crosses,
and the like. Happily for the present thou may be without them, but thou can
not promise thy self freedom and exemption from the same, no not for one day:
for they are continually hanging over thine head, ready every moment to seize
upon thee: and they oftentimes come suddenly when they are least expected. It
is expressly noted, that when the Lord rained Fire and Brimstone upon Sodom and
Gomorrah, at that time the Sun was risen from the Earth. Little did the
Sodomites expect so strange a shower after so fair a Morning. Believe it, this
days ease, and rest and mirth may be turned into pangs and anguish, and
groanings, and roarings before tomorrow.

2. They are liable to spiritual judgments, as blindness of mind, hardness of
heart, vileness of affections, horror of conscience, and the like. The Prophet
Isaiah does elegantly decipher the miserable condition of an unregenerate man
in this respect, The wicked, says he, Isa. 57.20.
are like the troubled Sea, when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and
dirt. The Sea is not only ofttimes outwardly tossed up and down with winds and
tempests, but also inwardly disquieted, even with her own motions, casting up
continually mire and dirt. Even so the heart of a carnal man is not only many
times outwardly troubled with crosses and afflictions; but also inwardly
disquieted with the impetuous violence of filthy lusts, and the restless
terrors and torments of a guilty Conscience, which are far soarer than any
outward afflictions, as seizing upon the tenderest part, namely the Soul and
Spirit of a man.

3. They are liable to eternal judgments. What can they expect if they dye in
their state of unregeneracy, but after this momentary life is ended, to be cast
into that everlasting fire, which God has prepared for them, as well as for
the Devil and his Angels? which is the most dreadful condition of all: that
judgment cannot be accounted small which is eternal. An eternal Fever, or but
an eternal toothache, were a misery unspeakable. But what are these to the
lying in that lake which burns with fire and brimstone to all eternity? Oh
methinks, the name of eternal judgment should, if not fright him out of his
wits, yet awaken eyely unregenerate man out of his security; and stir him up
without further delay to abandon his wicked and ungodly course of life, and to
set upon the practice of all holy and religious duties, and to labor therein,
to get the work of Regeneration wrought in his heart, that he may become a new
creature. It may be thou have a plentiful portion of this Worlds goods,
enjoying what thine heart can wish or desire; But oh what will it profit thee
to live plentifully and prosperously here, and to be eternally miserable
hereafter? Thy former happiness will serve only to make thee more sensible of
future miseries. And therefore when thou art tempted to any unlawful pleasure,
or profit, reason thus with thy self, Shall I for a short momentary pleasure,
that will soon have an end, run the hazard of an eternal judgment, that will
never have an end? shall I for a little profit here, loose my soul to all
Eternity? What greater folly, yea what greater madness can be imagined?

Thus much of the miseries of the Unregenerate in this life: Come we now to
show their miseries at death.

CHAP. VIII. Shows the miserable and dreadful condition of the Unregenerate
at their death.
IF the life of an unregenerate man be so miserable, as has been showed. How
doleful think you, will be his death? surely his misery then will be much
increased, As will appear from the consideration of these particulars.

I. When death shall appear unto thee, and tell thee, it has a message from
the Lord, who has sent an habeas corpus for thy body: Then comes in
Conscience, if a little awakened, with her books of accounts, her black and
bitter roll, and shows thee thy old reckonings and arrears, setting before thee
the follies of thy youth, the sins of thy riper years, and the iniquities of
thy whole life.

Ah sinners, thou who go on impenitently in thy wicked and ungodly course of
life, consider with what a ghastly countenance thou will look upon that black
and hellish Catalogue of all thy sins: thy lies and oaths, thy railing and
rotten speeches, thy scoffings at Gods people, thy goods ill gotten, thy time
ill spent, thy profanation of Sabbaths, thy speculative wantonness, yea thy
many actual filthinesses, and uncleanness, thy pride, worldliness, and
covetousness, thy sensual revellings, and jovial meetings.

Ah sinner, sinner; what horror will then possess thy soul, no heart of man
can conceive, nor tongue of men and angels can express. Indeed many there are,
who upon their deathbeds have little right or sense of their sins, neither do
they think of judgment, or eternity, but drop into hell before they consider
any thing. But yet upon the approach of death, commonly there is some terror
and trembling upon the consciences of carnal men: and if ever any sin did
formerly sting, it will then especially. Oh, methinks a serious apprehension,
and sensible forethought of these things, even at hand, for ought any man
knows, should make the hardest heart to tremble, and melt into tears of
unfeigned sorrow.

II. The Devil will not be then wanting to aggravate thy sins, and to set
before thee the curses and the judgments due unto thee for the same, thereby
to drive thee to despair, For when death lays siege to the body, then does he
most violently assault the soul. And the shorter he perceives his time to be,
the more eagerly does he bestir himself. And when through pain of body, and
perplexity of mind, thou art least able to make resistance, then will he most
fiercely assault thee. Whereas formerly his great design was to ^ull thee fast
asleep in a presumptuous security, by persuading thee that thy state and
condition was as good as the best, and thy salvation sure enough: at thy death
(if he be not then also pursuing the same design) if he can no longer hold thee
under thy sleep, it will be his great work to persuade thee, that thy sins are
greater than can be forgiven, that there is no place for thee in Heaven, and
that it is impossible thou should be saved. He that has made the way to
Heaven so broad, and the entrance so easy all thy life long, will at thy death
do his utmost to shut the door against thee.

III. Death puts an end to all thy Worldly comforts, and contentm^nts, which
must all die with thee, as to thy use and comfort; It salutes thee with this
sad word, Thou have received thy good things, Now an end of thy Heaven and joy.
Particularly,

1. Then thou must part with all thy carnal pleasures and delights, which thou
have loved so dearly. Yea then thou will find little comfort remaining of all
thy former pleasures, wherein thou tookest so much content and delight: and for
the enjoyment whereof thou dispensedst not only with the duties of thy calling,
but likewise with the duties of piety. Yea it will be a very hell unto thee
upon earth to consider what eternal torments thou art like to endure, for those
poor and perishing pleasures which thou enjoyedst here for a season. Are these
the things for which I dye? Are these the price of my soul, of my blood, of my
peace?

Ah sinner! the remembrance of thy past pleasures will then possess thee with a
double passion. First, with grief, because thou art parting with them: And then
with d^t^station, because they have brought upon thee such bitter sorrows and
torments in hell with the Devils and damned to all eternity. O the tail of
these Locusts, whose fair faces have heretofore bewitched thee! O the sting,
the sting that they carry in their tails, which is now all that remains to
thee!

2. Thou must part with thy nearest and dearest relations, as thy dear Wife, or
dear Husband, with thy beloved Children. Death will separate thee from them
all. Ah sinners, sad will it be to part with these here, to live for ever with
the Devils and damned in hell. And how will it torment thee when you must part,
to remember to how little good purpose you lived together!

3. Thou must part with thy wealth and riches, carrying nothing away with thee
of all thy enjoyments. We brought nothing into the World, 1 Timothy 6.7.
and it is certain, we can carry nothing out, as the Apostle speaks. But as
we came naked into the World, Job 1.21.
so we shall go naked out of the World. And therefore when rich men dye, they
are said to leave a good estate behind them. And indeed they may well be said
to leave it, because they cannot carry it away with them. Ah sinner! I know it
will be a death to thee to part with thy wealth, which was thy life; but to
consider how thou have damned thy soul for the getting thereof; this will be an
hell to thee.

4. Thou must part with all the means and opportunities of grace. Now thou
enjoyest the ordinances of Christ, as the Word, Prayer, and Sacraments, which
whilst thou enjoyedst thou had hope: But death puts an end to these, and thy
hopes must give up their Ghost. Now Christ calls upon thee, Sabbath after
Sabbath, by his Ministers and Ambassadors, woing and beseeching thee to
abandon thy lusts, to cast away thy sins, and to cast thy self into his arms,
to accept of the reconciliation purchased by his blood. But ere long thou shall
hear no more of these things, not a Sabbath more, not a Sermon more, not a
promise, not one word more of grace, of mercy, of hope for ever. When thou
would give, if thou had them, ten thousand Worlds, for one moment of that
merciful time of grace, which thou have so long abused; for a drop of that
precious blood, which thou have so long trampled under thy feet: yea for one
Sabbath more, to have Christ once more tendered to thee in the Ministry of the
Gospel; but alas it will not be granted.

Ah sinner! Then will thou cry out of thy sins, and cry for mercy: mercy, mercy
Lord to a dying soul, that am just sinking, perishing under the load of mine
iniquities. Then will thou begin to wish; when it is too late, that thou had
spent thy precious time to better purpose; that thou had minded more the
things of Eternity: that thou had closed with the tenders and offers of Jesus
Christ, and that thou had better improved the means and opportunities of
grace, which thou did once enjoy.

Thou will then say, Oh if the Lord would be pleased to add a few years more to
my life! How would I contemn the World and the vanities thereof? How exactly
would I order my conversation? How careful would I be of duty, how watchful
against sin? How would I bestir my self to work out mine own salvation? But ah
sinner! the time of thy departure is at hand, and there is no hope of a
reprieve for one day longer; and therefore all these good wishes and purposes
come too late.

There are two things especially which will aggravate a sinners misery at his
death.

1. To think what possibility of making his peace with God he has had all his
life time; to remember how often he has been invited to accept of Jesus
Christ, and yet would not.

2. To think that now there is no hope of mercy, having by his sins shut
Heaven-gate, and hardened Gods heart against him. Ah sinner! then will thou in
the bitterness of thy soul cry out, and say, The God of mercy has utterly
forsaken me; and the Devil, who knows no mercy, waits for to take me. Ah! then
which way soever thou look, thou will find nothing but matter of bitter
weeping and lamentation. If thou look backward, what can thou behold but all
the filthy and abominable lusts of thy youth unrepented of? yea multitudes of
horrid sins which thou have committed in the whole course of thy life; for
which thou never have been humbled, nor shed one penitential tear: the guilt of
the least of them is enough to sink thee body and soul into everlasting
burnings.

If thou look forward, what can thou behold but sudden destruction ready to
seize upon thee? Yea Gods strict Tribunal, before which thou art just making
thy appearance, there immediately to be sentenced to endless torments and
miseries of the other world; the sting and terrors of which thou shall never
be able either to avoid, or abide.

If thou look within thee, what can thou behold, but thy conscience polluted
and defiled, yea accusing and condemning thee? If without thee, what can thou
behold, but the wicked World which thou have too much loved? and thy relations
which stand weeping about thee? a company of miserable comforters, that cannot
delay the separating stroke of death one day or hour: neither can they afford
thee the least dram of true comfort.

If thou look downward, what can thou behold, but hell deserved? with her
mouth open ready to swallow thee up quick; and the Devils ready to receive thy
soul, and carry it to that dungeon of darkness. If upward, what can thou
behold but a provoked, enraged God? whom because thou refusedst to hear in the
day of his merciful visitation, he will now laugh at thy calamity, and mock
when thy fear comes upon thee, as himself threatens, Prove. 1.24, 26. and in
verse 28. says the Lord, Then shall thou call upon me, but I will not answer,
thou shall seek me, but thou shall not find me, for that thou hatedst
knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the Lord. And verse 30. Thou
would none of my counsel, but despisedst all my reproofs. Therefore shall
thou eat the fruit of thine own way, and be filled with thine own desires; that
is, the wickedness which thou have sown, shall thou reap with all fullness.
Thus thou will look every where for help, yet find thy self every way
helpless, and hopeless.

Happily thou will then look unto Jesus Christ, in hope that he will appear for
thee, and his blood make thy Atonement: But sinner know, that though his blood
be a fountain opened to all poor penitent believers, to wash away the filthy
spots and stains of their sins; Yet to thee, who have all thy life long,
suffered Christ to stand knocking at the door of thine heart, by the Ministry
of his Word, by the motions of his Spirit, and by the checks of thine own
conscience, and would not open unto him: to thee his blood will be then a
fountain sealed; so that thou shall not partake of the least benefit thereof,
because in thy life time thou have so often slighted it, yea and crucified him
afresh by thy bloody sins.

Ah sinner, sinner, whither will thou flee for comfort in the midst of thy
distress? It will then be too late to cry out, Oh that the time I have spent in
Taverns and Alehouses, in sports and pastimes, in carnal pleasures and sensual
delights, I had spent in Prayer and fasting, in humbling and repenting! It will
then be too late to cry with Balaam, Oh that I might dye the death of the
righteous, when thou have, neglected to live the life of the righteous. For
look as the life is, so commonly is the death; and as death leaves a man, so
the last judgment shall find him.

And now, sinner, thy last sand being run out, thy day past, and the Devils
long looked for day being come, who waits for thy soul, so soon as it goes out
of thy body. Oh what a direful screech will thy soul give when it passes out
of thy body into the Devils clutches, to be carried by him into the bottomless
burning lake!

Oh how should the consideration of these unspeakable miseries, which are the
portion of natural and unregenerate men at their deaths, startle and waken all
such worldlings and sensualists, who so they may increase their wealth, and
satiate themselves with worldly pleasures and delights, take no thought now,
nor make any provision against this dreadful day of reckoning, I mean, the day
of their deaths. Surely did they know and feelingly apprehend, or would they be
brought to believe what horror and astonishment, what terror and anguish is
like then to seize upon them; they would count it the greatest point of wisdom
in the World speedily to labor for an interest in Jesus Christ, who alone can
free them, as from the sting of death, so from these horrors and astonishments
which accompany the same; and would now ply all the blessed means of salvation,
as reading, hearing, praying, fasting, and the like; which are now their burden
and bondage; yea the matter of their mocks and scorns, would then be their
daily delight and exercise.

CHAP. IX. Shows the miserable and dreadful condition of the Unregenerate
after their deaths.
IF this were the conclusion of Unregenerate men, that death did put an end to
all their miseries, happy were it for many. But this is their grief and sorrow,
their woe and misery, that all this is the beginning of their sorrows: that
after all this, there is a reckoning to be made for what is past. Heb. 9.23.
For as it is appointed to men once to dye, so after this comes the judgment.
Where by the Judgment that immediately follows after death, the Apostle
means the particular judgment, which is at the end of each man's life, as is
evident by this phrase, (...).
after this, which intends the time of a man's death. For as there is a
general judgment at the end of the world; So there is a particular judgment
that passes upon each man at the end of this life. Ah sinner! so soon as thy
breath departs out of thy body; it fares with thy soul, as with that man of
whom the Prophet Amos speaks, Amos 5.19.
who did flee from a Lion, and a Bear met him. In like manner thy soul is no
sooner escaped out of a miserable World, but in a moment it is plunged into
another and greater misery.

Herein lies a main difference between the Children of God, and the wicked.
The course which God takes with his Children is this. When the soul is set at
liberty from the prison of the body, it is instantly conveyed by the Angels
into Abraham bosom, Luke 16.22.
as is expressly noted of Lazarus. And being clothed with the long white robe
of Christ's Righteousness, Rev. 6.11. Heb. 12.23.
is joined to the spirits of just men made perfect.

But with the souls of wicked and impenitent sinners, it is far otherwise; for
so soon as they depart out of their bodies, they are seized upon by wicked
Angels, and presently brought before Gods Tribunal-seat, where receiving their
doom, they are instantly sent down into the Kingdom of darkness, and bottom of
the burning lake, there to be reserved in everlasting chains unto the judgment
of the great day.

For the better awakening the Consciences of wicked and impenitent sinners, I
shall briefly show you the manner and degrees of this particular judgment.

1. As the Iaylor at the Assizes brings forth the Prisoner out of Prison, and
sets him before the Judge. So, Sinner, the Devil as thy Iaylor brings forth thy
soul out of the Prison of thy body, and sets it before the glorious presence of
God; the sight of whom will strike thee with such hellish horror and
astonishment, that thou would be glad to have the greatest rock to fall on
thee, and mightiest mountain to cover thee, Rev. 6.16.
and there to lie hid everlastingly from the face of him that sits on the
Throne.

2. As when the Prisoner is come before the face of the judge, then his
accusers bring in their evidence. So sinner, thou art no sooner set before the
face of the Almighty Judge, but thy Conscience joining with the Devil brings in
evidence against thee. And then all thy filthy thoughts and impure
imaginations, all thy lies and oaths, with all thy rotten communications, and
all the secret impurities and villainies of thy whole life will be set before
thee, and charged upon thy soul. And how dismally will all thy mirth, and thy
pleasures, the houses that thou have built, the lands thou have purchased, the
money thou have hoarded up by iniquity, how dreadfully will these look on thee
in that day? Now thou boastest thy self in thy wealth, and blessest thy self in
thy pleasures, and sportest thy self in thy sins, but in what a grim
countenance will all these appear, when they meet thee before the throne of
God? Ah sinner! What will thou then do? whither will thou fly from the
revenging hand of God? what mountain can thou get by entreaty to fall upon
thee. Truly, in this case one would not have thine heart in his breast one
hour, for all the riches, honors, and pleasures of the World.

3. Then will the Lord hereupon proceed to the sentence of condemnation,
(though happily not vocally, yet effectually,) upon thy soul; and say, Depart
thou cursed into everlasting fire, there to be reserved to the Judgment of the
great day. Ah sinner! what horror and astonishment will overwhelm thy soul
upon that dreadful sentence.

4. As the Judge having pronounced the sentence of death, delivers up the
Prisoners to the Jaylors: So then shall God deliver up thy Soul into the hands
of the Devils, who being thy Jaylours must keep thee to the great day of
account. Whereupon they will instantly hurry thee into that horrible dungeon,
and fiery lake, where is nothing but weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth.
Where thou shall have no other comforter, but the cursed Devils, who will be
continually insulting over thee with hellish spite for slighting and rejecting
the offers and tenders of Jesus Christ, for neglecting so great Salvation all
thy life long, and losing Heaven for thy base lusts.

II. Besides this particular judgment on the souls of the unregenerate at
their deaths; there will be a general judgment on their souls and bodies
reunited at the great and last day.

For the fuller clearing and opening of this great and fundamental principle of
Religion, I will show you; 1. That there will be a day of Judgment. 2. The
Person who shall be the Judge. 3. The manner of Christ's coming to Judgment. 4.
The order of Christ's proceeding in Judgment.


I. For the first, that there will be a day of Judgment, is clear from that of
the Author to the Hebrews, Chap. 6.2. where he reckons it amongst the
fundamental principles of Religion. And Act. 17.31. The Apostle Paul speaking
of God, says, He has appointed a day in which he will Judge the World in
righteousness. Yea in 2 Cor. 5.10. he puts a MUST upon it, We must, says he,
all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, which implies the necessity
thereof.

And truly there is a necessity of a general Judgment, as for the declaration
of the equity of Gods particular Judgment on each man at his death; in which
respect it is called the day of the revelation of the Righteous Judgment of
God. Romans 2.5.
So for a clear manifestation of the justice of God. Psa. 145.17.
Though God be most just in all his ways, yet in this World it is not so
evidently discerned. Because God in Wisdom often suffers the wicked to prosper;
yea and to domineer over the Righteous. Here the best men are ofttimes the
worst used, and most wronged. Here the true Prophets of God are fed with bread
and water in their Caves; whilst the false Prophets of Baal fared plentifully
at Iezabels Table. Luke 16.19, 20, 21.
Here Dives sits in his Palace, clothed richly, faring sumptuously every day;
whilst Lazarus lies at his gate, naked and hungry. But then God will reader
to every one according to his deeds. Romans 2.6. In die judicii cum justi
introducentur in regnum Dei, injusti autem abjicientur for as. Aug. in Psalm. 72.
When as Heaven and everlasting happiness shall be the lot of the righteous:
So hell and eternal horror shall be the portion of the unrighteous. Thus you
see, there will be a day of Judgment.

Oh how terrible will this day of Judgment be unto the unregenerate, and
wicked! To them it will be Zeph. 1.15.
a day of wrath, a day of trouble and distress, a day of darkness and
gloominess; Then shall the drunkard drink deepest of the cup of Gods wrath; the
fornicator and adulterer, who burned with the fire of lust, burn in the fire of
Hell. Then shall the glutton who gave himself up to the satisfying of his
greedy appetite, be pinched with hunger and parched with thirst, not having a
drop of water to cool his flaming tongue. Then shall the worldling and covetous
wretch feel his loads of ill-gotten goods sinking and drowning him in perdition
and destruction, pressing him down to the bottom of the infernal lake.

Ah sinner! How does it concern thee to retire into some secret place, and
there seriously to ponder on this day of judgment? Ask thine heart this
question, Is it certain there will be a day of judgment, or no? If it be
certain; Oh then why do I not prepare for it, by breaking off my sins, and
making my peace with God, before that day come upon me? why do I not labor for
an interest in Christ, by whom alone I can be freed from eternal death and
condemnation? Romans 8.1.
why do I not now give all diligence to make my Calling and Election sure? Oh
sinner, reason thus with thy self; thou know not of what advantage a few
such serious thoughts may be to thy soul.

When Paul Preached to the Athenians, he urged them to repent and turn from
their sins, from this very ground and reason, Act. 17.30, 31.
Because the Lord had appointed a day in which he will judge the World in
righteousness. Oh repent therefore, and turn ye from your wicked ways, for why
will ye dye and perish eternally in your sins? Seek unto the Lord while he may
be found, and call upon him while he is nigh. Christ now stands knocking at the
door of thine heart, by the Ministers of his Word, the motions of his Spirit,
and checks of thine own Conscience. Oh give him speedy and willing
entertainment. The time will come when thou will knock with the foolish
Virgins, and shall not be heard: and repent with Judas, and not be accepted.
For the Lord will have his day when thine is past, and a day of Judgment for
thy punishment, that did slight and reject the day of mercy for thine
amendment.

II. For the Person who shall be the Judge, It is Christ that shall be Judge:
who shall in a visible shape both judge and pronounce sentence upon all men, as
the sentence of absolution on the elect, so the sentence of condemnation on the
wicked.

Indeed judging the World, being a work ad extra, which is terminated upon, or
respects the creature, it is common to the whole Trinity; So that neither the
Father, nor the Holy Ghost are excluded: but yet it is in Scripture more
especially appropriated to the Son. And that partly as a recompense of his
humiliation; and partly because the proceedings of the judgment being visible,
it seemed convenient, that the Judge himself should be conspicuous. And
therefore Christ in his humane nature shall judge the World, and denounce the
doom of condemnation against the wicked ones: yet shall he do all as Immanuel,
God and man.

Oh, how terrible will the sight of Jesus Christ as Judge be unto all carnal
and impenitent wretches? who when they shall see him sitting upon the Throne,
whose gracious invitations they have slighted; whose Ministers and Ambassadors
they have wronged and contemned; whose ordinances they have neglected, and whom
they have often crucified by their sins: how then will their hearts be appalled
with dread and terror? entreating the rocks and mountains to fall on them,
Rev. 6.16.
and hide them from the face of him that sits on the throne, and from the
wrath of the Lamb.

A poor believer on that day seeing Christ sitting upon the Throne, may with
comfort say, Lo yonder is he who dyed to save me, who shed his blood for my
redemption, and rose again for my justification, and is now come to judge both
the quick and the dead.

But thou who dyest in thy sins, can not but with much anguish of Spirit in
that day cry out and say, Lo yonder is he, who came from Heaven to save poor
lost sinners, and who did Sabbath after Sabbath, even all my life long, by his
Ministers, woo and b^seech me to abandon my lusts, and to receive him as my
Lord and Savior, to yield subjection unto him, and his laws, and to rest upon
him alone for life and salvation: who now would have received me into eternal
bliss and happiness. But I miserable wretch that I was, did slight his woings,
and beseechings, turning a deaf ear to the calls of his grace, and preferred my
lusts and corruptions before the Lord, and his salvation: yea and all my life
long opposed his Kingdom and government, as quite contrary to my carnal heart,
and sensual pleasures, wherein I took much content and delight. This is the
Judge who now sits on life and death, and from whom I must now receive my
sentence. And oh what a fearful sentence must I expect from such a wronged,
cont^m^ed, c^raged, righteous Judge? What will he award me? whether will he
se^d me? Oh my sins, my sins have clothed his soul with fury against me. O my
soul, what Talents of wrath and vengeance will this righteous provoked Judge
lay upon thee? how will he bind thee in chains of darkness, and setters of
eternal fire?

Oh therefore that we were so wise, as now in this our day and time of grace,
so to renounce both our own wickedness, and righteousness, as to join our
selves to our Lord, resigning up our souls to the government of his holy laws,
adventuring and relying upon the merit of his blood, resolving to follow him in
holiness, that hereby we may make him sure to us against that terrible day.

III. For the Manner of Christ's coming to Judgment, it will be as in great
glory, so in great terror to the wicked and impenitent.

1. Christ will come in great glory and Majesty, Mat. 24.30.
even in the glory of the Father. Mat. 16.27.
This is the most glorious work that Christ ever did, or will do in his humane
nature. He will therefore in doing it be ar^^yed with as much glory and
Majesty, as his humane nature is capable of: Tit. 2.^13.
and therefore the Apostle calls it the glorious appearing.

Q. If you ask wherein the glory of Christ shall appear?

A. His face shall shine as the Sun. Mat. 17.2.
Bright clouds as a Canopy shall be over him. Mat. 24.30.
A loud sound of a Trumpet shall be heard before him, He shall sit on a
glorious Throne. Mat. 24.31.
He shall be attended with all the glorious Angels, who are ready to do him
service in this judgment. Mat. 25.31.
These are present as so many Sheriffs and other officers, attending on the
Judge of that great assize.

If it be so terrible to guilty prisoners to behold an earthly judge in his
scarlet Robes, attended upon with the Justices, and Sheriff and other Officers.
Oh how fearful and terrible will the sight of this Judge be, manifesting
himself from Heaven with such a mighty host, and glorious array of Angels!
certainly no tongue can express, no heart can conceive that terror of soul,
and horror of conscience, that fear and amazement, which will seize upon thee,
when thou shall see Christ in his glory, sitting upon his Throne.

2 These. 1.7.
2. As Christ will come in great glory, so in great terror. For he shall come
in flaming fire. Yea the terror of Christ's coming to Judgment is noted in
this, that thereupon the very Sea shall quake and tremble, and in its kind, cry
out and roar, making a most doleful and dreadful noise. Oh what shall become
of the roaring Boys of the earth, when all their rude roarings, and rufflings,
and rantings on their Alebench shall be drowned and swallowed up of this
terrible roaring of the Seas? oh then what shall become of swearers, drunkards,
whore-masters and such like in that dreadful day? Surely they will seek to
creep into an auger-hole to hide their heads: and will cry out in the
bitterness of their souls, Woe and alas, that ever we were born, surely it had
been better for us, if our Mothers wombs had been our graves, and that we had
never seen the Sun.

When Foelix heard Paul preach of this Iudgement-day, and the terribleness
thereof, the text notes that he trembled. Act. 24.25.
And sinner, do not thou tremble, who go on impenitently in thy wicked and
ungodly courses? in thy lying, swearing, drinking, whoring, Sabbath-breaking,
and other like abominations? Ah sinner, either thou know not, or think
not as thou should of this dreadful and terrible day. And therefore it is
that thou go on in the career of thy lusts, giving thy self up to the
gratifying thy sinful affections, and satisfying thine own hearts desire. Oh
that thou would seriously weigh that advice of the Wise man, Eccl. 11.9.
Rejoice, O young man in thy youth, and let thine heart cheer thee in the days
of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thine heart, and in the sight of thine
eyes. As if he had said, Ah young man, do what thou please, take thy fill of
pleasure, satisfy thy Lus^s, deny not thy self any thing that heart can wish;
which expressions are to be taken as spoken ironically, by way of derision, as
appears by the following words, But know thou, that for all these things, God
will bring thee into judgment; as if he had said, Though thou put from thee
the thought of death, and of judgment, yet assure thy self, that for thy
misspent youth, and for all thy sinful lusts, dye thou must, thou know not
how soon; and after death thou shall be brought before Gods Tribunal, there to
receive the just reward of all thy sins. A serious consideration whereof would
be an excellent means to abate the heat of lust, and cause the hearts of young
men to tremble at the thought of that great and terrible day, when Christ shall
come to judgment in glory and great Majesty, with his mighty Angels in flaming
fire.

CHAP. X. Shows the order of Christ's proceeding in Judgment.
IV. FOr the order of Christ's proceeding in Judgment at the last day.

I. There will be a Citation of all both dead and living men with the Devils,
to come to Judgment. We must all appear, 2 Cor. 5.10.
says the Apostle. All without exception of any must make their appearance,
high and low, rich and poor, King and beggar, male and female.

Oh what a great day will that be, when the whole world shall be cited and
summoned to appear together at once!

Q. If you ask how they shall be summoned?

A. By a shout from Heaven, and the sound of a Trumpet, which shall alarm this
sleeping earth, and at which Hell shall shake, all graves shall open, and yield
up their prisoners, which they have fast kept in the chains of death, from all
ages since the beginning of the World. Rev. 20.13.
Yea the Sea shall give up her dead which are in it.

A dreadful summons it will be unto all the wicked and ungodly, whom this
sudden noise will no less astonish, than confound. We read, that when the Lord
descended upon Mount Sinai, for the delivery of the Law, Exodus 19.16.
with the sound of a Trumpet; the people of Israel quaked and trembled. Oh then
how will the wicked and ungodly quake and tremble when the Lord Christ shall
descend from Heaven with the sound of a Trumpet to punish the transgressors of
that Law?

II. Upon this Citation and summons there will be a resurrection, from the
dead, and such a change of the living, as if they had been a long time dead,
and were raised to life again. And as the graves shall then give up their dead
bodies; so hell shall give up her living souls, which shall enter into their
old Carcases to receive a greater condemnation. Oh, what woeful salutations will
there be between that body and soul, which living together in the height of
iniquity, must now be reunited to suffer the fullness of their misery?

III. After the resurrection follows a Collection, and gathering together of
all men and Devils in the World; but with this difference. The Elect being
gathered together by Angels, Mat. 24.31.
shall with great joy be caught up into the air to meet the Lord. But the
reprobate together with the Devils and his Angels shall with extreme horror
and confusion be drawn and dragged into his presence. Rev. 6.15, 16.
Ah sinner, What terror and amazement will then seize upon thee, when like a
malefactor thou art brought against thy will before the Judgementseat of Christ?

IV. After this follows a separation of the good from the bad, of the elect
from the reprobate. For Christ at the first appearing of all before his
JudgementS^at, to testify his gracious favor, and good respect to believers,
separates them from others, and sets them on his right hand, as a flock of
sheep, whom he intends to take for his own. And then will he set the wicked and
unbelievers on his left hand, to testify as his rejecting them, so his purpose
to pass a terrible doom upon them, as himself expresses, Mat. 25.32, 33. Yea
in Luke 17.34, 35. I tell you, says he, in that night there shall be two in
one bed, the one shall be taken and the other left, Two men shall be in the
field, the one shall be taken and the other left. So that at the day of
judgment there will be a separation of the nearest and dearest relations that
may be: as between Husband and Wife, yea Father and Child. Oh! what a sad
separation will that be? when the Husband shall be separated from the Wife, and
the Wife from the Husband: the Father from the Child, and the Child from the
Father. You have often seen what a sorrowful parting it is, when the Wife
buries her Husband, and lays him in the cold grave. How she goes home
weeping and lamenting her sad loss; though she has hope of meeting him again
in Gods Kingdom. Oh, but what an heavy parting and separation will there be,
when the one shall be set at the right hand of Christ, the other at his left?
the one taken into Heaven, and the other cast down into Hell? Oh, that all
Husbands and Wives, all Parents and Children, all Masters and Servants would
seriously think of this dreadful separation; and be thereby stirred up, so to
live together here in the fear of God, that they may not be separated at the
day of judgment, when this sad and fearful separation shall be.

V. After this follows conviction of the wicked, and a discovery of all their
works; Which is proper to go before giving of sentence. For in all Courts of
Justice, there is no man condemned till he be convicted. And therefore this
Court of Christ being the most exactest Court for equity and justice, we may
well conclude, that there will be no man condemned, till he be convicted, and
his offenses laid open before all. And therefore at that day there will be, 1.
A conviction of the wicked and ungodly. 2. A discovery of their sins to all the
World.


Touching the conviction of the wicked, two things are to be considered; 1. The
matter of their conviction, or what they shall be convinced of. 2. The means of
their conviction, or what they shall be convinced by.


I. The matter of their conviction shall be twofold, they shall be convinced,

1. Of their state. That enquiry shall be made after this is evident, Romans
14.12. Every one of us shall give an account of himself to God, that is, what
he is, whether a sheep or a goat; whether a believer, or an unbeliever;
regenerate or unregenerate; in Christ or out of Christ; under the power of
corrupt nature, or sanctified by the grace of God. Here in this world, if
carnal men make any enquiry after themselves at all, it is only after their
outward ways and actions, not asking themselves, What am I? whose am I? Am I
of God or the Devil? Am I in Christ, or in my sins? But for the most part
enquiring only, What have I done? What life have I lived? What course have I
run? 'Twere well if there were more such enquiries as this now in this day. Oh
how seldom do we hear carnal men asking, Jer. 8.6.
What have I done? But in that day the great enquiry will be, What art thou? A
Saint or a sinner? A believer or unbeliever? What charge has been made upon
thy nature? Has there been a work of grace wrought upon thee? And as this will
be the grand inquiry, so this will be the great matter of conviction in that
day. Now men easily take themselves to be converts, to be believers; but then
shall they be convinced of their mistakes, and shall be made to acknowledge,
that they are still in their sins, have rejected Christ, and are strangers from
the life of God.

2. Of their actions: as those that shall evidence what their state is. All the
wickedness of their lives shall be brought forth to light, and made to stare
them in the face: and with such unquestionable evidence charged upon them that
they shall stand speechless before their Judge, not having a word to say to
excuse and acquit themselves of this dreadful charge.

II. Touching the means of conviction, know that this conviction will be by the
opening of two books, which we find mentioned in Scripture.

1. The book of Gods Remembrance. 2. The book of every man's Conscience.
The former we find mentioned, Mal. 3.16. A book of Remembrance was written
before God. God has a book of Remembrance, as of the goods works and actions
of the godly, so of the evil works and actions of the wicked, wherein their
most secret abominations are registered and recorded. Sinner, all the
wickednesses of thy life, the secret villainies that thine heart has been privy
to, which no eye of man ever saw, or suspected: all thy chamber sins, all thy
twilight sins, all thy works of the night, and of darkness, yea secret and
open, which thou have long since forgotten and buried out of thy sight; all
these are written and booked up before the Lord against that terrible day.

The latter book, namely the book of Conscience, we find mentioned Jer. 17.1.
The Sin of Judah is written with a pen of Iron, and with the point of a
Diamond, it is graven upon the Tables of their hearts. That is, their sins are
so fixed in their hearts and consciences that they cannot be forgotten, but the
memory of them all shall be revived. And with the Apostle, Their conscience
also bearing witness, Romans 2.15.
and accusing them in the day, when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus
Christ. In this book of conscience, which God has given to every man and
woman, as in Gods book, so in this also are written all their thoughts, words,
and actions; yea their sinful omissions, as well as their sinful commissions;
their secret impurities, as well as their open impieties.

Now many men's consciences are, as it were, asleep, so that though they are
guilty of manifold sins and transgressions, yet their consciences do not accuse
them for the same: but their iniquity is still marked, and at that day every
man's conscience shall be awakened, bring forth its black roll, even all his
sins, and so shall be as a thousand witnesses against him. Then the Covetous
Shopkeeper shall remember all his deceits in trading, his false weights and
measures, his lying and dissembling. Then shall the unclean person remember all
his watchings for the twilight, all his speculative wantonnesses, and
contemplative as well as practical uncleanness. Then shall the proud man
remember all his fantastic fashions. The malicious man all his envious
wishes, all his plots and stratagems to ensnare and mischief the godly. Yea
then shall every one read in this book the hell of his nature, as well as the
hideous abominations of this life: then shall he see all his former sins, which
he had forgotten, to be written in his conscience, with indelible characters,
never to be blotted out. That work of accusing, which the conscience here does
in some men imperfectly, it will at that day do most perfectly.

Some have found by woeful experience what an intolerable burden one sin is to
the conscience, when the Lord has been pleased to set it home. When Judas had
betrayed his Master, and his conscience began to accuse him for the same, it
was such an intolerable burden to him, that he was not able to stand under it,
but went and hanged himself.

Now if one sin proves so intolerable, who then can stand under the weight of
the many millions of sins, which he has committed in the whole course of his
life? especially when God shall set them all home together upon his conscience.
Ah sinner, If the reading one leaf of this book was so dreadful to Judas; how
dreadful and terrible will it be to thee? when thou shall read not only one
leaf, but the whole book from the beginning to the end, and therein see the
millions of sins committed by thee, whereof as thy whole life, so thy whole
book will be filled within and without, and interlined with lamentation,
mourning and woe. Ah, in what a woeful case will thy heart then be? what horror
and astonishment will then possess thy soul? when all thy lies and oaths, all
thy raylings and rotten speeches, all thy filthy and unclean thoughts, thy
misspent time in Taverns and Alehouses, thy worldliness and covetousness, the
vanities and rebellions of thy whole life, shall be brought to thy remembrance,
and at once charged upon thy graceless soul.

2. At the day of Judgment there will be a discovery of thy sins to all the
World. For as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 4.5.
Hidden things shall on that day be brought to light. They shall not only be
called to remembrance, by the sinner himself, but likewise exposed to the view
and censure of others. There is no sin so secretly and closely committed, but
then shall be discovered to the view of all. There is scarce a wicked man in
the World, though never so formal, but he has at some time or other committed
some such sin in secret, which he would not have others to know for all the
World. But know for certain, that at the day of judgment, all the World shall
hear thereof. For then all thy secret sins, and close villainies shall be
discovered, and laid open before Angels, Men and Devils; thy secret Whoredoms
and close Adulteries, thy Pilfrings and stealings, thy false Weights and
Measures, thy Hypocrisies and Dissemblings shall be discovered to the view of
all, and that to thine eternal shame and confusion. And therefore the day of
Judgment is called the day of revelation, Romans 2.5.
when many Murders, Thefts, Adulteries, and other abominations, which come not
to light here, shall at that day be made known, and discovered to the view of
all. The Husband shall then behold the Whoredoms of his Wife, and the Wife the
Adulteries of her Husband: the Master the Pilferings of his Servant, and the
Servant the deceitfulness of his Master. Yea then not only thy words and
actions, but also thy secret thoughts and imaginations, how vain and wanton,
how filthy and abominable soever they have been, shall appear to the view of
all. Never therefore adventure upon the committing of any sin in hope of
secrecy, because thou seem safe from the eyes of men. For suppose thy sin
lies undiscovered unto the last and great day: yet then shall it out with a
witness, and be made manifest to the view of all.

Q. If any shall ask, how their sins shall be discovered to all the World at
the last and great day?

A. 1. By their own confessions and complaints extorted from them by the power
of God. For then will they cry out in the bitterness of their souls, with these
or such like expressions, Woe and alas, that ever I slighted the manifold
gracious invitations of Jesus Christ, and preferred my base lusts and
corruptions before him; that I have opened the door of my heart to every sinful
temptation, but never would open it to let in Jesus Christ; that I so often
rejected the motions of Gods spirit stirring me up to turn from my sins unto
God; and hearkened more unto the solicitations of the Devil, than to the
motions of Gods spirit: that I neglected the many opportunities and means of
grace afforded unto me, and trifled away my precious time in vanity and
pleasure, yea sin and wickedness; spending that time in the Alehouse, and in
following my sinful lusts and pleasures, wherein I should have been praying in
my closet, or attending upon the Ministry of the Word, or reading the
Scriptures with other good books: that I should prefer^ my Wordly business
before the service of God; that the World should have more of my heart and
time, than my maker and Redeemer.

2. By the cries and complaints of those whom they have wronged and oppressed.
Then Abels blood will cry out afresh against Cain; and the hungry bellies of
the poor will cry out against those hardhearted rich worldlings, who would not
afford them the least comfort or relief. And starved souls will then cry out
against their ignorant, scandalous Ministers, for not giving them the bread of
life. The Wives and the Children of Gamesters, Drunkards and Whore-masters,
being impoverished by their sins, will then cry out against them for spending
their small means in the satisfying their sinful lusts. The poor Tenants will
then cry out against their covetous unmerciful Landlords, for raising and
racking their rents to such an height, as they could not earn their bread by
all their care and labor.

3. By the testimony of Gods spirit, who will then come in as a witness against
thee, saying, at such a time I showed thee the evil of thy sins, and how sad
the issue of them would be, and thereupon persuaded thee to turn from thy sins
unto God, but thou would not: at such a time I showed thee thy misery without
Christ, and thy need of him, how thou would be undone for ever without an
interest in Christ; and how willing Christ was to receive the worst of sinners
unto mercy upon their coming in to him; but thou hearknedst to the Devil more
than to me, to his suggestions, rather than to my motions.

4. By the testimony of the Devil, who is now a tempter, but will then be an
accuser; whose chief design in tempting us to sin is that he may have
wherewithal to accuse us in that great day; that so he might drive us into the
same condemnation with himself.

Thus you see there are several ways of discovering the sins of the wicked and
ungodly at the day of judgment, even to the view of all.

Now I know no better way to prevent the discovery of your sins at that great
day, than here in this time and day of grace to call your selves to an account,
to search and examine your own hearts and lives, and th^n to judge and condemn
your selves for your manifold sins and transgressions; for as the Apostle
speaks, 1 Cor. 11.31.
If we judge our selves, we shall not be condemned of the Lord. Oh therefore
let us here often keep a day of judgment in our own souls and consciences, by
a serious examining of our selves concerning our sins, and judging and
condemning our selves for the same: and then let us in all humility prostrate
our selves at the Throne of grace, pleading the mercy of God and merits of
Christ for the pardon and forgiveness of them all; giving no rest to our souls,
till we have some comfortable evidence and assurance thereof, which will cause
us to lift up our heads with joy at the great day of account.

VI. After conviction and manifestation of all their sinful actions, follows
the sentence of condemnation; and what it is, our Savior himself has showed,
Matthew: 25.41. Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the
Devil and his Angels. O dreadful sentence! every word whereof carries much
terror in it, and breaths nothing but woe and misery, yea fire and
brimstone. So terrible is this sentence that the first hearing thereof will
make all ears to glow and tingle.

Depart from me] that is, from Jesus Christ, the fountain of bliss and
happiness. This the wicked make light of at present: for taking more delight in
their sinful lusts and pleasures than in Christ's presence, they are willing to
depart from him. Whereas in truth it is a most grievous misery; for, as the
Psalmist speaks, in his presence there is fullness of joy, Psalm. 16.11.
and pleasures for evermore. So to be cast out of his presence, is to be cast
away from the fountain of all joy and pleasure, yea from glory and Salvation:
for if from Christ, then from all that is his, even his glory and salvation.

Ah sinner, What a terror, what a torment will this be unto thee at that great
day? This will be a great part of thy torment, that thou shall be excluded, and
that from Christ and his glory, when others shall be admitted; as our Savior
speaks, There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, Luke 13.28.
when ye shall see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the Prophets in the
Kingdom of God, and you your selves thrust out. Oh the fears and distractions!
the horror and confusion! the tearing of hair, and gnashing of teeth! the
wringing of hands and dashing of knees! that these words will produce, Depart
from me. Oh that sinners would lay this to heart! You that now bid God depart
from you, you will have none of his knowledge, none of his commands: God will
requite you in your own kind, he will then command you to depart from him.

Ye cursed.] To depart from Christ were hell enough, but thou must also go with
a curse, even a curse that comprehends all woes and miseries under it. This
curse will be a thousand times more grievous than the cursed and bitter water
was to the defiled woman, Numb. 5.18, 27.
which caused her belly to swell, her thigh to rot, and made her accursed among
her people. For upon the pronouncing of this curse, not only the belly and
thigh, but likewise head and heart, yea body and soul of the wicked shall be
filled with rottenness and bitterness, and become accursed before God, men and
Angels. Now thou cursest every one that stands in the way of thy lusts; and
that crosses thee in thy designs. But at the great and last day all the curses
of Heaven and Hell shall meet in thee, so that thou shall be cursed with a
witness. And truly to be under Gods curse is the quintessence of misery.

Into everlasting fire.] What! into fire, and into everlasting fire? Ah
wretches! cursed indeed. For as the Prophet Isaiah speaks, Isa. 33.14.
who can dwell with devouring fire? who can dwell with everlasting burnings?
which shall not be quenched night nor day, but fed continually with Rivers of
brimstone, and kept still in flame and fierceness by the unquencheable wrath of
the just God to all Eternity. The torment of the wicked in hell will be, as
without any intermission, so without any end. After they have there been
tormented hundreds, thousands, millions of days, years and ages, their
torments will be as far from ending, as if they were then beginning. And is not
this misery enough? to lie in fire? in everlasting burnings? this is even
beyond the expression of men or Angels. If a man knew he must lie in a flaming
fire but one day or hour, Oh what fear and horror would possess his soul? But
what is a day, or an hour, or an age, to eternity? Oh then what stupidity and
senselesness has possessed the hearts of sinful men, who by all this are not
frighted from their sins? The fear of Nebuchadnezzar's fiery Furnace made men
do any thing to avoid it. And shall not the fear of everlasting fire in hell,
make men do any thing to escape it? this methinks should awaken them, and cause
them not only to humble themselves for their sins, and to beg the pardon of
them: but also to cast away their transgressions, to strive against them, watch
against them, pray against them, begging power and strength from Christ, to
keep down the power of their lusts, that hurry them on in their sinful ways.
It is one of the wonders of the world, how men who do believe the word of
Christ to be true, that the wicked shall go into everlasting fire, can
wittingly and wilfully adventure upon sinful ways, the end whereof they know
will be so dreadful and astonishing.

Prepared for the Devil and his Angels] That is, you shall not only be cast
into a lake of fire and brimstone, but you shall there dwell with those hellish
Fiends, the Devil and his Angels, who are the best company you are like to
have. Sad company for distressed souls! and yet in that dismal dungeon, you
shall have no better company, or comforters: who will be continually insulting
over you with hellish exprobrations for neglecting so great salvation offered
unto you time after time; and being so foolish as to loose the joys and
pleasures of Heaven which last to all Eternity, for the enjoyment of some base
lust, which lasted but for a season.

It was a dreadful punishment which was executed upon Nebuchadnezzar, when he
was cast out of the society of men, Dan. 4.33.
and turned a grasing with the beasts of the field. But what was that in
comparison of this? to be cast out of the presence of Christ, and society of
Saints, and to have only the company of the Devils, and damned in hell?

We read in the Gospel of a Woman who came unto Christ, Mat. 18.22.
and said unto him, Have mercy on me O Lord, for my daughter is grievously
vexed with a Devil. Now if it were such a grievous misery to be vexed with one
Devil; what is it to be vexed and tormented with all the Legions of Devils in
Hell?

Oh what terror and trembling, what horror and amazement will seize on their
souls that have received this dreadful sentence? When King Belshazzar saw his
sentence written upon the wall, though he could not read it, Dan. 5.6.
it is said, his countenance was changed, his thoughts troubled him, so that
the joints of his Loins were loosed, and his knees smote one against another.
How much more shall the wicked tremble and quake, and their knees smite one
against another for fear, at the great day, when they shall hear the sentence
of condemnation pronounced by Jesus Christ? How will they then run like men
distracted to the Mountains and Hills for covert and shelter? How will they
then beg and yell again for mercy to a judge that is justly inexorable? I say,
justly inexorable to them, having scornfully rejected his many loving
invitations, and earnest beseechings by his Ministers, to accept of that peace
and reconciliation which he has purchased by his blood. Oh that men would
consider, that one tear or sigh of a penitent heart will now more prevail for
attainment of mercy, than all their bitter and importunate yellings in that day
of Gods wrath!

VII. After the promulgation of the sentence, follows the execution, and
sending of the persons judged to their everlasting estate; Mat. 5.46.
as it is written, And these shall go away into everlasting punishment: So that
now comes the eternal separation from Christ, and possession of those torments,
which are easeless and endless. For then shall they be hurried by the Devils as
their Iaylors out of Christ's presence, and dragged into the bottomless lake of
outer-darkness, that perpetually burns with fire and brimstone. Oh the
hellish cries and horrible shrieks that then will be heard! no heart can
conceive or imagine what an hideous cry it will be. When the inhabitants of
Sodom and Gomorrah felt the fire and brimstone falling from Heaven upon their
heads. And when the earth opened her mouth to swallow up Corah and his company,
and they saw themselves going down quick into the pit: Oh the cries which were
then heard? Oh the shrieks which then filled the air? But alas what were these
to the outcryes which will be made? and to the scrieches which will be heard?
when the Devils and reprobate men and women shall be violently driven into
Hell, never, never to return again. For though they houl and cry to the judge
for mercy and redemption; pity and compassion; yet will they find no answer,
but too late, too late. Mercy, and pardon and peace have been preached to thee,
but thou would not hearken, thou would not accept. Thy day is over, the
things of thy peace are hid from thine eyes: henceforth no more for ever.

Ah sinner, had thou now an heart to turn from thy sins unto God by true and
unfaigned repentance, and to pray unto him for mercy in and through the merits
of Jesus Christ, there were hope of mercy. But at the day of judgment thy
repentance and thy prayers will nothing avail: The judge will not then be
entreated by thee; and no marvel, seeing thou would not hearken to him in the
day of his merciful visitation. But though he sent unto thee messenger after
Messenger, Ambassador after Ambassador to woe and beseech thee to abandon thy
sins, and to accept of him for thy Lord and Savior; yet would thou not leave
one beloved sin, nor deny one fleshly lust for all his entreaties. And
therefore on that day will he not be entreated by thee, notwithstanding thy
manifold cries and prayers. If thou will not believe me, hear Christ's own words
to this purpose, Because I have called, Prove. 1.24, etc.
and ye refused, I have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded. But y e
have set at naught all my counsel, and would none of my reproof: I will also
laugh at your calamity, I will mock when your fear comes as desolation, and
your destruction as a whirlwind, when distress and anguish comes upon you:
then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer: they shall seek me early,
but they shall not find me. Ah sinner, time was when he called to thee, turn
from thy sins, cast away thy transgressions, accept of grace, submit to mercy,
be wise, be happy, thou may if thou will; but thou would not, but have sold
thy mercy and thy peace, and thy Savior, and thy soul for thy lusts, and the
pleasures of sin. And therefore though in thy greatest extremity thou cry unto
him for mercy, he will tell thee, that thy day of mercy is past and gone, and
the day of vengeance is come; wherein he will no longer entreat, nor no more be
entreated.

Ah sinner, how will it then wound thy very soul to remember thy folly in
neglecting thy season, and refusing so great salvation? How will it make thee
with anguish of heart to cry out, Ah silly wretch, where was thine
understanding, to slight such gracious invitations? to prefer every base lust
before the Lord of life? to turn aside from him that spoke unto thee from
Heaven, and to turn after thy companions, and the pleasures of this earth? to
put off the turning from thy sins, and making thy peace with God till it was
too late? Oh now would I give a World, if I had it, for one offer of Christ
more, for one Sabbath more to make my peace with God, and to make sure of
Christ, but alas it is now too late.

Oh the fears and distractions, the tearing of the hair, and wringing of the
hands, the gnashing of teeth, and dashing of knees: the weeping and wailing,
the crying and roaring that this will produce! especially when thou shall
consider, how God every Sabbath called upon thee by his Ministers to turn from
thy sins unto him: but thine ear and thine heart were shut against him. And how
Jesus Christ was offered and tendered to thee only upon these terms, that thou
would cast away thy sins, and cast thy self into his arms, and yet thou
would not go unto him, but refusedst, and rejectedst him and his grace. This
sad reflection of thy soul upon its own wilful folly in neglecting and
outstanding thy day, will be the everlasting worm that will gnaw on thy heart,
World without end.

Oh the folly and madness of all wicked men who go on securely and impenitently
in their sins, till they drop into hellfire! Is this thy Wisdom to sin awhile,
and burn for ever? to laugh a while, and howl for ever? for a little momentary
pleasure here, to suffer the vengeance of eternal fire?

Ah sinner, that thou would now forethink of this dreadful time, and woeful
misery, which hangs over thine head! that when thou art alone, thou would
seriously consider with thy self as the certainty and dreadfulness of this day,
so what thy condition is like to be* that thou might thereby be stirred up
to make out after Christ, by whom thou may escape the wrath to come. Now
whilst Christ is Preached to thee in the Ministry of the Gospel, mercy and
salvation is offered, and now if ever is the time to accept it. Oh therefore
that now, even now in this thy time and day of grace, thou would know the
things that belong to thy peace; that thou would now resolve for Christ,
resolve for holiness: and henceforth bid adieu to all thy vain and sensual
ways which are hastily carrying thee down to that place of darkness, from
whence there is no redemption.

CHAP. XI. Showing the miserable and dreadful condition of the Vnregenereate
after the day of Judgment.
HAving showed you the miserable estate of the unregenerate at the day of
Judgment. I shall proceed to show you, their dreadful estate after the day of
Judgment: Which in general is most cursed, and therefore says our Savior
unto them,

Mat. 25.41.
Depart from me ye cursed. That cursed estate is manifest, 1. By privation of
all felicity. 2. By subjection to all misery. Which misery is set out; 1. By
sundry resemblances. 2. By the place where they abide. 3. By the perpetuity
thereof.



Of these in their order,

I. The miserable and cursed estate of the unregenerate consists in their
privation of all that happiness which believers do enjoy in the presence of
God, Psalm. 16.11.
in whose presence there is fullness of joy, and at whose right hand there are
pleasures for evermore. Were there no positive sensible misery, this privation
of Gods presence were enough, (if they understood it) to make the damneds
future estate most accursed, to make Hell to be Hell without any other fire.
For as fullness of joy and pleasure is had by the enjoying of Gods presence; so
fullness of grief and sorrow does possess the hearts of all those who are
deprived thereof. Could thou but for one moment be wrapped up into Heaven, and
see a glimpse of that infinite glory which God has prepared for all that love
and fear him, thou would soon acknowledge as much.

Now, I know, thou art little affected with the apprehension of loosing Gods
presence, and all the happiness the godly do enjoy in Heaven. But then thine
understanding will be more cleared, and thine apprehension more enlarged to
conceive so much of the glory of that happiness which thou have lost, as will
exceedingly increase and aggravate thy misery and torment: especially when thou
shall call to mind the fair opportunity which once thou had of obtaining that
heavenly happiness: and on what easy terms it was tendered to thee, only upon
the abandoning thy lusts, and the accepting of Christ for thy Lord and Savior,
and thy submitting to his gracious government, walking in the ways of holiness
and righteousness.

It is said of Enoch, Genesis 5.24.
that he walked with God, and it is immediately added, that he was no more
seen, for God took him into his presence. If thou in like manner wilt walk
before God in the ways of holiness and righteousness, thou shall be taken up
into Heaven with Enoch, there to enjoy fullness of happiness in the presence of
God, with the blessed Saints and Angels to all eternity. It is the judgment of
many Divines, both ancient Fathers, and modern Writers, that this privation of
happiness is the greatest of Hells misery; that the pain of loss is greater
than the pain of sense; I mean the loss of happiness is greater than the
positive torments. Sure I am, that the loss of all that this World affords is
not comparable to the loss of the least degree of the future bliss. Oh what a
foolish and mad bargain art thou now making, who art selling such blessedness
for bubbles of vanity!

II. Besides this privation of felicity, there is a subjection to all misery.
Besides the pain of loss, there is a pain of sense, which the damned endure:
which is in it self intolerable, unutterable, and unconceivable. It were misery
enough to be tormented with the gout, colic, stone, toothache, or the like:
but should all these, together with the most exquisite tortures that the wit of
man could invent, meet together in one man, at one instant, yet would they come
infinitely short of these. All pains and torments, all racks and tortures
whatsoever, which men are capable of suffering here, are but sparks in
comparison of the flames of Gods wrath: and flea-bits to the stings and
scorpions beneath, where there is torment without ease, sorrow without solace,
darkness without light, horror without comfort, justice without mercy, wrath
without pity, misery without end. There are no sorrows like to the sorrows of
the damned, wherewith the Lord afflicts them in the day of his fierce wrath;
when he will pour out all the Vials of his fury upon them, and will make them
at once to pay for all the wrongs they have done to his name, for the contempt
of his mercy, their affronts to his justice, for the abuse of his patience and
long-suffering, for their misspent time, for their swearing and cursing, for
the^^ whoring and drinking, for their profaning his Sabbaths, for their hating
and persecuting his people.

Oh! What weeping and wailing? what sighing and groaning? what cursing and
banning will there then be heard?

The extremity of the torments of hell further appears in this, that they are
universal. Not only this or that part of thy body shall be tortured and
tormented, but every part and member thereof. As all have joined in sin, so
must they all partake of the torment.

Thy wanton eyes which were wont to please themselves in beholding beautiful
objects, shall then see nothing but what is dreadful and terrible. If thou look
above thee, what can thou behold but an angry judge, and Saints and Angels,
whose bright beauty will make thy deformity more ugly and loathsome? If thou
look beneath thee, what can thou behold but the bottomless pit into which
thou art fallen, and still falling lower? If thou look round about thee, what
can thou behold, but Devils and hellish furies, vexing and tormenting thee?
Thine ears which took great delight in pleasant songs and melodious sounds,
shall then hear nothing but cursing and banning, howling and blaspheming. Thy
nostrils which were wont to be filled with sweet perfumes, shall then be filled
with the noisome stench of fire and brimstone. Thy throat which was too much
delighted with strong drink, even to excess, or was an open Sepulcher to give
vent to the filth of thine heart, shall then be parched with unquenchable
thirst; so that with Dives thou would give a World, if thou had it, for one
drop of water to assuage thy thirst, and can not obtain it.

The pain which men here endure is for the most part particular, some pained in
their head, some in their back, and some in their feet. And some of these pains
are oft-times so extreme, as thou would not willingly undergo them to gain a
World. But for a man to be tortured and tormented in every part and member of
his body at once, must needs be very grievous, which is the condition of all
the damned in Hell.

By this you may a little conceive the extremity of their torments. But if I
had the tongue of Men and Angels, I could not express it to the full. For as in
Heaven there is such a fullness of joy as the heart of man is not able to
conceive, much less the tongue of man able to express. So in Hell there is such
a fullness of sorrow and torment, as is both beyond expression or conception.

Oh the folly and madness of the men of this World, who notwithstanding the
punishment of sin is so intolerable, yea and they believe it to be so, yet do
suffer themselves to be carried away down into this lake for things of naught:
they will dye rather than be wise: they will fry and roar and howl in the
other World, rather than not sing and laugh, and be vile and abominable in this
World. Ah sinner, should not the bitter sting in sins tail deter thee more,
than the false beauty of its face allure thee?

Certainly did thou but seriously consider the extremity, and burning heat of
that furnace below, it would make thy sin to be too hot for thee above ground.
This fire would quench thy lust, and cool thy fleshly affections, and fetch
thee off from those wretched ways in which thou have so long, and so
resolvedly walked.

Oh sinner, would thou never come into this place of torment? descend into it
daily: look into the pit often, if thou would not fall into it. If Heaven and
all the joy and glory there will not afford arguments enough to draw thee on
after thy God; see if Hell and the torments thereof will not yield thee
arguments enough to withdraw thee from thy sins. Would thou not be enticed to
sin? Let a thought of hell, of death and wrath meet every temptation. In all
temptations unto sin, consider the fearful issue and effect thereof: and
though it seem never so delightful and agreeable to thy natural humor, yet
ask, But what comes after? Let the dreadful consequence thereof, which
(without true and unfeigned repentance) is no less than eternal fire, deterr
thee from the same. Ah sinner, sinner, when thou art bathing thy soul by the
fire of ^ust, consider how for the same thou may burn in the everlasting
flames of Hell. When thou art drenching thy self with the voluptuous draughts
of thy carnal pleasure, think what a drench, what a poisonous and bitter cup is
prepared for thee below. And this may be a special means to kill that lust
which will otherwise kill thy soul. Want of consideration of the fearful issue
and effects of sin is questionless the cause of so much sin and wickedness in
the World.

III. The misery of the damned is set forth in Scripture by sundry
resemblances, as,

Mat. 8.12.
1. Darkness, yea outer-darkness. But the children of the Kingdom shall be cast
into outer-darkness; there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. As light is
one of the most comfortable things that man can enjoy; Eccl. 11.7.
( it is a pleasant thing to behold the Sun) So darkness, is most horrible and
terrible. Darkness was one of the Egyptians plagues, which were all fearful
effects of Gods wrath. It is counted a great severity of punishment to cast men
into dark dungeons. For darkness does much affright men, especially if they
hear hideous and terrible noyses. What then will be the darkness of hell? where
shall be nothing but weeping and wailing, howling and gnashing of teeth, with
such like effects of fearful terror. This is called outer-darkness, because it
is out of the place of bliss, the place of light, which is no small aggravation
thereof.

2. Torment. As Luke 16.23. And in hell the rich man lift up his eyes, being in
torment. Now torment is an extremity of pain, whereof man is very sensible, and
which is highly grievous unto him. Many torments which men inflict, cause such
as are tormented to cry and howl, and wish they were dead, rather than to live
in such torment. Oh then what is the torment, which God in his fierce wrath
inflicteth on the damned in hell? whom he will make to feel his heavy hand to
be the hand of a mighty God. All tortures and torments considered together are
not comparable thereunto. Take the pains of all diseases incident to our
nature, as stone, gout, colic, cramp, or what other can be named. Add
hereunto all the most exquisite tortures that cruel men have inflicted upon
others, as rack, strapado, boiling in lead, pulling the flesh from the bones
with hot pinsers, and such like. Add also hereunto all the anguish, horror,
and terror, that ever any man felt in his soul, mind and conscience: let all
these be joined together, they are but a flea-bite in comparison of
hell torments. The reason is evident, because all the forementioned torments
here endured, may stand with Gods love, and are off inflicted on his dear
children. But that torment is a fruit of his wrath, wherein he sets himself to
make the sinner feel the weight of his indignation.

O foolish sinner, thy pleasures are tormenting pleasures: thy gains, and thine
ease, that now thou blessest thy self in, they are tormenting gains, a
tormenting ease. Now thou drinkest the sweet, but beware, whatever they are in
thy mouth, they are torment in the belly. Buy not an hours ease, or pleasure,
at the price of an eternity of torment.

3. Another resemblance whereby the misery of the damned is set forth, is Fire,
as Matthew. 18.9. This of all other metaphors is most frequently used; and of all
others it is the fittest. For fire is the fiercest kind of torment that is, and
the most intolerable. Great question is made about the kind of it, Whether the
fire of hell be material and corporeal fire, or no. Surely it is such a fire
as shall torment both body and soul, and that much more intolerably than any
fire here below. Brimstone mingled with fire, makes it burn more fiercely: Rev.
19 20.
therefore brimstone is often added to hellfire, to aggravate the torment
thereof. Yea it is said to be a lake of fire and brimstone, Rev. 20.10.
which implies a great quantity thereof, to make it the hotter. Isa. 30.33.
The Prophet Isaiah says, That the breath of the Lord like a stream of
brimstone does kindle it. The breath of the Lord must needs make the fire that
is kindled with it, burn more fiercely than all the bellows, or all the wind in
the World can make any fire here below to burn.

Fire here below uses to burn most fiercely in a furnace, where it is kept in.
Therefore hell is said to be a furnace, Mat. 13.42. 2 These. 1.8.
and that of flaming fire. The Furnace into which the three Children were cast,
was exceeding fierce, being made seven times hotter than it was wont to be. But
how fierce and dreadful will this Furnace be, whose fire is unspeakably
hotter, than that was at the hottest? Jer. 33.14.
Oh who is able to dwell in this devouring fire? who amongst us shall dwell in
those everlasting burnings? There was a fearful crying and shrieking when the
Lord sent a deluge of water to drown the old World. How did the poor creatures
run up and down for shelter in that deluge? Oh but what bitter crying and
shrieking will there be in hell? Dan. 7.10.
When a fiery stream shall go out from the throne of God, and poor damned
creatures shall run hither, and thither, and not get a drop of Water to cool
their scorched tongues.

Ah sinner, sinner, how can thou but quake and tremble at the thought of this
fire? at which the very Devils do quake and tremble. Suppose thou were
condemned to be cast (as many of the Martyrs were) into a boiling Caldron, or
flaming fire? oh how dreadful and terrible would the apprehension thereof be
unto thee? and how would thou cry and roar through the extremity of the
torment? But alas, what is a boiling Caldron to that boiling Sea of fire and
brimstone? And what is a flaming fire of Wood and Coal here, to the fire of
hell kept in highest flame by the breath of Gods wrath: Surely this as far
surpasses that in heat, as our Chimney fire does exceed the fire painted on
the Wall.

This methinks should sour the pleasure of all thy sinful lusts, and provoke
thee forthwith to set upon that stricter course of life, that more serious
circumspect conscientious walking, whereby thou may escape these heavy things.

Ah sinner, look about thee while it is called to day, run over to Christ, lay
hold on his righteousness, stoop to his Scepter, beg of God, that whatsoever he
deny thee, he would not deny his Son to thee, by whom alone thou can be freed
from this tormenting fire. Otherwise woe and alas that ever thou were born.

But oh how wonderfully prodigal are we generally of our souls! when that for
the vile things here below we are so ready to prostitute them to the lust of
Satan, and to expose them to the torments of hellfire. Whereas alas, What is
it to gain the World, and to lose our Souls? What, to spend our days in mirth
and jollity, and in a moment to be cast into hell? It is easy for a secure
unbelieving soul to read and hear of this fire. But woe and ten thousand woes
to all such who shall feel and endure, and prove by their experience how hot it
is.

4. Another resemblance whereby the misery of the damned is set forth, Isa.
66.24.
is a Worm; Their Worm shall not dye, neither shall their fire be quenched.
Which very words Christ applies to the damned in hell; Mark 9.44, 46, 48. This
metaphor of the Worm, sets out the sting of conscience, and anguish of soul,
Mark 9.44, 46, 48.
and shows that hell pains go through a man without and within.

In the forementioned place, there be two especial things in the torments of
hell, which are thrice repeated together, namely the Worm, and the fire; the
Worm that dies not, and the fire that is not quenched. And it is observable,
that in all the three verses, the Worm is set in the first place, as it were to
teach us, that the principal torment in hell is the Worm, rather than the fire.
And what is the Worm? but the sting, or the torment of an evil conscience,
which shall lie eternally gnawing and griping the hearts of the damned in hell.

As of the putrefaction of the body, there breeds a worm which eats and
consumes the body: so from the corruption of the soul tainted with sin, there
arises the Worm of Conscience, which gnaweth and vexes the soul with
continual anguish. Men talk much of hellfire, and it were well they would talk
more of it. But yet there is another torment that would be thought on too, and
that is this Worm of an evil conscience, which whilst the fire burns, this
will bite, and sting the soul with torment intolerable.

This Worm of Conscience consists especially in two things.

1. In bringing to remembrance thy former sinful lusts and pleasures, of which
nothing remains but thy present shame and pain. Then shall thy conscience
gnaw thee by bringing to thy remembrance thy former oaths and cursings, thy
misspent time, thy cozenings and defraudings, yea all thy secret impurities, as
well as thine open iniquities: as also thy sinful omissions of good duties, how
seldom thou prayedst with thy family, or in thy closet: how little care thou
had of thy precious soul, slighting the opportunities and means of grace. Ah
sinner, the remembrance of these things will exceedingly pierce thy soul, and
afflict thine heart with bitter grief and sorrow.

Soul how came thou in hither? ah! this was mine own doing, it was my
negligence, and carelessness, and wilfulness and wickedness. A little care, a
little wisdom, a little labor and pains might have prevented all this. If I
would have hearkened to God, hearkened to conscience in time, none of all this
misery had ever come upon me. Oh wretch that I was, oh foolish, sottish wilful
wretch, how have I undone my self? what ever I now feel, and roar under, I have
none to blame but my self, it was mine own doing that I am fallen headlong into
this place of torment.

2. In despairing of freedom and deliverance from thy present misery. This is
one special thing which will very much add to thy present torment, that thy
condition, though most sad and dreadful, yet is hopeless. Did thou conceive
any hope of deliverance after thousands and millions of years, hell would not
be hell unto thee. But this is that which will lie like a mountain of lead upon
thee, that there is no hope of deliverance: In the consideration whereof
consists the gnawings of the Worm of Conscience. These are the resemblances
whereby the misery of the damned is set forth.

IV. The misery of the damned is further fet forth in Scripture by the place
where they abide, which is ^ell. For that is the most usual word attributed to
the place of the damned.

Isa. 30.33. 2 King. 23.10. (...), non videns. Neh. 11.30. (...). Mat. 5.29,
30. Rev. 9.11. Rev. 20.10.
In the old Testament that word which properly signifies the grave, is often
translated hell, and by way of resemblance Tophet is taken for hell, because in
the place called Tophet, great fires were made, wherein they Sacrificed their
Children. In the New Testament there are two words ordinarily used to express
hell. One implies a place of darkness. The other translated from the name of
the place where the forementioned Tophet was, called Gehinnom, the valley of
Hinnom, whence hell is called Gehenna.

The place of the damned is also called a bottomless pit, by reason of the
unsearchable depth of it, and a lake.

These and other like names of terror are attributed to the place where the
damned are tormented: but where that place is, in Scripture is not expressly
revealed, and therefore cannot be defined, only we may know that it is out of
Heaven, even below it. It is the most fearful place that ever was, or can be:
and it is a great point of wisdom in this World so to carry our selves, as we
may never come by our experience to prove where, and what it is.

V. The misery of the damned is likewise set forth in Scripture by the
perpetuity, and eternity of their torment. Their Worm dies not, and their fire
is not quenched, Mark 9.44.
but continues to burn without end. And therefore is called unquenchable fire,
Mark 3.12. Mat. 18.8.
and everlasting fire. As the Salamander is said to live in the fire: So shall
the wicked live for ever in the fire of hell. Though they seek for death, yet
they shall not find it: though they be always burning, yet they shall not be
consumed: though they be always gnawed upon by the Worm of Conscience, yet
they shall never be devoured. Which makes the misery of the damned in hell most
exquisitely miserable.

Men in misery comfort themselves with hope of an end. The Prisoner with hope
of Jail-delivery: the Apprentice with hope of a freedom and liberty: the
Gally-slave with hope of a ransom: only the poor wretches in hell have no hope
of freedom and liberty at all: they are as far from an end of their torments,
as at their first beginning and entrance thereinto.

If there might be any end of their torments, though it should be after so many
millions of years, as there are Sands on the Seashore, or Stars in the
Firmament, it would be some comfort to those who endure them. But Eternity is
the very hell of hells, and that which most of all breaks the very hearts of
the damned. The present sense of pain being not so grievous to the damned, as
it is to think that after thousands, yea thousand thousands of years, they
shall be as far either from end or from ease, as they were the first hour of
their falling into it. Surely if to a man tormented with the gout, stone, or
colic, one night seems exceeding long; Oh how long do you think eternity
(that night which shall never know morning) will seem to those who shall lie
tormented and roaring in a bed of flame, with wicked fiends, and Devils about
them, daily and hourly adding to their torment? If one short nights pain be so
tedious and grievous, what will that eternal night be?

Ah sinner, thou art not now able to endure the sudden scorch of a fire, nor to
hold one of thy fingers over the flame of a Candle for a quarter of an hour.
How will thou then endure to lie in a fiery flaming Furnace, not only an hour,
or a day, but years, yea millions of years? Some have thus represented the
eternity of hell torments. Suppose, say they, that all the vast space, which is
between Heaven and Earth, were filled with Sands: and God should command an
Angel once in every thousand years to fetch away one small grain; what an
innumerable number of years would be spent before all those sands would be
fetched away? yet shall thou abide thus long in hellfire: and when they are
expired, continue as long again and again, and a thousand times told, for
Eternity knows no beginning, no middle, no end: but after a thousand thousand
millions of years, there are still as many more to come: and when these many
more are come, and gone, thy torments are as far from the last, as they were at
the first.

What heart can think of these things without horror and amazement? Suppose
that for some hightreason against the Kings-person, thou were condemned to be
cast into a fiery flaming Furnace, or Caldron of boiling lead, and there to
continue a thousand years, how sad would thy condition be? yet this were a
mercy to hell torments. For after thou have layn ten thousand, thousand years
in a Furnace of fire, kept up in the highest flame by the breath of Gods wrath,
there is full as much behind, as there was on thy first day.

Thou sinnedst in thine eternity, and therefore must suffer in Gods eternity.
Thou sinnedst against an infinite God, despising his infinite grace and mercy,
and the infinite merits of Christ, and would have drawn out thy sin to the
length of eternity; and therefore must suffer an infinite, eternal punishment.
Thou never heartily repentedst of thy sins, and therefore God will never repent
him of thy sufferings. This is the day of Gods-long-suffering, and that will be
the day of thy long-suffering, when thou shall suffer long for thine abusing
the long-suffering of God.

Ah sinner sinner, what stupidity has seized on thee that thou shoulst be
liable to eternal torments in hell, and yet live as carelessly and profanely,
as if it did no way at all concern thee? Know for certain, that though thou
do not as yet feel these torments, yet thou art every moment subject, and
hasting thereunto. A cloud of fire and brimstone hangs over thine head, and
the Lord knows, how suddenly it may fall upon thee. It is certainly decreed
in Heaven, that if thou turn not here from thy sins unto God, by true and
unfaigned repentance, and turn over a new leaf, leading a new course of life,
thou shall lie in a lake of brimstone to all eternity; and thou know not how
soon God may seal the warrant for thine execution.

Oh sinner, that I could prevail with thee once a day to steep thy thoughts in
a serious meditation of the Eternity of hell torments. Certainly it would abate
the heat of thy lusts, and take off the edge of thy love to thy most pleasing
vanities, and stop thee in the eager pursuit of thy carnal pleasures. For
would thou be content to run the hazard of such torments for thy present
ease? of such plagues for thy present pleasures? of such thick darkness for the
light of thine own sparks? of such an Eternity for a few jocund hours? Oh when
will thou awake from this folly?

Thou who now give thy self up to the gratifying of thy sinful lusts, to the
satisfying of thy brurish pleasures, who art sowing daily to the flesh, sowing
oaths, and curses, and lies, and adulteries, etc. without considering what a
bitter harvest thou shall have after such a black seed-time: should I but ask
thee, how much pleasure thou would take to lie but one day in such a burning
Furnace, as Nebuchadnezzars was, after it was heated seven times more for the
three Children? I dare boldly say, thou would not lie therein one quarter of
an hour for all the pleasures and riches in the World. How is it then, that for
a little pleasure, which endures but for a moment, thou do so little regard
the lying in the Furnace of hellfire to all eternity?

In the fear of God therefore often think as of the extremity, so of the
eternity of hell torments. Methinks the very thought thereof should forthwith
call off the drunkard from following the Alehouse with his vain companions:
and the swearer from taking the name of God so often in vain: and the
voluptuous person from his sensual delights, and wanton dalliances: and the
worldling from his immoderate seeking after earthly riches and treasures; and
cause every of them out of hand to set upon another and a wiser course, to mind
the good of their immortal souls, and bethink themselves in earnest how they
might escape the wrath to come; to cast away sin, to cry after mercy, to run
over to Jesus Christ, with their tongues, with their eyes, with their hearts
full of prayers, Lord save me or I perish: Lord teach me what I must do to be
saved. Lord pardon me, Lord turn me, Lord sanctify me. Lord help me that I
come not into this place of torment. But when will the folly of fools depart
from them? Oh the stupendous brutishness of this mad and sensual World! though
they know these things, and have been forewarned of them, yet they have not the
heart to fly from the wrath to come.

Thus much for the clearing and setting forth of the first truth to be embraced
toward the working of regeneration in men's souls, namely, That every man in
his state of unregeneracy is in a miserable and dreadful condition. Wherein I
have the longer insisted, that thereby I might startle and awaken unregenerate
men out of their carnal security, unto a lively sense and apprehension of the
dreadful danger they are in, so long as they live and lie in their unregenerate
estate: and so countermine the great design of the Devil against their souls,
which is to keep them blindfold and ignorant of their wretched miserable state,
by persuading them that their condition is as good and safe as the best. For
certainly were they but sensible of their present condition, how they were lost
and undone for ever, if they should dye in their natural and unregenerate
estate, the Devil with all his skill and cuning would be hard put to it to
persuade them to live another day therein, left they should suddenly be snatched
away to hell: would they then turn such a deaf ear to the Voice of the Gospel?
would they then make such excuses, and make such delays when Christ calls them
to repentance? I cannot be at the pains, I cannot bear the labor, and the
sorrow of a penitent life. I cannot part with mine ease, my pleasures, my
friends and companions, at least, not yet awhile. Oh the sense of an hell would
silence all such excuses, and shake off all such delays. To day, to day, O my
soul, hearken to thy Lord, left it be too late by to morrow.

Now stand sinner, stand and pause awhile on what has been hitherto spoken.
Look back and consider, Is this thy state? Is this thy portion which has
hitherto been described? Art thou a sinner, a wilful and impenitent sinner,
and does not all this belong to thee? search the Scriptures, believe the
Scriptures, and then say if this be not the place of them that know not God,
and obey not the Gospel of Christ. But what saift thou, is it good for thee to
be here? Is this a state to acquiesce in? to be at ease and secure, to be so
merry and jolly in? Is this the state thou art so loath to be delivered from?
Do thou hang over the burning furnace by the small thread of thy life, which
as soon as it is snapt off, thou tumblest headlong into this bottomless gulf,
and do thou scoff and scorn at the poor Ministers and Ambassadors of Christ
that come to thee only to snatch thy soul out of this amazing danger?

But hearken sinner, will thou escape? will thou the redeemed? will thou be
delivered from all this? would he be a messenger of good tidings, would thou
bid him welcome that should bring thee news of redemption from all this? why,
is there any hope of that? hope of deliverance, hope of salvation? what for
such a sinner, what from so great destruction? what is there any hope for such
a great sinner? such an hardened sinner, such an old sinner, that has even one
foot already in hell? why, will thou hearken? consider, consider, what shall
further be spoken, and thou shall see that there is yet hope for thee, even for
thee, concerning this thing. As great as thy sins are, as great as thy danger
is, if thou will yet hearken, there is hope that thou may be saved.

CHAP. XII. Shows that there is hope of Mercy for the worst of Sinners.
II. ANother truth to be embraced in order to thy Regeneration, is this, That
there is hope of mercy for the greatest sinners.

Though the condition of men in their state of unregeneracy be very deplorable,
yet it is not desperate: there is hope of mercy for the worst of them, which
will appear from a due consideration, 1. Of Gods powers and willingness to save
the worst of sinners. 2. Of the all sufficiency of Christ's Sacrifice. 3. Of
Christ's readiness to embrace all poor sinners, who will but, come unto him, and
receive him upon the terms of the Gospel.


I. For the Power of God to save the worst of sinners, it does appear;

1. From the infiniteness of his mercy, which is compared to the depth of the
Sea. Mich. 7.19.
Thou will cast all their sins into the depth of the Sea, says the Prophet
Micah. The Sea is of such a vast capacity, that it can swallow up the highest
mountain, as well as cover the lowest molehill. In like manner the mercy of
God is of such a boundless extent, that it can pardon the greatest and grossest
sins, as well as the least. In which respect he is said to be plenteous in
mercy, Psalm. 86.5.
and rich in mercy: Ephesians. 2.4.
admire it we may, but no man is able to express how great the mercy of the
Lord is, being as himself infinite without any limits or bounds.

Ah sinner, far be it from thee, either to straighten the mercy of God, or so
to aggravate thy sins, as to conclude that thy sins are greater than can be
forgiven: do not so aggravate thy mighty sins, as thereby to derogate from
infinite mercy. Is not the mercy of God infinite? Is it not the mercy of a God?
thy greatest sins are but finite, as being the sins of a creature: but his
mercy is infinite, being the mercy of a God. As there is no proportion between
that which is finite, and that which is infinite: So neither is there any
proportion between the greatest of thy sins, and the mercy of God.

2. The power of God to save the worst of sinners appears from the unlimited
extent of his promises. What ever God promises, sure he has power to perform.
Now the promises of God exclude no sinner, nor any sin (except the sin against
the Holy Ghost) nor any time of coming unto him: for in all these respects are
the promises of God wondrous large, and of great extent.

1. They exclude no sinner. For they run for the most part in the generality:
promising mercy and forgiveness to all who turn unto him in truth, and
sincerity, as Isa. 55.7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous
man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy on
him, and to our God, and he will abundatly pardon. Here the Prophet speaks to
the wicked and unrighteous indefinitely, even to all and every one of them, and
assures them that upon their repentance, they shall be received to mercy.

2. They exclude no sins, no not scarlet and crimson sins, as Isa. 1.18. Though
your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow, though they be red
like crimson, they shall be as wool; that is, though your sins be never so
great and heinous, yet upon your repentance, through the mercy of God in
Christ, they shall be so abolished, as if they had never been committed.

3. They exclude no time for the sinners coming unto God, but whenever,
sooner or later, first or last, so that he come in truth, he shall find mercy
and forgiveness, Ezck. 33.12. The promise lies in the day that the sinner
turns. Seeing therefore, oh sinner, God has not excepted thy person, nor thy
sins, no thy time of coming, do not thou except thy self, saying, thy sins are
greater than can be pardoned, and thy day of grace is past. Oh do not so great
an injury to God, as to set any bounds or limits either to his mercy, or to his
promises.

3. The power of God to save the worst of sinners appears from his actual
receiving the most heinous sinners to mercy. The greatest sinners that we read
of in Scripture have obtained mercy. Who greater than Mannasseh? 2 Chronicles. 33.3,
etc.
who was a Sorcerer, an Idolater, a Murderer, and what not? and yet was
received to mercy. And who greater in the New Testament than Paul? 1 Timothy 1.
13, etc.
who was a Blasphemer and a Persecutor of the Saints and People of God; and yet
was received to mercy. Now what God has done formerly, he is still able to do,
he is still the same God, his power is no whit lessened, nor diminished.

Oh sinner, what ground have thou then to question the mercy of God to thy
soul, if thou do in truth turn from thy sins unto him, and earnestly beg the
pardon and forgiveness of them? I know indeed that before God gives a sight
and a sense of our sins, we are too too apt to presume: but our understandings
are no sooner enlightened to see our sins, and our consciences awakened to feel
the burden of them, but we are very apt to despair: it being the great design
of our adversary the Devil either to make us dye in a senseless calm, or else
to perish in a desperate storm. Oh says the awakened sinner, my sins are many
for number, and heinous in their quality, having aggravated them by many
amplifying circumstances. Certainly there is no hope of mercy for such a
wretched, sinful creature as I am, whose sins are greater than can be
forgiven. But take notice, I beseech thee, of these two things.

1. Though in thy self there is nothing but ground and matter of despair, yet
in the mercy of God, through the merits of Jesus Christ, there is ground enough
of comfort, and encouragement.

2. How many and heinous soever thy sins have been, yet if thou can find an
heart to turn from them unto God, and in good earnest set upon the practice of
an holy life, and so become a new creature, God will receive thee to mercy.

But still beware thou abuse not mercy by making it thy encouragement to sin:
turn not this cup of Salvation into a cup of deadly poison: let not the
doctrine of infinite mercy be thy damnation: abuse not mercy as thy
encouragement to sin, but improve mercy as thy encouragement to repentance.

2. For the Willingness of God to save poor sinners, even the worst of them; it
does appear,

1. From Gods description of himself, Exodus 34.6, 7. The Lord God, merciful,
and gracious; long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy
for thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin. Why should the Lord
proclaim himself merciful and gracious to forgive all manner of sins? but for
the encouragement of poor penitent sinners to come unto him with hope of
acceptance.

There is not a letter in this name of God, not a word in this description of
him, but fully and adequately answers all the objections which may be made by
poor sinners against their own souls.

Obj. 1. Will thou say that thy condition is as bad as the worst? having been
as great and heinous a sinner as ever lived upon the face of the earth.

A. To answer this, God here declares himself to be the Lord, merciful. The
Lord, therefore able to save thee to the utmost: Though thy sins be never so
many and heinous, yet he is able to save thee from them all. And he is
merciful, therefore willing to save thee; for in him there are bowels of mercy,
pity and compassion, and he delights in mercy.

Obj. 2. Will thou say, thou art in thy self most unworthy to partake of any
mercy from God, having nothing in thee to commend thee to him, or to move him
to extend his mercy unto thee?

A. To this the Lord answers in the next place, that he is gracious: and
therefore what he does, he will do freely, without any respect of works or
worthiness in us; for grace is to show mercy freely. The mercy God ever showed
to any of his people, was originally founded in himself alone, in his own
goodness and loving kindness. The Apostle therefore calls it (...) 2 These.
1.11.
the good pleasure of his goodness. Whereupon says the Lord himself, Exodus
33.19.
I will be gracious to whom I will be gracious, and will show mercy on whom I
will show mercy.

Obj. 3. Will thou further object and say, thou have misspent the flower of thy
youth, and the strength of thy age in vanity and pleasure, thy whole life has
been a continued course of sinning against God; so that thou have cause to fear
that God has given over looking after thee, and that his patience toward thee
is expired, and thy day of grace past.

A. To this the Lord answers in the following words, that he is long-suffering.
Not only merciful and gracious, but likewise long-suffering to thee-ward, 2
Pet. 3.9.
not willing that thou should perish, but that thou even thou should come
to repentance. He still waits, for thy repentance and reformation, Isa. 30.18.
that he may be gracious unto thee.

Obj. 4. Will thou say that though the Lord has showed himself merciful,
gracious and long-suffering unto others, yet thou art so destitute of all grace
and goodness, that thou have little hope of partaking thereof?

A. To this the Lord answers in the next words, that he is abundant in
goodness; as he has extended his grace, mercy and patience unto others, so he
has enough and enough for thee: his store is no whit diminished by what he
has given out: but as he is an ever-flowing, so an overflowing Fountain of
all grace, mercy and goodness for the supply of his people; he is abundant in
goodness.

Obj. 5. Will thou say, that though the Lord be abundant in goodness, yet thou
art fearful whether he will extend his goodness unto thee?

A. To this the Lord answers, that he is abundant as in goodness, so in truth.
God having in his word promised to receive all poor penitent sinners unto
mercy, who will in truth turn from their sins unto him; his truth and
faithfulness ingageth him to show mercy unto thee, and to receive thee into the
arms of his free grace, upon thy true and unfeigned repentance.

Obj. 6. Will thou say, God is indeed abundant in mercy and goodness, but it is
only for a few.

A. To this the Lord answers, in the next words, That he has mercy for
thousands, yea he keeps it by him for all that will but come in, and partake
thereof, for so it is expressed, keeping mercy for thousands. Where a finite
number, thousands, is put for an indefinite, multitudes, innumerable
multitudes. Therefore if thou with thousands wilt come in truth, unfeignedly
hating thy former lewd courses, and resolve for the time to come upon new
courses, company and conversation: know, that God has mercy in store for thee,
yea as large a portion as ever any found, or were made partakers of.

Obj. 7. Will thou say, Thy sins are both many and heinous, more for number
than thou can possibly reckon up, and more heinous than thou can
sufficiently aggravate.

A. To this the Lord answers in the next words, That he is a God forgiving
iniquity, transgression, and sin, that is, sins of all sorts, from the least to
the greatest. As if he had said, That he would pardon; as all sinners who truly
turn from their sins unto him, and close with Jesus Christ, So all their sins,
of what kind or degree soever. For the learned generally conceive, that under
these three terms, iniquity, transgression, and sin, all manner of sins are
comprehended. Thus much for the opening, and applying the forementioned
description of God, which sets forth his willingness to save poor lost sinners.

2. Gods willingness appears from his commands to the worst of sinners to
repent and believe. For the former, that God commands them to repent, and turn
from their sins unto him, we have abundant proof in Scripture. As Isai. 1. we
read that they who are styled Rulers of Sodom, and people of Gomorrah, v. 10.
being like them for all manner of abominable wickednesses, even as bad as they,
or rather worse; and whose sins ar^ called scarlet, and crimson sins, v. 18.
yet in v. 16. are they called upon to repent. Wash ye, make ye clean, put away
the evil of your doings from before mine eyes, cease to do evil, learn to do
well. Which are exhortations to repentance. And Ier. 3.1. We read that they who
had committed spiritual Adultery, having forsaken the true God, and worshipped
Idols, even stocks and stones; yet are they called upon to repent, and turn
unto God. Though thou have played the Harlot with many Lovers, yet return again
to me, says the Lord; and I will be reconciled to thee again, and receive thee
into my grace and favor.

And for the latter, that God commands poor sinners to believe in Jesus Christ,
we have a clear proof, 1 John 3.23. This is his commandment, that we should
believe on the name of his Son Jesus Christ. Now Gods commanding all poor
sinners, even, the worst of them to repent and believe, is a clear
demonstration of his willingness to have them saved, by putting them upon the
use of those means he has appointed and sanctified thereunto.

Ah sinner, how should this prevail with thee to abandon thy sins, and to
adventure on Jesus Christ as thy Lord and Savior? The command of God to repent
and believe should methinks outweigh all the suggestions of Satan, and carnal
reasonings of thine own heart; it should swallow up all scruples, fears and
doubts. Abraham we read upon the command of God was willing to offer up his own
Son, his beloved Son Isaac, us a Sacrifice. And will thou refuse to Sacrifice
thy beloved Lust, and to embrace the beloved Son of God with the arms of thy
faith, when thou have the command of God for both? Oh therefore resolve, as to
cast away thy sins, so to cast thy self into the arms of Jesus Christ, and to
give up thy self unto him, and his Laws, to be ruled and governed thereby, and
thou shall live.

3. Gods willingness to save poor penitent sinners, appears from his many
gracious promises to receive the very worst of sinners upon their repentance.
Let the wicked fo^sake his way, Isa. 55.
and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and he
will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon. Or, as
the Original word signifies, he will multiply pardon and forgiveness; Though
the wicked multiply their sins, yet if they turn from them unto God by true and
unfaigned repentance, he will multiply pardon and forgiveness. And says the
Prophet Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 18.21, 22.
If the wicked will turn from all his sins that he has committed, and keep all
my Statutes, and do that which is lawful and right, he shall surely live, he
shall not dye: All his transgressions that he has committed, they shall not be
mentioned unto him, in his righteousness that he has done, he shall live.
These and such like gracious promises of God in his Word for the encouragement
of poor sinners to turn from their sins unto him, cannot but strongly argue his
willingness to have them saved.

4. As if this were not enough to set forth Gods willingness; to his promises
he has added his ^ath. As I live, Ezekiel. 33.11.
says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that
the wicked turn from his way and live. Here the Lord swears by himself, there
being no greater to swear by. As if he had said, As sure as I am the true and
living God, so certainly I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but
that he should turn from his wicked ways, and embrace my mercy in Jesus
Christ. Because wicked men are so hardly persuaded of Gods willingness to save
them, therefore to convince them thereof, and to encourage them to turn from
their sins unto him, he takes his oath on it, that he is infinitely more
willing that wicked men should repent, and be saved, than that they should
perish in their sins, and be damned.

5. The Lord to show his willingness to save poor sinners, pleads with them in
the words following, Turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways, for why will ye
dye, Ezekiel. 33.11.
O house of Israel. Here the Lord condescends to reason the case with poor
sinners, Why they will dye and perish, and not rather turn from their sins unto
him, that they may live in bliss and happiness to all Eternity: And then
exhorts them with all earnestness to repentance, saying, turn ye, turn ye;
which ingemination denotes the vehement affection and desire of God, to have
sinners turn from their sins unto him, that they may not perish, but have
everlasting life.

6. Gods willingness appears from his free offer and tender of Christ to all
who will but receive him by the hand of faith; as none are named, so none are
excluded. The Angel that brought from Heaven the tidings of Christ's birth,
says, that it was for all people, Ezekiel. 2.10.
Behold, says he, I bring you tidings of great joy, which shall be to all
people. And says our Savior, God so loved the World, Joh. 3.16.
that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not
perish, but have everlasting life. Where by the World is meant indefinitely
mankind, of what Nation or Condition, Sex or State, Age or other Difference
soever they be. And therefore the offer of Christ is indefinitely to all,
without exception of any: there being no state or condition of men which God
has excluded from Salvation by Christ, which does clearly evidence his
willingness to save poor sinners.

Oh sinner, seeing God does freely offer Christ to all, without exception of
any, do not thou except thy self, limit not where God has not limited; say not
I am unworthy, or my sins are many and heinous, clothed with many aggravating
circumstances; but stir up thy self to adventure thy soul on Christ, upon the
general offer of him in the Gospel. The first work of faith in many has been
to adventure their souls on Christ upon the free offer of him to all
indefinitely. Do thou in like manner adventure to cast thy self upon the free
grace of God in Christ, with resolution to abandon thy lusts for the time to
come, and to take Christ for thy Lord and Husband, as well as for thy Priest
and Savior. This is that which God requires; and if he has persuaded thine
heart to this, it is a good sign that mercy is intended for thee.

7. Gods willingness appears from his beseeching poor sinners to be
reconciled to him, as the Apostle expresses, We are Ambassadors for Christ, 2
Cor. 5.20.
as though he did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead be reconciled
to God. Ah sinner, rather than thou should perish in thy sins, God himself,
who is the God of mercy, does as it were, kneel down before thee, and
beseeches thee, for the Lord Jesus Christ his sake, to pity thy poor soul,
and to accept of the reconcil^ation which Christ has purchased by his bloody
death and passion. Oh the depth of the incomprehensible love of God to poor
sinners, that he should not only command and invite, but likewise beseech and
entreat them to turn from their sins unto him, and accept of the reconciliation
purchased by the blood of his Son Jesus Christ. Surely this must needs evidence
his great willingness to save poor sinners.

8. His willingness further appears by his sending Ministers as his
Ambassadors unto poor sinners, upon terms of peace and reconciliation, as the
Apostle expresses in the forementioned place, 2 Cor. 5.20.
We are Ambassadors to beseech you to be reconciled to God. As if he had said,
We are commanded by the Lord our Master, to offer you terms of peace and
reconciliation, to profer you peace and pardon, if you will heartily turn from
your sins unto God. We are sent as Ambassadors to acquaint you, what Christ
has done and suffered for your redemption, how he has fulfilled the Law for
you, and offered up his life as a Sacrifice and satisfaction to Gods justice
for your sins, and how you may be happy for ever, if you will rest upon Christ's
perfect righteousness and all-sufficient Sacrifice for life and salvation, and
give up your selves unto him, to serve and obey his laws and commandments. I do
here therefore as Gods Ambassador, in his name, proclaim to the worst of you,
to the greatest and oldest sinner; that you may have mercy and Salvation, if
you will abandon your lusts, and close with Jesus Christ, upon the terms of the
Gospel, receiving him for your King, Priest and Prophet.

Oh how can we but stand amazed at the riches of Gods mercy and goodness, that
when we, upon the knees of our souls, should have sought unto him for peace and
reconciliation, yet that he, being the great Lord of Heaven and of Earth,
should condescend so far as to send Ambassadors unto us, sinful dust and
ashes, to entreat us to be reconciled to him, to accept his grace and favor?
Oh how does this evidence his great willingness that poor sinners should not
perish, but have everlasting life? Certainly if God had taken more pleasure in
your damnation than in your salvation, he would never have sent his Ministers
as Ambassadors to show you the way and means of salvation, by receiving Christ
as your Lord and Savior, and giving up your selves unto him; he would never
have persuaded you by so many arguments, and beseeched you to turn from your
sins unto him, that your souls might live in glory to all Eternity.

9. Gods willingness does likewise appear from the greatness of his patience in
bearing with sinners. For the Lord having used all means for the conversion of
poor sinners, he waits with much patience and long-suffering for their
repentance; to see whether they will turn from their sins unto him or no. He
waits upon the Swearer, the Drunkard, the Whore-Master, the covetous Worldling
day after day, week after week, year after year, crying after them, as he did
after Jerusalem, Jer. 13.17.
Oh will ye not be made clean? Oh when will it once be? When will thou leave
thy Swearing, thy Drinking, thy Whoring, thy Covetousness, and the like? And
when will thy profane heart be sanctified? thine unclean heart be purified?
and thy carnal heart spiritualized? oh when will it once be? oh sinner, who art
now grown old in sin, how long has the Lord waited on thee? for shame, let him
wait no longer, but turn thee, turn thee from thy wicked ways and courses,
that thou may receive mercies from him. This patience of God toward sinners,
must needs evidence his willingness to have them saved. For if he had not been
willing, he would have cut them off long ago, and have dealt with them as he
did with the Devils, who had no sooner sinned, but he clapped his chains upon
them, and still reserves them to the great day in chains of darkness.

10. Gods willingness appears in that he has made the way of salvation as
easy as can stand with his honor. For the way of salvation now is only
believing in Jesus Christ, for so runs the covenant of grace, believe and ye
shall be saved. Whereas the Covenant of works ran thus, Do this and live. So
that now whosoever believes in Jesus Christ shall be saved, that is, whosoever
receives Jesus Christ as his Lord and Savior, giving himself up to be ruled
by him, and rests upon his perfect righteousness, and all-sufficient
Sacrifice, for the pardon of his sins here, and for eternal salvation
hereafter, Shall not perish, but have everlasting life.

The covenant of works required perfect obedience in every man's own person. But
the Covenant of grace requires only our sincere endeavor to keep the
Commandments of the Lord; and accepts the obedience performed by our surety
Jesus Christ for us. For we being disenabled by the fall of Adam for performing
obedience to the law; Jesus Christ the only begotten Son of God, came down from
Heaven, took our nature upon him, and therein became our surety, and as our
surety, in our steed, for us, subjected himself to the Law, perfectly fulfilled
the same; and his obedience is by God accepted for us, and imputed unto us, as
if we our selves, in our own persons, had kept the whole Law of God, and
perfectly fulfilled the same. Indeed personal obedience is required under the
Gospel of believers, but not as the matter of our justification, but as an
evidence and fruit of our justification. I say as an evidence of our
justification, that we may make it manifest both to our selves and to the
World, that we are justified and made righteous by Jesus Christ. And also as a
fruit of our justification, that by our good works we might glorify God, Mat.
5.16. Joh. 15.8.
for God is much glorified by the good works of his people.

Now in that God has made the way of salvation so easy to poor sinners,
accepting of their sincere endeavor to keep his Commandments, for perfect
obedience; And of the obedience and righteousness of Jesus Christ their surety
for personal obedience; it must needs evidence his willingness to have poor
sinners saved.

11. Gods willingness to save the very worst of sinners is most lively
represented in the Parable of the Prodigal, as it is recorded, Luke 15.20, etc.
where we read how the Prodigal no sooner resolved to go to his Father, and
acknowledge his offenses, but his Father prevented him, for when he was yet a
great way off, Luke 15.20.
his Father saw him, and had compassion, and ran, and fell on his neck, and
kissed him. Where there are several passages very observable in the Father of
the Prodigal.

1. His quick observation, For when he was yet a great way off, his Father saw
him. Before he espied his Father, his Father saw him. Though God is many times
unwilling to see the sinner, yet is he at all times very willing to espy the
penitent. Yea, no sooner does a sinner resolve to turn from his sins unto God,
but he spies him and pittyes him.

2. His present commiseration, His Father saw him and had compassion on him.
Though God looks on obstinate sinners with indignation, yet he looks on the
penitent with commiseration. When the heart of a sinner is penitentially
touched, then the bowels of Gods mercy are moved within him. Jer. 31.20.
When Ephraim repented and turned, the Lord says, My bowels are troubled for
him, I will surely have mercy on him.

3. His sp^edy readiness to embrace him. It is said, the Son went to his
Father, but the Father ran to meet his penitent Son, showing how ready and
swift the Lord is to show mercy to a penitent returning sinner. There is a
great difference betwixt Gods coming to punish a sinner, and his coming to show
mercy to a penitent. Nah. 1.3.
He is said to be slow to wrath, but he is f^ist to show mercy. As soon as ever
Ephraim said, Jer. 31.19, 20.
I repented, instantly it follows, I will surely have mercy upon him, says the
Lord. David had no sooner said, I have sinned, but Nathan had commission
presently to reply, 2 Samuel 12.13.
the Lord has done away thy sin. A sinner no sooner turns from his sins unto
God by repentance, but God turns unto him in mercy.

4. His wonderful tenderness. The Father fell on his neck. To have taken him by
the hand had been much, but to fall on his neck and embrace him, and that as he
was in his loathsome stinking rags, was a greater favor than could be
expected. How open are the arms of mercy to embrace a penitent returning sinner?

5. His strong affection, expressed by kissing his penitent Son, for as it
follows, He kissed him. He did not only embrace him, but he likewise kissed
him. And as St. Austin observes, Nondum uno verbo audito, squalidum and
deformem amplectitur, etc. Aug.
Before the Son had spoken one word unto his Father, the Father falls upon
his neck, and kissed his ragged and deformed Son; which shows Gods
willingness to receive and embrace all poor penitent sinners, that have but a
thought of turning from their sins unto him. Yea, the Fathers kissing of his
returning Son, was to make him know that he was truly reconciled to him,
notwithstanding his former wicked and l^^d courses; I^ signum reconciliationis
and laetitiae.
and to show that he rejoiced as much at his penitential return, as he had
grieved at his sinful departure.

Oh sinner, What an encouragement should this be unto thee to turn from thy
sins unto God, who has as an eye of mercy to espy a returning sinner; so an
heart full of mercy and compassion to pity a returning sinner; and feet of
mercy to meet a returning sinner; and arms of mercy to embrace a returning
sinner; and lips of mercy to kiss a returning sinner, in token that he is
reconciled to him. Oh therefore let me prevail with thee, whosoever thou art,
how many and heinous soever thy sins are, to turn from them unto God by true
and unfeigned repentance, and that with hope of mercy and acceptance, in and
through the merits and intercession of Jesus Christ.

CHAP. XIII. Of the all sufficiency of Christ's Sacrifice.
III. THat there is hope of mercy for the worst of sinners, appears from the
all sufficiency of Christ's Sacrifice offered upon the Cross, and the fullness of
satisfaction that was ther^by made to the justice of God for the sins of the
whole World. So much the Apostle expresses, where he says, He is able to save
them to the uttermost, that come unto God by him. The word translated, able,
does imp^y power to do a thing. And the word translated, (...).
uttermost, is of a very large extent, it extends so far that we cannot look
beyond it, no not in our ^houghts: for let a m^n imagine his case to be never
so desperate, his sins to be never so many and heinous, yet Christ by his death
is able to save him from them all.

And therefore this we must lay as a foundation-truth, that Christ's Sacrifice
was a full sa^isfaction to the justice of his Father for the sins of the World;
it being the Sacrifice of the Son of God, even of him who was God as well as
man. For this is that which added an infinite value to what Christ did and
suffered for our redemption, that it was the obedience and the sufferings of
the Son of God, of him who was God equal with the Father: whereupon the blood
of Christ, 1 Pet. 1.19.
whereby we are redeemed is called precious blood: being of infinite price and
merit, able to countervail and answer for all our sins, and to free us from the
punishment due unto us for the same.

Besides, Christ's resurrection from the dea^ is an evi^^nt demonstration that
his death was an all-sufficient Sacrifice and full satisfaction to Gods justice
for our sins. For God having seized on Christ, as our Surety, and cast him into
the prison of the grave, for the debt of our sins, he could not have come forth
till he had paid the uttermost farthing. But by his rising out of the prison
of the grave, we are assured that Gods justice is abundantly satisfied by the
death of Jesus Christ.

Labor therefore to get thine heart truly satisfied in the all sufficiency of
Christ's Sacrifice, that his death was a full satisfaction to Gods justice for
thy sins; for otherwise when either thy conscience or the Devil begin to
aggravate thy sins, and to set before thee the number and the hainousness of
them, thou will be at a loss, and even ready to sit down in despair: whereas if
thou did clearly apprehend what a full satisfaction the death of Christ was
to Gods justice for all thy sins, thou would not fear what either thy
conscience or the Devil could object against thee. In Romans 8.33. We read how
the Apostle from the consideration of Christ's all-sufficient Sacrifice and full
satisfaction to Gods justice by his death, did triumph over sin, and Satan. For
having treated thereof in the former part of the Chapter; In the latter part
thereof, ver. 33, 34. he speaks as one ravished with abundance of comfort: yea,
challenges the Devil and all the World to object what they could against the
pardon of his sins; Who, says he, shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods
elect? It is God that justifies; Who is he that condemns? it is Christ that
dyed. As if he had said, let Conscience and carnal Reason, let Law and Sin, let
Hell and Devil object what they can; let them object the number and hainousness
of my sins, what is that? seeing Christ has dyed, even Christ the Son of God,
has offered up his own life, as an all-sufficient Sacrifice, and thereby
abundantly satisfied Gods justice for my sins. Beloved, the case between God
and us and our Savior Jesus Christ, is not much unlike the case of a Creditor,
a Debtor, and a Surety. Though the debtor be altogether unable to satisfy his
debt, or to contribute any thing thereunto; yet if his surety have fully
discharged the debt, and cancelled the bond, the debtor is safe enough from
imprisonment, or danger of arrest. In l^ke manner though we were much indebted
unto God, and were no way able to make the least satisfaction for our sins; yet
seeing our surety Jesus Christ has taken upon him the debt of our sins, and
fully satisfied Gods justice for the same, by offering up his own life as an
all-sufficient Sacrifice upon the Cross, we shall not need to fear the
accusations of Conscience, or of carnal reason, or of all the Devils in Hell,
if we do apply the merits of Christ's death unto our own souls comfort.

IV. That there is hope of mercy for the worst of sinners, appears from
Christ's Willingness to receive and embrace all poor sinners who will but come
unto him, and receive him upon the terms of the Gospel.

1. Christ's Willingness appears from his frequent personal invitations of all
sorts of sinners, even the worst to come unto him for life and salvation, as
Matthew. 11.28. Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will
give you rest. In which we find no exception either of persons or sins: but
whosoever thou art, rich or poor, male or female; how many and heinous soever
thy sins are, if thou art but sensible of them, thou art invited to go unto
Jesus Christ, and to cast thy self, and the burden of thy sins upon him. And
Rev. 22.17. Let him that is a thirst come. And whoever will, let him take the
Water of life freely; That is, in whomsoever there is but an earnest will, and
longing desire to partake of Christ, and of the benefits of his death and
passion, they are invited to come unto him. Now these gracious invitations of
Jesus Christ unto poor thirsty sinners to come unto him, that their souls might
live, must needs argue his incomparable willingness to have them saved.

2. Christ knowing our backwardness to come unto him, to the forementioned
invitations adds his awakening excitation, or proclamation, crying out, Ho
every one that thirsts come ye to the Waters, Isa. 55.1.
etc. And because many poor souls are apt to say, Alas there is nothing in me
to commend me unto Christ, I have no goodness, no righteousness of mine own,
therefore Christ adds, He that has no money, that is, he who has no goodness,
no righteousness of his own, which is there meant by money, let him come. And
indeed they are the fittest to go unto Jesus Christ, for it is the empty soul
that is most capable of Christ, the soul emptied of all self-righteousness, and
self-goodness. Whereas that soul which with the Church of Laodicea, is rich and
full with a conceit of its own righteousness, has no room for Christ.

3. Christ's Willingness appears by the many sweet and gracious promises which
he has made in his Word unto all those who by faith come unto him. As that
known promise, Mat. 11.28.
Come unto me all ye who labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest,
that is, I will ease you and refresh you, I will comfort you with the assurance
of the pardon of your sins, I will give you peace of Conscience here, and
eternal peace and rest with me for ever in my Kingdom. And questionless, one
special reason why many find so little peace and comfort in their souls, is
because they go not unto Jesus Christ, they cast not themselves and the burden
of their sins upon him, who is the fountain of peace and comfort, and from whom
alone it is to be had.

And Mark 16.15, 16. says our Savior, He that believes shall be saved, but
he that believes not shall be damned; that is, He who goes out of himself
unto Christ for life, shall be saved, from the wrath of God, from the curse of
the Law, from the guilt and power of sin, yea from eternal death and
condemnation, and shall inherit eternal life and salvation. But he that
believes not shall be damned, that is, He who refuses to go unto Jesus
Christ, preferring his lusts and corruptions before him, shall be cast into
that burning lake, where is nothing but weeping and wailing and gnashing of
teeth.

Oh how earnestly does Christ press sinners to come unto him that they might
have life, promising Heaven, and salvation upon their coming: and threatening
hell and damnation upon their refusing. And what more prevailing argument could
he use, to persuade sinners to come unto him? Which must needs evidence his
exceeding great willingness to embrace them with the arms of his mercy upon
their coming.

4. Christ's Willingness appears from his e^d of coming into the World, which
was to save poor l^st sinners. He left his Crown, and Throne, his Royal Court,
and glorious Robes, and clothed himself with the rags of our humanity, for no
other end but to seek and to save that which was lost; 1 Timothy 1.15.
as the Apostle expresses, This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all
acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the World to save sinners. So that the
Salvation of poor lost sinners was his great design in coming into the World.
He came from Heaven to Earth for this very end, that he might send us from
Earth to Heaven. The Son of God became the Son of man, that we the sons of men
might become the Sons of God. Certainly that Christ should come out of Heaven,
to keep us out of hell, that he should uncrown himself to Crown us, must needs
argue a wonderful willingness in him to have poor sinners saved.

5. Christ's Willingness appears by his rejecting of none who sincerely go
unto him, though never so weak and worthless in themselves. Never did any
sinner go to him, but he accepted of him, Joh. 6.37.
as himself expresses, All that the Father gives me, shall come to me, and
him that ^ometh unto me, I will in no wise cast out; but receive him to mercy.
Has Christ promised this, and will he not be as good as his Word? Did he ever
break his word with any poor soul, though never so unworthy? Did he ever cast
away any who came unto him? Heb. 13.8.
And is he not the same yesterday, to day, and for ever?

Go sinner, fear not, go upon the credit of this word, which he has spoken, I
will in no wise cast them out. Though the Devil say, go not, though thy
misgiving heart say, go not, he will not regard thee, he will never look on
such a vile wretch, he will cast thee out; yet since he has said, He will not,
go and thou shall find mercy.

Thus have I by several demonstrations proved, as God the Fathers willingness
to save the worst of sinners; So Christ's readiness to embrace all poor sinners
who will but come unto him for life and salvation; Wherein I have the longer
insisted, because I know no better argument to prevail with sinners, to turn
from their sins unto God by true and unfeigned repentance, and to close with
Jesus Christ by a true and lively faith, than a serious consideration as of
Gods readiness to save the worst of sinners upon their turning unto him; so of
Christ's Willingness to embrace all poor sinners, who will come unto him, and
receive him as their Lord and Savior.

I have read a story of a Gentlewoman who was condemned to dye for killing her
own child; whereupon diverse Ministers came to visit her, and perceiving her
little affected with her sin, and sad condition, they labored to set before
her the hainousness of her sin, and the dreadfulness of her condition, without
hearty and deep repentance. All which little moved her, seeming rather the more
hardened in her sin. But at last another Reverend Divine hearing of her
obdurate hardness, notwithstanding all that was said unto her; went and
preached to her the abundant riches of Gods mercy in Christ, how ready he was
to embrace with the arms of his free grace, every penitent sinner; and how
willing Christ was to receive all poor sinners, who would go unto him, and cast
themselves into his arms, how many and heinous soever their sins were, and
thereupon told her, there was hope of mercy for her, if she were heartily sorry
for her sins, and would adventure her soul upon Christ, notwithstanding the
greatness and hainousness of her sin, What! mercy for me? said she, that is
impossible, etc. Whereupon the Minister proceeded further to set forth the
freeness of Gods grace, and riches of his mercy to all penitent and believing
sinners, declaring unto her, how God delighted in mercy, and that where sin had
abounded, there his grace and mercy would much more abound, or to that purpose.
And thereupon she presently fell a weeping, wringing her hands, and cryi^g for
mercy, and dyed very comfortably, as it is related, having had the mercy of God
abundantly revealed to her before her death.

And truly, sinner, as it was my design, so my hearts desire, in s^tting forth
Gods willingness to save the very worst of sinners upon their repentance; and
Christ's readiness to embrace them with the arms of his mercy, that it might
have the same effect in thee, as it had in the forementioned Gentlewoman. And
oh that the consideration thereof would melt thine heart into tears of
unfeigned sorrow for thy sins past, and stir thee up to turn from them unto God
by hearty repentance, and to close with Jesus Christ upon the terms of the
Gospel. Oh that I could prevail with thee, as to give a bill of divorce to thy
lusts and corruptions, so to give up thy self unto Christ, and to adventure thy
soul upon him, resting upon his perfect righteousness, and all-sufficient
Sacrifice for the pardon of thy sins here, and for eternal life and salvation
hereafter! If Christ be so willing to receive thee, why should not thou be
willing to go unto him, and that with confidence of acceptance? Salvation is
this day offered unto thee, the golden Scepter is held out unto thee, Oh
stretch forth the hand of faith to lay hold and embrace the Lord Jesus Christ;
so shall thou be happy to all Eternity, For whosoever believes in Jesus Christ
shall not perish, Joh. 3.16.
but have everlasting life. Thus much of the truths to be embraced in order to
your Regeneration.

CHAP. XIV. Shows the Duties to be Practiced in order to your Regeneration.
HAving showed you the truths to be embraced in order to your Regeneration. I
come now to the Duties on your part to be practiced, and performed.

I. From the consideration of the dreadfulness of thy condition, so long as
thou continuest in thine unregenerate estate; and of the hope thou have of a
blessed change; stir up in thy self an earnest longing, restless desire after
the new birth, that thou may in truth say, O that I were Regenerate and born
anew! Oh that the Image of the Devil might be razed out, and the Image of God
imprinted in me! O that a blessed change were wrought in my soul, a change from
nature to grace, from darkness to light, from the Kingdom of Satan to the
Kingdom of the Lord Jesus! Oh that I might become a new creature, renewed
throughout, in all the faculties of my soul, and all the parts of my body!

As Rachel cried, Give me Children, or else I dye. So do thou cry out and say,
Give me this new birth, let me be born again by the spirit, or else I shall
dye, not only the first, but likewise the second death, and be undone for ever.
And know for thy comfort, if thou can find any such longing desire in thy
soul, thou art not far from this new birth, from the work of Regeneration in
thy soul. For this longing desire after this new birth, will put thee upon the
use of all ordinances and means God has sanctified for the attaining thereof.

II. Labor to get thine heart deeply and thoroughly affected with a sense of
thy miserable condition by nature. It is not sufficient to know thy condition
to be sad and deplorable so long as thou continuest in thine unregenerate
estate: but thy care and endeavor must be to get thine heart thoroughly
affected therewith. If you look into the Scriptures you shall find this
qualification required in the persons whom Christ came to save, and whom he
invites to come unto him. Our blessed Savior speaking to Zacheus says, The
Son of man is come to seek and to save that which is lost. Luke 19.10.
Where by the lost, whom Christ came to save, are not meant every sinner, who
indeed are lost men, but such as have a spiritual feeling of the woeful plight
and condition wherein they are by reason of their sins. And again says our
Savior, I am not come to call the righteous, Mat. 9.13.
but sinners to repentance. As by the righteous are meant such as are so in
their own opinion, and conceit, so by sinners are meant such as are sensible of
their wretched, miserable condition, and groan under the weight and burden of
their sins; whom Christ especially invites to come unto him, Mat. 11.2^.
saying, Come unto me all ye who are weary and heavy laden, and I will give you
rest.

1. The more sensible any are of their miserable condition by nature, the more
sensible will they be of their need of Jesus Christ. Mat. 9.12.
They that are whole, says our Savior, need not a Physician, but they that
are sick. In like manner, such as are whole and sound in their own conceit, see
no need of Christ; but such as are sick of their sins, and sensible of their
miserable and lost condition, they feel a need and necessity of Christ, who is
the only Physician that can help them, and without whom they look upon
themselves as undone for ever.

2. Sense of our miserable condition by nature, will stir us up to seek after
Jesus Christ for help and deliverance. As the manslayer under the Law, being
pursued by the avenger of blood, betook himself to a City of r^fuge for shelter
and defense. So the poor sinner pursued by the Hue and Cry of his sins, betakes
himself unto Jesus Christ, who is a true City of refuge to all who fly unto
him. Yea the more sensible any man is of his misery by sin, the more will he
hasten after Jesus Christ. And certainly one special reason why Christ is so
little sought after by many; and his gracious invitations so slighted and
neglected, is because they are not sensible of the woeful plight and condition
wherein they are by nature.

3. Sense of our miserable condition will make us more highly to prize Jesus
Christ, and to prefer him before all things in the World besides. The truth
is, the more sensible any of us are of our unregenerate estate, the more highly
shall we prize Jesus Christ. In what measure we can discern the height and
depth, the beadth and length of our miserable condition by nature, in the same
measure shall we discern the height and depth, the breadth and length of the
worth and excellency of Jesus Christ, and accordingly shall we prize and value
him.

Q. If any shall ask, how may I get my heart deeply affected with a sense of my
miserable condition by nature?

A. 1. Steep thy thoughts frequently in a serious meditation of thy sad and
deplorable condition, so long as thou continuest in thine unregenerate estate.
How thou art no better than a servant to sin, and slave to thy lusts, under the
bondage and command of Satan, doing his drudgery: yea and under the curse of
God, and guilt of all thy sins; and liable to all sorts of Judgments, both
temporal, spiritual and eternal. Consider likewise the miseries which will
accompany thee at thy death, and after thy death, even at the day of Judgment,
and after the day of Judgment; when thou shall not only be deprived of all
happiness, but exposed to such miseries, as neither the tongue of man can
express, nor the heart of man conceive, and that to all Eternity, if thou dyest
in thine unregenerate estate. Ah sinner, if thou would but frequently chew
this bitter pill, it would not only purge thee of thy sinful corruptions and
noisome humors, which now are praedominant in thee, but likewise exceedingly
make to thy spiritual health and welfare.

2. Be earnest with God in prayer that by his spirit he would convince thee of
thy miserable condition by nature, and make thee truly and thoroughly sensible
thereof. Consider that it is the office of the spirit of God to convince thee,
and so to affect and afflict thy heart for sin. Ioh. 16.8. He shall reprove or
convince the World of sin. It Is true his chief work is to convince of
righteousness, whereby he becomes a Comforter as he is there called: and it is
therefore said, ver. 14. He shall take of mine and show it unto you: he shall
take of my blood, of my bowels, of my righteousness, of the pardons which I
have procured, of the peace which I have purchased, he shall take of mine, and
show it unto you. This is his great work, but his first work is, He shall take
of your own, and show it unto you: he shall set your sins, and your guilt, and
your miseries before you. Look thee here soul, see what thou art, what a vile
thing, what an unclean thing, what a wretched thing thou art; what an hell thou
have within thee: what a Devil thou art become: what a treasure, what a portion
thou have laid up for thy self, even wrath, and fire, and brimstone, this must
be the portion of thy cup. This sad and dismal sight the spirit of God presents
to the soul, and therewith affrights and afflicts it.

O beg this spirit, God has promised to give it those that ask it: how much
more shall your heavenly Father give his spirit to them that ask it of him? Beg
for this work of the Spirit, his convincing work, as well as his comforting
work; resist not this holy Spirit, shut not thine eyes against this light, but
be wil^ing to see and feel the worst of thy case, to know and be deeply
affected with thy abominable wickedness, and the intolerable misery that it is
bringing upon thee.

III. Labor to be truly humbled for thy sins as the cause of thy present sad
condition. It is not sufficient to get thine heart in some measure affected
with the sense thereof, but thy care must likewise be to get thine heart into
an humbled and broken frame for the same. Having spent many years in sinning,
what caust thou do less than spend some hours in mourning and sorrowing for the
same? Having all thy life long broken the most holy and righteous Laws of God,
what can thou do less, than to get thine heart broken for the same? which
usually goes before, or at least accompanyeth our new birth. For as no Child
is ordinarily born without some throws, so no man is ordinarily regenerated,
and born anew by the Spirit, without some pangs of sorrow and humiliation,
though not all with a like measure: it being sanctified by God to be the
entrance into the state of grace.

Humiliation is as necessary to salvation, as faith: and you may as well think
of being saved without faith* as without repentance and humiliation, which like
John Baptist, prepares the way for Christ, and therefore is the most immediate
disposition that God usually works in the soul, before he works faith to
close with Jesus Christ. For until thou be truly humbled under a sense and
apprehension of thy sins and misery, it is not possible thou should heartily
desire Christ, much less cordially embrace him, as thy Savior and redeemer. Oh
therefore labor, in the use of all means God has sanctified, to get thine
heart kindly humbled and broken for thy sins. To this end,

1. Look back into thy life, and call to mind as many of thy sins as possibly
thou can; the sins of thy youth, as well as of thy riper years; thy sins of
omission as well as thy sins of commission; yea the sins of thy holy services.
Especially call to mind the greatest and grossest of thy sins, though they were
committed long ago. Thus did the Prodigal begin his humiliation and repentance,
by a serious examination of his former course of life, calling to remembrance
his departure from such a gracious Father, his own wanderings in the ways of
wickedness, in which he had lost himself, Luke 15 13.
and then as the text notes, He arose and came to his Father, and with tears
said unto him, Father, I have sinned against Heaven and against thee, and am no
more worthy to be called thy Son. To acknowledge thy self in the general to be
a sinner, works but a formal kind of repentance and humiliation, if any at all.
But if thou would be truly humbled, thou must descend to thy special, and
particular sins, saying, this evil have I done, and that good have I left
undone.

2. Consider together with the number, the hainousness of thy sins. To this end
call to mind the aggravating circumstances of them, as how thou have sinned
against the motions of Gods Spirit, the admonitions of his Ministers, the
checks of thine own conscience, against the light of nature, against the
patience and long-suffering of God, which should have led thee to repentance.

3. Seriously consider the fearful threatenings against sin and sinners, which
are all judgments and plagues here, and eternal death and condemnation
hereafter; and apply them to thy self, reasoning thus, If the least
transgression of the Law deserves the curse of God, yea all judgments and
plagues here, and eternal condemnation hereafter: then how many curses and
plagues? what and how great condemnation have I deserved? who have committed
sins innumerable for number, and heinous in their quality. And withal consider
the truth and faithfulness of God in making good his threatenings as well as his
promises.

4. Beg this great Mercy of an humbled heart from God. For it is he who must
strike our stony hearts, these hard Rocks of ours, before they can yield any
water of true repentance: it is he who must pour out of the spirit of grace
upon our hard hearts, before we can pour out any penitent tears, or lament as
we ought for our sins. It is he that must thaw our frozen hearts, before they
can dissolve into kindly sorrow. To him therefore alone thou must go for this
great work of humiliation. And that thy prayers may be the more prevalent,

1. Confess unto God the hardness of thine heart, how it is grown to such an
adamantine hardness, that neither the thundrings, nor threatenings of the Law,
nor the sweet showers, the promises of the Gospel can make it relent, or
dissolve. Confess unto God, that Though thou have broken his holy and righteous
Laws ten thousand thousand times, yet the consideration thereof has not broken
thine heart. Oh this rock, this rock, when shall it be pierced? Oh this hard
heart, I cannot break it. I would melt, I would mourn, but cannot. I can mourn
for a lost friend, for a lost estate, but I cannot mourn for a lost soul. Oh
what groanings and sighings, and lamentations will afflictions press out of me:
but my sins, my sins, how little do they move me? The pains of my body I can
feel and roar under, but O what a stock am I under, the plague of my heart?
Lord smite this rock. My plaints are before thee: mine eyes are toward thee. I
cannot weep, but I can cry for a broken heart, Lord hear me.

Ezekiel. 36.26.
2. In thy Prayers plead that gracious promise of God, to take away the stony
hearts out of our flesh, and to give us hearts of flesh. Has God promised, and
is there no hope in the promise? Is there hope, and will thou not lay hold on
that hope? plead with thy God upon his own word. Is not this thy Word, O Lord?
Have not thou said, thou will make this stone flesh? will it ever be done, if
thou do it not? wilt not thou do what thou have said? Is it not thy will that
I should believe thou will? Oh perform thy word unto thy Servant, wherein thou
have commanded me to put my trust.

3. Be importunate in this request of thine unto God, often renewing thy
prayers, and never give over till thou find thine hard heart brought into a
mourning and melting frame. Though God for a while seems deaf to thy prayers,
yet be not thou dumb, many petitions he cannot deny.

IV. Resolve to give a present bill of divorce to all thy sinful lusts and
pleasures, utterly to renounce and forsake thine old sinful course of life, and
to set upon a new course, to serve God in holiness and righteousness all the
remaining part of thy life. Its vain for thee to lament and bewail thy past
sins, if thou will not give over thy sinning trade. For as the Apostle
advises, Thou must first put off the old man with* his corrupt-lusts, before
thou put o^ the new man. Thou therefore who have accustomed thy self, to
swearing and cursing, to whoring and drinking, to scoffing and railing against
the people of God, resolve to swear and curse no more, to whore and drink no
more, to scoff and rail no more; but cast them away with detestation, avoiding
the places and occasions of these sins. For it is a vain thing to think thy
self strong enough to abstain from any sin, when thou can not withdraw thy
self from the occasions thereof.

Ah sinner, if thou have any regard to thy precious soul, it will be thy wisdom
speedily to resolve to leave thine old course of life, and to turn over a new
leaf. Think not of peace with God, whilst thou art at peace with sin. Think
not that thine old scores are crossed, whilst thou art so freely scoring up a
new. Deceive not thy self, thy divorce from sin, and thy marriage with Christ
must be both on the same day. And count not thy self divorced, till thou and
thy sins be parted. Resolve this day to have done with thy old ways for ever.
At once give Christ his welcome, and thy lusts their farewell. There is no true
humiliation for sin, where there is not a resolution against it. Say not thou
art not humbled enough, how little soever thy sorrow be, if thou art sincerely
resolved against iniquity. And say not thou art humble enough, how deep soever
it has been, if there follow not this resolution. Thy Furnace has not yet
been hot enough, if thy sin be not too hot for thee. Resolve for Christ,
resolve against the Devil, and all his works. And that thy resolution may hold,
observe these following directions.

1. Be sure thou do not ground thy resolutions upon any confidence in thine own
strength, but in the strength of Jesus Christ: without whose assistance thou
can do nothing, as our Savior himself expresses, Job. 15.1. But through
Christ strengthening thee, thou will be enabled to do any thing. As David
therefore when he was to encounter with Goliath, 1 Samuel 17.45.
went not out in his own name, but in the name and strength of the Lord of
Hosts. So must thou resolve to fight against thy lusts and corruptions, not in
thine own name or strength, but in the name and strength of Jesus Christ.
Otherwise thy lusts may reply to thee, as the Devil did to the Sons of Sheva,
Act. 19.15.
Jesus I know, and Paul I know, but who are ye? And know that the more sensible
thou art of thine own weakness, and insufficiency, the more ready Christ is to
help thee, and the more strength shall thou receive from Christ. Which the
Apostle Paul found true in his own experience, for says he, when I am weak,
then am I strong, that is, when I am weak, 2 Cors 12.10.
and insufficient in my self, in mine own apprehension, then do I most of all
feel a gracious supply from Christ.

2. Back thy resolutions with Prayer. As thou do resolve in the grace and
strength of God to abandon thy lusts, to forsake thy former wicked and ungodly
course of life: so be earnest with God in prayer for power and strength against
the power and strength of sin. For as it is Gods power by which alone thou
can keep down the power of thy lusts; so prayer is the means sanctified for
the obtaining thereof. Oh therefore pray, and pray earnestly, yea add fasting
to thy prayers. For old sins to which thou have been long accustomed, are like
those Devils which possessed the man from his youth, which could not be cast
out without fasting and prayer.

3. Second thy Prayers with thy diligence and faithful endeavors, striving
against thy lusts and corruptions, though never so sweet and dear unto thee.
For these are vain and insignificant resolutions which promise great matters,
but do nothing. Whereas true resolutions are active and stirring, putting men
upon the work. Have thou resolved, through the grace of God, to abandon thy
lusts? up then and be doing, set on it presently without any farther delay. For
should thou consecrate the prime and strength of thy days to the service of
Satan, and gratifying thine own carnal lusts, and reserve thy decayed strength,
and decrepit old age, the dregs of thy days, for God and his service? Can
thou think God will accept thereof? Surely no. For mark what the Prophet
Malachy speaks, Cursed be the deceiver, which has in his flo^k a male, and
voweth and sacrifices unto the Lord a corrupt thing. What then can they expect
who dedicate the prime and strength of their days to sin, and reserve only the
lees, their old age full of sores and corruptions unto God?

4. Frequently call to mind the resolutions thou have made of a speedy and
through reformateon, which will be an especial means to keep them fresh in
memory, and a fresh remembrance of them will stir thee up to a conscionable
performance of them.

5. Often renew thy resolutions. It is not sufficient frequently to review thy
resolutions, but thou must likewise frequently renew them. For a resolution
renewed is as new made, and thereby becomes fresh and vigorous. And truly
there is great power in a resolution, when it is fresh upon the heart; new
cords are strong.

V. Having resolved to give a bill of divorce to thy sinful lusts and
pleasures, make choice of Christ for thy Lord and Husband, as well as for thy
Priest and Savior. Take him as the Bride does her Bridegroom for better for
worse, for richer and poorer, with his cross as well as with his Crown, resign
and give up thy self unto Christ, to be ruled and governed, ordered and
disposed in all things by him: and resolve as to cast thy self at the feet of
Christ in subjection to him, so to cast thy self into the arms of Christ, and
upon his shoulders for Salvation from him: adventure thy soul upon him, rest
upon his perfect righteousness, and all-sufficient Sacrifice for the pardon of
thy sins here, and for eternal life and Salvation hereafter.

Let the consideration of those many melting invitations of Jesus Christ unto
poor sinners to come unto him, stir thee up to go unto him, to cast thy self
into the merciful and meritorious arms and embracements of thy Crucified
Savior, to throw thy self upon his grace and mercy. As God has laid thy help
upon him, so do thou lay thy hope upon him, both for the pardon of thy sins
past, and for power against sin for the time to come: for grace here, and glory
hereafter, saying, If I perish, I will perish in the arms of Jesus Christ. And
if thou can bring up thine heart to this, then is the match made between
Christ and thy soul; so that thou may with confidence say, Christ is mine,
and I am his.

And oh what a joyful day will this be unto thee? In this consists thy new
birth, and work of Regeneration, whereby thou art become a new creature. This
day is salvation come into thy heart: All other things are but preparatives
unto this.

Oh therefore let me prevail with thee, above all things to make this choice of
Christ for thy Lord and Savior: to resign up thy self unto him, and his Laws,
as well as to expect salvation from him. For no man can take Jesus Christ
savingly, who takes him not wholly, as his Lord, and husband to serve and obey
him, as well as his Priest and Savior to free him from the guilt and
punishment of all his sins^ He is the author of eternal Salvation only to those
who obey him.

Many I know are willing to accept of Christ upon their own terms. Some are
willing to accept of Christ, provided that together with him, they may enjoy
their sinful lusts and pleasures. Others are willing to accept of him,
provided that together with him, they may enjoy their worldly riches and
treasures. But he who will take Christ savingly, must take him upon his own
terms. He will be all to thee or nothing: he will rule thee, or else he will
not ransom thee. Away then with thy sins, be divorced from thine old Husband,
let sin no longer rule in thee; if thou will be married to the Lord, and have
any part in his righteousness.

Ah sinner, whosoever thou art, how many soever thy sins are, this day in the
name of the great God, I do tender Jesus Christ unto thee. And as thou tendrest
the life and happiness of thine own soul, refuse him not, but stir up thy self
to accept of him, both his person and in all his offices. Say the Lord Jesus
Christ shall be my Prophet, I will in all things labor to be taught and
instructed by him. And he shall be my King, I will give him the Supremacy, I
will resign up my self wholly to his Dominion, in all things to be ordered and
governed by him. And he shall be my Priest, he shall answer to God, and make an
atonement for me. I will rest upon his perfect righteousness, and
all-sufficient Sacrifice offered upon the Cross for life and salvation.

Though thou have hitherto been a great sinner, yet if now thou will abandon
thy sins, and thus embrace Jesus Christ, thou shall have him given to thee, and
all thy sins freely forgiven thee. Oh why will thou neglect so great salvation?
Oh do not deferr the doing it one day longer. But to day, even now that Christ
is freely offered unto thee, resolve to receive him.

And be not discouraged out of fear, that because thou have so long refused to
choose and embrace Jesus Christ, therefore now the time is past. But know that
so long as the Lord continues calling, and inviting thee by his Word and
Spirit, so long the day of grace lasts. The golden Scepter is this day held
forth unto thee: Christ and Salvation are now offered unto thee: O therefore
embrace him by faith; which if thou refusest to do, know assuredly that
everlasting fire prepared for the Devils, will be thy portion to all Eternity.
For as our Savior speaks, This is the condemnation, Joh. 3.19.
even the soarest and surest condemnation, that light is come into the World,
that Jesus Chrst, and salvation by him is offered in the Gospel, and yet men
love darkness more than light, preferring their deeds of darkness, their sinful
sensual ways before the Lord of life, who is the light of the World. Oh that
any should be so foolish and unwise, as to choose darkness rather than light,
and death rather than life.

CHAP. XV. Other Means on our part to be performed for attaining of
Regeneration.
VI WIth patience wait upon Christ in the use of his Ordinances, especially the
Word and Prayer.

1. Frequent the Ministry of the Word, where the Spirit of God uses to breath.
The Spirit is the principal worker of this great work, as our Savior
expresses. And the Ministry of the Word is the ordinary Means and instrument,
Joh. 3.5, 6.
which the spirit of God uses for the effecting hereof. The Spirit of God
breaths not in an Alehouse, or in a Tavern, or Playhouse, but in the Ministry
of the Word. Whereupon the Apostle Paul calls it the Word of life, Phil. 2.16.
by which our souls are quickened: And the Apostle Peter, the seed of
Regeneration, by which we are new born. 1 Pet. 1.23.
Being born again, says he, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by
the Word of God; this seed being sown in the heart, does by little and little
grow up to a new creature. In this respect the Preachers of the Gospel are
called spiritual Fathers, because by their Ministry they beget men unto God, 1
Cor. 4.15.
as Paul told the Corinthians, that he had begotten them through the Gospel. So
that it is clear that the Ministry of the Word is the ordinary means whereby
the Holy Ghost does usually work in us that great work of Regeneration.

But we must take heed that we do not attribute our new birth unto the Word
Preached, as having in its own nature any inherent power to give life and
grace, but as it is the Word of God, and his holy ordinance, which he has
instituted and sanctified for working grace in us. Attend therefore unto the
Ministry of the Word as the Ordinance of God, unto which his blessing is
promised; use it in obedience to his command, in hope of his blessing, and with
desire to profit thereby.

And for thine encouragement know, that as dead a soul as thine, has been
quickened by the spirit of God, as it has been attending upon the Ministry of
the Word: as hard an heart as thine has been softened: as profane an heart
has been sanctified: as carnal and corrupt an heart has been changed and
renewed. And who knows, but while thou art attending upon God in his way, his
spirit may breath upon thee, and so quicken thy dead heart, mollify thine hard
heart, sanctify thy profane heart, yea renew and change thy totally corrupted
and carnal heart, wherein consists the work of Regeneration.

This I press upon all, knowing that a carnal, unregenerate man may give
outward attendance unto the Ministry of the Word. Though thou art spiritually
dead, yet have thou feet to carry thee to the house of God, and ears to hear
the outward Ministry of the Word, and understanding to know in great measure
what is said. Thou may come to the Pool, and lie by it, though thou can not
put thy self in. And truly it is good lying in the way where Christ uses to
come.

Oh therefore frequent the Ministry of the Word, where the Spirit of Christ
uses to move, yea* and to breath a spirit of life into dead souls. Take all
occasions of hearing the Word both in season and out of season. Let nothing but
necessity keep thee at home; for thou know not what Sermon may be most
suitable to thy condition. And when thou hear, attend to it, as to a message
sent from God concerning thine everlasting salvation. And be often calling it
to remembrance, whereby it will take the deeper impression upon thine heart.
And though for the present thou find not that benefit thou expectest, yet wait
still upon the Ordinance. The lame man who lay long at the Pool of Bethesda, at
last was cured.

2. Be much in reading the Word of God, and such practical books as may help
thee in understanding and applying it. This must not thrust out Preaching, yet
is it an excellent means of grace in its own time and place, as very many have
found by their own experience. For as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 19.7.
The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul. So that the word read is
sometimes the power of God to Regeneration and Salvation, as well as the Word
Preached. As the E^nuch was a reading a portion of Scripture in his Chariot,
the Spirit of God commanded Philip to go near unto him, to teach him the
meaning thereof, and to instruct him in the knowledge of Jesus Christ,
whereupon he believed and was baptized.

And Luther confesses of himself, that he was changed and renewed upon reading
the Scriptures; and therefore professed he would not part with one leaf of the
Bible for all the World. For in the Scriptures there is a clear revelation of
the way and means of Salvation by Jesus Christ; therein is contained the
Covenant of grace, and the Laws of Heaven according to which we must square all
our actions.

Oh sinner, as thou desire to partake of the new birth, and to be made
partaker of the grace of God, be careful and conscionable in reading the
Scriptures. Spend not that time in reading of play-books and unprofitable
pamphlets, which thou might spend in reading the Word, which is able to make
thee wise unto Salvation: to this end carry it about thee as Alexander did
Homers Iliads for his fellow and companion in the Wars. Histor. Eccles. lib. 6.
cap. 2.
Oh that every one of us were ambitious of that commendation which Eusebius
gives of St. Origin, That he could repeat all the Scriptures at his fingers
ends.

3. Pray unto God for the change of thine heart; beg of him that he would be
pleased by his spirit to regenerate thee, to plant his image in thy soul, that
thou may become a new creature. What the Apostle James says of wisdom, Jam.
1.5.
is true of all grace, If any one lack it, let him ask it of God, that gives
to all men liberally, and upbraideth not, and it shall be given him.

Oh therefore beseech him to open thine eyes, and show thee how sad and
deplorable thy condition is, so long as thou continuest in the state of
unregeneracy, that thou may be truly sensible thereof; that he would show
thee the excellency and necessity of a new birth, that thine heart may be
raised up in some earnest, longing desires after the same: that he would
vouchsafe unto thee his Holy Spirit, which may quicken thy dead soul, and renew
it after the Image of God, in righteousness and true holiness. And in thy
prayers plead the promise of God, Luke 11.13.
to give his Spirit to those who ask him. That thy Prayers for a new birth may
the better speed;

1. Be earnest therein. Pray withal thine heart, and with all thy might, with
the highest intention of affection. If thou would be a prevailing Israel,
thou must be a wrestling Jacob; wrestle with God in prayer; for it is the
fervent prayer only that is effectual.

2. Be un^^ssant in thy Prayers, as one that will take no nay, nor give over
till thou find the work wrought in thy soul. Be as importunate with God, as the
Widow was with the unjust judge. For God loves importunity. If the unjust
Judge was overcome with importunity, how much rather will the righteous God,
who is compassionately affected toward those who seek unto him. Resolve with
Jacob, I will not let thee go except thou bless me. Lord help me, Lord break
me, humble me, change and turn me: I cannot turn my self, Ministers cannot,
Ordinances cannot, afflictions cannot turn me. If thou will, thou can: turn
thou me, and I shall be turned, draw thou me, and I will run after thee. O
suffer thy self this once to be overcome by a poor Worm. I cannot be denied: I
dye, I am undone, if thou deny me. I cannot be denied, I will not be denied, I
will not let thee go until thou bless me. Lord hear, Lord turn me.

Obj. But some are apt to object and say, how can I pray without the Spirit?

A. Put thy self upon the duty of prayer, and who knows but thou may soon
feel and find the assistance of Gods spirit in the performance, though thou
find it not in the entrance of the duty. Go therefore unto God in prayer,
spread before him thy wretched, miserable state and condition, plead thy
miserable necessity, the dreadfulness of thy present state, how much better it
had been that thou had never been born, than not to be born again. And then
waiting for the assistance of the Spirit, be earnest and importunate with God,
that he would not let thee live a day longer in thine Unregenerate state, least
death should find thee therein, and then thou perish everlastingly.

Obj. Some I know do question whether carnal and unregenerate men may be put
upon that duty of prayer, because the Scripture says, Prove. 15.8.
that the Sacrifice of the wicked is abomi^ation to the Lord, and that God
hears not sinners.

A. 1. The Scriptures give us warrant to press carnal and unregenerate men upon
the duty of Prayer. For at the time when Peter told Simon Magus that he was in
the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of i^iquity, then he pressed him to
pray unto God, Act. 8.22.
saying, Repent of thy wicked^ess, and pray unto God, if perhaps the thought of
thine heart may be forgiven thee.

2. We do not exhort men to pray and still hold themselves resolved to continue
in their wicked and ungodly courses; such prayer indeed would be an
abomination: but to resolve upon turning, and so to go unto the Lord for his
grace to assist and accept them. And therefore says Peter to Simon Magus,
Repent of this thy wickedness, and so pray for pardon.

3. The young Ravens cry for want of food, and God is said to hear them. Why
may he not then hear the cries and Prayers of carnal and unregenerate men?
especially when they pray unto him for changed and renewed hearts; which
prayers cannot but be agreeable to the will of God. How graciously did God
reward that petition of Solomon, when he asked not for riches or long life, but
for a wise and understanding heart. So may God say unto them, because ye have
not asked temporal blessings, as health, wealth or the like, but a renewed
heart, a new birth; be it according to your desires, your natural carnal heart
shall be changed and renewed.

And to thine own Prayers call in the help of other men's prayers, beg of them
that in their Prayers they would be mindful of thee, and of thy condition;
that they would be earnest with God on thy behalf, that he would make thee a
new creature by endowing thee with true, saving, sanctifying graces. Thus Simon
Magus begged the Prayers of the Apostles, apprehending their prayers to be more
prevalent than his own. For it is possible that God may hear the Prayers of Job
for his friends, when he will not hear them for themselves. And the Iaylors
Conversion is set down as the Consequent of the Apostles Prayers. Not only
their deliverance out of his prison, but his deliverance out of the Devils
prison, is set down as a fruit of their prayers. To thine own prayers
therefore, call in the help of other men's Prayers.

VII. When either in hearing, reading, praying, or at any other time thou
feel any motions of Gods spirit in thy soul and conscience, make much of
them, surrender up thy self thereunto, presently turn those motions into
resolutions, and those resolutions into endeavors. Let not the motions of Gods
Spirit be nipped in the bud, but nourish and cherish them, that they may bring
forth good fruit.

Ah sinner, as thou tendrest the good and happiness of thy precious and
immortal soul, slight not the motions of Gods Spirit in thee, but labor to
improve them to the ends for which they are sent. Are they motions tending to
the working in thee a loathing and abhorring of thy former sinful lusts? second
those motions with strong resolutions to leave and forsake them for the time to
come, at least so to strive against them as they may not rule and reign in
thee, as formerly they have done. Are they motions tending to the stirring thee
up to any good duty omitted? oh turn these motions into performances, and
presently fall upon the practice of those duties, whether it be praying in thy
closet, or in thy Family, or such like.

Does the Spirit of God beam any light from the Word into thine understanding,
whereby thou art more thoroughly convinced of thy miserable condition by nature,
of the excellency of the new birth, of the necessity thereof unto Salvation?
Labor to improve this light to the stirring up in thee an earnest, longing
desire after the work of Regeneration. Has the Spirit of God in a Sermon so
convinced thee of some grofs, scandalous sin, or sins, that thou art pricked at
the heart, and deeply humbled under the sense and apprehension of them? oh
content not thy self with some sudden pangs of affection, but forthwith go into
some secret place, and there take the advantage of thy present relenting frame
of heart, for the more free and full confessing of thy sins unto God, and
engaging thy self by a solemn covenant unto him to be more watchful over thy
self, as against thy former lend and wicked courses, so against the occasions
leading thereunto.

Ah sinner, it will be thy Wisdom carefully to observe, and diligently to
improve all the motions and stirrings of Gods Spirit in thy Soul and
Conscience, by seconding the work of this holy Spirit in thee. Lose not the
Wind and Tide, the Wind may lie, the Tide may turn, and where art thou then?
'twill be hard Rowing against Wind or Tide. Thou little think what advantage
such motions wisely improved may be to thy soul: and what prejudice the
slighting, and neglecting of them may be unto thee: for ought thou know,
thine eternal happiness or misery may depend upon the improving or slighting
the same.

VIII. Be much in the company of the godly, walk with them who walk with God.
He that walks with the wise, shall be more wise: he that walks with the
humble, shall be more humble: he that walks with the holy, shall learn
holiness. As there is no greater hinderance to the work of Christ, than the
society of the wicked; So there is no greater furtherance to it, than the
society of those who fear God. For there is none will be so ready to pity and
compassionate you, to counsel and direct you in the way to Heaven, as these:
none so ready to provoke and egg you on unto godliness, to encourage and cheer
you up when you do well, and to reprove you when you do amiss, as these: none
so ready to communicate their experiences to you, O come, say they, and we will
tell you what the Lord has done for our souls. So that in the company of the
godly there is much good to be got; they being like Lanthorns which disperse
their light round about. If thou be much in their company, thou shall hear
much of God, much of Christ, and much of Heaven: they use to be talking much of
the riches of that Country, and the glory of that holy City, whether they are
traveling. They will be opening to you the excellency of Jesus Christ, the
riches of his love, the all sufficiency of his Sacrifice, his willingness to
receive all poor sinners, who will go unto him, and adventure their souls upon
him. And who knows how much their discourse may warm thine heart, and raise
up thy desires after Christ. Agrippa was almost persuaded to be a Christian,
whilst he was talking with St. Paul. And the Ennuch was not only almost, but
altogether persuaded, whilst he was conversing with Philip. As therefore thou
desire to further the work of grace begun in thy soul, be much in the company
of those who are gracious; who will be exceedingly helpful to thee therein, as
by their prayers, so by their counsel and good example. For their lives tell
thee what it is to walk in the Spirit, what to mortify the flesh, and to live
abo^e all the alluring va^ities of the world.

Oh Christians, encourage poor sinners to come among you; let your discourses
be practical Sermons; let your ways be living copies of that holy doctrine
which you have received; let your conversation be full of love, life, pity,
compassion toward them: be ready to teach, counsel, encourage and help them on
after the Lord. Teach not sinners to say (by the barrenness, and unsavouriness
of your lives) there is no more of God to be gotten in the dwellings of the
Righteous, than in the tents of Wickedness.

Thus have I showed you the Means on our part to be performed for the
furthering the new birth, and the work of Regeneration in your souls. And now
give me leave to propound one Question to you. Are you resolved with the grace
and assistance of God, speedily to put your selves upon the practice of these
Directions or no? If you think these things more than necessary, and are ready
to say, What need so much ado, as if without so much hearing, so much reading,
so much praying, and the like, there were no hope of Regeneration, and
Salvation! you may then sit down and take your ease. But know for certain, that
without a conscionable use of these Means, you are like to fall short, as of
Regeneration here, so of Salvation hereafter. For where God has appointed
Means, he does not ordinarily work without them; and therefore if you will not
use Gods Means, no wonder if you go without his grace.

Ah sinners, I beseech you for the sake of your precious souls, do not
wilfully refuse to be happy, do not, wittingly plunge your souls into
everlasting miseries. Be willing to be happy, awaken your sleepy, stir up your
lazy hearts to be doing. Heaven is not gotten with a wish, everlasting glory is
worthy your utmost pains, and will not be gotten without it.

What say you, after all that has been said? Are you willing to be converted?
to become new men, and to take up a new course? If you are not yet, when will
you? Are you content to dye in your present state? If you were now breathing
out your last, and just passing into another World, would you not wish you had
hearkened to counsel? Though thou will, live the life, yet art thou content to
dye the death of the obstinate and hardened? Be not Brutes, and mad men. If
Christ be best at death; if holiness will be best at last; if you know and
believe, that when you come to dye, you shall wish you had made Christ sure:
then sure your standing out against Christ now, your refusing grace now, is the
firstborn of follies. O be wise, consider what is before you; Christ and the
World, holiness and sin, life and death, choose now for your selves; and if you
will be advised, let your this days choice be the same, which you are resolved
shall be your dying choice. If you would not choose to dye in your sins, to dye
Drunkards, to dye adulterers, to dye Scoffers, to dye unbelievers, live not out
this day in such a dreadful state.

CHAP. XVI. Several Objections of Carnal and Unregenerate men against the use
of the forementioned Means, Answered.
HAving showed the Means; I come now to answer the Objections which many carnal
men pretend against the use of them in order to a new birth.

Obj. 1. Some are ready to object and say, These are indeed likely means, but
they find neither strength, nor ability to set upon the practice of them.

A. 1. I would ask thee, whether thou can in truth say, thou have not been
wanting to thy self in such things as were within thy power and strength? Have
thou not as much power to go into the house of God, as into an Alehouse? to
read the holy Scriptures, as Playbooks and Pamphlets? to associate thy self
with the Godly, as with the Wicked and Profane? can not thou take up a
resolution, to abandon thine old sinful lusts, and to set upon a new course of
life? Certainly if thou have been wanting to thy self in these and such like
things, this objection taken from thine own inability, is but an idle excuse;
and argues rather thine unwillingness, than disability: and know that in the
last and great day, thou will be damned not so much for thy want of power, as
for thy want of will.

2. If thou will but put thy self upon the use of Means, thou* do not know
what strength thou may receive from God, Act. 10.44.
and what may be the issue thereof. While Peter was Preaching; the holy Ghost
fell on all them that heard the Word. And for ought thou know, whilst thou
art attending upon the Ministry of the Word, or praying unto God; the Holy
Ghost may fall on thee; and make that Ordinance effectual for thy Regeneration
and Salvation. And therefore put thy self upon the use of Means: wait at the
Pool; thou know not how soon the Spirit may come and move upon thy soul. For
God does usually meet with those who seek him.

Obj. 2. I fear I am not elected, and therefore conceive it altogether
fruitless for me to labor in the use of any means for this new birth. Oh could
I be assured of my election! then should I with comfort and confidence labor
after it.

A. 1. Election is a secret thing and belongs unto God; according to that of
Moses, Deuteronomy. 29.29.
Secret things belong unto the Lord our God, but things which are revealed
belong unto us. And therefore trouble not thy self with Gods secret will, but
follow his revealed will. Apply thy self seriously and cordially to the use of
the means God has sanctified for thy Regeneration; and from thence thou may
gain some comfortable evidence of thine election.

2. Consider though it be the duty of every Christian to give all diligence to
make his calling and election sure: yet no man can know, and be assured of his
election, till he be Regenerated by the Spirit of God: therefore the not
knowing thine election should be so far from keeping thee off from applying thy
self to the means of Regeneration, as it should rather be an argument to press
thee thereunto: for by thy Regeneration thou may know thine election. The
eternal decrees of God are only made known a posteriori, from their effects,
o^e whereof is Regeneration: find this and thou need not doubt of thine
election.

3. Will thou not plow nor Sow because thou know not whether God has
determined thee an Harvest? Thou will say, I am sure I shall not reap, if I sow
not; there is hope of an Harvest, if there be a Seed-time: and therefore I will
adventure to sow what ever the issue may be. And will thou not be as wise for
thy soul, as for thy body? Because thou art not sure of thine election, will thou make thy damnation sure?

Obj. 3. Ah! I am too unworthy to partake of so great a mercy: there is nothing
in me to move God to work grace in me, and therefore why should I trouble my
self about it?

A. 1. Consider Gods grace is every way so free, that the mercy which he
vouchsafes to any of his Creatures, is altogether of himself, and from
himself. He respects his own goodness, not our worthiness, in the mercies
which he conferreth. If none shall obtain grace but the worthy, who then can be
saved?

2. Consider that no man before his Regeneration could ever find any worthiness
in himself why he should partake of that mercy. What was there in Manass^h? Or
in Zacheus? Or in Mary Magdalen? Or in Paul before their conversion? Surely
none at all. Nay there is never a child of God on Earth, or in Heaven, but had
as much personal unworthiness before his Regeneration, as thou now have. Why
then does the sight and apprehension of thine unworthiness put thee out of all
hope of obtaining the same?

3. Consider that the sense of thine unworthiness is some degree of worthiness:
yea it is the greatest worthiness thou can attain unto. And none ever found
greater mercy from God, than they who have been most sensible of their
unworthiness. Instance the Centurion, who speaking unto Christ, Mat. 8.8.
said, I am not worthy that thou should come under the roof of my house. And
yet Christ granted his desire in healing his servant. So likewise the Woman of
Canaan, who acknowledged her self to be no better than a Dog, yet received this
answer from Christ, Oh Woman, Mat. 15.27.
great is thy faith, be it unto thee even as thou will. So likewise the
Publican, who was conscious to himself, of so much unworthiness, that he stood
afar off, and durst not lift up his eyes unto Heaven, but smote upon his
breast, saying, God be merciful to me a sinner. Luke 18.13.
Yet as the text notes ver. 14. He went away justified rather than the
Pharisee, who was puffed up with a conceit of his own righteousness.

4. It is to be feared that this objection of thine unworthiness arises not so
much from true humility, as from the pride of thine own heart, who art loath to
be beholding unto God for any mercy; but would rather discern something in
thy self which may deserve it at his hands. But we are to root out of our
hearts this spiritual pride, and be humble; and then we may rest confident,
that though we are most unworthy in our selves, yet God will accept of us in
and for the worthiness of Jesus Christ.

Obj. 4. Some object the number and the heinousness of their sins. Oh they are
such vile and wretched sinners, having misspent the best of their time, the
strength of their youth in the service of sin and Satan, and in gratifying
their own carnal lu^ts and affections; and as they have grown in years, so they
have grown in sin and wickedness; and therefore cannot expect so great a mercy
from God, as of a Son of Belial to be made a Son of God, by the work of
Regeneration.

A. 1. Know for thy comfort that God has embraced with the arms of his free
grace, as great and heinous sinners as thy self. For have thou been an
Idolater, or Murderer? 2 Chronicles. 33.4, 13. 1 Timothy 1.13, 16
so was Ma^asseh, yet was he received to mercy. Have thou been a Blasphemer or
a Persecutor of the Saints and servants of God? So was Paul, and yet he
obtained mercy. Have thou been a Filthy, unclean person, wallowing and
delighting like a Sow, in the filth of sin, and mire of sinful filthiness? So
did Mary Magdalea, and many of the Corinthians; 1 Cor. 6.11
yet were they washed with the blood of Jesus Christ, justified and sanctified.
Have thou been an Oppressor and Extortioner, who have got thine estate by
overreaching thy neighbors, and grinding the faces of the poor? So did
Matthew and Zacheus, who yet found mercy. Why then is there not hope of mercy
for thee? when grace has embraced such great and heinous sinners.

Q. Will thou say, thou art a greater sinner than any of these forementioned?

A. 1. This is scarce credible. But suppose thy sins do exceed the proportion
of any one thou can find pardoned in Scripture! yet this were no just ground
of despair: because the depth of Gods mercy was never yet fathomed; God never
acted his mercy so far, but he is able to act it farther. Greater sinners, than
ever yet were pardoned, may be pardoned. And therefore though thy sins were
more and greater than the sins of others, yet there is hope of mercy for thee,
unless by thine infidelity thou do exclude thy self from the same.

2. Consider that there was no more in Manasseh, Mary Magdalen, Paul, nor any
of the Saints now in Heaven to move God to have compassion on them, than there
is in thee. Romans 3.23.
The Apostle says, that there is no difference, for all have sinned. The true
cause of any man's Regeneration is the free grace, and love of God. For says
the Apostle, Ephesians. 2.3, 4.
we were all by nature the Children of wrath, even as others. But God who is
rich in mercy, for his great love, wherewith he loved us, even when we were
dead in sins, has quickened us. And immediately adds, By grace ye are saved.
Now seeing the free grace and love of God is the true cause of man's
Regeneration and Salvation, why should thou imagine there is less love in God
for thee, than there was for them?

Obj. 5. Others object, they fear their time and day of grace is past and gone,
having long stood out, and rejected many offers of grace, and that it is now
too late to seek after the grace of God.

A. To this I answer that the slighting and rejecting the many offers of grace,
is very sad, yea an heinous sin, which calls for thy deepest sorrow and
humiliation. This made our Savior to weep over Jerusalem, because they
neglected the day of their visitation. But yet know,

1. Though thou have often refused and rejected the offers of grace, yet is not
thy condition hopeless, in that it is not the sin against the Holy Ghost, which
alone cannot be pardoned: but it is a sin, though heinous, yet pardonable. Many
have obtained mercy even for this, and so may thou, upon thy true
humiliation and repentance. For such is the mercy of God, as he both can and
will pardon even sins against mercy.

2. It Is a question whether there be any Saint on Earth or in Heaven, who
before their closing with Christ by faith, did not stand out against, and
reject many of his gracious invitations, excepting such as were sanctified from
the Womb. It Is the Devil that puts it into thy mouth to say, I have slighted
many offers of grace, therefore my day of grace is past and gone. Do we not see
by daily experience, how Christ brings home some to himself in their old age?
who questionless in their youth and riper years turned many a deaf ear to his
gracious invitations. And that Christ is still willing and ready so to do,
appears by this, that he continues his offers of grace, though formerly
neglected. How often would I have gathered thee? Mat. 23.37.
says Christ of Jerusalem.

3. Christ has several seasons of Conversion, and Regeneration; all come not
in at the first hour of the day, nor at the sixth hour. Christ brings home some
to himself in the latter end of their lives, who have all the former part
slighted and rejected his gracious invitations. And therefore he will have them
often renewed, and tendered to poor sinners; because though the time of some be
to come in at the first offer, yet the time of others is to come in upon
renewed and multiplied offers: so that often renewing thy refusals is not an
eternal prejudice.

4. If thou art heartily sorry for thy former refusals, and do now unfeinedly
desire to close with Christ, I may with confidence say, thy day of grace is not
past. For those affections wrought in thee by the Spirit of God are gracious
hints that he intends thee good, if yet thou will accept. Such who have
outstood their day, are usually given up to a feared Conscience, and reprobate
mind, and are hurried by the Devil to the committing of all manner of sin and
wickedness, and that with greediness and delight.

5. Thou who fear thy day of grace is past, know this, that if thou now
find in thy self a willingness to abandon thy former lusts and corruptions,
and to become a new creature; to cast off the Devils service, and to become the
servant of the Lord Jesus, thy day of grace is not past.

6. It is evident thy day of grace is not past, because the Lord has not yet
given over to strive with thee. Is he not yet woing and beseeching thee by the
Ministry of his Word, by the motions of his Spirit, to accept of the
reconciliation purchased by the blood of his Son? And does not Christ himself
stand knocking at the door of thine heart, Rev. 3.20.
telling thee, that if thou will open to him, he will come in and sup with
thee, and thou with him? It is yet the acceptable time, and day of Salvation,
if thou will accept, thou may be accepted. Say not foolishly, my day is past,
but prove it is not so, by coming in this day. Harden not thine heart this day,
and thou shall find God will not harden his ear against thy cry.

7. Though thou have long stood out, yet know that God will not presently take
the forfeiture of thee: neither will Christ suddenly take his advantage against
thee. If the Lord were as hasty to punish sinners, as they are forward to
commit sin, there would suddenly be an end of all. And if Christ should be as
forward to reject sinners, as they are to reject him, what hope of mercy were
there? But Christ is not so severe, he is of great goodness, and of great
patience, he makes tenders of grace and peace over and over again, and waits
our acceptance. In which respect he is said to stand at their door and knock.
Rev. 3.20.
As knocking is usually a repetition of strokes, so standing at the door and
knocking, implies his waiting for our opening.

Ah sinner, does Christ continue to renew his offers of grace and mercy unto
thee, and will thou thereupon continue to refuse them* know assuredly that
though renewed offers are doubled mercies, yet renewed refusals are tr^bled
sins, which will exceedingly aggravate thy condemnation.

I speak not these things to encourage any to deferr, and put off their turning
from their sins to farther day, upon a presumption they shall have mercy at
last. Beware of that madness. Thou that wilt not to day, thy soul may be in
Hell before to morrow. But I speak this to encourage old sinners to a speedy
turning. Old sinner, it is the last time with thee, for ought thou know,
thou art just come to thy Now or Never. And two things I would speak to thee.

1. It Is a great doubt whether thou who have stood it out so long wilt come in
now, fear and tremble; few very few of those that stand it out to the last
hour, do come in at the last hour, yet,

2. If thou will thou may; if in this thy day, thy last day, thou will come
in, thou shall be saved.

Obj. 6. If once I be Regenerate, and become a new creature, I shall never live
one merry day more: then farewell all delights, and pleasures; for the life of
a godly man is full of uncomfortableness, and sadness.

A. 1. True it is, every Regenerate man ought to renounce all sinful delights,
to bid adieu to all unlawful pleasures: which in truth is no bondage, but
rather a spiritual liberty. The bondage of a Christian is in being a servant to
his sinful lusts: and his liberty in being delivered from them. The Apostle
bewails the time when himself, and other Saints were foolish, Tit. 3.3.
serving diverse lusts and pleasures. And reckons it amongst the prime benefits,
they received by the grace of the Gospel, to be delivered from that slavery and
bondage.

2. Though every Regenerate man ought to renounce all sinful pleasures, and
delights, yet he may in some measure enjoy any lawful pleasures, which the
Creature affords. Yea none does or can enjoy the sweetness of the Creature
more, than the new creature. For he has not only a fleshly palate like other
men, whereby he relisheth the carnal pleasure which the Creature affords; but
he has likewise a spiritual palate whereby he tastes the sweetness and
goodness of God in the Creature. So that this Objection is a mere slander,
which the Devil and his Agents have raised to fright men from looking after
grace.

3. The work of Regeneration is so far from depriving a man of all delights and
pleasures, that there are unspeakable delights peculiar to the Regenerate: they
have dainties which their spirits feed upon, that the World knows not of; Prove.
14.1.
a stranger does not intermeddle with their joy. As they have higher, and more
noble principles than other men: so they feed upon higher and more noble
comforts. Their comforts are spiritual, administered unto their souls by a
special work of the Holy Ghost; who is designed by the Father and the Son to be
the Comforter, to cheer and revive the spirits of his servants. And certainly
the comforts and delights which he conveyes into the souls of the Regenerate,
must needs be soul-satisfying, and soul-ravishing consolations. What Blasphemy
is it to affirm, that the joys of the World are better than the joys of God?

Oh how sweet and delightful must it needs be to know, that we are brought out
of the state of nature into the state of grace! that we are the Children of
God, beloved of him! the members of Christ, and dear to him! that our sins are
pardoned in and through the merits of his bitter death and passion! and that so
soon as our earthly Tabernacles are dissolved, we shall have a building of God,
an house not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens; and there reign with him
in everlasting bliss and happiness! Oh what a comfort must it needs be
seriously to fix our thoughts on those joys and pleasures, which hereafter we
shall enjoy at Gods right hand to all Eternity!

Ah sinners, What folly then has bewitched you to think it greater pleasure to
live in foolish sports, and fleshly delights, than in the sense of Gods love,
and in the believing thoughts of glory? Did you but know the peace and the
comfort; the pleasure and the joy, which springs from the apprehension of
Gods love, and walking in the ways of holiness, you would soon be of another
mind, and take another course than you do. Much good may do you with your
crackling thorns: walk in the light of your fires, and the sparks which you
have kindled: make the best of your present pleasures, till that vanity and
vexation, which is all you are like to reap from them, bring you to a better
mind.

The new birth is the very beginning of a life of peace and comfort: and the
greatest pleasantness is to be found in the ways of holiness. Would you but
make enquiry of those who have tried both stares, both that of sin, and that of
grace, they will tell you, that their first state was a state of trouble and
misery: and that they never found any true peace and comfort in their souls
till they were brought home to God, and came to be acquainted with an holy
life. Yea that they have enjoyed more sweetness and delight in one hours
communion with God, than ever their flesh brought them in, in all their lives.
Solomon who had experience of all other pleasures, yet says of the ways of
godliness, Prove. 3.17.
Her ways are ways of pleasantness, even soul-satisfying pleasantness.

If you will not believe the reports of the people of God, yet hearken to what
God himself speaks in his word, Romans 5.1, 2, 3.
Being justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ:
and not only so, but we glory in tribulation. 1 Pet. 1.8.
And says St. Peter, Believing ye rejoice with joy unspeakable, and full of
glory. And the Psalmist often calls upon the righteous to rejoice, Psalm.
97.12.
Rejoice in the Lord ye righteous, and shout for joy all ye that are upright in
heart. And says the Apostle, Phil. 4.4.
Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I say rejoice. Will you believe God?
this you see is his testimony, that true joy is proper to the Regenerate, the
Children of God are the only heirs of joy and glory.

Obj. 1. But some are ready to object and say, how can the state of the
Regenerate be so comfortable, and joyful, when as none are more afflicted and
persecuted than they? Joh. 16.33.
In the World, (says our Savior speaking to his Disciples) ye shall have
tribulation. And says the Apostle All that will live godly in Christ Jesus
shall suffer persecution: Qui non est crucianus, non est Christianus, Luther in
Genesis 29.
which made Luther to say, a Christian is a Cross-bearer.

A. 1. True it is none are more afflicted and persecuted than they: but their
afflictions and persecutions do not always deprive them of true spiritual joy
and comfort. For says the Apostle, Being justified by faith we have peace with
God, and we rejoice in tribulation. And says our Savior, Romans 5.1, 3. Mat.
5.11, 12.
When men shall revile you, and persecute you, and say all manner of evil
against you falsely for my sake, rejoice and be exceeding glad.

2. Gods Children in and under great afflictions do oft-times feel and find the
greatest joy and comfort. As their sufferi^gs abound, so their consolation
abounds in and through Christ. 2 Cor. 1.3.
When does a Christian stand in more need of the comforts of God, and when does
he enjoy more of them then when outward comforts do most fail him? When David
was sorely distressed, being plundered of his goods, and robbed of his Wives and
Children, he encouraged himself in the Lord his God, and received much comfort
from him. 1 Samuel 29.6.


Obj. 2. How can the state of the regenerate be joyful, when as the grace of
God teaches, Tit. 2.12.
and requires them to deny all ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and to^ live,
as godly and righteously, so soberly in this present World?

A. 1. True it is, the Regenerate ought not to live according to the course of
the World, satisfying their own carnal lusts and pleasures, but according to
the strict rule of Gods Word.

2. But yet this strict walking is no hinderance to true joy, but rather a
furtherer thereof; which made the Prophet David to say, Psalm. 119.165.
Great peace have they who love thy Law, that is, they shall enjoy much peace
of Conscience, and quietness of mind. It is said of the primitive Saints, that
they walked in the fear of the Lord, Act. 9.31.
and in the comfort of the holy Ghost, because they walked in the fear of the
Lord, therefore they found the joy and comfort of the Holy Ghost. And indeed
the strictest walking has procured the swe^test joy: and the loosest walking
the greatest sorrow. Ask the people of God, whether any of them, have ever
found more soul-re^oyci^g, than when they have walked most closely and exactly
with God. Nay I dare appeal to thine own Conscience, whether it be not more
comfortable to serve God, than the Devil? to please God, than to gratify thy
sinful lusts and affections? Do thou make nothing of the joy of a good
Conscience, and the sweetness of uprightness and integrity?

Obj. 3. Does not daily experience tell us, that many Godly Christians,
notwithstanding their close walking with God, live very uncomfortably; their
spirits are heavy and sad, and they are oftener in tears and groans than others.

A. 1. It may be their sadness is not a real, but a seeming sadness, they only
seem to be sad unto wicked and profane men; 2 Cor. 6.10.
As sorrowful, yet always rejoicing. Where the Apostle brings in the sorrow
of the Godly with a quasi, as it were sorrowful, not that it is sorrow indeed.
But when he speaks of their joy, there is no quasi, but true joy: which is
grounded upon so sure foundations, viz. the free grace of God, and the merits
of Christ apprehended by a true and lively faith, that it continues for ever,
and never utterly vanishes away. When the Countenance of a Christian seems
sad, there is many times much peace and joy in his heart: and therefore his joy
is called hidden Manna, Rev. 2.17.
as being inward and secret, to which worldly men are mere strangers.

2. Though their sadness be real, yet is not their godliness the cause thereof,
no more than the Sun can be the cause of darkness.

But the grounds and causes of a Christians sadness are these,

1. Happily he has lately fallen into some great and heinous sin, and if so, no
marvel if he walk sadly and uncomfortably, till he has got some comfortable
evidence of the pardon and forgiveness thereof. For guilt makes a man a terror
to himself. Psalm. 32. and 51.
What made David walk so heavily, yea roar out for grief? but the guilt of his
Adultery and Murder. What made Peter go out and weep so bitterly? but the
guilt of his cowardice in denying his Lord and Master.

2. Happily he has some deep apprehension of the corruption of his own heart,
which he oft-times finds working and stirring in him. This made Paul to smite
himself upon his breast, Romans 7.24.
and cry out, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of
sin and corruption! Thou think much to see a godly man walk sadly and
uncomfortably. Whereas if thine eyes were but opened to see the vileness and
wretchedness that is in thine own heart, thou would presently sink down in
dismal sorrow and desperation.

3. He may yet be in the travel of his new birth, or but newly delivered; so
that he is hardly freed from the spirit of bondage. And therefore no marvel
that he still walks with a sorrowful heart. But this sorrow will soon end in
full joy. For Christ the Sun of Righteousness is rising upon his soul with
healing in his Wings, who will dry up his tears, and fill his heart with joy.

4. Or if he be a through Convert, yet he may be under some soar temptation
from the Devil, whose main design is to keep men in slavery and bondage to
himself; but if he fail therein, then his next design is to weaken their
comforts. And therefore so far as God will give him leave, he will be sure to
set upon them with his fiercest, temptations, and to cast into their minds many
Atheistical and Blasphemous thoughts: the venom of which is ready to drink up
their spirits: and it is no marvel if they walk uncomfortably at such times,
for joy and rejoicing attends not the combat but the conquest. Think not the
worse of the ways of God for that the Devil is so much against them, and
straws them with such thorns.

5. It may be he is of a melancholy constitution, and then it cannot be
expected he should walk joyfully. For joy has no greater enemy than
melancholy. And know, that though the disposition of the soul is changed by the
new birth, yet not the constitution of the body.

6. It may be God has hid his face, and favor from him, withdrawn himself in
respect of the manifestation of his love to his soul, so that he does not enjoy
that comfort which he was wont to have in God; and if so, no marvel if he walk
heavily and uncomfortably. For what Christian can rejoice when God deprives him
of all sense and feeling of his loving favor? and shuts up those sweet streams
of refreshment which were wont to flow into his soul?

Surely the chief work of a Christian in such a case is heartily to bewail his
present sad condition, and to be earnest with God in prayer, that he would lift
up the light of his countenance, and shine in comfortably upon his soul, that
the bones which he has broken may rejoice.

Now for any to argue, because some godly men have ofttimes occasion of sorrow
and mourning, therefore the lives of all the godly are full of sorrow and
sadness, is a very absurd and false kind of reasoning; and yet this is the
reasoning of many carnal men and women in the World. Whereas we may more
rationally argue, the lives of all carnal and profane men to be uncomfortable,
because all the causes of uncomfortableness are found on them as guilt of sin,
death in sin, enmity against God, alienation from Christ, and therefore
lyableness to all judgments and plagues here, and to eternal death and
condemnation hereafter. Surely if carnal men understood themselves thoroughly,
they would find all both within and without them, like Ezekiels roll, nothing
but lamentation, mourning and woe.

CHAP. XVII. The second branch of the Use of Exhortation unto the Regenerate.
HAving done with the first branch of the Use of Exhortation unto the
Unregenerate: Come we now unto the second which concerns the Regenerate, and
consists of diverse heads;

1. Admire and adore Gods special mercy and goodness in thy Regeneration. Let
thine heart be ravished with the consideration of his love to thee in Christ
Jesus, the bottom whereof cannot be fathomed by any Angel in Heaven. And
therefore well may thou cry out, Oh the height, and the depth, the length
and the breadth of the love of God unto thy soul! If David upon the
consideration of the goodness of God to man in his Creation, Psalm. 8.4.
cried out so affectionately, Lord what is man that thou art mindful of him?
and the son of man that thou visitest him? Surely upon the consideration of
Gods mercy unto thy soul in this work of new Creation, have not thou cause to
say the like, Lord what is man that thou art mindful of him? and the son of
man that thou visitest him? Lord what am I among the Sons of men, that thou
should have respect to me? That the Lord should pluck thee as a brand out of
the fire, that he should take thee into his special grace and favor, when he
left many millions of Men and Women to perish in their sins: that he should
make thee an heir of Heaven, when he left so many to be firebrarnds of hell:
that thy nature should be renewed and sanctified, when others are left in their
filth and pollution, have not thou unspeakable cause to sit down and admire the
freeness of Gods grace, and riches of his mercy toward thee? Surely nothing
but free Grace has put this honor upon thee, and put such a difference
between thee and others. For what did God see more in thee than in others, to
move him to set his special love on thee?

Oh cast thine eyes round about thee, look upon thy neighbors, who live under
the same Ministry, partake of the same Ordinances as thou do, and yet never
felt the power and sweetness of them in their souls. Let the abominable
wickedness which thou daily see in others, fill thee with wonder at the
loving kindness of the Lord to thee. That the dew of his free Grace should fall
upon thy soul, when the hearts of so many about thee should be dry, not having
one drop of that dew upon them, is not this a mercy to be admired? Oh consider
it, and adore it, and say, Lord, how is it that thou should bestow thy grace
on me, and deny it to so many, who in many respects are better than I?

That thy heart may be the more raised up in admiration of the mercy and
goodness of God unto thee herein, take notice of the manifold privileges which
do follow and accompany such as are Regenerated.

1. The love and favor of God wherewith they are embraced. Love is weighty and
falls downward from Father to Child. Yea love in God is as a Fountain and
springhead, and the channel or pipe in and through which it runs, is
Christ: now that spring continually flows forth through that pipe to every
Regenerate person. Observe the love of earthly Parents to their Children, how
great, how constant it is: withal consider how far God exceeds them in his
love, even as far as he does in greatness, which is infinitely. So as every
Regenerate person may with assurance rest on the love of God his Father, which
cannot be but most sweet to the soul, and exceeding comfortable. For in Gods
fatherly favor consists our happiness.

II. Union with Christ. For Christ is the head, and by Regeneration we are his
members. The Apostle writing to the Corinthians, who were born again by the
Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.22.
says, Now are ye the body of Christ, and members in particular, meaning of
the mystical body of Christ. This Union of the Regenerate with Christ, is one
of the great mysteries of our Christian faith: (...), Ephesians. 5.32. Joh. 20.17.
Heb. 2.11, 12. Heb. 1.14.
and it is a Mystery of an unspeakable comfort and consolation. For by virtue
of our Union with Christ, God is our Father; Christ is our Brother, and our
Husband and Head; Heaven is our inheritance: Angels are our attendants and
guardians, who are sent forth to minister for them, who shall be heirs of
Salvation. These Angels are those Horses and Chariots of fire, which were round
about Elisha: and which are also round about every member of Christ in all
their dangers, though they see them not. If the eyes of the Regenerate were but
opened to see their glorious attendants, how would their hearts be comforted
and cheered in all their distresses.

III. Adoption. Such as are Regenerated are thereby the adopted Sons of God.
Whereas by natural propagation they were the children of wrath; by this
Regeneration they are the Children of grace, being translated out of the Family
of Satan into Gods own Family, and in and through Christ they are made the
adopted Sons of God. Oh that the Lord would open our eyes to see this
privilege! 1 John 3.1.
Behold, says St. John, what manner of Love the Father has bestowed on us,
that we should be called the Sons of God. The Apostle not being able to express
the greatness of Gods love to us therein, he breaks forth into an admiration
thereof. And truly well might he say, Behold what manner of love the Father
has bestowed on us. For here is not only love, but love to admiration, that we
vile, wretched, sinful creatures, Ephesians 2.1. Col. 1.21. Ephesians. 2.3.
who were dead in sins and trespasses, enemies to God by wicked works, yea and
children of wrath as well as others, that we should be thus advanced in and by
Christ, as to be accounted not only servants which is much; nor only friends
which is more; but also Sons, and consequently heirs, and coheirs with Christ,
which is most of all.

IV. Christian freedom. As it is the great unhappiness of the unregenerate,
that they are in a state of vasalage: so it is the great happiness of the
regenerate, that they are in a state of freedom, being freed,

1. From Satan. Though not from the assaults and temptations of Satan, yet from
the power of Satan. For our Savior Christ by his death has destroyed him that
had the power of death, Heb. 2.14.
that is, the Devil. He has now broken the Serpents head, so that though he
may hiss against us, yet he cannot sting us: though he may assault us, yet he
cannot overcome us: and though he goes about like a roaring Lion, 1 Pet. 5.8.
s^^king whom he may devour; yet Christ has him in a Chain, and he cannot go
one link thereof farther than he pleases.

2 From si^. Though the Regenerate are not freed from the in-being of sin,
which does and will live in them, so long as they live in this World: yet are
they freed both from the guilt of sin, and from the power and dominion of sin.

1. From the guilt of sin, that is, from that wrath and punishment which is due
to sin: so that none of our sins shall be able to condemn us. For Christ as our
Surety, Savior and Redeemer, did bear all our sins in his body upon the tree,
and there offered up his life as an all sufficient Sacrifice, and full
satisfaction to Gods justice for the same. So that God being fully satisfied by
the death of Christ for our sins, he will not, nay he cannot in justice require
satisfaction again from us. Well therefore might the Apostle make this bold
challenge, Romans 8.33, 34.
who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect, seeing Christ has dyed,
and by his death fully satisfied Gods justice for their sins?

2. From the power and dominion of sin; which comes to pass by the Spirit of
Christ conveyed to them, whereby their sins are in some measure mortified and
subdued, so that they do not rule, nor reign in them as formerly. Sin shall not
have dominion over you, says the Apostle, and why? because you are not under
the Law, but under grace. In our unregenerate estate, sin had not only
possession of us, but dominion over us, so that we did yield a willing
subjection unto the command of sin. But since we are regenerated by the Spirit
of God, we are freed, though not from the in-being, yet from the dominion of
sin. So that though sin may tyrannize over us, yet shall it not reign in us. We
shall not yield a free and willing obedience to the command thereof.

This is the great comfort of Gods Children, that though sin be not removed,
yet it is subdued. Though they oftentimes feel the workings and stirrings of
corruption in them, which make them to have many a sad heart, and wet eye, yet
are they freed, through Christ from the dominion of sin.

3. The Regenerate are freed from the Law, not only from the Ceremonial, and
Judicial Law, which were peculiar to the Jews, and dyed with the decay of their
Commonwealth; but likewise from the Moral Law, (which concerns all men, at all
times, in all places) yet not as it is a rule of Obedience, and Christian
walking, for so it still remains in force even to the Children of God even
after their Regeneration; But,

1. As it was a Covenant of works, or as the Covenant thereof was works. We are
not absolutely bound to such rigor, and exactness as that required. Indeed we
ought to endeavor after the most perfect obedience, and to be humbled for our
defects and failings therein; but not to despair because of them: for all
failings not allowed are pardoned. Besides Christ our surety has in all things
fullfilled the Law, and performed perfect obedience thereunto. So that the
strictness of the Law being fulfilled by our surety, its not expected, that it
should be performed by us in our own persons.

2. We are freed from the Curse and condemnation of the Law. Gal. 3.13.
Christ, says the Apostle, has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being
made a curse for us. So that although we do not perform it in that exact manner
and measure which it requires: yet our transgressions shall not be imputed to
us to condemnation. The Law may condemn the actions, but not the persons of the
Regenerate, it has nothing to do with them; Romans 8.1.
therefore the Apostle says, There is no condemnation to them which are in
Christ Jesus.

V. Provision of all needful good things is another privilege of the
Regenerate, who have a right to all good things through Christ, and the
possession of all things God sees good for them. It is observable that when
God was with Israel in the Wilderness (where nothing was to be had) they lacked
nothing. Deuteronomy. 2.7.
It is naturally engrafted into all Parents to provide for their Children: what
then can they want who have God for their Father? who as he is all-sufficient,
so a most loving Father to his Children, whose love far surpasses the love of
natural Parents to their Children. Art thou a Child of God by Regeneration?
then look up to thy Heavenly Father for a supply of all good things. For can
they that are evil, know how to give good gifts to their Children? says our
Savior. And shall not your Heavenly Father give to you the things whereof ye
have need? He feeds the Fowls of the air, and the Beasts of the Field; and he
that is careful to provide for his Hawks and his Hounds, will he suffer his
Children to beg and starve, who must one day be his heirs? Matthew. 6.31, 32.
Be not then faithless, but believe, and say not, What shall we eat? or what
shall we drink? or wherewithal shall we be clothed? For your Heavenly Father
knows whereof ye have need, and shall relieve you.

VI. Acceptance of their Services though full of weaknesses, infirmities and
imperfections. Natural Parents are not more ready to accept of the weak
Services performed by their Children; than God is to take in good part the
imperfect services of his Children. How maimed and broken are our prayers many
times! yet coming from a broken heart they find acceptance with God. Though he
regards not the glorious works of hypocrites, yet he graciously accepts of
the weak Services of his Children done in sincerity. When we cannot pray with
that affection and fervency as we desire: yet if we set upon it with an honest
and sincere heart, doing it in obedience to the command of God, with a desire
to approve our selves unto him therein, and grieving for our failings and
imperfections, God will overlook our failings, and crown our weak endeavors
with acceptance.

VII. Protection from things hurtful, is another privilege of the Regenerate.
They are here subject to manifold casualties, and contingencies, from which the
Lord in mercy protects them, keeping Watch and Ward for them. Zech. 2.5.
Yea he is said to be a wall of fire round about his people. A wall to defend
them, and of fire to consume those that rise up against them. Psalm. 112.7.
So that they shall not be afraid of evil tidings, for their hearts are fixed
trusting in the Lord. I deny not but the Children of God may be wronged,
oppressed, spoiled of all they have, and unjustly stain, yet in all these shall
they not be hurt, for God will turn all to their good. Note what David said of
Shimei's cursing him, 2 Samuel 16.12.
The Lord will look on my affliction and requite good for his cursing this day.
Heb. 10.34.
On this ground the Hebrews took joyfully the spoiling of their goods.

VIII. Support under all afflictions is another privilege of the Regenerate.
For God is present with them in all their afflictions, supporting their
weakness with his might; and manifesting his greatest power in their greatest
impotency. Yea though sometimes he seems to leave them in their distress, yet
he gives such sufficient strength as they are thereby enabled to bear it, and
well to pass it through. 2 Cor. 4.8, 9.
This is evident by the Apostles holy triumph in this case, We are perplexed,
but not in despair; persecuted, but not forsaken: cast down, but not destroyed.
The ground hereof is the assistance which God affords us, and the strength
which he communicates to us.

IX. All things shall work together for the good of the Regenerate. Romans 8.28.
And God will do them good by all in the latter end. Deuteronomy. 8.16.
He will turn their losses into gain, their crosses into comforts, their
sorrows into joy, their cursing into blessings. Those afflictive providence
which seem to be most prejudicial unto them, will in the issue prove most
beneficial. As we see in Joseph, The evil which his brethren intended against
him, Genesis 50.20.
turned to his good. Their selling him as a slave to the Ishmaelites, proved
the means of his advancement. How did Ma^asses imprisonment work for his good?
For the text says, 2 Chronicles. 33.11, 12.
When he was in affliction, he besought the Lord, and humbled himself greatly,
and the Lord was entreated of him. To know that nothing shall hurt a child of
God, is ground of exceeding great comfort and consolation. But to be assured,
that all things, even all cross-providences shall work together for his good,
is enough to fill the heart with joy. Oh then how great is the happiness of
every Regenerate person! who may be assured that whatsoever befalls him,
shall be for his good, and does work together for the best. Certainly, he may
truly say, Soul take thy spiritual ease, for here is much spiritual good
treasured up for thee.

X. A blessed death. Rev. 14.13.
For so says the Spirit, Blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord; that is,
in the faith of Christ. Who are blessed, both because then they rest from their
labors, from all their toil and pains, from all their griefs and sorrows. As
also because their works do follow them, through free grace in glorious rewards.

The souls of the Regenerate, so soon as they are by death separated from the
body, go immediately into Heaven, as is clear from that speech of our Savior
to the converted thief on the Cross, Luke 23.43.
This day thou shall be with me in Paradise, which place the Apostle expounds
to be the third Heaven. 2 Cor. 12.24.
The word in the Original translated, this day, implies, that immediately after
the breathing of his soul out of his body, (...)
his soul should go to Heaven. And thus it is with all the Regenerate, unto
whom death is like the Red Sea to the Israelites, even a passage, and
thorow-fair into the Heavenly Canaan.

XI. An happy Resurrection. For at the sound of the last Trumpet all the
Regenerate shall arise out of their graves, like so many Joseph's out of Prison.
Whatsoever imperfections were before in their bodies (as blindness, lameness,
crookedness) shall then be done away. Though the body was sown in corruption,
yet it shall be raised in incorruption, 1 Cor. 15.42.
not to be subject to any manner of aches, pains, diseases, or imperfections.
Though it were sown in weakness, it shall be raised in power. And though it
was sown in dishonor, it shall be raised in glory. Here it is many times
deformed, but then all deformities and defects shall be removed, and the body
made more glorious, through the admirable beauty thereof. Certainly if the
Beauty of all the Men and Women in the World were concentred in one, it would
be far short of the Beauty of the Saints in Heaven, whose bodies shall shine
more gloriously than the Sun in the Firmament.

XII. The last and highest privilege of the Regenerate is, That they shall
have an Heavenly inheritance. Fathers on earth use to provide inheritances for
their Children. 1 Pet. 1.3, 4.
And the Apost^e Peter, Blesses God, who has begotten us to an inheritance
incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in Heaven. The
Regenerate in this life poss^ss Heaven in Christ, Coelum in Christo possidetis.
Tertullian de Resurrectione.
but hereafter they shall enjoy it in their own persons. When they come to
enjoy this heavenly inheritance, they shall not only be freed from all evils,
both bodily and spiritual: but likewise replenished with all good. Their minds
shall be enlightened, their wills reformed, their memories made blessed
treasures, their consciences purged, their hearts purified, their affections
rectified, their bodies glorified, and all these perfectly. There shall be a
blessed communion of all the Saints together, who shall enjoy the society of
Angels, and fellowship with Christ himself, whose surpassing excellency they
shall clearly behold, and partake of that glory wherewith he is arrayed. What
tongue can express? what heart can conceive the excellency thereof?

If Peter, James and John seeing but some small glimpse of Christ's glory and
Majesty in his transfiguration, were so ravished therewith, that setting aside
all worldly desires, they wished only the continuance thereof. Then how shall
the Saints in Heaven be ravished with joy and comfort, when they shall
continually behold their Savior Jesus Christ sitting at the right hand of his
Father, like a triumphant Conqueror, having subdued his, and his Churches
enemies.

Thus have I showed you some of the glorious privileges of the Regenerate. Oh
happy day may that Man or Woman say, as long as they live, when God by his
Spirit Regenerated them, and made them new creatures! Many keep their birth
day, as a day of rejoicing and feasting. But they who know the day of their
new birth, may well make that a day of rejoicing while they live, in regard of
the many glorious privileges whereof they are thereby partakers.

CHAP. XVIII. An Exhortation to bless God for the work of Regeneration. And to
walk worthy thereof.
II. A Second branch of the Use of Exhortation unto the Regenerate, is To be
thankful unto God for this great mercy. Admire the grace of God, and bless his
name for ever. Art thou made alive? Is the life of God begotten in thee? And
have thou evidence of it? O bless God whilest*thou have any being. Let thine
heart and mouth and life be filled with his Praises. Take up the Psalmists
words, Psalm. 103.1, 2.
Bless the Lord O my soul, and all that is within me, bless his holy name:
Bless the Lord O my soul, and forget not all his benefits. Will thou be
thankful unto God for thy natural birth? And wilt not thou be thankful to him
for thy spiritual birth? will thou bless him for that he has made thee a
reasonable creature? And will thou not bless him for making thee a
new creature? will thou bless him that thou art not a Toad? And will thou not
bless him, that thou art not a Devil? Is not Regeneration of all mercies the
most necessary? And wilt not thou be thankful for that which is the one thing
necessary? If the Children of Israel praised God for their deliverance from the
Egyptian bondage; how much more cause have thou to praise and magnify the
name of God for thy deliverance from a greater than Egyptian bondage? It being
a deliverance from Satan, the worst of all Tyrants: from hell, of all prisons
the most loathsome: yea from sin, death, and the curse of the Law.

The more to stir up thy self to this duty of thanksgiving for this mercy,

1. Consider the specialty of Gods love, and goodness unto thee therein, in
singling thee out from the multitudes that perish, and setting thee apart for
life, Has he dealt by all, as he has dealt by thee? Oh how many millions of
Men and Women has he suffered to live and die in their sins, when thy soul
lives? How many for birth more noble, for policy more wise, for riches more
wealthy, are let run in their sins, till they fall into wrath, when thou art
escaped? when thou considerest that he should pass by them, and set his special
love upon thee, if this do not fill thee with love, and with praises, the very
stones may cry out against thee. The Psalmist speaks of it as a great mercy
to a godly man, that in a time of Plague and Pestilence a thousand should fall
on his right hand, Psalm. 91.7.
and on his left, and yet it should not come nigh him. But what is that to this
mercy, that many thousands should fall into hell on thy right hand, and on thy
left, and yet thou preserved?

2. Consider how sad thy condition was before thy Regeneration, being a Child
of wrath, a bondslave of Satan, and an heir to hell. And then compare it with
thy present state. Behold of a child of wrath, thou art made a Son of God: of a
slave of Satan, thou art become Christ's freeman: of an heir of hell and
damnation, an heir to Heaven, and salvation. And does not this call for
thankfulness?

3. Consider that this mercy is unspeakably greater than all other mercies in
the World. This new birth makes a man an ho^ourable person, one of the royal
seed, a King and Priest to God. This makes him a rich man; the least degree of
this grace is better than all the wealth in the World: this is the true riches,
the durable riches, a treasure that fails not, nor can it be valued. This
makes him a joyful man: there is joy in Heaven at thy conversion, and a
foundation of everlasting joy laid in thine own soul: thou may rejoice, its
meet that thou make merry, for this thy soul was dead, and is alive; was lost,
and is found. Theodosius gave God greater thanks that he had made him a member
of the Church, than head of the Empire. So bless God more for this mercy, that
he has made thee a member of Christ, than if he had made thee an heir of all
the Earth.

What though God has not abounded to thee in outward honors and estate; yet
if he has abounded to thee in grace, this alone will be matter of eternal
praises. Luther has a notable story which may be useful to this purpose, In
the time of the Council of Constance, he tells us there were two Cardinals
riding to the Council: and in their journey they saw a Shepherd in the field
weeping. One of them pitying him, could not but ask him, why he wept? At first
he seemed loath to tell him, but being urged, he told him, that upon the
beholding that Toad, which was before him, he considered, that he had never
praised God, as he ought, for making him such an excellent Creature as a man:
that he had not made him such a deformed Creature as that Toad. Upon hearing
whereof the Cardinal was much affected, considering how he had received greater
mercies than this poor man, and yet had not returned unto God that praise which
was due unto him. And will not this poor man rise up in judgment against many
of us? yea have not the best of us cause to be greatly humbled before the Lord,
who do not so affectionately remember the grace of God in making us Christians,
as that poor Shepherd did, in making him a man. O friend prove thy self to be
born again, and then go thy way rejoicing, leaping, and praising God.

III. Has God by his Spirit Regenerated, and made thee his Child, then walk
worthy of this special mercy and dignity, This worthy walking is much pressed
in Scripture, as Col. 1.10. walk worthy of the Lord. And Ephesians. 4.1. walk worthy
of the Vocation wherewith y^ are called. In these and other-like places the
word worthy imports no matter of m^rit, or condignity, but only a mere
meetness, and congruity, or answerableness. The Greek word translated worthy,
(...)
is in other places turned meet, or as becomes, as Romans 16.2. Phil. 1.27. And
where John Baptist says, Bring forth fruits worthy of repentance, (...)
our new Translations turn it, meet for repentance. So that the meaning of the
foresaid duty is, that ye carry your selves in some measure suitable and
answerable to your new birth and high dignity. To which agrees that of the
Apostle Peter, 1 Pet. 2.9.
Ye are a chosen generation, a peculiar people, that ye should show forth the
praises of him, who has called you out of darkness into his marv^ilous light.
As the Regenerate are more excellent in their state and relation than the
carnal and unregenerate: so ^ought they to be singular and exemplary in their
lives and conversations.

This Christ requires of every true Christian: for, says he, Mat. 5.47.
speaking to his Disciples, What do ye more than others? As if he had said, you
who will approve your selves to be sincere Christians, and the true Disciples
of Jesus Christ, must be of a more holy, and heavenly frame, of an higher
strain than the rest of men: Phil. 2.15.
you must be singular, and shine as lights in the midst of a sinful, and
crooked generation, by living exemplary, and convincing lives; that it may be
said of you, Job 1.8.
what God said of Job, There was none like him in all the earth, as for wealth,
so for piety, he being by many degrees the highest for grace in his age.

Has God shined upon your souls by his grace, let your light so shine before
men, Mat. 5.16.
that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in Heaven.

The more to quicken you up to a singular and exemplary life, to a life above
the rate of carnal and unregenerate men,

I. Consider thy high birth and noble parentage. For being born of the Spirit,
thou art thereby made partaker of the divine nature, and art become a Child of
God, a member of Christ, and have blood royal running in thy veins. Thy life
ought to be suitable to thy birth, and breeding, aspiring after higher things,
than worldly men do, or can do: and avoiding those base and filthy actions
wherein carnal men take their chief delight. For know that thy sins go nearer
the heart of God, and provoke him more, than the sins of other men. (...)
And thou my Son Brutus, art thou one of them? said Julius Caesar to his Son,
when he saw him to be amongst them, that murdered him: that went deeper to his
heart than the swords of all his enemies did, or could. In like manner the sins
of Gods Children are greater in his sight, and do more grieve him, than the
sins of other men.

II. Consider thine high and holy calling. Thou art called out of darkness into
light: out of the Kingdom of Satan into the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus. Shall
there be no difference betwixt the Children of the Kingdom, and the Children of
the wicked one? betwixt Gods servants, and the Devils slaves? Art thou one of
the called of God, oh how does it concern thee to follow the counsel of the
Apostle to the Ephesians, namely to walk worthy of the Vocation wherewith thou
art called, that is, suitable to the dignity and purity of it?

Phil. 3.14.
1. Thy calling is an high calling. And therefore as men called to high places,
carry themselves answerably thereunto. In like manner thou being called to be a
Christian, it is thy duty (that thou may not disgrace thy holy profession,
and that worthy name by which thou art called) to carry thy self becomingly,
and suitably to it, by hating every sin, laboring daily in the mortifying
every lust and corruption, keeping thy self unspotted of the World.

2 Timothy 1.9.
2. Thy calling is an holy calling: the end thereof is holiness, 1 These. 4.7.
For God has not called us unto uncleanness, but unto holiness. Now an holy
calling ought to be accompanied with an holy life and conversation. Being
called from darkness to light, from sinfulness to holiness, from the flesh to
the Spirit, from Satan to God, is it not most meet thou should cast off the
unfruitful works of darkness, and walk as a Child of light? That thou should
no more give thy members as Servants unto sin, but as Servants unto
righteousness? That thou should no more fulfill the Lusts of the flesh, but
walk in the Spirit, after the motions thereof? This is to walk worthy of the
vocation whereunto thou art called.

III. Consider the many great and singular privileges God has vouchsafed unto
you. Being raised above the condition of other men, it beseems not you to act
as the men of the World, but to live above their rate, to be more Holy and
Heavenly in your conversation, more zealous for God, more fervent in the
performance of holy and religious duties. The Lord expects greater matters, and
other manner of Service from you than from other men, for he has done more for
you, and bestowed more on you, than upon all the World besides. When you call
to mind your privileges, reason thus with your selves: Has God made us
partakers of such and such special mercies, and singular privileges, 2 Pet.
3.11.
Oh then what manner of persons ought we to be in all holy conversation and
Godliness! How ought we to walk worthy such singular privileges, by
singularity of actions! doing some singular things for God who has dealt so
singularly well for us. As God has abounded to us in his choicest mercies, so
he expects we should be abundant in singular duties.

CHAP. XIX. Shows the singular good things which the Regenerate ought to do
above others.
I. TO make Conscience of their precious time, and to improve it to the best
advantage. Carnal men make little or no conscience of spending their time to
any good advantage. Oh the many golden hours, and days, and weeks, and years,
that thousands of them spend, who yet cannot give the least account, wherein
they have done any thing which tends to the glory of God, the good of others,
or the farthering their own Salvation! Their minds are so much set upon their
carnal lusts and pleasures, that their chief care is, not so much how to
improve their time; as how they may pass it away in mirth and jollity. That
which when it is once gone, all the World will not buy it back, what a cheap
thing is it accounted? But oh how does it concern such, whom God has called,
to prize the time which he is pleased to afford unto them! and to be careful
in improving the same to some good advantage! yea to gather up the fragments of
time, every inch of it, that nothing may be lost. We cannot well spare one
spare hour. O make the best of thy day. To this end,

1. Consider that thine everlasting state depends upon thy well, or ill
spending of thy time. Many make light of their time, and thereupon play and
sport it away. Yet there is no moment which thou do mispend, but for ought
thou know, it may be the very time, upon which thine eternal state does
depend. Oh what a madness must it needs be for an hour or days pleasure to
hazard the loss of everlasting happiness, and to incurr the danger of eternal
misery! And yet how few think of the passing away their time, or that any great
matter depends thereupon!

2. Consider the preciousness of time, which is of more worth than all the
riches and treasures in the World: for they cannot purchase one minute of time.
Should the Lord be pleased to vouchsafe unto a damned soul in hell, but one
weeks time to live again upon the earth, for trial how he would improve the
same to his souls advantage. Oh how highly would he prize it; how carefully
would he improve every moment thereof! how serious would he be in every holy
duty, and in all the concernments of his soul! how conscionable in spending of
the Sabbath! how watchful would he be on that day over his thoughts, words and
actions! Should he hear Christ tendered in the Ministry of the Gospel as a
Savior to poor sinners, oh how readily would he close with the offer of Jesus
Christ! how heartily would he embrace him! Should he be tempted by some carnal
friends to spend one day with them in mirth and jollity, how would he answer
them! Alas the time on which my everlasting condition does depend is very
short: and must it not be egregious folly in me to trifle away part thereof?
Shall I implunge my soul into eternal flames for a little pleasure and short
delight? Oh, God forbid. And hereby may you see how precious time is. Surely
little reason have any to be so sparing of their wealth, and so prodigal of
their time: when as all the wealth in the World (as before is said) cannot
purchase one hours time.

3. Consider how much precious time you have already lost; how many hours and
days, and weeks and years you have trifled away in vanity and pleasure, yea in
sin and wickedness. Though in likelihood the greatest part of your time is past
and gone, yet it is to be feared that little of your work is done. Is it not
meet then now to begin to make Conscience of your precious time, and to improve
it better? The time which you have already lost can never be recalled? O let no
more of it run out in vain. Oh think it too much, that you have spent so much
of it already to so little, or such evil purpose. And now at length resolve to
be thrifty, to be more watchful over your selves, and more provident for
hereafter. You have but a little time to live, yet much may be done in that
little. Throw not away that inch which remains after the many years that are
gone, and can no more be recalled.

4. Consider the shortness of thy life: it is but a moment to eternity. And is
it not pity to lose any thing of that which is precious and short?

5. Consider as the shortness, So the uncertainty of thy life. You know what
was said to him who promised life to himself for many years, Thou fool this
night thy soul shall be taken from thee. And it may be thou may this next
night receive the like doom. And if thy time be ended, and thy work to be
begun, oh how sad is thy case like to be!

6. Consider as the shortness and uncertainty of thy time, So the greatness of
the work to be performed therein: thy Lusts must be mortified, thy graces
strengthened, thine evidences for Heaven cleared up, etc. Here is a great deal
of work to be done in a little time. Does it not then concern thee speedily to
bestir thy self, and not to lose a minute?

7. Consider the present time is only thine to improve. Behold now is the
accepted time, 2 Cor. 6.2.
now is the day of Salvation. Oh then, why will thou trifle away the time which
is properly thine; and promise to thy self great things in a time which is none
of thine? For even the next hour, yea the next minute thou may be cut off by
the stroke of death: and then all opportunities of doing and receiving good are
taken away.

II. Another singular thing which the Regenerate ought to do above others, is,
To embrace every opportunity of doing and receiving good. By doing good, I mean
not only beneficence to the poor, but also a conscionable performance of all
Christian duties: whether they concern the glory of God, the edification of our
brethren, or the Salvation of our own souls. Eccl. 9.10.
Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with thy might, says the Wise man,
that is, whatsoever opportunity of doing good is afforded unto thee, do it
vigorously and speedily, not deferring it till it be too late. Mark his reason
in the next words, For there is no work in the grave, whither thou art going.
As if he had said, In this life thou have many opportunities of doing good, but
in the grave, thou shall have neither power, nor opportunities: When thy night
comes there is an end of working; therefore while it is day, and while thou
have an opportunity, up and be doing.

Does the Lord afford unto thee any opportunity either of laying up for thine
own soul, or of laying out for the good of thy brothers soul, be careful to
embrace the same, yea and to improve it to the best advantage. Having a price
put into thy hands, oh let it not carelessly slip away, left thou full dearly
repent thereof; saying, Oh what an opportunity have I lost of benefiting both
my self and others! how might I have furthered both mine own, and others
Salvation, by building up one another in the most holy faith! But fool that I
was, I have carelessly neglected these precious opportunities, which will never
never be regained. Oh how will the thought thereof one day or other gall thy
Conscience!

That thou may be the more stirred up to embrace and improve every opportunity
God by his providence affords unto thee,

1. Consider how worldly men hugg their opportunities for the World; and wilt
not thou embrace thy opportunities for Heaven? The tradesman neglects not his
opportunity of buying and selling, but carefully attends the same. The Merchant
will not lose his Exchange-time, nor the Mariner his Wind and Tide; The Lawyer
will not lose his Terms; Nor the Husbandman his Seed-time, or Harvest. If thou
lose thy Seed-time of grace, thou thereby losest the Harvest of glory.

2. Consider how few thy remaining opportunities may be. For ought thou
know, the time is near at hand, when thy praying opportunities, and hearing
opportunities, and receiving opportunities, and relieving opportunities, with
the like will be past and gone. How then does it concern thee to improve them
whilst thou have them, and to use thy present as if it were the last season,
and opportunity would be afforded unto thee?

If thou art in the company of a godly experienced Christian, thou have then an
opportunity of gaining much spiritual good and advantage to thine own soul; as
by observing his graces, so by propounding thy doubts and scruples unto him. Oh
let not such an opportunity pass away without some spiritual improvement.

If thou art called to visit a dying friend, or neighbor, oh what an
opportunity have thou put into thy hand to do his soul good! by advising him to
think of death, and to prepare for it, to make his peace with God, to cast
himself and the burden of his sins upon Christ, to build the hope of his
salvation only upon that rock the Lord Jesus Christ.

If in walking abroad or traveling on the road, thou fall into company, what
good may thou do by some savoury and spiritual discourse of God, or of man's
miserable condition by nature, or of the state of redemption by Jesus Christ,
or the like? oh how much might thy care this way abound to thy account?
Remember the words of the Apostle, Exhort one another daily while it is called
to day.

If the Lord has given thee a Family, and furnished thee with abilities for
their instruction and edification, let not the souls that are with thee be lost
through thy neglect. Thou have daily opportunities to be sowing thy seed in
their souls, which may spring up to their eternal life. And for thy neighbors
that live about thee, let them find thee a good neighbor to them; and that
they will best do, if thou endeavor to help them to be good Christians.

CHAP. XX. Of performing good duties after a right manner.
III. ANother singular duty incumbent upon the Regenerate, is, To be careful
of the manner of performing good duties. Not only to be conscionable in the use
of Ordinances, but likewise to work up their hearts to a conscionableness in
the manner of doing them.

1. For therein especially is our respect to God manifested. As for the duties
themselves, many respects may induce us to the outward performance of them: as
obedience to authority, desire of a good name, hope of meriting thereby, or the
like. But it is respect to God (who searches the heart) that moves men to do
the good duties they take in hand, after a right manner, so as they may be
pleasing and acceptable unto him.

2. The most holy duties we take in hand are clean perverted and depraved
through our failing in the manner of performing them. Yea holy duties are
thereby turned into sin, Isa. 66.3.
as the Prophet Isay implies, He that kills an Ox, for Sacrifice, is as if
he slew a man: he that Sacrifices a Lamb, as if he cut off a dogs neck. Though
the Sacrificing of Oxen and Lambs, were good, and commanded by God himself: yet
because they failed in the manner of performing them, they were no more
acceptable to God, than the killing of men, or cutting off a dogs neck, which
things were forbidden by the Law, and abomination to the Lord.

3. Failing in the manner of performance makes God not only to reject our
duties, but to pronounce a woe and a curse against the performers of them. Jer.
48.10.
Cursed be he that does the work of the Lord negligently. Though it be the work
of the Lord, that work which the Lord appoints to be done, yet
notwithstanding if it be done negligently, not after a right manner, cursed is
he that does it.

4. It is the right manner of performing duties, that obtains a blessing from
God. It may be thou have heard much, and prayed much, and fasted much, and yet
have found little good, or benefit thereby. Examine whether thou have not been
dead and dull, formal and perfunctory in them, doing them as if thou did them
not. If so, no marvail that thou have received so little good by them. As
therefore thou would be loath to pray in vain, or hear in vain, or fast in
vain: as thou would be loath to lose the things which thou have wrought, see
to it that thou be as careful of the manner, as of the matter of them: how
thou do them, as that thou do them. Do what thou do with all thy soul,
yea and with all thy might, and then thou may expect a plentiful and gracious
return.

For the right manner of performing good duties, take these few directions;

I. Be sure you take Christ with you both for assistance, and acceptance.

1. For assistance. For without me, says Christ, you can do nothing. That is,
without Union with Christ, and Communion with him, you cannot perform any
acceptable service unto God. You may fall upon the duty of prayer, and attend
upon the Ministry of the Word: but without assistance from Christ, you can
neither do the one, nor the other as you should. Whenever therefore you set
upon any good duty, in the first place beg strength and assistance from Christ,
and rest and lean upon him for his help, go not to pray or hear but in the
strength of the Lord.

2. Take Christ with you for acceptance both of your persons and services.
Christ is the beloved Son of God, with whom he is so well pleased, that
likewise in him he is well pleased with all those that come to God by him? and
look for neither audience nor acceptance, but upon his account alone. The truth
is, as our persons are vile and wretched, and all as an unclean thing: so our
Services, even our most holy Services are all polluted and tainted, with the
corruption of our natures: and therefore they are odious and abominable in the
sight of God, who may justly reject both us and them: and will do it, unless
covered with the worthiness of our Lord Jesus Christ; but in him we shall not
fail to obtain gracious acceptance.

Whenever therefore we go unto God in prayer, or in any other ordinance, let
us carry Christ with us in the arms of our faith. Plut arch in the life of
Themistocles reports, that it was the usual custom of some of the Heathens,
namely, the Molossia^s, that when they would seek the favor of their King,
they took his Son in their arms, and so went unto him. And questionless it
would be the wisdom of Christians, in seeking the face and favor of God, who
is the King of Heaven and of earth, to take the holy Child Jesus with them,
without whom they may not see his face.

II. Stir up thy self and all thy strength, put forth thy self to the
uttermost, strive to be lively, active, and stirring in Spirit. Get the Spirit
of faith, and of power, this will be oil to the wheels, and wind to the Sails,
which set all a going: let this be wanting and thy best services will be
lifeless and dead Services, in which the Lord takes no delight.

There is a threefold strength we should labor to put forth in all our holy
duties, 1. Strength of Intention. 2. Strength of Affections. 3. Strength of
Body.


1. We must intend our work, as if it were for our lives, for so it is, whether
it be the work of praying, hearing, meditating, or the like. We must put forth
the strength of our intention, as well as of our attention, not giving way
either to drowsiness of body, or distractions of mind. But oh what light
matters are apt to steal away our minds and thoughts in the performance of holy
duties? If one of our superiors were talking with us, he would expect that we
should mind what he says, and not turn aside to talk with every one that
passes by us. But when God is speaking to us in the ministry of his Word: or
we are speaking unto him by prayer, how ordinarily do we turn aside to every
vain thought, and trifling business, which offers it self to us! Intend God
more earnestly, and this will fire your thoughts.

2. Strength of affections is required in every good duty. Eccl. 9.10.
Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with thy might, says the Wise man.
This may especially be applied to the duties of Gods worship and service, that
we do them vigorously, with all the strength of our affections. Which the
Apostle requires, where he bids us, Romans 12.11.
be fervent in spirit, serving the Lord. The word in the Greek notes an
ebullition, or boiling up of our spirits to the height. (...). Psalm. 69.9.
There is nothing in the World more unbecoming the Worship of God than flatness
of spirit, and coldness of affection, when a man serves God as if he served him
not. It was David's commendation, that the zeal of Gods house did eat him up.
Which expression shows the vehemence of his zeal, and strength of his
affections, as in reforming Gods house, so in performing the duties of his
Worship and service. For this was Jacob honored, and called Israel, because he
prayed with the strength of his affections, Genesis 32.28.
and is therefore said to wrestle with God in prayer, whereby he prevailed. As
thou desire to prevail with God in Prayer, Hos. 12.3, 4.
thou must with Jacob, wrestle with him, putting forth the strength of thine
affections which will be a special means to keep away vain wandering thoughts.
So long as honey is boiling hot, flies will not venture on it. So if the heart
and affections be boiling hot in prayer, vain thoughts are not apt to enter in.

3. Strength of body must likewise be put forth in every good duty. For Col
must be worshipped as with our spirits, so with our bodies. And blessed is the
strength which is put forth in the service of God. Carnal men are apt to lay
out the strength of their bodies upon their lusts. Why then should not we be as
ready to lay out the strength of our bodies in the Service of God? Then may we
have occasion to bless God, and say, Lord, thou might have left me to have
spent my strength in sin, in the gratifying my carnal lusts; but blessed be thy
name, who have made me willing to spend, and be spent in the service of my God.

III. Labor to keep close to God in holy duties. It were well if in the
performance of holy duties we did keep close to the duties themselves: few go
so far. But it must be our care not only to keep close to the duties, but
likewise to keep close to God in the duties. We must labor not only to mind
what we are about, but likewise have an eye upon God, and to hold communion
with him therein. In the use of every ordinance let our main desire, care and
endeavor be, to find God therein: and not to rest satisfied without meeting
him, and conversing with him. Let us never go from God without God. Never go
from the ordinance of God, without some special communion with God therein,
without finding our hearts raised and affected in the duty, and revived and
refreshed in his presence.

IV. In regard of our great inability, and insufficiency for the performance of
any spiritual duty after a right manner, In the first place, let us beg of God,
that by his Spirit he would enable us thereunto. For it is the Spirit of God
only that can help our infirmities: he can soften our hard hearts, quicken our
dead hearts, enlarge our straightned hearts, etc. And in praying for the
assistance of the Spirit, let us plead the promise of God, saying, Lord thou
have promised in thy Word, that thy Spirit shall help the infirmities of thy
Servants; Oh make good that promise unto me; let me feel and find the sweet
breathings and actings, the lively quicknings and enlargements of thy Spirit
upon my heart, carrying me forth with much life and vigor in the duty I am now
going about. This pleading the promise of God puts a strong engagement upon
him, to perform what he has said.

CHAP. XXI. Of walking Circumspectly and Exactly.
IV. ANother singular duty incumbent upon the Regenerate is, To walk
circumspectly and exactly, according to that of the Apostle, See that ye walk
circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise. The word in the Original translated
circumspectly, (...). Mat. 2.8. (...).
comes of two words, which signify to go to the extremity of a thing. We must
be willing to go to the utmost of every command. The same word is used by the
Evangelist St. Matthew, when Herod charged the Wise men to search most
diligently and narrowly, to make a close and a through search for the young
Child Jesus. So that by this Phrase is intended great accurateness and
exactness in our Christian conversation, which the Spirit of God accounts the
greatest point of wisdom, as appears from the following words, not as fools,
but as wise men. It is no part of folly, but a great point of wisdom to be
circumspect in the whole course of our lives. I know the men of the World count
preciseness of life the greatest folly that may be: and therefore often call
those precise fools, who endeavor to live soberly, righteously and Godly in
this present World. But at last it will appear the greatest point of Wisdom.

For the better clearing and pressing this duty, I shall show you, wherein this
exact walking does consist;

1. In walking by rule. As the Carpenter when he would do his work exactly,
does all by rule. So must the Christian that would walk accurately, he must
walk by the Word of God, which is the only adequate rule of holiness: He must
eat and drink, and buy and sell, and work and rest, and all by this rule.
Therefore says the Apostle, Gal. 6.16.
As many as walk by this rule, peace be on them, and on the Israel of God. Let
our walking be never so specious and glorious, yet if it be not strait and
according to the rule of Scripture, as it will afford no true solid comfort at
the last, so neither will it find acceptance with God. For as nothing is a sin
(how great a show of evil soever it bears) but that which swerveth from the
direction of Gods Word. So nothing is a good work, (how great a show of
goodness soever it bears) but only that which is according to the direction
of his Word. Therefore Moses gives this in express charge to the Israelites,
Deuteronomy. 5.32.
Ye shall observe to do, as the Lord your God has commanded you: ye shall not
turn aside to the right hand, nor to the left.

2. Our exact walking consists in having respect to the inward and spiritual
part of the Law; as well as to the outward and external. In every command of
God there is both an outward and external part, and also an inward and
spiritual part. The former I may call the letter of the Law: the latter the
Spirit of the Law. This our Savior excellently clears in his Sermon on the
Mount, where reciting the sixth Commandment, Mat. 5.21, 22.
he says, Thou shall do no Murder, there is the letter of the Law, And then
adds by way of Explanation, But I say unto you, whosoever is angry with his
Brother without a cause, shall be in danger of Judgment; there is the Spirit
of the Law. So afterward reciting the seventh commandment says, Thou shall
not commit Adultery, there is the letter of the Law, Mat. 5.28.
And then adds, But I say unto you, that whosoever looks on a Woman to Lust
after her, has committed Adultery with her already in his heart. There is the
Spirit of the Law, or the Spiritual part thereof. The most diligent observation
of the letter or external part of the Law, without a care of the inward and
spiritual part, is as a body without a soul, a dead thing, which is no way
acceptable unto the living God. Hence our Savior spent so many words to
convince the Pharisees, who were many of them punctual in their outward
observations, that they were yet horrible Hypocrites, violating that Law in
their hearts, which they so boasted of, and pleaded for with their mouths,
being Murderers in heart, Adulterers in heart, though they committed no such
wickedness in the outward man.

And hereby is the hypocrisy of many professors of Christianity discovered,
who reach no farther than the outside of Religion; whose Godliness is nothing
but carnal service, and bodily exercise. Whereas the Law is spiritual, Romans
7.14.
as the Apostle speaks, reaching to the very inwards of the Soul. And says
our Savior, God is a Spirit, Joh. 4.24.
and will be worshipped inwardly with the spirit, as well as outwardly with the
body. Whosoever therefore walks exactly, contents not himself with the
externals of Christianity, but labors to bring up his heart to the inwards
thereof; striving to suppress evil thoughts, to mortify unclean lusts, and all
inordinate affections; to abhor and watch against secret impurities, as well as
open impieties. This is to walk exactly and accurately indeed: for so the word
in the Greek seems to import in its proper notion, (...).
viz. A going from the bottom to the top of the rule.

3. Our exact walking consists in a careful avoiding all occasions of evil,
and temptations thereunto. Having by sad experience found such and such things
to have been snares, and occasions of sin unto us, it is our duty, and will be
our wisdom carefully to shun and efchew the same. Especially considering that
by running into temptations, we tempt the Lord, and provoke him to give us over
to our weakness, and to the power of our corruptions; that so by our falls we
may for the time to come be more wise and wary.

Every man by nature is like dry wood, which is apt to kindle so soon as fire
is put to it. There needs not any Devils to tempt us. Dry stubble will take
fire without any bellows to blow it. Let the least occasion that is be offered
unto us, how easily does it take? every spark will catch upon our tinder
hearts. The first sin that proved so fatal to mankind came by temptation. The
Devil prevailed with Eve to go and see the forbidden fruit, telling her, that
though she might not eat it, yet she might lawfully look on it, and that became
the occasion of her fall. For from sight and view she proceeded to touch and
taste, to the taking in of that which proved the bane both of her and hers.

By the like means how sadly does the Devil prevail upon souls daily? what
windows does he make our eyes and ears, to let in temptation first, and then
iniquity? what snares does he make of our voluptuous tables? our vain and loose
companions? our gorgeous apparel? our vain and wanton fashions? even forming
our hearts into the image of those vanities, and leading us out to all
iniquity. As our Savior therefore taught us to pray, that we enter not into
temptation. So it will be our wisdom to see to it, that our practice be
according to our prayers. What a mockery is it, this hour to pray against
temptations, and the next hour to be running into them. Pray against
temptations, and watch against them. Watch against all temptations, but
especially such as are most taking with thee: and such as have a tendency to
thy bosom and best beloved sins. For from them is most danger to be feared,
they having most strength from our natures. The Devil knowing full well, which
are our bosom and beloved sins, and most predominant lusts, unto them
especially, and with greatest success does he apply his temptations.

4. Our exact walking consists in abstaining from appearances of evil, 1
Th^s. 5.22.
as well as from apparent and direct evils. As there are some things
apparently evil, so there are other things in show and appearance only evil. He
who walks circumspectly and exactly will as carefully shun the one as the
other. He will not adventure upon any thing that looks like sin, or that has
the least affinity with it. If the thing be doubtful whether it may, or may
not be done, he will do that which is most safe, and leave the other undone.
Yea though he know a thing to be lawful in it self, yet if it may prove a
stumbling block in the way of another, and so be an occasion of sin unto him,
he will carefully avoid the same.

Upon this account St. Paul resolved to avoid the eating of flesh, though he
might lawfully do it: yet when it was like to be a stumbling block to his weak
Brother, in regard it had an appearance of evil in it, 1 Cor. 8.13.
he said, If meat make my Brother to offend, I will eat no flesh while the
world stands. Upon this ground likewise the Apostles and Elders in the first
general Council at Jerusalem imposed upon the Gentiles abstinence from meat
offered to Idols, Act. 15.29.
from things strangled, and from blood. Not for that these meats were in
themselves unclean and unlawful; but because they were apprehended to be so
unto many of the Jews, who were kept off from Christ, because those meats in
which they supposed to be such uncleanness were ordinarily eaten by the
Christians. Hereupon it concerns us in all our actions to be satisfied, not
only of the lawfullness but likewise of the expediency of them. Sicut non ^mne
quod libet, licet: sic non omne quod licet, statim etiam expedit. Bern. Ep. 25.
For many things in themselves may be lawful, which yet in some respect may
not be expedient, because they have some show of evil in them, or are liable
to some mis-construction, or may be occasions of sin unto our selves, or of
scandal and offense unto our weak Brother, or may strengthen and confirm wicked
men in their ungodly courses, and the like. But herein this cau^ion is to be
observed, Scandalum quod oritur ex rebus per se bonis, and necessariis, non
licet evitare: quia non est faciendum malum, ut eveniat ^onum, etc. Cameron. in
Matthew. 18.7.
that all necessary duties commanded by God, ought to be performed by us,
though our Brother be offended at them, and though to the World they have some
appearance of evil. Christ's Doctrines, Works and Conversations were an offense
to many in his days, yet he went on therein, and pronounced them blessed who
were not offended in him. We may not therefore shun profession of holiness, and
the practice of Godliness, because unto Worldly men it appears but brainsick
peevishness, and an irrational precis^ness. But being commanded by God in his
Word, ought to be endeavored after. I may not wound mine own Cons^ience to
secure my Brothers.

5. Our exact walking consists in a moderate use of lawful things. That
overmuch liberty which some men have given to themselves in such things as are
in their own nature lawful, has proved great occasion of sin unto them. Our
Savior seems to blame the men of the old World, that when the Flood came
upon them, Luke 17.27, 28.
they were eating and drinking, buying and selling, planting and building.
Things no doubt in themselves lawful to be done: but by over using those
lawful things, and setting their hearts upon them, they laid aside all care of
Heavenly things; and increased their pride and covetousness, neglecting the
threatenings of a Flood, Jude v.12.
and so drowned themselves in perdition.

The Apostle therefore tells us, 1 Cor. 7.29, 30, 31.
that they who marry, must be as if they married not: and they who buy, as if
they bought not: and they who use this World, as not abusing it. There is a
lawful using the comforts of this life, and an unlawful, an abusing of them.
We lawfully use them, when we enjoy them with moderation, and with
subordination to spiritual grace, and heavenly glory, when we use all we have
for God. We abuse the comforts of this life, when we use them too much, even
excessively in respect of the measure, and inordinately in respect of the
manner; when letting out our hearts too much upon them, the things which should
lead us to God, withdraw us from him.

To spend some time in honest recreations, for the refreshing of our minds, and
strengthening our bodies is lawful. But to waste too much of our precious time
in sports and pastimes, making a vocation of our recreations: or to give up our
hearts unto our pleasure, to use those delights for themselves and not for God:
or to use them more for gain than for refreshment, they are thereby turned into
sin.

In like manner sometimes to feast with our friends and neighbors is lawful:
but to be too frequent therein; or intemperate, feeding without fear, Jude v.
12.
as the Apostle Jude has it; never tasting the sweetness of God in the
Creature, nor having respect to that communion which should be amongst Saints,
is to abuse Gods good Creatures.

So to be diligent in the works of our calling is in it self both lawful, and
commendable. But when we shall be so diligent in our particular calling, that
we neglect the duties of our general calling, as Christians. I mean when we are
so taken up with our Worldly businesses and employments, that we can find no
time for serving God, either secretly in our Chambers, or privately with our
families, is to make our lawful calling sinful unto us. Much more when we
mingle fraud and deceit with our dealings, and cannot be content with that gain
that comes in by righteousness, and honesty in all our ways, this is to turn
our lawful calling into a mystery of iniquity.

The best of Gods Children are apt to use the lawful things of this World
unlawfully, and to abuse them by their excess therein. Did not our Savior warn
his Disciples that they should take heed of abusing as their meat and drink
unto surfeiting and drunkenness, so their callings to worldliness and
covetousness? Luke 21.34.
Take heed to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with
surfeiting and drunkenness, and cares of this life. Who would not have thought
the Disciples of Christ far enough from these sins? yet they must take heed to
themselves therein. If the green Tree may so easily take fire, what will not
the dry do?

Oh then how does it concern us to set bounds to our selves in all lawful
things! not to exceed either in our recreations, or in our vocations, or in our
eating, drinking and the like: but to observe the golden mean: the rather
because the Devil in nothing more prevails with Gods people than in their
immoderate and inordinate usage of things lawful. Knowing full well that the
Godly will not easily be drawn to the committing of such things as carry
wickedness in their foreheads, he therefore lays his snares for them in the
use of things lawful; as their meat and drink, their apparel and recreation,
their trading and traffic with the like. Wherein his snares being not so
visible, he oftentimes prevails with them. The Apostle declaring what a
cruel, crafty, and malicious adversary the Devil is, whom he sets forth to
be as a roaring Lion, 1 Pet. 5.9.
that walks about seeking to devour: he thereupon advises us to be as sober
in the use of things lawful and indifferent, so watchful over our selves,
lest we be foiled therein.

For your better help herein, take these few directions,

1. In the free use of lawful things be ever jealous of your selves, lest you
abuse them to intemperancy and excess. This has been the folly of many, that
presuming too much as on their Christian liberty, so upon their own strength,
have adventured upon such temptations, as have occasioned their fearful falls.

2. Labor to make a spiritual improvement of all those lawful comforts which
God has afford^d to you for your delight. And so whilst you refresh your
bodies, you will cherish your souls. Thus in your eating and drinking, often
meditate of Gods bounty in providing so plentifully for you: and not only take
in meats, but likewise give out gracious discourses and instructions. For what
can it be but egregious folly, when you are feeding your bodies, to neglect
your souls? In putting on your clothes, meditate on the robe of Christ's
righteousness; which alone can make you amiable in the sight of God, desiring
with the Apostle to be found clothed therewith at the great day.

3. Consider that to use your lawful comforts to the utmost extent, is the
next door to sin. He who will go to the utmost extent of what he may lawfully
do, is in danger to go beyond it; and to do also that which is unlawful. He
who will walk upon the brink of a River, may fall into the Water. And he who
will take the utmost liberty he may, is very near falling into sin.

CHAP. XXII. Of the danger of Covetousness, as being the root of all evil.
ANother singular duty incumbent upon the Regenerate is, To beware of
Covetousness and over-loving the World, as being the root of all evil. I do not
say, that our hearts being changed and renewed, we ought thereupon wholly to
abandon the World, and give over all Worldly businesses and employments. For
grace and a worldly calling may very well stand together: yea a man may be a
sincere, holy Christian, and yet a great dealer in the World: nay grace
ingageth a man to be a good husband, to improve the estate God has bestowed on
him. But yet we ought not insatiably to desire, and inordinately to hunt after
riches, as if they were the only things, or the great things to be sought
after; this is Covetousness. It is not the having of riches, but the immoderate
desiring and loving of them, and overvaluing them, which denominates a man
Covetous. A man may have much of this Worlds goods, and yet be no Worldling.
And another may have little, and yet be covetous. This sin is especially in the
heart.

Q. May not a Godly man desire riches, seeing they are often in Scripture
termed blessings, which God has promised as a reward of his Service?

A. There is a moderate desire of riches, which is lawful: and an immoderate,
or inordinate desire, which is unlawful. Then is our desire of riches
moderate, when we desire no more than is needful, and can be content to want
that, when God will have it so.

Q. What may be accounted needful?

A. 1. That which is meet for the state and calling wherein God has set us.

2. That which is requisite for the charge committed to us. As if a man have
Wife, and Children, and Servants, or Kindred lying upon his charge, what is
needful and sufficient for them, may be desired and sought after.

3. That which is needful for the future livelihood and maintenance of Wife
and Children, may lawfully be desired and sought after. The Apostle lays it
down as a duty, 2 Cor. 12.14.
that Parents ought to lay up for their Children.

Besides this moderate desiring and seeking after riches, there is an
immoderate desiring, and inordinate seeking after them. As when a man is not
content with that portion which God by his Providence does afford unto him, but
insatiably thirsts after more. And rather than fail of his desire, will both
neglect his God and his soul; and also venture on the use of any unlawful
means, as lying, swearing, false weights and measures, with the like, for
accomplishing the same; which is wickedness in any, but especially in such as
make a profession of Religion.

Yet how many professors are there in our days, who though they pretend much
love to Christ, yet by their practice it appears, that their love of riches is
greater and stronger than their love of him?

1. For how are their thoughts more upon the World, and the things thereof,
than on Christ? No sooner are they awake from their sleep, but the World
presently takes possession of their hearts: and their thoughts are upon their
estate, how they may increase the same, and that with unwearied care and
labor; when every little that is done for Christ is a weariness to them.

2. How do their discourses run out more upon their riches, than on Christ? Yea
with what freedom and delight do they talk of their wealth, and of the means of
getting and increasing the same? And scarce a word of Christ all the day long.
Which does clearly discover the covetousness which lies in their hearts: for
out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. Mat. 12.34. Mat. 26.69.
As the doorkeeper said unto Peter, Thou art surely of Galilee, for thy speech
bewrays thee. So whosoever shall make the World the whole matter, and subject
of his discourse, it may be truly said of him, He is a Citizen of the World,
for his speech bewrays him.

3. How eager and keen are their desires after the riches of this World? or at
least after a further portion, and provision for themselves, Wives, and
Children?

4. How do they toil and labor, spending their sweat and strength in seeking
after riches? thinking no care and study too much, nor pains too great for
increasing their wealth and store. How do they rise earlyer for their Worldly
businesses, than for their Prayers, or any spiritual exercises?

5. How do they suffer the World to take up so much of their precious time,
that they can scarce find any leisure either for closet devotions, or family
Prayers? but make their Religion give place to their Worldly businesses. And
when at any time they fall upon the performance of holy duties, how are their
hearts in that very time taken up with Worldly thoughts, and imaginations? So
that instead of conversing with God in his holy Ordinances, and enjoying
communion with him therein, they converse with the World, and hold communion
with the Devil.

O what a shame is it for such as are brought out of darkness into marvelous
light, having their understandings enlightened with the knowledge of God, and of
his Son Jesus Christ, and are able to discern the mysteries of Godliness that
they should set their hearts and affections upon base and transitory things!
that they should lay out themselves so much in the pursuit of them! and never
think they have laid up sufficient of these earthly treasures! What a shame is
it for such as profess themselves the Sons of God, to live like Sons of men! as
if their portion and happiness were only in this life. That they who profess
themselves Heirs to an Heavenly inheritance, should so much dote upon earthly
things! what a shame is it for such as have reasonable souls, capable of an
everlasting life, and of communion with God both here and hereafter, should so
far debase their natures, as to live like Moles and Worms in the Earth, and to
root like Swine in mudd and dung!

Oh how does it concern you, daily to humble your selves for this sin, and to
loath and abhor it, and watch against it for the time to come! For as every
evil is to be abhorred, so especially such as are disgraceful to the Gospel
of Jesus Christ, and to the Religion which you profess. Let us all therefore
who have given our names unto Christ, labor to mortify this sin in us. Let us
use this World, and the things thereof, as if we used them not; neither in our
judgments esteeming, nor in our hearts affecting, nor in our practice seeking
them before spiritual grace and Heavenly glory.

That we may be the better quickened up thereunto, let us often consider the
manifold mischiefs that do usually follow and accompany this sin of
covetousness,

1 Timothy 6.10.
I. It is the Root of all Evil. There is no evil which a covetous man will
forbear: his covetousness will put him upon the acting and committing all
manner of sin, that will serve his greedy design. It will make a man turn the
day of Sacred rest into a day of bodily labor. It will make him use wicked
balances, and deceitful weights. Mich. 6.11, 12.
For this they are full of violence and lies, says the Prophet Micah. It
ofttimes raises Wars, and sets the World together by the ears. It occasioneth
the neglect both of our own and others souls. It enticeth us into Hell for the
sake of living plentifully on earth. It causes Parents to neglect the souls of
their Children; and Children to wish the death of their Parents. It makes
people to hate their Ministers, and Ministers to neglect their People.

II. Covetousness alienates the soul of man from God, and that several ways, as

Psalm. 10.4.
1. From the thought of God. For God is not in all his thoughts. When he awakes
in the night, his mind is wholly taken up with worldly matters, without a
thought of God, or of any good thing. When he is following the works of his
calling, how is he wholly drowned, and swallowed up therein!

2. It alienates the soul of man from the love of God: For if any man love the
World, 1 John 2.15.
the love of the Father is not in him.

3. It alienates the soul of man from attending upon God in his Ordinances. As
you may see in the invited guests in the Parable, Luke 14.18.
whose eager desire after the things of this World, kept them from coming to
the wedding feast.

III. Covetousness makes a man unthankful for his present state and condition,
though in it self an estate very full and comfortable. His mind is so much upon
what he has not, that he neither takes notice, nor tastes the sweetness of
what he has. His full vessel in his own apprehension is an empty bottle.
Finding no contentment in what he has, he is full of murmuring and repining,
that he has not what he would have. Many a gracious poor man, that has little
of this Worlds goods, has oftentimes more satisfaction and contentment in his
little, than he that has the greatest earthly revenews, in all his abundance.

IV. Covetousness works the heart to a mean and low esteem of things spiritual
and heavenly. From such as love the World, and the things thereof overmuch,
Christ to be sure has love little enough. Their eyes are so blinded, that they
see not his beauty: and their pallat so distempered, that they taste not his
sweetness. And therefore, with Esau, prefer a mess of pottage before a
birthright: and with the men of Shechem prefer the bramble before the Vine,
the Olive, and the Fig Tree. Worldly men prefer these poor empty things, the
Brambles of the World before Jesus Christ the true and living Vine; yea and
above the blessed birthright of Gods newborn Children.

Covetousness depriveth a man of the comfort of what he has, and possesses.
For the having of all is as nothing to him, that has an immoderate desire
after more. Ahabs Crown and Kingdom yielded him no comfort after he had set his
heart upon poor Naboths Vineyard. The want of this did more molest and vex him,
than the enjoyment of his whole Kingdom did solace and comfort him. 1 King.
21.4.
For this he came heavy and displeased to his house, laid him down upon his
bed, turned away his face and would eat no bread.

V. Covetousness exposes men to manifold temptations, making them ready to
yield to Satan's wicked suggestions. They that will be rich, 1 Timothy 6.9.
fall into temptation and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts
which draw me^ into perdition. As if he had said, They who set their hearts
upon their riches, whose hearts run after their covetousness, are fit for any
temptation, ready to yield to any of Satan's wicked suggestions, for the
satisfying their covetous humor. Judas (as Tertullian thinks) was pretty
honest till he carried the bag, and that gave him occasion to discover the
rottenness that was in his heart.

CHAP. XXIII. Of living by faith in Gods promises.
ANother singular duty incumbent upon the regenerate is, To live by faith,
casting themselves upon God in Christ, and upon his gracious promises in all
their straights and dangers, for such needful and useful things as they stand
in need of. To live by faith is not only to believe in Christ for salvation,
but also firmly to rest and rely upon God, and his gracious promises expressed
in his Word, for support under all our trials, for succor in all our
distresses, for assistance against all assaults, for deliverance out of all our
dangers, and for supply of all our wants, whether temporal or spiritual.

Thus did those ancient Worthies mentioned, Heb. 11. Where we read that into
whatsoever trouble or straight they were brought, they so lived by faith in
Gods promises, that nothing could dismay them, much less overthrow them. And if
thou in like manner could but quietly rest upon God and his gracious promises
thou would in thy greatest trials and troubles be more than Conqueror, as
the Apostle speaks.

When therefore thou art troubled for thy sins, groaning under the weight and
burden of them, then throw thy self upon the merits and righteousness of Jesus
Christ, and there let thy soul rest it self in hope of the pardon of thy sins
here, and of eternal life and salvation hereafter; venturing upon that
comfortable promise, Mat. 11.28.
Come unto me all ye who are weary and heavy laden, and I will give you rest.

When thou art assaulted with the temptations of Satan, and fear left thou
should be overcome by them: then look up unto God, trusting in him for
deliverance in due time, and for support in the mean time, 1 Cor. 10.13.
relying upon that gracious promise, God is faithful, who will not suffer you
to be tempted above that you are able: but will with the temptation make a way
to escape that ye may be able to bear it.

When thou art under any spiritual desertion, sitting in darkness, without any
spark of comfort, th^n look up unto God with the eye of faith for the light of
his countenance, and the assurance of his loving favor, resting and refreshing
thy drooping soul with that comfortable promise, Isa. 54.8.
In a little wrath have I hid my face from thee, but with everlasting kindness
will I have mercy on thee, says the Lord thy Redeemer.

When thou apprehendest thy self weak and insufficient for the performance of
duties, then look up unto God who has promised to help the weaknesses and
infirmities of his Servants: and trust upon the power of Jesus Christ; then
will thou be able to say with the Apostle, Phil. 4.13.
I can do all things through Christ which strengthens me.

When thou feel thy corruptions strongly working and stirring in thee, then
look up unto God, who is able; and has promised to subdue thine iniquities,
and to keep down the power of thy lusts, laying hold on that good word, Romans
6.14.
Sin shall not have dominion over you, for ye are not under the Law, but under
grace.

When thou art reviled and persecuted by wicked, and ungodly men, then look up
unto God with the eye of faith, trusting in him for help and strength,
comforting thy self with that gracious saying of our Savior, Bl^sse are ye
when m^n shall revils you, and persecute you, Mat. 5.11, 12.
and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake. Rejoice and
be exceeding glad: for great is your reward in Heaven.

When thou art straightened in these outward things, and thereupon art full of
Worldly fears and cares, what to eat, and what to drink, and what to provide
for Wife and Children: then look up unto God, and by faith cast all thy care
upon him, who cares for thee, 1 Pet. 5.7. Psalm. 34.
resting upon that comfortable promise, The young Lions do lack, and suffer
hunger, but they that seek the Lord shall not want any good thing. Though thou
may not have that abundance and affluency which some others do enjoy, yet
thou shall not want that which God sees good for thee, Phil. 4.19.
who will supply all thy need according to his riches.

Thus in all thy streights and distresses thou may by the Sovereign power of
faith, working upon the gracious promises of God, exceedingly revive and
refresh thy troubled Spirit. For all the promises of God set down in his Word
for thy comfort and support, being sealed with the blood of Christ, are all yea
and Amen, as true as truth it self, and therefore shall assuredly in their due
time be accomplished.

For thy better encouragement to this Christian duty of living by faith,
seriously weigh these few things,

I. The Properties of God, more especially,

1. His Almighty power, whereby he is able to strengthen thee in all thy
weaknesses, to support thee under all thy trials, and temptations, in a word,
to perform whatsoever he has promised. This made Abraham with strong
confidence to rest upon the promise of God, Romans 4.20, 21.
which the Apostle thus sets forth, He staggered not at the promise of God
through unbelief, but was strong in faith, being fully persuaded, that what he
had promised, he was able to perform. Abraham's eying the power of God was it
that made him so confidently to rest upon his promise. The power of God is
often in Scripture mentioned to move Saints to live by faith in Gods promises,
and to rest upon them. When Sarah made some doubt of Gods promise concerning
Abraham's having a Child by her; this question was by way of exprobration
propounded to her, Genesis 18.14.
Is there any thing too hard for the Lord? To like purpose said God to his
Prophet Jeremy for the strengthening his faith, Jer. 32.27.
Behold I am the Lord of all flesh, is there any thing too hard for me?
implying there is nothing too hard for God.

2. His truth and faithfulness in performing what he has promised. For faith
the Apostle to the Hebrews, faithful is he that promises. Heb. 10.32.
We read how under the Law God commanded by Moses concerning him that voweth or
promises any thing to the Lord, Deuteronomy. 30.2.
that he shall not break his word, but shall do according to all that
proceeds out of his mouth: And shall the Lord say, and not do it? Shall he
promise and not perform it? Surely it is as possible for him not to be, as not
to keep his word, and not to perform what he has promised.

Indeed the Lord many times makes his Children wait long for the
accomplishment of his promises: Yet he never fails to be as good as his Word.
Which duly considered cannot but strengthen our faith in the firm expectation
of all good things promised, and enable us quietly and contentedly to rest and
repose our selves in God for the accomplishment of what he has promised, and
not to doubt thereof, though he seem long to deferr the performance of them.

3. His infinite Wisdom, whereby he dispenses the good things contained in his
promises, in their fitest time and season, whenas they shall make most for his
own glory, and his Childrens good. Far be it therefore from us to prescribe
unto God the time and season for the performance of his promises. But let us
rather resolve with patience to wait his appointed time and season, who is
infinite in Wisdom, and so knows what is best and convenient for us, even
better than we our selves. Thus did the Church, Psalm. 123.4.
Our eyes wait upon the Lord our God until he have mercy upon us. Therefore as
the Lord speaks by the Prophet Isay, Isa. 28.16.
He that believes shall not make haste, because he is assured by faith, that
though he have not the thing he desires at his own time, yet he shall have it
in that time which God in his Wisdom knows to be best for him, whenas it
shall make most for his good.

II. Consider the good success believers have found upon their living by faith,
how things have fallen out according to their hope and expectation. It is
recorded of Abraham, that he lived by faith in Gods promise to him of a Son;
being fully persuaded that what he had promised, he was able to perform. And
God accordingly did perform the same unto him. Look into the Histories of the
Kings of Judah and Israel, and you shall find that according to their trust in
God, and faith in his promises, was their success and deliverance. Psalm. 22.4,
5.
Our Fathers trusted in thee, they trusted, and thou did deliver them: they
trusted in thee, and were not confounded. And says David of himself, The Lord
is my strength, and my Shield, my heart trusted in him, and I was helped. What
an encouragement must this needs be unto us, to trust in God, and live by faith
in his promises? Seeing he never failed such. Faith in the promises being like
the bow of Jonathan, and Sword of Saul, which never returned empty: but
always finds what it seeks, and enjoyes what it desires.

III. Take notice of the particular fruits of living by faith recorded in
Scripture, some whereof are these,

1. Protection from things hurtful. Though Daniel was cast into a Den of
Lions, yet it is said, that no manner of hurt was found in him. Dan. 6.23.
And this reason is rendered thereof, Because he believed in Gods Word: by faith
relying on his power, whom he knew was able to deliver him.

2. Provision of needful good things. Therefore the Apostle exhorts to trust
in the living God, and that on this ground, 1 Timothy 6.17.
he gives us richly all things to enjoy: namely all such things, as he in his
Wisdom sees to be needful for us. And to set out Gods bounty in providing for
such as live by faith in his promises, Prove. 28.25.
the Wise man faith, He that puts his trust in the Lord shall be made fat,
that is, he shall not only have such a competency, as is absolutely necessary
to preserve life, or to keep body and soul together; but also such plenty, and
abundance, as will make him fat, and well-liking.

3. Comfort in every condition, is another fruit of living by faith in Gods
promises. The promises of God in his Word are the Christians Cordials, to cheer
up his fainting spirits, when he is ready to sink. They are his aqua-vitae, to
revive him when he is ready to swound. They are breasts of consolation, full of
sweet nourishment for the faint and weak. They are Sacred and sure Anchors, in
the tempestuous seasons of trouble and affliction, to stay and six believers
amidst all tossings whatsoever. They are roses that blow in the Winter, which
with their fragrancy revive drooping and dejected souls, in the sad Winter of
their desertion, when the verdure of all other comforts wither, and drop like
leaves that are bitten with the frost. This David found in his own experience,
for faith he, thy promises are my comfort in my affliction, Psalm. 119.50.
for thy Word has quickened me.

Whereas the best of the Worlds comforts are only applicable to some particular
condition: the comforts of the promises are universal, such as agree with every
estate, and suit every malady; and therefore apt to relieve the soul of a
believer in every condition, though never so sad and disconsolate. So that the
Christian who lives by faith in Gods promises, many times walks more cheerfully
under sore, fiery troubles, than others in the Sunshine of Worldly prosperity.
The three Children walked to and fro with more joy in the fiery Furnace, than
Nebuchadaezzar in his stately Palace.

4. Contentment in our present state and condition, is another Fruit of living
by faith. (...). Arist. Homo quadratus. Erasm.
A Believer is like a dye that has four squares, throw it which way you will,
it falls upon a bottom. Let God cast a Believer into what condition he
pleases, he still falls upon his bottom of contentment, he will be contented
with his present state, believing it to be ordered by God as in Wisdom, so in
much mercy and goodness unto him.

CHAP. XXIV. Of Heavenly-mindedness.
ANother singular duty incumbent upon the Regenerate is, to be spiritually
minded by a frequent contemplation of spiritual and Heavenly things. It is not
some few, slitting, transient thoughts on God or Heaven, wherein this duty
consists: but thoughts resting and fixing on some spiritual subject. The truth
is, the thoughts of all men fly up and down like birds in the air, or chaff in
the wind: and some of these may light sometimes on God, or Heaven: but they are
soon off and fixed on some worldly matter, or some impertinencies or other: and
therefore cannot denominate a man to be spiritually-minded; which is another
manner of business than many are aware of. It Is a thinking with thought upon
thought, a reiteration and multiplication of the thoughts of the mind upon God,
and the things of God, and this in order to the affecting the heart deeply with
them.

It is not sufficient to think and think often of the love and goodness of God,
but we must labor to get our hearts inflamed with a love unto him again. It is
not sufficient to think and think often of sin, and the misery it has
implunged as in; but we must so think thereof, as to work our hearts to an
hatred of sin, and a fear of that wrath of God it has exposed us, and made us
liable to, and to a looking after Jesus Christ, who alone can free us from the
guilt of our sins, and from the punishment due unto us for the same.

This is a work of so great concernment and advantage, as none can truly
apprehend, but such as have made trial therein. David who was a man full of
Holy and Heavenly affections, was full of Heavenly meditation. And from the
experience of that abundant sweetness and comfort he found therein, does often
in his book of Psalms commend it unto others; and pronounces that man blessed
who meditates in the Law of God day and night. Psalm. 1.2.


Let thy soul full often soar aloft upon the wings of divine contemplation. Let
not any solitary season pass away without some spiritual meditation, and
conference with thy God. Either take a sorrowful survey of thy manifold sins,
which may draw from thee as hearty grief for the same, so hearty ejaculations
for the pardon and forgiveness of them. Or take a view of Gods blessings and
favors toward thee; and let this enlarge and raise up thine heart in praises
and thanksgivings unto him. Or bath thy self in an admiring commemoration of
the meritorious blood of the immaculate Lamb Christ Jesus, which was abundantly
shed for the washing of thy body and soul from the filthy spots and stains of
sin. Seriously think what he has done and suffered for thee; how he has
fullfilled the Law, and undergone the punishment due to thy sins; and now in
Heaven makes intercession for thee, by presenting himself an allsufficient
Sacrifice unto his Father for thy sins. Oh think with thy self, what thou must
have suffered for thy sins, if he had not suffered for them. What thou had
been, if he had not redeemed thee, even a bondslave of Satan, and firebrand of
hell.

Especially, let thy soul full often meditate on the glorious things which the
Lord has reserved in Heaven for such as here do sincerely serve him, and obey
the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Oh think with thy self what a blessed thing it will
be, to live in the vision and fruition of God himself: in whose presence there
is fullness of joy, and at whose right hand there are pleasures for evermore.
As also what an happiness it will be to behold the glorious body of Jesus
Christ, shining there with such incomprehensible beauty, as shall infinitely
delight the eyes of the beholders, and that to all Eternity, without satiety:
for the longer the Saints behold Christ, the more they will be ravished with
joy and delight. Ponder likewise as on the excellent qualities wherewith thy
soul and body shall be adorned in Heaven, so on the excellency of that place,
which is set forth in Scripture by Pearls and precious stones.

And the more to set off this glory and blessedness, often consider with thy self
the deplorable state of the damned in hell, who feel nothing for the present
but wrath and vengeance: and can expect nothing for the future but the fuller
Vials of Gods indignation to be powered on them to all Eternity.

Such considerations as these will serve as notable helps to draw and keep
thine heart Heavenward, and to turn all the streams of thy desires and
longings toward the God of glory. But oh how many Christians are there who
having an hope toward God, and some confidence of their interest in things
above, do notwithstanding converse but very little with them? Their thoughts
are seldom on Heaven or Heavenly things; that notwithstanding all their
confidence, they may well question whether their treasure be there.

Consider, Reader, As before the Lord, whether this be not thine own case. Thou
can not be ignorant that an heart estranged from Heaven, has little evidence
that he has any part or place therein. And will thou yet persuade thy self
that God is thine, when thou carest no more for him? Do thou highly prize an
Heavenly mind, and account them the best and the happiest Christians, that are
much in Heaven? and yet is it not grievous to thee to find that thou did
never in all thy life, it may be, or but very seldom fix thy thoughts thereon
for a quarter of an hour together? but have many and many a time suffered the
Devil to run away with thy thoughts, and to detain them on this dunghill below.

Certainly it were better the Devil had power to run away with thine estate,
than with thy thoughts, and to order their motions at his pleasure. Oh the
multitude of Worldly and covetous thoughts! of wanton and unclean thoughts! of
proud and ambitious thoughts! of wicked and profane thoughts! yea of
blaspheamous, and atheistical thoughts that lodge in the hearts of most of us,
and there Revel it day and night! Oh the speculative filthiness, and
contemplative uncleanness that not only harbors, but likewise find hearty
welcome and entertainment there!

Surely friend thou had best look to thy self, and get thy heart cleared of
these evil guests, thy vile and vain thoughts: drive away these birds of prey,
and then the thoughts of God will be more familiar and precious to thee. That
thou may get up to this Heavenly-mindedness; take these directions.

1. Humble thy self unfeignedly for thy great strangeness to God, and Heaven,
that thou have so rarely set thine heart on things above. And for the time to
come let it be thy special care and endeavor to habituate thy self to
Spiritual, and Heavenly Meditations, frequently to steep thy soul in Heavens
delights.

2. When thou find thy mind and thoughts to be ridden, by the Devil, and
carried away from God, lift up thine heart by earnest and fervent prayer unto
him, who is the Father of Spirits, and has power over Devils; and beg of him,
that as by his permission he has suffered the unclean Spirit to enter into
thee: so he would command him speedily to depart from thee, that thy mind might
be free for its proper work. For he only can cast down imaginations, 2 Cor.
10.5.
and every thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and bring
into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ.

3. Work thy heart to a perfect detestation of all vain and wicked thoughts,
that thou may be able to say with David, Psalm. 119.113.
I hate vain thoughts. This will highten thy resolutions to a greater
watchfulness against them for the time to come, and to use thine utmost
endeavor to drive them away, so that though they may arise in thine heart; yet
they may not lodge there. And know this for thy comfort, that those vain and
wicked thoughts, which thou do from thine heart hate and detest, shall not be
laid to thy charge, at the great day of account.

4. Above all things keep a watch over thine heart; according to that counsel
of the Wise man, Prove. 4.23.
Keep thine heart with all diligence. As if he had said, Above all keeping keep
thine heart: which is like a City liable every moment both to outward assaults
and inward commotions. Not only Satan thine arch-enemy is ever watchful for an
opportunity to cast thereinto his fiery darts, and sensual objects: but there
are also many rebellious stirrings within, which spring from the fountain of
original corruption, over which thou must especially watch; and dismiss them
with loathing and detestation. If vain and wanton thoughts be not st^fled in
the conception, what monstrous wickedness may they not bring forth? How great a
fire may these little sparks kindle?

5. (...) thy heart and affections more and more from worldly, cares and
pleasures, which clog the soul that it cannot mount aloft. As a Bird whose
wings are Limed, is not able to take her flight on high. So the man whose heart
is entangled with the cares of this life and the pleasures of sin, will not be
able to get above ground: the wings of holy meditation will not raise it on
high. Yea such a carnal and earthly mind is altogether unfit for Heavenly
meditation, and very backward and unwilling to it. What better reason can be
given why many think so little of God, his Word and Works, or of any good
thing, but because their hearts are so full of the World, and their affections
set so much upon the same: where their treasure is, there will their hearts
also be.

6. Be often lifting up thine heart to Heaven in some spiritual ejaculations,
especially in the morning. Such as find themselves subject to wind in their
stomachs through emptiness, use before they go forth, to take a mornings
draught. And as great need is there for such as are subject to vain, wanton,
worldly thoughts, every morning to prepossess their hearts with the thoughts of
God, of his glorious Majesty, his omnipresence, and omniscience, his purity,
justice, and the like. And not only mornings, but throughout the day when ever
thou find vain or wicked thoughts to arise at any time within thee, meet
them presently with a Prayer; lift up thine heart in some short ejaculatory
request unto God, for power and strength to keep down and suppress the same.

7. Labor to spiritualize every outward occurrence by raising Heavenly
meditations from the same. There is not any creature thou beholdest, or any
thing that befalls thee, but thou may make some spiritual use, and
improvement thereof. As the Be sucks honey out of every flower; so may thou
extract spiritual and holy thoughts from every thing thou see, and beholdest:
yea from all occurrences and emergencies; which will be a special means to
prevent the Devil and Lust, and to keep out those vanities and wickednesses
which otherwise would fill thine head and heart withal.

8. Labor to get thine heart furnished with the knowledge of God and his word,
which will take up thine heart with better things, and leave no room for these
unclean birds. As the emptiness of the stomach makes it subject to windiness;
so it is the emptiness of our hearts that makes them so full of vain, foolish
thoughts. Mat. 12.35.
A good man, says our Savior, out of the good treasure of his heart brings
forth good things. A good man having his heart furnished with a treasure of
many precious truths, brings forth good thoughts, as well as good things.
When thou art walking or riding alone, call to mind some spiritual subject or
favoury truth whereon to meditate: bring forth out of thy treasury, and let
thine heart be continually working upon those good things thou have there laid
up.

9. So often as thou go unto God in Prayer, let one petition be for
mortifying grace, to conquer those sinful Lusts and vile affections, which are
apt to steam up into thine head with answerable thoughts; and that he would
make thee more heavenly minded, by working in thine heart better affections.
Nothing but the power of God can cure us of the vanity of our thoughts, and
make them such as may be acceptable unto him.

In regard that the best of Gods people do find a great backwardness, and
untowardness in themselves to the performance of this Heavenly duty: I shall
give you some Motives thereunto, which if seriously weighed, may through Gods
blessing prove effectual to persuade you to be more spiritually minded.

I. May be taken from the possibility of the work. Indeed the work is somewhat
difficult, yet is it possible; it is that you have power to do. Though you have
not that command of your affections, you cannot love what you will, or hate
what you will, or grieve when you will; yet can you not think of what you will?
And by how much more able you are to it, by so much the greater your sin is, if
you neglect it.

II. Consider the necessity of this duty. The mind of man being active, if it
be not exercised on spiritual, and holy things, it will be on things earthly
and carnal. The truth is, whosoever does not accustom himself to fix his
thoughts on God, or his Word, or some spiritual subject, will be sure to find
them taken up with things of less concernment, yea of dangerous and sad
consequence; from which they will reap nothing but corruption, and defilement.
By how much our minds stray from God, and pitch upon other things, the more
will they grow into the form of the Devil. Jer. 2.^.
They are gone far from me, and have walked after vanity, and are become vain.

III. Consider the manifold benefits which usually follow thereupon.

1. God will be sure to mind them, who mind him. Then they that feared the
Lord, Mal. 3.16.
spoke often one to another, and a book of remembrance was written before him,
for them that feared the Lord, and thought on his name. Not a thought of God
but it is registered in his book of remembrance. The more we look up unto God,
the more he will look down upon us for our good. When thoughts of God are
stirring in us, God himself is not far off, he will come and enter. Oh how
happy are those souls in whom God comes, and takes up his habitation!

2. A clearer apprehension of divine truths. Though we hear often, and read
much, yet if we digest not those truths we meet with, by meditation, we shall
still continue in the dark. Our knowledge at the best will be but weak, and
inefficacious. Whereas by a frequent thinking of those truths which we hear or
read, we shall have a clearer apprehension of them, and they will be concocted
into better nourishment.

3. An Heavenly conversation. The mind being the fountain of actions, such as
the mind is, such is the life, and conversation. If the mind be holy and
Heavenly, such will the life be. But if the mind be carnal, and unclean, the
conversation will be thereafter. Would thou have an Heavenly conversation?
then must thou be Heavenly minded. Thoughts are the seed and conception of all
our actions, and such as the seed is, such will be the fruit. As evil thoughts
bring forth evil actions, so Heavenly thoughts bring forth an Heavenly
conversation.

4. Readiness to discourse on divine mysteries. As they who have laid up much
riches, have sufficient by them, to bring forth on all occasions: so such as by
frequent meditation have treasured up many precious truths, have sufficient by
them to produce, for the benefit of those they converse withal. Whereas others
who have spent much time in reading, and hearing, and have not by meditation
made it their own, we see how barren they are. Psalm. 77.12.
I will meditate, says David, of all thy works, and talk of thy doings. It is
there observable, how good conference follows upon holy meditation.

5. Cheerfulness of Spirit. To be much in Heaven by a frequent contemplation of
things above, will exceedingly cheer up our Spirits, and make us walk
comfortably. For the proof hereof I dare appeal to the experience of any
Heavenly-minded Christian. When is it that your hearts are most cheerful? but
when you have been walking with God, and beholding his face, and looking to
those things that are within the vail. Certainly this will leave such a savor
upon the heart of a Christian, that he cannot but confess, that one hour thus
spent, does afford more true real joy and sweetness, than all the riches and
pleasures in the World.

Hereupon David cried out, Psalm. 139.17.
How precious are thy thoughts unto me, O God! As if he had said, How
delightful and comfortable are the thoughts that I have of thee! yea says he,
when I remember thee upon my bed, and meditate on thee in the night watches, my
soul shall be satisfied as with marrow and fatness. And who is there that has
seriously experimented this divine exercise, who does not find abundance of
sweetness and comfort in it? Certainly no comfort, no joy is to be compared
with it.

No marvail then that many Christians walk so uncomfortably, when they live at
such a distance from Heaven. Where is joy? where is comfort? but in Heaven? Who
are like to taste of these Heavenly comforts, but those who go often thither?
Strangers shall not meddle with this joy. How can Heaven be matter of joy to
them who are never there? nor consider the glorious things, which God has
there prepared for those who love him?

6. Another benefit of divine contemplation, is a profitable improvement of
time. For thereby all the chinks, and crevices of our time will be filled up.
There need be no vacuity, when we have work that is so proper for every season;
yea and that will whet and quicken us, to what ever other work God has for us
to do. The most contemplative Christians are the most active. Our holy thoughts
will set us upon our holy work; the thoughtless are usually the most fruitless
of men.

7. Victory over our lusts and corruptions, is another benefit of divine
contemplation. It is recorded of Noah, that though he lived in wicked and
corrupt times, yet he was a just and upright man. Genesis 6.9.
The reason thereof is rendered in the next words, He walked with God,
continually eying him, and meditating of him. By his frequent conversing with
God, he kept himself from the iniquities of the times, as well as from the
corruptions of his own heart. And certainly there is no better preservative
against sin, than to have our minds and thoughts thus holily employed about
spiritual things. For,

1. By looking into our selves, and considering our own hearts and ways, we
discern the evils that are there: we see such Worldliness and Covetousness in
our hearts, the very sight whereof will make us look the better to our selves.

2. By spiritual meditation we come to have such an insight into the evil of
sin, the vanity of the Creature, the folly of fleshly sensual delights: that
temptations unto sin will have the less power over us.

3. Divine contemplation is a preservative against sin, because it keeps the
heart employed. When the heart is taken up with better things, it has no
leisure to hearken to temptations; no leisure to be lustful and wanton; Quem
diabolus inve^it inoccupatum ipse ^ccupat.
to be Worldly or ambitious. When we are idle and empty of God, we are sure to
be pestred with evil thoughts: whilst we are well employed, we are safe. When
the vessel is full, you can put in no more. And when the heart is filled with
Heaven, there is no room for Earth and vanity. What Is the reason most men's
hearts are so full of wicked wanton thoughts? but because God is not in all
their thoughts.

4. Divine contemplation is a good preservative against sin, in that our
understandings are thereby cleared, to judge rightly of our sinful lusts, and
pleasures. When a Christian has been seriously musing either on those
everlasting joys, which are prepared for the Godly in Heaven: or on those
everlasting torments, which are prepared for the wicked in hell, what then are
his apprehensions of his lusts and iniquities? Oh how does he befool himself
for them, when he sees what he is like to lose and suffer by them! How could he
even tear his very flesh, and take revenge on himself, for his earthly
mindedness, and fleshly pleasures! for his misspent time, that he has so
prodigally lavished, and woefully wasted his golden and precious time, in
vanity, and pleasure, in sin and wickedness! How verily does he think there is
no man in Bedlam so truly mad, as they, who for the short fruition of a
momentary pleasure, and delight here, do plunge themselves into everlasting
burnings in hell, where is nothing but weeping and wailing, and gnashing of
teeth!

CHAP. XXV. Of Mortification.
ANother singular duty incumbent upon the Regenerate is, To labor in the use
of all good means, for the mortification of the whole body of sin, with all its
affections and lusts, especially those we feel most predominant in us. True
mortification extends it self to the whole of sin, body and members, root and
branch; even every sinful lust. Col. 3.5.
Mortify therefore your members which are upon the Earth, says the Apostle.
Where by Members on the Earth, are meant the sinful lusts and affections,
which are as the Members of that monstrous body of sin; which is evident by the
particular instances in the Words following, namely Fornication, uncleanness,
inordinate Affections, and the like. These must be mortified, that is, killed
and destroyed. The Regenerate by the Spirit of God are enabled as to restrain
the actings of sin, so by degrees to deaden the root. Indeed this is not done
to the uttermost while here we live, I mean, sin is not here so mortified and
destroyed, that it has no residence, nor activity in our hearts: yet may it be
so weakened and subdued, as to lose its vigor, power and strength, and languish
away more and more. Though corruption keep possession in us, after we are
Regenerate, yet has it not dominion over us, though we may be sins Captives,
yet shall we not be sins subjects, to yield a voluntary subjection of our
selves unto the commands of sin.

Q. How may we know when corruption is mortified in us?

A. When it is not only restrained, and kept from such ordinary breakings out
into actual sins: but the lusts and motions that issue from it, are a grief to
us: yea we hate and detest them, and groan under the burden of them: we watch
against them, fight against them, earnestly desiring to be delivered from them,
crying out with the Apostle, Romans 7.24.
O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of sin and
corruption.

For the more profitable pressing this so necessary and difficult a duty, I
shall, 1. Show you some Motives and arguments to enforce the same. 2. Some
Means whereby it may be effected. 3. The Manner how it ought to be performed.


The Reasons forcing this work of Mortification upon the Regenerate are these,

1. After Regeneration there remains a body of sin and corruption in the
best, which if we endeavor not, by the help of Gods Spirit, to mortify and
subdue, will gather strength, and become mighty to the great hinderance of our
duty, and darkning all our comfort.

2. Corruption does not only remain in us as long as we live in this World, but
it is always in continual work: either stirring us up to evil, or keeping us
from that which is good, or defiling our best actions. In which respect, Gal.
5.17.
says the Apostle, the flesh lusts against the Spirit: And from his own
experience he cries out, Romans 7.23.
I see another Law in my members, warring against the Law of my mind, and
bringing me into captivity to the Law of sin, which is in my members; so that I
cannot do the good which I would, but rather do the evil which I hate. How does
it then concern us, daily and hourly to fight, and strive against these lusts,
which are continually working, and warring in our members, hindering and
spoiling all our duties, breaking our peace, undermining all our hopes and
comforts, and seeking our lives? we must either kill or be killed.

3. By a conscionable performance of this duty, we shall be freed from those
heinous and scandalous sins, into which other men's lusts do carry them. Should
corruption have its way and course without resistance in the best of us, it
would soon break forth into the most loathsome and disgraceful sins, that are
committed by the very worst of men; as we see in David, Solomon, and others. Is
it not then needful for us to keep down, and withstand the first motions and
risings of sin in our hearts, before it break forth into such wicked and
disgraceful acts, which will blast our credit and reputation, and bring a
scandal upon our Religion and profession?

4. Mortification of sin was one special end of Christ's death; who dyed to save
his people from their sins: not to save them in their sins, but from their
sins: as from the guilt and punishment, so from the power of them. And indeed
whom Christ delivers from the damnation of sin, he first delivers also from the
dominion of sin. Whom he intends to save from hell, he first saves them from
iniquity: he saves their souls by killing their sins.

If thou find any lust to remain unmortified in thee, bearing rule in thine
heart, and sway in thy life, thou have just cause to question thy interest in
Christ, and his salvation. Gal. 5.24.
They that are Christ's have Crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts.

II. The Means whereby the work of Mortification may be effected by us, are
these,

I. When thou feel corruption working in thee, and stirring thee up to evil,
then call to mind, and lay to heart the ensuing considerations.

1. Consider the shortness of the pleasure of sin, with the length of the
punishment following thereupon, without true and unfeined repentance: The one
for a moment, the other everlasting. The pleasure is but short, but the
punishment is for ever and ever. The torments of the damned in hell are
intensively most grievous in themselves: but that which mainly and infinitely
adds to the greatness of them is, because they are eternal. Rev. 20.10
They are tormented day and night for ever and ever. The Worm is always
gnawing, and the fire continually burning, Mat. 3.12.
therefore called unquenchable fire. Oh what a folly must it then needs be* yea
and madness beyond admiration, for the short fruition of these perishing
pleasures, and transient contentments here, to implunge our selves into
everlasting burnings!

Oh how terrible is the thought of eternity in those tormenting flames? where
the damned would think themselves happy, if after they had endured them so many
thousand years, as there are Sands on the Seashore, or Stars in the Firmament,
they might then be assured of enlargement. But when all that time is past, and
innumerable millions of years, and ages are run out, they are as far from an
end, as at their first entrance. Why will thou then purchase a little sensual
delight at so dear a rate? for a moments pleasure to incurr everlasting woe and
misery? O the fire of hell, if thou would send down thy thoughts thither,
would burn up thy Lusts, which otherwise will be the fuel to burn thy soul.

2. Consider thy extreme folly in gratifying thy sinful Lusts: thereby thou
have chosen and preferred thy fleshly pleasure, thy carnal content, before the
glory of God, the everlasting joys of Heaven, and the precious blood of Jesus
Christ. Oh monstrous madness, and unconceivable folly! at which the Angels
blush, and Heaven and Earth cannot but stand amazed.

3. Call to mind and consider some of the threatenings in Gods Word, as against
sin in general, so against that particular Lust, which thou find most
working and stirring in thee, and unto which thou find strongest
inclinations in thy self.

First, Call to mind and consider some of the threatenings against sin and
sinners in general. Psalm. 11.6.
Upon the wicked, says the Psalmist, God shall rain fire and brimstone, and an
horrible tempest: this shall be the portion of their cup. Romans 2.8, 9.
And says the Apostle, Indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish upon
every soul of man that does evil.

Secondly, When thou find any inclination in thy self to a particular sin,
as unto drunkenness, seriously consider that of the Wise man, Prove. 23.29.
who has woe? who has sorrow? who has contentions, etc. they that tarry long
at the Wine, they that go to seek mixed Wine. When thou find any inclination,
or temptation unto uncleanness, seriously weigh that of the Apostle, Be not
deceived, 1 Cor. 6.9.
neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor Effeminate, shall
inherit the Kingdom of God. Heb. 13.4.
And again, Whoremongers, and Adulterers God will judge. When thou find any
inclinations unto Covetousness, call to mind that of the Prophet Isaiah, Woe
unto them that join house to house, Isa. 5.8.
and lay field to field, till there be no place: and that of the Apostle, The
love of money is the root of all evil, 1 Timothy 6.10.
which while some have coveted after, they have erred from the faith, and
pierced themselves through with many sorrows. As God has in his Word denounced
severe threatenings against many sins, so a serious consideration of them will
be a special means to mortify the same, and keep them at least from reigning
in us.

4. Call to mind the fearful judgments God has executed upon sinners; as the
drowning of the old World; the raining fire and brimstone from Heaven upon
Sodom and Gomorrah; the rejection of the Jews: the destruction of those famous
Churches of the Corinthians, Galathians, Ephesians, with diverse others.
Consider likewise the remarkable judgments of God executed upon notorious
sinners in thine own days, for their swearing, sabbath-breaking, whoring,
drinking, and the like; which (through Gods blessing) may prove a special Means
to keep down all sinful lusts, and inordinate affections, that they break not
forth into outward gross acts.

5. Consider the deceitful nature of sin, which allureth thee with shows of
pleasure, profit, credit, ease, and the like? but in the end it bites like a
Serpent, and stingeth like an Adder; and then thou will perceive how thou art
beguiled, and deceived. Horror of Conscience, and hellish torment is all it
will pay thee instead of the pleasure it promises thee: loss instead of
profit, even the loss of Heaven and happiness: shame and disgrace instead of
credit: anguish instead of ease: Romans 2.9.
tribulation and anguish shall be upon every soul of man that does evil. Jacob
complained of Labans deceit about his wages: and what will thou think of thy
wages when the pay-day comes? The wages of sin is death, will thou not then
say, the Serpent has beguiled me, this sin has deceived me. Be not such a
fool as to take the word of a known deceiver; away with it, crucify it, for it
intends thee mischief. Be undeceived betimes: how dreadful will it be, if
nothing but fire and ^^^mstone will bring thee to thy wits? If thou will no^
see the treachery of sin till it be too late to escape it?

6. When thou feel corruption working and stirring in thee entising thee to
sin, seriously consider the manifold sufferings and bitter death of our blessed
Savior Jesus Christ on the Cross: whereof our sins were the cause. These were
they that lay heavy upon his soul, and made him exceeding sorrowful even unto
death. These were the thorns which pricked his Temples; the whips which
scourged his innocent body: and the nails which fastened his hands and feet to
the Cross. And can we love our sins which killed our Savior? we complain of
Judas, and of the Jews for Crucifying him; and seem to hate them upon that
account. But behold the Judas in thy heart, and in thy life, thy sins, these
are the betrayers and murderers.

Oh never leave looking up to a Crucified Christ, till thou feel and find, both
arguments enough to engage thy heart against them, and virtue flow from him to
the Crucifying of them. To this end, reason thus with thy self. Has Christ
paid for my Redemption his most precious Blood, and shall I sell my soul to sin
again for this fleshly pleasure, or base profit? what is this but to Crucify
the Lord of life afresh? For know assuredly, so many sins as thou committest
wittingly, and with delight, so many thorns do thou again fasten upon his
head, so many nails do thou drive into his hands and feet, so many spears
do thou thrust into his heart. Certainly a serious consideration of these
things cannot but be a special means to set thee heartily upon this work of
Mortification.

7. Consider how frail and mortal thou art, subject to death every moment; and
woe be unto thee if thou dye before thy sins be slain. How dare thou
adventure upon thy Lusts, and the pleasures of sin, when as thou may suddenly
be taken out of the Land of the living, and cast into hell, while thou art
acting thy wickedness? Even then when thou art blessing thy self in thy
pleasures, or the gains of unrig^^eousness, thou may hear that voice, Thou
fool (...) night thy soul shall be taken from thee. Did thou but seriously
consider, as the cerrainty of thy death, so the uncertainty of the time
thereof, thou would not but be afraid of sinning once more, lest God should
strike thee dead in the very act, and thou have no time left for repentance. Oh
pray with the Psalmist, Psalm. 90.12.
that God would teach thee to number thy days, and this will make thee apply
thine heart unto Wisdom.

8. Consider that sin will be thy destruction, and nothing besides it can harm
thee. It is not in the power of all the men and Devils in the World to destroy
the soul of any man. Temptations can do nothing but by the advantage of
corruption; it is that wounds mortally our immortal spirit, and brings it into
that cursed state, where though it never dies, yet is it always dying; though
never quite dead, yet ever in the pangs of death.

Oh what prodigious cruelty must it then needs be, for such things of naught,
to betray thy precious soul to an eternal loss! when if thou would be
persuaded to secure this enemy, Sin, thou might live and be blessed, in
spite of men and Devils. And will thou yet be in league with it? will thou let
it live? Shall not thy soul be avenged of such an enemy as this? Arise, arise,
set upon thy sins, upon them all, let not thy soul spare any one of them, give
no quarter to them, let not any iniquity lodge in peace with thee one night
more, lest thou be a dead man before the morning.

Thus have I commended to thee several considerations to restrain thee from
sin, which by the help of God may serve to imbitter the sweetest bait that
draws thee to it, and to cool the heat of the most furious inticements. When
therefore thou feel corruption working, and stirring in thee, call to mind
the forementioned considerations, fix thy thoughts on them, let them not go
off, until they begin to have a powerful influence upon thy soul.

II. Another means on our part to be performed for the mortifying our sinful
Lusts is, carefully to eschew all occasions of sin, and temptations thereunto.
He who will dally with occasions of sin, is in danger of falling. He who will
venture upon temptations unto wickedness, is not far from commission of it.
Observe therefore what occasions and opportunities, what means and company,
have at any time given advantage to thy Lust, to exert and put forth it self;
and fly from them as from Hell. This is a point of true spiritual wisdom, to
see sin afar off in the occasions of it; and by eschewing the one, to prevent
the other.

III. Observe the first working of corruption in thine heart, and carefully
suppress the same, not suffering it to get the least ground. Do not say, thus
far it shall go and no farther. Give sin an inch, and it will soon take an ell,
as the proverb is. Lustful thoughts have oft-times ended in outward
uncleanness, and actual Adultery. Mat. 15.19.
From the heart, says our Savior, proceed evil thoughts, adulteries,
fornications, etc. Noting evil thoughts to be the cause of the uncleanness in
the life. In Athaliahs Massacre of the blood royal, young Ioash was hid in the
bedchamber, there he was nursed, and afterward came to be King, and ruled in
the Throne. Save any Lustful thought, nurse it in the bedchamber of thy
heart, hide it there, and it will in time come to be King, and rule over thee.

So soon therefore as any lustful or exorbitant thoughts begin to arise in
thine heart, speedily reject the same: quench the fire in the thatch; crush the
Cockatrice in the Egg: stifle the first conception of sin. Certainly as it is
a dangerous neglect not to observe and embrace the first motions of Gods spirit
in us: so likewise not to take notice of the first thoughts and rising of sin
in our hearts. He who slights sinful thoughts, Gal. 5.24.
is in a fair way to sinful actions. They that are Christ's, says the Apostle,
have Crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. The very affections and
lusts of the flesh must be Crucified, if we would prevent the works of the
flesh.

IV. Sir up in thy self an earnest desire to have thy lusts mortified and
subdued. The reason why no more is done against sin is, because we are too well
contented to let it alone; when nothing but the death of sin will satisfy
thee, thou will then use thy Weapons: when once thou desire in earnest the
destruction of thine iniquities, there is hope they will not be long lived. For
God has promised to satisfy the desire of those that fear him, he will hear
their groanings and deliver them.

Mat. 11.28.
Come unto me, says Christ, all ye who labor and are heavy laden, and I will
give you case, and rest. Certain^y one special reason why many complain so much
of the strength and prevalency of their corruptions is, because they are not
heartily willing to have them mortified and subdued. They will indeed profess a
willingness to part with their sins, that they may be freed from the guilt of
them, and punishment due unto them; but unwilling they are to part with the
pleasure they find in them. Thus Austin acknowledges of himself; I prayed,
said he, that my sins might be forgiven and mortified: but yet I was afraid
l^st my prayer should be heard and answered, If therefore thou would have thy
sins mortified indeed, stir up in thy self a willing mind thereunto.

V. Complain unto God of the prevalency of thy lusts, and by prayer beg
strength from him against the power of them. From God it is that strength must
be had, it is his power alone that can support us against the power of sin. And
Prayer is the means of obtaining it. This was the course that Paul took, when
he was troubled with that thorn in his flesh, 2 Cor. 12.7, 8.
which expositors generally enterpret to be, some strong motions and
inclinations in him to some foul sin. For this, says the text, he besought the
Lord thrice, that is, oftentimes. And though he did not presently obtain a full
deliverance, yet did he receive strength sufficient to resist them, so that he
could not be overcome by them.

If we in like manner shall go unto God by prayer for his help, laying open our
condition, and complaining to him thereof; we shall for the present receive
strength sufficient to resist, and in Gods due time deliverance from our
iniquities.

VI. Act faith in Christ for the mortifying thy sinful lusts, and corruptions.
To this end,

1. Be sensible that thou art in thy s^^f weak, and unable to grapple with thy
Lusts. Thou must despair of thine own strength, ere thou will take hold on the
strength of the Lord. Thou must be beaten out of thy self-confidence, ere thou will go unto Christ. When thou see thou art weak, thou will turn to the
strong hold.

2. B^lieve that Christ is able to succor and help thee. In him does all
fullness dwell. As he has a fullness of grace in his heart, so fullness of
power in his hand, whereby he is able to kill all thine enemies. Sin is mighty,
but Christ is mightier. The Devil is strong, but Christ is stronger than he.

3. Believe that Christ is as able, so willing to subdue thine iniquities.
Thine enemies are his enemies, and he will have their death: if thou be a
believer, he has undertaken for thee. He is thy great High Priest, and thy
Lord and King; and hereupon not only by his mercifulness, and kindness; but by
his office and interest he stands engaged to pity and relieve thee: he will
not be unfaithful to his trust, nor deaf to his own bowels, which plead with
him to save and help thee.

4. By faith cast thy self upon Jesus Christ, rest upon his power, and goodness
for his help and strength. It Is here in regard of Christ's power, as in regard
of his promises. As our resting and relying upon his promises in a time of
danger and distress, makes them our own: So our resting and relying upon
Christ's power for help and support, does make it our own.

5. By faith wait upon Christ in expectation of relief, and succor against the
working and stirring of thy corruptions. Though relief come in but slowly from
him, yet wait for it, because it will most surely come in the most seasonable
time. Hereby will thou engage Christ to appear for thy help. For as nothing
does more engage the heart of a man to be helpful to another, than an
expectation of help from him: So certainly the raising up thine heart to an
expectation of relief from Christ, must needs be a great engagement unto him to
assist thee accordingly.

When Christ cured many of their bodily diseases and distempers while he lived
upon the Earth, we find their cure is still ascribed to their faith. Now what
was their faith? They believed that Christ was both able and willing to cure
them, and thereupon with confidence went unto him for cure, and so drew virtue
from him accordingly. This you may see in the poor Woman that had an issue of
blood twelve years, who came behind Christ and said, If I may but touch the hem
of his garment, I shall be whole. To whom Christ replied, Mat. 9.20.
Daughter be of good comfort, thy faith has made thee whole. This is written
as all other Scripture is, for our learning, to teach and instruct us: what
course to take for the curing of our spiritual maladies and diseases.

Have thou any foul issue of Worldliness and Covetousness, of pride or
frowardness, of passion or envy, or the like running upon thee? And would
thou be cured of them? Do as that poor Woman did: go unto Christ, set thy faith
at work on him; believe his power and willingness, let thy faith touch but the
hem of his garment, lay hold on him, cast thy self on his blood and bowels,
wait at his door, resolving not to return without a gracious answer, and then
see if this be not his answer, Son be of good comfort, thy sins are forgiven,
be thou cleansed of all thy corruptions, thy faith has made thee whole.

Having showed the Means whereby the work of Mortification may be effected. I
come now to show the Manner how it ought to be performed.

1. Our Mortification must be speedy. Begin to day, let the ax be presently
laid to the root of these trees; and whenever you feel the Devil at work,
blowing up the Coals of Lust, be instantly in arms, give not time to sin to get
head upon thee, resist it in its first motions and risings. Delays herein are
very dangerous. That Lust which at first may easily be overcome, afterward
will hardly be kept under.

Why should we not be as wife for our souls, as we are for our bodies? who
having fire cast into his bosom or house, will not presently cast it out, and
quench it? Woe to those fools who let alone these hellish fires, and trifle so
long, till it has gotten the mastery. You whose Lusts are through your own
neglects gotten up into a flame, fear le^t it be too late to quench them: fear
lest these fires having been neglected so long, should now burn to the bottom
of Hell.

Vain, wicked, wanton thoughts are evil seeds sown in our hearts by our
adversary the Devil, which if they be let alone, will insensibly grow up first
into a blade, then to an ear, and so bring forth a dismal harvest of
wickedness and wrath. And therefore our wisest course must needs be, so soon as
they are sown, speedily to weed, and pull them up by the roots. To which
agrees that of an ancient, Vitia corporis non sunt sinenda coalescere; sed in
exordiis statim enecanda sunt. Hillar. Enarrat. in Psalm 36.
We must not suffer those fleshly vices to grow and increase, but rather
destroy them in their first beginnings.

2. Our Mortification must be willing and voluntary, not forced and
constrained. The Mariner in a storm, casts away his goods, because he dares
keep them no longer; yet still his heart goes after them. And this is all the
mortification of the most, they will cast off their transgressions because they
dare do no other. Then only are we sincere in this work, when our hearts are
the first in all that opposition we make against our sins: when we pray against
them heartily; when we watch and wrestle, and strive, and resist them with all
our hearts: when our very souls long to see the blood of our Lusts; and if it
were possible we might with safety, yet our hatred against them would not
suffer them to live. They are like to do something to purpose against sin,
whose hearts do give the first charge upon them.

3. Our Mortification must be universal, extending it self to all our sinful
Lusts, with a sincere purpose not to bear with our selves in any known sin. For
most certain it is, that true mortification, and an advised remaining in the
practice of any known sin cannot possibly stand together. Therefore the Prophet
David, to testify the truth of his Mortification, says, I have refrained my
feet, Psalm. 119.101.
not from one or two, but from every evil way: he did not willingly bear with
himself in the practice of any one sin; well knowing every sin to be a
transgression of the Law. (...), and (...).
These two words, Sin and transgressio^ are convertible. Whosoever commits
sin, says the beloved Disciple John, 1 John 3.4.
transgresses the Law, for sin is the transgression of the Law; yea, every
sin, and so makes us liable to the wrath of God, to all judgments and plagues
here, and to eternal damnation hereafter. God will not spare that soul, that
will have any one of his sins spared to him. He that would have one sin spared,
would have another and another if it served his turn. He that would not have
all of Christ, would in truth have none of him. And he that would not be rid of
all sin, has no sincere mind to be rid of any.

Christ will have all or nothing: every duty must be done, or as good you did
none; ^very sin must be left, or as good you kept them all. Can thou let all
sin go but this one? even this must go too, or thy life must go for it. O
friend, set thy self against every sin, great and small, open and secret,
carnal and spiritual. Set thy self against them heartily, be willing to prosper
and overcome; and set upon them speedily, let no iniquity live a day longer,
nor sleep a night more in quiet with thee, (only remembering to go forth against
them in the strength of the Lord) and then we shall quickly find thee to be one
of Christ's mortified ones, who as thou art dead with Christ, shall certainly
live with Christ, and reign with Christ to all Eternity.

FINIS.
Josh. 24.15. As for Me and my House, we will serve the Lord.


CHAP. I. The Parts of the Text, and Observation thence arising.
THe sum of these words is, The good man's godly r^solution, to serve the Lord
with his household.

In which we may observe these particulars, 1. The person resolving, viz,
Joshua, he it is who makes this resolution. 2. The order of his resolution,
first himself will serve the Lord, and then his house. 3. The extent of his
resolution, viz. his whole house, as for me, and my house. 4. The matter
resolved on, and this is, to serve God.


Each of these might afford unto us a distinct point of Doctrine. But I shall
wave them all, and insist upon one, which as it comprehends the main scope of
the words, so it best suiteth with the scope of my intention in this discourse;
which is to press all Parents, Masters, and Governors of Families to a
constant and conscionable performance of holy, and religious duties in and with
their Families.

The point of Doctrine is this,

Observe. It is a duty incumbent upon Parents and Masters of Families, to be
careful, that not only themselves, but also all under their charge, even their
whole household, do faithfully serve the Lord.

It is not sufficient for Governors of Families to be good Christians
themselves, but they ought to be Christian Governors. Not enough to be
themselves Religious, but they must train up all under their charge in the
knowledge and practice of Religion. And the truth is, good Christians they
cannot be, who are not Christian Governors: He has little Religion himself,
that does not faithfully endeavor to propagate it in his Family. Thus Joshua
as a Master of a Family undertaketh not only for himself, but also for his
whole household, that he with them, and they with him should serve the Lord. Yea
and in all ages such as have been most eminent in grace, have been most exact
in their Family Duties; instance Abraham, the Father of the fa^thfull, of whom
God himself gives thi^ testimony, Genesis 18.19.
I know Abraham, that he will command his Children and his household after him,
that they shall keep the way of the Lord, etc. And Jacob his Grandchild
walking in the steps of his Father Abraham, was not content at Bethel to
worship God sincerely himself, Genesis 35.2.
but he charge his Family to put away the strange Gods which were among them,
and to serve the true God according to the prescribed rule of his Word. David,
though he were a King, and so had the care of an whole Kingdom upon him, yet
thought his State Affairs no privilege to exempt him from the Religious
ordering, and governing of his Family. And therefore he professes, Psalm. 101.
That he would walk within his house with a perfect heart, that is, sincerely
discharge the duties belonging to the Governor of an house. Yea under the Law,
we find that the Fathers amongst the Israelites were commanded to teach their
Children the meaning of the Passover, Exodus 12. and 13.
and of the Feast of unleavened bread.

And that we may not think this a legal precept abolished in the time of the
Gospel; the Apostle gives a general charge to all Christian Parents, to bring
up their Children in the nurture, Ephesians. 6.4.
and admonition of the Lord. Yea by the practice of the primitive Christians,
who lived in the days of the Apostles, it does appear, that so soon as any
Governor of a Family was converted and professed the Christian faith, he still
engaged his Family to serve God; Act. 10.2.
It is said of Cornelius, that he was a devout man, and one that feared God
with all his house. Act. 16.15.
And it is recorded of Lydia, that she was baptized and her Household. And it is
said of the Iaylor, ver. 34.
that he believed in God with all his house. Yea the houses of the faithful in
the primitive times were styled Romans 16.5.
Churches, which implies that their private families were so piously ordered,
and religiously instructed, 1 Cor. 16.19.
that they seemed to be little Churches, rather than, ordinary houses; having
taken up Ioshuah's resolution, As for me and my house we will serve the Lord.
Col. 4.15. Philem. v. 2.


The point being thus proved by Scripture and Examples; come we now to the
Reasons for the farther confirmation thereof.

CHAP. II. The Reasons of the point.
R. 1. MAy be taken from the command of God, who has commanded as much,
saying, Deuteronomy. 6.7.
Thou shall teach my Laws diligently unto thy Children, and shall talk of them
when thou sit in thine house, etc. And God has manifested his approbation
thereof by commending Abraham for commanding his Children, Genesis 18.19.
and household to keep the ways of the Lord. So that to whomsoever the Lord
has given this honor to make him a Father of Children, a Master over
Servants, a Governor over an Household, of them he requires this duty, to
teach, and instruct all under their charge.

R. 2. Every man's house is his private charge which he must oversee, it is his
flock which he must attend. You will all acknowledge that every Ministers flock
is his charge, and that it is a most dreadful thing for any to neglect them.
And have not you as great a charge of your family, as the Minister has of his
flock? Yea doubtless, I dare boldly say, that every Parent, and Master of a
Family, is as deeply charged with the souls of their Children, and Servants; as
the Minister is with the souls of his flock. If therefore your Children and
Servants live and dye in their sins through your negligence, their blood will
be required at your hands.

Yea let Parents, and Masters of Families know and consider, that those
Children, and Servants, who by the neglect of their duty to them, shall perish
in their sins, will curse them for ever hereafter, amongst the fiends, and
damned in hell; crying out, woe and alas that ever we were born of such
irreligious Parents; and served such wicked, and ungodly Masters, that had no
care of the Salvation of our souls; but suffered us to run headlong into these
everlasting flames. Oh that all Parents and Masters of Families would seriously
consider these things, and in time labor to prevent them, by a conscionable
discharge of the duties belonging to their places, and relations.

R. 3. Justice and equity requires this at your hands, to do your utmost
endeavor to train up your Children, and Servants in the fear of God; and to
instruct them in the ways of Godliness; that as they help you in many things,
so you should be a means to help them in this; that as God of his goodness has
made them your Children, and Servants, so you in way of gratitude, should
strive to make them his Children, and Servants. And truly though you feed them
well, and cloth them well, and provide well for them, yea and teach them how
to live another day, to live as men; yet if you teach them not withal the fear
of God, whereby they may live as Christians which will make them live for ever:
wherein do you differ from Heathenish Parents, and Pagan Masters? for even they
will not be wanting in the former things; which the Apostle implies, 1 Timothy
5.8.
where he says, He that provideth not for his Family, is worse than an
Infidel. And if you go no further, than to make outward provision for the
bodies of your Children, and Servants, you are no better than Infidels and
Heathens.

And therefore how does it concern you who are Parents, and Masters of
Families, to have a special care of the souls of your Children, and Servants,
by a conscionable performance of holy, and religious duties amongst them, as
Praying, Reading, Catechizing, and the like; whereby you will not only go
beyond all the Heathens in the World: but likewise gain an hopeful evidence to
your own souls, of the truth of grace in you; and of the sincerity of your
profession, that ye are Christians indeed.

R. 4. The curse of God hangs over those Families in which Religious duties are
altogether neglected; yea it abides in their houses; as the Wise man
expresses, The curse of the Lord is in the house of the wicked. Prove. 3.33.
Howsoever they may seem to abound, and flourish in all Worldly wealth, and
riches; yet the curse of God is upon all that they enjoy. For as the Lord
speaks by his Prophet Malachy, Mal. 2.2.
He will curse their blessings, that is, whatsoever outward good things they
did enjoy, should be cursed to them. Whereupon says Eliphas, in Job, I saw him
taking root, Job 5.3.
but I cursed his habitation, that is, I saw him seemingly settled in his
outward prosperity, but by the eye of faith I likewise saw a curse hanging over
his house, and family, over his wealth and riches.

R. 5. Another Reason may be taken from the manifold benefits and commodities,
which usually follow upon a conscionable performance of these duties,

1. Religious duties consciensciously performed, will bring down Gods blessing
upon your selves and your relations; upon your estate, and all your
undertakings. As God blessed Obed-Edom, 2 Samuel 6.11.
and all his household, for the Arks-sake. So questionless will the Lord bless
those Families wherein holy duties are faithfully performed. For Godliness is
profitable unto all things, 1. Tim. 4.8.
having the promise of this life that now is, as well as of that which is to
come. Prove. 14.11.
Whereupon says the Wise man, The house of the wicked shall be overturned; but
the Tabernacle of the upright shall flourish. And therefore the Psalmist
pronounces them blessed who thus fear the Lord saying, Blessed is he that
fears the Lord, Psalm. 128. 1, 2, 3, 4.
and walks in his ways, for thou shall eat the labor of thine hand, happy
shall thou be, and it shall be well with thee. How then can such expect a
blessing from God, either upon themselves, or upon their relations, or upon
their pains and endeavors, who do not set up God and his Worship in their
houses, seeing it is that whereby Gods blessing is entailed.

2. Those Children and Servants who are religiously educated and principled,
are likeliest to prove comforts to their Parents and Masters. What a comfort
must it needs be to thee, who art a Master of a Family, to see thy household
(through the blessing of God on thy care and pains) to be walking Heavenward?
Yea when thou come to lie upon thy deathbed; Oh what a comfort will it then
be unto thee, that thou have good ground to believe, that thy Children are Gods
Children, and the Servants of Jesus Christ? thou may then with stronger
confidence commend them unto Gods Fatherly care and protection, and with
greater assurance expect Gods blessing upon them after thy death.

3. There is no such means to make your Children loving and dutiful unto you,
and your servants faithful in the discharge of their duty; as to instruct them
in the principles of Religion, and to plant the fear of God in their hearts. In
which respect Solomon says, Prove. 15.20.
A godly Son makes a glad Father, viz. by his dutiful and respectfull carriage
toward him. And that servant who shall find true grace either first wrought,
or further increased in him by his Masters means, will endeavor with the
utmost of his power to do him what faithful service he can, in way of
thankfulness.

So that if Parents and Masters of Families, respect either that charge God
has laid upon them, whereof they are to give an account to him at the great
day: or that good and benefit, which themselves may reap thereby; they will see
good and just ground to be diligent and constant in the discharge of holy
duties with their Family.

R. V. Another reason may be taken from the manifold mischiefs, which usually
follow, and accompany the neglect of family duties.

1. From hence come all Domestic brawls and contentions; hence it is that the
house is divided against it self; Husband against Wife, and Wife against
Husband; Master against Servant, and Servant against Master; Parent against
Child, and Child against Parent; which would be prevented were the Lord better
known, and more duly worshipped amongst them. For where God is served with
perfect purity, there is perfect peace. But where God is not served, there is
no peace, but jarrs and contentions, strife and debate; which gives great
advantage unto Satan the archenemy of mankind, 1 Pet. 5.8.
who like a roaring Lion walks about continually seeking whom he may devour.

2. From hence it is that Magistrates are enforced to execute the penalties of
the Laws upon so many; namely, because they are not Religiously educated, but
suffered to have their wills in their youth. Which appears from the sad
complaints of many malefactors, at the place of Execution, against their
Parents and Masters, for their careless omission of their duty toward them;
saying, if they had had any care or conscience of our education, if they had
corrected and restrained us betimes from our wicked courses, we had never come
to this dogs-death, and shameful end.

3. From hence it is that so many Families are so dissolute and profane,
abounding with all manner of sin, and wickedness, as lying, swearing,
Sabbath-breaking, drinking, whoring, and the like: as if there were a seminary
of little Devils, an household of fiends. And truly when Families leave God in
not doing the good they should, God leaves Families to do the evil they should
not. So that sin has there free place, where Gods service has no place. And
sins of commission do usually follow sins of omission: it being ordinary with
God to punish one sin with another; to punish the neglect of duty, with the
committing of sin, by leaving men so to themselves, that they break forth into
the committing of great, and heinous sins. A general complaint there is in
these days of the undutifulness, and disobedience of Children; of the
negligence and unfaithfulness of Servants, yea and of the loose, lewd lives of
both in many Families; whereof if we would search the true ground and cause, we
shall find it rather in the superiors, than in the inferiors. For howsoever
inferiors cannot be excused, yet questionless the fault is chiefly in
superiors, and Governors, because they are careless and negligent in the
discharge of their duty toward them, not praying with them, nor Catechizing,
and instructing them, as they should. For where religious duties are shut out
of any Family, there usually the door is set wide open to looseness, and
profaneness.

4. The neglect of Religious duti^s in thy Family will make thee guilty of
Murder, even of Soul-murther, which is the greatest of all. For whereas the
Souls, as well as the bodies of thy Children, and Servants are committed to thy
care and charge; if any of them should perish through thy default, thou art
deeply guilty of their eternal death and damnation, and their blood will be
required at thy hands. As Jacob was accountable to Laban, for the ^oss of every
Lamb, or Sheep; at his hand was it required. Genesis 31 19.
So is every Master of a Family accountable to God, for every soul under his
roof. If any of them perish through his default, God will require it at his
hands. God will require the blood of thy Child, the blood of thy Servants at
thy hands one day. If therefore you will be free from the blood of your
Children, train them up in the fear and nurture of the Lord: pray for them and
with them: Catechize them, etc.

The Point being confirmed by Scripture and Reason, come we now to the Uses
thereof.

CHAP. III. The Use of Reproof of those Masters who make no Conscience of
Family Duties.
Use 1. SEeing it is a Duty incumbent upon Parents, and Masters of Families, to
be careful, that not only themselves, but also all under their charge, even
their whole Family do faithfully serve the Lord; then they are greatly to be
reproved who are neither careful to serve God themselves, neither take they
any care of their Family: but as there is no fear of God in their hearts, so
neither is there any fear of God in their Families. Yea instead of Gods
service, there is all manner of wickedness and profaneness; so that their
houses are as so many filthy cages of unclean birds, so many styes of all
manner of abominations. Of whose houses we may say what Solomon said of the
Harlots house, Prove. 7.27.
It Is the way to Hell, that is, the high and ready way unto eternal death and
condemnation. These men howsoever they would be esteemed good Masters, and good
Governors, yet are they far from such; in that they neglect the main duty
belonging to good Governors, which is to take care of the souls of those under
their charge, and willingly suffer all manner of wickedness, and profaneness, to
rule and bear sway in their Families, and that without any check or control.

I dare boldly say, it were much better for a man to put his Child into a
P^sthouse, than into such a Family: in that wickedness is more infectious than
the Plague, spreading infinitely, polluting every one it comes near. Peccatum
adeo facile alios invadit, ut nulla pestis tantopere aerem inficere potest.
Chem. Har.
And whereas the Plague and Pestilence can but kill the body, the contagion of
sin is apt to destroy both body and soul. And therefore what is usually written
upon the doors of such houses as are visited with the Plague ( Lord have mercy
upon us) may far better be written upon the doors of such houses, where through
the neglect of Family Duties, sin and wickedness does abound.

I know there are very many both Parents, and Masters, who having provided for
the bodies of those under their charge, think they have sufficiently discharged
their duty toward them. But I would demand of such, if their care be only to
provide for the bodies of their Children and Servants, what do they more to
them then to their beasts? If they only cloth them, and pay them their wages,
what do they more to them, than the Turks and Infidels (who know not God) do to
their Children, and Servants? If their care be only to provide for them an
earthly inheritance, without any care to make them Heirs of an Heavenly
inheritance, what do they more to them than Jews (who are ignorant of Christ,
and his Gospel) do for their Children?

Let such know, that it is their duty to provide not only for for perishing
Carcasses, but also for the immortal souls of all theirs. And it is a vain, and
foolish imagination for any to think, they have done their duty, when they have
apparelled, nourished, and brought up their Children and Servants; considering
they have a far greater account to make before God for their souls: of which if
any should perish through their negligence, and unfaithfullness, how dreadful
will their account be? oh what answer will they be able to make, when the blood
of their Children, and Servants souls shall be required of them?

CHAP. IV. An Exhortation unto all Parents and Masters of Families to make
Conscience of Family Duties.
Use 2. LEt the second Use be an Use of Exhortation to stir up all Christian
Parents, and Masters of Families, to be careful that their whole house do
faithfully serve the Lord, Officium pii patris familias est, liberos and
familiam educare ad pietatem, etc. Piscat. in Genesis 18.19.
as well as themselves; that they take up Ioshuah's resolution, as for me and
my house we will serve the Lord. As you would not be guilty of the blood of
your Children, and Servants souls; and as you would not have them cry out
against you in everlasting fire, see that you bring them up in the fear and
admonition of the Lord.

Every Governor should be that in the body politic of his own house, which
the heart is in the natural body of man: as it communicates life, and vital
spirits to the rest of the members. So must the Master of the household
endeavor to impart the spiritual life of grace, to all that are members of his
body politic. And his house by a constant, conscionable performance of holy
and religious duties there, should be a little Church. For the maintaining the
Worship of God makes every house to become a sanctuary, an house of God. Hence
diverse pious Governors in the new Testament are said to have Churches in their
houses, Philem. v. 6.
as Philemo^, Aquila, and Priscilla, and Nimphas, whose houses were called
Churches, 1 Cor. 16.19.
as in respect of the Saints in their houses, so in respect of the worship of
God among them. Col. 4.15.
Oh what an honor will this be to us, when upon this account, our habitations
shall be called rather Churches than private houses! Temples of God, rather
than the dwellings of men!

For the more profitable pressing of this Use, I shall show you, what be the
duties and services which are especially required of Parents and Masters of
Families in reference to those under their charge.

CHAP. V. Of Family Prayer, with quickening Motives thereunto.
I. PRayer, which is one principal part of the service of God in all Families,
and therefore ought to be performed by the Governor thereof; who as he is a
King to govern his Family, so a Priest to offer up a Morning and an Evening
Sacrifice of Prayer and praise unto God in and with his Family. This we find
commended to us in the practice of the Patriarchs, who when they removed to any
place, they builded an Altar, where God was to be called upon by the whole
Family. Thus did Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. David though a King, yet prayed
with his Household as their Governor: 2 Samuel 6.18.
for it is recorded of him, that having offered burnt-offerings, and
peace offerings before the Lord, he returned to bless his household, that is,
say Expositors, to bless God with his Family, and to beg Gods blessing on them.

In the New Testament the Apostle writing to Masters of Families concerning
their duties, adjoyneth this, continue in Prayer, Col. 4.2.
implying it to be one special duty incumbent on them to be constant in
Family Prayer. Of Cornelius it is said, Act. 10.2.
that he was one who feared God with all his house, which gave much Alms to
the people, and prayed to God always; which implies, that he prayed daily with
his Family. These examples are recorded by the Holy Ghost as Copies for us to
write after.

But for your more full conviction of that obligation that lies upon you for
the performance of this duty, let the following arguments be duly weighed.

Arg. 1. The first Argument shall be drawn from that trust that is committed
unto governors of Families. Here observe,

1. That Governors of Families are entrusted with the souls, with the Religion
of their Families: not that they may prescribe unto them, or impose upon them
what way of Religion they please: or that inferiors may be excused by the
errors or neglects of the Superiors: but it is committed to their care, and
they have received a charge from the Lord, to look diligently to all that are
under them; that they duly worship God, observe his ordinances, and keep ^^s
statutes.

That there is such a care incumbent on them is evident under the Law, the
Master of the Family was by the appointment of God, to look to the circumcising
of all the Males of his house, Genesis 17. 10, etc.
both those that were born in his house, and those that were bought with his
money. In the fourth commandment, the Master of the Family is charged, not only
to keep the Sabbath in his own person, Exodus 20.10.
but to look to his family also. Thou shall do no work therein, that is not all,
nor thy Son, nor thy Daughter, nor thy Manservant, nor thy Maidservant, etc.
Suitable to this charge is the care and holy resolution of Joshua in the Text,
I and my house will serve the Lord. Choose you whom you will serve, says he,
to the rest of the people, I have not so much to do with that, but as for me
and my house, I must and will look to that, we will serve the Lord. Hence this
first thing appears, that governors of Families are to take care of the
Religion, and therrefore of the souls of their Families. When a Child is
brought forth, when a Servant is brought into thine house, God says to thee as
the man in the Prophets Parable, 1 King 20.39.
Keep this man, look to this Child, look to this Servant, look to their souls,
if they miscarry, or be lost through thy neglect, Thy life shall go for their
lives, thy soul for their souls, and so shall thy judgment be.

2. Governors of Families have never faithfully discharged their trust till
they have used all means which God has appointed, that may be for the
advantage of the souls under their charge, and the furtherance of them in
Religion. If there be any thing you might have done that you have neglected,
you are therein unfaithful.

3. Their joining in Prayer with their Families, is according to Gods
appointment, and of great advantage to souls.

1. Ioynt-prayer is an ordinance of God. Thus much is hinted clearly enough in
that form of Prayer, which Christ taught his Disciples, which runs in the
plural number, Act. 12.12, etc.
Our Father, Give us this day our daily bread. And from the practice of the
primitive Christians. Now if Christians in general, such as were not of the
same Family are by Gods appointment to join in Prayer; then much more
Christians of the same family. Conjunction in the same Family-relation cannot
hinder or discharge from any part of Christian communion. Families as well as
greater assemblies should not forget their joynt-prayers.

2. Conjunction in Prayer, as it is Gods Ordinance, so it is of great advantage
to souls. The joint prayers of the several persons in a Family, are more
acceptable to God, and more prevalent with him, than the Prayers of the same
persons apart.

There Is the same reason for the prevalency of the joynt-prayers of Christians
of the same Family, as of the joynt-Prayers of Christians not of the same
Family; of the same City, or Town, or Country. Now we find in Scripture from
the practice of the people of God, that this was their concurrent judgment;
that their coming together to pray, would prevail more with God, than their
praying apart, as Act. 12.12. before mentioned. Many were gathered together in
Mary's house praying for Peter. If it had been all one as to the probability of
the success, If the Lord had been as likely to have been prevailed with, for
Peter's enlargment, by their separate as by their joint Prayers, they would
never have run that hazard, as they did, by their coming together. They knew
well enough what danger it would have been, had they been taken praying. Many
instances might be brought of the like practice of Christians in all ages, who
especially in cases of great exigencies and necessities did thus assemble.
Whence is a clear foundation of this argument. That way of Prayer which the
people of God did choose, and betake themselves to in cases of any special
exigencies, that was in their judgment the most acceptable and prevailing. But
joint Prayer is such, in the case of greater societies, and therefore also in
the less.

Besides, joynt-prayers will be of this advantage, It will be a great help to
those that are less able, to teach them to pray apart. Governors should teach
theirs to pray, Longum iter per precepta, breve per exempla.
as Christ taught his Disciples. And how should they teach them? by instruction
only! We may learn more of the skill, and Spirit of Prayer, by a few
instructions exemplified, than by multitudes of counsels alone. The Nurse
teaches the Child to speak by speaking in its hearing. By this Christian
practice we shall suggest matter of Prayer to them, put words into their
mouths, yea kindle desires in their hearts. Who that has any experience knows
not, how our affectionate enlargements, and importunate pleadings, and
wrestlings with God in Prayer, do often warm and enlarge the hearts of those
that join with us.

Arg. 2. Its the will of God that Christians should take and improve all
opportunities, advantages, and occasions of Prayer. This proposition if it need
proof, (...). Per omnimodam precationem. A. Lapid.
is sufficiently evident from 1 Timothy 2.8. I will that men Pray every where, and
Ephesians. 6.18. Praying always with all Prayer. Always, or as it is in the Greek,
on every opportunity; with All Prayer, with all manner of Prayer: in public,
in private, in secret, alone, together, as opportunity is offered and occasion
requires. Now have not governors of Families, as such, special opportunities
for joynt-Prayer? Their cohabitation, upon which they may meet more easily and
frequently, than those that live at a greater distance; their authority by
virtue whereof they may command the attendance of their families, puts
opportunities into their hands.

And have they not also, as such, special occasions of joining in Prayer? there
are Family-mercies which they are jointly concerned to pray for when wanted,
and to acknowledge when received: There are Family-afflictions and crosses
which they are in common concerned to pray against: there are Family sins which
call for joynt-confessions, and humiliations. Those that have sinned together,
or suffer together, or are sharers in the same common mercies, ought also to
join together in the same confessions, petitions, and thanksgivings.

Arg 3. From the example of Christ, who not only taught his Family to Pray, but
prayed with them. His Disciples were his Family. The Passover was to be eaten
by the several Families apart, a Lamb for a Family. And if you would know who
were Christ's Family, enquire with whom he are the Passo^ver, these are his
^isciples, Matthew. 26.18, etc. Luke 9.18.
and with these he prayed; As he was alone praying, his Disciples were with
him. But how was he alone when his Discipl^s were wi^h him? the meaning only
is, he was withdrawn from the multitude; he and his Disciples were privately
together, and with them he prays.

Now to gather up all together. If the example of Christ be obliging to his
followers: if governors of Families have opportunities and occasions of
joining in Prayer with them; and it be the will of God that they take, and
improve all opportunities and occasions: if governors of Families be entrusted
with the souls of their Families, and this trust cannot be discharged, where
this exercise is neglected, then must it be acknowledged that it is a duty
incumbent on them from the Lord, and that they sin against God, who make no
conscience of it.

To what has been said, let me farther add these two things,

1. Consider the manifold benefits which usually follow and accompany this duty
of Family Prayer.

1. It is a sanctifying Ordinance: thereby the Husband is sanctified to the
wife, and the wife to the husband, so that they prove blessings and comforts
each to other. Children likewise are blessed and sanctified to their Parents;
and Servants to their Masters. Yea Family Prayer produces Gods blessing upon
their callings, and enjoyments, upon their losses and crosses, both are thereby
blessed and sanctified unto them.

2. Family Prayer, as it is a sanctifying ordinance, so it is a seasoning
ordinance; it seasons the whole house with the fear of God. It is recorded of
Cornelius, that he was a devout man, one that feared God with all his house,
who prayed to God always: his constant course of praying with his Family,
questionless did season his whole house with the fear of God. As Prayer-less
Families are for the most part destitute of the fear of God: so in those
Families where a constant course of Praying is kept up, there the hearts of
many are seasoned with the true fear of God. Genesis 24.11.
As Abraham was a Praying-master, so he had praying-servants. For inferiors
are very apt to write after the Copy of their Superiors, and to follow their
example. Thus by a praying Master, Children and Servants are taught to Pray.

3. Family Prayer is a special preservative against common calamities. Polanus
in his Syntagm, relates how in the year 1584. there was such a terrible
Earthquake that overthrew all the houses in a whole Town in Switzerland, save
one, wherein the Master of the Family was at the same time praying with his
Wife, Children and Servants. If God does not preserve praying-families from
those common judgments and calamities which befall others, yet he will so
sanctify those calamities unto them, that they shall turn to their good;
according to that gracious promise, Romans 8.28.
All things shall work together for good, to them that love God.

V. Consider the manifold mischiefs that usually sollow and accompany the
neglect of Family Prayer. As,

1. Neglect of Family Prayer is usually accompanied with the neglect of all
other Religious duties, which is found true by sad experience. For, whoever
heard that the Scriptures were read, or Catechizing used in any Family where
Prayer was omitted? So that Prayer-less houses are as Sepulchers wherein all
Religion lies buried.

2. Neglect of Family Prayer expos^th the whole household to the wrath and fury
of God, as the Prophet Jeremiah implies, Jer. 10.25.
where he says, Pour out thy fury upon the Heathen that know thee not, and
upon the Families that call not upon thy name. Where by the fury of God, is
meant his wrath in the highest degree, his anger boiled up to the height. Oh
who can abide this scalding wrath? And by pouring out Gods fury, is meant Gods
inflicting his fierce wrath in the greatest measure, in the highest degree. The
words though they are set down in the form of a Prayer, yet they are a
prediction (as well as a petition) of Gods dreadful wrath and fury, to be
undoubtedly inflicted upon all Prayerless-families. For the Prophet put up this
Prayer unto God, as foreseeing the certain ruin and destruction of such
Families, as called not upon the name of the Lord: He knew that God would
assuredly pour out his fury upon their Families, who did not pour out their
souls unto him. Oh that all Masters and Governors would seriously think, and
meditate on this fearful imprecation of the Prophet against all
Prayerless-families; that so they might dread the omission of so necessary a
duty, as much as the scorching wrath and fury of God; yea as the scorching fire
of hell: for what is hell it self, but the feeling of this wrath and fury of
God?

I shall close this with answering three Questions, and as many Objections.

1. Q. How often should we Pray with our Families?

A. 1. Every day. For first our Savior has intimated so much unto us in his
platform of Prayer, by teaching us to Pray for our daily bread, in these
words, Give us this day our daily bread; that is, bread needful for the
present day. And in regard we daily stand in need of bread, therefore our
Savior would have us pray daily for the same.

2. Have you not daily wants to be supplied? wants for your selves, and wants
for your Children, and Servants? Have you not daily infirmities in your Family
to be healed? Are you not daily subject to dangers and temptations? And do you
not daily sin against God? Is it not necessary then that you daily Pray unto
God, for the supply of all your wants, for the healing of all your infirmities,
for the preventing of the dangers you are daily subject unto, for the
strengthening you against all your temptations, for the pardoning of all your
sins. Surely our daily wants, our daily infirmities, our daily dangers, our
daily temptations, and our daily sins, do all call upon us for daily prayers.

And as you and yours daily partake of Gods mercies, is it not just and equal,
that you all should daily bless God for the same? The truth is, every day
supplyeth new matter both of Prayer and praise, and therefore there is just
cause daily to offer up our Sacrifice of Prayer and praise unto God.

2. Q. How often in each day are we bound to pray with our Families?

A. Family Prayer ought to be performed twice at least, viz. In the Morning and
in the Evening.

1. For first this is commended unto us by the Morning and Evening Sacrifice
under the Law, Exodus 29.38, 39.
which we find given in command unto the Jews. And are not Christians under the
Gospel, as well as those under the Law, obliged to offer up their Morning and
Evening Sacrifice?

2. Equity requires this duty at your hands; as the mercies of God are renewed
upon you and yours every Morning, and the showers of his compassion fall down
upon you every night, so you should not forget to offer up both a Morning, and
an Evening Sacrifice of Prayer, and praise unto him, who is so continually
mindful of you.

3. Q. What time in the Morning and Evening is fittest for the performance of
Family Prayer?

A. For this no certain rule can be prescribed, in regard of the several
occasions which may fall out in a Family; and by reason of age, sickness and
the like in the Governors thereof. Yet it were to be wished that the Morning
Sacrifice (if possibly) may be betimes in the Morning, before Servants go about
the works of their calling; as being the fittest time for holy exercises, when
the Spirits are freshest, and freest from Wordly thoughts and distractions.

And it were to be wished, that the Evening Sacrifice may be before Supper, in
regard that afterward we are generally more heavy and sleepy; and will find it
more difficult to keep up our hearts, and spirits in the duty.

Having thus resolved the Questions, come we now to the Objections raised
against the duty of Family Prayer.

CHAP. VI. Objections against Family Prayer, Answered.
1. Obj. SOme Object their inability to pray, they know not how to perform the
duty.

A. 1. Let the sense of thine own weakness drive thee unto God for power, and
strength. Beg of him that he would by his Spirit help thine infirmities,
teaching thee to pour out thy soul unto him in Prayer. For it is he alone that
can teach thee, Romans 8.26.
and endue thee with this Heavenly gift.

2. Be constant in thy secret devotions, which will be a special means to
embolden thee to pray with thy Family. For when thou find that thou can
express thy self in any competent measure in secret, thou will then the better
adventure to Pray in private, with thy Family. And know this for thy comfort,
that if thou sincerely endeavourest to do what thou can, God will enable thee
to do what thou should.

3. Rather than the apprehension of thine own insufficiency to pray, should
occasion a constant omission of the duty, I would advise thee to use the help
of a form of Prayer for a while, till by Gods blessing, thou have attained some
ability therein, and boldness thereunto.

2. Obj. Some against this duty object their multitude of business, and little
spare time for Family Prayer.

A. 1. The more and greater thy businesses are, the more and greater need thou
have of Family Prayer, for the obtaining Gods blessings thereon: without which
all thy pains and endeavors may signify little, yea prove succesless. Assure
thy self that the time spent in Prayer, both in thy closet, and with thy
Family, will prove no let, but rather a great furtherance to thy business.

2. Do thou put off praying with thy Family for the multitude of business?
Know that therein thou art penny-wise, and pound-foolish, hazarding the loss of
thy precious and immortal soul for the gaining of a little Worldly pelf, which
will be soon taken from thee, or thou from it: Oh that such Wo^^d^ngs would
seriously consider that expression of our Savior* Mark 8 36.
What shall it profit a man, if h^ shall gain the who^e World, and lose his own
soul?

3. Do thou put off Family Prayer for the multitude of Worldly bu^inesse^,
thereby to increase thy wealth? Know that that wealth is cursed, which is thus
gotten; that substance which is the price of a Prayer may for ought thou
know be the price of blood.

Well, beware thou neglect not this great duty upon any pretense whatsoever.
Neither let it be performed after a cold, formal, and perfunctory manner: but
be very serious, and fervent therein, stirring up thy self to an active, lively
performance thereof, which the Apostle intimates, where he says, Be fervent
in Spirit, serving the Lord; and that for two reasons.

1. Such Prayers only are acceptable and pleasing unto God, these are the
Sacrifices wherewith he is well-pleased. 2. Such only have the promise of being
heard. And thereupon says the Apostle St. James, Jam. 5.16.
The effectual fervent Prayer of a right^ous man avails much. The word in the
Greek translated effectual, properly signifies a prayer excited, (...)
or stirred up: and so implies both the efficacy and influency of the
Holy Ghost, and the vehemence of an earnest spirit and affection, which is the
only prevailing Prayer.
CHAP. VII. Of Reading the Holy Scriptures in Families, with quickening Motives
thereunto.
II. ANother duty incumbent upon Parents and Masters of Families, is frequently
to read the Holy Scriptures, or to cause them to be read in and with their
Families. Though this be a distinct exercise from the former, of Prayer: yet do
they mutually help one another, and therefore are fit to be joined together.

Exodus 30.7, 8.
We read how the Priest under the Law was daily to light the Lamps, and to burn
incense; as the Lamp signified the Word of God, so the incense signified
Prayer. And as the Lamp was daily to be lighted, and the incense daily to be
burned, so are we thereby taught, daily to join the Word and Prayer together;
for as the Apostle speaks, By the Word and Prayer every thing is sanctified.
1 Timothy 4.5.
Yea this duty of reading the Word we find given in command unto householders
under the Law, for says the Lord, Exodus 11.28.
Ye shall lay up my words, (meaning the words of the Law) in your heart, and in
your soul. And ye shall teach them your Children, speaking of them when thou
sitest in thine house, when thou lie down, and when thou risest up, which
implies a diligent reading of the Word in their houses. Yea the old people of
the Jews were so diligent in teaching their Children the Word of God, that
Josephus says, Nostrorum quilibet de legibus interrogatus, facilius quam nomen
suum recitat universas, Josephus lib. 2. contra Appionem.
Every one of our people being asked concerning the Laws, rehearses them more
easily than his own name.

In the New Testament we have the Apostles command for this duty, for says he,
Col. 3.16. (...).
Let the Word of Christ dwell in you richly. The Word is sometimes taken for
Joh. 1.1. (...).
Christ himself, and so it is true, that we should labor that the word Christ
should dwell in us. But by the Word of Christ is here meant the written Word of
God, which is here called the Word of Christ, both because he is the author of
it, and because he is the chief subject of it. And whereas the Apostle says,
Let the Word of Christ dwell in you, it is a Metaphor taken from such as dwell
under one and the same roof with us, and notes two things, 1. That we must get
it into our hearts, and houses as well as into our Churches. 2. That by our
frequent reading of it, and causing it to be read in our houses, it should be
as familiar with us, as one that dwells with us under the same roof.


For the better pressing of this duty upon the Consciences of Parents and
Masters of Families; I shall hint only two Motives to quicken you up thereunto.

1. The knowledge of the Scriptures will be an excellent means to keep up your
authority in your Families, over your Children and Servants. For therein they
cannot but hear, and understand, it is their duty to be obedient to you in all
things. Your own commands and threatenings may perhaps cause them to serve you
with eye-service, as menpleasers^; but to hear the commands and threatenings of
God in his Word, may cause them to serve you in singleness of heart. So that if
nothing else, yet policy, methinks, should prevail with you to cause the Word
of God to be read frequently in your houses.

2. Some by reading the Scriptures, others by hearing it read in the Family,
have been converted from the state of nature, to the state of grace. For faith
may be wrought in us by hearing the Word read, as well as hearing it Preached.
St. Austine reports of an Egyptian Monk who living in a Christian-family,
August. Prolog. lib. 1. de Doctrina Christi.
where the Word of God was frequently read, was thereby converted to the
Christian faith.

And indeed there is a greater virtue in the holy Scriptures, than in any other
book, for the working of conversion in the hearts of natural Men and Women. Oh
what an encouragement should this be unto Parents and Masters of Families, to
cause the holy Scriptures to be frequently read in their houses! for what know
they whether some under their charge may not thereby be converted.

And that your reading may be the more profitable, observe these few directions.

1. Before you read, lift up your heart unto God in some short Prayer,
beseeching him who is the Father of light, to enlighten the blind eyes of your
understandings, that you may understand what you read, so to strengthen your
memories, that you may remember it, and that he would give you. Wisdom to
apply, faith to believe, and grace to practice what you read.

Which Prayer is necessary before reading, because as the Apostle speaks, 1
Cor. 2.14.
Naturally we understand not the things of the Spirit of God, neither can we
know them, because they are spiritually discerned. And it is only the Spirit of
God that reveals them unto us, which we have no hope to attain, but by
fervent Prayer.

2. The Word must be read and heard with all holy reverence and attention, as
being the Word of the great God, whereby he reveals himself and his will
clearly unto us, for the building us up in all grace and Godliness.

3. In reading every one ought to take special notice of such passages as are
either more weighty in themselves, or proper to them, for their particular
cases, use and occasion.

4. In reading, or hearing any portion of Scripture, let every one apply it to
himself as spoken to him. By this means may every one be much edified by every
part of the Word of God.

CHAP. VIII. Of Family-Catechising with quickening Motives thereunto.
III. ANother duty incumbent upon Parents, and Masters of Families in reference
to those under their charge, is to instruct them in the principles of Religion
in a Catechistical way. (...), rudimenta Religionis docere.
For to Catechize is to teach the first principles of Christian Religion,
whereby they who are young may be acquainted with God betimes.

This we find given in command unto Householders under the Law, Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7.
for says the Lord, Th^se words which I command thee this day shall be in
thine heart, and thou shall teach them diligently unto thy Children, and shall
talk of them when thou sit in thine house, and when thou walk by the
way, and when thou lie down, and when thou risest up. Where by Children are
not meant only natural Children, but likewise servants, it being usual with the
Hebrews by Children to understand all under subjection. We have a Prophecy
that there shall be, Psalm. 72.17.
as it were, a succession of Christ's name from generation to generation; His
name shall end^re sor ever, his name shall be continued as long as the Sun,
Filiabitur nomen ejus, sive propagabitur.
or as the phrase imports, His name shall pass from Father to Son. Every Father
then must by Christian instruction declare the name of Christ to his Son, that
so the name of Christ may pass from Father to Son, from generation to
generation: which prophecy concerns the time of the Gospel, Ephesians. 6.4. (...).
wherein Parents are commanded to bring up their Children in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord; or to nurture them up in instruction, as the word in
the Greek properly signifies.

This duty is commended to us by the example of Godly Householders in all ages.
I know, says God of Abraham, Genesis 18.19.
that he will command his Children and his Household after him, to keep the way
of the Lord. We likewise find David often instructing his Son Solomon, 1 Chronicles.
28.9.

And that this was the practice of the Saints in the time of the Gospel,
appears from the expressions of the Apostle, Heb. 5.12. Heb. 6.1.
Ye have need that one teach you again which be the first principles of the
Oracles of God. And leaving the principles of the doctrine of Christ; which
imply a form of Catechism, which was used by the Christians in those days. And
oh that all Christian Parents, and governors of Families in our days, would
make conscience of instructing, and teaching their Children, and Servants in
the principles of Religion, out of some good Catechism, Observing these two
Caveats.

1. That this duty be done frequently, on some day or days every week. 2. That
it be done by little at once, for to be too long, or tedious therein is apt to
dull the understanding, and to cause wearisomeness in the learner.
For the better pressing this duty I shall add a few motives or arguments,

Pro. 22 6. Quo semel est imbuta recens servabit odore^ Testa diu. Horat. ad
Lollium Epist. lib. 1. Ep. 2.
I. The first Argument or Motive may be taken from the benefits which will
follow thereupon;

1. Timely instruction will season their hearts that they are like to be better
for it all the days of their lives; and therefore says the Wise man, Trai^ up
(or as the Word signifies, Catechize) a child in the way he should go, and
when he is old he will not depart from it. But as a Vessel will retain long the
savor of that liquor it was seasoned first withal. So will men, the
instructions they have learned in their youth.

2. It is an excellent means to keep them from the errors and heresies of the
times: For Children well Catechized, and instructed in the principles of
Religion, are in great measure antidoted against the danger of seducing
doctrines. 1 Cor. 11.19. Mat. 16.6.
The Apostle says, There must be heresies, which are of a spreading nature,
and therefore by our Savior compared to Leaven.

What better preservative against the infection of false doctrines, errors,
and heresies, than to be well Catechized? Observe who they be that are easiest
seduced by false teachers, who they are that have embraced their erroneous
tenets, and you shall find, that they were such, who were never well
Catechized, nor grounded in the principles of Religion. As therefore you would
not have your Children, and Servants poisoned with the erroneous Doctrines of
false teachers, do your endeavors to get them well rooted and grounded in the
knowledge of the truth.

3. It is an excellent means to make them hear the public Ministry of the Word
with more profit. For thereby they will be enabled to Examine the Doctrine
which they hear, by the analogy of faith. It is foretold, that in the latter
days there shall be false teachers, 2 Pet. 2.1.
who shall privily bring in damnable heresies; And therefore we are not to
receive all for truth, which is delivered in the Pulpit, but as the Apostle
exhorts us, 1 These. 5.21.
to prove and try all things, and to hold fast only that which is good, which
we shall never be able to do, unless we be first well Catechized, and
instructed in the principles of Religion; as also well acquainted with the
Scriptures.

If therefore you who are Parents, and Masters of Families would discharge your
duty herein: how would Errors vanish? Religion flourish? and how would
knowledge and grace abound in your Children and Servants?

II. Another argument may be taken from the manifold damages, which usually
follow a neglect of Family Catechizing.

1. It is the ground of that ignorance, and spiritual blindness which
overfloweth this Nation. For as darkness proceeds from the want of light, so
ignorance must needs proceed from the want of teaching.

2. It is the ground of that looseness and profaneness that is in many
Families. For where Gods service has no place, there sin will be sure to have
free place. Where the light of knowledge is not set up by Catechizing, there
the deeds of darkness will be sure to break forth. Where there is no sp^aking
to God by Prayer, nor speaking of God by Catechizing, you may be sure, there
will be speaking against God, and all the ways of holiness.

4. It is the ground of that barrenness, and unfruitfulness under the Means of
grace, that is to be found amongst many in these days. For were Children and
Servants better Catechized, they would better understand the mysteries of the
Gospel; and much more profit by the Ministry of the Word, than they do. It is
found by experience that the most intelligent and best practiced hearers are
such, as have been well Catechized, and instructed? The seed which thou thus
timely sowest, will spring up to a plentiful harvest.

4. Such Parents, and Masters as neglect this duty, do what in them lies to
damn their Children, and Servants as well as themselves. For how can it be
expected but that those Children and Servants, who through want of the light of
knowledge walk in darkness, should unavoidably stumble into hell? Oh that so
many Parents and Masters should be so cruel and unnatural to their Children and
Servants, as to neglect this duty! the blood of souls is upon you.

Obj. Against this so necessary a duty, some are apt to object and say, To what
purpose should we Catechize our Children, considering that through the
tenderness of their years, they are not capable of the Mysteries of Salvation?

A. 1. Though Children are not so capable of apprehending clearly the mysteries
of salvation, as they will be afterward: yet none can deny them to understand
so much as to be capable of the seeds of grace, which daily experience
confirms.

2. It is found by sad experience, that Children uncatechised, as they grow in
years, so they grow in sin and wickedness: whereby they become more backward
and untoward to the learning of any thing that is good, yea and opposite
thereunto. If you do not, the Devil will Catechize them betimes, and of him
they will quickly learn. O prevent as much as may be that enemies sowing his
tares: be before hand with him: take the first season to cast in your good
seed. The first season is the fittest season.

Obj. Should we constantly observe these Religious exercises in our Families,
which you thus press upon us, we should hinder our servants work, and thereby
hazard our estates, and so show our selves worse than Infidels.

A. 1. This is a mere delusion of Satan to keep you from the discharge of your
duty. For know assuredly that the time spent in religious exercises with your
Family, is so far from hindering your servants work, that it will rather
further it, and bring such a blessing upon it, that shall return upon your
selves. For profit, and increase is the gift of God, who will give it to such
as fear him, and observe his commandments. Oh then say not of Family Duties, as
Judas did of that ointment, which Mary poured on our Saviors feet, why is this
waste? Think not that time waste and lost, which is spent in the service of
God, and in the performance of the duties of your places and relations.

2. A wilful neglect of Family Duties is like to bring the curse of God upon
your estates, yea upon your selves, and all that belong unto you. Read what
Moses says in Deuteronomy. 28.15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.

3. Who can produce the man that did really suffer in his estate by the loss of
that time, which he spent with, and for God? Surely as the whetting of the
Sithe is no hinderance, but rather a furtherance of the Workman: So the
exercises of Religion can be no hinderance to your Family-affairs, but rather a
great furtherance, Psalm. 127.1, 2.
unless you think this an hinderance, to stay to take Gods blessing along with
you; without which what are all your own and servants pains but vain, and
fruitless?

4. Suppose you should suffer somewhat in your estate by the loss of that time
which you spend upon Religion: you will have no cause to repent thereof. For
whilst others with Martha, Luke 10.41, 42.
are careful and troubled about Worldly things, thou with Mary have chosen the
better part. Thou have lost a little of thy Temporals, to gain Spirituals and
Eternals for thy self and thine. Quae insania est, o miserrimi! ut haeredes
alios faciatis, vos ipsos exhaeredetis: ut alios relinquatis vel brevi divites,
vos ipsos aeterna mendicitate dam^ctis? Salv.
How wise are those men who prefer Temporals before their Eternals, and will
advance their estates upon the ruins of their souls?

CHAP. IX. Of Sabbath sanctification in Families.
IV. ANother duty incumbent upon Parents, Masters, and governors of Families
is, To look to the sanctification of the Lord's Day, to see that the Christian
Sabbath be sanctified as by themselves, so by their whole Family, even by all
under their charge. This is expressly enjoined in the fourth Commandment, which
is directed not so much to Children and Servants, as to Parents and Masters of
Families, who are there commanded, not only in their own persons, to keep holy
the Sabbath day; but to see that their Children, and Servants do it also. For
thus the Commandment runs, The seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God;
Exodus 20.10.
In it thou shall not do any work, Thou, nor thy Son, nor thy Daughter, thy
Manservant, nor thy Maidservant. Which Phrase (as Zanchy well notes)
implies that it is the duty of Parents, Zanch. in 4. Praeceptum.
and Masters of Families to see, that their Children, and Servants do not any
way profane the Sabbath Day, but that they keep it as an holy rest.

The sanctification of the Sabbath consists, 1. In a resting upon the day. 2.
In a consecrating that rest to the Worship and service of God.


Therefore it is the duty of all Parents, and Masters of Families to take care,
that both themselves, and all under their charge, do keep it, 1. As a day of
rest. 2. As an holy rest.


I. As a day of rest, resting in special from all the works of their ordinary
calling. The very name Sabbath (which in Hebrew signifies rest) and the
express prohibition in the fourth Commandment of doing any work on that day, do
show that it is a day of rest.

How blameworthy then are some Masters, who contrary to the express command of
God, do set their Servants about the ordinary work of their calling on the
Lords day. Let such know that what is got by their Servants work on that day,
is but the gain of wickedness, which will prove their loss at last.

II. It is the duty of Masters to take care, that their Families keep the Lords
day as an holy rest, by consecratng that time which they set apart from their
Worldly business, to the worship and service of God, in the duties belonging to
such an holy day. For the Sabbath was not simply ordained, that we, and our
servants should rest from our bodily labor, but that we should in a special
manner worship God on that day. So much is employed both in the first and last
words of the fourth Commandment. In the beginning it is said Remember the
Sabbath day to keep it holy. And in the close it is added, The Lord blessed the
Sabbath day, and hallowed it, that is, sanctified it, and set it apart to be
wholly consecrated to him, and to his worship and service.

That Parents and Masters of Families may the better discharge their duty
herein, observe these directions,

1. Look that your Children and Servant go with you to the Ministry of the
Word, and let none be left behind, without necessary and urgent occasion; It
being the ordinary means God has sanctified for the reforming of their lives,
and the saving of their souls. When Jacob went to Bethel to Worship, Genesis 35.2,
3.
he took his whole household with him. When Elka^ah went up to offer unto the
Lord his Sacrifice, 1 Samuel 1.21.
all his house went with him. In like manner do thou carry thy household with
thee to the house of God.

2. After the public Ordinances be careful to call together all under thy
charge, and let there be a repetition of the Sermons Preached, either by thy
self, or some one of thy Family, who can write best: And then examine them one
after another, What they remember of the Sermons they have heard, laboring to
make them plain unto them, and to apply them also. Thus did our blessed Savior
with his beloved Disciples, for after his Preaching, when he was come home, he
said unto them, Mat. 13.51.
Have ye understood all these things, which ye have heard. Mark 4.34
And Mark says, When they were alone, he expounded all things to his
Disciples. Whereupon one observes, Christus suo exemplo, etc. Chemnit. exam.
That Christ by his example does instruct every Master of a Family how to carry
himself in reference to those under his charge, on the Lords days, after their
departure from the public Congregation.

And truly much good will hereby redound, as unto your selves, so likewise unto
all under your charge. For, 1. It will make them give better attention unto the
Ministry of the Word, when they know they shall be called to an account, and
examined what they have heard. 2. It would much help and confirm as your selves
so your Children and Servants in the understanding and believing of what has
been delivered publicly by the Minister, if you would repeat and search the
proofs of Scripture, which were brought for the confirmation of the doctrine.


III. Another du^y to be performed in and with your Families for the better
sanctification of the Lords day, is singing of Psalms, which as it was much
practiced by the Saints and people of God of old under the Law; so is it both a
lawful and a meet thing to be used by Christians now under the Gospel, and
that as publicly in the Church, so privately in the Family.

1. We find it was an ancient custom of the people of God to sing Psalms in
their Families, according to that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 118.15.
the voice of rejoicing is in the Tabernacle of the righteous: that is, in the
dwelling places and houses of good men. 2. We have our Savior herein for a
pattern, of whom it is recorded, that after the eating of the Passover, Mat.
26.30.
which was in a private house, he sung a Psalm with his Family.
IV. Another duty to be performed in and with your Family, for the better
^anctification of the Lords day, is Reading some part of the holy Scriptures,
whereof before Chap. VII. As also some good Sermon, or Treatise of practical
truths.

V. Another duty is Family Prayer. Whereof before Chap. VI.

VI. Another is, Catechizing those under your charge, whereof see Chap. VIII. A
conscionable performance of these will exceedingly help forward the
sanctification of the Lords day, and that without tediousness.

VII. Another duty incumbent on Parents, and Masters, is godly conference.
Conferring before your Children and Servants about some good and profitable
matter, especially of the Sermons you have heard. The counsel which the Apostle
gives concerning our words, and discourses, as it ought to be carefully
observed and followed by us at all times, so especially on the Lords day. Ephesians.
4.29.
Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouths, but that which is
good, to the use of edi^^ing; that is, to the winning of them who are not
converted, or to the further building up of those who are already converted.

And the Prophet Isaiah forbids the speaking our Isa. 58.13.
own words on the Sabbath day, that is, all discourses which are merely
Worldly, and about earthly things, more than charity and necessity requires;
Under which prohibition, of not speaking our own words, is employed a direction
to speak the word of God, or those things which tend to the honor of God, and
the spiritual good of others.

VIII. That you may the better discharge your duty in looking to the
sanctification of the Lords day; Be sure you suffer none under your roof to
spend any part thereof, either in idleness, or in sports and pastimes.

1. Not i^ idleness, it being not a day of idleness, but of spiritual action.

2. Not in sports and pastimes, especially such as tend to carnal and sensual
delight. For the Lord has forbidden every man the following his own pleasure
on his holy day. Isa. 58.13.
And the truth is, sports and pastimes are greater impediments to the worship
and service of God, than the ordinary works of our calling, in that they do
more subtly steal away the heart from holy duties than those do. Quanto
melius est arare quam salt are in Sabbato. Aug. in Enarratio^em tituli Psalm 91.
Whereupon St. Austin thought it better to plow on the Lords day, than to dance
and sport.

Obj. Some Object and plead the hard labor their servants have undergone the
week before, and thence think they may be allowed a little recreation on the
Lords day.

A. 1. The rest of the Lords day is the best and fittest recreation for the
refreshing of their bodies who have been tired with labor the six days
before. And if they be spiritually minded, the best and fittest recreation for
the refreshing of their souls is singing of Psalms, the perusing their
spiritual evidences for Heaven, the solacing themselves in the meditation of
Christ, of what he has done and suffered for them, holy conference, and the
like.

2. If you think bodily recreations necessary for your servants health, why do
you not rather allow them some part of your own time on the week-dayes, than to
rob God of any part of his day, which he has wholly appropriated to the duties
of his Worship and service. Whereas the Lord might have reserved six days for
himself, and allowed but one unto us, he has dealt so bountifully and
graciously with us, as to reserve but one to himself, and leave six for our
business. And shall we be so ungrateful as to encroach upon it, and
Sacrilegiously steal away some part of that small time which he has reserved
to himself, for our Servants recreation?

CHAP. X. Of Exemplary lives in Parents and Masters of Families.
V. ANother duty incumbent on Parents, and Masters of Families is, To show
themselves patterns of piety, and Godliness unto their Children, and Servants
by an holy, and righteous conversation; That they may say unto them, Judge. 7.17.
as Gideon did to his followers, look on me, and do likewise. This we find
practiced by Abraham, of whom God himself gives this Testimony, Genesis 18.19.
I know Abraham, that he will command his Children, and his household after him
to keep the way of the Lord. Whereby is employed, that Abraham would go before
his household, in keeping the way of the Lord, and they would follow after him.
And Joshua testifies as much of himself, Josh. 24.15.
As for me and my house we will serve the Lord; He would be a pattern of piety
and Godliness unto his household, and they should follow his good example. And
David likewise resolves as much for himself, Psalm. 101.2.
for says he, I will walk within my house with a perfect heart, intending to
become a pattern of piety and Godliness to his household by an holy and
righteous conversation.

The better to quicken up Parents and Masters of Families hereunto. I shall
hint a few Arguments, and Motives.

1. Your lives are looked upon as Presidents, your examples as rules, by your
Children and Servants: and therefore you ought to be exemplarily holy, and
religious. What the Wise man says of one sin in a Ruler, If a Ruler hearken to
lies, all his servants are wicked, is true in other sins: If a ruler, or master
of a Family be a swearer, a drunkard, a Sabbath-breaker or the like; his
servants are so too, or will quickly become such. For patterns are very
prevalent both to Vice, and Virtue; especially the patterns of Superiors.
Inferiors are very apt to follow the example of Superiors, and to tread in
their steps. How ordinary is it for wicked Parents to have bad Children, and
profane Masters to have wicked Servants; And no marvel, seeing Children and
Servants are apt to follow the evil example of their Parents and Masters, and
to write after their copy. How careful then should Parents and Masters of
Families be of their lives and conversation, that they be holy and righteous,
and not loose and scandalous, lest their Children and Servants should follow
after them to Hell.

2. Your holy and righteous lives will draw honor and reverence from your
Children and Servants. For, the Image of God, which consists in true holiness
and righteousness, carries such a Majesty in it, that it commands honor and
reverence from others. If therefore you who are Parents and Masters will with
David, walk within your houses with perfect and upright hearts, showing your
selves patterns of piety, and Godliness, your Children, and Servants cannot but
honor and respect you; 1 Samuel 2.30.
For them that honor me, says God, I will honor, that is, I will make them
to be held in honorable esteem by others. I grant indeed some are therefore
despised, because they walk holily and unblameably. Yet such, as they are truly
honorable in themselves, so are they honorable in the eyes and esteem of many
others. For there is more true worth in the least grace, Isa. 43.4
than in all earthly glory. Since thou wast precious in my sight, thou have
been honorable, says God of his despised people. Such Parents therefore, and
Masters, as by their Godly lives and conversations are precious in the sight of
God, they shall be honored by their Children and Servants. But on the other
side such Parents and Masters of Families as by their wicked li^es and ungodly
conversations are vile in the sight of God, they shall be despised, and lightly
esteemed by their Children and Servants. For if Children and Servants perceive
their Parents and Masters to be Liars, Swearers, Drunkards, Sabbath Breakers,
and the like; How can they honor and respect them? Lam. 1.8.
That which is said of Jerusalem, All that honored her, despised her, because
they have seen her nakedness; may be applied to wicked and profane Parents and
Masters of Families; Their Children and their Servants who should most have
honored them, cannot but despise them; because they have seen their nakedness.
And this questionless is one special reason why most Parents and Masters have
so little reverence and honor from their Children and Servants.

3. Such is the infectious property of sin, that if a Parent, or Master of a
Family be a Swearer, Drunkard, Scoffer at Religion, etc. he is like by a
contagious insinuation and evil example to inf^ct his whole Family, even his
own Children and Servants. And therefore sin is not unfitly resembled to the
Leprosy, which quickly over-spreadeth the whole house. And it is observable
that the more public the persons are, the more dangerous are their sins.
Private men's sins are but like the errors of a Pocket-watch, which usually
misleads only the keeper of it. But the sins of a Master of a Family are like
the errors of an house-clock, which is apt to mislead the whole Family. Oh how
careful then ought Parents and Masters of Families to be of their lives and
conversations, lest by their evil example they corrupt and poison their own
Children and Servants.

4. What will it avail Parents, and Masters of Families, to teach their
Children, and Servants the fear of God, to walk in his ways, when they
themselves manifest little fear of God in their lives and conversations; but
contrariwise are loose, and wanton; wicked and profane. For certainly as good
examples are the life of instruction, to make it profitable and effectual: so
evil examples are the death, and bane of good instruction, to make it
unprofitable and ineffectual. That Parent therefore or Master who reproves sin
in his Child or Servant, must be free from that sin himself; Mat. 7.5.
otherwise it will be said, Thou Hypocrite first cast the beam out of thine own
eye, and then thou shall see clearly to cast out the moat out of thy brothers
eye. Yea and he must be free from all other scandalous sins, otherwise the
Child may say, My Father reproves me for lying, but he himself will Swear. And
the Servant may say, my Master reproves me for Drunkenness, and he himself is
Covetous. That therefore thy Family-reproof and admonition may be profitable,
thou must be sure to be, at least, unblameable in thy life, and conversation;
that thou may not be guilty of that sin, which thou condemnest in thy Child,
or Servant. For thereby thou will pass a sentence of death, and condemnation
upon thine own soul.

FINIS.
A Morning Prayer for a Family.
BLessed Lord God, who art great and glorious in thy self, good and gracious in
and through thy beloved, Jesus Christ. A God glorious in thy justice to execute
vengeance upon the wilful, and impenitent; but gracious in thy mercy to pass
by the offenses of poor penitent sinners. Lord, had not thou been exceeding
good and gracious unto us, we might this night have slept the sleep of death:
and from the darkness of the night been sent away into outer darkness. But such
has been thy mercy and goodness unto us, as to add another day unto our lives:
most meet therefore it is that we should consecrate the same unto thee, by
offering up a Morning Sacrifice of Prayer and thanksgiving. Lord we acknowledge
our great unworthiness to come into thy presence, to present our Prayers and
supplications unto thee. But though we are unworthy, yet Christ is worthy. We
beseech thee therefore for his sake to look graciously upon us; to pass by our
unworthiness, and to strengthen our weakness. To this end as we draw near unto
thee, so be thou pleased to draw near unto us, enabling us to pray as with
humility and sincerity; so with zeal and fervency of spirit, and with faith in
Jesus Christ, looking for audience and acceptance in and through him. Blessed
Lord God, we cannot but acknowledge, thou did at first create us in a blessed
and happy estate, even after thine own image, endowing us with true knowledge,
holiness, and righteousness. But we soon fell from that state of innocence and
blessedness, in the loins of our first Father Adam; and implunged our selves
with him into a dreadful gulf of sin and misery. For, O Lord, besides the
guilt of Adams sin, we have contracted from him a Mass of corruption, which
has poisoned our very natures: polluted and defiled all the faculties of our
souls, with all the parts and members of our bodies. So that we may more truly
in regard of our spiritual uncleanness, cry out Unclean, Unclean, than the
Leper under the Law in regard of his bodily uncleanness. And O Lord, to this
corruption of our natures we have added many many actual sins of our own: which
as they have been heinous in their quality, so in their number and multitude
have far exceeded the hairs of our heads, and the sands on the Seashore, which
cannot be numbered. The which we have committed through the whole course of our
lives, from our infancy to this present time. So that we are now grown old in
sin, and overgrown with corruption. Though the time thou have allotted us here
to live is very little, even as a moment to Eternity; yet, alas, how little of
this little have we lived to thee our God, or to the good of our own souls,
having misspent the greatest part of our days in vanity and pleasure. We have
continued ignorant of thee: how much means of knowledge have we had, and yet
how little knowledge have we gotten? oh how little have we done for our souls,
or the other World? We have not considered what is like to become of us
hereafter. How little care and pains have we taken to make sure for Eternity?
we have taken the course to undo our selves for ever. We have broken every one
of thy most holy and righteous Laws ten thousand, thousand times. Yea we have
sinned against thy Gospel in slighting the offers of grace. Though thou have
sent unto us Ambassador after Ambassador, to woo and beseech us to abandon
our sins, and to receive Jesus Christ, yet alas, how have we slighted thy
messengers, and turned a deaf ear to all thy gracious invitations. Though we
are willing to take Christ for our Savior, to preserve us from hell and
damnation; yet, alas, how unwilling are we to take him for our Lord and King,
to yield obedience and subjection unto him. Lord we cannot but acknowledge our
great unthankfulness under those manifold favors and mercies thou have in a
plentiful measure conferred on us; as also our unprofitableness under thy
Fatherly chastis^ments, laid upon us in love and for our good: our
discontentedness at our present state and condition. And oh how careless and
negligent have we been in the discharge of the duties of our places, callings,
and relations! Oh the multitude of worldly and covetous thoughts, of proud and
ambitious thoughts, of wicked and profane thoughts, of wanton and unclean
thoughts, yea and of blasphemous and atheistical thoughts that lodge in the
hearts of most of us, and there revel it day and night. And O Lord, we cannot
but acknowledge the deadness of our hearts, the distractions of our minds in
the performing holy duties. We are active and lively about our worldly
businesses, but oh how dull and flat are we in our religious exercises! praying
as if we prayed not, and hearing as if we heard not. Lord, make us truly
apprehensive of our sins and misery, that we may humble our selves under a
sense of them, and turn unto thee by true and unfeigned repentance. Turn us, O
God, and we shall be turned, draw us, and we will run after thee. And, O Lord,
whilst we are returning unto thee, meet us, we pray thee, in the way: and like
a tender Father, embrace us with the arms of thy mercy. Our sins, we confess,
are many and heinous, yet we know and believe thy mercies are far more, and the
merits of Jesus Christ are far greater: and therefore we are resolved to
adventure our souls, as upon the mercies of the^ our God, so upon the merits of
Jesus Christ, into whose arms we here cast our selves.

Oh be pleased to make us partakers both of the merit of Christ's death in
freeing us from the guilt of sin, and of the virtue of Christ's death in freeing
us from the power and dominion of sin, that it may not rule and reign in us as
formerly. Lord, work in us a loathing, and a true hatred of every sin,
especially of such we have been most addicted to, and have most delighted in.
To this end convince us what a folly, yea madness it is, for the short fruition
of a momentany pleasure here, to implunge our selves into everlasting burnings.
Oh convert every unconverted soul among us; bring us to Christ; make us
adventurers for the other World: let us be resolved henceforth for an holy and
righteous life: instruct us in thy ways, and teach us thy S^atutes. Break the
power of our sins, subdue our rebellion, and make us willing to be the Lord's.
Change our evil natures, and give us another Spirit. Help us sincer^ly to
choose thee as our portion; to love, and fear, and trust in thee; and to walk
humbly with thee all the days of our life. Help us to set our affections on
things abov^, and no longer on this earth: let us dye daily to sin, and this
World: let us exercise our selv^s in keeping a good Cons^i^nce toward God and
men: let us work out our Salvation with fear and trembling, and give all
diligence to make our calling and election sure; and let not our labor herein
be in vain. Keep us, O Lord, from our iniquities; keep us from the way of
lying, from all unrighteous and unjust dealing, from wrath, and evil speaking;
let us be true, temperate, peaceable, and merciful, as the children of our
heavenly Father. Help us to be serious, and savoury, and tender, and watchful:
and hold us on constantly in our holy course to the end of our days.

Lord, take us into thy keeping and protection this day: keep us from all
danger, especially from sinning against thee. To this end make us watchful
both against the occasions of sins, and temptations thereunto. Keep us, we pray
thee, from ^dleness, as knowing that our idle time is the Devils working tim^,
who is most busy with us, when we are most at leisure. And bless all our
undertakings. So sp^ritualize our hearts and affections, that we may have
heavenly hearts in earthly employments, and so may serve thee our God, whilst
we are serving our own necessities.

Together with us bless, we beseech thee, thy whole Church; Call thine ancient
people the Jews; and bring in the fullness of the Gentiles. And particularly we
pray thee for our own Nation, the Land of our Nativity: pardon the crying sins
thereof. Shower down thy blessings upon it both temporal and spiritual. In
special we pray thee so to bless our royal Sovereign, that under him we may
live a quiet, and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. Bless likewise
all our Magistrates, and Ministers of thy holy Word. Thou the Lord of the
harvest, send plenty of Laborers into thy harvest. And, O Father of mercy,
look down with the eye of pity and compassion upon all thine afflicted ones:
let thy mercies be suitable to their several needs and necessities. Bless all
Christian families, this in particular; enrich every soul with all needful,
saving graces.

Blessed Lord God, according to our bounden duty, we offer up our Sacrifice of
Praise and Thanksgiving unto thy blessed Majesty, in the name and mediation of
thy beloved Son Jesus Christ. Blessing and praising thee for our health,
wealth, food and raiment, for our preservation from our first being to this
present time. We bless thy name above all for that gift of gifts the Lord
Jesus. And for the Gospel wherein thou have freely offered Christ, with all his
benefits to us. We bless thee for whatever grace has been wrought in any of us
by the Gospel; and for that good hope thou have given us through grace. We
bless thy name for the last nights quiet rest, this days protection hitherto.
Add, we Pray thee, this mercy, give us grace to live as in thy sight, who sees
all our ways, and art privy to every secret thing which we do. And now, O
Lord, accept our persons, though sinful; and our service, though full of
weaknesses, in thy beloved Son, with whom thou art well pleased. In whose name
and words, we further call upon thee, saying, Our Father which art in Heaven,
etc.

An Evening Prayer for a Family.
O Most great, and glorious Lord God, and in Jesus Christ a loving and a
gracious Father. We thy poor and unworthy Servants, being by thy good
providence brought to the end of this day, desire to conclude the same with an
Evening spiritual Sacrifice of Prayer and Thanksgiving. Lord we do here
profess, we come not in our own names, nor in our own strength, we are unable
of our selves to perform any spiritual duty after an acceptable manner. But we
come in the alone name, and strength of thy beloved Son, Jesus Christ:
beseeching thee for his sake to pass by our unworthiness, to quicken our dead
hearts, and to carry us forth with life and vigor in the duty we are now going
about.

Blessed Lord God, we do acknowledge our selves to be vile, wretched sinners:
Sinners by nature, sinners by birth, sinners in the whole course of our lives,
having sinned as if we had come into the World for no other end but to sin
against thee. Though thou have been pleased to restrain us from many heinous,
scandalous sins; yet Lord, thou know what evil thoughts do lodge in our
hearts, and what Lusts bear rule and sway there. Blessed Lord God, though we
are in some measure convinced of the need and necessity that we have of Jesus
Christ, that we are undone for ever without an interest in him: yet how have we
slighted and rejected the tenders and offers of him in the Ministry of the
Gospel, and preferred our lusts, and the pleasures of this World before him. We
have indeed outwardly made profession of the Gospel, yet have we disgraced the
prof^ssion thereof by our carnal and sinful conversation. Lord, we cannot but
acknowledge, our desires, cares, and endeavors have run out more after the
things of this life, than after the things of a better life. We have slighted
thy judgments, abused thy mercies, profaned thy Sabbaths, and polluted all
thy holy Ordinances. When we have drawn near unto thee with our bodies, and
honored thee with our lips, then have our hearts been far removed from thee;
when we have had communion with thine Ordinances, we have oftentimes had little
communion with thee our God therein. Blessed Lord, our sins are many and
heinous, yea there seems a kind of infiniteness in our sins: but we know and
believe there is indeed an infiniteness in the mercies of thee our God, and in
the merits of Jesus Christ: and therefore with an utter disclaiming of all
righteousness of our own, as filthy rags, we place our whole confidence for
life and salvation upon thy mercies in Christ. As thou have laid our help upon
him, so on him will we lay our hope for the pardon of our sins here, and for
eternal salvation hereafter. Lord, be pleased to accept of his all sufficient
Sacrifice, and perfect satisfaction thereby made to thy justice for all our
sins. Pardon us, we pray thee, and free us as from the guilt and punishment, so
from the power and dominion of all our sins, that we be no longer the servants
of sin, but may be henceforth the servants of God. Lay hold on all our souls,
and bring us in effectually to Jesus Christ. Subdu^ our reb^llion, take away
our unw^llingness, answer all our objections and excuses, and work our hearts
to a resolved adventuring upon him, an hearty acceptance of him, and a total
resignation of our selves for ever to him, to his gover^^ent and dominion.
Lord, we beseech thee, not only to j^stifie us by thy grace, but likewise to
sanctify us by thy Spirit, that we may be an holy people, serving thee in
holiness and righteousness all the days of our lives. Mortify our flesh with
the affections and lusts: let us be proud no longer, nor covetous, nor envious,
nor froward, nor m^litious. Let thy grace be sufficient for us both for the
killing of our dearest lusts, and strongest corruptions; and for the quickening
of us on in a conscionable discharge of the Duties of our places, callings, and
relations; by which grace let us be carried on throughout our whole course, in
an holy, humble, and sincere conversation. Lord, let it suffice us, that we
have spent so much of our precious time in seeking after earthly things: help
us now in earnest to seek after spiritual and heavenly things, after spiritual
grace and heavenly glory. We pray thee convince us thoroughly, that upon the
little inch of time in this life, depends the length and breadth of all
Eternity: and that as we live here, we shall fare everlastingly hereafter. And
O let the consideration thereof stir us up to a fruitful improvement of our
short time to the best advantage for the spiritual and eternal good of our poor
souls. Help us to keep always upon our hearts a deep sense as of the certainty
of our death, so of the uncertainty of the time thereof, that we may live as
those who believe we must shortly dye. Lord take us into thy keeping and
protection this night. Grant we may lodge in the arms of Jesus, that we may
rest in his bosom. Give unto us such sweet and comfortable rest and sleep,
that our bodies may be refreshed, and we the better enabled to serve thee the
next day in our several places and callings.

In mercy remember thine all the World over. And in special we pray thee for
this sinful Land and Nation. Pardon our sins, be reconciled to us in Jesus
Christ. Let thy Gospel have a free passage therein. Pour the choicest of thy
blessings upon the head of our King, that he may be a blessing unto us. Bless
all our Magistrates, with the Ministers of thy Word and Sacraments. P^tty the
afflicted members of Jesus Christ. Bless all Christian Families, this in
particular, giving unto every member thereof all needful, saving, sanctifying
graces.

And now accept our Sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving which we offer unto
thee for thy manifold favors and mercies conferred on our souls and bodies:
especially and above all, for that great gift of thine the Lord Jesus Christ,
and for all those great things he has done and suffered for our redemption. We
bless thy name as for the enjoyment of the Gospel, so for any spiritual good we
have received thereby: that any of us have fiducially and cordially closed with
the tenders and offers of Jesus Christ. We bless thy name that thou have
withheld us from the company and ways of those, who live without God in the
World, giving themselves up to work all wickedness with greediness; and have
set our hearts to seek the Lord, and wait for thy Salvation. For every other
good thing whether temporal or spiritual, concerning this life or a better,
blessed and praised be thy great and glorious name. And now, O Lord, we beseech
thee in mercy to overlook all the weaknesses and infirmities which have
accompanied this holy duty. Sprinkle both our Persons and our Services with the
blood of that immaculate Lamb Christ Jesus. To whom with thee, O Father, and
the holy Spirit, be rendered, as is most due, all honor, and praise and glory,
both now and for evermore, Amen.

A Prayer for a single Person.
O Eternal and ever-living Lord God, the fountain of all blessing, the Father
of Mercy, and God of all Consolation. I thy poor creature altogether unworthy
to appear in thy sight, to present my Prayer and supplication unto thee: do yet
in the name and mediation of thy beloved Son Jesus Christ prostrate my self at
the footstool of thy grace, looking for acceptance and assistance in and
through him. For his sake look graciously upon me, pardon my sins, which are
many and heinous. Lord, I cannot but acknowledge, that besides the guilt of
Adam's sin, there is in me a fountain of corruption, which I brought with me
into the World: from whence has plentifully flowed many poisonous streams of
actual transgressions, and that in evil thoughts, evil words, and evil actions;
which I have committed through the whole course of my life, from my tender
infancy to this present time. I have been alienated from the life of God
through the ignorance that is in me. I have walked after the course of this
World, fulfilling the desires of my flesh and of my mind, minding earthly
things. I have broken thy Law, neglected thy Gospel, refused the offers of
Christ, and am in great doubt that to this day there has been no good work
wrought upon me; but that I continue in the gall of bitterness, and the bond of
iniquity. Lord, I cannot but acknowledge, I have shamefully abused the ric^es
of thy goodness, forbearance, and long-suffering, which should have led me to
repentance; as also thy Fatherly corrections and chasti^ements, laid upon me in
love, and for my good; oh how little have I been bettered thereby! How do I
spend my time and strength for the getting of earthly riches; and satisfying my
self with sensual pleasures, and in the mean time am careless of my precious
and immortal soul? Lord, I have often for my profit and pleasure sake omitted,
and put off the holy exercises of Religion, which ought to have been performed
by me; and have been exceeding dead and dull, lifeless and heartless in
performing those good duties I have taken in hand. I have been unfruitful
under a plentiful dispensation of the means of grace, unthankful under those
favors and mercies thou have conferred on me, unfaithful to those manifold
vows and promises, I have made unto thee my God. Truth, Lord, my sins are many
and heinous: but this is my comfort, that Jesus Christ came into the World to
save sinners, and why not me? why not me? I acknowledge my self to be a great
sinner: but yet again thy Word testifies, That Jesus Christ came to save the
chief of sinners. Therefore will I not despair of mercy, but am resolved to
cast my self, and the burden of my sins into the arms, and upon the shoulders
of Jesus Christ. Be pleased to accept of what Christ has done and suffered for
me, and to accept of me in him. Turn me, O Lord, unto thee, and through him let
me be reconciled unto thee. Slay the enmity, and subdue the rebellion of mine
heart against thee. Wash my polluted soul with his most precious blood; cloth
my nakedness with the long white robe of his righteousness, fill my emptiness
out of that fullness which is in Jesus Christ. Enrich my soul with all needful
saving, sanctifying graces. Let the faith of Gods Elect, let the love and fear
of thy name be shed abroad in my heart. Oh that every grace may more and more
flourish in me, and my lusts more and more wither and decay in me. Let my
covetousness dye, let my pride, and envy, and passion, and sensuality dye; let
the whole body of death be destroyed, that I may no longer serve sin. Oh give
me grace in this my day to know the things that belong to my peace, to make a
right use of this time of my visitation. As Christ is now frequently tendered in
the Ministry of the Gospel as a Savior to poor sinners: So Lord, give me grace
fiducially to close with the offers and tenders of him, that Christ may be
mine, and I his. And as thou have been pleased to afford unto me the means of
grace, so I pray thee, help me to carry my self in some measure suitable and
answerable thereunto; that I may not be a shame, but rather a credit to
Religion, and my profession thereof. To this end teach me to deny all
ungodliness and Worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and godly in
this present World. Blessed Lord, seeing without thy blessing it will be in
vain to put forth my own pains and endeavors, I beseech thee to help me to
labor in the work of the Lord, and to crown my pains and endeavors with a
blessing from Heaven. Make me more spiritual in Worldly businesses; and less
wordly in spiritual businesses. Be pleased to put good meditations into my
mind, and holy desires into my heart. Let no corrupt communication proceed out
of my mouth, but such as may administer grace to the hearers. Help me to redeem
time, let me not lose one day more, set me presently to work out my salvation
with fear and trembling: let me choose the good part, and make sure for
eternity: let me never venture my soul on false and deceitful hopes, but let
me make sure. Good Lord, let me not be deceived, and found an hypocrite at
last: but let me be sound in the faith, that I may have rejoicing before thee
in the great day.

Neither pray I for my self alone, but for thy whole Church wheresoever
dispersed, or howsoever distressed upon the face of the whole earth. In special
I pray thee, to bless this Land and Nation, with all blessings both temporal
and spiritual. And herein our Sovereign Lord and King: make him an instrument
of bringing much glory to thy nam^, and much good to thy Church and people.
Bless him in his Relations, Counsels, and Forces. Bless the Magistrates and
Ministers, with the whole people of this Land: the afflicted members of Jesus
Christ; let thy mercies be suitable to their several needs and necessities.
Vouchsafe to every one of us grace to live in thy fear, to dye in thy favor,
and to reign with thee Eternally in Heaven.

And now, O Lord, in the name of Jesus Christ, I bless and praise thy glorious
Majesty, for all those manifold favors thou have in a plentiful manner
conferred on my soul and body; for my preservation as from manifold dangers
whereunto I was subject, so from many sins wherinto the corruption of my flesh,
and the persuasion of the Dev^l would have thrown me headlong. Blessed be thy
name for thy good providence over me through the whole course of my life; thou
have been my God from my Mothers womb, supplied me with all needful good
things. But above all, blessed be thy name for that foundation of all other
mercies, thy dearly beloved Son; for those great things he has done and
suffered for me, and those many good things, whereof in and through him I have
hope, or am made partaker. Lord, pardon the manifold weaknesses and
imperfections, which have accompanied this holy service, in and through thy
beloved Jesus Christ. To whom with thee, and thy blessed Spirit, I do from my
heart render all praise and glory, both now and evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
THE PRINCIPLES OF Christian Religion Explained to the Capacity of the Meanest.

By T.G. Minister of the Gospel.

John 17.3. This is life Eternal to know thee the only true God, and Jesus
Christ whom thou have sent.

LONDON, Printed for John Wright at the Globe in Little-Brittain. 1668.

THE PRINCIPLES OF Christian Religion EXPLAINED.
Quest. WHo is the Maker of all things?

Answ. God. Genesis 1. 1. Col. 1.16. By him were all things Created that are in
Heaven, and that are in Earth.

Q. What is God?

A. God is a Spirit of infinite perfection.

God is said to be a Spirit. 1. Negatively, to intimate that he is not a body
or material substance. 2. Analogically, Spirits being the most perfect and
excellent of all created beings are the fittest to represent the
incomprehensible God to our narrow conceptions.

God is said to be a Spirit of perfection, or perfect spirit, thereby to
exclude all manner of imperfections, and including all manner of perfections
and excellencies.

In that he is a Spirit of infinite perfection, thereby is employed, that there
is no measure or bounds set to his perfection. Whereby he is distinguished from
the glorious Angels, and the souls of the Saints in Heaven, which though they
are perfect spirits, yet their perfection is limited. Whereas Gods perfection
is beyond all measure, being infinite.

Q. How many Gods are there?

A. There is one only God.

1 Cor. 8.4. There is none other God but one.

Q. How many Persons are there in the Godhead?

A. Three, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.

Though there be but one God in substance, and essence, yet there be three
distinct Persons subsisting in that one Godhead. This appears from Christ's
own testimony in Matthew. 28.19. Where he gives commission to his Apostles to
teach all Nations, and Baptize them in the name of the Father, of the Son, and
of the holy Ghost. See likewise, 1 Ioh. 5.7. That God should be one in essence
and three in persons, is a Mystery not to be comprehended, yet ought to be
believed, being so plainly revealed in the Word.

Q. How is God farther set forth unto us in his Word?

A. 1. By his Properties. 2. By his Works.

The Properties of God are certain excellencies attributed to him: as when he
is said to be Eternal, Almighty, Merciful, just, etc.

Q. What are the kinds of Gods Properties?

A. 1. Incommunicable. 2. Communicable.

Incommunicable properties are such excellencies, which are so proper to God
alone, as in no respect they can be attributed or communicated to any other. As
Eternity, without beginning: Immutability, not subject to any change:
All-sufficient, not only for himself, but for all others: Omnipotency, able to
do all things: Ubiquity, to be everywhere present. These and such like are
excellencies proper only to God, and cannot be communicated to the Creature.

Communicable Properties are certain excellencies in God, communicated also to
creatures, as Power, Wisdom, Holiness, Justice, etc. Thus Sampson was a strong
man, Solomon a wise man, Noah a just man, etc. But yet there is a great
difference between these communicable properties, as they are in God, and as
they are in the creature.

1. They are in God Originally, he is the primary fountain of them all, who
has what he has in and from himself. Thus all these Properties in God are his
very Essence. 2. They are all in God infinitely, without any limits or bounds.
He is infinite in power, wisdom, holiness, justice, etc. But in the Creature
they are, 1. By participation, they receive all their excellencies from God.
What have thou that thou did not receive, 1 Cor. 4.7. 2. By Measure. The
Creature that has the most, and best excellencies, has but a stinted measure.
Ephesians. 4.7.

Q. To what heads may the works of God be brought?

A. Creation and Providence.

Q. What is meant by Gods creating things?

A. A making them out of nothing.

To create is to give a being to things that never were, and that out of
nothing. In this respect it is said, Genesis 1.1. In the beginning God created the
Heaven and the Earth, that is, when there was nothing at all, no not any matter
out of which things might be made, then God Created all things. Which kind of
making things out of nothing, is proper to God. Thereby the Lord shows
himself to be the true God.

Q. What things did God so make?

A. All things.

This the Apostle expressly avouchet, Col. 1.16. By him were all things Created
that are in Heaven, and that are in Earth, Visible and Invisible. If the
excellency of many Creatures, the greatness of others, the multitude of all
together, be duly considered, it must needs be granted, that herein the Lord
shows himself to be a God indeed: the only true God. None else can do the
like.

Q. By what did God make all things?

A. By his Word.

Genesis 1.3, 6. God said, let there be light, and let there be a Firmament, and
it was so. And Psalm. 33.6. By the Word of the Lord were things made. By Gods
Word we understand the manifestation of his will. For God is said to speak not
properly, but after the manner of man. Men use most commonly to express their
mind and will by speaking. When God did manifest and declare his will, that
such and such things should be, instantly they were: and they were so as God
would have them.

Q. What was that estate wherein God made all things?

A. Very good.

The holy Ghost expressly notes, that at the end of every day, God took a
through view of the particular works which he had made, and found them to be
good, Genesis 1.4, 10, etc. This is to be noted to justify God against all the
evil that is in the World. Many Creatures are now evil. But as God made them,
they were not so. All evil has risen from the Creatures.

Q. Wherein consists the Providence of God?

A. 1. In preserving Creatures. 2. In well ordering them.

For the preserving of Creatures, if God did not sustain, and maintain them,
they would soon come to naught. In this respect it is said, In him we live, and
move, and have our being, Act. 17.28.

Q. What does God by his providence order?

A. All things whatsoever. Psalm. 113.6.

The providence of God extends as far as his Creation: as all things were
Created by God; so all things are ordered by him. As the high and great things
in the highest Heaven. So the greatest things on earth, (Dan. 2.21. He removes
Kings, and sets up Kings) Yea, and the meanest things also, as the very
color of hairs, Mat. 5.36.

Q. What is that end whereunto God directs all things?

A. 1. His own Glory. 2. His Childrens good.

Gods glory is the most principal and supreme end of all. At that he aimed in
giving the first being to his creatures. And at that also he aims in all
things that are done at any time in any place.

Yea also, as at the next subordinate end, he aims at his Childrens good. In
regard whereof, all things work together for their good, Romans 8.28.

Q. In what estate did God make man at first?

A. In a very good and happy estate.

Genesis 1.31. It is said, After God had made man, he overlooked every thing that
he had made, and behold it was very good.

Q. Wherein did man's happiness especially consist, in which he was at first
made?

A. In that he was made after the image of God which consisted in perfect
knowledge, true holiness, and righteousness, Genesis 1.26, 27. Col. 3.10.

Man at first had knowledge of all things necessary for the glory of God, and
his own good; and was likewise made holy and righteous, and without sin.

Q Did man always continue in that holy and happy estate.

A. No: he fell from it by transgressing that commandment of God, in eating the
forbidden fruit, Genesis 3.3, etc.

The sin especially lay in disobeying the command of God: which commandment he
gave him for the trial of his obedience. Many may possibly think this sin a
light matter, and are apt to charge God with severity for punishing man so
sorely for so small an offense. But if they shall consider the manifold sins
infolded in that transgression, they must acknowledge it a very heinous sin, For

1. There was infidelity therein, in that they believed not Gods word. For
though God had said, In the day thou eatest thereof thou shall surely dye, Genesis
2.17. yet they believed not that they should dye, but made some question and
doubt thereof.

2. Sottish credulity, in giving credit to the Devil: God had said, ye shall
surely dye. And the Devil said, ye shall not surely dye. Yet the Woman, and so
also the Man through her persuasion, gave more credit to the Devil, the Father
of lies, than to God the father of truth.

3. Horrible Idolatry in doting upon, and loving the creature more than God the
Creator, who is blessed for ever. For this is one way of committing idolatry,
namely by Deifying the Creature, and loving it more than God.

4. Pride and Ambition, desiring to be as Gods. For when the Devil said, ye
shall be as Gods, knowing good and evil, they were so puffed up therewith, that
they transgressed.

5. Theft. For they took that which was none of their own, but by a special
reservation kept from them. For God had expressly forbidden them to eat of that
tree, Genesis 2.17.

6. Murder. Our first Parents by eating that forbidden fruit, brought death,
not only upon themselves, but upon all their posterity. Yea, as much as in them
lay, they thereby implunged themselves and all their posterity into hell fire.
By these you may judge of the greatness of the sin of our first parents.

Q. Is Adams posterity guilty of that sin?

A. Yea, Adams sin is imputed to all his posterity.

By one man's disobedience many were made sinners, Romans 5.19. That is, by the
transgression of Adam, the first man, many, even all that have or shall come
from him, are justly accounted sinners.

Q. How can Adams posterity be guilty of his sin?

A. 1. Adam was a public person in that business.

He stood not in his own room alone, but in the room of all mankind. He was the
great representative of the world, so that he sinning, we sinned in and with
him.

2. We were all in the loins of Adam when he sinned.

And so by the Law of generation sinned in him, and in him deserved eternal
condemnation.

Q. What is sin in general?

A. Sin is a transgression of the Law.

Thus does an Apostle expressly define it, 1 Ioh. 3.4. The law is a
manifestation of the will of God, declaring what he would have man to do, or
not to do: therefore to transgress the law, is to offend God, and to sin
against his express will.

Q What are the kinds of sin?

A. Original and Actual.

Q. What is Original sin?

A. That corruption of nature wherein all are conceived, and born.

It is the immediate effect of Adams first sin, and the principal cause of all
other sins. In which respect it is called Original, because it is the spring
from whence all actual sins issue and flow. Of this Original corruption did
David speak in Psalm. 51.5. Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my
Mother conceive me. Never was any that came from Adam (Christ only excepted,
who was conceived by the holy Ghost) free from this sin. As every other
creature receives the nature and disposition of their kind, and stock; thus
Lions a ravenous disposition, Dogs a doggish disposition: so the Children of
sinful man a sinful disposition, an inclination rooted in their natures to
all kinds of sin: which continues in them as long as they live, and is never
quite rooted out of any, so long as he continues here on earth. Which the Lord
in his wisdom has so ordered, 1. That thereby they may be the more humbled,
and kept from spiritual pride. 2. That they might have more frequent occasions
of going to God by prayer for help and strength against the working of
corruptions in them.


Q. What is actual sin?

A. A particular breach of Gods Law.

Q. How many ways do men fall into actual sins?

A. 1. By omitting or not doing the good which God in his Word requires.

2. By committing or doing the evil which God in his Word has forbidden.

3. By a sinful manner of performing that which is good.

The best duties we take in hand are exceedingly corrupted through our failing
in the manner of performing them.

Q. What is the punishment of sin?

A. All curses and plagues in this life, at the end death, and after that,
eternal torment in hell, Deuteronomy. 28.16, 17. Romans 6.23. 2 These. 1.8, 9.

Q. Is any man able to free himself out of that woeful plight whereinto he has
implunged himself by sin?

A. Surely No.

2 Cor. 3.5. We are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our
selves. Much less can we do any thing of our selves, to free our selves from so
great a misery, as sin has brought us into. We are dead in sin, Ephesians. 2.1. And
dead men cannot raise themselves to life.

Q Can any other creature deliver man?

A. No mere Creature.

Psalm 49.7. None of them can by any means redeem his brother, nor give unto
God a ransom for him. This may be applied to all the Creatures in the World,
to all the Saints and Angels in the World, none of them can by any means redeem
his brother. So that in regard of man's own power, or in regard of succor from
any mere creature, there remains nothing but matter of despair.

Q. Is there any means to free man out of his corrupt and miserable estate?

A. Yes, God himself has given unto man a Savior.

Act. 5.31. When it was manifested none could help, God himself gave an helper,
and a Savior unto us.

Q. Who is man's Savior?

A. Jesus Christ.

1 Timothy 1.15. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that
Jesus Christ came into the World to save sinners.

Jesus, is an Hebrew word, and signifies a Savior. The Angel that gave this
name, adds this reason thereof, He shall save his people from their sins,

The other name, Christ, is a Greek Word, and signifies anointed, Jesus shows
him to be a Savior. Christ an able Savior, because anointed, that is, set
apart by God and endowed with all fullness for the work of our redemption.

Q. What is Jesus Christ.

A. He is the eternal Son of God, who in the fullness of time took man's nature.

The only begotten Son of God, the second Person in the Trinity, who in the
fullness of time took man's Nature upon him; This is Jesus Christ. He is called
the only begotten Son of God, because he is the alone Son of God by nature. For
though others be Sons of God by Creation, as Adam was, and the Angels. Others
by adoption, and regeneration, as the Saints of God. Yet none is his Son by
nature, but Jesus Christ, who is therefore called, the only begotten Son of
God, Joh. 1.14. which is to be understood of an eternal* and incomprehensible
generation, which would rather be admired than enquired into.

Q. Why must man's Redeemer be man?

A. 1. In general that he might suffer and dye for man's Redemption.

Heb. 9.22. Without shedding of blood is no remission of sin ^ Christ therefore
that he might dye for our Redemption, took upon him our Nature, for as God he
could not dye.

2. That he might satisfy the justice of God in the same manner wherein it was
offended.

For the justice of God did require, that satisfaction should be made in the
same nature which had sinned. Man therefore having sinned, it was requisite
that man should dye, for the satisfying Gods justice, and appeasing his wrath.
Whereupon says the Apostle, Since by man came Death, by man came the
Resurrection of the dead, 1 Cor. 15.21.

3. That he might feel our frailties, and from sense and experience learn pity
and compassion.

Which reason the Apostle renders, Heb. 2.16, 17. He took on him the seed of
Abraham, that he might be a merciful, and faithful High Priest, that is, that
he might be merciful, as one man is to another. And in Heb. 4.15. We have not
an High Priest, which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities,
but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin.

Q. Why must man's Redeemer be also God?

A. 1. That he might be able and sufficient to endure that which for man's sin
he undertook.

The burden which he underwent, was the wrath of an infinite God, and there was
need of a divine power to support under the divine wrath. His humane nature
would have been overwhelmed with the heavy weight of Gods wrath, had not the
divine nature strengthened and upheld it.

2. That he might vanquish all the enemies of our Salvation, and overcome
Satan, hell and death, which no mere creature could do.

Christ being God, by his death he overcame death, and him that had the power
of death, that is, the Devil.

3. That his obedience and sufferings might be of an infinite price and value.

That which made the Obedience, and the Death of Christ to be of such an
infinite value was, that it was the obedience, and the death of the Son of God,
of him who was God, as well as man. The Deity being one nature in the person of
our Redeemer, an infinite dignity accompanied his person, and every thing that
was done and suffered by him.

Which affords a singular ground of comfort to all humbled sinners, sensible of
their sins, and misery, due unto them for the same; in that the death and
sufferings of Jesus Christ is of infinite worth and merit, far above the merit
of their sins; being the death and sufferings of him who was God as well as
man. Oh what comfort, yea what matter of triumph did this afford unto the
Apostle Paul, as appears in Romans 8.33.34. For treating of the fullness and
a^sufficiency of Christ's satisfaction by his death, in the former part of the
Chapter; in the latter part, he speaks as one ravished with abundance of
comfort, and thereupon presently challenges a dispute with any, concerning the
fullness of Christ's satisfaction by his death. Let conscience, says he, and
carnal reason, let Law and sin, Hell and Devil bring in all their strength,
object what they can, either the justice of God, or the number and hainousness
of my sins, what are all these? Seeing Christ has dyed, who is he, shall lay
any thing to the charge of Gods elect? whom shall condemn? It is Christ that
dyed. As if he had said, seeing Christ, the beloved Son of God, has offered up
his life as a Sacrifice, and satisfaction to the justice of God for my sins, I
will not fear the accusations of Satan, nor the objections of mine own carnal
heart.

Q. What has Christ done for our Redemption?

A. 1. He performed that obedience which we did owe to the Commandments of God.

2. He suffered that punishment which was due unto us for our sins.

The former is called Christ's active obedience, the latter his passive
obedience.

Christ's active obedience was most absolute, and perfect: for he perfectly
performed whatsoever the Law of God did require; which himself intimates in
that speech of his to John Baptist, (Matthew. 4.15.) It becomes us to fulfill
all Righteousness. And as we were made unrighteous by the first Adams
disobedience: So are we made righteous by the obedience of the second Adam,
Christ Jesus. This the Apostle expressly notes, Romans 5.19. As by one man's
disobedience, meaning, Adams, many were made sinners. So by the obedience of
one, namely Christ, shall many be made righteous, that is, all who belong unto
him. And as Christ subjected himself unto the Law, and fulfilled the same for
us, in our stead, whereby he purchased eternal life and salvation for us: So
likewise he suffered that punishment which was due to us for our sins, and
thereby redeemed us from death and hell. For as the Prophet Isay speaks (Isa.
53.6.) The Lord laid upon him the iniquity of us all, that is, the punishment
due to all our iniquities. And verse 4. Surely he has born our griefs, and
carried our sorrows. The sorrow and anguish that was due to us for our sins, he
has born it all, and every jot of it. And so having made full satisfaction to
the justice of God for us, we are discharged. Therefore says the Apostle (Ephesians.
1.7.) we have redemption through his blood, that is, through the bloody death
and passion of Jesus Christ, we are redeemed from all our sins. But yet this is
not so to be understood, as if we were redeemed from the curse by Christ's
passive obedience, and had the inheritance of glory purchased for us by his
active obedience, separately considered; but by his active and passive
obedience jointly considered, we are both redeemed from the curse, and entitled
to glory.

Q. What offices did Christ undertake to make us partakers of the benefit of
that which Christ did and s^ffered?

A. Christ undertook three Offices, he became a (a) King, a (b) Prophet, and a
(c) Priest. ( a) Act. 5.31. ( b) Deuteronomy. 18.18. ( c) Psalm. 110.4.

Q. What are the parts of Christ's Kingly Office?

A. 1. To govern his Church.

Christ's governing his Church is partly External, and partly Internal.

1. External by his Word, wherein his Laws are revealed. And by his Officers,
and Ministers, which he has appointed to stand in his room; to whom he has
committed not only the word of reconciliation, but also the power of the Keys,
or a power to put his Laws and Orders in execution. 2. Christ does Internally
govern his Church by his Spirit, whereby he so powerfully works upon them that
he makes them willingly to submit to him.
Q. What other part is there of Christ's Kingly Office?

A. 2. To provide for his Church.

Christ's providing for his Church extends to all things needful for soul and
body, even to all spiritual, and temporal blessings. He provides spiritual
blessings for the souls of his members, by furnishing them with all needful
saving graces. He likewise provides temporal blessings for their bodies, so far
as he sees to be good for them. The young Lions do lack and suffer hunger, but
they that fear the Lord shall not want any good thing, Psalm. 34.10.

Q. What other part is there of Christ's Kingly Office?

A. 3. To protect his Church.

Christ protects his Church and Members from all enemies. Her enemies are
Visible and Invisible. Her Visible Enemies are all manner of wicked men. Her
Invisible enemies are the Devil and his Angels. Christ either keeps these
enemies from assaulting his Church, as Genesis 35.5. or weakneth their power, and
restrains it, as 2 Samuel 3.1. Or delivers his out of their clutches, as
Exodus 14.39. Or destroys their enemies, as 2 King. 19.35.

Q What is the chief work of Christ's Prophetical Office?

A. To teach and instruct his Church.

Q. How does Christ instruct his Church?

A. 1. Outwardly by his Word.

2. Inwardly by his Spirit.

First, Christ instructs his Church outwardly by making known his Fathers will,
which he did by his own mouth, when he lived upon the earth. And by his
Ministers, after his Ascension into Heaven, by their writings and Preaching.

Obj. Some may Object and say, Gods will was made known before Christ was born.

Ans. 1. It was indeed made known, but not so clearly, nor so fully as by
Christ. It was obscured by Types.

2. It was not then made known altogether without Christ. For though Christ of
old did not so visibly show himself a revealer of his Fathers will, as after he
was born and lived on Earth: yet did he reveal Gods will to the Children of men
in those days. For wheresoever God is said to speak, the Son of God, the
second person in the Trinity, is there meant. And when God is said in any
visible shape to appear to men, the same person, the Son of God appeared. Yea,
that which Angels or Prophets made known to men, was first made known to them
by the Son of God, Act. 7.38. In this respect, among others, Christ is often
called the WORD, as John 1.1, etc. For as men by word of mouth ordinarily
declare their mind and meaning: So did God declare his will, and mind by his
Son.

2. Christ instructs his Church inwardly, by causing his Spirit to work with
the outward Ministry, which he has ordained, upon the souls of men. Christ
speaks now in Ministers, as he did in Paul, (2 Cor. 13.3.) though not in the
same measure, yet in the same manner. Thus in and by those Ordinances which he
has prescribed to his Church, he enlightneth the mind, mollifieth the heart,
comfort the Conscience, yea and works faith, hope, love, patience,
new-obedience, and all other needful graces:

Q. What are the parts of Christ's Priestly Office?

A. 1. Satisfaction. 2. Intercession.

These two were the principal works of the High Priest under the Law. (...) did
by offering Sacrifice. The other by entering into the most holy-place with
Incense. Both these are joined together, and applied to Christ, Romans 8.34. Who
is he that condemns? It is Christ that dyed, yea rather that 'is risen again,
who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession for us. Here
we have both Satisfaction, and Intercession applied to Christ. Satisfaction by
his death, and Intercession now that he is risen again, and sits at the
right hand of God.

Christ's Sacrifice on the Cross was of such efficacy, that Gods Justice was
thereby abundantly satisfied, his wrath fully pacified, yea his face and
favor, and all blessings following thereon, was purchased. The death of Christ
is therefore said to be a Sacrifice to God, a sweet smelling savor, Ephesians. 5.2.
And the Church is said to be purchased thereby, Act. 20.28. namely, from all
that bondage under which it was, as sin, the curse of the Law, the Wrath of
God, Death, Devil, Damnation. After Christ had offered up his Life a Sacrifice
unto God, and thereby made satisfaction for the sins of his Church; he was
buried, and laid in the grave, to sanctify the grave to all his members. And
the third day he arose from the dead. As he himself laid down his life, so he
himself took it up again. And then he ascended into Heaven, there to make
intercession for us, which is the second part of his Priestly Office. The
former was to make satisfaction: this latter to make intercession.

Christ may be said to make intercession for us two ways, 1. By a continual
presenting of himself to his Father for us. Christ, says the Apostle, Heb.
9.24. is entered into Heaven, now to appear in the presence of God for us.
Christ presents himself our Sacrifice, and propitiation for our sins, whose
very blood becomes our Advocate, to plead with the Father for us, Heb. 12.24.
2. By manifesting his will to have all his made partakers of the virtue and
benefit of his Sacrifice. Joh. 17.24. Father, I will that they also whom thou
have given me, be with me where I am, that they may behold my glory, which thou
have given me.


The word Intercession properly signifies supplication for another. It is
attributed to Christ especially as he is now in Heaven, by way of resemblance.
The resemblance may be taken from the Favorite of a King, who is always at
Court, in the Kings presence, and there presents his friends petition, and
intercedes for the granting thereof. Christ, the great favorite of the Lord,
stands before him continually to present our supplications, and procure our
acceptance.

Q. How comes Christ, and those things which he did and suffered in his own
person to be ours?

A. By Faith.

Romans 3.22. Faith is called the faith of Jesus, because we thereby relying on
Christ, are united to him, and so have a right to all that is his. In this
respect whatsoever we receive from Christ, is attributed to faith. By faith we
are justified, Romans 3.28. We are saved by faith, Ephesians. 2.8. By faith we have
access to God, Romans 5.2. In a word, As they, who in the days whilst Christ
lived upon the earth, received cure of any malady from him, received it by
faith. So every good thing that now we receive from Christ, we receive by
faith. How needful then is it, that we be well instructed in the nature of
faith.

Q. What is faith?

A. True saving faith is a grace wrought in us by the Spirit of God, through
the Ministry of the Word, whereby we receive Christ, as he is offered in the
Gospel, and rest upon him alone for life and salvation.

First, I say, True saving faith is a grace. It is not the work of nature; it
being as impossible for a man by his own strength to believe, as it is to keep
the Law. Faith therefore in Scripture is called, the gift of God.

It is added, wrought in us by the spirit of God, by whose efficacy (as the
principal cause) it is begotten in us.

Through the Ministry of the Word, because that is the ordinary means whereby
the Spirit of God does work faith in our hearts. Its true, that the reading of
the Scriptures, and of good books, may through Gods blessing be a means of
working faith* but it is most sure and certain, that the most ordinary means is
the Word preached, as Romans 10.17. Faith comes by hearing, viz. the Word of God.

For first, the Law discovers unto us our sins and miserable condition by
reason of them: That we are utterly lost in our selves, having deserved, and
are liable to all judgments and plagues here, and eternal death and
condemnation hereafter: and that we are altogether unable to free our selves
out of this miserable condition, whereunto we have plunged our selves by sin.

And then the Gospel shows us, that in the fullness of time, Jesus Christ who
was the Eternal Son of God, came into the World, took our nature upon him, and
therein became our Surety; and as our Surety, has taken our debts upon him*
and by his obedience, and alsufficient Sacrifice of his own body, once offered
upon the Cross, has made full satisfaction to Gods justice for the same.

Yea, the Gospel farther shows, that God, in him, offers grace and
reconciliation, pardon of sins here, and eternal salvation hereafter, to all
that believe in him.

The which truth being revealed to us by the Preaching of the Word; the Spirit
of God inwardly works in us effectual assent thereunto, upon which follows
an high prizing of Jesus Christ above all things, an hungring and thirsting
after him, and a resolution of heart to receive him as our all-sufficient
Savior, and to rest upon him, and his merits alone for life and salvation.

And therefore it is added in the forementioned description, that faith is a
grace whereby we receive Christ. And indeed thereby is Christ made ours. For
what is more our own, than that which is freely offered us, and we have
received. To receive Jesus Christ, is the same as to lay hold on him, or to
embrace him, and apply him to our selves. But I have the rather made choice of
this word receive, because it is the very expression of the holy Ghost, Joh.
1.12. As many as received him to them gave he power to become the Sons of God,
even to them that believe. This latter clause, to them that believe, is added
as an explanation of the former clause, As many as received him; showing what
is meant by receiving Christ, namely a believing on him. Which two are very
fitly joined together. Believing is added to receiving, to show what is meant
by receiving Christ. And receiving is added to believing, to show what kind of
faith it is, whereby Christ becomes ours, it is such a faith, whereby we accept
of and receive Christ with the benefits of his death and passion.

It follows in the description of faith, How Christ must be received, namely,
as he is offered in the Gospel.

Christ is offered in the Gospel In all his Offices, as Priest, Prophet, and
King. And so he must be received, not only as our Priest, who has made
satisfaction for us, by his death upon the Cross, and now in Heaven makes
intercession for us. But likewise as our Prophet, to be taught and instructed
by him, and as our King, to be ruled and governed by him: and we must as
willingly cast our selves at the feet of Christ in subjection to him, as into
the arms of Christ for salvation from him: we must be as willing to serve Jesus
Christ, as to be saved by him. The purpose of God in freeing us from the
spiritual bondage, in which we were by nature, being this, that we should serve
him without fear, in holiness and righteousness, all the days of our lives.

Vainly therefore do they deceive themselves, who are willing to receive Christ
as a Redeemer, but not as a Ruler: as a Savior, but not as a Lord and King.
Let such know, that Christ will be a Savior to none, to whom he is not a Lord,
and King. His subjects alone, and none other will he save, for he will not part
his Offices.

In the last place is added, And rest upon him alone, for the pardon of our
sins here, and for eternal life and Salvation hereafter. This resting on Christ
we find is set forth in Scripture by sundry Phrases, as a trusting in Christ,
Ephesians. 1.12. And a leaning on Christ, Cant. 8.5. A staying our s^lves upon him,
Isa. 50.10.

Q What are those esp^cial benefits which believers receive from Christ?

A. 1. Justification. 2. Adoption. 3. Sanctification.

That justification is by faith, the Apostle concludes, Romans 3.28. We conclude
that a man is justified by faith, without the deeds of the Law.

Q. What is Justification?

A. Justification is an act of Gods free grace, whereby he forgives us all our
sins; and accepts of us as righteous, in and for the righteousness of Jesus
Christ imputed to us.

That justification is an act of Gods free grace, The Apostle expresses, Romans
3.24. Being justified fre^ly by his grace. And that God accepts us as righteous
in and for the Righteousness of Jesus Christ, is clear from Romans 5.19. As by
one man's disobedience many were made sin-ers; So by the Obedience, or
righteousness, of o^e; namely Christ, shall many be made righteous: that is,
perfectly righteous, so as God shall accept them for righteous. We are
justified not by any inherent righteousness of our own, which is imperfect; but
by the perfect righteousness of Christ imputed to us, and by God himself
accounted ours.

2 Cor. 5.21. He made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be
made the righteous^^ss of God in him; that is, in Christ. In which words is
expressly noted, that we are so made righteous before God in Christ, as he was
made a sinner for us. Now how was Christ made a sinner for us? Namely, by
imputation; according to that of the Prophet, Isa. 53.6. The Lord has laid on
him the i^iquity of us all. God accounted our sins his, and accordingly he was
punished as a sinner. And so he accounts his righteousness ours, and in that
respect we are righteous before God. The Lord accounting us as righteous
through Christ's righteousness, as if we had kept the whole Law. Admirab^e is
the comfort which a believers soul receives from this point of his
ju^tification before God. For so soon as he be^ieveth, even while he lives in
this World, he is thus justified in Gods sight* Hereby therefore is he upheld
against the afflicting sense of the imperfection of his own righteousness. For
though his own righteousness be but as filthy rags, yet this is his comfort,
that he is righteous in the sight and account of God, by the perfect
righteousness of Jesus Christ imputed to him.

Q Which are the parts of Justification?

A. 1. Remission of all our sins.

2. Acceptance of us as righteous through the imputation of Christ's
Righteousness, Romans 4.6, 7, 8.

1. Our sins make us odious and abominable in the sight of God: yea they make
us cursed, and liable to eternal damnation: they therefore are first taken
away: not that they are not, or that God sees them not, but in that God
imputes them not to us, 2 Cor. 5.19.

2. God to make us glorious in his sight, imputes his Sons righteousness unto
us, and therein accepts us. In which respect we are said to be made righteous
by Christ's righteousness, Romans 5.19. and to be made accepted in the beloved,
Ephesians. 1.6.

By laying these two parts of our justification together, the transcendent love
of Christ to believers is clearly set out. For,

1. That which is our own, namely our sins, because they make us miserable, he
takes from us, and lays on himself, He was made sin for us, 2 Cor. 5.21.

2. That which is none of our own, because without it we cannot be happy, he
imputes to us, and accounts ours, and accepts of us, as if it were our own,
namely, his own perfect righteousness. For ^aith the Apostle, We are made the
righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21.

Q. What is Adoption?

A. Adoption is an act of Gods free grace whereby of Children of Wrath, and of
the Devil, we are made the Children of God, Ioh. 1.12.

We are not only accounted Children, and taken into the number of the seed of
God, but are invested with all the privileges of the Children of God, Romans
8.17.

Q. What is Sanctification?

A. Sanctification is a work of Gods Spirit, whereby a justified person is by
degrees renewed throughout, according to the Image of God in holiness and
righteousness.

First, Sanctification is said to be a work of Gods Spirit, because he is the
principal author, and efficient cause thereof.

Whereby a justified person is renewed: I add a justified person, because
Justification and Sanctification always go together. Though Justification be
before in Nature, yet are they both wrought at the same time. The Lord
accounts no man righteous, by imputing Christ's righteousness unto him, but he
makes him also righteous by a righteousness inherent in himself.

Is renewed; by the work of Sanctification a man is morally made a new man, and
as it were, another man. All things are become new, 2 Cor. ^.17. He has new
thoughts, new desires, new dispositions.

This renewing is by degrees; that is, by little and little, and not all at
once. Indeed we are justified at once, but we are Sanctified by degrees. In
which respect Sanctification is compared to the light which shines more and
more unto the perfect day, Prove. 4.18. And Ephesians. 4.26. To the body of a man,
which grows and increases in stature, and strength, till it be come to the
perfection of it. Even so our Sanctification increases by degrees; we go on
from grace to grace, from virtue to virtue, till we be perfect men, of full
growth in Christ Jesus.

This renewi^g as it is by degrees, so it is throughout, that is, within and
without, in all the faculties of the soul, and parts of the body. And that
according to the Image of God in holiness, and righteousness. So that a
Christian by the life of Sanctification lives like unto God: at least he has
an holy disposition and inclination; and heartily endeavors so to do, to be
holy, as God is holy: and as the Apostle speaks (Romans 7.22.) He delights in
the Law of God after the inward man.

Q. What other Grace does the Gospel require besides faith?

A. Repentance, Mat. 3 2. and 4.17.

Q What is Repentance?

A. Repentance is such a change of the heart, as causes a new Life.

Repentance chiefly consists in the change of the mind, and heart of a man.
As for the new life, it is an effect and evidence of the new heart. A new heart
causes a new life. The outward change and renovation of a man's life is
necessary. For Repentance must be in the whole man; and this latter gives
evidence to the truth of the former. And where the former is, there the latter
will also be: where there is a renewed heart, there will be a reformed life.
For the soul has an absolute command over the body: and the body is wholly
governed by the soul.

Q Whence arises Repentance?

A. 1. From a sight and sense of sin, with sorrow for it.

2. From a faith of the pardon of sin.

I. By sight of sin is meant, both a general, and also a paricular knowledge of
sin.

First, A general knowledge of the nature of it, what it is; and of the
loathsome properties of it, how ugly and odious it makes us in the pure eyes
of God; and of the fearful effects of it, which are all miseries in this life,
a cursed death, and eternal damnation.

Secondly, A particular knowledge of our own sins. Not only of those sins which
are common to the nature of all men, as Original corruption, proneness to evil,
dullness to good, etc. But also of such particular Lusts as we feel warring in
our members, and such actual sins, as we have committed in our lives. As he
that said, I was a blaspheamer, and a persecutor, and an oppressor, 1 Timothy 1.13.

By sense of sin is meant a spiritual feeling of the woeful plight, and
condition wherein we lie, by reason of sin. When inwardly in our souls and
consciences we are touched, and wounded for our sins.

II. Faith concerning the pardon of sin is that which most kindly and
effectually brings a man to Repentance. The forementioned sight and sense of
sin, and sorrow for sin, are excellent means to work in a man an hatred of sin,
and to make him wish he had never committed it, yea and to make him think of
turning from sin.

But faith in the pardon of sin, whereby the soul is persuaded that all sins
past shall be fully forgiven to him that repents, and turns from sin, is a
strong Motive to draw him from his former wicked courses And the Repentance
that is by faith in Gods mercy wrought, is most kindly wrought. For faith as it
apprehends pardon of sin most freely through Gods mercy in Christ Jesus; so it
works repentance by way of gratitude, because it is pleasing and acceptable to
God to turn from sin: and because the good God is displeased, and dishonored
by committing sin, and continuing therein.

Q What are the outward Means appointed by God, for the working, and
strengthening of faith, repentance, and other graces in us.

A. The Ordinances of God, especially the Word, Sacraments and Prayer.

The Ministry of the Word is the most necessary, both for the working, and
increasing faith and other graces. That which the Apostle says of faith, That
it comes by hearing, may b^ applied to all other graces, They come by hearing
the Word Preached. And to show that by it grace also is nourished, The Apostle
Peter exhorts, To desire the sincere milk of the Word, that they may grow
thereby, 1 Pet. 2.2. How does it then concern us, as to give diligent heed to
the Ministry of the Word, So to mix faith with our hearing, as by giving
credence to what is delivered out of the Word of God, so by applying to our
selves those truths which the Word reveals.

Q. What is a Sacrament?

A. An holy Ordinance instituted by Christ, wherein by outward signs, inward
grace is signified and sealed.

So that there are three things necessary to the making up of a Sacrament.

1. An outward sign. 2. An inward or spiritual grace. 3. Christ's Instituiton.
Q. How many Sacraments are there?

A. Two only; Baptism, and the Lords Supper.

As the Jews of old had two ordinary Sacraments, which were circumcision, and
the Passover. So Christians now have two such as answer to them; Baptism to
Circumcision, Col. 3.11, 12. The Lords Supper to the Passover, Luke 22.15, etc.

Q. What is Baptism?

A. A Sacrament wherein by the washing with water, in the name of the Father,
the Son, and the Holy Ghost, our Reg^neration is signified and sealed.

In that Baptism is a Sacrament of our Regeneration, it shows,

1. That by nature we are born in a cursed condition, who have therefore need
to be newborn as soon as we are born. Regeneration is so absolutely necessary
to our Salvation, as without it we cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven,
Job. 3.3.

2. That Baptism is a means of our Regeneration. Gods Spirit in and by that
Ordinance works this great work. In which respect we are said to be born of
water and of the Spirit, Joh. 3.5. yet is not every one that is baptized really
and inwardly regenerated. It is not the bare washing with water, but the
working of the Spirit thereby, by which we are Regenerated. And the Spirit is a
free agent, and works when and upon whom it lists, Ioh. 3.8.

Q. What is the outward sign in Baptism?

A. Water, Act. 8.36.

There is nothing so fit to set out our cleansing from sin, as Water, whereby
that which is filthy is clean.

Q What is the inward thing signified by Water in Baptism?

A. The Blood of Christ.

In relation hereunto Christ is said to have washed us from our sins in his
blood, Rev. 1.5. As Water has a cleansing virtue, so also has Christ's blood.
The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin, 1 John 1.7.

Q. What is the Lords Supper?

A. A Sacrament of our spiritual nourishment, wherein by receiving Bread and
Wine, according to Christ's institution, our communion with Christ is
repr^sented, and sealed.

The Lords Supper is add^d to Baptism, as a needful means to maintain that
life of God which is begotten in us.

Q. What are the outward signs in the Lords Supper?

A. Bread and Wine, Mat. 26.26.

Q. What does the Sacramental bread set out?

A. The body of Christ.

This is evident by Christ's own words, who holding bread in his hands, says of
it, This is my body, (Matthew. 26.26.) that is, by way of representation, as if
he had said, This bread represents my body.

Q. What does Sacramental Wine set out?

A. The blood of Christ.

This is evident by the words of institution, where Christ holding the Cup that
had the Wine in it, and speaking of the Wine therein, he says, This is my
blood, Mat. 26.27.

Q What is signified by the Ministers breaking the bread?

A. That Christ was broken with torments for our sins.

The Apostle in 1 Cor. 11.24. Thus brings in Christ himself applying that
rite, This is my body which is broken for you.

Q. What is signified by pouring out the Wine?

A. The shedding of Christ's blood.

Or his suffering unto death, and pouring forth his soul an offering for sin*

Q. What is signified by the Ministers giving Bread and Wine to the
Communicants?

A. Gods giving and offering his Son to them.

In the Sacrament God does offer and tender Christ to every Communicant: yea he
does, as it were, put him into our hands with his own hands.

Q. What is meant by those words of the Minister, Take, Eat, Drink?

A. Gods will for our applying Christ to our selves.

He does not only in a dumb show make offer of Christ, but by his Minister
speaks unto us, and says, I will and require you to take my Son, to apply him
to your selves, that so you may live by him. What can we more expect on Gods
part to move us to receive his Son?

Q. What does the peoples taking the Bread and Wine set out?

A. Their receiving Christ's body and blood.

That is, a spiritual receiving of Christ made man, and made a Sacrifice, to
themselves, and that by faith. For faith is that instrument whereby we receive
Christ, and all his benefits as they are offered to us in the Gospel, and
sealed unto us in the Sacrament. Faith is to the soul, as the hand is to the
body. That which is offered to a man for his good, the hand receives to be his
own. Thus God offering his Son unto us, faith first persuades the heart of Gods
good will to man, and of his true intent to bestow Christ upon him, and
thereupon applies and takes Christ to himself, as his own. By faith the things
signified are as truly received for the nourishment of the soul, as the signs
are received f^r the nourishment of the body. Faith is not only our hand to
take hold of Christ: but our mouth to take him in, to take him down into our
hearts, whereby he becomes our nourishm^nt and streng^h.

Q. What is the duty of every Communicant before he goes to the L^rds Table?

A. Examin^tion.

1 Cor. 11.28. Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and
dri^k of that C^p. Concerning this, see my Directions for the worthy receiving
the Lords Supper, Chap. 24.

Q. What is Pray^r?

A. Prayer is an offering up our d^sires to God in the name of Christ, for such
good things as he has prom^s^d to give, and we stand in need to receive.

Prayer stands not in the bare use of a form of good words, but is the pouring
f^rth the soul, and the desire^ thereof after God, and the good things he has
to bestow, Isa. 26.9.

In the name of Christ. God hears not sinners, that is, coming in their own
name. But says Christ himself, Joh. 15 16. Whatsoever ye shall a^k the Father,
[in my name] he will give it you.

For such things as he has promised to give, and we stand in need to receive.
Our prayers must be according to Gods Will. And this is according to the will
of God, that we ask what he has promised, and what he knows we have need of.
And this is the confidence that we have in him, that if we ask any thing
according to his will he hears us, 1 John 5.14.

The Parts of Prayer are, 1. Confession, or the acknowledgement of our sins and
transgressions. 2. Petition, or the asking, or craving from the hands of God
such things as we want. 3. Thanksgiving, or the praising of God for the mercies
we have received.


Q What shall be the state of men after death?

A. I. In general, 1. The bodies of all men shall be raised out of their
graves, and shall live again, 1 Cor. 15. 2. All men shall be brought to
Judgment, 2 Cor. 5.10.


II. In particular, 1. Bel^^vers shall go into everlasting life. 2. U^believers
and ungodly into everlasting fire, Mat. 25.34, 41.


FINIS.

