THE Surest and Safest WAY of THRIVING.

OR, A Conviction of that Grand Mistake in many, That what is given to the
Poor, is a loss to their estate; which is directly contrary as to the
experiences of the Charitable; so to the testimony of God's Spirit in diverse
places of Scripture: As, Prove. 11. 24. There is that scatters, and yet
increases; There is that with holds more than is meet, but it tends to
poverty. Prove. 19. 17. He that has pity on the poor, lends unto the Lord,
and that which he has given will he pay him again. Luke 6. 38. Give, and it
shall be given to you again, good measure, pressed down, and shaken together,
and running over. Psalm 37. 26. He is ever merciful and lends, and his seed
is blessed.

Deus bis solvit hoc foenus, scilicet semel in terra, secundo in coelo. In
terra enim eleemosynariis multiplicat opes, in coelo autem long plura, and
majora rependit. Cornelius a Lapide, in Prove. 19. 17.

BY THOMAS GOVGE, Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON, Printed for William Rawlins at the Hand and Pen over against the Royal
Exchange in Cornhill. 1673.

THE Surest and Safest WAY OF THRIVING.
Math. 10. 41, 42, He that receives a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall
receive a Prophets reward: and he that receives a righteous man in the name of
a righteous man, shall receive a righteous man's reward.

And whosoever shall give unto one of these little ones, a cup of cold water
only, in the name of a Disciple, verily I say unto you, he shall in no wise
lose his reward.


THE troubles whereunto God brings his Ministers and People, though they be
many and Great, yet are they not more, and greater, then the comforts which He
affords unto them, to support and encourage them in their troubles. Instance
this Chapter, and the Sermon of Christ therein recorded, concerning those sore
Trials whereunto his Church and Children should be brought. As any kind of
affliction is foretold, a proper and peculiar consolation is usually annexed.
Therefore to establish the hearts of his suffering Servants, and to encourage
their Succourers, He closes up His Sermon with the words of the text, wherein
He declares not only that high account which he had of His Ministers, and
People themselves, but also of them who should yield any relief, of upon His
account show kindness to them, assuring them; That he who receives a Prophet
in the name of a Prophet, should receive a Prophets reward. And he that
receives a righteous man in the name of a righteous man, should receive a
righteous man's reward.

The words in brief contain, A Declaration of that great benefit, which they
bring to themselves, who afford any relief, and succor to Ministers, or other
Saints; teaching, That there is no such way to fill our Treasures, as by
emptying them for God.

For, the clearing of the words, I shall briefly show you, 1. Who is here meant
by a Prophet. And who by a Righteous man. 2. What is meant by receiving them.
3. What is the Reward which follows thereupon.


I. For the first, who is here meant by a Prophet; and who by a Righteous man.

By a Prophet our Savior here means not only extraordinary Ministers, such
as were immediately and extraordinarily inspired by the Holy Ghost; or who had
extraordinary revelations to foretell things to come: but also ordinary
Ministers of the word, and interpreters of the Scriptures, as Ioh. 4. 44. Rev.
11. 18.

By Righteous men he means his Saints, or such as testify their
justification through faith in Christ, by their sanctification, and fruits of a
good conscience, whom commonly the Scripture styles Saints.

II. For the Second, what is meant by receiving these?

For Answer thereunto, you must know, There are two things whereunto this
receiving may have a respect.

1. To the word and message of a Minister, and so it signifies, the harkening
to, and embracing their holy Counsel and Doctrine.

2. To the Person of a Minister, and so it signifies the harboring, or showing
kindness to Him, as is evident from the instance of cold water, given unto a
Prophet, or Righteous man, expressed in the following verse. Both these are
employed under this phrase of receiving a Prophet, viz. His Doctrine, by
embracing, and submitting to it: and his Person, by harboring, succouring, and
relieving him according to his need.

By the receiving a Prophet, in the name of a Prophet, is meant a a succouring
and relieving him for his particular calling sake, eo nomine, because he is a
Prophet. So by receiving a righteous man, in the name of a righteous man,
intends the same thing; namely, the relieving him, for his General callings
sake, because he is a Christian a child of God, and a member of Christ.

III. For the third particular, what is here meant by the reward of a Prophet,
and of a righteous man? I Answer, These phrases of receiving a Prophets, and of
a Righteous man's reward, may be taken Actively, or Passively. Actively, for
that reward which a Prophet or a righteous man gives. Passively, for that
which is by God given to the one, and to the other. The reward which a Prophet
gives, is ministerially to preach the word of Reconciliation to such as
receive them, as Peter did to Cornelius, Act. 10. 34. etc. To pray for them, as
Abraham for Abimeleck, Genesis 20. 7, 17, And to bless them, as Melchisedec
blessed Abraham, Genesis 17. 19.

The reward which a righteous man gives is privately to instruct, and edify,
to pray for, and to be a good pattern, and example of righteousness, to such as
entertain or otherwise relieve him.

The reward which is given by God, to either of these, for that kindness which
any show unto them, is such a surpassing, and excellent weight of glory, as
cannot be expressed by the tongue of men, or Angels, yet different in degrees,
as is evident, Dan. 12. 3.

Some take these phrases, Of receiving a Prophet, and a righteous man's reward,
in the former sense, Actively; and others, Passively. I conceive it may be
taken in both.

The words thus explained do afford unto us several points of Doctrine.

From the duty here expressed of receiving, and relieving Prophets, and
righteous men, with the manner of setting it down, we may observe.

1. Doct. That all needful succor, and good entertainment is to be afforded to
Ministers of the Gospel. This is the main and principal point intended.

2. Doct. Christian kindness is to be showed not only to Ministers, but also to
all the members of Christ. For our blessed Savior contents not himself to have
mentioned a Prophet, but also adds a righteous man.

These two sorts make up The household of Faith; to whom the Apostle exhorts
Christians especially to do good, Gal. 6. 10.

Q. Is our Charity to extend no farther?

A. Yes, even to all that are in want, but especially to such as have a
particular relation to Christ, as being his members, or Ministers; because
Christ in them is after an especial manner succored, and relieved. It will be
therefore our wisdom to take notice of the extent of this duty, and in all we
do, either for Christians or others, to see to it, that what we do, is done
for the Lords, and for conscience sake, to the one in compassion to his
members, to the other in obedience to his will.

4. Doct. According to the kindness which we show, shall our reward be. He that
receives, and relieveth a Prophet, shall receive a Prophets reward. And he
that receives and relieveth a righteous man, shall receive the reward of a
righteous man.

Verse 42. And whosoever shall give to drink unto one of these little ones, a
cup of cold water only in the name of a Disciple, he shall in no wise lose his
reward.

These words are added by our Savior to the former to anticipate some
Objections, which might be made thereupon, as also more fully to explain the
forementioned points.

1. Obj. May be thus made, These Preachers and Professors of the Gospel are but
mean persons, and little in esteem, what great reward can be expected for
entertaining them?

A. As little as they be, be they as inconsiderable and contemptible as the
proud world make them, yet are they not so little in the eyes of Lord, but that
he will reward all such as are friendly to them.

2. Obj. I my self am but poor, and can do but little for them.

A. Though thy kindness be never so small, as small as a cup of water, and that
cold, taken out of the River, without any pains or cost to heat it, yea but ONE
cup full thereof, and no more, (supposing that to be the most thou can do
for them) yet it shall be rewarded by him, who more respects the willingness
of the Giver, then the greatness of the Gift.

The greatest difficulty in the words is who are here meant by little ones, for
whose sake the reward is promised.

By little ones, our Savior means no other than such in the foregoing verse,
he had styled Prophets and righteous ones.

They are called Little ones in two respects.

1. In regard of the worlds esteem of them. 2. In regard of their own account
of themselves.
First, They are little in the worlds eye. The world which judges not
according to inward worth, have them in low esteem. It fares with the servants,
as it fared with their Master, they are despised, and rejected, and trodden
under foot of men. Of old they were accounted Desolate, and forsaken, Isa. 62.
4. In the Apostles time, the filth of the world, the of scouring of all things,
1 Cor. 4. 13. Experience of all ages verifieth as much. And among other ages
ours gives not the least evidence.

That comfort and contentment which God's people find in the Lord, and the
light of his countenance, yea that hope they have of finding grace in his eyes,
make them the less to mind, and seek after the honor, wealth, and promotions
of the world, and commonly they have but little of it. Now the world judges
according to outward, earthly, worldly glory, it discerns not the spiritual
glory of the Saints, 1 Ioh. 3. 1.

Judge not of men according to the worlds judgment: think not ever the more
meanly of Saints, because the world thinks so of them. They are highly favored
of the most High: they are such of whom the world is not worthy, they are the
excellent ones, Psalm. 16. 3: but what ever they be in deed, in the eye of the
world they are but little ones.

Secondly, They are little in their own eyes, Genesis 18. 27. we read how Abraham
in speaking to God, styles himself no better than Dust and ashes. And Genesis 32.
10. Jacob acknowledges himself unworthy, or, less than the least of Gods
Mercies.

The ground thereof may be because the Saints best know themselves, since they
more thoroughly, than other men, Search their hearts, and observe their ways, and
compare themselves with the pure and perfect law of God, and take notice of
their inward, Secret corruptions, as well as of their outward and visible
transgressions: and thus come they to know more of themselves, then any other
can, or may suspect of them. And this clearer sight of themselves brings them
down, and lays them low. This made Saint Paul to cry out, Romans 7. 24. O
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death? This
is a note of true grace, and of a sanctified heart. They are the poor in
spirit, not the proud in Spirit, that are Christ's blessed ones, Math. 5. 3. The
false disciple thinks highly of himself, and would be accounted not (...) a
little one, like a true disciple of Christ; but (...) Some great one, like to
Simon Magus, Act 8. 8, 9. This Spirit is a Satanical Spirit. Try thy Spirit by
this note, whether it be of God, or no.

But though all the Servants of God are on the the forementioned account little
ones, yet there are some among them less than others, as in regard of their
offices, and stations in the Church, some are in higher, others in lower
Offices, some are in office, others not; So also in regard of their parts and
gifts, and graces, some are strong, and others are weak; some the chief, others
the least of Saints: some as the head, and others but as the finger, or the
foot: and it is probable the text has the most special respect (and the
Emphasis of it is the greater) to the least of all these little ones, and so
the expression is Math. 25. 40. In as much as ye have done it unto one of the
least of these my brethren ye have done it unto me.

This I the rather take notice of it to give an hint to Christians in their
Charitable distributions to have an eye to such Ministers or Christians as are
more obscure, and less considerable in the World. Possibly when those of
greater worth and remark may taste deeply of their bounty, every one almost has
a kindness for them: in the mean time there may be some poor hidden ones, whose
worth is less, but their wants are greater, who being low in those gifs or
graces which would commend them to the more public notice, are almost buried
in forgetfulness. Its true that by how much the more eminent the person is that
is relieved ( caeteris paribus) by so much the more excellent the work: yet
special care should be taken that the more obscure and least deserving among
all that belong to God be not forgotten.

The words thus explained, afford unto us two special poins of Doctrine.

1. Doct. God takes notice of every of his Saints, even of the least of them,
and of kindness showed to them.

Though Joseph was but a lad, and sold as a slave, yet being one of the Church,
one of the little ones, yea minimorum minimus; yet in Egypt God takes notice
of him, and of that kindness which was showed to him, Genesis 32. 5. Many other
like examples are noted in the Scripture; but none more fit for our purpose,
than the example of Lazarus, Luke 16. 20. though he were a very poor beggar,
and full of sores, and despised of Dives, and all his househo^d, yet God took
such notice of him, as he made his Angels attend him. Yea God took notice of
the kindness which the Dogs showed him, for their licking of his sores is
recorded to all ages. Note those expressions of the Psalmist, Psalm. 40. 12. But
I am poor and needy, yet the Lord thinks upon me. And again Psalm. 34. 6. This
poor man cried, and the Lord heard him, and saved him out of all his troubles.

Qu. If you ask, why the Lord takes notice of every of his Saints.

Ans. 1. They are all his Children, and of his household; therefore as a
tender, and careful father, and Master, he cares for every one. Yea they are
all members of the body of Christ. Now the head takes care of every member,
even the least, and takes notice of every kindness done to any of them.

2. They are all by reason of grace in them, as Jewels and precious stones;
therefore as a provident Ieweller he will look to every one of them. Yea that
which often appears least may be of greater worth; as a little Diamond is of
more Value than a far greater pebble.

This affords a singular ground of comfort to such as in this world are
desolate, and forsaken: though they be left alone (as Elijah was 1 King 19.
10.) And as a Pelican in the wilderness: Or an Owl of the Desert, Or as a
sparrow alone upon the house top, as the Psalmist expresseh, Psalm. 102. 6, 7.
yet is the Lord with them, and takes care of them. Now if the Lord be with us,
and takes care of us, What need me fear?] How should this encourage us to
extend our charity to any one of the Saints, and members of Christ, though mean
and little in the world, and not able to recompense us: and though none take
notice thereof, to consider that the Lord takes notice, and will abundantly
recompense every good work, yea the least kindness we do unto them. Heb. 6. 10.
God is not unrighteous to forget your work, and labor of love, which ye have
showed toward his name, in that ye have ministered to the Saints, and do
minister, Where, Gods not forgetting their labor of love in ministering to the
Saints, does imply, that as God takes notice of their beneficence, So he is,
and will be ever mindful of such and such persons to support and succor, and
every way do them good.

And if God will thus remember those that remember the least of his, how will
he take it that they are neglected? Beloved, how is it with Gods little ones at
this day? Is it not very low with many, of them? God takes notice how very low
it is; and whether you will or no, God will not forsake them; but (that I may
use the words of Mordecai to Ester, with some variation, Ester. 4. 14.) If you
altogether hold your hand at this time, relief shall arise to them some other
way, but you and your house (take heed that word be not verified upon you)
shall be destroyed. But who knows whether you are come to your estates for such
a time as this!

And thus I come to the Second and main point of Doctrine, which rises from
the reward promised to such as show the least kindness to a minister, or
righteous man, though it be but a cup of cold water they shall in no wise lose
their reward. Whence we may observe.

2. Doct. That the least work of charity showed to a Minister or righteous man,
shall be abundantly recompensed, and that not only hereafter, but likewise here
on earth.

Though our beneficence ought to extend unto all who are in want and come
within the verge of our knowledge, and power, as Gal. 6. 10. According as we
have opportunity, let us do good unto ALL men; yet I confine my discourse here
to Ministers, and righteous ones, because they only are employed under those
little ones mentioned in my text.

That merciful men shall be abundantly recompensed hereafter in heaven for
their works of charity, there is no doubt, being so clearly expressed in the
word of God, Luke 16. 9. Make your selves friends of the Mammon of
unrighteousness, that when ye fail, they may receive you into everlasting
habitations And 1 Timothy 6. 17. Charge them that are rich in this world, that
they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to
communicate, laying up in store for themselves a good foundation against the
time to come, that they may lay hold of eternal life.

But the great question is concerning temporal reward, Whether Christian
charity, rightly performed, shall be recompensed here in this life with
temporal blessings: So that what men give in a way of charity, there is ground
to expect, it shall be here returned into their bosoms again with increase.

I deny not but a charitable man may become poor, and be reduced into some
straights, through Suretiship, negligence in his Calling, or in respect of some
secret sin, wherein he lives, which may justly bring a temporal curse upon
him: So that his liberality in such cases may not be a sufficient fence against
want and penury. But this I say, That as penuriousness toward the poor is the
readiest way to poverty: So Christian charity, rightly performed, is the surest
way to plenty and abundance, it being usually rewarded with temporal blessings
here, as well as with eternal hereafter. Where is the man to be found, that is
the poorer by what he has given to the poor? How many are the instances of
such which have met with some signal blessings from God in this life, as the
reward of their liberality?

This may seem a paradox to many uncharitable men, that Giving should be the
surest way of getting, and that the more liberal any man is, the more likely he
is to thrive and prosper in the world. Yet nothing more clearly laid down in
the Scripture, and found to be true by the experience of multitudes of Gods
people in all ages. And I am verily persuaded, that there is seldom any man,
that makes conscience of this duty, who gives out to the poor proportionably
to what God has bestowed on him, and with an honest, upright heart, but if he
do observe the passages of Gods providence toward him, he shall find the same
doubled, and redoubled upon him in temporal blessings, I dare challenge all the
world to give one instance, or at least any considerable number of instances of
any truly merciful men, whose charity has undone them. But as living wells
the more they are drawn, the more freely they spring, and flow; So the
substance of charitable men does oftentimes, if not ordinarily, multiply in the
very distribution; Even as the five loaves, and few fishes did multiply in
their breaking, and distributing. And the widows Oil increased by the pouring
it out.

But these bare assertions being no full convictions: For the better clearing
the truth of this doctrine, I shall prove it by Scriptures, Examples, and
Reasons.

1. For Scripture proofs, there are very many both in the old, and
New Testament. What the Apostle says of Godliness, 1 Timothy 4. 8. It is
profitable unto all things, having the promise of this life, and of that which
is to come. The like I may say of Charity, It is profitable unto all things,
having promises of temporal blessings, as well as of Spiritual, and eternal.

Deuteronomy. 15. 10. Thou shall surely give unto thy brother, and thy heart shall not
be grieved when thou give unto him; because that for this the Lord thy God
shall bless thee in all thy works, and in all that thou put thine hand
unto. It is not thine own labor, or care, but the divine blessing that makes
rich, and of that blessing behold here is a Scripture-entail upon the liberal.
And the like we have Pro. ^. 9, 10. Honor the Lord with thy substance, by
giving out a portion thereof for the relief of the poor, So shall thy barns be
filled with plenty, and as thy Barnes, so thy Shop, thy Cellers, warehouses,
where thou bestowest thy goods, shall be filled with abundance: and thy presses
shall burst out with new wine, this seems to be an hyperbolical expression,
yet it signifies no less then this, that Gods usual way is to make good
returns of all we lay out upon him and his; and that our wisest way both for
ensuring, and improving what we have is to make our selves Creditors to his
wanting Saints.

A compassionate heart, and an helping hand will gather by expending; such
giving is getting, such bounty is the most compendious way to plenty. Whereupon
the wiseman adds, Pro. 11. 24. There is that scatters, and yet increases;
there is that withholdeth more then is meet, but it tends to poverty. Who is
he, here, that scatters? not he that wastes his estate upon his throat, his
back and his belly, or with the Prodigal upon Harlots; but he that casts his
bread upon the waters, as the expression is Eccl. 11. 1. He that disperseth and
gives to the poor, as Psalm. 112. 9. this is the scatterer in that text. And
what of him? is he wasted? is he impoverished? Behold the quite contrary: the
man is grown rich, he is increased by scattering. Let him look to it, that
withholdeth more than is meet: this is the more likely man of the two to be
found shortly on the dunghill. If thou will secure thy self from beggary, keep
not Gods beggars from thy door, nor send them away empty whose needs, though
not their tongues, cry in thine ears, Give for the Lords sake. Fear not to
loose by laying out. Thy laying up what thou should lay out has the most
danger in it. The divine curse may wither that in thine hand which thou hold
fast against the divine command.

In the following verse we read further, The liberal soul shall be made fat.
The Soul is often in Scripture taken to signify the Man, and so it is here,
and is the same, as the liberal man. To be made fat, signifies to prosper, to
be full, and abound, or to grow rich in this worlds goods; and thus it shall
be, if this Scripture may be credited.

The liberal Soul] It is in the Hebrew, as you may find it noted in the Margin,
the Soul of blessing, the merciful man is a blessing, and has a blessing for
such as need him: and he that is a blessing, shall be blessed; the Lord God
shall bless him with an increase of his substance, who has most emptied
himself for him, and his. Its true that the SOUL of the liberal properly taken,
shall be a gainer by his liberality: no more thriving Christians, then the
merciful Christians, what they expend in temporals is abundantly returned in
spirituals. But because there is so much of carnal, even in too many
Christians, and have need of encouragements suited to our tempers, therefore to
our spiritual advantages, which are the greatest these outward encouragements
are added as often most taking with our too carnal hearts. So that this is the
sense of the place. The liberal man, as the reward and encouragement of his
liberality, shall prosper in the world. And as it follows, He that waters,
the soul of the needy, his waters shall not fail, but he shall be watered also
himself. God will give in to him, according as he has given out to others.

And for their farther encouragement, says the wiseman, Pro. 19. 17. He that
has pity on the poor, lends unto the Lord, and that which he has given,
shall he pay him again. If that which thou give be repaid thee again, how can
it be said to be lost? Indeed the poor, unto whom thou give, are not able to
repay thee again, yet having such an alsufficient Surety, as God himself, who
has undertaken the repayment, thou need'st not doubt thereof. Oh happy is that
man that becomes a Creditor to his Creator, and makes God his debtor! whose is
the earth, and the fullness thereof. Heaven and earth shall be emptied before he
shall want a royal payment.

Fear not to be an Usurer, so thou lendest unto God, make him thy debtor, and
he will surely pay thee Principal and Interest. Allow him his time (for that he
will have) and he will not only pay the debt, but allow thee for the
forbearance. The ungodly borrows, and pays not again: but this shall never
be said of the righteous God: He is just, and will make good payment of
whatsoever is lent unto him.

It is true, the Lord loves to deal upon trust, and uses to make payment by way
of Returns. He will be trusted, and those that will not give him Credit, let
them if they can, put their estates into surer hands. And he uses to pay by the
way of Returus, it may be neither in the same kind, nor in the same Country.
Sometimes it is so that he pays not in the same kind, bread for bread, or clothes
for clothes, or money or money, Nor possibly may he make his payment in this
foreign land, where thou art a Merchant adventurer, but may give thee his bill
of exchange to receive it in thine own country, that better Country, which is
thy home, and inheritance, which shall be the reward of thy works, and labor
of love, which thou show to his name. And if he do thus, does he thee any
wrong? Is it not best for thee that thou receive thy goods at thy home? Is it
any harm to thee to receive Silver for thy Brass, Gold for thy Silver, Rubies
for thy Gold, a treasure in Heaven, for thy treasure on Earth? Doubt not that
he will be behind hand with thee: yet stick not if thou should be put to it,
to wait for payment in full till hereafter: and for the present this thou
may depend upon from Pro. 28. 27. He that gives to the poor shall not lack,
he shall have in hand what is needful at least. He shall not lack and there may
be more in this word, then if he had said, I will presently pay thee all: For
all that thou have, if thou should hold it never so close, cannot secure thee
from ever coming to want; as great as thy abundance is, thou may come to want
before thou die. But what thy abundance cannot do, this promise of God can
and does for thee even give thee security that thou shall never lack.

Again Eccl. 11. 1. Cast thy bread upon the waters, for thou shall find it
after many days. By bread is here meant all things necessary for the support of
men's lives. And by casting their bread upon the waters, is meant their giving
freely of that which they have for the relief of the poor, whose watery eyes
bewray their great necessity. And though that which thou bestowest on them, may
seem to be as clearly lost and cast away, as that which is thrown down the
River, or cast into the Sea, where there is no like^ihood of receiving it again,
because given to those who can no way recompense thee; whence arose that Greek
Proverb (...) Thou sowest upon the water, which is usually applied to such as
bestow kindnesses where they are utterly lost.

Yet thou shall find it after many days, Lavater in locum says, that here is
employed a promise of long life to the charitable, that God will lengthen out
his days to a good old age. Though this falls out true in many, yet I conceive
it not to be here intended, nor to be the meaning of the words, but rather,
this, that though thy reward does not presently appear, yet if thou bestowest
thine alms with a sincere heart, it shall not be lost, but certainly be
returned into thy bosom with increase.

Yet further says the Lord by the Prophet Isa. 58. 7, 8. etc. If thou deal thy
bread to the hungry, and bring the poor that are cast out, to thy house, and
when thou see the naked, if thou cover him, and that thou hide not thy self
from thine own flesh, by tnrning thy sace from him; Then (see what a gracious
promise of signal blessings follow hereupon) shall thy light break forth as the
Morning, that is, then shall the night of thine adversity be dispelled, and the
day spring of thy prosperity break forth as the Morning-light: and thy
righteousness shall go before thee, that is, the fruit and reward of thy
charity shall be visible to all: the glory of the Lord shall be thy rereward,
that is, the God of glory shall by his power and providence both go before
thee, and follow thee with his blessing. And verse 10. If thou draw out thy
soul to the hungry, and Satisfy the afflicted soul, that is, afford that
hearty relief unto him, which shall satisfy his necessity, then shall thy
light rise in obscurity, thy adversity shall be turned into prosperity, And the
Lord shall guide thee continually, and satisfy thy soul in drought, as thou
did satisfy the poor man's soul by supplying his wants, so the Lord will
supply thee with a sufficiency in the greatest dearth and famine; and make fat
thy bones; and thou shall be as a watered garden, and a little spring of water,
whose waters fail not; an emblem of a flourishing, and prosperous estate, which
does usually follow, and accompany merciful men.

Yea our blessed Savior, Math. 19. 29. promises, that such as for his sake
shall this or any other way part with their estates, or any part or portions of
them, shall receive an hundred fold here, and inherit eternal life hereafter:
here in this life he shall have the return of an hundred fold, which many
Christians have found true in their own experience, and with thankfulness to
God have acknowledged as much.

And what variety of expressions does our Savior use in Luke 6. 38. to assure
us of a large reward here of all our labor of love showed to his Ministers,
and members? Give, says he, and it shall be gien to you again, good measure,
pressed down, and shaken together, and running over. For your encouragement
unto this duty of giving to the poor, Our Savior first annexeth a general
promise of return, Give, and it shall be given to you again, where he gives
you a Bill of his hand, that you shall be no looser by what you give to his
poor, but shall be repaid, and that with advantage, as the following words
declare, you shall have good measure, pressed down, shaken together, and
running over, we account it good measure, when it is heaped up, but when it is
not only heaped up, but pressed down, that is more; but when it is heaped up,
pressed down; and then heaped up, and running over again, who can but say, that
this is good measure indeed? Yet thus God deals with merciful men, they shall
have mercies and blessings heaped up, pressed down, and running over. How
truly then may I take up the words of the Psalmist, Blessed is he that
considers the poor; He shall not only be blessed, but he shall have blessings
heaped up, and running over! which the Apostle St. Paul expresses very
Emphatically by the similitude of reaping and sowing, 2 Cor. 9. 6. He that
sows sparingly, shall reap sparingly, but he which sows bountifully, shall
reap bountifully. As men sow, so shall they reap, the more liberally they give
to good uses, the more bountifully they shall receive from God: they shall find
a plentiful harvest, as the fruit of all their cost and pains. Dr. Hammond in
his practical Catechism, quoting these words of the Apostle He that sows
bountifully, shall reap bountifully, adds this gloss, By reaping bountifully,
I conceive is meant, not only Gods abundant retributions of glory in another
world, but even his payments of temporal plenty, and blessings here to those
who have been willing to make that Christian Use of that earthly talent
committed to their Stewarding.

Thus you see there are so many promises both in the old and new Testament of
temporal, as well as of spiritual and eternal blessings to the merciful, that
there can be no question made of the truth of the doctrine. And to use the
expression of the forementioned Doctor: By all those testimonies from the word
of God, both in the new and old Testament, I conceive this Doctrine as clear as
any in the Scripture; That the promise of temporal plenty to the liberal is so
distinct and infallible, that is can be no less than.

1. A very gross ignorance of plain Scripture not to observe it, and 2. An act
of arrant infidelity, not to believe it.
Though these proofs of Scripture are sufficient to convince any Christian of
the truth of the Doctrine, yet for your farther Satisfaction, I shall briefly
give you the Judgment both of some ancient Fathers, and modern Divines
concerning the same.

Non qui habet et Servat, sed qui impertit est Dives, et impertitio, non autem
possessio divites facit. Clemens Alexand. Paedag. lib. 3. Not he that
possesses wealth, and keeps it by him, but he that distributeth it, is rich:
neither is it the having, but the laying out of riches, that makes men rich.

Terrena omnia Servando amittimus, largiendo Servamus. Isiodorus. We loose all
earthly things by keeping them, and by giving them away we keep them.

Lucrum est egenis dare, says St. Basil. Its the best way of thriving to give
to them that are in want.

Faecundus est ager pauperum, cito reddit donantibus fructum. Aug. Sermon. de
Divite. The field of the poor is very fruitful, and quickly yields an
increase to the charitable.

The fame Father in his 25 Sermon de verbis Domini, brings in Christ speaking
thus, Da mihi ex eo quod dedi tibi, habuisti me largitorem, fac me debitorem
etc. Give to me of that which I have given to thee; I have been thy benefactor,
make me thy debtor, become an Usurer to me, and I will pay thee with advantage.
And in one of his Epistles, Da modicum ut recipias centuplum. Give a little,
and thou shall receive an hundred fold.

Da pauperi ut detur tibi, quicquid pauperi dederis tu habebis, quod non
dederis, habebit alter. Give to the poor, and it shall be given to thee.
Whatsoever thou give to the poor, thou securest to thy self* what thou
withholdest, another shall possess. Pet. Raven Sermon. quodam.

Deus his solvit hoc faenus, scilicet semel in terra, Secundo in caelo. In
terra a enim elecmosynariis multiplicat opes, in caelo autem long plura, et
major a rependit. God twice pays what is lent to him, once in this world, by
multiplying the wealth of alms-givers; and then in heaven he pays it over and
over. Cornelius a lapid. in Pro. 19. 17.

Dr. Hammond in his Sermon on Deuteronomy. 26. 12, 13. lays down this proposition.
That almsgiving or mercifulness was never the wasting or lessening of any man's
estate, to himself or his posterity, but rather the increasing of it. And
thereupon adds, If I have delivered a new Doctrine, which will not presently
be believed, Such as every Auditour will not consent to, I doubt not but there
be plain texts of Scripture, more than one, which will assure every Christian
of the truth of it. Consider them at your leisure, Psalm. 41. 1, 2. Psalm. 112.
all to this purpose. Pro. 11. 25. and 12. 9. and 19. 17. and 28. 27. Add to
these the words of Christ, Mark 10. 30. which though more generally delivered
of any kind of parting with possessions for Christ sake, are applied by St.
Hierom: to the words of Solomon. Pro. 11. 24. There is that Scatters, and yet
increases, quia contuplum accipiunt in hoc tempore, because, says he they
receive an hundred fold in this world.

All these being put together, must, says he, (to my understanding) make it as
clear to any that acknowledge these for Scripture, as if God should call to a
man out of heaven by name, and bid him relieve that poor man, and he should
never be the poorer for it etc.

Afterward in pressing upon his Auditors the duty of Almsgiving, This, says
he, I am resolved on, it is want of belief, and nothing else, that keeps men
from the practice of this duty. Could this one Mountain be removed, the
lessening of our wealth, that alms giving is accused of; could that one Scandal
to flesh and blood be kicked out of the way, there is no other Devil would take
the unmercifull man's part, no other temptation molest the alms-giver.

And let me tell you, that you have no more evidence for the truth of Christ's
coming, for all the fundamentals of your faith, on which you are content your
Salvation should depend, then such as I have given you for your Security in
this point.

Dr. Jeremy Tailor in his Rules of holy-living, treating of Alms, Sect. 8.
among other Motives thereunto, has this. That portion of our estate, out of
which a tenth or a fifth, or a twentieth, or some offering to God for Religion,
and the poor goes forth, Certainly returns with a great blessing upon all the
rest. It is like the effusion of oil by the Sidonian woman, as long as she
poures into empty vessels, it could never cease running: Or like the widows
barrel of meal, it consumes not as long as she fed the prophet.

Mr. Hildersham in his 22th. Lecture on Psalm. 51. speaking of almsgiving,
says, It is a Duty that God has made greater promises unto, than to any other
almost that a Christian can perform. And three sorts of promises there be that
are made unto it. First, That it shall never hinder, nor beggar a man; That
that is thus given shall not be lost, yea it will return again with advantage
and increase: Yea that that is thus given will bring Gods blessing upon all
that we have besides, Deuteronomy. 15. 10.

Dr. Thomas Iacomb, in his Sermon on Math. 5. 7. preached at the spittle 1657.
says, God w^ll return to the Merciful man what he gives to the poor, he will
reward him in kind; that look what ever it is that he bestows, it shall be in
the very kind made up to him again; many have found this to be true: in the
Morning they have given, may be, five shillings, and before night God has
brought them in unexpectedly twenty for it. The best way for a man to increase
his estate is charity: Money here like the widows oil, the more it is poured
out, the more it does increase, etc. And p. 26, No man shall be the poorer at
the years end for what he lays out upon the poor; you shall have your money
again, and improvement for it too.

The Author of the whole Duty of man, treating of Alms in Partition 17. says,
There is but one Objection to be made against a cheerful giving of Alms, and
that is, The danger of impoverishing ones self by what one gives. To which he
answers in these words; that this is sure a vain supposition, God having
particularly promised the contrary to the charitable: That it shall bring
blessings on them, even in these outward things. The liberal soul shall be made
fat, and he that waters, shall be watered also himself, Pro. 11. 25. He that
gives to the poor, shall not lack, Pro. 28. 27. And many the like texts there
are, so that one may truly say, This Objection is grounded in direct unbelief.
The short of it is, we dare not trust God, for this giving to the poor, is
directly The putting our wealth into his hands: He that gives to the poor,
lends unto the Lord, Pro. 19. 17. and that too, on solemn promise of
repayment, as it follows in that verse, That which he has given will he pay
him again. It is amongst men thought a great disparagment, when we refuse to
trust them: it shows, we either think them not sufficient or not honest. How
vile an affront is it then to God, thus to distrust him? Nay indeed, how horrid
blasphemy, to doubt the security of that, for which he has thus expressly past
his word, who is the Lord of all, and therefore cannot be insufficient: and who
is the God of truth, and therefore will not fail to make good his promise? Let
not then that infidel-fear of future-want contract and shut up thy bowels from
thy poor brother: for though he be never like to pay, yet God becomes his
Surety, and enters bond with him, and will most assuredly pay thee with
increase.

Therefore it is so far from being damage to thee, Thus to give, that it is thy
great advantage. Any man would rather choose to put his money in some sure hand,
where he may both improve, and be certain of it at his need, than to let it lie
unprofitable by him, especially if he be in danger of thieves, or other
accidents, by which he may probably lose it: Now alas! all that we possess is
in emminent-danger of losing: innumerable accidents there are, which may in an
instant bring a rich man to beggary; he that doubts this, let him but read the
story of Job, and he will there find an example of it. And therefore what so
prudent course can we take for our wealth, as to put it out of the reach of
those accidents, by thus lending it to God, where we may be sure to find it
ready at our greatest need, and that too with improvement and increase? In which
respect it is, that the Apostle compares alms to Seed 2 Cor. 9. 10. We know it
is the nature of Seed that is sown, to multiply and increase; and so do all
our acts of Mercy, they return not single, and naked to us, but bring in their
sheaves with them, a most plenteous and bountiful harvest. God deals not with
our alms, as we too often do with his graces, wrap them up in a napkin, so
that they shall never bring in any advantage to us, but makes us most rich
Returns. And therefore we have all reason, most cheerfully, yea-joyfully, to
set to this duty, which we have such invitations to, as well in respect of our
own Interest, as our Neighbors needs.

Thus have you the truth of the point proved both by divine, and humane
testimonies. I should now proceed to give you some instances for the farther
confirmation thereof. But I must beseech you first to take these two Cautions.

1. Not to ascribe the reward to any merit of your good works, but only to the
free grace, and rich mercy of God. It is his rich mercy, that we have
wherewithal to give, and his free grace, that we have an heart to give, and
his abundant goodness, that he accepts our works of charity, and rewards
them with all sorts of blessings, both temporal, Spiritual and eternal; but we
cannot merit any thing at his hand; by giving him that which is his own.

2. Though our Alms-deeds are sacrifices acceptable and welpleasing unto God
through Christ; and though he has bound himself by many gracious promises to
reward the same both here, and hereafter: yet far be it from us to perform them
merely out of hope of reward, but rather for conscience sake, in obedience to
the command of God, (who has required them at our hands,) and in testimony of
our thankfulness unto him, for what he has graciously bestowed on us. As we
are commanded to obey the Magistrate, not so much for fear of punishment, and
hope of reward, as for conscience sake, in obedience to the command of God,
Romans 13. 5. So ought we to distribute our Alms not so much for the reward-sake,
as out of conscience, for the Lords-sake.

I deny not but Christians in their well-doing may for their encouragement have
respect to the recompense of reward, but not only, and chiefly. The chief and
principal Ends we should aim at in all our good works, are, The glory of God,
And Obedience to his command. Our respect to the recompense of reward ought to
be subordinate unto these. The truth is, This temporal reward should not so
much be looked on, as an argument to persuade us to give, but as an answer of
an Objection against Giving. Thou will be ready to say, I may want it my self,
or mine may want it. But do but believe, that God will repay thee, and with
overplus; and then that doubt willbe taken out of the way.

These two Cautions premised, I shall proceed in the confirmation of the point
from the examples of many charitable persons, who have in temporal mercies been
abundantly recompensed for the kindness they have showed to the Ministers and
Members of Christ.

The widow of Sareptah nourished the Prophet Elijah in her house during the
whole time of famine: and how did the Lord abundantly recompense this her
charity, by his miraculous preserving and increasing her meal and oil, whereby
her family was nourished. As also by restor^ng her Son to life again, after his
Soul was departed? 1 King 17. 22. And by causing the Prophet to continue with
her many Months, to feed her soul with spiritual, as she had his body, with
carnal food.

How abundantly was the Shunamite's kindness to the Prophet Elisha,
recompensed? 1. By the gift of a Son after long barrenness. 2. By restoring her
Son to life again when he was dead. 2 King. 16. 3. By forewarning her of a
famine approaching, 2 King. 8. 1, 4. 4. By the restoring of her house and land,
lost in her long absence; by reason of the famine, 2 King. 4. 28.


Notable is the instance of Job. What a merciful man he was, we may read chap.
29. 12, 13, 15. I delivered the poor that cried, and the fatherless, and him
that had none to help him. The blessing of him that was ready to perish came
upon me, and I caused the widows heart to sing for joy. I was eyes to the
blind, and feet I was to the lame, I was a father to the poor. And chap. 31.
16, and 22* If I have withheld the poor from their desire or have caused the
eyes of the widow to fail, or have eaten my morsel alone, and the fatherless
has not eaten thereof; If I have seen any perish for want of clothing, or any
poor without covering; If his loins have not blessed me, and if he were not
warmed with the fleece of my sheep: Then let mine arms fall from my
shoulder blade, and mine arm be broken from the bone. I have transcribed his
own words thus at large, that I might set this worthy pattern before the
readers eyes.

But you will say, what became of this merciful man? did he prosper? did he
flourish, and grow great? who so poor as poor Job after all these acts of
mercy? How long after was it, that we find this merciful man a miserable man,
stripped naked of all that ever he had? But, First, It was not his own mercy,
but Satan's malice that brought him down: It was the Devil that set the
Sabeans, and Chaldeans, upon him, to plunder, and carry away all that he had.
And Secondly, what became of Job afterward, after Satan had done his worst?
you may read, chap. 42. 10. etc. That the Lord turned the Captivity of Job and
gave him twice so much as he had before, and blessed his latter end more than
his beginning, so he had fourteen thousand sheep, and Six thousand Camels: a
thousand yoke of Oxen, and a thousand she asses: He had also seven Sons, and
three daughters.

Act. 28. 7. We read how Publius the chief man of the Island of Melita (into
which St. Paul, and many others with him were cast by Shipwreck) received and
lodged them three days courteously: and in the next verse we read how the
father of Publius, when he lay desperately sick of a fever, and bloody flux,
was recovered by St. Paul, and restored to his former health. So likewise the
kindness which the barbarous people of that Island showed unto Paul and his his
fellow-Travellers, was recompensed with the cure of many of their sick bodies.

To these Examples, recorded in Scripture, I shall add a few more out of
ancient, and modern writings.

St. A ban (whom Mr. Fox in his first To me mentions amongst the Martyrs who
suffered for the name and cause of Christ) having received a poor persecuted
Minister into his house, was by his godly life, and gracious exhortations so
wrought upon, that he turned from Heathenism to Christianity, and at last
suffered as a Martyr for the truth of Jesus Christ, as Beda, and others write
of him. His kindness to a poor persecuted Minister was recompensed not only
with his conversion to the true religion, but likewise with the honor of
Martyrdom.

St. Austin, having set forth the mercifulness and liberality of Constantine
the great, says, Bonus Deus, Constantinum Magnum tantis terrenis implevit
muneribus, etc. God gave Constantine, that Merciful Prince, more wealth than
heart could with, for his bounty to the poor, Aug. de Civitate. Dei. l. 5.

Dr. Hammond in his forementioned Treatise mentions an ancient Story out of
Cedrenus, of a Jew, who upon reading those words of Solomon, Pro. 19. 17. He
that has pity upon the poor, lends unto the Lord, and that which he has
given will he pay him again, resolved to try, whether God would be as good as
his word: thereupon gave all that he had but two pieces of silver to the poor
and then waited and expected to see it come again. But being not presently
answered in that expectation, grew angry, and went up to Jerusalem to
expostulate with God for not performing his promise. And going on his way,
found two men a striving, engaged in an unreconcileable quarrel, about a Stone,
that both walking together had found in the way, and so had both equal right to
it; but (being but one and not capable of being divided) they could not both
enjoy: and therefore, to make them friends, he having two pieces of Silver,
does upon contract divide them betwixt the Contenders, and has the Stone in
exchange for them. Having It, he goes on his journey, and coming to Jerusalem,
shows it the Goldsmith who tells him, that it was a Jewel of great Value, being
a Stone fallen, and lost out of the Highpriests Ephod, to whom if he carried it,
he should certainly receive a great reward. He did so, and accordingly it
proved. The high Priest took it of him, gave him a great reward, and withal
sharply reproved him for questioning the truth of Gods promises, bidding him
trust God the next time.

The story of Tiberius the second is pertinent to this purpose, which take in
the words of that Reverend person beforementioned in his Sermon at the
Spittle. This Tiberius was very famous for his bounty to the poor, insomuch
that his wife was wont to blame him for it, and speaking to him once, how he
wasted his treasure that way, he told her. He should never want money, so long
as in Obedience to Christ's Command he did supply the necessities of the poor.
And presently see how providence ordered it! Immediately after he had given
much this way, under a marble table which was taken up, he found a great
treasure, and news was brought him too of the death of one Narses, a very rich
man, who had given his whole Estate unto him.

Famous is the story of that charitable Bishop of Millain, who as he was
traveling with his Servant, overtook some poor people who begged an alms of
him: whereupon he asked his man what money he had about him, who answered Three
crowns, which he commanded him to give unto them: but the servant thinking
himself wiser than his Master, gave them but two crowns, not knowing what
occasions they might have for money before that got home. Not long after Some
Noblemen meeting the Bishop, and knowing him to be a very charitable man,
appointed two hundred Crowns to be paid to the Bishops Servant for his Masters
use. The Servant having received the money, presently with great joy acquainted
his Master therewith, whereupon said the Bishop, Thou may now see how in
wronging the poor of their due, by keeping back the third crown which I
intended them, thou have likewise wronged me, Si enimtres dedisses, trecentos
accepisses etc. If thou had given those three Crowns I commanded thee to
give, thou had received three hundred Crowns whereas now I have but two.
Melanc. apud Ioh. Manlium in Loc. Com.

It is recorded of Mary the wife of Alexander F^rnese, Prince of Parma, that
being childless, she conceived an hope, that if she would take into her house
some Orphan, or poor man's child, and there train him up, God would bestow a Son
upon her. Whereupon she took a poor man's Son into her care, and gave order for
his education and according to her expectation, at nine Months end she was
delivered of a Son.

Suitable likewise to this point is the story of one John Stewart Provost of
Air in Scotland, who was eminent for piety and charity. He had a considerable
estate left him by his Father, of which he gave a great part to the poor and
other charitable uses. To pass by many, I shall mention only one. His heart on
a time being much affected with the wants and necessities of many of Gods
people, who were in a suffering condition, he sends for diverse of them to
Edinburgh, where being met, and some time spent in prayer, he made them promise
not to reveal what he was about to do, so long as he lived: and then told them
he was not ignorant in what a low condition many of them were, and therefore he
had brought some money with him to lend each of them, yet so as they should
never offer to repay it till he required the same; Soon after this, such
aplague brake forth in Air, the place of his abode, that trade much decayed,
and he himself with others were reduced to straits. Whereupon Some of the
Profane in that place derided him, saying, that Religion had made him poor,
and his giving so much to others, like a fool, had brought him to want, But
mark what followed. Having borrowed a little money, he departs from Air to
Rochel in France, where Salt and other commodities being exceeding cheap for
want of trading, he adventured to fraught a ship, and loaded her upon Credit;
and then went back again through England unto Air in Scotland, having ordered
the ship to come thither. But after long expectation he was informed for
certain, that his ship was taken by a Turkish man of war, the report whereof
did exceedingly afflict him, not because he knew not how to be abased, as well
as how to abound, but out of fear, that the mouths of wicked men would be the
more opened to the reproaching of his profession and charity. But Soon after,
tidings was brought him that his ship was safely arrived in the Road, and upon
his going forth saw it was a truth. And through Gods good Providence, as a
reward of his charity, he made so much of the Commodities in the ship, that
after the payment of his debts, he had twenty thousand marks left for himself.
Though his bread was cast upon the waters, and to appearance lost, yet after
many days it returned to him with great advantage. This Story I lately read in
a book, called, The fulfilling of the Scriptures.

The point being thus proved by Scriptures and Examples, Come we now to the
Reasons for the farther confirmation thereof.

1. Reason, May be taken from the goodness and bounty of God which is such,
that he will not suffer any work of charity, showed to any of his Ministers, or
Children, to pass away unrewarded, without a full recompense. Whereupon says
David, Psalm. 62. 12. Unto thee, O Lord, belongs mercy, for thou rendrest to
Every man according to his work, Though God does not render a reward to any man
for his work done, yet does he render to every man according to his work. So
that whosoever has done a good work, shall be sure to receive a royal reward
from God for the same. Yea God does allways exceed in his remunerations, to
give Evidence of his grace and bounty. So that not only no man shall sit down
a loser, but shall be a great gainer in the end. God will not be in any man's
debt long, but what he has dis-bursed upon his account, he will speedily
return into his bosom with advantage. Not that the liberality of the rich does
merit any thing at the hand of God, (as is before said) but in regard of the
promises of God, made to all them who in faith apply themselves to the practice
of good works.

2. Reason. May be taken from the faithfulness and righteousness of God, who
having in his word graciously promised abundantly to recompense, and reward our
beneficence, his faithfulness and righteousness ingageth him to make good what
he has promised; So that he cannot but be as good as his word. Men may be
forward

Daniel Waldow Esquire, Citizen and Mercer, who was chosen Alderman of London,
is a further proof of this Doctrine before laid down. I could from mine own
experience speak much of his bounty and charity; as also of that plentiful
estate wherewith God blessed him thereupon. But I shall rather give it you in
the words of that holy man, and blessed servant of Christ in the work of the
Ministry, Mr. James Nalton, now with God, who was more intimately acquainted
with Mr. Waldow, and therefore the more fit to preach his Funeral Sermon, and
to set forth his life for our Imitation. His words are these, He was a man
eminent, and exemplary in the grace of Charity; as appeared by his great bounty
manifested on every occasion. Never any good man, Minister or other, came to
propound any work of Charity, public or private, that needed to do any more
than to propound it: For his heart was so set upon works of mercy, that he
prevented importunity, by his Christian and Heroic liberality. He made no more
of giving ten pounds to a work of Charity, than many other rich men make of
giving ten shillings. His Charity had two singular concomitants, which made it
the more remarkable and praiseworthy.

1. He did good while he lived: He carried his Lanthorn before him: He made his
own hands his Executors, and his own eyes his Overseers. Some will part with
their riches when they can keep them no longer: This is like a Cutpurse, that
being espied or pursued, will drop a purse of gold, because he can keep it no
longer. But to be doing good in our lifetime, while we have opportunity; this
is an act of Faith, and an evidence that we can trust God with our estate, and
our children, that he will provide for them, when our heads are laid in the
grave.

2. He dispensed his Charity so secretly, without any self-seeking, or
pharisaical vainglory, that his left hand did not know what his right hand
did. Therefore did he often go with an hundred pounds under his cloak to some
godly friends, desiring them to distribute it amongst such honest poor people
as stood in most need of relief.

In brief, He did so much good while he lived, as if he meant to have nothing
to do when he died: And yet he gave so largely when he came to dye, as if he
had done no good when he lived.

Many, I know, are apt to say, they have many children, and therefore cannot
give. So had Mr. Waldow; He had nine children alive at his death, but the
providing for them was no obstruction to his Charity, nor prejudice to his
Children, but did rather entail a blessing upon them.

Mr. John Walter, Citizen and Draper of London, was signally charitable, not
only at his death, but in the whole course of his life, even from his younger
years. For the avoiding of vainglory, his manner was, to send considerable
sums of money to several poor families, by the hands of others, in whose
faithfulness he could confide. Whereupon God did not only bless him with a
large estate, but likewise gave him such contentedness therein, that he sat
down abundantly satisfied; and made a solemn vow and promise unto God, that he
would give the surplusage of his estate, whatever it was that for the future
should accrue unto him from his calling and employments, to charitable uses.
That you may be assured of the truth thereof, I have here given you his own
expressions transcribed out of his last Will and Testament, which are as follow.

I thought fit to declare, that about twenty years past, when the Lord had
entrusted me with a convenient estate, sufficient to maintain my charge, and
afford fit portions for my wife and children after my decease; I resolved that
what further estate the Lord should be pleased to entrust me with, to bestow
the same on charitable uses.

After this vow finding his estate wonderfully increased, he began to build
Almshouses; one in the Parish of St. George in Southwork; another in St. Mary
Newington; because in those Parishes he observed, there were many blind, lame,
distressed poor people, and never an Almshouse in them. He likewise built a
Chapel neat one of his Almshouses for the poor people to serve God in daily.
Having built his Almshouses, with the poors stock, he bought Lands, and Houses
of Inheritance, which he settled upon the Company of Drapers, as for the relief
and support of his Alms-people, after his decease; so for the performing other
charitable gifts mentioned in his last Will and Testament. While he lived, he
was wont to go himself once a month to his Almshouses in his worst clothes
(that he might not be suspected to be the Founder of them) and gave unto the
poor people their promised allowance. Doubtless, that is the best Charity,
which Nilus like, has the several streams thereof seen, but the fountain
concealed. Having built his Alms houses, and endowed them with a good revenew;
then with the remainder of his poor's stock, (which daily increased through
God's blessing upon his pains and endeavors in his calling) he relieved poor
people, and families with considerable sums of money; and gave much bread
weekly to the poor of several Out-Parishes. All this he did whilst yet living;
besides what he gave upon the like account at his death, which was also very
considerable, as further appears by his Will. Nothwithstanding all which, he
gave and left to his Wife and his two Daughters about ten thousand pounds. This
questionless is the surest way to have our WILLS performed, to see them
performed in our lifetime; in regard that many Executors prove Executioners of
WILLS.

William Pennoyer Esquire, Citizen and Merchant of London, a person wholly
composed of Mercy and goodness, bounty and liberality, which he expressed in
the whole course of his life, even from his first setting up in the world. Many
years before his death, he turned great part of the stock wherewith he traded,
into Lands of Inheritance, to the value of four hundred pounds per annum; and
being eminently charitable, he lived as frugally as he could, spending about
two hundred pounds a year upon himself, wife and family; and the remaining part
of his incomes, he wholly bestowed on charitable uses; as I have been informed
by those who lived long with him, and were nearly related to him.

To give you a clear demonstration of his Christian Charity, and of God's
recompencing the same unto him here in this life with temporal blessings; I
shall recite some of his Legacies bequeathed in his last Will and Testament, to
charitable uses, passing by such as he gave to his rich kindred and
acquaintance.

To poor Ministers, Widows, and others in distress, about 150 l.

To four of his poor Tenants 20 l.

Likewise 800 l. to be laid out here in Woollen Cloth, or other commodities, to
be sent to New England, for the use of his poor kindred there.

He gave to certain Trustees Lands to the value of twenty pounds per annum, to
pay for the teaching of forty Boys at School.

To Bristol 54 l. per annum toward the maintenance of a Schoolmaster, and
Lecturer, to preach a weekday Lecture there; and to other charitable uses.

He likewise settled 20 l. per annum on Trustees, for the teaching of forty
poor children in or near White-Chappel: And 40 s. yearly to buy Bibles for some
of the children.

He gave 12 l. per annum for the maintaining a School at the Hay in
Brecknockshire: And 40 s. more yearly to buy Books for the Scholars.

As also 10 l. per annum for the maintenance of poor distressed people in the
Hospital of Bethlehem in London.

And 10 l. per annum to ten of the blindest, oldest and poorest Cloath-workers,
at the discretion of the Masters, Wardens and Assistants of the said Company
for the time being.

He gave 40 l. per annum to Christ-Church Hospital, for the placing out four
children yearly: And 40 s. more yearly to buy each of the children a Bible.

Besides these, he gave to his poor kindred above two thousand pounds by his
Will.

And by a Codizel annexed thereunto, he bequeathed to certain Trustees a
thousand pounds to be given to honest poor people; as also 300 l. for releasing
poor prisoners; which sums have been paid into the hands of the Trustees by
Mr. Richard Loton, and Michael Davison Esquire who to their honor approved
themselves faithful Executors to this charitable Will.

Thomas Arnold, Citizen and Haberdasher of London: At his first setting up for
himself, his stock was not great; but being charitably disposed, and ready to
every good work, his estate, through God's blessing, very much increased.

His Charity in his lifetime appeared not only by his forwardness to
communicate to the relief of such, whom he saw in want; but likewise by his
frequent enquiring of others, after such poor people as were over-burthened
with children, or otherwise distressed. Yea, he hired men with money, to make
it their business to find out honest poor people, on whom he might bestow his
Charity; and likewise did entrust others with considerable sums of money, to
distribute amonst the poorest sort, charging them to have special respect to
the honest poor, such whom they conceived did truly fear God. That he was no
loser, but a gainer by his liberality, appears, in that God so blessed him in
his Calling, that he attained to an Alderman's estate, and was chosen to that
Office. Yea, he gave over his Calling in the City, and withdrew himself into
the Country, that he might the better mind God, and the concernments of his
soul more, and the world with its concerns less.

John Clark, Doctor of Physic, one of great repute for his Learning, Piety and
Charity: Some while President of the College of Physicians. His custom was, to
lay by all his Lord's Day fees, as a sacred stock for charitable uses; devoting
that entirely to God, which he received on his day; acconting it a piece of
sacrilege to appropriate it to himself, or any common use: whereupon the Lord
was pleased so to prosper him in his Calling, that though at first his practice
was little, and his estate not very great, yet afterward his practice so
increased, and the world so flowed in upon him, that he lived plentifully and
comfortably, and gave to his children liberal portions.

The like also was practiced by John Bathurst, Doctor of Physic, with whom I
was very well acquainted: His Lord's-Days fees were constantly kept as a bank
for the poor, and wholly devoted to, and employed for their use; which was so
far from lessening his incomes, that by the blessing of God upon his practice,
they were greatly in few years augmented by it. For though at his first coming
to London, he brought little estate with him, and here had small acquaintance,
Yorkshire being his native Country, where he had spent his former days; yet
the Lord was pleased so to prosper him in his Calling, that in twenty years
time he purchased Lands of Inheritance, to the value of a thousand pounds per
annum, to speak what I know to be certain; For in the repute of some, his
estate at his death was no less than two thousand pounds of yearly value.

Dr. Edmond Trench likewise observed the same course, as his wife, and diverse
other friends of his do testify. And certain it is, that this was no damage,
but a great advantage to him: For he had as many Patients as his weak body
would permit him to visit. And, though he lived at a full and plentiful rate,
frequently and cheerfully entertaining Ministers and Scholars at his Table; yet
did he gain a very considerable estate, which he left to his wife and children;
in whom not only his memory, but his Piety still survives.

I have good ground to believe, that many other Physicians do make conscience
of this duty; but oh that all would do the like! certainly they would be no
losers thereby at the years end, but find God's blessing upon their Calling and
Estates prospering them in both.

And here to me occurs a Case of Conscience worthy to be enquired into, viz.
Whether Physicians may lawfully appropriate unto their own private use their
Lord's-Dayes fees; I mean, those fees which they receive from their Patients on
the Sabbath day?

I deny not but works of mercy may, and ought to be done on that day; for,
says the Lord, Matthew. 9. 13. I will have mercy, and not sacrifice; that is,
mercy rather than sacrifice. And I deny not, but, of the richer sort
especially, they may receive their fees for their pains. But I much question
whether they may appropriate those fees to themselves: In regard the Lord has
afforded us six days of seven, wherein we may and ought to follow our
Callings, for our own livelihood, and of those who belong unto us; but has
sanctified and set apart the Christian Sabbath for his own honor and service:
And therefore it seems but reasonable that what accrews unto us on that day,
should be set apart and employed for his more immediate use and service. But I
will not impose this as a necessary duty, at least upon all, in regard that
circumstance may vary; but leave it at present to the determination of their
own consciences who are most concerned therein.

Samuel Dunche of Pusey, in the County of Berks, Esquire, a person that
according to the Apostle's rule, did good to all, but especially to those of
the household of Faith. His custom was to send monys yearly to several Towns, as
to Stow upon the Woolds in Gloucester shire, to Norliche, to Lamburn, and others
not here mentioned, for the relief of their poor. And upon the last here named,
he settled Lands of Inheritance for ever for the same use. And to Rumsey in
Hampshire he gave by Deed upon the like account a Lease of 99 years to commence
after his descease. The poor also of the said Town, whom he called his
Alms-people, had, during his life, weekly relief from him, and many other Towns
together with them, were large sharers in the like bounty.

Several poor children of the said Town, and likewise of those belonging to
Farriugdon he set to School, and did not only pay for their teaching, but also
furnished them with all such books as were fit and convenient for them. He also
caused several good books to be printed at his own charge, which he freely gave
to the poor, that they might the better be encouraged to mad, and to acquaint
themselves with the concerns of another and better life.

He further gave considerable sums of money yearly for the constant supply of
such godly Ministers as he knew to be in want: And upon several of them he
settled considerable Animities, 10 l. 20 l. per annum for their lives, besides
such Legacies which were not small, that he gave to some of them at his death.

Besides all this, his hand was ever open and ready to distribute when ever any
fit occasion was offered to him; yea, such was the enlargement of his heart,
and tenderness of his bowels, that he could hardly pass by any whom he judged
due objects of his Charity, but he freely and bountifully contributed to their
relief.

Thus did this pious Gentleman honor God with his substance, and adventure
upon the royal Prophet's words, to cast his bread upon the waters; which though
the unbelieving world accounts but folly, and usually reckon it amongst their
losses; yet he to his advantage, according to the promise thereto annexrd,
found it again not after many days: This bread, like the loaves with which
Christ fed the multitude, was multiplied in his hands, and his oil increased
by pouring out. He was but a younger Brother, and the Estate settled upon him
was but 800 l. per annum, or thereabouts: And yet notwithstanding, I had almost
said, this excess of Charity, his Estate was so far from being ruined, or in
the least impaired, as that not only the same bare measure he received, but
much greater, pressed down, and running over, was meeted out to him and his
posterity. So signally did God in this life reward his Charity, wisely ordering
by his good providence, that one way or other large handfuls, as over-measure,
were from several hands thrown into his bushel. There is now left to his Heirs
an Estate of more than the double value of what he received from his Father,
besides the portions which he gave to all his Daughters, five in number, which
were very considerable, to some of them more than 2000 l.

And here I hope I may, without offense, or vain glory, take liberty to
mention, amongst others, the Charity and Liberality of my dear and hononred
Father Dr. William Gouge, late Pastor of Black friars, London, who was eminent
as in other graces, so in that of Charity; From him I first heard, The tenth
part of a rich man's estate to be a fit proportion to be devoted and dedicated
to God for charitable uses. But though he commended that to others; yet by what
I find in some papers written with his own hand, I may truly say, He gave the
seventh part of all his yearly comings in, toward the maintaining poor
Scholars at the University, and the relieving poor families, and distressed
persons. And how wonderfully God blessed, as his Ministry, so his outward
Estate, is so well known to all who lived in his days, that I suppose it
needless for me to say any thing thereof; only I may truly apply unto him the
words of the Psalmist, He was ever merciful and lending, and his seed is blessed

Many more instances of the like nature might here be added; some of persons
who are now with joy reaping in the other world the blessed fruit of that seed
which they had so plentifully sown in this: Others of persons yet living
amongst us, some of which have acknowledged to me, That God has already
rewarded them an hundredfold for what they have lent to him, by giving it to
his poor. But these already mentioned, may be abundantly sufficent to evidence
the truth in hand, and to encourage and provoke us in imitation of those
Worthies, to a more ready and conscientious practice of this great duty, so
essential to Christianity, so well pleasing to God, so creditable to our
profession, so beneficial, not only in order to our eternal happiness, but our
present gain, comfort and prosperity here on earth.

The Point being thus proved by Scriptures and Examples, Come we now to the
Reasons for the further confirmation thereof

1. Reason. May be taken from the goodness and bounty of God, which is such,
that he will not suffer any work of Charity, showed to any of his Ministers, or
Children, to pass away unrewarded, without a full recompense. Whereupon says
David, Psalm. 62. 12. Unto thee, O Lord, belongs mercy, for thou rendrest to
every man according his work. Though God does not render a reward to any man
for his work done, yet does he render to every man according to his work. Yea
God does always exceed in his remunerations, to give evidence of his grace and
bounty. God will not be in any man's debt long, but what he has dis-bursed upon
his account, he will speedily return into his bosom with advantage.

2. Reason 2. May be taken from the faithfulness and righteousness of God, who
having in his word graciously promised abundantly to recompense and reward our
beneficence, his faithfulness and righteousness ingageth him to make good what
he has promised; So that he cannot but be as good as his word. Men may be
forward in promising, but slow in performing: but with God, who is the true and
faithful one, dictum et factum, saying and doing, are both alike, All his
promises are Yea and Amen in Christ Jesus. Heb. 6. 10. says the Apostle, God
is not unrighteous to forget your work, and labor of love, which ye have
showed toward his name, in that ye have Ministered to the Saints, and do
Minister. Here the Apostle argues a certainty of reward to those who minister
any thing to the Saints, from the righteousness of God, even because he is
righteous, and therefore will not fail to do what he has promised. He is not
unrighteous to FORGET, that is, he will righteously remember; and Gods
remembering, signifies the same as recompencing: as he will remember sinners by
recompencing their evil ways upon their own heads, so he will remember his
Saints by returning the good that they have done into their own bosoms.

The more to assure us of such kind of remembrance from God, the holy Ghost
mentions certain books, or roles of remembrance written before God, wherein
the merciful deeds of his servants are recorded. So that it is no more possible
that such as are charitably benign, and helpful to the poor Ministers, and
people of God should lose their reward, than that God himself should cease to
be righteous, or be forgetful of his word.

3. Reason. May be taken from several metaphorical expressions used in
Scripture, by which Almsgiving is represented to us; all which imply not only
a certain return, but that with increase, as SOWING, and LENDING, and that upon
Usury.

1. We find it set forth in Scripture by SOWING, 2 Cor 9. 6. He which sows
sparingly, shall reap sparingly: and he which sows bountifully, shall reap
bountifully. This proverbiall speech the Apostle applies to the dispersing of
alms. Now as Husbandmen, who sow their corn with a liberal hand, do usually
reap a crop answerably thereunto: In like manner, such Christians as shall sow
their feed of charity with an open, plentiful hand, shall reap accordingly a
plentiful crop, they shall find their seed sown come up with increase,
yielding thirty, if not sixty, or an hundred fold here, besides eternal life
hereafter. It may be, thou may not presently reap the fruit of thy seed, and
what wonder? Who is there that sowes, who expects to reap the same day? The
Husbandman waits for his harvest; wait thou on the Lord, and doubt not but an
harvest will come, that will pay thee both for thy sowing, and thy waiting.

2. The second Metaphor, whereby almsgiving is set-forth in Scripture is
LENDING, and that upon use, Pro. 19. 17. He that has pity on the poor lends
unto the Lord, and that which he has given, will he pay him again. Men that
lend to men receive their own with increase: what they lay up lies dead, and
possibly the Thief may break in, and steal it away; but what they lend if to
sure hands, comes in with advantage. How rich do some Usurers grow by this
trade of lending? And though it be a Paradox, that GIVING is a richer trade
than Lending, even upon use: yet it is a certain truth: for this giving is
lending: and he that lends to the Lord will find a greater income at the years
end, then he that lends to the best of men. Therefore as one well says,
Eleemosyna non est divitiarum dispendium, sed dite scendi potius compendium,
quaestusque; omnium uberrimus; Giving to the poor is not the way to wast our
wealth, but the art of thriving, and the most compendious course to attain unto
riches. Though our alms-deeds seem (as the seed sown) to perish, and rot; yet
believing what we see not, we shall assuredly see, what we believe, and find
(even here) such a fruitful increase, as we shall conclude, that Giving to
charitable uses is the surest and safest way of getting, and thriving in the
world.

Thus have you the truth of the point confirmed by Scriptures, Examples, and
Reasons. Come we now to the application.

1. Use of Reproof of all unmerciful men, who notwithstanding the many charges
God has laid upon us, to be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing
to communicate, to draw forth our souls to the hungry, to open our bowels to
the needy; and the manifold encouragements he has given us in his word hereto,
yet do shut up their bowels of compassion from them, refusing to afford them
any succor or relief. Surely such have no love to Christ: for who can say he
loves the Lord Jesus Christ in truth and sincerity, when he suffers his
Ministers and members to want necessaries, even food and raiment? Is this thy
love to Christ to suffer him to starve? It is evident thou love thy money
more than Christ, and so come under that fearful Anathema, 1 Cor. 16. 22. If
any love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha: These two
words though both denoing a curse, are of two several languages. The former
word Anathema, is a Greek word signifying accursed; So it is used Romans 9. 3.
Gal. 1. 8. The latter is a Syriack word, as Beza observes in his Annotations
on 1 Cor. 16. 22. yet frequently used by the Jews: it signifies, Our Lord
comes. Maran is Our Lord, and atha comes; intimating that such as were under
this curse, were to expect no mercy, but to look for the dreadful coming of
Christ to take vengeance of them. So that, as St. James speaks, chap. 2. 13.
Such shall have Judgment without Mercy, that showed no mercy. How do they think
to find mercy from Christ who never showed mercy to him, and his!

I will not condemn all for unmercifulness (God forbid I should) many there are
(and I would to God they were more) who do contribute bountifully to the
necessities both of Ministers, and other poor Saints of God. But yet I have too
great cause to say, that the greatest part of rich men amongst us have their
hearts hardened and their bowels shut up, that they cannot compassionate their
wants; and their hands withered, like his in the Gospel, that they cannot reach
them out to any good use.

Oh that such would consider, that unmercifulness is a greater sin than they do
imagine. It was one of Sodoms sins which fetched down fire and brimstone from
heaven upon them, and all their children, Ezekiel. 16. 49. Uncharitable men are
cursed as in their life so at their death: but most cursed will they be at the
day of Judgment. Being barren fruitless trees in Gods Orchard, they shall with
the barren fig tree be surely cut down, and cast into unquenchable fire.

More particularly to show you the miseries of uncharitable persons.

1. They are accursed here in every thing: all they have is cursed: So much is
employed in that expression of our Savior, Luke 11. 41. Give alms of such
things as you have, and all things are clean unto you, but without almsgiving
nothing is clean unto you, that is, nothing is blessed, and sanctified unto
you, but all things are defiled and cursed. Not only your crosses are curses,
but your blessings are curses unto you. So God threatens, to curse their very
blessings, Mal. 2. 2. Though thou enjoyest abundance of this worlds goods, yet
so long as thou art hard-hearted to the poor and needy, the curse of God
cleaves to thy store, and abundance. Oh how sad and lamentable must thy
condition needs be, when those things which are not only blessings in
themselves, but likewise blessed unto others, should be cursed unto thee!
Surely, To be thus accursed is misery enough.

2. As the unmerciful are cursed here, so shall they be cursed hereafter. Jam.
2. 13. He shall have Judgment without mercy, that has showed no Mercy. Such as
have shut up their bowels of compassion against the necessities of the poor,
God will shut up his bowels of compassion against them, and let forth his fury
upon them, they shall have their portion in his plagues, and indignation,
without the least drop of pity or Mercy. And at the day of judgment Christ
will say unto them, Math. 25. 41. Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting
fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels; There Is their doom, and why? For I
was an hungry, and ye gave me no meat, I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink.
Oh dreadful sentence! every word whereof carries much terror in it, and
breaths nothing but fire, and brimstone. What! must they depart from Christ
the fountain of bliss and happiness? and into everlasting fire? Ah wretches!
cursed indeed. For as the Prophet speaks Isa. 33. 14. Who can dwell with
devouring fires? who can dwell with everlasting burnings? An everlasting
fever, or an but an everlasting toothache, were a misery unspeakable. But what
are these to the lying in that lake which burns with fire and brimstone to
all eternity? Oh methinks, the name of everlasting fire, and everlasting
burnings should awaken all uncharitable men out of their security, and stir
them up without any farther delay to bewail their former unmercifulness, to beg
the pardon thereof, and unfeignedly to resolve, willingly to give out of their
store toward the relief of the poor, proportionably to what God has
graciously bestowed on them. It may be, thou have a plentiful portion of this
worlds goods; but oh, what will it profit thee to live plentifully here, and to
be eternally miserable hereafter? Seriously I cannot but stand amazed to
consider, how men who do believe the words of Christ to be true, That all
uncharitable men shall by him at the last day be sentenced into everlasting
burning for their not feeding the hungry, nor clothing the naked; and yet can
be so hard-hearted, as not to hearken to the cry of the poor.

3. The misery of uncharitable persons appears in this, That the wants and
necessities of the poor cry loud to heaven against them. God has dealt
bountifully with thee, loading thee with his henefits, (as the Psalmist
speaks, Psalm. 68. 19.) and has given thee not only food and raiment, things
needful, and necessary, but an abundance, an affuency of outward things, even
all things richly to enjoy: but how many of Christ's Ministers and members are
in great want, not having wherewithal to satisfy their own and childrens
hunger? whose miseries like the blood of Abel cry unto God for vengeance
against thee, saying, Lord, there are not a few who have enough and to spare, a
liberal portion of this worlds goods, with Dives they fare sumptuously every
day: but what are we thy wanting servants the better for them? who of us are
warmed with their fires, or clothed with their raiment, or so much as partake
of the crumbs or their table? we are ready to perish for want, when they are
surfeited with their abundance. Is the blessing of them that are ready to
perish like to come upon them? wilt not thou judge them O Lord? Certainly,
these bitter and lamentable complaints cry loud in the ears of the Almighty
against such unchristian and inhumane misers. Beware of the cry of the poor
against you: If thou will not hear their cries unto thee, God will hear their
cries against thee.

4. Thy unmercifulness to the poor will provoke God to reject thy most
religious exercises; Pro. 21. 13. Whosoever stops his ears at the cry of the
poor, he also shall cry himself, but shall not be heard. In which words Solomon
hinteth to us two things.

1. That unmerciful men, such as turn away their ears from the cry of the poor,
shall fall into such miseries as will bring them to their knees, and make them
cry sooner or latter. Here in this world worldly men sometimes make many
prayers, and their religion they hope will make amends, for their inhumanity at
least. And in the world to come they shall follow their fellow Dives in his
infernal devotion.

2. Though they cry, yet they shall not be heard: whether they cry here upon
their deathbeds for mercy, or hereafter in Hell for ease, they shall not be
heard. A notable instance hereof we have in Dives, who though he cried not
here, yet he cried in, hell, saying, Father Abraham have Mercy on me, and send
Lazarus, that he may dip the top of his finger in water, and cool my tongue,
for I am tormented in this flame, Luke 16. 24. But was he heard? was his
request granted? 'twas but a small request, but yet it is denied. Because he
denied crumbs of bread here in this life to the poor, he was denied a drop of
water in Hell.

And as thy prayers are rejected by God, so likewise will it be in vain for
thee to hear the word, or come to the table of the Lord. All thy religion will
be in vain, shall I say? Nay it will be an abomination to the Lord, whilst that
accursed thing thy covetous, and cruel heart, which the Lord abhoreth, ( Psalm.
10. 3.) remains within thee. Think not that one duty will excuse the neglect
of another, that thy praying may serve instead of thine alms, that religion
shall excuse thee mercy, or thy confession of thine unmercifulness will make up
the matter. The Lord abhors thee and all thy Sacrifices, whilst the
Sacrifice of a compassionate heart is wanting.

Oh that all uncharitable persons would steep their thoughts in a serious
meditation of these things: and as they desire to prevent those judgments which
accompany all merciless men, they would put in for a share in the mercies of
the merciful, and to that end, would put on bowels of pity and compassion
toward the wants and miseries of Gods distressed ones, and stretch forth an
helping hand toward their relief, which leads me to a Second Use, namely

2. Use of Exhortation, to stir up every one who have given up their names unto
Christ, to make conscience, as of every duty commanded by him, so of this
especially, which he has so vehemently pressed upon us in his word, and
encouraged us unto by many sweet and precious promises. This work of charity is
wages, and like Samson's Lion it carries honey in the belly of it. He who out
of a principle of love, in obedience to Gods command, shall open his heart and
hand wide to the poor, shall find God blessing his stock and store, and
prospering all his undertakings. As there is a Secret curse goes out from God
upon the uncharitable man's estate, which blasteth all his projects, and
undertakings whereby they prove altogether fruitless: So there is a Secret
blessing goes out from God upon the charitable man's estate, whereby he thrives
and prospers in the world, even to his own and neighbors admiration.

It is observed that they are the richest Merchants, and Citizens who trade
boldly: whereas they who are fearful to adventure their goods, have but small
returns. In like manner it is found by experience, that such Christians as are
most forward to supply the wants of the poor, boldly adventuring their goods
upon the waters, do most of all thrive, and prosper in the world. Why then will
any man be so unwise, as to lose his riches for fear of losing them? And not
rather seem to lose them that he may in truth find them? These earthly things
are assuredly lost by keeping, and kept by well bestowing them.

What now remains but that you look about you, where you may lay out your
money to your best advantage? Make diligent enquiry after the poor Ministers
and members of Christ: Seek more after them than they do after you. For most
certain it is, that you get more by giving unto them, than they do by receiving
from you. And you are more beholding unto them for receiving your charity, than
they are unto you for giving it. Whereas you only relieve their bodies, they
feed your souls, as Pro. 11. 17. The merciful man does good to his own soul,
which is refreshed with the mercy which he shows to others. And whereas they
partake of a small quantity of your outward good things, you shall have the
same in kind here returned sevenfold into your bosoms, and at last shall be
received into the Kingdom of heaven, prepared for all those who have fed the
hungry, clothed the naked, and performed such like works of charity to the
poor members of Christ, Math. 25. 35. So that you pleasure not the poor so much
by giving, as you profit your selves by receiving.

Riches are a mere uncertainty, like unto a flock of birds in a man's field, who
cannot say they are his because they sit there, for they take unto themselves
wings, and fly away. Now in dealing with things uncertain, it will be your
wisdom, 1. To make them as sure as you can. 2. To make the best use of them
that you can.


1. What greater wisdom than to make sure? And what better way imaginable to
make sure your estate, than by putting it into good hands? And what safer hands
than the hands of the Lord? Put them into the hands of Gods poor, and you
thereby put them into Gods hands.

As in a State Politic, the Lieger Ambassadors that are sent abroad to lie in
foreign Kingdoms secure our peaceable state at home. So what we disperse and
send abroad to the poor, secureth the rest at home. For as the poor beg of
thee, so they beg of God for thee, that he would preserve, and bless thy store:
their devotions are sent up to heaven for thy Security.

2. And what better use can you make of your riches, than by bestowing a part
of them upon the poor and needy? It being the chief end of Giving more of this
worlds goods to some than to others, that they who have the greater store
should give out thereof to them who are in want. Which was typically signified
by the Israelites gathering of Manna, which though it were rained down from
heaven, yet the Lord would not allow, that they who had gathered more than was
needful for themselves, and their household, should hoard up their superfluity,
but enjoined them to communicate of their abundance to such as had not enough,
that so he that had the most, should have nothing over; and he that had the
least, should have no lack. The which the Apostle applies to the giving of
alms out of our abundance to those who want, 2 Cor. 8. 14.

By communicating of our riches to the poor, we shall make them our friends,
both to give evidence for us of the truth of our faith and charity, and to beg
a plentiful return upon us: This is the advice of our Savior, Luke 16. 9. Make
to your selves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness, that when ye fail,
they may receive you into everlasting habitations. Where, by Mammon, our
Savior intends the abundance of this worlds-goods, which he called Mammon of
unrighteousness, because ordinarily by worldly men it is unrighteously gotten,
unrighteously reserved, and unrighteously used. This he hinteth, that his
Disciples might be the more wary about it, and the more careful of making
themselves friends thereof, that is, so to use their riches by relieving the
poor, as the good works done by them may give testimony of their Faith and
Charity, which is the part of Friends. Friends are ready to give good testimony
of one another. The coats and garments which Dorcas made for poor widows Acts
9. 39. were such friends. But mark what follows, Make to your selves friends of
the Mammon of unrighteousness, that when ye fail, they may receive you into
everlasting habitations. When ye fail, that is, when ye depart out of this
world, they may receive you into everlasting habitations. This particle THEY,
some refer being relieved call upon God to recompense their benefactors,) but
most refer it to the Riches which they bestow upon the poor, which, by virtue
of the evidence that they give of the faith and charity of the giver, are said
to receive them into everlasting habitations.

Surely, rich men have a price in their hands, wherewith to purchase to
themselves a good inheritance, had they but hearts to make use of it. Though
charity pretend not to any merit ex congruo, or condigno, yet will it be
plentifully recompensed by God both here and hereafter.

I hope you will pardon my zeal in pressing this duty of charity so much upon
you: I do assure you, it is not out of any design to take any thing from your
selves, and children, but only to show you the surest and safest way of
thriving in the world; and how you may entail Gods blessing upon your children,
and so secure unto them the portion which you leave them. I am willing to do
you a kindness, and I shall do you a great kindness, If I can but effectually
persuade you to this duty: Whatever kindness I may herein do to those who need,
I shall do a greater kindness to you that will be persuaded to help them in
their need; in as much as it is a more blessed thing to give, than to receive.
And therefore bear with me, if I do not only offer you a kindness, but use such
importunity to press you to accept it.

The Apostle, knowing how backward rich men especially were to all works of
charity, advises Timothy (1 Timothy 6. 17.) not only to commend unto them the
duty, but to command it. The expression of the Apostle is very observable, He
does not say (...) declare unto them, but (...) charge them that are rich in
this world, as they love their lives, and would save their souls, To be rich in
good works. As one wittily glosseth upon those words of the Apostle. If God
should charge the Rocks, they would send forth water: If the Stones, they would
become bread: If the Ravens, they would feed Elijah: If the Quails, they would
victual the Camp: If the Clouds, they would rain down food from heaven upon his
poor people; will you then be more rocky than rocks? more stony then stones?
more ravenous than ravens? more senseless than birds? more empty than clouds?

If you be rich in this worlds goods, and be not rich in good works, talk not
of your faith, for there can be no true faith without good-works, Jam. 2. 17.
Neither tell me of your religion: for there can be no true religion in you, so
long as you make no conscience of this duty. Pure religion; says the Apostle
James, chap. 1. 27. ( is this) To visit the Fatherless and widows in their
afflictions, and you never learned other Religion of us.

The Lord indeed gives us leave to eat and to drink, and to cheer up our
hearts by partaking, in some measure, of that portion he has bestowed on us:
but he never allowed us to keep all unto our selves, or to spend it in the
gratifying our sinful lusts, but commands us to set apart some portion of our
estate for the relief of those for whom nothing is provided, Pro. 3. 9. Says
the wiseman, Honor the Lord with thy substance. He does not say, Honor thy
self with thy riches, but honor the Lord with them; as they come from his
grace, so they should be used to his glory. Now then we use our riches to Gods
glory, when in obedience to his command, we therewith supply the want, of his
children, who will thereby be stirred up to bless and praise the name of God
for his Fatherly care and providence over them.

Shall I yet again need to tell thee, that thy liberality to the poor cannot
bring any loss to thine estate, seeing, The more thou give, the more thou
shall receive? It is fabled of Midas, that whatsoever he touched was turned
into gold. But it is no fable, nor fancy, That the hand of charity can do it;
can extract grace out of your goods, righteousness out of riches, and heaven
out of earth. The imparting of goods to such good uses, whilst it seems to
impair, does mightily improve what you have, to your most singular advantage.
The more liberal any man is, the more likely he is to be a rich man: the mercy
of God will crown his beneficence with such a blessing of store, that he shall
find, He will never be behind hand with him. Its nothing which the poor receive
from him, in comparison of that blessing which he shall receive from the Lord.
It may be, thou do not find thy store thereupon presently increased, yet if
thou diligently observest the passages of Gods providence toward thee, thou will sooner or latter find thy self abundantly re-imbursed of all thy
disbursments.

I told you before that I am willing to do you a kindness: and that it may be a
kindness indeed, I must farther tell you, not only what you should do, but How
you must do it, that you may not loose your reward. And if you would make sure
to be gainers by whatever you thus lay out, observe the following DIRECTIONS.

I. Give your selves to the Lord, and with your selves, all that ever you have,
to be so laid out, whether upon your selves or others, as He does appoint and
require.

2 Cor. 8. 2. The Apostle boasting of the Macedonian Christians, and of the
riches of their liberality, tells us, ver. 5. That they first gave themselves
to the Lord. He that will not give himself to the Lord, is like to give but
little else. And if he should give all that he had, and only withhold himself,
God will not accept, nor reward it. God will have nothing of thee, if he may
not have thy Heart.

Give your selves for Servants to the Lord, to serve him with your Spirits
first, and then with all that you have. Make over your selves to God in Christ
to be his Covenant Servants, and thence-forth count and say of your selves, as
the Apostle teaches you, 1 Cor. 6. 20. I am not mine own, but must henceforth
glorify God with my body and my spirit, yea and with all that I have, which
are his.

He knows not what he says, that says I serve the Lord, who has not first
given himself to him for a servant; God will not be served by Aliens. And he
has but lied unto God, who says, I give my self unto the Lord for a servant,
and does not actually serve him with all that he has. He that has given
himself to the Lord, will withhold nothing from him that God will have.

He that will serve the Lord with his spirit, will as readily serve him with
all that he has. God that has given us his Son, how will he not with him
freely give us all things, Romans 1. 32? And that Man that has given God his
soul, will keep back nothing from Him.

Friend, thou say thou art the Lords, and have devoted thy self to him; thou
hopest that thou art Christ's, and have joined thy self in covenant unto him,
resolving to be his disciple: but, which way runs thine estate? whose house is
this, these lands, and this money which thou have, are these the Lords too? How
is it then that thy lusts have so much of them at their service? That thy pride
has so much, and thine appetite so much, or that they are all impropriated and
kept by thee to feed thy covetousness? Is all thou have the Lords? How is it
then that thou begrutchest, or thinkest-so-much of every little that he calls
for from thee? Thou who wilt not in every case part with so much as God calls
for, art either a Liar, or a Robber. Either thou did not give all to God,
when thou saydst thou did, and then thou art a Liar: or if thou did give
all, and yet will not let him have what he calls for, but bestowest it
elsewhere, then thou art a Robber.

Obj. But some will say, Must I give all I have to the poor, and so leave my
self, and my farily to be beggars? Or, what else is your meaning, when you say,
I must give all to the Lord?

My meaning is, that you so give all to the Lord, as to resolve to dispose of
your whole estate to such persons and purposes, as God orders and appoints you.
The Lord would have you live, and maintain your self, and provide for you
family soberly, according to your rank and degree (some extraordinary cases
being excepted.) But still you must allow no more to your self, nor no less to
those in need, then is according to the will, and good-pleasure of the Lord.

Some other will here put in and say: But I am free and bountiful, and give
great alas; I cast my bread upon the waters; I give a portion to six, and also
to seven: I devise liberal things, I delight to show Mercy.

Do thou so? It Is well thou do, Gods blessing on thine heart for it: it is
great pity that any liberal man in the world should lose his reward; and that
thou may not lose thine, take this Counsel of a friend that loves thee, See
that thou have sincerely given up thy self to God as his covenant-servant, and
art a devoted Disciple of Jesus Christ, and that these thy works of Mercy are
done in pursuance of thy Covenant, as a part of that service which thou owe
and have vowed to thy Lord, whose thou art, and whose talents thou reckonest
all thou have. And look to this the rather, because its possible that men of
great good works may be, as of little charity, so of little faith also, which
is that grace which entitles God to us, and all we do, and obtains our
acceptance with Him. First, by faith give thy self to him, and then by charity
serve Him with what thou have, and then doubt not of a plentiful return.

II. Offer up your gift upon the Altar. Give your selves, and with your selves,
all that you have, through Christ, unto God. Let him be your Altar that
sanctifies your gift: it is through him alone you will be accepted, Ephesians. 1. 6.
He has made us accepted in the Beloved. Let your Souls be sprinkled with his
blood, and thereby washed from your blood, from your natural and contracted
guilt, and pollution, and then they will be a gift acceptable to the Lord. Do
not think you have no more to do, but to give your selves as you are to the
Lord: you have given your selves to sin, and now, it may be you think, you will
give yourselves back to the Lord: but know there is more in it than so. Thou
art in thy self a guilty, and defiled soul, and God will have none of thee in
this case: Go to Christ first, and get him to cover thine unrighteousness, and
to cleanse thee from thy filthiness, put thy wretched soul into his hands, and
let him present it unto the Father.

And what ever thou give with thy self, thine alms, thy bread, or thy flesh,
or thy money, that thou have for his poor; put it all into the same hand, and
let him present this also to the Father for the use of his Servants.

Friends, though I would have you givers yet I would not have you losers. I
would not have you losers, either by Saving, or by unprofitable Giving.

1. Be not losers by Saving. That Is the next way to lose all, by thinking to
save, and k^ep all to your selves. He that will save his life, that is, by not
laying it down when God calls for it, he shall loose it. And so he that will
save his estate, that is, by refusing to lay it out where God would have him,
he is the more like to loose all that he has.

2. Lose not by unprofitable Bestowing. All that is bestowed unprofitably, as
to thee, to whomsoever thou give it, which is not given first through Christ
unto God, and to his servants for the Lords sake. It may be profit however to
them, who receive it, but no profit to thee who give. It Is only what is given
to God, and to men for Gods sake, for which God becomes debtour.

III. Fetch all your alms out of your hearts. Draw forth thy soul to the
hungry, Isa. 58. 10. Give what thou give, 1, Out of a willing heart. 2, Out
of a compassionate heart. 3. Out of a thank^fu^ heart:

1. Out of a willing heart; Give willingly, 2 Cor. 9 6. Every man as he
purposes in his heart so let him give, not grudgingly, or of neccessity, for
God loves a cheerful giver. An alms-deed in Scripture is called a Sacrifice,
such a Sacrifice as is well-pleasing unto God, Heb. 13. 16: To do good, and to
communicate forget not, for with such Sacrifices God is well pleased. Now all
our Christian Sacrifices are to be free will Oblations. An alms without a will,
is a Sacrifice without an heart, and will be rejected of God.

2. Out of a compassionate heart. Get a compassionate heart, and fetch all
thine alms out of thine own bowels. It Is the hard-hearts of men that shut up
their purses: thou say, Thou have not to spare, thou want it thy self, or
those about thee may want it: No, thou want an heart, and that is the reason
that those that need, must want thine alms. A compassionat heart would find
something, or other, for those that are in distress.

Get a compassionate heart. God is a God of compassion, and his children are
compassionate children, Col. 3. 12. Put on, (as the elect of God) bowels of
Mercy. 1 John 3. 17. Whosoever has this worlds goods, and sees his brother in
need, and shuts up his bowels of compassion from him, (or is a man of no
bowels,) how dwells the love of God in him? What ever thy profession, or thy
religion be, or thy hopes be concerning it, thou have nothing of God in thee,
thou art none of His, who have no bowels. God is a God of mercy, His children
are all merciful children.

Worldling, will thou prove thy self to be no child of God? would thou prove
that the faith thou have is vain, thy religion vain, and that thou art but a
pretender to the love of God, and have not the love of God within thee? This
unmercifulness of thine will put it out of question. If thou have no bowels of
compassion, the love of God is not in thee.

O get a compassionate, and merciful heart. Have thou received Mercy, and will thou not be merciful? Do thou hope for mercy, and will thou not show Mercy?
Put thy self into thy poor brother's case a while, think how hard it is with him,
think of his hunger and nakedness, of his pressing straits and miseries, let
thy soul go into his house, and see his naked walls, his cold chimney, his
empty cup-board, his starveling children: and then think again O how if it were
thus with me! Ah poor distressed creatures: how are they pinched and pined
whilst I have enough and abound? O my bowels how can you but yern? O mine
heart, how can thou but bleed over such distressed ones? Have thou nothing to
help them? There Is enough in my house there is enough in my purse to yield them
relief, but is there no alms for them in my heart? Can I have the heart to see
them pine and perish, and do nothing to h^lp them? Where are ye, O my bowels?
Where are my compassions? O my soul help, and send portions to them for whom
nothing is provided.

3. Out of a thankeful heart. Remember what God has done for thee; Have thou
any sense or experience of his special love to thee, in Christ? What should
that produce? The sense of divine Goodness in a way of Common Providence calls
for all due acknowledgment from us: But a taste of his paternal love in
pardoning our sins, and justifying our persons, and enstating us in eternal
life and happiness, upon the account of his Son's-suffering, and dying for us,
this is, as the strongest Motive to, so the most commanding reason of our
charity, or beneficence to our fellow creatures, who stand in need of it.

In Christ, the beams of Gods mercy are concentred, as the beams of the Sun are
in a burning-glass, which falling upon our hearts, they are, or should be
hereby inflamed, and made to burn with greater heat of love and kindness to all
in want, especially to all who bear his image. The right spring of Mercy to our
neighbor, is the sense of God's Mercy toward us.

IV. Let all your streams of love flow into the Ocean. My meaning is, Let all
be done to the glory of God. This must be your last end to which all must be
directed, as the Apostle charges, 1 Cor. 10. 31. Whether you eat or drink, I
may add, or whether you give to eat, or to drink, or Whatsoever ye do, do all
to the glory of God. Let this be chiefly in your eye, and your heart, that God
may be glorified. Other subordinate ends there are, As the refreshing of the
needy, the adorning our holy profession, the edification of others by our good
example, but all at last must end here, that God may be glorified.

Take heed your end be not to glorify your selves. As worms breed in the
fairest fruit; so pride, and vainglory are apt to creep-up out of the best
duties.

V. Let your works of charity be done in humility, giving unto God the honor
of them, by acknowledging that as what you have bestowed on the poor, you first
received from him: So it was his goodness to give you an heart to give any
thing out of your abundance toward their relief. Yea, you ought to be ever
jealous over your-selvs, lest there has been some hypocrisy, and self-seeking
in your works of charity; acknowledging that you are so far from meriting
heaven, and Salvation by your good works, that, if God should deal with you
according to the rigor of his justice, he might cast you into hell, for that
pride and hypocrisy which cleaves to your best works.

VI. Let your works of charity to men be accompanied with prayers, and
thanksgivings unto God. Thank God, that he has put you amongst the givers, and
not amongst the receivers, it being a more blessed thing to give then to
receive: that he has put you among the givers, and not the withholders: that
he has given you an estate to give, and an heart to give. Thank God, that he
will accept a gift at your hands; that He, whose is all you have, and to whom
it is owing, will count that a gift, which is but the payment of so small a
part of your debt: say with David, in 1 Chro. 29. 11, 13. Thine, O Lord, is the
greatness: both riches and honor come from thee; Now therefore, Our God, we
thank thee, and praise thy glorious name. But what am I, and what is my people,
that we should be able to offer so willingly after this sort? For all things
come of thee, and of thine own have we given thee.

VII. Give out proportionably to what God has given unto you, 1 Cor. 16. 2.
The Apostle advises the Corinthians to give, as God had pr^spered them.

Rich men therefore ought to be rich in good wor^s, for God expects fruit
answerable to the seed which he sows. Has he abounded to you in this worlds
goods? you ought thereupon to be abundant in good works toward others: your
Pounds are expected, where the Widows mites are accepted.

Having given you some Directions for the manner of bestowing your Alms, I
shall briefly show you the means how to attain to this grace of Christian
Charity.

Now the means I shall prescribe, shall be, 1. Such as tend to the bringing
your hearts to be willing to this Duty. 2. Such as shall tend to the helping of
you for the better managing of it.


First, for means to bring your hearts to be willing to set upon this duty,
take These,

Often call to mind, and imprint in your memories the manifold precepts in the
Scriptures, requiring this Duty at your hands. As also the many gracious
promises God has there made for the encouragement of his people thereunto; and
thereupon reason thus with thy self, what? Has God commanded me, (Deuteronomy. 15.
10.) to give unto my Brother according to his necessity? to cast my bread upon
the waters? Eccl. 11. 1. And has our blessed Savior commanded me, Luke 6. 38.
to give unto the poor?

And has the Lord for my encouragement thereunto promised, that he will bless
me in all my works, and in all that I put my hand unto, prosper me in my Trade
and Calling? That my Barnes shall be filled with plenty? That what we shall
give or lend unto the poor, he will pay us again with Interest? That though I
cast my bread upon the waters where it may seem to be lost. yet I shall find it
after many days, it shall certainly be returned into my bosom with increase?
And has my Savior for my encouragement promised, Luke 6. 36. That if I give
unto the poor, it shall be given to me again, good measure, pressed down, and
shaken together, running over? Then certainly, there is no such compendious way
to thrive and prosper in the world, as by my liberality to the poor.

2. Prefer Heaven and the things thereof before this earth, and earthly things.
Though the temporal reward which I have so much insisted on, be a great
encouragement, yet the greatest encouragement is the spiritual and eternal
reward that the Lord has promised. And that this may be the more prevailing
encouragement, learn to esteem and prize things spiritual and eternal above all
things that are but temporal. Suppose it should so fall out, that you should
never receive in kind what you bestow, yet count those temporal things put off
at the best rate, which you receive in things spiritual and eternal. Value
grace and glory above all the treasures of the earth, and count your selves to
grow rich men, according to your abounding in grace, and your evidences for
glory. And esteem it an unthristy Saving, and holding in, where you have an
opportunity to improve in your inner man by expending of your outward substance.

Till Heaven be valued above earth, this great Argument encouraging to Acts of
bounty and mercy will lose its efficacy. When God says, Cast thy bread upon the
waters, for thou shall find it again after many days; the Worldling will be
ready to demand. But how shall I find it? in what way shall it be returned me?
Shall I have bread for bread, or money for my bread. or houses or Lands for my
money? probably thou may. But suppose not so, yet it shall be better than
so, thou shall have in grace what thou partest with in bread or money; thou
shall reap in Heaven, what thou sowest on the waters.

I but the worlding will reply; I do not mean to part with my bread, or my
money so. No, I know thou do not; but the reason is, because thou love this
earth more than Heaven. Thou say, Will Grace feed me? Will Grace cloth me?
Can I keep my self, and my Family? Can we live and be maintained, and preserved
from poverty and beggary here, by hopes of glory hereafter?

Go fool, and learn better what God is, and what his everlasting mercy is; let
the lasting treasures, the durable riches be more prized and valued by thee,
and this will stop thy mouth, and silence thine heart from such vain
reasonings. Thou will never again say, I cannot spare my bread, or my money,
when by spending it for God thou see thou make him thy debtor, who will pay
it thee again in spiritual and eternal good things, if once thou account these
to be better than thy bread, or thy money.

But till thou art come to be settled in this Judgment, and belief, both that
the good things of God are infinitely better than the good things of this
earth; and that what thou sowest in the earth, thou shall certainly reap in
Heaven; till thou come in good earnest to be of this mind, God's poor are
like to be but little the better for thee.

It Is this, beloved, that will effectually do it, will open your hearts, and
open your hands in bounty and liberality for God, when you come to be rooted in
the practical belief of this principle, upon which the practice of all Religion
stands, and is upheld in the world; That Heaven is better than Earth: if this
other be added to it, That what is sincerely laid out for God in the Earth,
shall certainly be repayed in Heaven; besides that return which the Lord here
in this world oftentimes makes to the charitable.

2. For the Means tending to help you for the better managing of it; take these
following.

1. Either follow the Example of the Primitive Saints, in setting apart
something every Lords Day out of the former weeks gettings.

Or, 2. Devote unto God a certain portion of thy yearly incomes for charitable
uses.

That the former way of setting apart something every Lords Day for the relief
of the poor, was the practice of the Primitive Christians, is clear from that
of the Apostle to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 16. 1, 2. Now concerning the
Collection for the Saints, as I have given order to the Churches of Galatia,
even so do ye. Upon the first day of the week (which is the Lords Day) let
every one of you lay by him in store, as God has prospered him. This way and
course concerns such in special who live upon their daily labors.

But to such Gentlemen, and others who live upon their Rents and Offices; and
to such Merchants and Citizens who once a year cast up their accounts, I would
commend the latter way of devoting unto God a certain portion of their yearly
income by Rent or otherwise, and then separating it from the rest, to account
it a sacred stock for the poor, not to be employed to any other use.

All men naturally (through the corruption that is in them) are hard-hearted,
and close-handed, very unwilling to part with any thing considerable upon
sudden occasions for charitable uses. But having aforehand set apart something,
their ears, hearts and hands, are open to every charitable motion, and very
ready and forward are they the more liberally to contribute thereunto of what
is laid by; rejoicing that they have met with so good an object of Charity.

As for the quota pars, what proportion every one ought to set apart out of his
yearly income for good uses, I do not find it particularly set down in the Word
of God, and therefore dare not positively determine the same: and the rather,
because there are so many circumstances which alter the case, that no certain
rule can be given, but shall leave it to the discretion and ingenuity of the
prudent Christian.

But though the Scripture does not determine the exact proportion to be set
apart for good works, yet does it command us, to give out proportionably to
what God has given unto us; to open our hands wide to the necessities of the
poor; to be rich in good works, and the like. Yea the Scripture does commend
unto us the examples of very bountiful Christians, as of Dorcas, who is said to
be full of good works, and alms-deeds which she did, Act. 9. 36. And of
Cornelius, who is said to give much alms, Act. 10. 2. And of the Macedonians,
who are said, to give to their power, yea and beyond their power, 2 Cor. 8. 3.
It likewse commends unto us the example of Jacob, who in testimony of his
thankfulness unto God for what he should bestow upon him, vowed the tenth
thereof unto God, for pious and charitable uses; as Genesis 28. 20, 22. And Jacob
vowed a vow unto God, saying, Of all that thou shall give me, I will surely
give the tenth unto thee.

These examples are left upon record for our imitation; for as the Apostle
speaks, Romans 15. 4. Whatsoever things were written aforetime, were written
for our learning, and for our admonition. The most that I have heard or read
of, who have taken this course, to con^ecrate unto God a certain portion of
their estate to charitable uses, have followed the example of Jacob, in giving
a tenth part unto God. And as God did exceedingly bless Jacob after his vow; so
has he likewise blessed very many others, after their like vow unto God.

Mr. Stock in his funeral Sermon at the burial of the Lord Harrington, speaking
of his Charity, declared that in his life time, he gave the tenth part of his
yearly revenue to the poor. Mr. Gataker in his funeral Sermon at the burial of
Mr. John Parker Merchant, and Citizen of London, speaking of his Charity,
says, That at his first effectual Call, among other things he then resolved
upon, this was one, to set apart every year a tenth of his gain for the relief
of the poor and needy; and that God from that time abundantly advanced his
estate. And questionless, if such Merchants, who usually ensure their goods
upon their apprehension of danger at Sea, would sincerely promise unto God, in
testimony of their thankfulness unto him, the tenth of what should come safe
into their hands, they might receive far greater returns than they do.

In the Life of Dr. Hammond, written by Dr. Fell, I find this expression, The
rate and sum of what the Doctor devoted, was the tenth of all his income,
wherein he was so strictly punctual, that commonly the first thing he did was
to compute, and separate the poor man's share. And how his stock increased
notwithstanding his abundant giving out to the relief of others, the history at
large declares. The like I read in the Life of Mr. William Wheatly, Minister
of Banbury, how for many years he set apart the tenth of his yearly comings in,
both out of his Temporal and Ecclesiastical Means, and that his Estate
prospered the better after he took that course. To these I could add many more
out of the Lives of good and charitable men, and out of several funeral
Sermons, which are printed and published. And could name multitudes of men now
living, who have devoted the like, and greater portion out of their estates for
charitable uses, and are ready to attest the truth of this discourse, That they
are no losers, but great gainers in Temporals by what they have given to the
poor.

Mr. Richard Baxter in his Learned and Useful Piece, called A Christian
Directory, Part the 4th. fol. 195. of the quotapars, what proportion is meet
for most men to devote for charitable uses, whether the tenth part of their
increase be not ordinarily a fit proportion? has this expression,

Though the proportion of the tenth part is too much for some, and much too
little for others, yet for the most part, I think it as likely a proportion as
it is fit for another to prescribe in particular.

Yet I would not be thought to impose this as a proportion to be observed by
all; for all men's hearts are not alike enlarged with love and bounty: and some
there are who have no more than is necessary for the comfortable support of
themselves and family; from whom less is required for the relief of others. But
I would advise such whom the Lord has blessed with a plentiful estate, so that
their necessary expenses are, or might be, far less than their incomes, to
devote a tenth part of their whole yearly income to charitable uses: I say, of
their whole yearly income, without first deducting any part thereof for diet,
clothes, or other necessary expenses; for the tenth of the remainder will be a
very inconsiderable proportion for a rich man to devote to Charity, and far
short of that which the Scripture seems to call for.

And know assuredly, that this course is so far from being a means of
diminishing your stock and store, that if it be managed as it ought, according
to the forementioned rules and directions, it is the surest and safest means,
the most compendious course of increasing it, through the secret blessing of
God, which accompanies the same; which has been sufficiently demonstrated in
the foregoing discourse.

2. Be careful on whom thou bestowest thine alms; for by giving to such common
beggars who are able to work, and yet are so lazy, that they will not work, but
would live by the sweat of other men's brows; I say, by relieving such, we shall
both maintain them in their idle and wicked life; and they who are truly poor,
and ought to be looked upon as the proper objects of our Charity, will be
neglected, or at least scanted of that, which of right belongs to them.

I am not against the relieving of all beggars; some of them I know are blind,
others lame, aged, and past their work; these impotent poor, in regard of their
present condition, are objects of Charity, but not the impudent poor, who have
strength enough to work, and will not, those canting vagrants, who are the
burden of the earth, and shame of the Kingdom, for these I have no charity:
Neither had the Apostle St. Paul, who toward God's poor was full of
compassion; but for the Devil's poor, he gave this command, 2 These. 3. 10. That
if any would not work, neither should he eat; that hunger and necessity might
drive them to labor. Erasmus mentions a kind of mercy meetest for such, ' it is
misericordia puniens: Surely the Whip is more their due, than food: Bridewell
to entertain them, than an Almshouse.

III. Another Means for the attaining this grace of Christian Charity, is this,
Be earnest with God in prayer, that he would be pleased to bestow upon thee
that adorning and enriching grace of Charity, and accept thy offering. This
Sacrifice, as it must be offered up to Heaven; so it must be fetched from
Heaven. The gift of a merciful and charitable heart, is one of those gifts that
come down from above, even the Father of Lights, Iam. 1. 17. If thou receivest
not this gift from God, thy poor Brother is like to have no gift from thee. Now
it must be thy prayer that must fetch down this gift from God. Lift up thine
heart to the Lord, and beg a merciful and compassionate soul; beg of God that
he would make thee ready to every good work, willing to communicate to the poor
members of Christ, according to thine ability, and their necessity, that
thereby thou may lay up in store for thy self a good foundation against the
time to come, and so lay hold on eternal life: pray for a willing heart, and
pray for acceptance of thy gift, that thine alms may be such a sacrifice, and
so offered up, that therewith the Lord may be well pleased.

Having thus showed you the Means on our part to be performed for attaining and
exercising this grace of Charity: I shall close this discourse with answering
two or three Objections.

Object. 1. Some object the greatness of their charge, the number of their
children, who must be cared for, and thereupon have little to give to the poor.

Answ. 1. Have thou many children, thou ought the rather to be charitable,
that thereby thou may entail God's blessing upon them, which is the best
portion, and surest inheritance thou can leave them; that will secure their
stock, and improve their store; whereas unmercifulness to the poor will intail
a curse instead of a blessing upon the persons and estates of thy children.

2. Thou who objectest the number of thy children as a plea for thy parsimony,
how justly may God then lessen the number, and so take away this excuse, by
taking thy children from thee.

3. Suppose thou have many children, it may be half a score, reckon God for one
more; give unto him a child's portion; I mean, bestow upon the poor, for his
sake, as much every year, as one child stands thee in; give unto them a child's
portion, and I dare boldly say, thou will not be the poorer, but rather a great
gainer. For thereby will thou procure God's blessing upon thy self and
children, which in truth is all in all; and without which, all is like to come
to nothing, as we see by daily experience; which made St. Austin say, Haeredi
praestabis, quicquid misericordiae causa de ejus portione detraxeris, Aug. de
Tempore, Sermon. 76. That which thou give out of thine estate to charitable
uses, will be no loss to thy children, but rather a great advantage. Yea the
Spirit of God in setting forth the happiness of a merciful man, says, His
children shall fare the better for his goodness and bounty, as Psalm. 37. 16. He
is ever merciful, and lends, and his seed is blessed; that is, God will bless
his children, not only with spiritual, but also with temporal blessings.

2. Obj. Many Professors in these days are very barren in good works.

Answ. Fruitless and uncharitable Christians may make a profession of Religion,
but questionless they are no sound Christians, nor sincere Professors. For most
certain it is, that the Elect of God do put on bowels of mercy and compassion,
as the Apostle speaks, Col. 3. 12. And therefore an uncharitable Christian is
a mere contradiction. For who is a Christian but he who conforms himself to the
Law and Life of Christ? The substance of whose Law is Charity, and whose Life
was spent in going about doing good, some way or other, to the soul and bodies
of men and women.

Whosoever therefore having this worlds goods, sees his Brother in need, and
shuts up his bowels of compassion from him, and will not communicate any
thing considerable toward his necessities; let his profession be never so
specious and glorious in the eyes of men, yet certainly he is but a rotten
Professor, and dissembling Hypocrite in the sight of God. In Matthew. 25. 23. We
find that liberality to the members of Christ is made the special touchstone of
true Faith and Godliness. For they are the charitable persons, who at the great
day of Judgment will appear to be the Sheep at Christ's right hand, and shall
hear that joyful sentence of absolution, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit
the Kingdom prepared for you, from the foundation of the world: for I was an
hungered, and ye gave me meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink: I was a
stranger, and ye took me in: I was naked, and ye clothed me: I was sick, and
ye visited me: I was in prison, and ye came unto me.

And on the other side, all unmerciful men, who have not relieved Christ in his
members, whatsoever profession of Religion they have made here in this world;
yet at the last day will appear to be the Goats set on Christ's left hand, and
shall hear that dreadful sentence of condemnation, Depart from me ye cursed
into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels: For I was an
hungered, and ye gave me no meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink: I was
a stranger, and ye took me not in: naked, and ye clothed me not: sick and in
prison, and ye visited me not. Hence it appears, that as mercy and bounty to
the poor members of Christ, is a conspicuous evidence of true Faith, and
sincere godliness in a Christian, and signally declare him pious: so
illiberality, and unmercifulness to them, is a clear mark of infidelity, and
ungodliness, and signally declare him as an unbeliever; so a wicked and
profane person: Therefore I should much question the sincerity of their faith
and piety, who making a profession of Religion, show little or no charity to
the poor members of Christ. For as the Apostle James speaks, c. 1. v. 21.
Pure Religion and undefield before God, and the Father, is this, to visit the
fatherless and widows in their affliction: Implying, that works of mercy and
charity rightly performed, are clear evidences of the truth of our Religion,
and of the sincerity of our Profession. And if you look into the Scriptures,
you shall scarce read of a man truly godly, but you may read also, that he was
merciful and charitable, forward to every good work.

So much shall suffice for this Point of Doctrine.

A word or two for my Brethrens sake of the first Doctrine raised from the
foregoing verse, which is the principal Point there intended by our Savior,
which was this.

17. That all needful succor, and good entertainment ought to be afforded in
special to the Ministers of the Gospel.

Our Savior in commending objects to our Charity, in the first place
mentions Prophets, and the Righteous ones, saying, He that receives a
Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall receive a Prophet's reward; and then
adds, He that receives a Righteous man in the name of a Righteous man, etc.

Indeed, so general must be the extent and emanation of our Charity, that it
must not exclude any who are in want and distress. For though we may, and ought
to put a difference between men upon whom we bestow our Charity; yet ought we
not to restrain it from any men who are in want; but must act the grace of
Charity toward them who have not the grace of Faith. Yea, we ought to do good
unto all, as the Apostle exhorts, Gal. 6. 13. But especially unto them who
are of the household of Faith. And among them chiefly to the Ministers of
Christ. So as this object of Charity, Prophet, is not here to be taken
exclusively, but by way of eminency and preferment: Ministers are before, and
above others, with more readiness and cheerfulness to be ministered unto.

The people of Israel we read were commanded once and again not to leave nor
forsake their Levites, especially when they were reduced into any streights and
exegencies, as Deuteronomy. 12. 19. and 14. 27. Then much less should the Ministers of
the Gospel be left and forsaken by the people of God, when they lie under any
want or distress.

The examples of God's people that have gone before us in the performance of
this duty are many, both in the Old and New Testament. It is recorded to the
perpetual praise and commendation of Obadiah, that he hid the Prophets of God
by fifty in a cave from the cruelty of Iezabel, and sustained them with food,
and ministered all things necessary unto them, 1 King. 18. 13. We read likewise
how the widow of Sarephath nourished the Prophet Elijah in her house for many
days and years, even so long as the famine continued, 1 King. 17. 15, 16. The
kindness of the good Shunamite to the Prophet Elisha, is largely reproved, 2
King. 4. 8, etc. It fell on a day that Elisha passed to Shunem, where was a
great woman, and she constrained him to eat bread; that is, to refresh himself
with food. And so it was, that as often as he passed by, he turned in thither to
eat bread. Having found good entertainment, and hearty welcome, he did the
oftener visit the family. And she said unto her Husband, Behold now I perceive,
that this is an holy man of God, which passes by us continually, let us make a
little chamber, I pray thee, on the wall, and let us set for him there a bed,
and a table, and a stool, and a candlestick. Under these, other necessary
accommodations are comprised. The good woman desired of her Husband, that a
chamber might be made for the Prophet on the wall; perhaps not that she wanted
room in her house to lodge him in, but because she considered, that the noise
of a great family might be some disturbance to the Prophet's study and
devotion; therefore thought it convenient to provide such a chamber for him,
where he might be more retired, and have the free ingress and egress; that by
those accommodations he might be encouraged the oftener to take up his lodging
there.

Romans 16. 2. It is set down as the height and crown of Phebe's good works, that
she had been a succourer of the Apostle Paul in his wants and straits. And in 2 Timothy 1. 16. we read how Onesiphorus refreshed and relieved the Apostle in his
suffering condition, and was not ashamed of his chain; that is, though he were
a prisoner, and under restraint for the Gospels sake, yet Onesiphorus owned
him, showed him all respect, succored and relieved him in that his low
condition. Gaius likewise, a godly, wealthy Citizen of Corinth, is famous for
that kind entertainment and succor which he gave to the Apostle, and the
Church with him, Romans 16. 23.

It is recorded to the commendation of King Edward the sixth, that he afforded
all needful succor, and good entertainment to Bucer, Fagius, and other
Divines, when they fled into this Kingdom by reason of the troubles in their
own Nation. And Beza in his Epistle ad Regem Iacobum, makes an honorable
mention of a liberal collection of the Church of Scotland sent to the
French-Ministers, who were banished Religionis causa.

Here are fair Copies for us to write after. And indeed why are these things
written, and left upon record to posterity, but for our learning? Not so much
for our admiration, as for our imitation, that we might follow their steps, and
write after their copy; which St. Paul testifies of the Macedonians, 2 Cor. 9.
2. How that very many of them were stirred up and provoked to a liberal
contribution to the poor Saints at Jerusalem by the forwardness and zeal of the
Corinthians. And St. Austin (Confess. lib. 9. cap. 2.) confesses, that the
examples of God's servants, did burn and consume his own lukewarmness; and
their fervent zeal set an edge on his Devotion.

To these Examples I shall add a few REASONS for the better enforcing this duty
upon you.

Reas. I. Because Ministers being supported, are like to be most serviceable to
the Church of God. They are Spiritual Fathers, to beget men unto Christ. They
are his Anbassado^rs, and stand in his stead to reveal the Mysteries of the
Kingdom, sent forth to be reconcilers betwixt God and this sinful world; to
pray and beseech them to be reconciled unto God, 2 Cor. 5 20. Their work is to
bear the Name of God, to publish the salvation of God before the world; to open
the eyes of the blind, and to turn them from darkness to light, and from the
power of Satan unto God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and an
inheritance among them that are sanctified: In which respect Ministers of the
Gospel are more useful and serviceable in their generation, than either
Lawyers, Physicians or Tradesmen, which yet are useful enough.

1. Lawyers indeed may be a means of settling your Right in your Goods and
Lands: But Ministers of settling your Right to your heavenly Inheritance.

2. Physicians may cure the maladies of your bodies: But Ministers are sent to
cure the diseases of your souls.

3. Merchants, and all sorts of Tradesmen may replenish a Land with all manner
of Commodities necessary for this life: But Ministers only bring in such
heavenly and spiritual treasures as spring up into the everlasting treasure.

So that by supplying their bodily wants, you do comfort and refresh the souls
of many. And what better Charity imaginable, than by relieving the temporal
wants of some few, to further the everlasting salvation of many? Oh what cause
will their souls have to bless God to all eternity for your Charity, who have
been converted by the Ministry of those whom you have refreshed and supported
in their work!

Reas. II* Another Reason may be taken from the consideration of the quality of
the persons for whom I am pleading: They are not so mean as outwardly they
appear. They whom you behold so poorly clad, walking so djectedly, being
destitute of many outward comforts, are men endowed with many singular
prerogatives and privileges, not only above the rest of God's people; but
likewise above the most glorious Angels.

Compare them first with the people of God; they are called the Lord's Sheep;
These the Shepherds of the flock, Ezekiel. 34. 2. They Children in God's family;
These Spiritual Fathers, who by the seed of the word beget men unto God, 1 Cor.
4. 15. Therefore the Spirit of God vouchsafes them this dignity, to be called
(...), fellow laborers with God.

Concerning Angels; true it is that they and Ministers are fellow servants,
Rev. 22. 9. But yet Ministers have sundry prerogatives above them.

1. Angels rejoice at the conversion of a sinner, Luke 15. 10. But by the
Ministry of Prophets sinners are converted unto God, Act. 26. 18.

2. An Angel was sent to Cornelius, to advise him whither to go to be
instructed: but a Minister instructed him in the way of life, Act. 10. 6. 34.

3. Was the word of Reconciliation ever committed to Angels? to Ministers it is
committed, 2 Cor. 5. 18. It is observable, that the Embassage of Ministers is
not simply (...), Message, but (...), the Gospel, the gladsome tidings of
salvation by Jesus Christ, into which the Angels themselves do desire to look
and pry, as the Apostle Peter expresses, 1 Pet. 1. 12. The Lord has also
committed to his Ministers the administration of the Sacraments, which are the
seals of his covenant, whereby all his precious promises are ratified, and
confirmed unto us. So that as in respect of the rich treasures of God's Word
committed to their dispensing, they are the Lord's Treasurers: So in respect of
the Sacraments, they are the Keepers of his great Seal. If these Officers be
great under mortal Princes, what are they under the King of Kings?

I have taken the liberty in a few words to set forth some of the privileges
of the Ministers of the Gospel; partly for the comfort and consolation of many
of them under the present misery and poverty which they suffer, rather than to
sin against their consciences: and partly for the incitation of others to
afford them that double honor, which the Apostle calls for, 1 Timothy 5. 17.
Namely, the honor of respect, and the honor of maintenance, that they suffer
them not to sink under their burden, but afford them some seasonable succor
and relief, suitable to their present wants and necessities.

Reas. III. Because Ministers are oftenest exposed to sufferings and
distresses, and so have most need of relief. The Bow of the Adversaries of
Religion is bent most against the Teachers and Leaders of the people. That
word, 1 King. 22. 31. Fight neither with small or great, save only with the
King of Israel, is often changed into, Fight neither with small or great, but
only against the Prophets of the Lord. Smite the Shepherds, and the Sheep will
be scattered. Experience enough tells the world who they are that are set in
the Front of the Battle, and who are the first that fall by the power of the
Adversaries. And who should be most in the eye of Charity, but those that are
most in the eye of malice?

Besides, For whose sakes is it that Ministers are so often brought so low? Is
it not for your sakes, whose souls are dearer to them than their own substance?
Is it not often upon this account, because they will be faithful to you, and
will not keep silence, nor cease to watch over you, and to warn, and to
instruct you from day to day?

Might they not save themselves more whole, if they would hold their peace, and
let the Devil alone to have his will of you? For your sakes no doubt it is,
that much of their sufferings come upon them; and shall they be forsaken by
you? The truth is, it is upon this account a piece of Justice, as well as a
piece of Charity, to relieve and succor them; and so you may do two good works
in one; the same alms may be both a work of righteousness, and a work of mercy.

Reas. IV. Your gratitude to God requires a cheerful performance of this duty
from you. For wherein can you otherwise make a suitable return to God, for what
he has plentifully conferred on you, than by contributing some of your
Temporals to them, from whom ye reap so much in Spirituals? The Lord of his
free grace and rich mercy has abounded to you in these outward things; He has
given you richly all things to enjoy. Yea, as the Psalmist speaks, He has
loaded you with his benefits. Now, not to return some part of your estate to
him, who has given you all that you do enjoy, were ingratitude in the highest
degree: And therefore how does it concern you often to put the Psalmist's
question to your selves, What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits
toward me? Psalm 116. 12. Surely one kindness deserves another; as God has
been bountiful to you, sure you are very unworthy, if you be not bountiful to
his. And how do you think he will take it at your hands? Will he ever say to
you, Well done good and faithful Servant, thou have been faithful, a good
Steward of my many gifts? Or, is it all one to you whether he say, Well done,
or not?

And in regard you cannot directly and immediately requite him who is incapable
of being enriched by us; My goodness extends not to thee, Psalm 16. 2. It
will be your wisdom to express your thankfulness to God by being kind to his
poor relations. Now, who are nearer to God than his Ministers? whom he has
appointed to stand in his room, to declare his mind unto his people; who are as
the mouth of the people unto God; so God's mouth unto the people; who are the
Messengers of the Lord of Hosts, by whose Ministry there is peace concluded,
and reconciliation proclaimed between God and man. Surely what kindness you
show to these, he takes as done unto himself, Matthew. 25. 40.

Reas. V. Your relieving the faithful Ministers of Christ, may in a sense be
said to have something more in it, than if you should show your Charity to
himself, in his own person, as being a sign of greater love. It is but an
ordinary thing to return kindness to our dearests friends; but to extend our
good will to their relations, or servants for their sakes, is an evidence of
much greater love. For if upon their account only we do good unto these; how
much more would it be judged we should be ready to do it unto themselves, if
they stood in need of our help? And so will Christ look upon it: Our bounty
expressed to his Ministers he will receive as an evidence of our more abundant
love unto him, which he will in no wise forget, nor suffer to go unrewarded.

Reas. VI. Such as relieve the poor Ministers of Christ, shall have their
blessing, the benefit of their prayers unto God. They will bless you however,
though you have no blessing for them. Though you have not an alms for them, yet
they will have a prayer for you. But their bowels being refreshed by you, you
may expect that their heart will be the more enlarged for you; and this will be
a far greater kindness than you can bestow on them. Your gift cannot be worth
their fervent prayers. In this respect it is much better to give, than to
receive; because he that receives has but a perishing alms; he that gives,
receives an abiding blessing, the blessing of prayers.

Herein did the Apostle St. Paul, make a large requital to Onesiphorus for the
kindness he showed to him in his imprisonment; as you may read, 2 Timothy 1. 16.
The Lord give mercy unto the house of Onesiphorus, for he often refreshed me, and
was not ashamed of my chain. As if he had said, I received much comfort and
refreshment from Onesiphorus, when I was in prison, for the which I beseech the
Father of all mercies, to show mercy unto him, and his, by blessing him, and
his whole family, with all blessings, both temporal, spiritual and eternal. And
indeed what blessing can that man want, who has a share in many Ministers
prayers? which are available for the obtaining of all good things at the hand
of God, as for themselves, so for others. Yea the very work of Charity does
bespeak a blessing from God. As the blood of Abel is said to cry to the Lord
for a curse or vengeance upon Cain: so every act of Charity cries to God for a
blessing upon the Charitable. Our very acts of Charity in relieving the wants
of the poor, and refreshing their bowels, do pray and cry to God for his
blessing upon us and ours.

Reas. VI. Your Charity to them will be hereafter rewarded with everlasting
glory and happiness in the Kingdom of Heaven. This reason our Savior himself
gives in these words; He that recieveth a Prophet in the name of a Prophet,
shall receive a Prophets reward; whereby is meant that surpassing and excellent
weight of glory, which cannot be expressed by the tongue of men or Angels. Yea,
by the reward of a Prophet seems to be employed the highest degree of heavenly
glory. For Daniel 12: 3. It is said, That they that be wise, that is, the
righteous, who are endowed with true spiritual wisdom, being lightened by the
Spirit of God, shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament; but they that
turn many to righteousness, which is the work of Prophets, shall shine as the
Stars for ever and ever.

Now by your bounty to the Prophets of God, you may come to partake of their
reward. So that it is your own concernment to contribute liberally toward
their relief. Not that your Charity to them does merit that glorious reward;
but in regard of the promise of God made to all those, who do exercisethe same
toward his Ministers, it shall be truly given unto them.

For a word of Application.
Oh how should the consideration of these things stir up the hearts of all,
especially such as have a blessing in their hand, an estate to give, to draw
forth their souls, and reach forth their hands to the supply of these wanting
servants of God. Surely this is a time wherein Christ is trying your love to
him, by your Charity to them. Are you not concerned to make proof of your love
to Christ? Have you not an opportunity before you, and a loud call from Heaven
to prove it in this way? Can you not hear him, that said once to Peter, John
21. 16. Love thou me? Feed my Sheep. Can you not hear the same voice calling
to you, Love thou me? Feed my Shepherds. Sure thou art very deaf to the
voice of the Providence of this day, if thou do not hear this Call. And will
you prove that you have no love to Christ? What do you else if you suffer his
to starve, when you have wherewith to feed them?

Beloved, it is through God's free grace, and rich bounty, that you enjoy such
plenty of outward good things, when many of his Ministers are in great want.
What you have, you have recieved from him. Is it not then most just and
reasonable, that you should return back some part of your estates unto God, by
relieving his Ministers, in testimony of your love and thankfulness unto him
for what you have? Has God given you hundreds and thousands? and will not you
part with a few pounds or shillings when he calls aloud unto you for the same,
as now he does in these days? Though the earth be his, and the fullness
thereof, yet (in a sense) he has sometimes need of your estates. Matthew. 25.
35. Christ tells you of his wants, and shows you how, and when he is
relieved.

If you have any spiritual wisdom to discern times and seasons. you may know,
that now Christ stands in need of your helping hand, now that so many of his
Ministers are in want, for the testimony of a good conscience: And should you
now deny him in his Ministers, I do verily believe, that if Christ were now
upon earth, as when he first took our nature upon him, and in his own person
should crave your relief, you would turn a deaf ear unto him.

Though for the present you enjoy manifold blessings; yet how easily can he
pluck them out of your mouths, and if you will not perform your duty, thrust
you down from among the givers, to take your place among the receivers!
Certainly the communicating a part is your best way to secure the remainder,
and to season and sanctify it to your more comfortable use.

Luke 11. 41. Says our Savior, Give alms of such things as you have, and
behold all things are clean unto you; that is, lawful to be used. The metaphor
is taken from the Law, whereby many things were counted unclean, and so
unlawful for use; they might not be touched or meddled with. Yea by the
inference of the Apostle; Give alms of such things as you have, and behold all
things are clean unto you: He seems to allude to another Rite of the Law
about First Fruits, Tithes, and Free offerings, by giving which to the Lord,
all the rest which they had were secured, sanctified and made clean. So that
charitable men are they, who may with the more freedom, quietness and comfort
use what they have. Who that has any desire to be accepted and appoved of God,
would not have his person, and the actions which he does, and things which he
possesses to be clean? Whatsoever is unclean is odious and abominable in God's
sight: unclean persons might not approach to God's Sanctuary, nor meddle with
sacred matters. If they were not cleansed, they were to be cut off from God's
People, Numb. 19 20. Levit. 7. 20. and every unclean thing was an abomination.

This therefore must needs be a strong persuasive to put in practice the
counsel of our Savior, in Giving alms of such things as we have, that so all
things may be clean, and sanctified unto us. What Is clean you may use with
God's good leave and allowance: (clean things might be eaten) and where you
have God's good leave, you may expect his blessing. It Is sin to eat where God's
portion is among it.

The truth is, it is the great mistake of many, to think that all their goods
are their own, and that they are absolute Lords and Owners of all which they
possess: Whereas indeed they are rather Stewards, than Lords and Owners of this
worlds goods; all is the Lords. God of his infinite wisdom has committed to
some a greater portion of them, than to others, yet not to be impropriated to
themselves, but they must give him his special part, to which his have as good
a right as themselves unto the rest, saving only that they may not lay hands on
it themselves, until you put it into their hands. But as they may not take it
out of yours; so you may not keep it out of their hands. Therefore Solomon
speaking of the right which the poor have to a part of rich men's estates,
says, Prove. 3. 27. Withold not good from them to whom it is due, when it is in
the power of thy hand to do it. So that relieving the poor is not only an act
of Mercy, left to our choice to do, or leave undone; but also, as I said
before, an act of Justice, to the performance whereof we stand bound. Hence to
give alms, and to do Righteousness and Justice, are often in Scripture put the
one for the other, both signifying the same thing. Therefore the Septuagint
have rendered the Hebrew word signifying Righteousness, in Deuteronomy. 24. 14. (...),
alms deeds. And in Psalm. 112. 9. It is said, His Righteousness endures for
ever; that is, his alms, or his mercifulness; as is clear from the foregoing
words; He has dispersed, he has given to the poor; his Righteousness endures
for ever: Whereby is employed, that giving of alms is one special branch of that
Righteousness and Justice we owe to our poor neighbors.

And dare thou yet hold it in thy hand? Will thou wrong the Almighty of his
right, and rob his poor of their due? If it be nothing with thee to be
unmerciful, is it nothing neither to be a robber? a robber of God? Will a man
rob God? Mal. 3. 8. Dares any man be so wicked? How can thou but expect that
he will make a forcible entry upon thee, and take what is his own, and seal a
Writ of Ejectment against thee, and turn thee out of all that ever thou have?
Look not to be long in quiet possession of what thou have; but fear lest either
God should take thine estate from thee, or thee from thine estate, and give
thee thy portion with Dives, who because he denied his crumbs to satisfy poor
Lazarus his hunger, was himself denied a drop of cold water to quench his own
heat and thirst, Luke 16. 23. Upon which words St. Austin thus glosseth, Ideo
rogans Dives non exauditur in tormentis, quia rogantem pauperem non exaudivit.
Therefore was not Dives heard when he prayed in torments because he hearkened
not to the poor that begged of him, when he was upon the Earth. Aug. Sermon. de
Divite.

Let me add a few quickening words to set home what has been spoken, by these
following Questions.

Quest. 1. Now at length, What do thou think of mercy and bounty to the poor?

1. Is there not an excellency in it? Oh how much of God is there in it! There
is faith in it; He that will cast his bread upon the waters, is it not a sure
sign that he believes God, who has said, that it shall be returned again?
There Is the love of God in it: He that sees his Brother in need, and shuts
up the bowels of his compassions from him, how dwells the love of God in him?
And he that opens his bowels, and draws forth his soul to God's hungry ones,
who can deny but the love of God dwells in that man? It is the Image of God's
goodness. God is a merciful God, and his mercy is his glory; and this glory of
God shines forth in his merciful servants. There is self-denial in it. Self
would keep all; flesh would hold back; it cannot spare for God; it is a sign
that self is laid low, that the flesh is kept under, that the interest of God
is the swaying interest, when whatever God will have, this self is not suffered
to keep back. Is there so much of God in mercifulness, and is there not an
excellency in it?

2. Is there not a necessity of it? Shall the merciless ever obtain mercy?
Can thou hope for mercy who wilt show no mercy.

Qu. 2. What do thou think of thy self? Art thou merciful, or merciless? How
do thou find it? Is thine heart open? are thy bowels open? or are they still
shut? Do thou feel that heart of thine inclined and resolved to open thy
hands, and to disperse, and that liberally the good things thou have received,
as a good Steward of the manifold gifts of God? Or do thou yet feel that the
door is shut, thine heart is hardened against showing kindness to the Lord? Give
thy plain judgment, what think thou? Art thou a merciful man, or merciless?
and if merciless, How do thou hope to obtain mercy?

Qu. 3. What do thou think of thy worldly goods?

1. Are they not thy Talents, committed to thee for thy Lord's use? Must thou
not be accountable to him, how they have been laid out? Will it be a
comfortable account when thou must bring in thy Bill; so much for thy pride, so
much for thine appetite, or all hoarded up for thy covetousness, and nothing or
but little for God?

2. Are they more worth than Treasures in Heaven? Is it more to thine advantage
to be rich in this worlds goods, than to be rich in good works? Do thou in
good earnest judge, that thy laying up treasures on earth is better husbandry,
than thy laying up in store for thy self a good foundation against the time to
come?

Qu. 4. What do thou think of the state of many of the servants of God in
this age? Are there no wanting ones? no distressed ones? What neither amongst
Ministers, nor Christians? Are they all provided for? Do not many of them eat
the bread, and drink the waters of affliction? Is it not very strait and very
short with them? Do but enquire after their condition, and thou will find it
so. Art thou one of those that carest not how it fares with the poor friends of
Christ? Are they not worth the enquiring, and looking after? or at least, Is
not he worthy, whose they are, and whom they serve? Is not Christ worthy, for
whose sake thou should show kindness to his? How will he take thy neglect of
them? Remember that word, Matthew. 25. 45. Inasmuch as ye did it not to these, ye
did it not to me.

Qu. 5. What will thou do for the future? What shall be the success of these
few words that are written for thy learning? What art thou resolved upon? for
mercy, or for cruelty? Consult thine own heart; lay not by this little Book,
till thou art come to a resolution one way or other, either to accept, or
reject this counsel, which in the name of the Lord is offered thee for thy
good. Oh show thy self a man in whose soul Christ has an interest, and so
great an interest, that thou will do any thing at his word; pity at his word,
relieve at his word, give, lend, feed, cloathe, refresh the bowels of his needy
ones: Let thy soul say, Lord, at thy word I will do it: here is my bread, and my
flesh, and my money, command what thou will of it, I will not say thee nay.
Thou have given me a large portion, and every one of thy servants that thou
appointest to receive it, shall have their part; for thy sake, Lord, they shall
have it. Thine I am, and thine is all that I have; show me thy pleasure, how
much, and how often, and where, and to whom I shall bestow it, and through the
grace of God there it shall go.

Friend, Will thou say thus? Will thou in the presence of the Lord come to this
gracious resolution? or can thou yet find in thine heart to deny thy Lord,
and continue to be as hard-hearted, and close-handed as thou were wont to be?
Dare not to say, Lord, my goods are mine own, I owe thee nothing: Dread such
thoughts, that how much soever thou have, the servants of Christ shall be
nothing the better for it.

Once again consider, thou art put to this choice, either to accept of the
counsel of Christ, or to reject it; which of the two will thou do? If thou
resolvest not on mercy, and liberality, thou rejectest the word of the Lord;
and if thou rejectest his word, thou rejectest the Lord, and therein say, He
shall be no Lord for me. But if thou acceptest, then go, and do accordingly:
Let the hunger, and the thirst, and the nakedness; the wants and distresses of
his servants feel in that relief they shall receive from thee, that thou art a
man to whom the Lord has not spoken in vain. Let them feel it presently, and
let them feel it constantly; this year, and the next year, and the next, even
whilst they have need to receive, and thou have it by thee to give. This do,
and the Lord accept thee; remember all thy offering, and accept all thy
sacrifices; the Lord hear thee in the day of thy trouble; the name of the God
of Jacob defend thee: The Lord grant thee according to thine own heart, and
fulfill all thy counsel: The Lord remember thee with the favor he bears unto
his children, and visit thee with his salvation.

FINIS.

