THE PRINCIPLES OF Christian Religion.

Proved by Scripture, propounded by Questions and Answers: short for memory,
plain for the meanest capacity, and profitable for all.

DEUTERONOMY. 6.6, 7. These words which I command thee this day, shall be in thy
heart, and thou shall teach them diligently unto thy children, and shall talk
of them when thou sit in thy house, etc.

Imprimatur, CHARLES HERLE.

LONDON, Printed by R. L. for SAMUEL MAN, at the Swan in PAUL'S Church yard 1645.

To the READER.
THe Orthodox, pious, and learned Author of these few ensuing Catecheticall
Principles of Religion, did, it seems, at first in^^^^ and commend them only
to his own Parishioners, to be directions for all such godly house-holders,
that desire to instruct and to train up their children and servants in the
information, fear, and nurture of the Lord: But because every Question and
Answer is so fully proved by many pregnant and apposite testimonies of Gods
Word, to inform and satisfy young beginners in Religious ways; It has been
the hearty wish, and godly desire of many good Christians to have them Printed,
that among other good means to build us up in our most holy faith, and to
remove fond and wicked opinions, that run against, and labor to overthrow the
very first elements and principles of Christianity, Heb. 5.12
these few directions might be public and extant also. The method, the Author
uses in them, is such, and the Questions and Answers are so wisely digested,
that young beginners in piety may easily refer, what they hear in the public
Assemblies, or read in godly books privately, to some of these heads, whereby
they may be enabled, by Gods blessing, is give account to every man, that shall
ask them a reason of the hope, that is in them with meekness and fear. 1 Pet.
3.15.
The Lord of heaven establish and settle us in the truth, and by the faithful
Ministry of his word weed out, and free us from all those nasty weeds of
heresy and truth-overthrowing Schisms! That we the people of this Island,
being quite delivered from the Prelaticall popish yoke of former oppressions,
and superstitions on the one side, and from old and new Heresies on the other
side, may at length become a well resined Church, a people truly zealous of
good works, that foreign Nations, seeing GOD'S blessing upon Englands
Reformation, may begin also in good earnest, to hate the Whore of Babylon, and
help to burn her with fire: That so away may be opened for the poor blind Jews
to come in, and look on him, whom they have pierced: Which the Lord grant for
Jesus Christ his sake.

AMEN. J. H.

The Principles of Christian Religion, proved by Scriptures.
Quest. WHat is true happiness?

Answ. To know God and myself.

Proofs.
1 That it is true happiness to know God, see Joh. 17.3. where Christ says.
This is life eternal that they know thee the only true God and Jesus Christ
whom thou have sent. Jer. 9.24. 2 That it is true happiness to know our selves
Matthew. 5.3. Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of God.
Q. What is God?

A. God is a spirit every way infinite, goodness it self, Creator, preserver
and governor of all things, distinguished into three persons, the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost.

Proofs.
1 That God is a Spirit. John 4.24. God is a Spirit, and they that worship him
must worship him in spirit and in truth. 2 That God is every way infinite 1
King. 8.27. Solomon says unto God, behold the heavens, and the heavens of
heavens, are not able to contain thee: how much more unable is this house which
I have built: Psalm. 90 2. Moses says to God, Before the mountains were made
and brought forth, ere ever thou had framed the eard, and the world, even
from everlasting to everlasting thou art God. 3 That God is goodness it self,
Ezod. 4.6, 7. The Lord proclaims himself thus: The Lord, the Lord, strong
gracious, and merciful, slow to anger, abundant in goodness and truth,
reserving mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity transgression and sin, and
that will by no means clear the guilty. 4 That God is Creator of all things,
Exodus 20.11. Ton in six days the Lord made the heaven, and the earth the sea
and all that in them is: Prove. 16.4. 5 That God is preserver of all things Heb.
1.3. he bears up all things by his mighty word. 6 That God is governor of
all things, Mat. 10. (...) where Christ says, Are not two sparows sold for a
farthing, yet one of them shall not fall on the ground without your father, the
hairs of your head are all numbered. 7 That this God is distinguished into the
Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost, 1 John 8.7. There are three that bear
record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are
one.
Q. What are you by creation in Adam?

A. I am a reasonable creature endued with the image of God, which stands in
wisdom and true holiness.

Proofs
1 That a man is a creature, endued with a reasonable soul, Genesis 2.7. The Lord
God formed the man, of the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils
the breath of life, so man became a living soul. 1 Cor. 15.45. 2 That man was
created in the image of God, Genesis 1.27. Thus God created man in his image, in
the image of God created he him, he created them male and female. 3 That
wisdom is a part of Gods image, Col. 3.10. and have put on the new man, which
is renewed in knowledge after the image of him that created him. 4 That
holiness is another part of Gods image, Ephesians. 4.24. Put on the new man, which
after God is created in righteousness, and true holiness.
Q. What are you by Adams fall?

A. I am wholly corrupted with sin, and continually subject to the curse and
wrath of God.

Proofs.
1 That man's nature is wholly corrupted with sin, Genesis 6.5. God saw that every
imagination of the thoughts of man's heart was only evil continually Romans
5.12, 14. 2 That every natural man is subject to Gods curse, Gal. 3.10. Cursed
is every one, that continues not in all things, which are written in the book
of the Law to do them.
Q. What are your sins?

A. A guiltiness in Adams first offense, and a disposition of my heart to
every thing that is against the Law of God, with innumerable fruits thereof in
thought, speech, and action.

Proofs.
1 That we are guilty of and in Adams first offense, Romans 5.12. By the offense
of one judgment came upon all mem to condemnation. 2 That our hearts are
inclined to go against Gods Law, Romans 7.23. I see another Law in my members,
rebelling and warring against the Law of my mind, and leading me captive to the
Law of sin, etc. 3 That we are thus corrupted from the beginning of our nature,
Psalm. 51.5. David says, Behold, I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my
mother conceive me, Job 14.4. 4 That our actual sins are innumerable. Psalm.
40.12. and Ezra. 9, 6. Our iniquities are increased over our heads, and our
trespasses are grown up to heaven.
Q. What, is Gods curse due for sins?

A. It contains all the miseries of this life, with the death of both body
and soul, which is endless damnation in hell.

Proofs.
1 That all miseries of this life are punishments for sin, Deuteronomy. 28.20. The
Lord shall send upon thee cursing, vexation, and reb ke, in all that which thou
shall set thy hand to do, until thou be destroyed quickly, because of the
wickedness of thy doings. 2 That death of body and soul comes by sin, Romans
6.23. The wages of sin is death. Romans 5.12. and James 1.15, when lust has
conceived it brings forth sin, and sin when it is finished brings forth
death. 3 That damnation in hell is the reward of sin, Mat. 25.41. and 2 These.
1.8, 9. They that know not God and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the prefence of God,
and from the glory of his power.
Q What remedy or redemption is there against sin and death?

A. Jesus Christ the eternal Son of God, who in man's nature suffered the
death of the cross and perfectly fulfilled that Law for all them that do
receive him.

Proofs.
1 That Jesus Christ is the Son of God, John 20.31. These things are written
that ye might believe, that Jesus is that Christ that son of God, and that
in believing ye might have life through his name, Mat. 1.21. and 1 John 3.23.
2 That the Son of God Jesus Christ became man, John 1 14. That word was made
flesh and dwelt among us, etc. Heb. 2.14. For as much as the children are
partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took part of the same,
that through death he might destroy him, that had the power of death, that is
the devil. 3 That Christ suffered death for us, Phil, 2.8. he humbled himself
and became obedient to the death, even to the death of the cross. 4 That
Christ fulfilled the Law for us, Met. 3.15. and 5.17. Where Christ professes
it becomes us to fulfill all righteousness and he also says, think not
that I am come to destroy the Law and the Prophets, I am not come to destroy
them but to fulfill them Romans 10 4. That the benefits of Christ do belong to
all them that do receive him John 1.12. But as many as received him to them he
gave prerogative to be the sons of God even to them that believe in his name
see John 6.64 56. where Christ says who so eaveth my flesh and drinks my
blood, has eternal life, and he dwells in me and I in him
Q. What is the instrument whereby Christ is received and appeared.

A It is faith whereby I do unfainedly believe that Christ is made unto me in
particular wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption. 1 Cor. 12.30.

Proofs.
1 That by faith we are made partakers of Christ, Ephesians. 3.17. Saint Paul
says, that Christ may dwell in our hearts by faith. 2 That this faith must be
sound and not fained. 1 Timothy 1.5. the end of the commandment is love out of a
pure heart, and a good conscience, and faith unfeigned. 3 That faith must apply
Christ particularly. Gal. 2.20, Paul faith, the life which I now live in the
flesh, I live by faith in the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for
me. 1 Timothy 1.15, 16.
Q. When does this faith begin to breed and take place in thy heart?

A. When by Gods grace I begin to be touched in conscience for my sins, and to
hunger and thirst after Christ and his merits above all thing: in the world,
and against all doubting to endeavor my self to believe.

Proofs.
1 That there is sound faith where the soul is humbled for sin: Isa. 57.15.
The Lord says, I dwell in a high and holy place, with him also that is of a
contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to give
life to them that are of a contrite heart, Heb. 11.6. Without faith it is
impossible to please God: Phil. 16. and Psalm. 51.17. 2 That faith is begun
where there is a servent desire of grace, Mat. 5.6. Blessed are they that
hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be satisfied. Psalm
143.6. 3 Where there is a striving against distrust, that their faith is begun,
Psalm. 42.11. Why art thou cast down o my soul? and why art thou disquieted
within me? hope in God, for I shall yet praise him.
Q What is true lively faith?

A. It is to be fully without doubting, resolved of Gods mercy toward me in
Christ Jesus.

Proofs.
That some have attained to such a lively faith, Romans 4.20, 21. Abraham did not
doubt of the promise of God through unbelief, but was strenghened in the
faith, and gave glory to God being fully assured that he which had promised was
able to do it, Romans 8 38, and 39. Saint Paul says, I am persuaded that
neither death nor life, etc. shall be able to separate us from the love of God,
which is in Jesus Christ our Lord.
Q. By what means is faith wrought and strengthened in us?

A. It is begun by the preaching of the word, and is continued by the same
means, as also by the diligent reading of the same word, and in and by the
reverend using of prayer, and the holy Sacrrments.

Proofs.
1 That faith is begun by the preaching of the word, Romans 10.14, 17. How shall
they believe in him of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear
without a Preacher? and how shall they preach except they be sent? then faith
comes by hearing and hearing by the word of God. That faith is strengthened
by the same means, 1 Pet. 2.2. As newborn babes desire the sincere milk of
the word, that yea may grow thereby. 3 That our faith may be confirmed by
reading of the word of God, Acts 17.11, and 12. The Bereans received the word
of God with all readiness, and searched the Scriptures daily, whether those
things were so, therefore many of them believed. 4 That our faith is increased
by prayer, Mar. 9.24. and Luke 11.13. If then you being evil, know how to give
good gifts to your children, how much more shall your heavenly Father give the
holy Spirit to them that ask him, Luke 22.32. and Psalm. 9.10. 6 That the
Sacraments are means to strengthen our faith, Rom 4.11. Where circumcision is
called the seal of the righteousness of faith.
Q In what manner is Gods Word to be heard and read, that it may be profitable?

A. With prayer and resolution to practice it, before it; with trembling and
thirsting hearts in using of it, and with meditation and conference after it.

Proofs.
1 That by prayer we must be prepared to hear Gods Word, see Psalm. 119.33, 34.
where David says Teach me, o Lord, the way of thy statutes, and I shall keep
it to the end, give me understanding and I shall keep thy Law, yea, I shall
keep it with my whole heart. 2 That we must resolve to obey Gods Words, Exodus
24.7. Moses took the book of the Covenant, and read it in the hearing of the
people, and they said, all that the Lord has said we will do and be obedient.
Psalm. 119.57. 3 That we must hear it with trembling hearts, Es. 66.2. the Lord
says, To this man will I look even to him that is poor, and of a contrite
heart and spirit and that trembles at my words. 4 That we must hear it with
thirsting fools Psalm. 119.131. I opened my mouth and panted for I loved thy
Commandments. 1 Pet. 2.2. 5 That we must meditate on Gods word. Psalm. 119.97
99. Oh how love I thy Law, it is my meditation continually I have more
understanding then all my teachers, for thy Testimonies are my meditations. 6
That we must confer on Gods Word Deuteronomy. 6, 6 7. The words which I command thee
this day shall be in thy heart, and thou shall teach them to thy children
diligently and thou shall talk of them when thou sit in thy house, and when
thou walk by the way, and when thou lie down, and when thou risest up.
Q. What is Prayer?

A. It is a speech to God in the name of Christ, wherein with a contrite and
faithful heart, I ask graces wanting, and give thanks for benefits received.

Proofs.
1 That prayer must be made unto God Mat. 4.10. Thou shall worship the Lord thy
God, and him only shall thou serve. Psalm. 50.15. Call on me says God, in the
day of trouble, and I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. Genesis 18.17.
2 That prayer must be made in the name of Christ John 16.23. Christ says,
whatsoever you shall ask the Father in my name he will give it you. John
14.14. 3 That prayer must be made with our hearts Lam. 3.41. Let us lift up our
hearts with our hands unto God in the heavens. 9 That prayer must proceed from
a contrite heart Psalm. 34.18. and Psalm. 51.17. the sacrifices of God are a
contrite spirit, a broken and contrite heart o Lord thou will not despise. 5
That Prayer must be made in faith Mark, 11.24. What things so ever you desire
when you pray, believe that you shall receive them and you shall have them. 6
That Prayer consisted of Petition and thanksgiving Phil. 4.6. Take thought for
nothing, but in every thing by prayer and complication with giving of thanks,
let your requests be made known to God.
Q. What is a Sacrament?

A. It is a sign to represent to mine eye and a seal to consume, and conveigh
to mine heart Christ with all his benefits.

Proofs
1 That Sacraments are signs Genesis 17.11. Yea shall circumcise the foreskin of
your flesh and it shall be a sign of the Covenant between me and you. 2 That
they are seals, Romans 4.11. Abraham received the sign (...), as a seal of the
righteousness of the faith which he had being circumcised. 3 That the
Sacraments conveigh unto us Christ and all his benefits 1 Cor. 10. The cup of
blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of the blood of Christ? the
bread which we break is it not the communion of the body of Christ? Romans 4.1
Q. How many Sacraments are there?

A. Two. Baptism whereby, as by the door I entered, and the Supper of the Lord,
whereby as by meat I am fed, in the house of the Lord.

Proofs,
1 That there are only these two Sacraments, see 1 Cor. 10.1, 3 4. where Saint
Paul srith, that the old Israellites were all baptized, and did all eat the
same spiritual meat, and drink the same spiritual drink. 2 That by baptism
we are entered into Gods Church, Acts 2.41. Then they that gladly received his
word, were all baptized and the same day there were added to the Church about
three thousand souls Romans 6.3. 3 That we are spiritually fed in the Lords
supper 1 Cor 10.3.4. They did all eat the same spiritual meat, and drink the
same spiritual drink.
Q. How must you come prepared to the Lords Supper?

A. By a due examination of my knowledge, faith, and repentance and by a
careful renewing of them.

Proofs.
1 That we must examine our selves, etc. 2 Cor. 13.5. prove your selves
whether you are in the faith, 1 Cor. 11.28. therefore let a man examine
himself, and so let him eat of this bread and drink of this cup. 2 That we
must renew our faith and repentance see Psalm. 26.6. in David I will wash my
hands in innocence, o Lord, and (...) thine Altar. 2 Timothy 1.6. and 1 Cor. 5.7.
Q. What owe you to God for your Redemption?

A. All thankfulness.

Proofs.
Psalm. 119.22, 23. What shall I render to the Lord, for all his (...) toward
me; I will take the cup of salvation, and call on the name of the Lord.
Q. Wherein stands thankfulness?

A. In new obedience, which is to carry in my heart a consort purpose never to
sin any more, and withal to endeavor in my life to please God in all his
Commandments, within the compass of my particular calling.

Proofs.
1 That thankfulness for our redemption stands in new obedience see 2 Cor.
5.15 17. Christ died for all, that they which live should not live henceforth
unto themselves, but unto him which died for them all, and rose again;
therefore, if any man be in Christ let him be a new creature. 2 That there must
be a constant purpose not to sin any more, 1 Pet. 4, 1, 2. Seeing Christ has
suffered for us in the flesh, stir up your selves also with the same mind;
that he which has suffered in the flesh, has ceased from sin; that he no
longer should live the rest of his time in the flesh, to the lusts of men, but
to the will of God Romans 4.24. 3 That there must be an endeavor to please God in
all things, in all his Comandements, see Psalm. 119.5, 6.106.102. in David I
have sworn, and will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous judgments; I
have inclined my heart to perform thy statutes always, even to the end, Acts
24.16. the like in Saint Paul. 4 That every one must walk in their calling, 1
Cor. 7.17. As God has distributed to every one, as the Lord has called every
one so let him walk.
Q. What is your comfort herein?

A. I am assured, that I shall want nothing that is good for me in this life
present, and that I shall enjoy everlasting blessedness in the world to come.

Proofs.
1 That serving God in our callings, we are assured of all necessaries for this
life, Matthew. 6.33. Psalm. 84.11. The Lord is the Sun and Shield unto us, the
Lord will give grace and glory, and no good thing will he withold from them
that walk uprightly. 2 That we shall be blessed for ever in the world to come,
Romans 2.10. Glory, honor, and peace shall be to every one that does good, to
the Jew first, and also to the Gentile, Matthew. 19.29. 1 Timothy 4.8.
Q. What is everlasting blessedness in the world to come?

A. That at my death, my body for a short time shall remain in the grave, as
in a sweet bed of rest, but my soul shall go immediately into heaven; and at the
day of judgment, my body shall be raised from the dead, and joined to my soul
again, and then both my body and soul shall have fellowship with Christ in
incomprehensible joy, and everlasting glory.

Proofs.
1 That our graves shall be as sweet beds of rest unto us; Isaiah 57.2. They
shall enter into peace they shall rest in their beds, every one that walks in
his uprightness. 2 That at death the soul goes to heaven see Luke 16.22. The
beggar also died, and was carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom; Luke
23.43. Where our Savior Christ said to the penitent thief; verily, I say unto
thee, this day shall thou be with me in Paradise. 3 That our bodies shall be
raised from the dead. John 5.28, 29. Christ says, the hour is coming, in the
which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice and come forth they that
have done good to the resurrection of life; and they that have done evil to
the resurrection or condemnation: 1 Cor. 15. 4 That bodies and souls shall have
fellowship with God see Psalm. 17.15. where David says to the Lord; as for me.
I shall behold thy face in righteousness, and when I awake I shall be
satisfied with thine image, and likewise Job 19.6 27. 5 That our happiness in
heaven shall be incomprehensible, and everlasting 1 Cor. 2.9. Psalm. 16.11. Thou
will show me the path of use, in thy presence is fullness of joy, and at thy
right hand there are pleasures for ever more. 1 These. 4.17.
The end of the Principles.
FINIS.

