THE COURT OF THE GENTILES.

PART IV. Of Reformed Philosophy.

BOOK III. Of Divine Predetermination.

WHEREIN The Nature of Divine Predetermination is fully Explicated and
Demonstrated, both in the General, as also more Particularly, as to the
Substrate Matter, or Entitative Act of Sin: WITH A Vindication of Calvinists and
others from that Blasphemous Imputation of Making God the Author of Sin.

By Theophilus Gale.

Si Pelagio tantillum dederis, danda sunt omnia.

Cornel. Jansen. Praefat. in Pelag. LONDON, Printed for John Hill at the Black
Lion in Fleet Street, and Samuel Tidmarsh at the King's Head in Cornhill. 1678.

PREFACE.
THE strong and almost invincible Inclination I have to Solitude and
Retirement, with a natural aversion from the Controversies of this Age, wherein
there is so little of Christian Candor, Fidelity, Ingenuitie, and Moderation
to be found, has given me no small satisfaction in my being exemted hitherto
from those vexatious Conflicts which I see many learned and pious men involved
in: and it seems to me a thing no less than prodigious, to consider, with what
warm zele and self-complacence some learned men contend in the mists and clouds
of ambiguous terms, as if they had no other design but that of some Mercenary
Soldiers, who do what they can to protract the War. These and such like
considerations have kept me, for some Months, from the publication of this
Discourse, with hopes there might be found out some Expedients for the putting
a period to those unhappy Controversies it refers to, which I now have little
hopes of. But enough of that.

The Discourse it self both as to its first conception and present publication,
has not been without various agitations in mine own thoughts; and how little my
natural Inclinations have induced me hereto, is well known to some. But I must
confess, the crime charged on us being no less than Blasphemy against the
God of Heaven, it may be deservedly judged too great a violation to the Laws of
Christianity not to purge our selves from so black an Imputation; and yet in
as much as some reverend Divines, of repute among us both for their Learning
and Piety, have entertained Sentiments opposite to our Hypothesis, we have
been very studious, yea emulous to deliver our own thoughts in such a mode or
form, as may be least obnoxious to passionate emotions, personal reflections,
or whatever may unbeseem one that lies under essential obligation to love and
honor the Persons of some that differ in Judgment about these points.
Wherefore, to render our Discourse the less offensive, we have cast it into a
thetic and dogmatic Method, rather than agonistic and polemic. And because it
is altogether impossible distinctly and demonstratively to discuss such an
Hypothesis, without some opposition against such as defend the Antithesis, we
have pitched on Strangius as our principal Antagonist, who indeed, to give him
his merited character, has ventilated this Controversy with candor,
perspicuitie, and force of Argument beyond his Sectators. Yet we must also do
the Cause we undertake this justice, as to declare, that we have not omitted to
examine the Reasons and Arguments of other Reverend Divines, who oppose our
Hypothesis, albeit we have, as in duty we conceived our selves obliged,
conceled their Names. For indeed, of what use are such personal Nominations and
Reflections, but to render us a grief to Friends, and reproach to Enemies?

As for my Style, if any judge my pen too much drenched in Scholastic
Theology, I shall not deny, but that I have spent some time in those Studies,
neither do I as yet see any reason to repent thereof; for I have found those
Controversies about Divine Concurse and Efficacious Grace, no where more
accurately examined and demonstratively determined, than among the Scholemen,
specially, Bradwardine and Alvarez, neither can I conceive how any one can
distinctly and perfectly discuss these Controversies, specially as now
miserably perplexed with ambiguous obscure terms, without some inspection into
and knowledge of Scholastic Theology. For does not a principal part of the
Controversy depend on that scholastic Notion of Free Will? Yea, is there any
thing New started by the Arminians or New Methodists, but what has been fully
examined and answered by some among the more sober Scholemen, specially
Aquinas, Ariminensis, Bradwardine and Alvarez. Whatever others may judge of
them, yet Reverend Mr. Baxter, Cathol. Theol. Part 1. p. 124. prefers the
Scholemen before Arminians. And albeit I have a particular kindness for some
of the more sober Scholemen, as to such points wherein they serve not the Papal
Interest, and their own vain Imaginations; yet what a low and cheap estime I
have of the Scholemen in the general, is sufficiently apparent, by the
Character I have given them, Court of the Gentiles, Part III. B. 2. c. 2. S. 1.
* 2. And indeed I would read them, with the same indifference and suspension of
mind, as I read Plato and Aristotle. But to conclude, if any private Christian
desires, not to charge his thoughts with the Scholastic part of this
Controversy, but only to satisfy his Douts and confirm his Faith in the
Scriptural part, he may confine himself to Chap. III. of this Discourse, (which
contains almost a third Part of the Book) where we have under seven general
Heads largely given the Scriptural Demonstrations of our Hypothesis, Touching
Gods Concurse to the entitative Act of Sin, with Solutions to such false
Glosses and Comments as our Adversaries give thereto; which are suited to
Vulgar Capacities.

BREVIARIE of CONTENTS.
The COURT of the GENTILES.
PART IV. Of Reformed Philosophy.
BOOK III. Of Divine Predetermination.
CHAP. I. The Explication of the Terms.
THE Controversy about Predetermination to the entitative act of Sin. p. 2
Seven heads to be discussed by us. 3 The Explication of the Terms. 4 1. Of
Sin. (1) Its origin. ibid. (2) Its substrate matter. 5 (3) Its formal
Constitution. 6 [1] Al acts in their generic nature indifferent. ib. [2] Al
moral Constitution from the Divine Law. ibid. [3] Sin formally considered
privative. 7 (4) The Kinds of sinful actions. 8 [1] Actions modally sinful. 9
[2] Actions intrinsecally sinful. ib. 2. The natural liberty of the Will, what.
10 The New Methodists distinction of Liberty largely and strictly taken,
examined and refelled. 11 The true Idea of Liberty. 12 3. Moral Liberty, or
Free Will to good. 13 Of Necessity, Impossibility, Possibility. 15 4. The Will
of God, its Distribution into significative and decretive. 17 5. Divine
Concurse. (1) Its Immediation, consisting not in a mere Ability to act, but
in exciting to act. 19 (2) Its Efficacitie and Predetermination. 21 [1]
Efficacious Concurse, what. 22 [2] Determinative Concurse, what. 23 [3]
Predeterminative Concurse, what. 24 Predeterminative Concurse active and
passive: also Physic and Moral. 25 Gods Predetermination to wicked acts. 27
CHAP. II. The state of the Controversy.
THE agreament of the Predeterminants and Antipredeterminants in ten
Propositions. 28, etc. The Antipredeterminants differences among themselves in
5 particulars. 34, etc. The difference between the Predeterminants and
Antipredeterminants in 7 particulars. 40, etc.
CHAP. III. Scriptural Demonstrations of our Hypothesis.
1. FRom Gods prime Causalitie. 45, etc. 2. From Gods predetermining natural
actions to which sin is annexed. 52, etc. [1] The Vendition of Joseph. ibid.
Evasions as to Joseph's Vendition solved. 56 [2] The Crucifixion of Christ. 58
Evasions about Christ's Crucifixion taken off. 65 3 From Gods making use of
wicked Instruments for the punishment of his people. 69 4. From Gods immediate
hand in the Acts of Sin. 72 Shimei's cursing David from God. 73 God moved David
to number the People. 75 Other Acts of sin from God. 76, etc. 5. From Gods
efficacious permission of sin. 85 6. From Gods judicial Induration. 90 The
false Comments of Adversaries reselled. 94 Gods concurse to the individual act
which is sinful. 96 How God judicially hardens men, without being the Author of
sin. 97 7. From Gods efficacious ordering men's sins for his own glory. 101
CHAP. IV. An Historic Idea of Predeterminants and Antipredeterminants.
THe Assertors of Gods predeterminative Concurse to the substrate matter of Sin.
108 Augustins Sentiments touching it. 109 Prosper and Fulgentius. 110 Anselme,
Hugo de Sancto Victore accord hereto. 111 Aquinas express herein. 112 Scotus
also positive herein. 114 Greg. Ariminensis demonstrates the same. 116 So
Holcot and Altissiodorensis. 117 Thomas Bradwardine his Character and zele for
efficacious Grace. 118 Also for efficacious Concurse to the substrate matter of
sin. ibid. His Sentiments touching Gods willing sin. 119 Also how the
entitative act is from Gods predeterminative Concurse. 121 Moreover how God
spontaneously impels men to the entitative act of sin. 122 The Sentiments of
Dominicans, Alvarez, etc. 123 The doctrine of Jansenius, concordant with ours.
125 The Jansenists sentiments agree also. 126 The Roman Catechism consonant.
127 Reformed Divines, Wiclef, Calvin, Zuinglius, fully agree. 128 Chamiers
defense of our Hypothesis. 130 The Testimony of Lud. Crocius for us. 131 The
Synod of Dort and Church of England, Davenant, Ward, Abbot, etc. for us. 132
Such as deny Gods concurse to the substrate matter of sin. 136 Marcion, Manes,
Pelagius, Nic. Bonetus. 137 Durandus against Gods immediate concurse. ib. Who
they are that symbolise with Durandus. 138 The Consentiments of Jesuits and
Molinisis. 139 Lud. a Dola a sectator of Durandus. 140 Arminius's
Consentiments. 141 The Remonstrants and Anabaptists consent. 142 The New
Methodists how far consentient. 143 Camero and Amyraldus their consent. 144
Placeus in suspense. 145 Le Blanc and Baronius how far they agree. 146
Strangius our principal Adversary. 147 How these New Methodists fell into this
their New Method in imitation of Semipelagians. 149 Who of the New Methodists
may be estimed orthodoxe. 150
CHAP. V. Rational Demonstrations of our Hypothesis.
ARguments for Predetermination to the substrate matter of al sin; 1. From the
Futurition of althings. 151 Objections against this Argument solved. 152 2.
From the Certitude of divine Prescience. 155 Our Adversaries Evasions from the
force of this Argument. 157 3. From the divine Will and Decrees, specially that
of Reprobation. 159 Davenant's Hypotheses about absolute Reprobation. 161 4.
From Divine Concurse: (1) Its Principe. 163 (2) Its Nature. [1] Totalitie.
ibid. [2] Universality as to Effects. 164 [3] Particularitie as to manner of
working. ib. [4] Immediation. 166 [5] Prioritie and Antecedence. 167 [6]
Absolute Independence. 169 (3) From the Efficace of Gods Concurse: 170 [1] As
to al natural acts. 170 [2] As to supernatural Acts and Effects. 172 The
Objections urged by the New Methodists against Predetermination to the
substrate matter of Sin, urged with as much force by Arminians against
predetermination to good. 174 5. From the Nature of Sin: (1) Its Matter. 176 (2)
Its formal Reason. 178 6. From Gods Permission of sin. 179 Divine Permission
explicated. 180 7. From Gods Providence about Sin. 182 8. From Creatural
Dependence. 185
CHAP. VI. The Objections against Predetermination to the substrate matter of
Sin solved.
1. OBject. That this Hypothesis makes God the Author of Sin. 189 1. This
Objection as urged by Baronius. ib. 2. The Objection as urged by Strangius. 191
General Solutions for the freeing God from being the Author of Sin. 195 (1)
Gods Will the effective cause of the substrate matter, not a defective cause of
Sin. ibid. (2) None the Author of sin, but the particular moral cause thereof.
196 (3) God concurs only to what is naturally good in sin. ibid. 2. Object.
From Gods Essence and Attributes. 197 (1) Gods Sincerity and Fidelity
vindicated. ib. (2) His Justice also cleared. 198 (3) The Vindication of his
Mercy. 199 (4) His Sanctity also vindicated. 200 3. Object. From Gods Word.
(1) Preceptive. 202 (2) Promissive and Inviting. ibid. [1] Al Promises
primarily for the Elect. 204 [2] Their use as to Reprobates. ib. [3] The
Antithesis of Antipredeterminants destroys the use of Promises, etc. as much
as our Hypothesis. 206 [4] What Power we allow Reprobates. 207 4. Object. From
the Overthrow of Religion. 208 5. Object. From the Liberty of the Will. ib. The
injustice of the New Methodists in urging this Objection, and its inconsistence
with their own Sentiments. 209
CHAP. VII. The genuine Hypotheses of the Predeterminants and
Antipredeterminants with their Consequents.
THe genuine Hypotheses of the Predeterminants, with the false Hypotheses and
Consequents imposed on them. 211 The Antitheses of the New Methodists and
Antipredeterminants, with their dangerous Consequents. 215
Table of SCRIPTURES Explicated.
Genesis.
Chapter Verse. Page 45. 5, 7, 8. 53

Exodus.
Chapter Verse. Page 9. 14, 15, 16. 102

1 Samuel.
Chapter Verse. Page 2. 25. 86 26. 19. 76

2 Samuel.
Chapter Verse. Page 12. 11. 72 16. 10, 11. 73 16. 22. 72 24. 1. 75

1 Kings.
Chapter Verse. Page 11. 31, 37. 77 12. 15, 24. 77 22. 23. 79

2 Kings.
Chapter Verse. Page 9. 3, 10. 78 10. 30. ibid.

Job.
Chapter Verse. Page 1. 21. 71 12. 16, 17. 88

Psalms.
Ps. Verse. Page 33. 15. 47 69. 22. and 81. 12. 90 105. 25. 71

Proverbs.
Chapter Verse. Page 16. 4. 103 21. 1. 49

Esaias.
Chapter Verse. Page 6. 10. 91 10. 5, 6, 7. 69 19. 14. 92 26. 12. 45 29. 10. 91 44.
18, 19. 92 60. 2. ib. 63. 17. 89

Jeremie.
Chapter Verse. Page 16. 16. 70

Habakkuk.
Chapter Verse. Page 3. 4. 49

Matthew.
Chapter Verse. Page 26. 24. 58

Luke.
Chapter Verse. Page 22. 22. 24, 60

John.
Chapter Verse. Page 19. 10, 11. 61

Acts.
Chapter Verse. Page 2. 23. 24, 62 4. 28. 63 7. 9. 55 11. 21. 49 17. 26. 23 17. 28.
51 18. 21. 52

Romans.
Chapter Verse. Page 1. 28. 93 8. 29, 30. 24 9. 17, 18. 102, 103 9. 21, 22. 104 11.
8, 10. 92, 91 11. 36. 45

1 Corinthians.
Chapter Verse. Page 2. 7. 24 4. 19. 52 4. 28. 24. 12. 6, 11. 22.

2 Corinthians.
Chapter Verse. Page 4. 12. 22.

Ephesians.
Chapter Verse. Page 1. 11. 22, 24, 46 1. 19. and 3. 7. 22.

Philippians.
Chapter Verse. Page 3. 21. 22.

2 Thessalonians.
Chapter Verse. Page 2. 11. 93.

Hebrews.
Chapter Verse. Page 4. 7. 23

James.
Chapter Verse. Page 4. 15. 53

1 Peter.
Chapter Verse. Page 2. 8. 105

Jude.
Chapter Verse. Page 4. 107

Revelations.
Chapter Verse. Page 17. 17. 81

Table of Hebraic Words Explicated.
(...), verily. p. 102 (...), to termine, and determine. 23 (...), to decree.
24 (...), to make to stand. 102 (...), daub, or dim. 91 (...), to contrive. 55
(...), he has daubed. 92 (...), the Judgment. 88 (...), he infatuateth. ibid.
(...), to found. 104 (...), he excited. 75 (...), mine omnipotent severitie.
103 (...), to ordain. 104 (...), because. 86 (...), to be determined. 23 (...),
to cover over by daubing; thence to expiate and purge. 100 (...), a
Stumbling-stone or block. 100, 105 (...), to mingle, or pour forth. 92 (...),
stumbling, or smiting. 100 (...), to predetermine. 80, 81 (...), they were
designed. 105 (...), to work efficaciously. 22 (...), to declare. (...), to
work. 22 (...), thick darkness. 93 (...), efficaciously to work. 103 (...),
to explicate more clearly. 60 (...), to erect. 102 (...), to stupifie. 91
(...), to seal, or constitute. 24, 65 (...), a deceiver. 88 (...), spoiled.
ibid. (...), to constitute, or destine. 106 (...), to predetermine. 90, 102

Table of Grecanic Words Explicated.
(...), reprobate, drossie. 93 (...), a fixed decree. 62, 63 (...), he
peremtorily willed. 86 (...), a determined decree. 81, 82 (...), has
predetermined. 80, 81 (...), Efficacitie what. 22 (...), to work
efficaciously. 22 (...), I have constituted. 102 (...), legal Authority. 61
(...), to Predetermine. 103 (...), from (...), what. 91 (...), aptly to fit or
frame. 104 (...), to determine. 23, 24, 60 (...), a stupifying Portion. 91
(...), designed. 107 (...), to predetermine. 24, 60, 64 (...), to preordain. 24
(...), a Stone of offense. 100, 105, 107 (...), bow down. 91 (...), to
cooperate. 22 (...), to constitute. 106, 107

THE COURT OF THE GENTILES.
PART IV. Of Reformed Philosophy.
BOOK III. Of Divine Predetermination: Wherein the Nature of Divine
Predetermination is fully explicated and demonstrated, both in the general, as
also more particularly, as to the substrate matter or entitative act of Sin.
CHAP. I. The Explication of the Terms.
(1) The Origin of the controversy about Predetermination to the entitative
act of Sin; with the method we proceed in. (2) The Nature of Sin, its Origin
and material constitution; al acts in their generic nature indifferent: Al
Morality determined by the Moral Law: Sin as to its formal reason a privation:
Of actions modally and intrinsecally evil. (3) The Liberty of the Will: The
newcoined distinction of Liberty, largely and strictly taken, with its abuse:
A true Idea of Liberty. (4) Moral Liberty or Free Will to good: Necessity,
Impossibility, Possibility what. (5) The Will of God, its Distribution into
Significative and Decretive. (6) Divine Concurse, its Immediation, Efficacitie,
and Predetermination: (...), with the Nature of Predetermination explicated.

. 1. THE Doctrine of Divine Concurse, and Creatural Dependence The Origin of
the Controversy.
has in all Ages of the Church, but more specially since the rise of
Pelagianisme, received vigorous assaults from many learned and potent
Adversaries: and indeed no wonder, sithat corrupt Nature propagated from Adam
has, in imitation of its first parent, been ever aspiring after an equality to
the Deity; and that not only in being the last End of its Acting, but also the
first Principe of its Dependence. This vain attemt has appeared more visibly in
some daring and proud spirits, such as Nebuchadnezar, Dan. 4. 30. Is not this
great Babylon that I have built, etc? But in others the Design and opposition
against the Concurse of God has been more refined, under a pretext of
vindicating the Divine Majesty from the blasphemous imputation of being the
Author of sin. And because al pious Souls have so great a veneration for the
Blessed Deity, as to abhor the very shadow of such Blasphemy, therefore the
Adversaries of Divine Concurse have in all Ages pitched on this as the most
puissant argument to oppose the same, that it brings the most holy and blessed
God under the black imputation of encouraging, yea impelling men to Sin. And
albeit those that assert Gods efficacious Concurse to the substrate matter or
entitative act of sin, do most vehemently detest in their own souls, and
solemnly protest against the least thought or opinion that makes God the Author
of sin, yet nevertheless this direful piece of blasphemy is still charged on
them. Moreover, there being in this Doctrine of Efficacious Concurse (as in all
other great Mysteries of Faith) some intricate difficulties, which the wise God
has left us under, to try our faith and submission to divine Revelation; hence
also many learned, and some pious men have been at a great loss in their
Inquiries, how to reconcile the Liberty of the human Will with the Efficace of
Divine Concurse, so as to free the blessed God from the imputation of impelling
men to Sin. These and such like considerations made me the more prolixe in the
philosophic metaphysic contemplation of the Divine Concurse, its Nature,
Origin, and manner of working, particularly as to the entitative act of what
is sinful; together with the creatures Dependence thereon: which I have more
fully discussed, Court of the Gentiles, Chap. 7, 9, 11. with design and
endeavors, if it might be, to give the blessed God and his sinful Creature
both their dues, and remove those extremes which men are apt to fall into.

But these my sincere desires and endeavors have not had that The method of
our procedure.
success which was desired; which brings me under a fresh obligation to
vindicate mine own Hypothesis, touching the efficacious concurse of God to the
substrate matter or entitative act of what is sinful. I must confess, the
province before us is difficult on many accounts, but principally, because
whiles we endeavor to defend the Concurse and Providence of God about the
entitative act of sin, it is suggested by some, and believed by others, that we
make the holy God the Author of sin, which is the dregs of blasphemy, and that
which every serious spirit abhors more than Hell. Yet we need no way to dout,
but that, with divine assistance, we may firmly assert and demonstrate the
efficacitie of Divine concurse to the material entitative act of that which is
sinful, and yet fully vindicate the Divine Majesty from that blasphemous
Imputation of being the Author of sin. And for our more distinct and
demonstrative procedure herein, we propose this method or form as most apt for
the subject matter before us. (1) To examine and explicate the Terms formally
implied in, or virtually relating to, the subject in controversy. (2) To show
wherein the opposite parties agree, and wherein they differ both among
themselves and each from other; together with the original and principal
motives, grounds, and causes of such Differences. (3) To give a Scriptural
Explication and Demonstration of our own Hypothesis, touching Gods efficacious
concurse to the substrate matter of that which is sinful; with an answer to
those false glosses and comments, which our Adversaries the Jesuits,
Arminians, and some new Methodists give to those Scriptures for the evading the
force of them. (4) To draw up a brief History or Narrative of this
controversy, and its state in all periods of the Christian Churches to this
day. (5) To give the Demonstration of our Hypothesis from Reasons grounded on
Scripture, with the Vindication of those Reasons from the ungrounded invalid
answers given to them by our opponents, Strangius, and others. (6) To solve and
answer the Objections urged by those that oppose our Hypothesis, particularly
Strangius, Baranius, Le Blanc, with others. (7) And finally, to lay down the
proper Sentiments and Hypotheses of the Orthodoxe about this subject, in
opposition to those false Opinions which their Adversaries charge upon them: as
also to produce the proper opinions of the adverse party, and the dangerous
consequences that naturally and necessarily flow from them.

. 2. Our first and indeed principal task, in order to a clear The explication
of the Terms.
and demonstrative procedure in this controversy, will be, to explicate the
terms, and disabuse them from those ambiguities, confusions, and false
impositions, in which at present they are involved. And here indeed I cannot
but break forth into a doleful Lamentation over the bleeding state of the
Churches of Christ, by reason of those vexatious controversies which rend and
tear out their very bowels, and al from the sophistic abuse or Ambiguitie of
terms. And I no way dout but to make it most manifest, when opportunity is
offered, that most of the controversies of this Age are somented and maintained
from the obscurity and abuse of terms misapplyed by subtle wits, for the
establishment of their own Hypotheses. This is most evident in our present
case, which makes it a duty absolutely necessary, before we enter on our
province, to clear up the way by a distinct and particular explication of those
terms that relate thereunto.

The first Term we are to consider is Sin: wherein we are to Of Sin*
examine its Origne, Causes, Constitution, both material and formal, and Kinds;
particularly the nature of Acts substantially or intrinsecally sinful: al which
we shall discuss with that Brevitie and Perspicuitie the matter will admit. 1. As
for the Origin of Sin, it 1. Its Origin.
came first into the world from the Defectibilitie of our first Parents their
Free Will, and has been ever since maintained and fomented by the Vitiositie of
human nature depraved by Adams sin, as we have copiosely demonstrated, Court
Gent. P. 4. B. 1. c. 4.. 2. and Philos. Genesis P. 1. l. 3. c. 3. sect. 4.. 3.

2. Sin, as to its material constitution, has for its substrate matter 2. Its
substrate matter.
or subject some natural good: For all sin being, as to its formal nature, but a
moral privation or relation, it necessarily requires some natural good as its
substrate matter or subject. The wise Creator and Gubernator of althings has by
his Law so constituted al moral Beings, both Virtues and Vices, as that they
cannot subsist but in something natural: albeit sin be, according to its formal
reason, a mere privation, yet it requires some positive, real natural Being for
its subject, according to the nature of al other privations. Thus Augustine:
That which is evil by reason of vice, Quod malum est per vitium, bonum est per
naturam, Aug. contra Advers. Leg. and Prophet. cap. 5.
is good by nature. Again he says, That sin is not nature, but the vice of
nature. And that trite Maxim communly received by all the Ancients, That al
evil is founded in some good, i. e. natural, sufficiently demonstrates this our
assertion. Thus Augustine, Enchirid. 97. Although therefore things sinful, as
sinful are not good; yet not only that good things, but also that sinful be, is
good: i. e. things sinful are good, not morally, but naturally, as means utile
and conducible to the promoting of Divine glory: for albeit they oppose the
bonitie of the creature, yet materially considered they oppose not the bonitie
of the Creator; who can extract the greatest good out of the greatest evils.
Does it not then belong to the infinite bonitie of God, to permit sins to be?
Yea, does not the ingresse of sin into the world belong to the perfection
thereof? is not then the substrate matter thereof some natural good? This is well
demonstrated by Suarez, Metaph. Disput. 11. sect. 3. p. 252. Sin as sin has a
material cause, which is always some good. So Augustine says, That there can be
no evil but in good, because if there were pure evil it would destroy itself:
and the reason is, because sin, as to its formal cause, is not purely positive,
Absurdum esset, si diceretur, ullum defectum aut peccatum, aut ullum peccatum
aut defectum, posse per se existere, cum nullum detur separatum malum, sed omne
malum sit in bono, Strange. de Volunt. l. 3. c. 19. p. 629.
or a pure negation, but a privation of debite perfection, therefore it
requires a subject unto which such a perfection is due; which subject must be
some good, etc. Yea, Strangius himself, our principal Adversary in this
Controversy, grants in this particular as much as we demand, page 629. That it
is absurd to say, any sin or defect can exist of itself, sithat there can be no
separate evil; but al evil is [seated] in good. Yea, he ingenuously confesses,
page 245. That hatred of God, [which is an action intrinsecally evil] as it is
an Act and Being, so it is from God, namely as it is hatred. For, adds he, So
hatred truly, as it is abstracted from this or that object is a physic action,
to which the metaphysic bonitie of Ens or Being agrees, and it is morally
indifferent; but as it is determined to God, hence is its (...), Obliquitie.
This concession of Strangius, if well considered, would not only overthrow his
own Antithesis against our Hypothesis, but also put a period to this
Controversy, as in what follows we shall demonstrate, Chap. 6.. 1.

3. But the principal thing to be examined in the explication of sin is its
formal Constitution or Reason, which we shall endeavor to manifest in the
following Propositions. (1) Al human acts considered Al Acts in their generic
nature indifferent.
in their generic physic Entitie or natural Being, abstracted from their moral
constitution, are neither good nor evil, but morally indifferent. Al moral
Beings or Acts are scated, (...), in proper nature, as Cyril; neither can they
existe without that proper nature whereunto they are appendent. There is no
virtue or vice which has not something of nature for its subject and seat: it is
true, there may be nature where there is no morality, yet there cannot be
morality where there is not some nature to sustain the same. Now al human
nature, as also al natural Acts considered in their generic natural Idea,
albeit capable of virtue or vice, yet are in themselves morally indifferent. Al
thoughts, words and actions considered physically and abstractly, without
regard to their moral determination by the Will and Law of God, are neither good
nor evil. For Morality is a mode not physically or intrinsecally inherent in
human acts, but appendent to them from the determination of the Divine Law: The
very acts of loving and hating God, considered in their generic, physic and
entitative nature, as abstracted from the moral relation they have to their
object, are morally neither good nor evil; because moral Bonitie and Vitiositie
are differences of human acts merely accidental or modal, as Suarez and other
Scholemen generally grant. Thus much Strangius frequently grants; as page 158.
he says, That moral Bonitie and Vitiositie are accidents of natural Actions.
So page 875. The Actio seorsim per se and physice considerata indifferens est
moraliter, nec minus virtuti quam vitio substerni potest. Al moral constitution
from the Divine Law.
action considered apart and physically is morally indifferent, neither may it
be less subject to virtue than to vice. Hence,

(2) Al Morality and moral Acts, whether good or evil, receive their
Constitution and Determination from the moral Divine Law. This Hypothesis is
defended by Scotus, and other Scholemen, and that on the highest reasons: For
the Divine Will is the supreme measure and rule of al Justice and Sanctity:
Things are therefore just and good because God wills them; and whatever God wills
is for that very reason, because God wills it, good and just. Therefore that
Platonic notion defended by some learned men, That the reasons of good and evil
are eternal, is of dangerous consequence, albeit it has somewhat of Truth (as
other errors have) mixed with it: we grant, that in things morally good, there
is a natural condecence or congruitie to human nature, even antecedent to the
Divine will and constitution. As on supposition of man's being created, he
immediately falls under a necessary and essential obligation of loving God,
hating sin, etc. These are duties naturally congruous, yea morally necessary to
human nature. Whence it is, that Divines usually determine, That Original
Righteousness was natural to Adam, i. e. most condecent, congruous, and morally
necessary to his Nature. Yet all this hinders not, but that the formal
Determination of al Morals arise from the free constitution of the Divine will
and Law. The Law of God is the great Expansum or firmament, which God has
spread over the rational world, whereby al Mankind are moderated and regulated
in all their moral Acts, and by which they shall be at last day judged: whence
it necessarily follows, that al moral constitution must proceed hence, as we
have more amply demonstrated, Court Gentiles, P. 4. B. 1. c. 2.. 1, 2. Thus
also Voetius, Disput. Theolog. Par. 1. de jure and justit. Probl. 10. p. 351.
proves, That the divine will is the fountain and rule of al Goodness. So much
also Strangius grants us, p. 89. namely, That, as whatever is true is therefore
true, because conform to the first Truth; so whatever is good, is therefore
good, because conform to the first Goodness: and as the Truth of God belongs to
his Intellect, so Goodness to his Will. The like Mr. Baxter, Catholic Theolog.
Part 1. p. 100. Al created Justice and Holiness is such, i. e. good (for
goodness is their essence) because Gods efficient will made them so. Hence,

(3) The formal reason or nature of Sin consists in its being a Deordination,
or Transgression of the Divine Law. This Proposition is fully stated and
demonstrated in Sacred Philosophy, as we have copiosely proved, Court Gent. P.
4. B. 1. c. 4.. 1. and Philos. General. P. 1. l. 3. c. 3. S. 4.. 1. so that it
requires not further Explication or Demonstration. Hence,

(4) Sin as to its formal constitution and nature is not a positive Sin as to
its formal nature a privation.
real Being, but privative. This Hypothesis has found general assent to it
among all the Ancients both Pagan Philosophers and Christians, excepting some
few, Marcion and Manes, with others. It Is true, the Manichees held Sin to be a
positive Being, and they took up principes suited thereto, namely, That there
were two first Beings or Causes, one of good, the other of evil: But the sober
Philosophers and Christians abhorred such sentiments. Simplicius on Epictetus,
c. 34. p. 171. has an excellent Discourse to prove that sin is not in the
nature of Beings, but (...), a privation of Good, which we have largely
explicated, Philos. Genesis P. 1. l. 3. c. 3. 4.. 2. And this was generally
asserted by the Greek and Latin Fathers. Thus the spurious Dionysius assures
us, that Sin must necessarily be, (...), without nature, without subsistence.
So Greg. Nyssen. (...), Sin is an insubsistent Being, or privation. And it was
a general conclusion in the Greek Schools, that sin resulted, (...), from the
absence of good, as darkness from the absence of light. Thus also among the
Latins, Augustine asserted, that Sin was not Nature, but the evil of Nature.
Again: the Amission of Good has taken up the name of Sin. And Strangius, who is
our principal adversary in this controversy, yet l. 1. c. 13. p. 97, etc. he
strongly demonstrates this Hypothesis, That the formal reason of sin consists
in Privation. This I conceive deserves a particular remarque, because some late
Authors, and those not of inferior note, make great use of this Antithesis,
namely, That Sin is as to its formal nature positive, as their chief engine to
oppose our general Hypothesis, touching Gods efficacious concurse to the
substrate matter of that which is sinful. They tell us, that Sin, as to its
form, is not a mere privation, but a moral Relation, which has so much
Realitie as a relation. But to obviate al mistakes and verbal contests, we
grant, [1] That Sin may be termed a moral privative relation, or rather,
relative privation, as it is a transgression of, and so must have relation to,
the Moral Law. [2] That Sin is not a mere nothing, but has some kind of logic
positivitie or notional entitie, so far as to render it capable of being the
term of a Proposition, as we have more fully shown, Philos. Genesis P. 1. l. 3.
c. 3. S. 4.. 2. But, [3] We may not yield, that Sin is a moral positive
Relation, much less a positive act or real Being, such as is the term of a
natural production: For such a persuasion will necessarily force men to grant,
that God is the Author of Sin, or to hold with the Manichees, that there are
two first Causes, one of good and the other of evil.

4. Touching the kinds of sinful Actions, that which principally concerns our
present controversy is the distinction of sinful Actions, into such as are
modally only, or such as are intrinsecally evil.

(1) By actions modally evil they generally understand such as are Actions
modally sinful.
substantially good, yet have some modal accidental vitiositie or sinfulness
appendent to them. Such are all the sincerely pious acts of good men in this
imperfect state; which have an evangelic perfection and goodness in them, yet
mixed with much corruption and imperfection. For such is the profunde
mysterious wisdom of God, that he permits a mixture of sin even with the best
good works on this side Heaven, thereby to render the methods of his Grace the
more illustrious: so that the same Act, which is in evangelic estimation
sincerely good, is also modally sinful and imperfect. Thus Strangius, l. 2. c.
9. p. 205. Sithat al transgression of the Law is sin, men sin both by doing
what is forbidden, as also by doing what is commanded, if not in that manner as
commanded: Again, both by not doing what is commanded, as also by abstaining
from what is forbidden, if they abstain not in a regular manner. Thus often it
comes to pass, that the action may be good according to the substance of the
work, and yet evil as to the mode of acting. As for example; to give Alms to
the poor is a work substantially good, yet if it proceed not from Faith and
Charity, and respect to the glory of God, it is evil as to the mode of
acting. Thus Strangius. But I add, that the best works of Unbelievers are
substantially evil, in that they have nothing of sincere good in them; but full
of hatred of God; and the best works of pious souls in this imperfect state are
modally evil, because they have a tincture of vitiositie appendent to them.

(2) By Actions intrinsecally evil, they generally understand Actions
intrinsecally evil.
such as being referred to and determined by such or such an object, carry in
them an intrinsec vitiositie and malignitie; so that whiles under such a
reference and determination they can never become good. And the commun instance
is in hatred of God, and Blasphemy. Not that those acts are in their physic
material entitie or substance sinful, but only in their moral constitution and
formal determination or reference to their object. Thus much is also
acknowledged by Strangius, l. 1. c. 13. p. 89. When, according to the commun
sentence, it is said, that some also are in themselves or intrinsecally evil,
the acts are not understood as abstracted from their Object, but as they refer
to their object, in regard of which they have their vitiositie. -- It seems to
me, that the vitiositie, which is in the hatred of God, does not belong to the
material, but formal of Sin. Which is an ingenuous confession, and will be of
much use to us in what follows. At present we shall only remarque; that this
notion of Acts intrinsecally evil, if duly examined, will be of no use to our
Opponents, albeit they seem to lay the most stress on it. For [1] They grant,
as Strangius here, that the vitiositie, which is in the hatred of God [and so
in all other acts intrinsecally evil] does not belong to the material but
formal of sin: so that Gods concurse to the material or substrate matter of sin
does not suppose his concurse to the formal obliquitie of sin. [2] In acts
sincerely but imperfectly good, and modally evil, the substrate matter or
material act, which is both good and evil, is one and the same: now our
Adversaries grant Predetermination to the material act as good: how then can
they deny predetermination to the same material entitative act which is evil,
though not as such? But of this more hereafter, c. 5.

. 3. The next term to be discussed by us is the Natural The Liberty of the
Will.
Freedom, or Liberty of the Will; which is indeed the hinge on which our whole
controversy turns, as our more intelligent Opponents confess. A reverend
Divine, Cathol. Theology, Part 3. p. 80. says, I do readily confess, that, as
the sum of all the controversy is, Whether man has truly any free will; etc. I
do readily concur with him in this, That the sum of all the controvesie must be
resolved into this notion of free will; and therefore if we cannot make good our
ground here, we must necessarily fall under the efforts of our Antagonists. And
I must confess this conception has been deeply engraven on my thoughts, for
twenty five years or more, that the whole of the Pelagian and Arminian
controversy centers in this point, touching the Liberty of the Will: and he
that endeavors to remove those maladies, but overlooks those Pelagian
infusions that lie hid in the heart of Freewill, does act but like the
unskilful Physician, who, to remove an Hectic Fever, endeavored to cure the
Itch. What made Durandus drive Gods immediate Concurse to human acts, but this
persuasion, that it destroys the Liberty of the will, and so makes God the
Author of sin? And what makes the Jesuits deny Predetermination, but the like
groundless persuasion? So also Baronius, in his Metaphysics, Sect. 8. Disp. 3..
79. p. 147. Here it was that the Pelagians of old took Sanctuary, and under
the shadow of this term Free Will conceled al their venomous Infusions: here,
by their sophistic logic and ambiguous cloudy distinctions, they fortified
themselves against the Defenders of Efficacious Grace. Thus Jansenius, August.
de Nature. Laps. Tom. 2. l. 4. c. 24. proves largely out of Augustine, that the
principal fraud and cheat of the Pelagians lay in their philosophic
hallucination about natural free will, which they placed in Indifference, but
Augustine in a rational spontaneitie. Herein they are followed by the Jesuits
and Arminians, who indeed differ not scarcely one hairs breadth from the
Pelagians and Semi-pelagians. Yea Baronius, (whom Rutherford rangeth among the
Arminians) with confidence maintains Bellarmines definition of Liberty, as
justifiable and orthodoxe, Metaphys. Sect. 12. p. 285.

But other of our Antagonists, Strangius, Le Blanc, etc. perceiving The new
coined distinction of Liberty largely and strictly taken.
that our Reformed Divines have generally placed Natural Liberty in a Rational
Spontaneity, and so presumed, that voluntary necessity is very well consistent
therewith, hence they have found out an artificial distinction for the
reconciling the Calvinists with the Jesuits, Pelagians and Arminians: They
distinguish Liberty, into that which is largely, or strictly taken: and they
confess, (1) That Liberty taken largely, as it is a perfection of the Soul, so
it has one and the same notion with Rational Spontaneitie; and such is the
Liberty of glorified Souls. This Liberty they make essential to the will; of
which see Strangius, l. 3. c. 14. p. 686. also p. 691, 702, 703. But, add
they, (2) There is also a liberty strictly so termed, which consists in the
Indifference of the will to this or that object, also to act or not to act: and
this Liberty is most proper to this our imperfect state, as Strangius, p. 188.
687. 689. 711. So likewise Le Blanc, p. 435. and others. There were some first
lines of this distinction drawn by Camero, who makes liberty strictly so
termed to be about the means, not the end; yet his Notions about Liberty are
tolerable, in that he makes Divine Predetermination consistent with human
Liberty. But the first creator of this distinction touching a twofold
Liberty, among those who owned the Synod of Dort, was Strangius, who asserts a
twofold Liberty, one considered in its own Nature, which is essential to the
will, and the other as limited to lapsed man, which includes Indifference, etc.
as in places above cited.

What these new Methodists mean by this new-coined distinction of Liberty,
unless it be a gratification to the Pelagians, I cannot conjecture: Certain I
am, that I never could find it among the ancient Philosophers, Primitive
Fathers, Scholastic Theologues, or any other but these new Methodists or their
Sectators. Do any of the Greek Philosophers make mention of any liberty, but
what is essential to the will and al human acts? Can we find among the Greek
Theologues any notices of this twofold Liberty? Yea do not the very Jesuits
herein concur with us, that Liberty is essential to al moral acts, both in the
future, as well as the present state of the Soul? Is not Liberty constituted by
them and the Arminians as the foundation of al Morality? Does not Amyraldus,
de Libero Arbitrio, as well as we, make Liberty properly taken essential to the
will and al its Acts? Of what use then can this distinction of a twofold
Liberty be? Will it satisfy the Pelagians, Jesuits or Arminians? No; because
they al make Liberty strictly taken essential to al Moral Acts. Or, will it any
way relieve the Calvinists in their conflicts both with Jesuits and Arminians,
to say the will is sometimes free and sometimes not? If it be supposed, that
Indifference be essential to liberty in this imperfect state, will it not then
be replied by Pelagians and Arminians, that the will is not, according to these
new Methodists, free in Conversion, because not indifferent? It were not
difficult to demonstrate, how invalid this newcoined distinction of Liberty
is, and unapt to reach those ends for which it was designed by the authors
thereof.

As for the true Idea and notion of Natural Liberty, we have, The True Idea of
Liberty.
with what study and diligence we could, inquired into and discussed the same,
Court of the Gentiles, P. 2. B. 3. c. 9. S. 3.. 11, 12. and B. 4. c. 1. 29 --
32. also Philosoph. General. P. 1. L. 3. c. 3. S. 2. and P. 2. L. 1. c. 1. S.
4.. 2. the sum whereof may be drawn forth in these following Propositions. (1)
Natural Liberty, as it denotes a power, has one and the same Idea or Nature
with the Will. This is copiosely demonstrated, in the forementioned places.
Hence, (2) Al acts of the Will have liberty in the strictest notion essentially
appendent to them. (3) The Dominion which a free Agent has over his own Act is
not absolute, but limited and conditionate. (4) The necessity which arises
from the concurse of God the first cause, no way diminishes, but establishes
the Natural Liberty of the Will. For nothing offers violence to the Will, or is
injuriose to its Liberty, so long as the act it puts forth is voluntary: so
long as the will does voluntarily elect and embrace what it is predetermined
unto, the act is in its own power and free: for as Aristotle, Eth. l. 5. c. 12.
well observes, (...), nothing happens to such an one, but what he wills. (5)
Actual Indifference to variety of Objects or Acts, is no way essential to
natural Liberty, but only an Accident resulting from its imperfection. (6) The
formal, native and genuine Idea or notion of natural Liberty, both as to state
and exercice, includes no more than a rational spontaneitie. This last
proposition, which is the principal, Strangius Libertas voluntatis in genere
nihil aliud esse videtur, quam (...) spontaneum intellectuale. Strange. l. 3. c.
14. p. 686.
owns; and Le Blanc de Libr. Arbit. These. 19. p. 405. confesses this to be the
general opinion of our Reformed Divines, even of Amyraldus, Placeus, and other
new Methodists. That this also is asserted by our Judicious Davenant, see his
Determinations, Quaest. 22. That the Divine Decree takes not away Liberty.
These Propositions about natural Liberty, we have in the forecited places more
amply demonstrated, because the whole Pelagian and Arminian controversy, and
particularly this about Gods concurse to the substrate matter of sin depends
thereon: and he that shall undertake this Province of resolving our present
Question, without a clear Explication and Demonstration of the Wills natural
Liberty, does nothing to purpose.

. 4. Next to the natural Liberty of the Will, we are to consider Moral Liberty
or free will to good.
Moral Liberty or Free Will, as also what is possible or impossible to corrupt
Nature. By Moral Liberty or Free Will is generally understood the moral potence
or spiritual ability of the Soul to do good. This moral and spiritual
Liberty, our Adversaries the Pelagians, Arminians and new Methodists confound
with natural Liberty, and from our denying the later in corrupt Nature, they
falsely charge us with denying the former: therefore to remove this confusion
of the terms, and those false imputations which are charged on those that
defend efficacious concurse, the following Propositions will be of use unto us.

1. Natural Liberty is essential to the Will and al its acts, but moral
Liberty or free will to good only accidental and separable. The Will is not a
Will if it be not naturally free in all its acts; whatever act is voluntary, is
for that very reason free; Voluntary and free being in Scriptural estimation,
as also by the determination of the best Philosophers, terms synonymous and
equipollent, as we have demonstrated, Philos. General. P. 1. L. 3. c. 3. S. 2..
1. But now as for Moral Liberty and free will to good, that is only accidental
to the human Soul; it may come and go, be present and absent without the
natural destruction of the Soul, or violation to natural Liberty. It Is true,
that Moral Liberty, consisting in virtuose Habits, Inclinations and Exercices,
is the Perfection of Man, yet so as the Essence of the Soul is not diminished
or destroyed by the loss thereof.

2. Our first Parents in their innocent state were invested not only with
natural but also with moral Liberty or free will to good. This is granted on
both sides, and therefore needs not further demonstration.

3. Since the fall corrupt Nature in its unregenerate state lies under a total,
universal and naturally moral Impotence as to al Moral and spiritual good. I
call this Impotence total and universal, as it overspreads the whole soul, and
has stripped it of al seeds of, or inclinations to, any spiritual or truly moral
good. I term it also natural, or naturally moral, in that, albeit the subject
be moral, yet the Impotence being communicated together with corrupt Nature,
connatural or congenite and proper thereto, as corrupt, and as to al natural
power inseparable therefrom, it is become a moral Nature. I am not ignorant,
that some new Methodists, together with the Arminians, stiffely contend, that
this Impotence is not natural but only moral; but either they intend under the
ambiguitie of the terms to concele some Pelagian Infusions of natural seeds of
virtue and Free Will to Moral good, or else they must wrest the terms Moral and
Natural from their native sense, and what is intended by those that defend a
natural impotence. For all know, that by moral Impotence is generally understood
an Impotence contracted by frequent Acts of and Custom in Sin; and so on the
contrary by natural Impotence is understood such as is traduced together with,
and through the miserable contagion of sin inseparably appendent to corrupt
nature. Of this see more Philosoph. General. P. 1. L. 3. c. 3. S. 5.. 1. Hence,

4. Sin in corrupt Nature becomes necessary, and the observation of Divine
Precepts impossible. This Proposition has ever been in all Ages of the Church,
the great bal of contention between the Patrons of Free Will, and the Defensors
of Free Grace. The Pelagians of old as the Arminians of late have made this
their main Refuge for the defense of their Diana of Free Will. If Sin, say they,
be necessary, and so inevitable, then it cease to be sin: if it be voluntary,
then it may be avoided. But these Pelagian Arms Augustine and his Sectators
have stoutly refelled, by showing, (1) That the Law was not originally
impossible to man's Nature, but only is become so accidentally by reason of Sin,
and the impotence of corrupt Nature. (2) That this Impotence is not less
voluntary than necessary, yea the more necessary it is, the more voluntary: The
necessity of this Impotence is seated in and arises from the Will, and
therefore most voluntary. Thence Augustine terms it dura Necessitas, an hard
Necessity, because the more necessary this impotence is the more voluntary,
and the more voluntary it is the more necessary. Plato, Phileb. p. 22. gives it
the character, (...), of a miserable necessity; which he opposes to that
blessed necessity of adhering to the chiefest good, of which see Court Gent.
P. 4. B. 1. c. 4.. 7. (3) That albeit the avoiding of sin and the observation
of Divine commands be legally impossible to corrupt nature, yet both are
Evangelicly possible through the habitual and actual assistances of the Spirit
of Grace. See more of the impossibility which is in corrupt nature for the
observation of Divine precepts in Jansenius, Aug. Tom. 3. l. 3. c. 15, etc.
Philosoph. General. Part. 1. lib. 3. cap. 3. sect. 5.. 1. Court Gent. P. 4. B.
1. c. 4.. 8.

5. Notwithstanding the necessary impotence of corrupt nature as to what is
morally and spiritually good, yet it still retains a physic or natural faculty
and remote passive power capable of receiving spiritual good. No one denies,
but that the Soul, as a rational and voluntary subject, is remotely, passively,
and naturally capacitated for the reception of gratiose infusions; all the
Controversy is about a proxime or next, active, and moral power, which we
deny to remain in corrupt nature.

6. The Necessity of consenting and Impossibility of resisting which
Necessity, impossibility and possibilite what.
attends the will on the supposition of Divine concurse efficaciously moving and
applying the same to act, is only consequential, hypothetic, or conditionate
and voluntary, not simple, absolute, and coactive or violent. Here we are to
inquire what a simple and absolute impossibility is, and how it is differenced
from a conditionate and limited Impossibility. A thing is said to be simply
and absolutely impossible, when it is in no regard possible: for if it be in
any respect possible, it cannot be said to be simply and absolutely impossible.
Now nothing can be said to be in no regard possible, or simply and absolutely
impossible, but what in its own nature implies a repugnance of existing: and
surely nothing in its own nature implies a repugnance of existing, but what
involves a contradiction: that which involves a contradiction comes not within
the compass of possible, because contradictions have no passive power of being
verified; for the affirming of the one is the denying of the other; the truth
of the one makes the other false: But whatever implies not a contradiction or
repugnance of existing, that may be; and therefore cannot be simply and
absolutely impossible, of which see Court Gent. P. 4. B. 2. c. 5. 4. Now that
the Concurse of God predetermining the will to the substrate matter of sinful
acts cannot render the opposite act of obedience simply and absolutely
impossible is evident; because (1) the opposite act of obedience implies no
contradiction or repugnance of existing: For God can and does work it in some:
albeit it be in a limited sense impossible to corrupt nature, yet it is
possible to Grace, as before. (2) The will predetermined to one act has an
habitual indifference or radical flexibilitie to the opposite act; and
therefore the impossibility is only conditionate and limited. A reverend
Divine supposes, That Gods determinative concurse to the substrate matter of
sin leaves it undeniable, that the matter of al his Laws, in reference to al
such actions, are a simple and most strictly natural impossibility. Which I
conceive to be a great mistake, and that according to the confession of our
principal Adversary, Strangius, who lib. 3. cap. 8. page 625. speaks thus:
Therefore the Divine determination either by efficacious grace, or any other
way [which includes concurse to the entitative act of sin] being granted, there
is truly inferred a necessity of the consequence; because that act of the will
unto which it is determined by God must necessarily follow, but it is not a
necessity of the consequent, which in its own nature remains contingent; and
therefore in a composite sense the will, when it is determined by God to act,
cannot but act. Whence some Scholemen say, That in free will there is a simultie
of power to opposites, In libero arbitrio est simultas potentiae ad opposita,
sed non potentia simultatis, Alvarez.
but not a power of simultie, i. e. a power of embracing opposites at one and
the same time: whereof the reason is this, because a power to one act is not
opposed to the power unto the negation of the same act, or to a contrary act,
but two contraries or contradictories cannot be together in the same subject.
Of which matter Alvarez discourses learnedly, de Auxil. l. 9. Disp. 94. and l.
12. Disp. 115. Note well here, that Strangius in this point falls in with the
Dominicans, and fully assents and consents to their mode of conciliating Divine
determination with human liberty, which if the forementioned reverend Brother
and others would do, I should judge our Controversy very near, if not fully at
an end. The sum of al is this, That the determination or predetermination of
Divine concurse to this or that act does not make the negation of that act, or
a contrary act a simple or most strictly natural impossibility, as some would
persuade us, but only infers a necessity of the consequence, the will having
still, in sensu diviso, i. e. on supposition of the withdrawment of Divine
concurse, an habitual indifference to act or not to act, though, in sensu
composito, as predetermined by Divine concurse, it cannot but act. Or summarily
thus: The will has at that very time, when it is predetermined by God to this or
that act, an habitual power or radical indifference to the negation of that
act, or to the putting forth a contrary act: So that Divine predetermination
excludes only a contrary act, not the radical power to that act. Thus also
Davenant, Animadv. against Hoard, p. 240, 333, 341, 360, 402. proves strongly
and accurately, That absolute Election and Reprobation may stand with a
possibility to contrary events, though not with contrary events. Of which more
hereafter.

. 5. The next term that falls under consideration is the Will of The will of God,
its distributions, etc.
God, its different Ideas and various Acceptions in the Scriptures, under which
our Opponents concele themselves, and their misrepresentations of our
sentiments. The ancient distinction of the Divine will, (which they say Hugo de
S. Victore first formed) was, into voluntatem signi and voluntatem beneplaciti,
Gods significative will and his beneplacite will. (1) Gods significative will they
make to consiste of Precepts, Promises, Prohibitions, Permissions, Counsels,
and Admonitions. By Permissions here we must understand such as are moral, not
natural, which as to sin properly belong to Gods beneplacite will, as anon. This
significative Will of God some Divines term his Reveled will, from Deuteronomy. 29. 29.
others term it his Legislative or Preceptive will: others his Approbative will,
whereby he declares what he approves and what he disapproves, of which see
Davenant Animadv. against Hoard, page 222, 356, 391 -- 399. Lastly learned
Chamier, and Daille out of him, term this significative will of God, his will
(...), of complacence, or complacential will, whereby he declares, what is most
agreeable to him, and what not. Our judicious Davenant makes use also of this
term, as having one and the same Idea with the former notion of Gods
Approbative will. These several notions of Gods significative will, albeit they
may differ in some formalitie, yet they agree in substance and import, denoting
Gods reveled will touching man's duty, and that which is most agreeable to his
holy will and nature. (2) As for Gods Beneplacite will, commonly ^iled his will
(...), of good pleasure, it is that whereby he decrees, effects, or permits al
events and effects: whence it is distributed into effective and permissive.
Gods effective beneplacite will, is that whereby he decrees and produces al
natural and supernatural effects: Gods permissive beneplacite will, is that
whereby according to his eternal Decree he efficaciously permits the existence
of sin.

This distribution of the Divine will is greatly opposed by the Pelagians,
Arminians, and new Methodists. (1) The Jesuits, whom we may without breach of
charity term Pelagians, do what they can to baffle this distinction: so
Molina, the Head of that Faction, in Thom. Part. 1. Quaest. 19. Art. 12. tells
us, That these signs of the Divine will signify properly and formally some
nolition or volition in God; and therefore Gods significative will cannot be
contradistinguisht to his beneplacite will. The same is urged by the Arminians.
But the Orthodox both among Papists and Protestants reply, that Gods reveled
significative will is only equivocally, analogically, figuratively and
improperly termed his will, as the Edicts of Princes, and Laws of States. So
Sanderson de Obligatione Conscientiae, Praelect. 4 sect. 20. tells us, That Gods
beneplacite will is that whereby God has from al Eternity constituted with
himself what he will do: his significative will is that whereby he has appointed
unto us a Law, by signifying what he will have done by us. Whereof the former is
properly and univocally the will of God, but this later improperly and
analogically so called. The like Davenant, Animadvers. page 392. It Is true,
Divines grant, that this significative will of God has some Decree or Act of the
beneplacite will answering thereto: for the wise God decreed, that this or that
should be man's duty; but they deny that this reveled will of God touching man's
duty is the same with his decretive will touching events. (2) Our Adversaries
pretend, that by this distinction of the significative and beneplacite will we
make two opposite wills in God, and such as clash each with other. This makes a
reverend Brother to reject this distinction, as of no use in our present case.
But Divines answer, that these wills are not opposite in God, but only disparate
and diverse: the things decreed, and the things reveled and constituted by Gods
significative will may oppose each other, but the decretive and reveled will
never oppose each other. The most holy and wise God really intends whatever he
commands, or approves, with an intention that it shall be man's duty, and
rewarded if performed, but not always with an intention that it shall be
effected. (3) Our Opponents, and particularly the new Methodists, confound Gods
Beneplacite Decretive Will, with his Will of Complacence and Approbation: and
under this confusion endeavor to secure their opposition against Gods willing
the Permission of Sin. Thus Strangius, l. 3. c. 2. p. 548. None can be said to
will what he does not approve. Thence others make Love of complacence essential
to al acts of the Divine Will: and thence conclude, if God will the permission of
Sin, he must necessarily take complacence therein. But the reply hereto is not
difficult: we say, that God takes complacence in all his own Acts, but not in all
the objects they refer unto: but now love of complacence is not so termed from
the act, but object about which it is conversant; which must be some good
either natural or moral. Whence it is evident, that God may will the permission
of Sin, and its existence as a consequent thereto, and yet not take complacence
in or approve of sin. See more of Gods Will and its various Distributions, Court
Gent. P. 4. B. 2. c. 5.. 3.

. 6. The last term that needs our Explication is Divine Concurse, Of Divine
Concurse.
its Immediation, Efficacitie and Predetermination. Strangius, l. 1. c. 11. p.
59. distinguishes Concurse from Influxe thus: (1) Influxe is more large than
concurse: for the causality of every efficient is termed Influxe; and therefore
the Influxe of God is seen in many things, in which his concurse is not, as
when he acts without the concurrence of a second cause. Thence, (2) the term
Influxe is absolute, not denoting the respect of any other cause, but that of
concurse is relative. I have no mind to quarrel about terms without just
ground, and therefore can easily admit this distinction, though it make neither
for nor against either party. But that which more immediately concerns our
Immediate Concurse what.
present controversy is, 1. To give the true Idea and Notion of Immediate
Concurse, as generally asserted and stated in the Schools: which we shall
endeavor to explicate both negatively and positively.

(1) Negatively, Immediate concurse to an Act consistes not in the preservation
of the principe, or rendering of it apt and habile for any congenerous action. I
know a learned and pious Divine, who seems in terms to grant immediate
Concurse as to the substrate matter of sinful actions, yet in the close places
it only in this, That God as the first Mover, so far excite and actuate those
powers, as that they are apt and habile for any congenerous action, to which
they have a natural designation; and whereunto they are not sinfully
disinclined. But all this, as I conceive, no way reaches the true notion of
Immediate concurse, neither is it consistent with it self. For, [1] If God as
the first mover excite and actuate those powers, then are they necessarily by
him drawn or applied to act, which is more than being apt and habile for any
congenerous action: certainly to excite and actuate a power is more than to
render it apt and habile for an action. [2] If the Powers by Gods exciting of
them are rendered only apt and habile for any congenerous action, then where is
immediate concurse as to the Act? Did or would any term this immediate
concurse, so far to excite and actuate those powers, as that they are apt and
habile for any congenerous Action? [3] What this Aptitude and Ability is,
which the Powers receive by being thus excited and actuated by God, I cannot
divine: Are not the powers of the soul as powers apt and habile for natural
actions, such as the substrate matter of sin is? What other Aptitude or
Ability does God give unto the natural faculties as to sinful acts, but
merely the faculty of acting? Need sinners any other faculty, power, Aptitude
or Ability to sin, but the rational faculties depraved? It Is true, God
applies those faculties to the entitative act of that which is sinful, but yet
does not add any aptitude or ability to sin. [4] Does not Durandus and his
Sectators grant all this, and yet deny immediate concurse as to the entitative
act of sin? The Hypothesis of Durandus does no way exclude any kind of Aptitude
or Ability, but rather include the same; it only excludes the immediate
application of the power to its act; which also is excluded by this laxe notion
of Immediate concurse. [5] Lastly, if they who oppose Gods concurse to the
substrate matter of al sinful acts, do indeed and in truth assert and own an
immediate concurse to any one entitative act that is sinful, al those black and
direful consequences, which they cast on the assertors of Predetermination, may
with as much facility be retorted on them, as we shall demonstrate, chap. 5..
4. Hence,

(2) Affirmatively, Immediate concurse as to its formal Idea not only gives an
Aptitude or Ability to act, but also immediately produces the very act it
self. That this notion of immediate concurse is universally received in the
Schools, is most evident. I shall desire the Reader to consult our Countryman
Compton Carleton, a learned and acute Jesuit, who had his first education in
Cambridge, and is more moderate than most of that faction. He says, Philosoph.
Disput. 28. de Causa prima, Sect. 3. p. 319. God therefore concurs with all his
Creatures immediately to al their actions, not only by the Immediation of
Virtue, but also of Supposite, i. e. that action, whereby the creature
operates, does also flow immediately from God himself, and not from any other
substituted in his place. A clear explication of Immediate concurse, so far as
it regards its Immediation. Whence Disput. 29. Sect. 2. he determines thus,
touching Gods Immediate concurse to the act of Sin: We must say therefore, that
God does physically and immediately concur to the act of sin, together with the
create Will. And he confirms this Hypothesis by Arguments out of Aquinas,
Suarez, Vasques, Anselme, Tanner, Zumel, Montesinus, Mulderus, Arriaga, and
Oviedo. So that this notion of Immediate concurse seems to have been generally
entertained by all parties, both Thomists, Scotists, and Jesuits, as that which
is most rational and self-evidencing.

2. But the principal point in controversy is touching the Efficacitie
Efficacious and predeterminant concurse.
and Predetermination of Divine Concurse; wherein the Jesuits and Arminians
oppose the Dominicans and Calvinists. I must confess, when I first undertook
the explication of Divine Concurse, specially as to the substrate matter of Sin,
I studiosely avoided the term Predetermination, (although it be frequently
fathered on me) as is intimated Court Gentiles, P. 4. B. 2. c. 11.. 7. partly
to avoid needless countests about words, and partly because I would not
professedly espouse the interest of any one Sect, but adhere to Scriptural
terms; but since, upon a more accurate inquiry, finding the term expressly
laid down in Scripture, and that as to the very matter in controversy, touching
Gods concurse to the substrate matter of sin, I see no reason why we may not
make use of it, notwithstanding the prejudices some endeavor to load it with.
Therefore for the more full explication of this term I shall endeavor to show,
(1) What efficacious concurse notes; and (2) How this efficacious concurse may
be termed Predeterminative.

1. Divine Concurse is termed efficacious as it does most potently Efficacions
concurse what.
and invincibly produce its effect. The Grecanic term, whereby the efficacitie
of Divine Concurse is expressed in the Scriptures, is (...), efficacitie, or
energie, which notes the puissant force of any operation. So Ephesians. 1. 19.
(...), Ephesians. 1. 19.
acccording to the energie or efficacious working of the might of his power.
Here is, (1) Power or force. (2) Might of power or most potent power; and (3)
The efficacious working of this most potent power: Which note the puissant
efficacitie of divine concurse. Thence the Syriac renders it (...), according
to the efficace. So Ephesians. 3. 7. (...), Ephesians. 3. 7.
according to the energie or efficace of his power. The like, Phil. 3. 21.
(...), Phil. 3. 21.
according to the efficacious working, whereby he is able even to subdue
althings unto himself. So Col. 1. 29. (...), according to his efficacious
working, which works in me mightily. In all these Texts we have mighty power,
yea omnipotence joined with the efficace of divine Concurse; which demonstrates
its invincible manner of working, in the production of al its effects. So that
(...) signifies Gods intime presence with all second Causes, and efficacious
concurring with and actuating of them in all their operations. The like import
may be applied to its conjugate (...), which notes, to effect any thing in the
most efficacious manner, so as to overcome al resistance made against the force
of the Agent. So 1 Cor. 12. 6. 1 Cor. 12. 6, 11.
(...), who efficaciously works althings. The like v. 11. of which hereafter.
This efficacious concurse, as it cooperates with the second cause is termed
(...) cooperation or concurse, and (...), to cooperate. So Mark 16. 20. (...),
the Lord cooperating, or efficaciously concurring. So elsewhere, that (...) as
applied to God notes his actuose, efficacious, and predeterminative concurse in
and with althings, is evident from the use of the word both in sacred and
profane Authors. So with Phavorinus (...), is (...), to work readily. It Is
rendered by the Syriac, sometimes (...), to work, as 1 Cor. 12. 6. (...) where
it notes not only an universal general concurse, but a particular, present,
certain, efficacious force or efficacitie of Divine Concurse, exerting it self
in all individual acts and effects. Again, (...) is rendered by the Syriac, Romans
7. 5. Romans 7. 5. 2 Cor. 4. 12. 1 Cor. 12. 11.
and 2 Cor. 4. 12. by (...), to work, to act with diligence, to be efficacious,
as Boderianus. And 1 Cor. 12. 11. it is rendered by (...), to act, to work, to
perform, to effect, as Boderianus. Lastly, it is rendered by the Syriac, Ephesians.
1. 11. (...), who has Ephesians. 1. 11.
efficaciously wrought althings. Which sufficiently demonstrates the
predetermination of Gods concurse, as to al second causes and acts. Hence,

2. This efficacious Concurse, as it determines and applies the Determinative
Concurse what.
second cause to act, is both in sacred Scripture and by scholastic Theologues
termed Determinative and Predeterminative. We find both these terms in
Scripture applied to Divine Concurse. Thus (...), from (...) a term or limit;
(1) primarily and properly signifies to termine, set bounds or limits to any
cause, effect, or thing. So Acts 17. 26. (...), and Act. 17. 26.
has determined the times before appointed, and the bounds of their
habitation: i. e. God has determined or predetermined to every Man, Nation, and
Kingdom their fixed terms of duration and life. So Arrian, Epictet. lib. 1.
cap. 12. speaking of God, he says, (...). And Virgils Song is remarquable:
Stat sua cuique dies, Every ones day stands fixed or determined: which Servius
understands, of the fixed determined period of human life. So that we see that
not only sacred Philosophy, but the very Pagans by their dim light, asserted a
fixed period of Divine life, as determined by God; albeit some that profess
themselves Christians deny the same. Then he adds, (...), and the bounds, or
the position of terms: for (...) properly signifies the position of terms or
limits to any cause, action, effect, or thing. God by his eternal Decree has
predetermined or set terms and limits to al second causes, their actions,
effects, and events: there is nothing so contingent in nature, but it is
predetermined by the Divine will. We find the Verb (...) applied to times and
places, as well as to causes and acts: So Heb. 4. 7. (...), he determines or
limits Heb. 4. ^.
a day. Thence in the Glossarie, (...) is a stated or determined day: and so
(...), I termine or limit as to place. Whence Hesychius makes (...), he
determines, to be the same with (...), he gives term or limit. Thence also
(...) with the LXX. answers to (...) to termine, determine, or constitute
terms to any place or thing, Number. 34. 6. Josh. 13. 27. and 15. 11. also to
(...) to be bounded or determined. Whence lastly (...) signifies a definition,
which is the term or boundary of an essence, according to Cicero, who renders
it, the circumscription of a thing. (2) From this primary notion of (...)
follows a secondary, namely, to decree, destine to a certain end, predestine,
predetermine. In which sense it signifies the same with (...), to predetermine:
and so it is transferred to predestination, predetermination, or the decree and
purpose of the Divine will, even about the substrate matter or entitative act of
sin; as Luke 22. 22. (...), as it was determined, Luke 22. 22.
or predetermined, decreed. Our Lord speaks of his Crucifixion, which was the
greatest of sins and intrinsecally evil, and yet lo! as to the substrate matter
or entitative act, predetermined and decreed by God. The same Acts. 2. 23. Him,
being delivered Acts 2. 23.
by the determinate counsel, and foreknowledge of God: (...), by that defined,
determined, or predetermined counsel: of which more Chap. 3.. 2. Hence (...) to
decree, deliberate, determine is expounded by Theodotion, Job 22. 28. (...) And
Hesychius makes (...) he determines synonymous to (...), which when applied to
the Divine will note predefinition and predetermination.

As the simple (...), so also the composite (...), to predestine
Predeterminative concurse what in Scripture. 1 Cor. 2. 7. Romans 8. 29, 30. Ephesians.
1. 5, 11. Acts 4. 28.
or predetermine is used six times in the N. T. (1) of things appertaining to
salvation, 1 Cor. 2. 7. (2) of persons elect, Romans 8. 29, 30. Ephesians. 1. 5, 11.
(3) of the substrate matter or entitative act of sin, yea that which was
intrinsecally evil. So Act. 4. 28. For to do whatsoever thine hand and thy
counsel determined before, or predetermined to be done. For so (...) may more
properly be rendered. (...) primarily signifies to predefine, predestine,
predetermine, to set limits, bounds, terms to persons or things. Thence, as to
this present text and point, when it is said here, that those who crucified
Christ did what Gods hand and counsel predetermined to be done, it must be
understood of the substrate matter or entitative act, which was predetermined by
God, as in what follows, Chap. 3.. 2. The Syriac version interprets (...) by
(...) to seal, constitute, or make firm any thing, which is rendered by the LXX.
(...), to order, dispose, constitute, institute. The Divine Will and Decree
gives order, constitution, limitation, determination, yea predetermination to
althings: al persons and things, times and places, ends and means receive
terms, limits, destination, and predetermination from the Divine Will and
Decree. Hence (...) in the N. T. is made synonymous to (...), to foreknow, 1
Pet. 1. 20. to (...), to preordain, Act. 17. 26. to (...), to propose, or
purpose, Romans 1. 13. Ephesians. 1. 9. to (...), to prepare, Romans 9. 23. 1 Cor. 2. 9.
By all which we evidently see, what footsteps predetermination, and as to the
substrate matter or entitative act of sin, has in the sacred Scriptures.

We now proceed to examine this notion as used by scholastic Predeterminative
Concurse active and passive.
Theologues, and how far their sentiments thereof are applicable to our present
Controversy. (1) Some distinguish between Gods predefinition and his
predetermination: his predefinition they restrain to his Decrees, and his
predetermination to his Concurse. Others distinguish the predetermination of
God into extrinsec and intrinsec: by extrinsec predetermination they understand
the act of the Divine Will or Decree, whereby the creature is predetermined to
act: by intrinsec predetermination they mean the previous motion of God upon
the creature, which continually moves and applies it to act. But I should
rather distinguish predetermination, (as Creation and al other Acts of God ad
extra) into active and passive: [1] By active predetermination I mean nothing
else but the Act or Decree of the Divine will, whereby al second causes,
persons, acts, effects and things receive their terms, order, and limitation
as to power and activitie. This is the same with predefinition, predestination,
and extrinsec predetermination. That this active predetermination procedes only
from the efficacious previous act of the Divine will, without any impression or
actual influxe on the second cause has been defended by Scotus and others of
great name in the Schools, and that on invict reasons: for if God will, that the
second cause, (suppose it be the human will) act, immediately on the volition of
God the action of the second cause will follow, not from any previous impression
on the second cause, but from its natural subordination and as it were
sympathy with the first cause: as at the beck of the human will every inferior
faculty of man moves. See Suarez, de Auxil. l. 1. c. 5. n. 3. and Court Gent.
P. 4. B. 2. c. 7.. 3. [2] By passive predetermination I understand the concurse
of God as applying the second cause to its act, and not really, but mentally or
modally only distinct therefrom: For as active predetermination is the same
with the Divine will, so passive predetermination is the same with the second
cause, its act and effect, as we have demonstrated Court Gent. P. 4. B. 2. c.
8.. 1.

(2) Predetermination is usually distinguished into physic or natural,
Predetermination physic and moral.
and ethic or moral. This distinction dependes on that of causes into physic,
and moral: a physic or natural cause is that which is truly efficient, and so
does really influence the act and effect, in a way of proper efficience or
causalitie: whence an Ethic or moral cause is that which does not immediately,
directly, or in a way of real proper efficience produce the act and effect, but
only morally, by proposing objects, motives, precepts, promises, or the like
moral means and influences, with excitements and persuasions. Thus
proportionably we may distinguish predetermination into physic and moral. [1]
By physic predetermination we must understand not corporal, or natural in a
strict notion, which is proper only to things inaminate or Brutes, but such a
predetermination as really applies the Agent or second cause to its act, and
really, yea immediately influenceth both act and effect. Thus Suarez, Metaphys.
Disput. 17. sect. 2. number. 2. A physic cause [and so predetermination] in this
place is not taken for a corporal or natural cause, acting by corporeous and
material motion; but it is taken more universally, for a cause that truly and
really influenceth the effect: for as nature sometimes signifies any essence;
so physic or natural influxe is that which by true and proper causalitie
works the effect: to which when a moral cause is opposed, it is to be
understood of such a cause which does not of itself and truly act, yet it does
so carry itself, as that the effect may be imputed to it: such a cause is he
that comforts, beseeches, or hinders not when he may and ought. Hence [2] by
moral predetermination, as it regardes Gods influence on the moral rational
world, we must understand his moral influence on man as his last end, his
stating man's duty by moral precepts, inviting thereto by Evangelic promises,
dehorting from sin by penal comminations, and al other moral influences. Here
we are to note, that albeit physic and moral predetermination be comprehended
under physic and moral causalitie, yet the later is more comprehensive than the
former: for physic predetermination properly belongs to a superior cause as
acting on an inferior, but physic causalitie to any efficient, as Strangius
does well observe.

But to sum up the whole, both the Dominicans and Calvinists agree with the
Jesuits and Arminians in this, That the holy God does not morally predetermine
any to sin: for he neither counsels, encourages, commandes, or invites any one
to the least sin. The Question therefore must be understood of physic
predetermination; which I shall describe according to the explication of
Strangius, l. 2. c. 4. p. 159. thus: By the physic predetermination of God in
this place is understood the action of God, whereby he moves and applies the
second cause to act, and so antecedently to al operation of the creature; or in
order of nature and reason before the creature works, God really and
efficaciously moves it to act in all its actions: i. e. he acts and causes,
that the creature acts and causes whatever it acts and causes: so that
without this premotion of God the creature can do nothing: and this premotion
being given it is impossible, in a composite sense, that the creature should
not act and do that, unto which it is premoved by the first cause. And more
particularly, though concisely, as for Gods predetermination of the human will,
Strangius, Praedeterminare voluntatem est applicare voluntatem ad agendum, and
facere ut faciat, Strange.
l. 2. c. 11. p. 244. gives it us thus: To predetermine the will, as they teach,
is to apply the will to act, and to make it act. Which description of
predetermination I do readily close with, and so the Question before us will be
summarily this,

Whether God does by an efficacious power and influence move and predetermine
men unto al their natural actions, even those that have sin annexed or
appendent to them? Affirm.

I am not ignorant, that a reverend and learned Divine who opposes our
Hypothesis, states the question otherwise, as if we held, That God does by an
efficacious influence universaelly move and determine men to al their actions;
even those that are most wicked. But this Hypothesis, as proposed and intended,
I know no sober mind but abhors: whoever said, that God determines men to the
most wicked actions as such? were not this to make him the Author of sin, which
every pious soul detestes? For to determine to wicked actions as such, implies
also a determination to the wickedness of those actions: and this
determination cannot be physic; because sin as sin has no physic cause or
determination: therefore it must be moral: and surely whoever determines
morally to the most wicked actions cannot but be the moral cause, and Author of
them: and is not this an high piece of blasphemy? We are so far from
asserting, that God determines men to the most wicked actions, as that we say,
he determines men to no wicked action; no not the least: Yea we add further,
that in actions sincerely but imperfectly good, and in part sinful, albeit God
predetermines men both naturally and morally to the goodness of the action,
and naturally to the substrate matter or natural act, yet he predetermines not
to the vitiositie of the act, or the act as sinful. So the sum and whole of our
Hypothesis is this, That God does by an efficacious power and influence move
and predetermine men unto al their natural actions, even such as have sin
appendent to them. This Hypothesis we no way doubt but to make good both by
scriptural and rational demonstration.

CHAP. II. The state of the Controversy.
(1) Ten general Propositions wherein the New Methodists and Predeterminants
agree. (2) The New Methodists differences among themselves about Prescience,
Futurition, Divine Concurse, and Gods permission of sin. (3) The differences of
the Predeterminants from the New Methodists about absolute Decrees, the
Futurition, Divine Permission, Prescience, Providence, Predefinition, and
Predetermination of Sin.

THE prolixitie we have used in explicating and stating our Question will render
our subsequent work more facile and concise. For here that old Proverb holds
true, A good beginning is half the work. But before we enter on the
Demonstration of our Hypothesis it will be necessary to manifest, (1) Wherein we
and those who maintain the Antithesis do agree. (2) Wherein our Opponents, who
maintain the Antithesis, differ among themselves. (3) Wherein we differ from
them. The explication of these Particulars will not a little conduce to the more
perfect state and determination of our Question.

. 1. Wherein we and our Opponents, who maintain the Antithesis, Wherein we and
our Opponents agree.
do agree. Some there are who conceive our differences greater than they are;
others on the contrary make them less: our first work therefore will be to
show, wherein we agree; which I shall endeavor to lay down in the following
Propositions.

1. Prop. That God has decreed althings that come to pass. Herein our
Adversaries generally concord with us; albeit they differ from us, as also
among themselves about the manner how God decrees the substrate matter of sin.
Thus Strangius, l. 3. c. 3. p. 558. But also we confess and say, that God does
truly decree althings that happen, but not althings in one and the same manner;
but some things effectively, other things permissively: which is the commun
opinion of Theologues, according to that famous Axiom of Augustine: There is
nothing done, which the Omnipotent does not will, either by permitting that it
be done, or by doing of it. Yet the said Strangius, in what precedes, gives us
a very dangerous position touching the Divine Decrees: It is not needful, says
he, that we appoint so many particular Decrees of God, touching his Concurse to
be afforded, as there are actions of the creature and particular objects of
them. Sithat that one general Decree or Institute of God may suffice, whereby
he has determined to concur with all the actions of the creature, as he has
given them a power to act, etc. This general Decree, foisted in to salve his
own Hypothesis, is most unworthy of the Divine Being, in that it overthrows the
Prescience of God, imposes imperfection on the Divine Will, and opens an
effectual door to Pelagianisme.

2. Prop. That Election of some to Grace and Glory is absolute, and no way
dependent on the prevision of any act of man. This Proposition, although it be
denied by the Pelagians, Socinians, and Arminians, yet it is generally granted
by our Adversaries, the New Methodists, Amyraldus, Strangius, Le Blanc, and
others. For these, albeit they make Reprobation conditional and dependent on
man's sin, yet they grant a particular absolute Election of some to Grace and
Glory: which to me seems very strange and inconsistent with their Hypothesis
about Reprobation: For if the Decrees of God be absolute as to Election, why
should they not be Volitiones pure conditionales sunt alienae a sapientia and
prudentia Dei, Ruiz. de Volunt* Dei, Disp. 20.. 1.
also estimed such as to Reprobation? Can the Divine will be moved by any thing
but itself? Are not conditional Decrees inconsistent therewith? Does not God in
the glass of his own Decrees foresee al acts and events of the human will? Must
they not then be al decreed absolutely by God? See hereafter, Chap. 5.. 3.

3. Prop. That God has a certain Science or Prescience of sin, as well as of al
other Events. This Proposition is universally granted by all the New Methodists,
Amyraldus, Strangius, etc. as also by most Arminians, although it be utterly
incompossible and inconsistent with the sentiments both of the one and the other
Party. For all the wit of man, yea I will with confidence add of Devils, will
never be able to explicate and demonstrate a certain prescience in God of
things future, but what is originated in and dependent on his own Decrees. I
must solemnly profess, I can see no way left to evade the force of Socinus's
argument against the certainty of Gods prescience, if we resolve it not into
the free determination of his own will decreeing al future events: of which more
in what follows, Chap. 5.. 2.

4. Prop. That whatever God absolutely predefines or predestines from
Eternity, he predetermines in time. This Proposition the New-Methodists seem
generally to grant. So Strangius, l. 3. c. 2. p. 547. When we speak of absolute
predefinition, we willingly grant, that the predefinition of God from
eternity, and the Predetermination of the create will in time mutually follow
each other; so that whatever particular singular Act God has absolutely
predefined should be done by us, to the same he does determine our will: For
whatever God has by his Decree so predefined, it is necessary that he effect
the same, or cause that it be done; because the Decree of God, seeing it is
absolute and efficacious, must necessarily have its effect; which it cannot
have but by efficaciously applying the create will to the predefinite act:
otherwise, if the will should not act that which is predefined, the
Predefinition and Decree of God would be frustrated, which is absurd. A good
concession, which will be of use to us in what follows, Chap. 5.. 3.

5. Prop. That God does predetermine the human Will to al acts and effects
morally good, as also to some other commun acts and effects. This Proposition
is generally rejected by the Arminians, as also by Baronius, yet the New
Methodists, who have chalked out a middle Way, generally entertain it. Thus
Strangius, l. 3. c. 5. p. 584. We have shown, that God does not in all things
predetermine the human Will, namely not in actions intrinsecally evil, and to
which Vitiositie is necessarily annexed; albeit in things lawful, not only in
works of Grace, but also in others that are commun, according to his own
pleasure, he determines it, with the preservation of its own native liberty,
sithat he can never offer any violence to the will, but only moves it sweetly
according to its own nature. See more on this argument in what follows, c. 3..
1. on Prove. 21. 1. This great concession of Strangius indeed cuts the nerves
and sinews of al his arguments against our Hypothesis: For if God can and does
predetermine the will to some acts, without any violence offered to its
Liberty, why may he not also predetermine it to al its acts, without prejudice
to its Liberty? The force of this consequence is so strong, that it forces
Baronius and the Arminians to deny al Predetermination. See Chap. 5.. 4.

6. Prop. That God predetermins the Will to the substrate matter of some sinful
acts, even of such as are not intrinsecally evil. This Proposition is granted
by Strangius, l. 4. c. 1. p. 766. But although in the actions of wicked men,
when God does use them as Instruments for the execution of some peculiar works,
it may peradventure be said, that God does determine their wills, yet it seems
more incommode to say, that God moves and predetermines to al other acts, as to
acts of hatred of God, blasphemy, etc. So that he yields, that God may
predetermine to the matter of some sinful acts: and indeed it cannot be
rationally denied; sithat Acts imperfectly good are also in part sinful; and
the substrate matter of the act as good and sinful is the same: wherefore if God
predetermine the human will to the substrate matter of the act as good, must he
not also predetermine it to the substrate matter of the act as sinful? When I
say, that God does predetermine the will to the substrate matter of the act as
sinful, As here must not, yea cannot be taken Reduplicatively, but only
Specificatively, as it specifies one and the same Act, and distributes it into
its opposite Adjuncts of Good and Evil: So that the meaning is no more than
this, that God predetermines the will to the substrate matter or entitative act
which is both good and evil: and if he predetermine the will to the substrate
matter of the Act which is imperfectly good, (as our Adversaries grant) he must
also necessarily predetermine the will to the substrate matter of the act
whereunto sin is annexed: because the substrate matter of the Act as good and
evil is the same. When our Adversaries shall have given us a rational and
distinct solution to this argument, I shall confess they have done much for the
subversion of our Hypothesis. Of this Argument, see Chap. 5.. 4, 5.

7. Prop. That there is no real positive Act or Entitie in nature, whereof God
is not the efficient cause. This is generally granted by all those that deny
sin to be a positive Being. So Strangius, l. 3. c. 3. p. 557. There is no
Entitie, and no action as it is an action or has any realitie, whereof God is
not the cause, or which he has not decreed either absolutely or respectively.
So l. 4. c. 11. p. 859. The entitie of the Action is reduced unto God, as the
first cause, on whose concurse and influxe it dependes. So a Reverend Divine,
Cathol. Theol. Part 1. Sect. 17. p. 85. `It is certain, that as motus vel actio
is quid natural, it is of God as the first cause of Nature: and so when a
sinner acts, it is not without the first Universal Cause. One would think
that this concession, if well stated and prosecuted, would put an end to our
controversy: For all that we demand is, that the real positive act, whereunto
sin is annexed, be from God as the first cause of Nature: But yet what our
Opponents grant, as limited by them will not answer our expectations. For some
hold with Durandus, that the action is from God, but not immediately; others,
that it is immediately from God, yet not by a predeterminative concurse. Hence,

8. Prop. That God concurs immediately to the substrate matter or entitative act
whereunto sin is annexed. This Proposition is not granted by such as follow
Durandus either in words or sense, yet by others it is. Thus Strangius, l. 1.
c. 10. p. 54. But we must judge, that God does immediately reach every action
and effect of the creature, and that both by the Immediation of virtue and
supposite or person. For as God himself, so his virtue is every where present
and energetic. For the proof whereof he cites Isa. 26. 12. Romans 11. ult. 1 Cor.
12. 6. Act. 17. 28. with other Scriptures. So Chapter 11. p. 61. he confesses,
that there is a common influxe of God unto al actions, which he calls (...), the
energie and efficace of God, whereby he does subordinate second Causes to
himself; so that whatever they are or do act, they essentially depend on him in
both respects. Whereby he seems to evince, that Gods Influxe does not only
render the subject habile to act, but also immediately reach the very act, even
that has sin annexed to it. The like he adds, l. 4. c. 1. p. 760. It may
truly be said, and men are wont so to speak, That God is the cause of vitiose
actions, albeit he be not the cause of the actions as they are vitiose. And
more fully l. 4. c. 3. p. 783. From what has been said, it may in some manner
be understood, how in a sane sense God may be said to impel or incline to some
sin, when yet he is void of al sin: specially if these things be observed. (1)
That it be not understood, that God moves or inclines men to sin in general.
(2) Neither that it be said, that God moves to al sin, but only to such, in
which he uses depraved wills as instruments to execute his good works. (3)
Neither that it be understood, that God does properly move to sin simply and
formally taken, or sin as sin; but only to the material of sin, i. e. not to
the sin of the Action, but to the Action as substrate to the sin, so that he be
not the Author of the vitiositie, which he only permits, but of the substrate
Act, and of his own direction and ordination, which he exercises about the
vitiose Action, etc. Yea in Actions intrinsecally sinful, he seems to grant,
that the Act, as it is a physic or natural Being, is from God. So l. 4. c. 12.
p. 876. That which is also true of Actions which are intrinsecally evil, such
as the hatred of God, perjurie, etc. In which also we must distinguish the
physic or natural Being from the Ethic or moral evil. -- That God concurs to
the physic action, but not to the moral vice of the action we have above
shown. There are two observables in these concessions of Strangius, which, if
he were candid and uniforme in granting us, would put a period to the
controversy. [1] That in Actions intrinsecally evil there is a physic or
natural entitie separable from the ethic or moral vitiositie. [2] That the
physic or natural entitie of al sinful Actions, even such as are intrinsecally
sinful, is immediately from God, as the first cause of Nature. But I must
confess, I cannot find that Strangius is candid or uniforme in these his
concessions, but elsewhere he seems to overthrow what he has here granted. For,
[1] He sometimes asserts, that the natural act of hating God is so
intrinsecally evil, as that the vitiositie cannot be separated from it. Again,
[2] albeit he seem frequently to grant an immediate concurse to the substrate
matter of sinful acts, yet when he comes to explain what he intends thereby, he
does too much verge unto, if not wholly espouse Durandus's mediate concurse, as
to acts intrinsecally evil. Thus also Amyraldus, as it is well noted by Le
Blanc, These. Conciliat. Arbitrii, etc. These. 48. p. 436.

9. Prop. That Gods Providence is universally and efficaciously active in the
directing and governing the Sins of men unto his own Glory. This most of the
new Methodists grant, albeit some seem to deny it, at least in part. Our
Proposition is granted by Strangius, l. 3. c. 4. p. 469. Neither does it follow
from our opinion, that any free act is subtracted from the Providence of God,
if man does that which God permits, sithat whether it be good or evil that man
does, God must foreknow, and direct and order it to the end appointed by
himself. So l. 4. c. 1. p. 760. `Furthermore it must be observed, which we have
often mentioned, that God albeit he does not will sin as sin, yet he does
advisedly permit, direct, and ordain it in the best manner, to execute his
righteous judgments, and illustrate his glory. The like p. 764. Albeit we
deny that God does ever determine the will to sin formally taken, or to the
actions unto which sin is necessarily annexed, yet we acknowledge, that God
does so rule and order the sinful wills of Men and Devils, that by permitting
tentations, offering objects, subministrating occasions, denying Grace, which
he owes to none, letting loose the reins to Satan, removing impediments, or by
operating in any other secret manner, the event which he pre-appoints
infallibly follows, and specially that that work be performed, for the
effecting of which God uses their ministry. How much would this concession
conduce to put a period to this controversy, were our Adversaries but
ingenuous in their assent and consent to it? Does he not say here as much as
we, abating only the term Predetermination? and yet elsewhere how does he
start off from what is here granted?

10. Prop. That God does no way concur or predetermine the human will to the
substrate matter or entitative act of sin so as to be the cause or author of
Sin. This Proposition we cheerfully and with our whole Souls assent and consent
unto; although it be the grand design and unwearied endeavors of our
Adversaries, both Pelagians, Jesuits, Arminians and new Methodists, to fasten
the Antithesis on us, namely, That we make God to be the Author of sin. Which
Imputation has been in all Ages of the Christian Church fastened on those that
defended Efficacious Grace and Divine Concurse, as we shall show in what
follows, Chap. 4.

. 2. Having laid down the general Propositions, wherein our Wherein our
Opponents differ among themselves.
Opponents generally, though not without some variation, concord with us, it
follows, that we show briefly wherein they differ among themselves. Indeed, so
great is the difference of our Adversaries, specially the New Methodists,
Amyraldus, Baronius, Strangius, Le Blanc, and others among themselves in this
point touching Gods efficacious concurse to the substrate matter of sin, as that
it is very difficult for us to form commun principes or Hypotheses wherein
they al agree. And albeit they generally agree in their opposing our
Hypothesis, touching Gods immediate predeterminative concurse to the substrate
matter of actions intrinsecally evil, yet they lay down their own Antithesis
with so much caution, suspension, and hesitation of mind, as if they were
afraid the contrary might prove true. Placeus, Tractat. de Liber. Arbit. p.
174. cunningly waves the determination of the Question, with this modest
concelement of his mind: Truly we, according to the reverence we have toward
the infinite Majesty of God, dare not define what the Dependence of the second
cause on the first is: It suffices us, that too much dependence cannot be
asserted, provided that it does not asperse God with any the least spot of our
sins. Which we readily close with, renouncing al such dependence as brings the
holy God under the imputation of sin. So Baronius, Metaph. Sect. 8. Disp. 3..
78. page 147. having given us the mention of the Thomists previous
predeterminative concurse, namely, that the human will is in all its motions
excited by God, and efficaciously, i. e. irresistibly moved, first to act, and
then to act this rather than that, before he undertakes the refutation hereof
he thus premonishes us: In the mean while we profess these two things: (1)
That we do much against our will recede from this opinion, and that because we
conceive so honorably of those great men, which are Patrones thereof. (2) That
we are ready, if any thing may follow from this our Doctrine against any
article of faith, to reject it. Le Blanc, Council. Arbitr. Hum. These. 55. page
438. seems to wave the Controversy; yet These. 56. he inclines to the opinion
of Strangius, That God cannot physically promove and predetermine free causes
to acts intrinsecally evil, without being the Author of sin. But These. 57. he
confesses, That provided God be not made the Author of sin, the dependence of
the second causes on the first in acting cannot be too much asserted, etc. And
These. 58. he concludes, That the force and efficace of the Divine providence
even about sinful acts, is not to be restrained to a certain general
indifferent concurse; but that God does many ways procure, promove, direct, and
moderate sinful events. So great is the hesitation of our Adversaries. Yea, how
frequently do the very same persons differ from themselves in their sentiments
about this point? Does not the same person sometimes seem to grant an universal
concurse immediately influencing al natural acts, and yet elsewhere deny the
same to acts intrinsecally evil? And so in other points controverted by us. But
the differences of our Opponents among themselves are more palpable and visible
as to the following Particulars.

1. They are greatly confused and at variance among themselves as Their
differences 1. about Gods Prescience.
to Gods Prescience of sinful acts. All the New Methodists generally grant Gods
certain prescience of al sinful acts, but yet they are at a great difference,
yea contradiction among themselves in the stating of it. (1) Strangius, lib. 3.
cap. 7. p. 594. tells us, That among all the modes which are wont to be
explicated, that seems the most probable, which is taken from the presence of
althings in Eternity. Wherein he follows the Dominicans, and so must by
consequence resolve the futurition of sin into the will of God permitting it,
which overthrows his Hypothesis. Yet cap. 8. page 622. he resolves the
certainty of Gods foreknowing future events into the more Essence of God. And
page 626. he resolves it into the actions themselves and their determinate
causes. Lastly, cap. 10. page 646. he in down right terms confesses, That the
science of future sins is referred to the science of Vision. Which is all that
we contend for, and that which necessarily resolves Gods prescience of sin,
into the act of his will permitting it. Some of our Opponents resolve Gods
certain prescience of sin into the infinitude of his science. Thus Le Blanc De
Concord. Libert. p 444. These. 39. As for the fourth opinion, which secketh the
certitude of Divine prescience in the infinity of the Divine Intellect, and in
the determinate verity of those things which are contingently future, it
lays down nothing but what is certain and indubitate. Yet These. 40. he
confesses, That this opinion does not satisfy the Question, nor take away the
principal difficulty. For that which is here most difficult to be understood
is, how future contingents do from Eternity pass from mere possibles into the
nature of futures, that so under that reason they may be perceived by God.
Which knot he endeavors to untie, by telling us, that the same causes that give
existence to things future give them also their futurition. But this is a very
jejune and poor evasion, as we shall hereafter show, Chap. 5.. 1. (3) Others
refer Gods certain prescience of sin to the Jesuits middle science, whereby
God foresees, that if the will of man come under such a connection of causes,
circumstances, and providential concurrences, the effect will certainly follow,
albeit in itself merely contingent. Thus Lud. Crocius, Dyodec. Dissert.
Dissert. 7. where he largely but weakly defends this middle science: which Le
Blanc, De Concord. Libert. page 449. These. 26; etc. makes to be the opinion of
Baronius and others. Le Blanc himself, page 444. These. 42. confesses, That it
wants not great difficulty, how a thing which is supposed to depend on a cause
in itself indeterminate should be certainly known by the Divine Intellect: for
the Divine Intellect although infinite cannot see what is not, nor yet change
the nature of its object. Whence he concludes, These. 43. That seeing there is so
much darkness on al sides, our safest and most ingenuous course is to confess
our own ignorance herein. The like subterfuge Strangius makes use of, l. 3. c.
5. p. 576. etc. 6. p. 591. with this pretexte, That the mode of Divine
prescience is not reveled in Scripture. A poor refuge indeed! why then do they
so daringly sift and pry into the Divine prescience, and draw it down to the
model of our corrupt reason? We easily grant, that the mode of Divine
prescience is incomprehensible by poor mortals, and therefore can content our
selves with scriptural descriptions thereof: but this we assert, that it is
impossible the Divine prescience, which is in itself most certain, should
depend on the most uncertain ambulatory will of man; and so much Scripture and
Reason grounded thereon does fully demonstrate.

2. Our Adversaries differ greatly among themselves about the 2. The futurition
of sin.
futurition of sin, and Gods predefinition thereof. Strangius, l. 3. c. 11.
holds, That some free acts are absolutely future, and known of God as such,
without any Decree predetermining the free causes to those acts: and yet he
denies, that those free contingent futures can be known by God according to
any Hypothesis, which does not necessarily infer the determination of the
create will; and thence which does not include an absolute Decree of their
futurition. Whence it will follow, that God can foreknow no contingent sinful
act as absolutely future, but what he first decreed to be absolutely future;
which yet Strangius admits not. Herein he is opposed by Le Blanc, De Concord.
Libert. page 455.

3. Our Opponents are also at variance among themselves 3. Divine Concurse.
touching Gods concurse, its immediation, totalitie, prioritie, efficace, and
predetermination as to sinful acts. (1) How many of them incline to the
sentiments of Durandus, denying al immediate concurse to sinful acts? And of
those that grant immediate concurse in terms, how many yet deny it in
realitie? Among those that grant immediate concurse both name and thing, do not
many espouse such consequences as are inconsistent therewith, yea repugnant
thereto? (2) Our Adversaries also differ much about Gods total particular
concurse to the substrate matter or entitative act of sin. Some grant a total
concurse to the physic entitative act in the general, but not in particular:
others grant a total concurse to the entitative act in particular, abstracting
the reference it has to its object: Thus Strangius, lib. 2. cap. 3. who grants,
that God does concur by a special concurse to the special effects as they are
specifically distinguished not morally but physically; which is all that we
contend for: Others, on the contrary, make Gods concurse to the substrate matter
of sin only partial and general, asserting with Molina, Part. 1. q. 14. a. 3.
Disp. 6. That God is only a partial cause of the entitative act of sin: So a
Divine of name among us; yea he asserts, that God never totally permits sin.
(3) Our Opponents differ also among themselves touching the Prioritie of Gods
concurse to the substrate matter of sin. Some grant Gods concurse hereto
previous, though not predeterminative; so Strangius: but others make it to be
only simultaneous; asserting, that God concurs with the will of man in the same
moment of nature and reason, to the same act. So Baronius, wherein he also
follows Lud. Molina and the Arminians. (4) Lastly, the principal difference
among our Adversaries is about the Efficacitie and Predetermination of Divine
concurse as to the substrate matter of sin. Some make the concurse of God to be
only general and indifferent, and so determinable by the second cause, as the
influence of the Sun is by the matter it works upon. Thus Baronius, Metaphys.
Sect. 8. Disput. 3.. 73, 74, 75. page 142, etc. where he makes Gods concurse to
the substrate matter of sinful acts to be the same with that of the Sun
concurring to the generation of a man or horse. Wherein he follows the
Remonstrants and Jesuits, more particularly Molina, Concord. Liber. Arbitr.
cum Great. donis, etc. Quaest. 14. Disput. 26. Thus a reverend Divine of name
among our selves openly asserts, that Gods concurse is determinable by the
creature. But Strangius, albeit he too far falls in with the sentiments of
Baronius against predetermination; yet he rejects this Hypothesis of a general
indifferent concurse as too gross and Pelagian. So l. 2. c. 3. p. 154. We say
not therefore, that God concurs only by a general concurse, as the Sun concurs
in the same manner to the generation of a man, and of an horse, and of a mouse;
but we determine, that the influxe of God is special to special effects, as
they are physically distinguished specie, and unto al kind of entitie, but not
to the reason of moral iniquity, which consistes in privation. Strangius here
seems to oppose Baronius's Hypothesis touching a general indifferent concurse;
but yet, I must confess, upon a more accurate research I cannot find that he
differs materially from Baronius herein: for although l. 1. c. 11. p. 61. he
calls this concurse (...), efficace, yet he makes it be but commun, and no way
determinative, and therefore only indifferent. The like l. 2. c. 19. p. 373.
And I am very positive in this, that no man living can rationally exemt
themselves from the imputation of the Jesuits indifferent concurse, and assert
an efficacious special concurse, but what is determinative as to the subject it
works on. And thence Le Blanc, Council. Arbitr. part. 3. these. 36. p. 434.
confesses, That Strangius' s opinion as to this point differs but little from
that of Baronius. Lastly, Baronius denies al predetermination both as to good
and evil actions; as Metaph. Sect. 8. Disput. 3.. 78, etc. p. 146. Strangius
allows predetermination to al acts moraly though but imperfectly good, and to
many other acts of the will, whenever God pleases, or need requires; yet he
denies it to al acts of the creatures, specially to such as are intrinsecally
evil, as lib. 2. cap. 4. page 162. and elsewhere. Herein he is followed by some
Divines of note among our selves, who I am very confident will never be able to
maintain their singular Hypothesis, but will at last be driven to the opinion of
Baronius, the Remonstrants, and Jesuits, or else fall under the lode of al
those black consequences they clog our Hypothesis with; of which hereafter,
Chap. 5.. 4.

4. Our Adversaries differ much among themselves about Gods 4. Gods permission
of sin.
permission of sin, its nature and efficace. (1) A Divine of repute among our
selves assertet^ that no act of sin, no not the active selling of Joseph, or
crucifying of Christ was willed by God; but only the passive vendition and
crucifixion or effect; yea he says, That God does not will sin as a punishment
in a proper sense: but others allow, that God wills the acts of sin as penal, or
conducible to his own glory, though not as sinful acts. Thus Strangius, l. 4.
c. 2. p. 773. where having refuted that distinction (at first framed by
Bellarmine, and of late reassumed by a Divine of great name among our selves)
of active and passive vendition and crucifixion, he concludes thus: Therefore
here was not an otiose or idle permission, but an efficax operation in the
selling of Joseph, which is more orthodoxe and consistent with itself, than the
former Hypothesis which seems to be contradictory to itself, as hereafter,
Chap. 3.. 2. (2) Some of our Opponents assert, Gods permission of sin to be
altogether inefficacious, yea idle and unactive: but others allow it an
efficace, and energie for the limiting, directing, and ordering of sinful acts
to their proper ends; albeit not about the act itself; which I conceive no
better than a modest contradiction: for how can Gods permission limit, direct,
and order sinful acts, but by influencing the very act itself materially
considered? See more of this, Chap. 5.. 6.

5. Our Adversaries also differ greatly among themselves about 5. The nature of
sin.
the Nature of sin, its formal Reason, etc. Some, and those of no small repute
among our selves, hold sin, as to its formal reason, to be a positive real
Being: which indeed is most agreeable to their Hypothesis touching acts
intrinsecally evil, which they deny to be as to their substrate matter or
entitative act from God. I must confess this opinion would carry somewhat of
probability with it, if we could with the Manichees hold two first Principes
or Causes, one of good, the other of evil; but for us that assert but one first
Cause of al create positive Beings, I cannot imagine how any can maintain this
Hypothesis of the positivitie of sin, without making God the Author of sin, or
making man's corrupt will independent, and so the first cause of a real positive
act. Therefore Strangius, lib. 1. cap. 13. to avoid these black consequences
strongly argues, with the Orthodoxe, that the formal reason of sin consistes in
privation. But withal we are here to note, that this Hypothesis utterly
overthrows his other Hypothesis touching acts intrinsecally evil, which he
denies to be from God as to their substrate matter; of which more hereafter,
Chap. 5.. 5.

There are other points of moment wherein our Antagonists differ among
themselves, as well as from us; namely, touching the natural or moral liberty
of the will, natural impossibility and possibility, Gods decretive and
approbative will, of which before Chap. 1. And indeed we need no way wonder,
that our Adversaries thus differ among themselves, sithat their Hypothesis is
liable to so many inconsistences and contradictions: for how is it possible,
that they should agree among themselves, when as their principal Hypothesis is
so disagreeing from itself? But more of this when we come to the demonstrative
part, Chap. 5.

. 3. We proceed now to show, Wherein we differ from those of difnew
the new method, Strangius, Baronius, Le Blanc, and others, about Gods concurse
to the substrate matter of sin. Immediately on the breaking up of the Synod of
Dort, wherein the Antitheses and sentiments of the Arminians were so strongly
and fully refuted, there sprang up some Divines, who gave their assent and
consent to the Canons of the said Synod, but yet contrived a new method,
specially as to universal Grace, Reprobation, and Gods concurse to the
substrate matter of sin, in order to a coalition with the Arminian party, as we
shall hereafter demonstrate. And the principal Agent, who undertook the new
modelling this last head, was Strangius; which he has copiosely treated of,
according to the new method, in his Book, De Voluntate and Actionibus Dei circa
peccatum: whose sentiments we are to examine in what follows; but at present we
shall only lay down in several Propositions wherein we differ from him, and
those who follow his method in the stating Gods Concurse to the matter of sin.
We assert,

1. Prop. God has an absolute efficacious Decree about the substrate 1. As to
Gods Decrees.
matter or entitative act of al sin. This Proposition Strangius, lib. 3. cap. 2.
page 547. grants to be true in althings but sin; specially the first sin, and
such acts as are intrinsecally evil: which sufficiently proves our Proposition;
for we say and are ready to demonstrate, that the substrate matter or entitative
act whereto sin is annexed, is not in itself or its natural entitie sinful, but
naturally good. What there is of sin annexed to it arises from its moral
estimation and relation to the Law of God violated thereby: in which regard we
peremptorily deny that it is from God. Yea Strangius, lib. 3. cap. 4. page
569. grants, That God is the cause of the act, though he does not absolutely
predestine or decree the same: and then to that objection of Alvarez, That the
Divine preordination and eternal predefinition extendes itself to al those
things unto which the causalitie and efficience of God extendes, he replies,
That God decrees althings either absolutely or respectively. But this is a very
poor Pelagian evasion: for respective or conditional Decrees are every way
unbecoming the Divine perfections of God, as our Divines, particularly Davenant
Animadvers: against Hoard, page 226. have proved against the Arminians. Lastly,
Strangius, lib. 3. cap. 5. p. 576. denies, That God decrees al sins, specially
the first sin: which we shall in its place endeavor to prove, with the solution
of his objections against it. Hence,

2. Prop. The Decree of God gives futurition to the substrate matter 2. The
Futurition of sin.
or material entitative act whereunto sin is annexed. The Antithesis hereto is
defended by Strangius, lib. 3. cap. 5. page 585. where he affirms, That it is
not repugnant to the nature of God, or of the thing itself, that something be
future, which God has not predefined. So c. 9. p. 628. he denies, that God has
decreed al futures, namely the fall of Adam, or the sin against the Holy Ghost.
This Proposition is also violently impugned by Le Blanc, de Concord. Libert.
Hum. par. 1. these. 55, etc. But specially I can no way approve of what Twisse
does in many places assert, That the Decree of God and his will is the sole and
only cause of the futurition of every event. And he instanceth in the fall of
Adam and the Angels. His Arguments against the futurition of the substrate
matter of sin from the Decree of God, we shall examine in what follows, Chap. 5..
1.

3. Prop. The permissive Decree of God about sin is not idle but efficacious.
3. Gods permissive Decree.
This Proposition is opposed by Strangius, l. 3. c. 2. p. 556. Neither do we
grant, what some affirm, that the permissive Decree of God, whereby he permits
al sin, is efficacious, albeit not effective. For so the fall of Adam and al
other sins should proceed from the efficace of the Divine Decree: which is an
hard saying. Neither is that less hard, which some affirm, that God has
absolutely decreed, that men do not more good than what they do, and omit not
more evil than what they omit. This Hypothesis is so far from being hard, as
that I conceive Strangius's opposite persuasion is most dangerous and
destructive of the Divine Decrees, as we shall show in its place. Yea Strangius
himself, in what follows, page 557. grants what Lombard, lib. 1. did. 47.
assertes, namely, that the will of God is always efficacious, etc.

4. Prop. Gods Prescience of things future, and particularly of acts 4. Gods
prescience of sin.
whereto sin is annexed is founded on his Decrees. Thus Hilarie, de Trin. lib.
9. What God decreed to do, those things he knows in his will. This sentence of
Hilarie Strangius, lib. 3. cap. 5. page 576. ownes as orthodox, but yet denies,
that the absolute Decree of God is the reason of knowing althings. So Le Blanc,
de Concord. Libert. par. 1. these. ^3. I see no reason, why we should deny unto
God the knowledge of those things which are freely future under a certain
condition, albeit in that condition there be not included a decree of
predetermining the free cause to this or that. But Scotus and his followers
fully espouse our Hypothesis, asserting, That God certainly knows al future
contingents, because his Divine Essence, which is the reason of knowing,
representes to the Divine Intellect the thing determinately future from the
determination of his own will. And then as to the prescience of sin, they hold,
That albeit God does not predefine sins as such, yet he predefines the
permission of sins, in which he knows them to be future. Which is orthodox, and
that which we shall demonstrate hereafter, Chap. 5.. 2.

5. Prop. It belongs to the Perfection of Gods will and providence to 5. Divine
Predetermination.
predefine and predetermine all the free acts of the will. This predefinition and
predetermination as to gratiose acts Strangius, lib. 2. c. 8. p. 188. and the
rest of the new Methodists, excepting Baronius, grant; but they deny it as to
the Fall of Adam and other acts intrinsecally evil. So Strangius, lib. 3. cap.
4. page 568. But if it be said, that God predefined and predetermined that Adam
should at that very time eat, abstracting from the object which he did eat of,
that cannot be. Then he gives his reasons, why God could not predefine and
predetermine Adam to the act of eating, abstracting it from the reference it
has to its object. And then he adds: Moreover we deny, that it belongs to the
Perfection of God or of Divine Providence, that he absolutely predefine al free
acts, and predetermin the Will unto them. The Arguments he urges for this his
Antithesis we shall endeavor to solve, and demonstrate our own hypothesis in its
due place, Chap. 6.. 1.

6. Prop. Gods predefinition of and predetermination to the substrate 6. Human
Liberty.
matter of sinful Acts destroys not their Liberty. Strangius and his Sectators
grant, That Predefinition and Predetermination destroys not that Liberty
which is essential to the Will, but only that which consistes in Indifference.
So Strangius, l. 3. c. 14. p. 681, 682, 683, 685, 686. and c. 16. p. 711. But
how frivolous this opinion is, and how unapt to serve the design for which it
was coined, we have already intimated, c. 1.. 3. and intend more fully to
demonstrate, Chap. 6.. 5.

7. Prop. Predefinition in the divine Decree and Predetermination 7. God not
the Author of Sin.
in time of those entitative Acts whereunto sin is annexed, do not make God the
Author of Sin. This is the principal point in controversy, the Antithesis
whereof is strongly urged, though weakly defended by our Opponents. Thus
Strangius, l. 3. c. 2. p. 548. But I judge it no way consentaneous to the
natural sanctity of God, that he will and decree sin to be, the vitiositie to
exist, and that he predefine such acts, whereunto the vitiositie is necessarily
annexed; specially the Fall of the evil Angels and our first Parents, from
whence al sins sprang. So c. 5. p. 579. Whether it be said from the permission,
or from the Decree of God permitting, or from the action of which God is the
cause, that sin is necessarily inferred, truly the necessity of sinning is
ascribed to God as the Author; namely because he decreed and caused that from
which sin necessarily follows. The like p. 587. Neither has God predetermined
the will of Adam to the very act of eating the forbidden fruit, which yet as to
its entitie is reduced to God as the first cause: neither was that act or its
vitiositie necessarily inferred from the permission of God. That this
Antithesis of Strangius and his Sectators is most false, and our Hypothesis
most true, it remains on us to demonstrate, Chap. 5.

Thus we have given the true and full state of our Controversy; which by reason
of the subtle evasions and subterfuges of our Adversaries lies under so much
obscurity and confusion: and indeed it is to me a deplorable case, and that
which argues men's diffidence of the merits of their cause, that they contend
with so much passionate vehemence for their own Phenomenon, and yet never
explicate the terms, or state the Question in controversy. I have thereby
given the Reader as well as my self the more trouble in this part of our
Province, that so what follows may be the more facile both for him and me.

CHAP. III. Scriptural Demonstrations of our Hypothesis.
Scriptural Demonstration, (1) That God is the first Cause of al natural
Actions and Things, Esa. 26. 12. Romans 11. 36. Ephesians. 1. 11. Psalm. 33. 15. Prove.
21. 1. Act. 17. 28. Jam. 4. 15. (2) That God does predetermine natural actions
to which sin is annexed. [1] Joseph's vendition, Genesis 45. 5, 7, 8. Genesis 50. 20.
Acts 7. 9. [2] The Crucifixion of Christ, Mat. 26. 24. Luke 22. 22. John 19.
10, 11. Acts 2. 23. and 4. 28. Our Adversaries Evasions taken off. (3) That God
makes use of wicked Instruments to punish his People, Esa. 10. 5, 6. Jer. 16.
16. Psalm. 105. 25. Job 1. 21. (4) God's immediate hand in the Act of Sin, 2 Samuel 12. 11. and 16. 22. 2* Sam. 16. 10, 11. and 24. 1. 1 Kings 11. 31, 37. and
12. 15, 24. 2 Kings 9. 3. and 10. 30. 1 Kings 22* 23. Rev. 17. 17. (5) Gods
efficacious permission of Sin, 1 Samuel 2. 25. Job 12. 16, 17, 20. (6) Gods
judicial hardening Sinners, Psalm. 81. 12. and 69. 22-27. Romans 11. 10. Esa. 6.
10. and 29. 10. and 19. 11- 14. and 44. 18, 19. and 60. 2. Romans 1. 28. 2 Thessalonians.
2. 11. The nature of Judicial Induration in six Propositions. (7) Gods ordering
Sin for his glory, Exodus 9. 14-16. Romans 9. 17, 18. Prove. 16. 4. Romans 9. 21,
22. 1 Pet. 2. 8.

HAving explicated the terms relating to and given the genuine state of our
Hypothesis, namely, That God does, by an efficacious power and influence, move
and predetermine men to al their natural actions, even such as have sin
appendent to them; we now proceed to the Demonstration hereof. And because al
demonstration must be grounded on some first principes, which give evidence,
firmitude and force thereto; and there are no proper principes of Faith and
Theology, but what are originally in the Scriptures, we are therefore to begin
our Demonstration Scriptural Demonstrations.
with Scriptural Arguments, which we shall reduce to these seven heads. (1) Such
Scriptures wherein it is universally affirmed, that God is the first Cause of
al natural actions and things, and more particularly of al even the most
contingent acts of man's Will. (2) Such Scriptures as directly demonstrate, That
God does predefine, predetermine, and foreordain such natural actions whereunto
sin is necessarily annexed. (3) Such Scriptures wherein God is said to make use
of wicked Instruments for the punishment of his People, in such a way wherein
they could not but contract guilt. (4) Such Scriptures as mention Gods own
immediate hand in those acts whereunto sin is appendent. (5) Such Scriptures as
mention Gods efficacious permission of some to sin. (6) Such Scriptures as
demonstrate Gods giving up some to judicial Occecation and Obduration. (7) Such
as clearly evince Gods ordering and disposing the Sins of men for his own
Glory.

. 1. We shall begin our Scriptural Demonstration with such 1. God the first
Cause of al natural Actions and Things.
Texts as universally affirm, That God is the first cause of al natural
Actions and Things; and more particularly, of al even the most contingent acts
of man's Will. 1. The Scriptures that speak God to be the first Cause of al
natural Actions and Things, are many and great: we shall mention some; as, Esa.
26. 12. Thou have wrought al our Esa. 26. 12.
works in us, or for us. This Text is urged by Strangius, p. 54. to prove Gods
immediate concurse to al actions of the creature, though it does in a more
peculiar manner regard the deliverance of the Church; wherein God predetermines
and overrules many actions of wicked men, which have much sin annexed to them.
Again, this universal prime Causalitie of God efficaciously influencing al
natural Acts and Effects is apparently expressed Romans Romans 11. 36.
11. 36. For of him, and through him, and to him are althings. Of him, as he
frames althings; By him, as he operates in and cooperates with althings; and
for him, as the final cause of althings. Thus Gods (...), multiforme energie,
as Cyril styles it, reaches al manner of Natural actions and effects: and if
so, then surely such natural entitative Actions as have sin annexed to them. Is
there any sin so intrinsecally evil, which has not some entitative act or
subject as the substrate matter thereof? And if althings are of God, and by him,
and for him, must not also the entitative act of sins intrinsecally evil be so?
Strangius, p. 342. replies thus: All that God works must tend to his Glory:
But what Glory redounds to God from those Actions of hatred of God,
blasphemy? etc. A strange reply indeed for a Divine to make. (1) Was there
not much Hatred of God, and Blasphemy in the crucifying of Christ? And yet was
there any action more conducing to the glory of God than this? Yea, (2) Does
not Strangius himself, and those of his party grant, that God directs,
disposes, and overrules al sinful acts, even such as are intrinsecally evil,
so as that they conduce to his glory? And how can God direct, dispose, and
overruled them, unless he concur, yea predetermine the Will to the entitative
act? Again Strangius, p. 561. answers to this Text thus: None that is orthodoxe
ever extended these words to sins; as if sins were of God, by God, and for him,
etc. [1] Neither do we extend these words to sins formally considered: [2] But
must we thence necessarily conclude, that the entitative act, whereto sin is
only accidentally appendent, is not from God, nor by him, nor for him? Yea, [3]
May we not say with Divines, that sin formally considered, although it be not
of God and by him as an Efficient, yet it is for him, i. e. conducing to his
Glory, as wisely ordered and overruled contrary to the intent of the sinner?
Thus much Augustine once and again inculcates, as De Genes. ad liter. lib.
Imperfecto, cap. 5. Nam and vitiorum nostrorum non est auctor Deus, sed tamen
ordinator est.
For God is not the Author of our sins, yet he is the Ordinator of them, etc.
And thus much indeed Strangius, p. 860. confesses.

Another Text that evidently and invincibly demonstrates Gods efficacious
predeterminative Concurse to al natural as well as supernatural Actions and
Effects is, Ephesians. 1. 11. Who works althings Ephesians. 1. 11.
after the counsel of his own will. We find three particulars in this Text
which greatly conduce to explicate and demonstrate Gods efficacious Concurse to
al Actions, and particularly to the substrate matter of sinful acts. (1) We may
consider the object, althings, i. e. whatever is clothed with the Notion and
Idea of real positive entitie: althings must be here taken distributively into
al singulars: there is no Being, that partakes of real entitie but is wrought
by God. (2) Here is to be considered, the Act, (...), who works
energetically, or efficaciously: for (...) signifies to work with an invincible
efficace; and thence it is often joined with words denoting infinite power and
activitie, as before, c. 1.. 6. It notes here Gods efficacious predeterminative
Concurse, working in and with althings, according to their natural propensions.
Thence (3) follows the original principe of this predeterminative efficacious
operation, (...), according to the counsel of his own will. Which notes, that
Gods efficacious predeterminative will is the supreme and first cause of
althings: there is no executive power in God distinct from his Will: his
Concurse in regard of its active attingence is no more than his simple
volition: so that divine Predetermination is the same with divine
Predefinition, as we have largely demonstrated, Court Gent. P. 4. c. 7.. 3.
Whence also it follows, that Gods working althings according to the counsel of
his will, has one and the same Idea with his predetermining al actions and
effects, even such as have sin appendent to them. Strangius, p. 560. replies to
the Argument drawn from this Text thus: From this place nothing more can be
collected, than that God has decreed those things that he works: as it is
certain, that God has decreed nothing which he does not execute -- not that
God works sins, etc. [1] This Text speaks more than what Strangius allows it
to speak, namely, that God has not only decreed those things that he works,
but also that he works by his Decree, or omnipotent Volition: for we own no
other executive power in God but his divine Will, as Scotus, Bradwardine, and
some of the greatest Scholastic Theologues demonstrate. [2] Who says, that God
works Sins? surely none but Marcion or Manes, or such as hold Sin to be a
positive real Being. [3] But yet we do with the Orthodoxe affirm and prove
from this Scripture, that God works that entitative natural Act, whereunto
sin is appendent: for otherwise, how can he be said to work althings? Is this
good sense or Logic, to say, God works althings, not only according to their
generic or specific distribution, but also according to their distribution into
each singular, (for so the Syncategoreme Al is here taken) but yet he works
not al singular entities, namely the substrate matter of Sin? Does this amount
to less than a downright contradiction? He works althings, but yet does not
work althings? What Logic or wit of man can reconcile these Notions?

2. Unto our first Head we may also reduce such Scriptures, as in a more
particular manner mention Gods efficacious predeterminative concurse to al
human actions and effects, even such as are most contingent and dependent on
the ambulatory will of man. Thus Psalm. 33. 15. He fashioneth their hearts alike:
he considers Psalm. 33. 15.
al their works, (...), who fashioneth, forms, frames, as the Potter does
his clay: it notes not only, yea not so much the first Creation of the human
Soul, as its actual figments, frames, imaginations and thoughts: this is
evident from the scope and contexture of the words: for what is the Psalmists
intent and undertakement, but to demonstrate Gods infinite prescience, and its
perfect comprehension of all the figments, frames, thoughts, intentions, and
affections of the heart, as verse. 13, 14? And how does he prove this? Why,
because he fashioneth their hearts alike, i. e. puts all the first thoughts,
inclinations, intentions and movements of the heart into what form, frame, or
fashion he pleases. There is also a great Emphase and significance in that
term (...), which we render alike, but may be as properly rendered together, as
it is by the Latin simul; neither is it to be referred to the Verb frames,
but to the object Hearts: and so it notes an universalitie distributive into al
singulars, without the least exception of any. And then the sense will be; who
fashioneth, forms, or frames the hearts of al mankind in all their very first
motions, conceptions, imaginations, resolutions, end, interests, contrivements,
ebullitions, affections, prosecutions, and fruitions, or other actions
whatsoever. Whence he adds, He considers al their works: what works does he
mean? Surely not only the works and labors of men's hands, but also the
workings, movements, and figments of their hearts: and how can God consider
them, if he did not form, frame and fashion them? Yea, there yet lies a deeper
notion in the coherence of these parts; namely, that Gods forming, framing and
fashioning the hearts of al men is the ground and cause of his considering
their works: For how God can perfectly consider and know the works of men's
hearts, unless he be the former, framer, and fashioner of them al, as to their
real entitative acts, all the wit of man can never devise or make clear unto us.
So that Gods Science of Vision, or Prescience as to the figments of man's heart
arises from this, that God is the framer, former, and fashioner of men's hearts
and al their natural movements; which also implies his predefinition and
predetermination of man's heart and al its first motions, inclinations, and
affections. So then to form and sum up our Argument from this Text: Does God
indeed fashion, form and frame the hearts of al men in all their natural
motions, imaginations, and affections? And may we without apparent
contradiction to the light of this Text exclude the entitative acts of any
sins, though never so intrinsecally evil? What is this but to exclude the far
greatest part of human acts from being formed and framed by God? Or how can the
omniscient God consider all the works of men's hearts, if he be not the former
and fashioner of them al, as to their natural entitie? I must confess the
validity of this argument from Gods prescience is to me so firm and great, as
that should it be baffled, I see no way left, but to turn Socinian, and so to
deny the certainty of Gods prescience as to the contingent imaginations of
man's heart, which implies much Atheism.

Another Text that proves Gods efficacious and predeterminative Concurse as to
al human acts is Prove. 21. 1. The Kings heart is Prove. 21. 1.
in the hand of the Lord, as the rivers of water; he turns it whithersoever
he will. (1) He mentions the Kings heart, as the measure of al other men's;
because Kings generally have a greater Soveraintie and Dominion over their own
hearts, than other men: if any men's hearts may plead the privilege of exemtion
from Gods efficacious predeterminative Concurse, surely Kings may, specially
such as Solomon was, who obtained from God such an amplitude of Soul, and
self-Dominion: yet he grants, that the Kings heart was not exemted therefrom.
(2) By the Heart we must understand, according to the Hebraic mode, the whole
soul, and al its movements, imaginations, ratiocinations, contrivements,
purposes, and undertakements. (3) In the hand of the Lord: i. e. under his
efficacious predeterminative influxe or concurse. The Hand being the instrument
of our most potent operations, it is usually put in Scripture for the energetic,
potent and predeterminative Concurse of God: So Hab. 3. 4. He [i. e. Christ
whose Hab. 3. 4.
brightness was as the light] had horns, [i. e. beams, as (...) notes] coming
out of his hands [i. e. most potent will, the spring of al his efficacious
operations: whence it follows] and there was the hiding of his power, i. e. his
most potent efficacious predeterminative concurse lay hid in the beams
irradiated from his omnipotent hand or will. So Act. 11. 21. And the hand of the
Lord was with them, Act. 11. 21.
i. e. the efficacious predeterminative power of Divine Grace; the hand being
the instrument whereby man exertes and puts forth his power. So Solomon saying,
That the hearts of Kings are in the hand of God, it must be understood of Gods
puissant predeterminative Concurse, whereby he applies the heart to its acts,
conduces and guides it therein, and determines it as he pleases. So it
follows, (4) As the rivers of waters, he turns it whithersoever he will. How
easy is it by Aquaducts to turn waters this or that way as men please? And is
it not infinitely more facile for the wise omnipontent God, to turn the hearts
of men, and al their natural conceptions, products, and issues which way he
listes? All this may be evinced from Strangius's gloss on this Text, lib. 1.
cap. 9. page 50. where having given us the mention of Gods preserving and
directing the wills of men even in evil actions, he adds a third and more
special mode of Divine influence, whereby God does bend, impel, and incline
human wills which way he please, not by proper compulsion, but by sweet
inspiration and motion: For albeit God does never take away that liberty which
is essential to the will, yet he does at times, and when he please,
efficaciously move and impel the wills of men: and what Solomon predicates of
the Kings heart, Prove. 21. 1. that very same may, on a greater account, be
affirmed of the heart of every man. So Augustine, de Great. and Liber. Arbitr.
cap. 20. If the Scripture be diligently inspected, it shows, that not only the
good wills of men, but even the bad are so in the power of God, that where he
will and when he will, he causes them to be inclined, either to perform
benefits, or to inflict punishments, by a most secret, yet just judgment. So
again August. de Corrept. and Great. cap. 6. God has in his power the wills of
men, more than they themselves; without dout having most omnipotent power to
incline men's hearts where he pleases. What could be said more categorically
and positively to evince Gods efficacious and predeterminative Concurse to all the natural products and issues of man's heart, even such as have intrinsecal
evil, as they call it, appendent to them? Yea, Strangius, lib. 2. cap. 7. p.
182. grants, That God does sometimes efficaciously move and predetermine the
wills of men not only to supernatural works, but also to natural and civil, as
often as it seems good to him, to perform certain ends which he has preordained.
So Prove. 16. 7. He makes even his enemies to be at peace with him. And how so?
Surely by overruling their hearts even in the sinful movements. Thus he bent
and determined the revengeful mind of Esau to embrace his brother, Genesis 33. So
he gained the hearts of the Egyptians toward the Israelities, Exodus 11. 2, 3.
and 12. 35, 36. Thus God determined the will of Cyrus to bring back the
Captivity of the Jews, 2 Chronicles. 36. 22. Ezra 1. 1. Thus God bent the mind of
Darius and Artaxerxes to grant the Jews liberty for the rebuilding the Temple,
Ezra 6. 1, etc. and 7. 2. Neh. 2. 4. So God dealt with Jeremy's enemies, Jer.
15. 11. Al these predeterminations even in civil and natural actions are
allowed by Strangius: whence we argue, That it is impossible, but that God
should predetermine to the substrate matter of sinful actions: for all these
actions being exerted by wicked men, had nothing of moral or supernatural good
in them, albeit God made use of them for the succor of his people, yea they
were full of hatred against God.

To these Scriptures we may add, Act. 17. 28. For in him we Act. 17. 28.
live, and move, and have our being. Not only Being in general, and Life, which
implies more than simple being, but also al our movements or motions are from
God as the prime Motor: which Paul demonstrates out of one of their own Poets:
for we are also his offspring. As if he had said: Do not your own Poets tell
you, that we are the offspring of God? Is he not then the first Cause and
Motor of al our motions? Does not Aristotle, Phys. 8. also strongly
demonstrate, That al our natural motions must arise from one first immobile
Motor? And to whom does this Prerogative belong but to God? Must not then the
substrate matter of al sinful motions, even such as are intrinsecally evil, be
reduced unto God as the prime Motor?

I shall conclude this first Head of scriptural Arguments with Jam. 4. 15. For
that ye ought to say, If the Lord will, we shall live, Jam. 4. 15.
and do this or that. There were a number of Free-willers, who proudly
conceited, that they had an absolute and plenary dominion over their own wills
and actions; whom James rebukes, and tells them, they ought to say, If the Lord
will, etc. So that he plainly resolves all the acts of man's will into the will of
God, as the original Cause and Principe. But let us see how poorly Strangius
shifts off the force of this Argument, lib. 2. cap. 10. page 227. he says, Who
ever understood these words, if God will, i. e. if God predetermine my will to do
this or that? Then he adds his own gloss: But truly nothing more can be
understood by that condition, IF GOD WILL, than this, if God shall permit, or will
permit, as it is elsewhere explicated, Act. 16. 7. and 1 Cor. 16. 7. I must
confess I cannot but wonder, that a person of so great reason, and under so
many advantages and assistances from Divine Revelation, should satisfy himself
with so slender an evasion, which not only Reason and Scripture, but even Pagan
Philosophemes contradict. For (1) it is most evident, that James here, (as
Luke, Act. 16. 7. and Paul, 1 Cor. 16. 7.) speaks not of a mere permissive
will, but of an efficacious influential concurse, arising from the will of God,
which is the alone principe and spring of Divine concurse: for all actions both
natural, civil, and supernatural must be resolved into the will of God, as their
prime cause: so that If God will here, is the same with (...) elsewhere, if God
concur, if he assiste, if he by his efficacious predeterminative will, without
which we can do nothing, concur. And that this is the genuine mind of this Text
is most evident by the use of this phrase among the Ancients both Jews and
Pagans. Bensyra, that ancient Hebrew, Sent. moral. xi. thus speaks: Let man
never say he will do any thing, before he has prefaced this, If the Lord will,
i. e. assiste or concur, not permit. So among Pagans, Hom. Iliad. B. verse. 28.
(...), etc. The like Demosth. (...), If God will. But none speaks more fully to
this point than Plato, Alcibiad. page 135. where Alcibiades demanding, How he
ought to speak touching Divine Si Dii volunt, volentibus Diis, Cic. in Offic.
efficacious concurse, Socrates replies, (...), If God will: and in his Laches:
But I will do this and come to thee to morrow, (...), If God will. Whence it is
evident, that this formule of speech was ordinary even among the Heathens, as
well as Jews and Christians, noting not only a permissive or Directory, but
Decretory and predeterminative will. So the same Phrase must be understood, Act.
18. 21. If God will, and 1 Cor. 4. 19. If Act. 18. 21. 1 Cor. 4. 19.
the Lord will. Is it possible that these Phrases should be understood of a mere
permissive will? Do not al mankind need an efficacious concurse and
predeterminative will to conduct them in all their affairs? Again, (2) Gods
permissive will is either natural or moral: it cannot be meant of Gods natural
permissive will, because that regardes only sin, which there is no mention of in
these Textes, neither is it necessarily included. Neither can it be meant of
Gods moral permissive will, because that was already declared and manifest in
the Laws of God: for all moral permission belongs to Gods Legislative will
declared in his word. It remains therefore that this phrase, If God will, be
understood of Gods efficacious will, whereby al natural motions and so the
entitative acts of sin are predetermined.

. 2. I now descend to the Second Head of Scriptural Demonstrations, God does
predetermine natural actions to which sin is annexed.
namely, That God does predefine, predetermine, and foreordain such natural
actions whereunto sin is necessarily annexed. I shall mention only two Actions,
The Selling of Joseph, and the Crucifixion of our Lord, whereof the former was
but a Type of the later. 1. I shall begin with the Selling of Joseph, mentioned
Genesis 1 Arg. from Joseph's Vendition, Genesis 45. 5, 7, 8.
45. 5, 7, 8. Joseph says v. 5. Now therefore be not grieved, nor angry with
your selves, that ye sold me hither: for God did send me before you to
preservelife. Joseph here has a double aspect on his Brothers sin; the one
regards their hand in the sin, which he, out of a noble generous principe of
fraternal Love, passes by; the other regards the special hand of Divine
Providence in this their Sin, which he admires and adores, in that it by an
efficacious predeterminative Concurse brought so great a good out of so great
an evil; which no finite power could do: men may make good use of what is in it
self good, but who can bring so great good out of so great evil, but a God
omniscient and omnipotent? (1) Let us remarque their Sin in selling Joseph, and
of what a black Idea it was. [1] It sprang from Hatred, yea a deliberate rooted
hatred, as Genesis 37. 4. They hated him, and could not speak peaceably unto him.
Their hatred was grounded on his fathers love to him. Yea, [2] There was much
Envy and Indignation joined with their hatred, as v. 8. Shall thou indeed reign
over us? etc. whence v. 11. and his brethren envied him, etc. [3] There was in
like manner bloody Cruelty, yea intended Murder in this sin, as v. 20, 21, 22,
24. [4] There was also notorious Lying evident in this sin, v. 32, 33. [5] That
this sin was of a very crimson bloody guilt is evident by their own Convictions
and Confessions, when God began to awaken their Consciences, as it is
conjectured about fourteen years after, Genesis 42. 22. Behold his blood is
required! [6] By all which it is most evident, that this vendition or selling of
Joseph was a sin intrinsecally evil. For certainly if a sin of such bloody
Aggravations deserve not the name of intrinsecally evil, I know not what sin
does. Hence, (2) We are to demonstrate, that God did predefine and predetermine
Joseph's Brethren to the entitative act or substrate matter of this Sin. And this
Province we no way dout but to make good out of the Text, Genesis 45. 5, 7, 8.
compared with other Texts. [1] Joseph says, v. 5. 7. God did send me before
you to preserve life. (...), sent me forth, by his efficacious predeterminative
hand, which conducted me hither. The LXX. render it (...), which signifies, to
send forth with a mighty hand, as Captives into Liberty, Luke 4. 18. also, to
send forth with commands, authority and power, Mat. 10. 16. and 11. 10. as
elsewhere: again, to send forth executioners, Mat. 2. 16. lastly, to direct the
course of a Ship. In all these notions Gods efficacious predeterminative
concurse in sending Joseph into Egypt, is necessarily included. This also
appears [2] by what is added v. 5. God did send me before you to preserve life.
Note here, that God certainly and absolutely foresaw the Famine and Joseph's
being sold into Egypt, which he intended to turn for good, even for the
preservation of Jacobs Family and the Elect seed in him. Now how could God
foresee this absolutely and infallibly, but in the predefinition or fore
ordainment of his own Will? And Strangius grants this, that where there is
Predefinition, there also follows Predetermination: Must we not then conclude,
that this Vendition of Joseph was both predefined and predetermined by God?
Yea, [3] Joseph adds v. 8. So now it was not you that sent me hither, but God,
etc. You see here Joseph makes a threefold mention of Gods overruling hand in
this their sin, and that for their as well as his good: And he tells them
plainly, that it was not they that sent him, but God. As if he had said, You
indeed sent me to be a poor Vassal in Egypt; but did not God send me to be a
Ruler over Egypt? You sent me to destroy me, but why did God send me, but to
preserve both you and me? You sent me out of Hatred and Malice; but did not God
send me out of great Love and pity both to me and you? And what could be
spoken more emphatically to illustrate and demonstrate Gods efficacious
predeterminative concurse to the substrate matter of sin than this, It was not
you that sent me hither, but God? Why does he use this manner of speech? was it
not they that sold him? Yes; but because they were but as mere passive
Instruments or Midwifes to bring forth that great predeterminative Decree, and
to subserve Divine Providence in the ushering into Egypt Joseph their temporal
Savior, and the Type of our Eternal Savior, therefore the entitative action is
wholly taken off from them, (albeit the moral vitiositie of it is imputable to
none but them) and ascribed unto God, as the principal Agent. This manner of
speech is Hebraic, and must be understood, (1) (...), it was not you, i. e. not
only you: you were but the Instruments of Divine Gubernation and
Predetermination. (2) (...), emphatically, it was not you, i. e. if we consider
the act of selling me in its natural entitative Idea, as the substrate matter of
Divine Providence, ye had the least hand in it, it was not you, but God that
sent me hither. We find the like Hebraisme, 1 Samuel 8. 7. Not thee but me, i. e.
principally and comparatively. So that it is most evident that Joseph ascribes
the whole Act considered entitatively and naturally unto Gods efficacious
predeterminative and principal concurse and conduct, whereof they were but the
Instruments; albeit, if we consider the act morally, as to its obliquitie, so
it Non refert in Deum peccatum fratrum, sed transitum suum in Aegyptum. Erasm.
was wholly theirs, not Gods: it is not his brethrens sin morally considered,
but the entitative act that he refers to God. [4] That this is the genuine mind
of Joseph's words is evident from other Scriptures. So Genesis 50. 20. But as for
you, ye thought evil against me, but God meant it for good, etc. Here we have
their moral evil separated from Gods natural and moral good in and by the
Vendition of Joseph. Their Act proceeding from hatred, envy, and attended with
Murder, was intrinsecally evil, and designed nothing but evil against Joseph:
but the same Act considered physically and entitatively as proceeding from the
efficacious predeterminative conduct of God, was naturally good; and as it
tended to the designed exaltation of Joseph, and rendered him a temporal and
typical Savior of Israel, so it was morally good. The aggravation of their Sin,
and efficace of Gods predeterminative Concurse may be both greatly illustrated
by an inspection into the native import of the Hebraic (...), used here to note
their malitiose plotted evil, and Gods plotted predeterminative concurse in and
about the same act. (1) He says, Ye thought evil against me, (...), ye
plotted, contrived evil against me. (...) properly signifies to excogitate,
deliberate, consult, compute, calculate, contrive, reason. It is often used to
signify plotted, inachinated evil, as Psalm. 10. 2. The same word is used to
note Gods determinate counsel and will about the entitative act of their Sin;
but God meant it unto Good, (...), i. e. from al Eternity contrived and
predetermined it for good. Their plotted contrived evil, was counter-plotted
and contrived by God for good: Which notes that it was not a thing casual or
accidental, but foreordained and predetermined by God, according to the
determinate counsel of his will. The like may be deduced from Stephens words,
Act. 7. 9. And the Patriarchs moved with envy, Act. 7* 9*
sold Joseph into Egypt; but God was with him. Here we have their Moral evil
aggravated from its original Spring, and Gods natural and moral good in the
same Act. How was God with him? Not only in his passive Vendition, or passing
into Egypt and continuance there, as some would persuade us; but also in the
very Active Vendition, or act of selling him to the Ishmaelites, considered
naturally and entitatively: for God was with Joseph in causing the Ishmaelites
to pass by at that very time, in determining his brethrens wills to take him out
of the pit and sell him to the Ishmaelites, and inclining or determining these
to accept the bargain. In sum, God was with Joseph by an efficacious
predeterminative conduct, determining every circumstance of this Vendition
naturally considered.

I am not ignorant what Responses or Answers are framed by The Objections
against Joseph's Vendition answered.
the Jesuits, Arminians, and New Methodists against our Argument deduced from
this Vendition of Joseph: Molina, (the Head of the Jesuits as to their
Pelagian Dogmes) de Concord. q. 19. Disp. 2. tells us, that this Vendition of
Joseph is ascribed to God, as merely permitting it. The like Ruiz, de Volunt.
disp. 18. Sect. 2. and Lessius, de Efficac. Great. Sect. 2. and others.
Arminius, de Efficac. Provid. Disput. 11, 12. over and above this mere
Permission of the Jesuits, adds Gods oblation, direction, and determination
of Arguments and Occasions, yea some kind of concurse in this Vendition of
Joseph, etc. But al these frivolous subterfuges to avoid the force of this Text
are incomparably well blown off by Rutherford, de Divina Provident. c. 16. p.
192, etc. I shall therefore only give the solution of such as have been coined
since by the New Methodists, which indeed are much the same with those of the
Jesuits and Arminians. A Divine of name among us, gives this reply to our
Argument, That the Venditio activa, the active Vendition of Joseph was not
willed by God, but only passiva, the passive, or effect and consequents; which
are only mentioned in the Text. I must confess this answer gives me some
amazement, but no difficulty to answer it. For, (1) What this Reverend Author
means by his passive Vendition I cannot divine: I know that in the Aristotelean
Schools Action and Passion have been really distinguished and so distributed
into two distinct Predicaments; but I think this imaginary distinction is now
generally hissed out of the Schools by all awakened Disputants; yea, how many of
those, who are zelose Sectators of Aristotle in other points, have subscribed
the banishment of this distinction? So that to distinguish active Vendition
from passive, what is it but to distinguish one and the same Act from it self?
But (2) grant there be such a distinction in Nature, yet is it not most
apparent, that it can have no place here? Does not Joseph ascribe the very
active Vendition or action of Selling him, unto God? Is it not said v. 8. So
now, it was not you that sent me hither, but God? Can this, with any tolerable
sense be applied to the passive Vendition, or the effects and consequents of
the selling Joseph? Must it not necessarily be understood of the very same
active Vendition, which, considered in its natural entitative act, they were
the Instruments of, but God the principal Agent and Conductor? (3) This
Distinction of Active and Passive Vendition was not indeed forged by the
Reverend Author before mentioned, but taken up from Bellarmine, who de Amiss.
Great. l. 12. c. 11. distinguishes the Action of selling Joseph and crucifying
Christ from the Passion, and grants, that God willed and decreed the Passion,
but not the Action, which inferred the Passion; and because the said Author has
so great an estime for Strangius, whom he generally follows in this point, I
shall give him the answer which Strangius, l. 4. c. 11. p. 772. gives to this
distinction of Bellarmine, thus: However it be, in the Text there are two
things to be observed, [1] That Joseph there cannot distinguish the Action from
the Passion, as if the Passion were to be ascribed to God, not the Action: for
it is plainly said and repeted in the Text, according to the Hebraic verity,
Genesis 45. 5, 7, 8. that God sent him. [2] Thence c. 50. 20. he does plainly
distinguish between the good work of God and their evil in the same matter, from
the diversity of the Intention: You designed evil against me, but God designed
that for good -- Then he adds: Here the various operation and provident
administration of God is seen, that he might bring to pass what he had
presignified before by the dreams of Joseph, etc. And p. 773. he subjoins:
There is no incommoditie if it be said, that God elected and also procured the
Vendition of Joseph as a means to the end foreordained by him, and that may be
understood not only of passive Vendition, but also of active, which truly can
never be separated. For if God willed that Joseph be sold, he willed, that some
one should sell him, and that no other should sell him but his brethren. For
neither was that Vendition a thing in it self evil, if it be considered apart
from the vitiositie and defect of the second Causes. Then he concludes: The
Permission of God here was not otiose, but an efficacious operation in the
tradition of Joseph, subministration of occasions, out of the concurse which he
made both by the direction of al circumstances, and moderation of the will of
his brethren, that their purpose of killing him being changed, they might do no
other than what God intended. And the same efficace and force of Divine
providence shines brightly in working, disposing, and directing al other things
that relate to this History. This Answer of Strangius to Bellarmine I have
been the more prolixe in reciting, (1) because the forementioned Divine of so
much repute among us makes great use of this distinction touching active and
passive vendition or crucifixion, endeavoring thereby to solve al our Arguments
from the vendition of Joseph and crucifixion of Christ; whereas Strangius, one
of his own party, rejectes it as spurious and frivolous. (2) Because the
concessions of Strangius in this his Answer to Bellarmine do indeed give a
mortal wound to his own cause: For if the active vendition of Joseph was from
Gods efficacious providence and will decreeing the same, then actions
intrinsecally evil are as to their entitative act or substrate matter naturally
considered from God, albeit their moral vitiositie is to be ascribed to no one
but the sinner.

2. I now pass on to demonstrate, That God does predefine, or 2. Arg. from the
Crucifixion of Christ.
foreordain and predetermine such natural actions whereunto sin is necessarily
annexed, from the Crucifixion of Christ. And the Textes that confirm this part
of our demonstration are so great and illustrious, that I cannot but greatly
wonder how any Christian, that assentes to the veracitie and authority of
Scripture, can evade the evidence thereof, or dissent from our Hypothesis. (1)
I shall take the Scriptures as they lie in order, and begin with Mat. Mat. 26.
24.
26. 24. The Son of man goes, as it is written of him; but woe unto that man by
whom the Son of man is betrayed. [1] Note here that Christ's death was
infallibly predicted or foretold: so much, as it is written of him, necessarily
infers. Now how could the death of Christ be infallibly predicted, if it were
not predefined and preordained by God? Yea, if the death of Christ were not
necessarily predefined and preordained by God, how could God infallibly
foreknow the salvation of any one elect soul, which necessarily dependes on the
death of Christ? So that it remains most certain, that the death of Christ was
predefined and foreordained by God, and that in every the least circumstance
thereof: the whole series of intentions and actions in Judas's betraying his
Lord, and the Jews malitiose and bloody crucifying of him was predefined and
preordained by God. [2] Hence also it follows, that all the bloody
contrivements, barbarous and cruel executions, with all the particular
circumstances in the betraying and crucifying of Christ were predetermined by
God. Thus much reason strongly evinceth, and Strangius with others grant, that
eternal predefinition or predestination, and predetermination in time are
parallel and commensurate each to other: whatever is eternally predefined or
preordained by God is predetermined by him in time. Indeed if we will take the
true Idea of Divine Predetermination, what is it but the eternal act of the
Divine will, whereby God predefined or preordained al persons, actions, and
effects to existe in such or such a period of time? So that, to speak truth,
predefinition and predetermination differ not really and originally as to their
active principe; albeit we may, out of compliance with the Schools, put this
difference between them, by understanding Predefinition, Preordination, or
Predestination of the eternal active Decree of God, and Predetermination of the
execution of the Decree, or its passive Attingence in regard of the effect. But
take predetermination in what sense you please, it must necessarily be applied
to the Crucifixion of Christ and all the most minute circumstances thereof. And
so much indeed is implied in those words, The Son of man goes, (...). Where?
or to what? Surely to die, and how? without al peradventure, as efficaciously
conducted, moved, yea predetermined by the Divine will. There was not the least
step he took to the Cross, the least intention, action, or circumstance in the
whole complexe or systeme of Christ's Crucifixion, as well active as passive, but
was predetermined by God. But [3] note also hence, that this Crucifixion of
Christ, although it were predefined and predetermined by God, yet this Divine
predefinition and predetermination did not at al diminish the guilt of those
bloody instruments, who had their hands embrued in that immaculate blood. This
is particularly specified in those words: but woe unto that man by whom the Son
of man is betrayed. Judas neither did nor could justly plead Divine
preordination or predetermination, as an excuse for his treachery. No, his own
conscience told him, that he had voluntarily, yea malitiosely betrayed innocent
blood: neither could the Jews plead the same, in as much as their own malitiose
and bloody wills were as deeply engaged in this Crucifixion, as if there had
been no predetermination, which does no way diminish the liberty of the will.
Hence, [4] it is most evident, that this Crucifixion of our Lord was a sin
intrinsecally evil. For was there not a world of enmity and hatred of God in
it? Did there not much blasphemy attend their wicked deeds? Is not the
shedding innocent blood, yea the blood of God, as it is styled, Act. 20. 28. a
sin intrinsecally evil? And does not this sufficiently demonstrate, that the
substrate matter of an act intrinsecally evil is predefined and predetermined by
God?

(2) Another Text that evidently demonstrates the Crucifixion of Christ to be
predefined and predetermined by God, is Luke 22. Luke 22. 22.
22. And truly the Son of man goes, as it was determined; but woe unto that man
by whom he is betrayed. This Text is the same, and refers to the same passage
with that before of Matthew, yet with this difference; Matthew says, As it is
written of him; but Luke, As it was determined; which puts it out of al dout,
that Christ's crucifixion was determined or predetermined by God. And for the
more full explication and demonstration hereof, we are to remarque, that Luke
being a Physician, was most intimely versed in the Greek Tongue: for a
Physician in those days was of little repute, if not well acquainted with the
Grecanic Monuments relating to medicine. And thence we find, even by the
confession of some Atheistic spirits, that Lukes Greek both in this his
Evangel, as also in the Acts of the Apostles, is most pure, elegant, and
significant. And among other this notion here used gives us a specimen of his
accurate skill in the Greek. For (...) here is a philosophic notion, of much use
among the Grecians to signify that which is defined, determined,
predetermined, predestined, decreed, constituted, and ordained by an
unalterable Decree, as we have more copiosely demonstrated from the genuine
import of (...), cap. 1.. 6. Of determinative Concurse. And that (...) here may
be properly rendered predetermined, is evident from the use of (...), Act. 4.
28. To do whatsoever thine hand and thy counsel Act. 4. 28.
determined before to be done. Where it is in the Greek (...), predetermined.
And indeed Determination and Predetermination as to the Divine concurse admit
not so much as any mental distinction, according to the confession of some
Adversaries. The Syriac, Luke 22. 22. renders it, (...), it is defined. (...)
in the O. T. signifies to expand, to make clear, to explicate more fully and
clearly by the distribution of al parts, etc. Whence it is rendered by the LXX.
Ezech. 37. 12 (...), to separate: and Number. 15. 34* (...), to decree: which
sense agrees with the mind of our Lord, Luke 22. 22. So that it is most
evident, that this notion (...) here considered in itself, and in all its
synonymies, notes the Crucifixion of Christ in all its circumstances both active
and passive, to be determined, predetermined, and foreordained by God. Yea, we
have for this a great concession of Strangius, lib. 3. cap. 13. page 665. But
that the works of Christ, specially his Passion and voluntary death were
absolutely predetermined by God is manifest from Scripture, Luke 22. 22. Act.
2. 23. and 4. 28. Whence I argue, that if the death and crucifixion of Christ
were absolutely predetermined by God, then the substrate matter of a sinful act,
yea of an act intrinsecally evil was absolutely predetermined by God. How poor
and evanid the evasions of Strangius and others are as to this Text we shall
examine and lay open when we have explicated the following Texts, which
demonstrate the same.

(3) I pass on to the Conference between Pilate and our Lord, Joh. 19. 10.
Then says Pilate unto him, Know thou not, that I Joh. 19. 10, 11*
have power to crucify thee, and have power to release thee? Pilate having
power of life and death committed to him by Tiberius Caesar, he threatens our
Lord therewith: and what reply does our Lord make? verse. 11. Jesus answered:
Thou could have no power at al against me, except it were given thee from
above: therefore he that has delivered me unto thee has the greater sin. We
find several particulars here very remarquable for the demonstration of our
Hypothesis. [1] Whereas Pilate boasted of his power to crucify, or release our
Lord, he tells him plainly, that he could have no power against him, except it
were given him from above. The power that Pilate pretendes unto was legal
Authority backed with an executive power committed to him: so much (...) notes:
our Lord does not deny his claim of legal Authority, as commissionated by
Caesar; but yet confines and restrains the execution thereof to Gods
predeterminative Concurse. As if our Lord had said: I grant thy power and
authority of life and death as Cesars Commissioner and Minister; yet know, thou
could not execute this thy power on me, unless the providential concurrence
of my Father did efficaciously move and predetermine thee thereto. [2] Observe
here the double negative, (...), which among the Grecians implies a more
vehement negation. As if he had said: Alas! thou have not the least umbrage or
shadow of power to execute against me, but what is dispensed forth unto thee by
the efficacious predeterminative hand or providential concurse of my Father;
whose wise and omnipotent hand has put in every bitter ingredient into the Cup
I am to drink of. [3] Neither does all this excuse Judas, the Jews, or Pilate as
to their guilt in crucifying the Lord of Glory: no, Gods predeterminative
concurse is so far from excusing these Traitors, as that it aggravates their
sin. So it follows: Therefore he that has delivered me unto thee has the
greater sin. Therefore, (...), for this very reason, because my Father has
left that traitorous wretch Judas to be hurried, by his own avaricious lust,
into this horrid Treason of betraying me, and predetermined thine execution
thereof, his guilt is the greater. [4] Lastly, hence also we may argue, that
this sin of crucifying our Lord was intrinsecally evil. So much that last
clause, has the greater sin, implies. As if he had said: Oh! what a world of
treason, murder, blasphemy, hatred of God and al manner of sin is involved in
the womb of this sin?

(4) We find the predefinition and predetermination of Christ's crucifixion more
expressly explicated and demonstrated, Act. 2. Act. 2. 23.
23. Him, being delivered by the determinate counsel, and foreknowledge of God,
ye have taken, and by wicked hands have crucified and slain. What could more
plainly be said for the predefinition and predetermination of our Lords
crucifixion, as to its substrate entitative act, and yet for the aggravation of
their sin in acting their parts in this bloody Tragedy? Let us examine the
particulars. [1] It Is said, he was delivered by the determinate counsel, (...).
The Greek (...) primarily notes counsel with a decree, or a decreed fixed
counsel, from (...) the cast of an arrow, or the like. Whence the formal act of
the will is termed (...), which is but a derivation from (...). But Luke, to
express Peter's mind more significantly, adds, (...), by that determinate,
defined, firm, immutable, decretive, predeterminative counsel of God, as the
word importes, according to our former explication of it, on Luke 22. 22.
whereto this Text seems to answer. (...) is by Glossaries made synonymous to
(...), to ordain; (...), to preordain; (...), to constitute; (...), to
establish; (...), to predetermine. Among the LXX. it answers to (...), to
termine, determine, predetermine, as Number. 34. 6. Josh. 13. 27. and elsewhere.
By which it is most evident, that it is here by Luke used to denote Gods
efficacious, absolute, predeterminative counsel and purpose touching the
crucifixion of our Lord. [2] Then he adds: (...), and foreknowlege of God.
Note here, that Gods foreknowlege or Prescience of Christ's crucifixion, and so
by consequence of the sin annexed thereto, follows the predetermination or
determined counsel of his own will: God therefore foreknew, because in his
determined counsel he foreordained or decreed the Passion of our Lord. And yet
[3] this necessary predefinition and predetermination of Gods will with his
infallible prescience touching the crucifixion of Christ, did no way lessen
their sin: for adds Peter, Him ye have taken, and by wicked hands have
crucified and slain. Albeit he was predefined and predetermined by God to go
(as himself declares, Luke 22. 22.) to the Cross, yet they, by their wicked
bloody hands, took him as voluntarily, yea with as much bloudthirsty
greediness, as if there had been no predefinition and predetermination of the
act by God. Lo! what a plain conciliation is here of efficacious predefinition
and predeterminative concurse of the substrate matter of sin, with the voluntary
and free election of the sinner as to his part in this bloody Tragedy. [4]
Note that phrase, (...), by wicked hands, i. e. sacrilegious, bloody,
God-murdering hands. Which certainly denotes their sin to be of the first
magnitude, and intrinsecally evil. And that this Text fully demonstrates the
predefinition of Christ's Passion, Strangius, lib. 3. cap. 3. page 563. freely
acknowlegeth. So lib. 4. cap. 2. page 768. he says, That it is not to be
douted, but that the whole humiliation and passion of Christ flowed from the
decree and will of God; and what God from Eternity decreed, the same he
executes and procures in time. But what his reply is to the force of our
argument from this absolute Decree of God we shall examine anon.

(5) I come now to that other parallel Text, which fully demonstrates the
predefinition and predetermination of Christ's crucifixion by God, Act. 4. 28.
For to do whatsoever thine hand and thy Act. 4. 28.
counsel determined before to be done. He speaks of the gathering together both
of Jews and Gentiles for the crucifying the Son of God, as verse. 26, 27. he
says, They did nothing but what Gods hand and counsel predetermined to be
done. [1] By the counsel of God we may here understand his Decretive counsel,
or the counsel and purpose of his will, whereby he predefined and predetermined
the crucifixion of our Lord. Thus some term Gods efficacious predeterminative
Concurse, quoad attingentiam activam, as to active attingence, which is nothing
else but the very will of God, according to his eternal counsel predetermining
and foreordaining al future events, as Scotus and others assure us. Thus (...)
must be understood, Act. 2. 23. as before. Whence [2] by the Hand of God, we
are to understand his most efficacious and potent execution of his decretive
counsel, predetermining the whole substrate matter, or al entitative acts and
circumstances in the crucifixion of our Lord, which they term his
predeterminative Concurse, quoad attingentiam passivam, as to passive
attingence. For man's hand being the instrument of operation, whereby he puts
forth his power and force, it is thence applied to God, to denote his most
potent execution of his Decrees in predetermining and applying al second causes
to their act, as before. 1. of this Chapter. We find a very good gloss hereon
in Strangius, lib. 4. cap. 2. page 769. In the other place, says he, Act. 4.
28. there is mention made not only of the counsel of God, but also of the hand
of God; that counsel may be referred to the Decree, and hand to the execution.
To decree is presupposed the wise counsel of God, and to execute the power of
the Divine right hand. And here truly what God has decreed in his counsel, he
also by his hand has executed: For in this whole work the hand of God has
appeared, howbeit many wicked hands did concur. So the Hand of God here is
opposed to wicked hands, Act. 2. 23. The hand, I say, of God appeared in
moderating, ordaining, governing, and directing all the machinations, endeavors,
sayings and deeds of his enemies, that they should will and perfect that very
same thing which he willed, though with a far different counsel and purpose,
whatever their malice were. Lo! what a full testimony is here? who would not
think Strangius orthodox in this point, did he acquiesce here? But there lies a
Snake in the grass: he elsewhere starts off from what he here grants, as
hereafter. Only this note, that he here, as elsewhere, strongly impugnes and
opposes that passive crucifixion which Bellarmine and a reverend Divine of
repute among us only ascribe to God: for he expressly says, That the very act
of crucifixion was executed by the hand of God; yea all the machinations,
endeavors, sayings, and deeds of Christ's enemies, moderated, ordained,
governed, directed by the same Divine hand. What could be said more for the
predefinition and predetermination of the substrate matter of an act
intrinsecally evil? But I pass on to the act of Divine predetermination
expressed in the Text before us by (...) What the genuine import of (...) is,
we have shown, Chap. 1.. 6. In the general it signifies to predefine,
predestine, predetermine: it is applied in the N. T. both to persons and things,
and these both good and evil. It is here limited and confined to Gods
predefining, predestining, and predetermining the substrate matter or entitative
act of Christ's crucifixion, which was a sin of the first magnitude, containing
in its pregnant womb blasphemy, hatred of God, murder, yea God-killing
bloudguiltinesse. The Syriac turns it by (...), to seal, constitute, and make
firm any thing. And surely if the blessed God ever sealed, constituted, made
firm, or predetermined any thing in the world, it was the crucifixion of his
Son, on which the salvation of al his Elect dependes. Augustine renders (...)
here praedestinavit, he has predestined. So the old Latin renders it, 1 Cor. 2.
7. And Strangius, lib. 3. cap. 5. page 582. is herein (as in some other points)
very ingenuous and free in confessing, That Augustine does use the words to
predestine, predefine, determine, constitute, ordain, and dispose,
indifferently, so as they may be extended to althings which God has decreed.
So that it is clear by his own confession, that the crucifixion of Christ taken
actively was predestined, predefined, constituted, foreordained, and
predetermined by God. Whence by a paritie of reason we demonstrate our
Hypothesis, that the substrate matter or entitative act of that, whereunto
intrinsecal sin is necessarily annexed, is predefined and predetermined by God.
The inference and conclusion to me is so natural and evident, that I cannot see
how the wit of man can evade it.

But let us examine what subterfuges and evasions our Opponents Our Adversary*
evasions examined.
frame to evade the force and evidence this second Head touching Christ's
Crucifixion gives to our Hypothesis.

1. Bellarmine and from him a reverend Divine of name among 1. Evasion touching
active and passive Crucifixion.
our selves reply, That the passive crucifixion of Christ was from God, not
the active: i. e. Christ's Passion and the effects of it was from God, but not
the actions of those that crucified him. (1) How poor and shiftlesse this shift
is we have already demonstrated on the vendition of Joseph from Genesis 45. 5, 7,
8. (2) But more particularly as to this Head, I cannot but wonder how any, who
have not quite banished Reason and Religion from their minds, can satisfy
themselves with such jejune notions and evasions: Did not the blessed God
predefine and predetermine the very act of Christ's crucifixion? how else could
he certainly foreknow that he would be crucified? Or what certain prescience
could he have of the salvation of any one elect soul, which wholly dependes on
the death of Christ? Again, what fine-spun nonsense is this, God predetermined
the Passion of Christ's crucifixion, but not the Action? as if God predetermined
that Christ should be kissed and so betrayed by Judas, but not that Judas
should kiss and betray Christ: again, that Christ should be mocked,
blasphemed, scourged, etc. by the Soldiers and Jews, but that these should not
mock, blaspheme, scourge, etc. Christ. Lastly, that the Spear should be thrust
into the side of Christ, but yet not that any thrust it in. What Logic, Reason,
or sense is this? Do not the very Aristoteleans grant us, That action and
passion are not really, but only modally distinct? As the way from Athens to
Thebes, and so back again from Thebes to Athens, is but one and the same way,
diversified only from its relation to different terms; so the same flux as it
procedes from the Agent is called Action, and as it termines on the patient,
Passion. Is it possible then that God should predetermine or concur to the
passion and not to the action of crucifixion? But enough of this, which is so
strongly refuted by Strangius, lib. 4. cap. 11. page 772.

2. Another reverend Divine of estime among us for parts and 2. Evasion.
piety evades thus: [Christs crucifixion] was a thing which Gods hand and
counsel had determined before to be done, Act. 4. 28. i. e. foreseeing wicked
hands would be promt and ready for this tragic enterprise, his sovereign power
and wise counsel concurred with his foreknowledge, so only, and not with less
latitude, to define or determine the bounds and limits of that malignitie, than
to let it proceed to this execution. And to deliver him up (not by any formal
resignation or surrender, as we well know, but permitting him) thereunto. Though
the same phrase of delivering him, has elsewhere another notion of assigning
or appointing him to be a propitiation for the sins of men, by dying; which was
done by mutual agreement between both the parties, etc. This reply of this
learned pious Divine (so far as I can penetrate and understand it, which seems
involved under much obscurity) may be resolved into the following parts. (1)
He makes Gods prescience or foreseeing the crucifixion of Christ by wicked
hands, to proceed or go before the concurrence and determination of Gods wise
counsel or predefinition thereof. Wherein he falls in with the Jesuits middle
Science, making Gods prescience precedent to his predefinition or decree, and
so dependent only on the mutable will of men as to the act of sin; which he
elsewhere seems to intimate: whereas the Scripture, which he refers to, Act. 2.
23. makes the foreknowledge of Christ's crucifixion subsequent to the
predifinition of his determinate Counsel or Decree. And certainly all the wit of
man summed up in one cannot conceive or demonstrate, how God should have a
certain prescience of Christ's crucifixion, which dependes wholly on the
contingent uncertain will of man, and not on the determinate counsel of his own
will. (2) He makes Gods determinate counsel or hand only to determine the bounds
and limits of that malignitie, etc. As if the bounding and limiting of the
malignitie, and not the substrate matter or act itself entitatively considered
were from God. Whereas the Text says categorically, That the hand and counsel
of God predefined and predetermined whatever those wicked hands of theirs
executed. (3) He gives us a new Gloss or Paraphrase on that phrase delivering
him, Act. 2. 23. as if it implied only an assigning or appointing him to be a
propitiation, etc. But how little this gloss will accord with the sense of
these Texts is evident. For that assigning and appointing him to be a
propitiation was immanent and eternal in the Divine Decrees, but the delivering
him here is meant of his being delivered into the hands of those that crucified
him, and that according to the determinate counsel of God.

3. We come now to the more plausible subterfuges of Strangius, Strangius' s
Evasions.
whereby he endeavors to evade the evidence of those Texts, which mention Gods
predetermining the crucifixion of our Lord. He answers, lib. 3. cap. 4. page
573. thus: The occision and crucifixion of Christ, also the kind of death were
from God: and as they were from God, they were good and greatly gloriose, and
properly the means to procure our salvation: and God is deservedly judged the
Cause and Author of them, Who by his determinate counsel and precognition
delivered his Son to them, whom with wicked hands they killed on the cross,
Act. 2. 23. Here truly in the same work the good action of God is distinguished
from their evil action: therefore their wickedness and malice was not from
God; neither was it willed or predefined by God, who cannot be said to be the
Cause and Author of any sin. Therefore speaking absolutely, the occision of
Christ was not sin; (otherwise God should be the Author of sin:) as to kill a
man is not sin. And truly if God had commanded men to kill Christ, and they out
of conscience to that command had obeyed God, they had not sinned. But to
prosecute Christ out of hatred and il-wil is intrinsecally evil, neither can
that be any way well done, or commanded by God.

Observe here (1) he grants that the crucifixion of Christ, Answer.
with all its natural circumstances entitatively considered were from God, as
the God of nature, and so naturally good: yea, that they were morally good and
greatly gloriose as means to procure our salvation; and therefore God is
deservedly judged the cause and author of them, as Act. 2. 23. And (2) we deny
with him, that the wickedness and malice of those acts was from God. (3) He
also grants, That the occision or killing of Christ considered absolutely was
not sin. Whereunto we retort, That neither the hatred of Christ considered
absolutely without relation to its object is sin. But, (4) he concludes: But to
prosecute Christ out of hatred and il-wil is intrinsecally evil, etc. Whence we
argue, That the crucifying of Christ was a sin intrinsecally evil, and yet as
to its substrate matter and entitative acts from God. For did not the Jews
prosecute Christ out of hatred and malice, yea malice blown up to the sin
against the Holy Ghost in some of them? And was not, in this good work of
crucifixion, the good action of God, and the evil action of the Jews the same
as to the substrate matter or natural entitative act? This pincheth Strangius
closely, and therefore he seems to make the natural entitative act of God
distinct from the natural entitative act of the wicked Jews: For he says, Here
truly in the same work the good action of God is distinguished from their evil
action; and therefore their wickedness and malice was not from God. Here we
grant, [1] his consequence or conclusion, That their malice was not from God.
[2] We thus far also grant his Antecedent, That the good action of God,
considered both naturally and morally, was distinguished from their evil action
considered formally and morally: for the malice and vitiositie which formalised
the action as theirs, is no way imputable to Gods act considered either
naturally or morally. [3] But yet we still avouch, and no way dout but to
demonstrate in its place, that in the crucifixion of Christ the act of the
wicked Jews considered materially, naturally, and entitatively was one and the
same with Gods act: So much al these Texts clearly evince; so much also reason
dictates: For if there were two acts, the one primarily, yea only from the
wicked instruments, the other from God the prime Efficient, then how could they
be said to be the instruments of Gods Efficience? Must we not then also suppose
two Crucifixions, one from God, and the other from the Jews? What a world of
absurdities would follow this Hypothesis, That the action of God in the
Crucifixion of Christ considered entitatively, materially, and naturally, was
really distinct from the action of the Instruments considered entitatively,
materially, and naturally? But to conclude, we find an excellent solution to al
these evasions and subterfuges in Augustine, Epist. 48. ad Vincentium, Quum
Pater tradiderit Filium, and Christus Corpus suum, and Judas Dominum, cur in
hac traditione Deus est justus and homo reus, nisi quia in re una quam
fecerunt, causa non est una ob quam fecerunt. August. Epist, 48. ad Vinc.
thus: When the Father delivered his Son, and Christ his own Body, and Judas
his Lord, why in this Tradition is God just and man guilty, but because in one
and the same thing which they did, the cause was not one and the same. A
solution sufficient to satisfy any sober mind: Wherein note, (1) That the act
of Tradition and so of crucifying Christ, was one and the same entitatively and
physically considered both in regard of God and the sinner. (2) That the
difference sprang from the Causes: God delivered his Son to Death, thereby to
bring about the greatest good that Sinners could wisn for, their Salvation; but
Judas and the malitiose Jews delivered the Lord of Glory to death, with wicked
hands, out of an avaricious humor, malice, etc. Hence, (3) The Action was most
just and gloriose on Gods part, but most unjust and wicked on the Sinners part.
This answer of Augustine is so great, that it might serve to answer all the
objections against our Hypothesis, were not men bent to cavil against the truth.

. 3. I come now to a third Head of Scriptural Arguments, namely such, wherein
God is said to make use of wicked Instruments for the punishing or afflicting
his people in such a way, wherein the Instruments could not but contract guilt.
I shall divide this Head into two members; (1) Such Scriptures, wherein God is
said to make use of wicked Instruments for the punishing his sinful people. (2)
Such as mention Gods afflicting his righteous People by sinful Instruments.

1. We shall begin with such Scriptures wherein God is said to 1. Gods punishing
his sinful People by wicked Instruments.
make use of wicked Instruments for the punishment of his sinful people. So
Esa. 10. 5, 6. O Assyrian, the rod of mine anger, I will send him against an
hypocritical Nation. The Assyrian is sent by God as his rod to punish his
sinful people; and every stroke of this rod was Esa. 10. 5, 6, 7.
from God; his hand guiding, ordering, and actuating the rod in all its motions.
And yet, how much sin was there committed on the Assyrians part in punishing
Israel? How little did he intend to serve God herein? were not Pride and
Ambition the main springs of his action? Thence it is added v. 7. Howbeit he
means not so, neither does his heart think so, etc. whence v. 12. God
threatens to punish him for his sin. So that it is evident, this sending of the
Assyrian by God, mentioned v. 6. cannot be meant of any legal permission or
commission given him by God, but of the secret efficacious predeterminative
concurse and Providence of God, ordering what should come to pass. So Jer. 16.
16. Behold, Jerem. 16. 16.
I will send for many fishers, says the Lord, and they shall fish them, and
after will I send for many hunters, and they shall hunt them from every mountain,
etc. Note, (1) That these words contain not a promise but threat, begun v. 9.
This is evident from v. 17. (2) By Fishers and Hunters in the general we must
understand enemies to the Jews. To fish and to hunt, is to take and destroy.
War has a great ressemblance with fishing and hunting, which is a kind of war
against bestes; as war is a kind of fishing and hunting of men: whence Nimrod
the first Warrier after the Flood, is styled Genesis 10. 9. a mighty hunter, i. e.
of men. Ay, but more particularly, (3) Who are these fishers? Why, as it is
supposed, the Egyptians, who are called Fishers, Esa. 19. 8. (4) And who are
the Hunters? The Babylonians, as it is generally said: But, (5) Who is it that
sends for these Fishers and Hunters? It is God, I will send, etc. (6) Why does
God send for them? To punish his sinful People, and that by those very Nations
in whom they had so much confided, and to whom they had so much conformed, as
is intimated v. 17. And what more just, than that Professors should be punished
by such Instruments, as have been the ground of their confidence, and the
exemplars of their sins? (7) How does God send for these Fishers and Hunters?
Surely, not by any legal Act or formal Commission given to them, but
providentially, by exciting their minds, applying their wills, and drawing
forth, yea determining the same to the substrate matter or material entitative
act of afflicting the Jews, whereunto there was much malice, murder, and hatred
of God and his People annexed. Yea, God did not only send Nebuchadnezar to
afflict Israel, but also give him a reward for his service; as Jerem. 27. 6.
And now have I given al these lands into the hands of Nebuchadnezar the King of
Babylon, my servant. God gives him the neighbor Nations as a reward for his
service against Israel. The like Jer. 43. 10. Multitudes of Texts might be
added to show, how God makes use of wicked Instruments in the punishment of his
sinful people, and in a providential way efficaciously concurs to and
predetermines al their actions materially and naturally considered, and yet is
no way the Cause or Author of their sin.

2. To mention one or two Scriptures, which speak of Gods 2. Gods afflicting
his righteous Servants by wicked Instruments.
using wicked Instruments in afflicting his innocent People. So Job 1. God
makes use of the Sabeans, and Caldeans, yea of Satan himself, to afflict Job;
and yet he says, v. 21. The Lord takes away. He saw by faith Gods hand
moving, yea predetermining the hearts and hands of his adversaries to every act
of theirs materially Job 1. 21.
considered, albeit not to the vitiositie. So Psalm. 105. 25. Psalm. 105. 25.
He turned their heart to hate his people, to deal subtilely with his servants.
Here it is said expressly, that God turned, i. e. efficaciously moved and
predetermined the hearts of the Egyptians to hate his People Israel. God's
turning their hearts does expressly and formally denote his efficacious
predeterminative concurse to the entitative material natural act of hatred,
albeit not to the vitiositie and malignitie thereof. So much also the next
clause importes, and to deal subtilely with his servants, i. e. al their
subtle strategems, machinations, and politic contrivements for the extirpation
of Israel, by putting to death their Males, oppressing them with hard labors,
etc. al these were, as to their substrate matter and physic entitative acts from
God, who turned their hearts thereto: And what could be more nakedly and
evidently said to demonstrate Gods efficacious predeterminative concurse to the
substrate matter of sin?

Let us now see what our Opponents reply to these Scriptures and our Arguments
drawn thence. Strangius, l. 4. c. 4. p. 791. evades the force of this last
Text thus: What is said Psalm. 105. 25. that God turned their hearts to hate his
people, it must be understood, that God did it not by perverting the hearts of
the Egyptians, but by doing good to his people, whence the Egyptians took
occasion of hatred. (1) We say not that God perverted the hearts of the
Egyptians; that is the commun odiose consequence which our Adversaries impose on
us. But, (2) We avouch, that God did more than give occasion to the Egyptians
of hating, by his doing good to his people. Is not this a strange Comment, God
turned their heart to hate his people, i. e. gave occasion of hatred, by doing
good unto his people? Does not Gods turning the heart in Scripture Phraseologie
always import his effica^ predeterminative concurse in applying the will to its
act? (...) it is said, Prove. 21. 1. God turns the heart whithersoever he w^,
is it not meant of an efficacious concurse? Do not also the following words,
Psalm. 105. 25. to deal subtilely with his servants, clearly implie an
efficacious act of God upon their hearts, predetermining them to their act?
Certainly such Comments are very poor evasions to elude such clear Texts. As
for the other Texts, Strangius's general answer p. 774, 775. is, That God is
the Cause of the act in those sins, but not of the pravitie of the Instruments,
etc. And what do we say or desire more? But yet there lies a sting in this very
concession of his: for he adds, p. 774. That God has decreed nothing by his
Will of good pleasure, but what he approves as Good. i. e. God has not
absolutely decreed to permit sin, because he does not approve of it. Wherein
note, [1] How he does, with the Pelagians and Arminians, confound Gods
Decretive Will, with his Approbative complacential Will. [2] We deny not but God
approves of al his own Acts; but the Question is touching objects, Whether God
approves of al objects which by his Decretive Will he decrees to permit? This we
peremptorily deny, and no way dout but to make good our denial in its place.

. 4. Another Head of Arguments, contains such Scriptures as 4. Gods immediate
hand in the Acts of sin.
mention Gods own immediate hand in those Acts whereunto sin is appendent. We
begin with 2 Samuel 12. 11. where God tells David by Nathan, that for his folly
committed with Vriah's wife, and 2 Samuel 12. 11.
murder, Behold, I will raise up evil against thee out of thine own house, and I
will take thy wives before thine eyes, and give them unto thy neighbor, etc.
This threat we find fulfilled, 2 Samuel 16. 22. And Absalom 2 Samuel 16. 22.
went in unto his Fathers Concubines in the sight of al Israel. What could be
more plainly and distinctly expressed to demonstrate Gods immediate concurse to
that entitative act of Absalom's Sin? Here Strangius, l. 4. c. 4. p. 789.
acknowledges, (1) That Absalom's Incest in violating his fathers bed is by God
owned as his own Fact. But, (2) then he answers, that this was acknowledged for
the reason abovementioned, namely, by reason of Gods efficacious Gubernation,
Moderation, and Direction, which he afforded, according to the modes already
explicated, about the sinful Wills of Absalom and Achitophel, and their actions
in this wickedness; which fact is related 2 Samuel 16. 20, etc. For this is
usual, that the effect, which arises from two causes, whereof the one is
effective, and the other directive, be ascribed to both, but in a different
respect, etc. This is the commun answer, which he and his Sectators give to
such Scriptures, which speak Gods immediate hand in the entitative acts of
sin; let us therefore a little examine the force of this answer.

(1) Take notice, that he allows Gods Gubernation, Moderation and Direction of
the Act whereto sin is annexed, but not the production of the act. This is
evident by the Conclusion, wherein he makes the Sinner to be the effective
cause, but God the directive only. But I reply, how can God efficaciously
Govern, Moderate, and Direct the Act, unless he be also the effective Cause
thereof? Take his own instance, the sinful wills of Absalom and Achitophel, how
is it possible, that God should efficaciously govern and direct those immanent
acts of their sinful wills, but by influencing their wills, and efficaciously
predetermining them to act? If God did, as he grants, efficaciously govern,
moderate, and direct their sinful wills in those immanent acts of Lust,
certainly he must necessarily produce those acts. (2) Neither will this answer
at al solve the Difficulty: for suppose we grant, that God does only
efficaciously govern, moderate, and direct the sinful act, not produce the
entitative matter thereof, yet this efficacious directive influence does as much
make God the Author of sin, as our effective predeterminative concurse. For
Gods efficacious Moderation and Direction of the sinful act, denotes his
efficacious Preservation of the act, which is as sinful as the effection or
production of the Act. But more of this hereafter, Chap. 5, 6.

Another Scripture which speaks Gods immediate predeterminative Shimei' s
cursing David, how from God. 2 Samuel 16. 10, 11.
concurse in the entitative act of Sin, is 2 Samuel 16. 10. where David says of
Shimei, That the Lord said unto him, Curse David. And v. 11. Let him curse; for
the Lord has bidden him. Now the force of this argument dependes on the
explication of this word or command of God to Shimei, which must be here taken
either morally, for a divine precept and injunction, or physicly for an
efficacious Concurse and influence. (1) That it cannot be here taken morally
for a preceptive word, is most evident; because had God commanded Shimei to
curse David, he had been the moral cause and so the Author of his sin. (2)
Therefore it remains, that it be here taken only physicly, for Gods efficacious
Concurse secretly and powerfully inclining and applying Shimei's will to the
entitative act of this cursing. And in this sense the Word of God is frequently
taken in Scripture, namely, for his efficacious predeterminative concurse, in
the Creation, Conservation, and Gubernation of things.

Now what does Strangius reply to this? Why, l. 4. c. 4. p. 786. he says,
That Shimei's Cursings being intrinsecally evil, we may not say, that God did
move or impel him thereto in a proper manner of speech, neither that Shimei was
the Instrument of God in these actions, as they were determined to such an
object; but only as directed by God to his just judgments: and that most
certain direction of God, with the administration of Circumstances and
Occasions was as a Precept. In which Response note, (1) That he grants, that
Shimei his cursing was an action intrinsecally evil: which is a great
concession, and will clearly overthrow his own Hypothesis, and prove ours, That
God does predetermine the will to the substrate matter of actions intrinsecally
evil. For if Shimei's Cursing was an action intrinsecally evil, then surely
such also was the Vendition of Joseph and the Crucifixion of our Lord, which
were both as to their entitative acts predetermined by God. But (2) he denies,
that Shimei was the Instrument of God in these actions, as determined to such
an object. In the last clause of this Antithesis lies the spirit and force of
al his objections against predetermination to the substrate matter of sin; which
we intend more fully to examine Chap. 6.. 1. at present, we say, [1] That
Shimei was not the instrument of any moral but physic influence from God: the
precept or bidding here specified was not moral but physic and real: God did
not morally command Shimei to curse David, but physicly and naturally incline
him to the entitative act of Cursing him; which was as a Precept: this
Strangius grants in the close as to Gods direction. [2] Hence if we consider
Shimei's cursing as physicly determined to such an object, it was not morally
evil but good, and so from God: It Is true, as it was morally determined by
Shimei the moral Agent to its object David, so it was intrinsecally evil, but
as it was physicly or naturally determined by God, for the punishment of David,
so it was both naturally and morally good and from God. (3) He places the
whole of Gods Influence to this act, in directing his Actions to his just
judgments, etc. To which I answer. [1] How could God direct these actions of
Shimei; specially, the immanent acts of his will, (which were the worst part of
his malediction) but by an efficacious predeterminative influence on his will
and its acts? [2] He grants, that this Direction of God was most certain and
efficacious: if so, then certainly predeterminative: and if the direction be
predeterminative, is not Gods concurse to the sinful act considered materially
and entitatively, predeterminative? [3] If Gods directive concurse be
predeterminative, as Strangius must by his concessions grant, will not those
ugly consequences which he lodes our Hypothesis with, be al retorted on him?
Did not Gods efficacious direction termine on Shimei's cursing as determined to
such an object, namely David? And was he not the Instrument of this efficacious
direction?

Baronius, Metaph. S. 8. Disp. 3. p. 158. answers this Text thus: To that
malediction of Shimei it is answered, That God commanded Shimei to curse David,
not by bending his will, but by opening to him the way to this evil, and by
shutting it to al other evils, i. e. by permitting him to act this only, whenas
he was ready for many other evils. A poor evasion indeed, and such as if
admitted would make the whole Scripture but as a Nose of Wax. (1) Does not
David say categoricly, that God bid, [i. e. not morally but physicly] Shimei to
curse? And what can this implie, but the bending his will to the substrate
matter, or entitative Act? (2) Can it be imagined, that David could mean only a
mere otiose and speculative permission, and not an active concurrence to the
act it self entitatively considered? (3) Does not Baronius confess, that God
opened to him the way to this evil? And if so, must he not then open Shimei's
heart to the matter of it? Did not the main act of malediction arise from his
will? And if that were not opened to the entitative act, would the way to this
evil have been ever opened?

Again, Gods immediate predeterminative hand in those acts, whereunto sin is
necessarily appendent, may be demonstrated from 2 Samuel 24. 1. And again the
anger of the Lord was kindled 2 Samuel 24. 1.
against Israel, and he moved David against them, to say, Go number Israel and
Judah. Here it is expressly said, that God moved David to number the people.
(...), and he moved or excited, i. e. efficaciously determined and applied his
will to the substrate matter of this command to number the people. Hence
Strangius, page 790. answers, (1) That the He here must be meant of Satan, who
is said, 1 Chronicles. 21. 1. to stir up David to number the people. And he cites
for this Comment Junius with others. But alas! what poor subterfuges will men
fly unto to avoid the force and evidence of Divine light? Does not Grammatic
construction, as well as the mind of the words utterly reject such a gloss? The
Particle He here is not a distinct Pronoun, as our English Version reads it,
but included in the Verb (...) which is by the Copulative joined to the former
part, and the anger of the Lord was kindled: so that if the passive, was
kindled, belongs to the Lords anger, then also must what follows, and he moved.
Neither is this sense aliene from other Scriptures: for 1 Samuel 26. 19. David
says, That God had 1 Samuel 26. 19.
stirred up Saul against him, i. e. efficaciously moved him to the entitative
act of persecuting David. Thence (2) Strangius fearing the ruinous downfall of
this refuge flies to another, thus: But if we follow the commun interpretation,
it appears, that the same fact is ascribed to God and Satan; and therefore it
must be on a different account: and here also the variety in the end and mode
makes the unspotted Justice of God to shine forth, and the malice of Satan and
pravitie of man to discover itself. For [1] the action of numbering the people
was not in itself evil. [2] Divines distinguish between tentation of probation
and seduction. [3] Here the sane things concur, which were before explicated of
the same sense, whereby God is said to incline to evil, namely the permission
and laxation of the reins to Satan, the oblation of occasions and irritaments,
impediments being removed, and the suspension of Divine Grace: which things
concurring with the pravitie of nature, sin necessarily follows.

(1) We grant, that the same fact is ascribed to God and Satan on different
accounts: God put the thought entitatively considered into David's heart, but
Satan stirred up his heart to the act of numbering the people; God in judgment
gave over David to this sin, that it should be at this time when God was angry
with Israel: There is a special providence of God even in the ebullitions of
lusts in the hearts of his own people. Thus also in the wicked; who put that
thought of murder considered materially into the heart of Esau, When my father
is dead I will slay my brother Jacob? Was it not from God? Whence came that
motion into the heart of Judas to betray Christ, with all the circumstances
materially considered referring thereto? were they not from God? Thus here, God
put the entitative thought of numbering the people into the heart of David,
albeit Satan stirred it up; and God was the Orderer, albeit Satan the Abettor
and in some sense the Author of it: for God is only the prime physic cause of
the natural entitie, but Satan the moral cause or Author of the vitiositie:
again, the concurse of God to the natural entitative act is immediate,
efficacious, and predeterminative, but Satan's concurse only mediate, objective,
and suasive, though with more or less degrees of moral efficacitie, as Ephesians. 2.
2. Again, (2) we grant, that the different ends and modes of operating make
Gods unspotted Justice and man's pravitie to shine forth. (3) We are glad, that
Strangius will grant, the action of numbering the people not to be in itself
evil. Whence, by a paritie of reason, we argue, That no action, though never so
intrinsecally evil, is in itself, i. e. as considered in its physic entitative
act, and according to its substrate matter, sinful: for certainly if David's
numbering the people, which was a sin attended with so much pride, vain-glorie,
and confidence in an arm of flesh, with other aggravations, which so greatly
provoked God, were not in itself evil, no other sin considered in its mere
entitative and physic act is such. Yea, I as yet see no reason why this sin of
David considered in its individual circumstances and moral relation to its
object and principes, may not be estimed a sin intrinsecally evil, as well as
Shimei's cursing David. But (4) Strangius's summary conclusion, That Gods
concurse to David's sin was only an idle permission, laxation of the reins to
Satan, and oblation of occasions, with suspension of Divine Grace, is very
contradictory both to the letter and mind of the Text, which says positively,
that God moved, or excited, and stirred up the mind of David, not morally, but
physicly, to the entitative act of numbering the people. Certainly, when the
Scripture speaks so categoricly and positively of Gods moving the will to its
act, to restrain such moving influences and causalitie, only to mere idle
permission, or objective oblation of occasions, or negative suspensions of
Divine Grace, what is this but to make the Scripture contradictory to itself,
or affirmation and negation applicable to the same words? How easily might an
Atheist hence take advantage to elude al Scripture!

But to pass on to other Texts, that clearly express Gods immediate
predeterminative concurse to the substrate matter of sinful acts. 1 Kings 11.
31. the Lord says, I will rend the kingdom 1 King. 11. 31, 37. and 12. 15, 24.
out of the hand of Solomon. So verse. 37. to Jeroboam, I will take thee and thou
shall reign, etc. Whence 1 Kings 12. 15. it is said, that the cause why
Rehoboam hearkened not unto the people, was from the Lord, that he might
perform his saying, etc. So verse. 24. God says expressly, The thing [i. e.
the revolt of Israel] is from me. So of Jehu, God says, 2 Kings 9. 3. I have
anointed thee 2 Kings 9. 3. and 10. 30.
King: and chap. 10. 30. Jehu is said to do unto the house of Ahab all that was
in Gods heart. From these Texts it is most evident, that the holy God assumes to
himself the production of such entitative natural acts, which had sin
necessarily appendent to them.

Now let us examine what response Strangius gives hereto: l. 4. c. 4. p. 793.
rejecting the answer of Bellarmine, (which to me is as good as his, yea not
really different) he answers, It is not unlikely but that Jeroboam and Jehu,
albeit in taking the Kingdom they sinned not as to the thing itself and
substance of the act, because instructed by Gods-command, yet in manner of
acting, as they were profane men, they variously sinned by mingling their own
ambition and depraved affections with the work of God. Thence he concludes,
That whatever their sins were, yet the justice of God sufficiently shines forth
in the whole of this Administration, because God used both the Kings and people
in this work only as instruments to execute his just judgments, etc.

To give a brief reply hereto, it is very evident, that all that Answer.
Strangius has given us in answer to these Texts, does but more confirm us in
the true sense we give of them. For (1) it is manifest, that Jeroboam and Jehu,
with the Revolters their Adherents, sinned not only in the mode or manner, but
in the very substance of their acts: For is not High treason against a lawful
King an act sinful as to its substance? And were not Rehoboam and Ahab both
lawful Kings? Was not Rehoboam Solomon's Son, whom God made King? It Is true,
Jeroboam and Jehu had private prophetic Instructions and Unctions, but yet
those gave them no real title before the people, but only secret intimations
what God would in his providence bring to pass. David had a promise of the
Kingdom and also Divine Unction; and yet he confesses, that God gave him no
actual title to the Kingdom in the eyes of men; but he still ownes Saul as his
Soverain King, and the Lords Anointed: and so ought Jeroboam and Jehu their
lawful Soverains, til God had given them a legal title before men. (2) But
suppose Jeroboam and Jehu's sin were only in the manner, not in the substance
of the act, yet certain it is, that the peoples sin, before God had declared
his soverain will to them, was high Treason, and so substantially evil. (3) Yea
further, grant that they al sinned but in the mode, not in the substance of
their acts, yet whether the act be substantially or modally only sinful, it
comes al to one in this case of Divine concurse and predetermination: For if
God concur to the substrate matter of acts modally sinful; why may he not as well
concur to the substrate matter of acts substantially sinful? Do not our
Adversaries hereby, according to their Principes, make God the Author of modal
sins? Or, is not the entitative act of modal and substantial sins the same as
to kind, namely a real physic or natural good? and therefore if God concur to
the one, why not also to the other? Assuredly, the most refined Wits will never
find out a sufficient disparitie between acts modally and substantially sinful,
so as to allow God an efficacious concurse to the substrate matter of the one,
but not of the other. (4) Strangius grants in the close, That God used both
these Kings and their mutinous Adherents as instruments in this work, to
execute his just judgments, etc. Did he so indeed? Did he not then also make
use of their politic contrivements, ambitiose wills, and rebellious affections
as instruments in this work? And if so, did not God also move, excite, apply,
yea predetermine their wills to the substrate matter of their traitorous
rebellious designs and exploits? Do not al these consequences hang together in
an indissoluble chain of invict Reason? To close up these arguments with that
of Calvin, Institut. lib. 1. cap. 18.. 4. page 78. But now how it may be from
God, and governed by his secret providence, which men wickedly undertake, we
have an illustrious document in the Election of King Jeroboam; in which the
madness and temeritie of the people is severely condemned, because they
perverted the order established by God, and perfidiosely departed from the
family of David: and yet we know, that God would have him anointed; whence in
the words of Hosea, c. 8. 4. there appears a kind of repugnance; because God
there complains, That that Kingdom was erected contrary to his will and
knowledge; and yet c. 13. 11. he declares, That he gave Jeroboam to be King in
his wrath. How can these things agree? Thence he concludes, We see therefore
that God, who nilled the perfidie or treachery, yet, for another end, justly
willed the defection. And if God justly willed the defection, he also justly
moved and predetermined them to the substrate matter thereof; for
predetermination answers adequately to God predefinition or absolute volition,
as Strangius grants.

We add to the forecited Texts, 1 King. 22. 23. Now therefore 1 Kings 22. 23.
behold, the Lord has put a lying spirit in the mouth of al these thy
Prophets, and the Lord has spoken evil concerning thee. (1) The Lord has put,
(...), has given forth, delivered, or put. LXX. (...), has given. It notes
here an efficacious enthusiastic infusion, which of al kinds of
predetermination is most prevalent and irresistible. (2) Note also the sin, it
is a lying spirit, which certainly denotes an act intrinsecally evil: For is it
not a sin of the first magnitude to forge lying Prophecies, and impose them on
men as the Oracles of God, thereby to delude their souls into Hell? Such was the
case here: and yet, lo! it is said, that this very sin was, as to its substrate
matter or entitative act, from God: can any thing be spoken more nakedly and
clearly to evince and demonstrate the truth of our Hypothesis?

What does Strangius reply to this? His answer we find, lib. 4. cap. 4. page
788. We must note, that this oration from the Prophet Micaiah is parabolic, in
which various things are spoken (...), to our capacity; and in a Parable
althings are not to be cut open to the quick, but that only must be regarded,
which belongs to the scope of the Parable -- But in that God said, verse. 22. Go
forth and do so, it must be understood of Divine permission: for we use the
Imperative Mode not only in commanding, but also in permitting, or giving
license. And albeit there be mention made of a Divine precept, yet that is not
otherwise to be taken, than for the efficacious direction of God, for the
execution of his just judgment, that God delivered Ahab and his false Prophets
left by God to be deceived by Satan: of which Tradition afterward.

In answer hereto, (1) what Strangius means by his parabolic Oration is not
easy to divine. For we know, that al Parables consiste of two parts, the
Proposition and Reddition or moral: and what is there to be found of these in
this Text or Contexture? But this seems most like to Strangius's design, to
bring this Text to a parabolic image, thereby to elude its argumentative force:
for Divines grant, That parabolic or symbolic Theology is not argumentative,
further than the scope and mind of the Symbol reaches. That here is something
spoken (...), or according to human capacity I easily grant, but this does not
at al invalidate the argument, but rather confirm it. The wise God speaks
according to the manner of men, inquiring, examining, and expecting what the
issue would be, thereby the more fully to demonstrate his efficacious
predeterminative concurse to the substrate matter of this sinful act. (2) As for
the command of God, verse. 22. Go forth and do so, it can in no sober sense be
understood of a mere permission. For all permission is either moral or Physic
and natural: it cannot be meant of a moral permission, which Strangius seems to
incline unto: for if God had given the lying spirit a license, or legal
permission to deceive, how could he be vindicated from being the Author of the
sin? Is not lying a sin intrinsecally evil? Should not the holy God then,
according to this sense, be the Author of a sin intrinsecally evil? Neither can
it be meant of a mere speculative physic permission, as to the substrate matter:
for it is expressed in a term of the most active import, the Lord has put,
(...). This Divine precept therefore must denote an efficacious real influence,
such as predetermined those lying spirits to the substrate matter of their sin.
Yea, (3) is there not so much included in the last clause of Strangius's
reply, wherein he grants, This Divine precept to be taken for the efficacious
direction of God, for the execution of his just judgment? Now what is Gods
efficacious direction, but a part of his efficacious predeterminative concurse?
And how could God efficaciously direct these lying spirits in Ahabs false
Prophets, but by a predeterminative influence applying their minds and wills to
the substrate matter of their false prophetic inspirations?

I shall conclude this Head with Rev. 17. 17. where speaking of Rev. 17. 17.
the ten Horns, which gave their power to the Best, he says, God has put
into their hearts to fulfill his will, and to agree and give their kingdom unto
the Best. That phrase (...), is very emphatic, and notes not the infusion of
any vitiositie, but the efficacious predetermining their wills to the substrate
matter or entitative act, and permission of the vitiositie. (...) here exactly
answers to (...), 1 Kings 22. 23. which the LXX. render (...), and here
signifies, to cause the matter effectually to be brought about, as the same word
signifies, Mat. 12. 39. and 16. 4. and 24. 24. Mar. 13. 22. Act. 2. 19. and 14.
3. Romans 15. 5. Rev. 3. 4. and elsewhere. Whence it follows: (...), to fulfill
his will. (...) here signifies, powerfully to effect, or to perform with
singular efficace, in which sense it is used also Mat. 7. 22. and 13. 58. or to
effect with labor and industry, as it is used, Act. 9. 39. and 19. 24. Heb. 8.
5. (...) signifies properly a decree, sentence, or confirmed purpose; so here.
So that the mind of this Text seems this: The blessed God passed an absolute
irreversible decree or purpose, that the Adherents of Antichrist should give up
their Power and Kingdom to him; and thence he, by an efficacious concurse,
predetermined their wills to the substrate matter of those acts, whereunto sin
was annexed, for the glorifying of his Justice, on Antichrist, and his power
and mercy toward his afflicted Churches.

Now let us examine the subterfuges men shelter themselves under, to avoid the
force of this Text. A reverend Divine of name among us replies thus: (1) He
that reads Dr. Hammonds Exposition applying this to Alaricus sacking Rome,
with the effects, will see that the very subject is so dubious and dark, as not
fit to found such a Doctrine on. (2) It was the effect of sin that God willed,
and not the sin. (3) He is not said to put the sin into their hearts, -- but
only to do his pleasure, and agree to give up, etc. which he could most easily
do by putting many good and lawful thoughts into their hearts, which with their
own sins, would have that effect, which he willed: if a thief have a will to
rob, God may put it into his heart to go such or such a way, where a wicked man
to be punished will be in his way. Thus that reverend Divine.

In answer hereto we say, That whatever men's Comments may be, yet certainly the
subject is not so dark, but carries evidence enough with it, that it can be
meant of no other than of the ten horns, which give up their Kingdom to the
Antichristian Best. (2) Whereas he says, It was the effect of their sin that
God willed, and not the sin, this seems contradictory to the very letter as well
as to the mind of the words: for it is said, [1] God has put it into their
hearts, i. e. not only the effect, but the very material entitative act. Then
[2] to fulfill his will, i. e. his decree, so (...) here must note. Now God
decreed the very act, and not only the effect; and therefore his predetermining
concurse must also reach the very act: according to that great theologic Axiom
allowed by Strangius and others, That predetermination necessarily follows
predefinition, or Gods absolute Decree. Yea [3] it is said, That God put into
their hearts, not only to fulfill his will, but also to agree and give their
Kingdom to the Best. To agree, (...), unanimously to make one Edict or
Decree, and that at a Council Table. Which clearly denotes a deliberate, firm,
unanimous consent of giving up their power to the Best. And does not this
clearly speak the act of their sin, as well as the effect? And is not this act
as to its entitative matter, said to be put into their hearts by God? So much
also the next Verb (...) importes, namely their deliberate free donation of
their power, wherein the formalitie of their sin lies: and yet this very act,
as to its substrate matter, is said to be from God. Whence (3) whereas he says,
God is not said to put the sin into their hearts, -- but only to do his
pleasure and agree, etc. I easily grant, [1] That God did not put the sin
formally considered into their heart; for God temtes no one to sin; but yet he
put the material entitative act of the sin into their heart. For wherein lay
the malignitie of their sin, but in this, that they unanimously and peremtorily
agreed or decreed to give up their power to the Best? And is not this very
act, entitatively considered, said to be put into them by God? And was it not
also Gods pleasure or stated Decree, that they should thus agree? etc. And [2]
whereas he says, God could make them do his pleasure most easily, by putting
many good and lawful thoughts into their hearts, etc. is not this a very
slender evasion? what the least mention is there of any such thing in the Text?
Yea, is it not expressly said, That God put into their hearts to agree, etc?
And did not the poison of their sin lie in this malign bloody agreement?
Albeit the holy God be sufficiently vindicated from the least imputation of any
hand in this conspiracy, in that he decreed and produced only the entitative
act, not the vitiositie. [3] His instance or similitude from the Thief that
has a will to rob, etc. is extreme lame and nothing to the purpose; for it is
evidently said in the Text, that God not only concurred to the externe acts and
effects, but that he put it into their hearts to agree, etc. So that the very
will and consent, entitatively considered, was from God.

Let us now examine what Strangius replies to this, who lib. 4. cap. 10. page
855. acknowlegeth this Text Rev. 17. 17. to be meant of the ten horns giving
their power to the Best; but yet so as that if we understand the words (1) of
Gods putting it into their minds to agree, etc. then the sense must be no other
than, 2 These. 2. 11. Romans 1. 28. and like places, which speak of Gods
delivering men up to a reprobate mind, and sending the efficace of error, that
they might serve Antichrist. And here the distinction must always concur, when
in the same action sin and punishment concur, that not men's sins, but Gods
judgments and punishments must be ascribed to God. In this sense God is said
to excite, impel, and incline to sin. Before we pass on to Strangius's second
answer, let us a little examine this. [1] He grants, that God judicially may
and does concur to sin, yea excite, impel, and incline men to it. And does not
this fully overthrow his own Hypothesis and confirm ours? For if God in
judgment impel, excite, and incline men to one sin, as a punishment of
another, is he not then as much the Author of sin in this way, as in ours? [2]
How does God judicially punish one sin by another, but, to use his own words,
by delivering such up to a reprobate mind and the efficace of error? And if so,
then must not the substrate acts of such judicial dereliction be from God? Of
this hereafter,. 6.

But (2) I pass on to his second answer, whereon he seems to lay the most
weight, though indeed most feeble: But, says he, because those words, Rev. 17.
17. are immediately subjoined to verse. 16. and are connected therewith by the
rational Particle (...), which points out the reason of that which next
follows, namely, that those ten Kings having changed their opinion, should
destroy the Whore and Antichrist, it seems to me more commodious, if in that
verse. 17. there be a reason given of this famous change, that they who were
before the friends and vassals of Antichrist, should be afterward enemies and
adversaries to him, namely, because God has put this into their heart. And the
first words of verse. 17. sufficiently accord to this Exposition -- But what is
subjoined, That they might give their Kingdom to the Best, until the word of
God should be consummate, I should think ought to be expounded negatively, etc.
Thus Strangius.

A strange comment indeed! let us a little inquire into it. (1) How infirm is
his argument from the rational particle (...), to make what follows, the
fulfilling of Gods will, to refer only to the destroying of Antichrist? whereas
the particle (...) seems rather to refer to the whole verse, and more
particularly to the last clause, until the Word of God shall be fulfilled; and
so it notes, that God put it into their hearts to fulfill his Will, [1] In
agreeing to give their Kingdom to the Best, and [2] When the words of God were
fulfilled, i. e. Antichrists reign expired, then to hate the Whore, etc. And
this makes the whole contexture of the words natural and evident. So that v.
17. is not only a reason of the change, mentioned v. 16. but also an account of
the whole series of their actions both whiles friends to, and enemies against
Antichrist. (2) As for what is subjoined v. 17. That they might give their
Kingdom to the Best, I cannot but admire with what shadow of reason Strangius
can understand this negatively, as if they should not give their Kingdom to the
Best: certainly if such glosses should be admitted, we might easily find in
Scripture subterfuges for the worst Heresies and Immoralities? Why may not the
most profane debauched wretch, when he is pressed with those Commands, Thou
shall not commit adultery, Thou shall not kill, etc. reply, that these
Scriptures must not be taken negatively but affirmatively, Thou shall commit
adultery, etc? But Strangius saw full well, that the affirmative sense of those
words, That they might give their Kingdom to the Best, would quite subvert
his forced sense of the foregoing words, and therefore he saw no way left, but
to secure himself by reducing this later affirmative clause to a negative,
though contrary to the express letter and mind of the words. But (3) being
after al his glosses sensible of the infirmity and invaliditie of this
response, he p. 856. flies again to his old refuge, telling us, That if any
shall think this exposition of the last member not sufficient, but that beyond
it there must be also signified, that God did put it into their hearts to give
their Kingdom to the Best, I have no mind to contend about this matter, sithat
the sense is sufficiently sane, which ever way the words be understood. In evil
works God is not the cause of the moral evil, but of the substrate act and
punishment, or Judgment which is annected to the sin; but in good works, not
only of the substrate act, but also of the moral Bonitie, etc. Who of us denies
this? would our Adversaries but stick here, how soon would our Controversy be
ended? But here lies the sting, even in this plausible concession, Strangius
with the rest would fain persuade us, that there are some acts of sin so
intrinsecally evil, as that you cannot separate the physic natural act from its
moral Vitiositie.

. 5. We descend now to such Scriptures as mention Gods Gods efficacious
Permission of Sin.
efficacious Permission of sin. The former Heads regard only the substrate
matter or entitative act of sin, but this sin in its formal nature. Our
Adversaries, the Pelagians, Jesuits, Arminians and Semi-Arminians or New
Methodists, al grant Gods permission of Sin, but only such as is otiose,
speculative, negative and naked, without any efficacious active Influence for
the production of its entitative act, or direction of it to its proper ends:
But the sacred Scriptures ascribe to God a positive, efficacious, directive,
and ordinative permission of sin, arising from his positive absolute volition
to permit it. So it is said of Eli's Sons, 1 Samuel 2. 25. They 1 Samuel 2. 25.
hearkened not to the voice of their father, because the Lord would slay them.
The conjunction (...) here is Causal, and resolves their sin into the
efficacious permissive Will of God: The Soverain Lord had, by an absolute
peremtorie decree, predetermined to leave the Sons of Eli to this sin of
Disobedience both against their Father and God, which should prove the cause of
their temporal and eternal ruin; and thence it is said, they hearkened not,
because the Lord would slay them: the will of God was not properly the cause of
their sin or slaughter, yet their sin was a consequent of Gods Will
efficaciously permitting it to be. I am not ignorant, that some of late have
endeavored to give the causal particle (...) a more soft, as they phrase it,
Version; and among these some make it conclusive, and so render it ideo,
idcirco, quapropter: others render it quamvis, as Turnovius; others otherwise:
But certainly our English Version, which renders it causally, because, seems
much more agreeable to the mind of the Words and all the ancient Versions: So
the LXX. who render the words thus, (...), because the Lord in willing willed
to destroy them. In willing willed, i. e. according to the Hebraic Idiome,
peremtorily, efficaciously, immutablely and absolutely willed. Thus also the
ancient Syriac and Arabic Versions, with some later, Munster, Pagnine, Arias
Montanus, Junius and Tremelius, Osiander, Piscator, Malvenda, with the Tigurine
and Belgic Versions; yea Castalio not excepted, render (...) causally, because,
according to our sense and interpretament.

Let us examine now what Strangius returns in answer to this Text, lib. 4. cap.
6. page 809, etc. He answers, (1) That the sons of Eli were, for their
flagitiose impieties, destined and devoted by God to ruin. (2) That the
punishment of death here mentioned, seems properly and directly to be
understood of temporal, not eternal. (3) That however it be, as it is manifest,
that sin precedes damnation and the inflicting of punishment, so it is necessary
that the prescience of every sin be presupposed in the eternal purpose of God,
of damning and inflicting punishment, whether temporal or eternal. (4) That the
particle Quia Because, here used, does not always denote a proper cause, but a
reason of consequence, which may be taken from the effect, and other arguments
besides the cause, etc.

Strangius here raises a great deal of dust, to blind our eyes from beholding
the Meridian light of this Text; but to answer briefly: (1) We say, that his
first answer smells too rankly of Pelagianisme, in that it makes the sins of
men the cause of the Divine Will: The Sons of Eli were not for their flagitiose
Impieties destined by God to ruin, as if their flagitiose Impieties were
causative of and influential on Divine destination; but the Soverain God
destined, by an absolute decree, to leave them to those flagitiose sins, and
for them to destroy them. What are the dangerous consequents of such a
conditional Reprobation, we intend more fully to show hereafter, c. 5.. 3. (2)
That the Death here intended and inflicted was only temporal, is too crude a
notion for a Divine instructed in the knowledge of divine wrath: Yea, Strangius
confesses, that they merited eternal wrath; and how then could they be exemted
from it, who had rejected the Merits of their Messiah? (3) What he adds,
touching the prescience of every sin to be presupposed in Gods eternal purpose
of damning men, has a tincture also of rank Pelagianisme: for if the prescience
or prevision of actual sins, yea of final Impenitence, be that which moves the
divine Will to decree the Damnation of men, then it will, by a paritie of reason,
necessarily follow, that the prescience or prevision of men's Faith and final
Perseverance is that which moves the divine Will to elect men: for if
Reprobation be conditional, Election must be so also, as our Divines on
Scripture-reason strongly demonstrate. Davenant in his Animadvers. against
Hoard, invictly proves, p. 226. and elsewhere, That Decrees purely conditional
are very much unbecoming the Divine Will. But of this more in what follows, c.
5.. 3. (4) As for the Particle Quia, Because, [1] We grant, that it does not
always denote a proper Cause, but a reason of Consequence, and that taken
sometimes from the effect. But, [2] that it cannot denote a reason of
Consequence taken from the Effect in this Text, is most evident; because Gods
Will to slay them was not the effect of their disobedience, but their
disobedience was the consequent of Gods will to slay them. [3] Take notice, that
we do not say, that Gods will was the cause of their disobedience or ruin, but
only that the later was the consequent of the former: God in his most soverain
wise and efficacious purpose decreed to leave the sons of Eli to such
flagitiose sins, as should prove the cause of their ruin, both temporal and
eternal: and hereupon their sin and ruin followed, as Darkness is the
consequent of the Suns retirement into the inferior Hemisphere.

Again, Gods efficacious permissive will about sin may be demonstrated from Job
12. 16. The deceiver and deceived are his. Job 12. 16, 17.
(...), His or unto him is the deceiver and the deceived, h. e. Justo judicio
permittit errare and seduci, Vatablus.
i. e. he does in just judgment permit men to deceive and to be deceived, as
Vatablus on this Text. Which Mercer thus more fully explicates: I understand
this not only of false Worship, but also of al errors that are committed every
where; although more specially in Polities and Cities to be governed, where God
stirs up some who draw others into error, that they might follow their
fallacious counsel, and enter on a perniciose course for their own damage. --
God therefore impels and draws some into error: not that the Lord is the Author
of Error or Sin, but that their sin and defection from God leads them thereto,
God not only merely permitting, but also ordaining, etc. Whence it is added, v.
17. He leads counselors away spoiled, and makes the Judges fools; spoiled,
(...), i. e. of their wisdom and counsel, as it follows. So it is taken, Psalm.
76. 6. The valiant are spoiled of their heart, i. e. deprived of their courage.
And makes the Judges fools, (...), infatuat, or ad insaniam adigit, as Mercer.
He infatuates them. Again, v. 20. He removes away the speech of the trusty,
and takes away the understanding of the aged. (...), the Judgment,
Discretion, Counsel, Prudence, Sense: Hebr. the savor or experimental taste. So
v. 24. He takes away the heart of the chief of the People of the earth, and
causes them to wander in a Wilderness where there is no way. The like Deuteronomy.
28. 28. and Esa. 19. 11, 12, 13, 14.

Now let us see what answer Strangius, l. 4. c. 9. p. 836. gives hereto: It
must be observed, says he, that Job in this Chapter does in an illustrious
manner discourse of Gods Providence so ordering things, that nothing comes to
pass casually or fortuitously, nothing without his destinated counsel, that
nothing is done but what he wills, either by permitting that it be done, or by
doing of it, as August. Enchirid. c. 95. so that God does effect and procure
whatever things are good, and also wisely foreknowing the future event, does
permit sins, which he directs to good ends ordained by him. -- Deservedly
therefore Job among other things observes, that it is from Divine Providence,
that some err, and draw others into error; and that both as to matters of
Religion, and in other matters of this life; not that is he the Author of
seduction and errors, but because God, for the contemt and abuse of his light,
delivers them destitute thereof into a mind void of judgment, and presenting
objects and occasions, opens a way, wherein they wander, etc.

Though this Paraphrase be far short of the mind of the Text, yet there is
enough in it to confirm our Hypothesis, and subvert his own Antithesis. For
(1) he grants, That nothing happens casually, without Gods destinated counsel,
according to that of Augustine, That nothing is done but what God wills, etc. Now
certainly Gods destinated counsel or determined will is most efficacious and
irresistible: so that if the permission of sin be from Gods destinated counsel,
it must be also determined by his efficacious will. (2) He grants, that God
wisely foreknows al future events, even the sins of men: and how this can be
without the efficacious predetermination of his own will to permit the same,
neither Strangius himself, nor any of his sectators, could ever yet make out.
(3) He grants also, That God directs those aberrations and sins to good ends
appointed by him. And how can God direct the immanent aberrations of the mind,
but by an efficacious predetermination of the substrate acts, and permission of
the vitiositie? (4) He yet further grants, That God delivers them unto a mind
void of judgment: and what do we say more? Does not this evidently denote an
active efficacious permission of sin? But then (5) his last clause, presenting
objects and occasions, etc. overthrows al his former concessions: for the wise
God does not only present objects and occasions, and thereby open a way to men's
infatuation, but he also predetermines the mind to the entitative act, and
efficaciously permits the vitiositie, without the least finger in the sin.

There are other Scriptures which demonstratively prove Gods efficacious
permission of sin; as Esa. 63. 17. O Lord, why have thou Esa. 63. 17.
made us err from thy ways, and hardened our hearts from thy fear? Strangius,
page 839. grants, that the Verb in both Members being in Hiphil often notes a
double action, as when we say, That one makes another to do a thing; though he
pretends, that sometimes it only notes a permission of the action. But it is
certain, that it cannot here denote a mere naked permission, but such as
procedes from the efficacious will of God. The like Jer. 20. 7. O Lord, thou
have deceived me and I was deceived. Whereto answers, Ezech. 14. 9. And if the
Prophet be deceived when he has spoken a thing, I the Lord have deceived that
Prophet. Which Texts speak certainly more than a mere idle speculative
permission, namely such as resultes from the active, efficacious, directive and
ordinative will of God, as Strangius, lib. 4. cap. 9. page 840 -- 844. grants.
What this permission of God is, and how far it extendes, see what follows,
Chap. 5.. 6.

. 6. Let us now pass on to such Scriptures as mention Gods Gods judicial
hardening Sinners.
tradition or giving up some to judicial excecation and induration or hardness
of heart; which will give a more evident demonstration of Gods efficacious
predeterminative Concurse to the substrate matter or entitative act of sin. Not
to insiste on Gods hardening Pharaohs heart, Exodus 4. 21. which has been
already solidly and demonstratively explicated by a judicious Divine, in his
Letter to a Friend, etc. page 28 -- 30. I shall begin with Psalm. 81. 12. So I
Psalm. 81. 12.
gave them up to their own hearts lusts, or to the hardness of their own
hearts, as Kimhi. Hebr. (...), and I sent them away in the depraved cogitation
of their heart. LXX. render it, Deuteronomy. 29. 19. (...), and Jer. 3. 17. (...).
Whence it follows: and they walked in their own counsels. (...), in their own
depraved imaginations. It Is just with God to give up men to that spirit of
hardness which they affect: his way of hardening is mysterious and invisible:
he delivers sinners up to the bent of their own lusts, and then lets them enjoy
what they lust after: when men add acquired hardness to natural, God justly
inflicts on them judicial hardness. And oh! how righteous is it with God
judicially to harden such as sinfully, yea voluntarily harden themselves! And
then the heart which is an Adamant toward God and things spiritual, is as wax
toward sin and Satan's tentations. And what is the effect of this judicial
hardness, but to seal up sinners from the darkness of mind to the darkness
of Hell? Thus God, albeit he be not the Author of sin, yet is the Orderer of it,
and the cause of the substrate act unto which sin is annexed.

The like Psalm. 69. 22. Let their eyes be darkened that they see not, Psalm. 69.
22.
and make their loins continually to shake. Let their eyes [i. e. their minds]
be darkened. (...), be made so obscure and dark, as that they may not see their
way: let al true wisdom be taken from them, and make their loins continually
to shake: i. e. take from them al force, vigor and ability of acting as they
ought; let them stagger and reel like to a drunken man. The shaking of the
loins argues imbecillitie and want of force, which is chiefly seated in the
loins. Thus he procedes, and then verse. 17. brings Divine wrath to a black
conclusion: Add iniquity to their iniquity, etc. (...), which implies, that
God adds the punishment of judicial hardness to the iniquity of their
voluntary acquired hardness. We find this piece of judicial hardness cited by
Paul, Romans 11. 10. Let their eyes be darkened that they may not Romans 11. 10.
see, and bow down their back always. The Heb. (...) is here rendered by Paul
(...), bow down; the sense being the same; for the bowing down of the back
argues the defect of strength in the loins.

To these Texts we may add, Esa. 6. 10. Make the heart of this Esa. 6. 10.
people fat: (...) make the heart fat, or gross, i. e. stupid and senseless:
for the fat of animals has little sense. It alludes to the heart in the animate
body overgrowen and oppressed with fat. These words are six times repeted in
the N. T. Whence it follows: and shut their eyes. (...), which is rendered by
some, dim them, or make them dim; by others, daub them, as with plaster, or
other like matter: by others, close them: al which notes the efficacitie of
error and blindness, that follows on judicial hardness.

The like curse we find, Esa. 29. 10. For the Lord has poured Esa. 29. 10.
out upon you the spirit of deep sleep, and has closed your eyes. LXX. (...).
The Heb. (...) is rendered by Aquila (...), and by Theodotion (...), which Act.
10. 11. notes a deep sleep or ecstasie: and the radix (...) signifies to
overwhelme with deep sleep; and it is rendered (...), Dan. 10. 9. So that by the
spirit of deep sleep, must be understood such a stupor of spirit as leaves men
without al sense. The allusion is to some soporiferous stupifying wine, or
potion, or medicine, which, being given to a man, or sprinkled on him, casts
him into a deep sleep. Hence the Prophet ushers in these words with a direful
exclamation, verse. 9. Stay your selves and wonder -- they are drunken, but not
with wine, etc. i. e. the Lord has made them drunken with a soporiferous
stupifying potion. As for (...) it is not derived from (...), to prick, Act.
2. 27. but from the ancient word (...). The simple (...) being put for (...),
which also remains among the Latins, as nuo, nutus, nutare. Thence (...) and
(...), which signifies to nod, or shake the head, as they are wont to do who
have drunk any stupifying potion. So that (...) here is such a spirituose,
stupifying potion as deprives men of their senses, makes them shake the head,
stagger and reel as drunken men. Thence it follows: and has closed your eyes.
When God judicially pours out a spirit of deep sleep, how soon is the heart
stupefied and made senseless! This Text is cited Romans 11. 8.
and explicated by Paul, Romans 11. 8. According as it is written, God has given
them the spirit of slumber, eyes that they should not see, etc. The first part,
God has given them the spirit of slumber, notes the stupor of their minds,
unto which they were judicially delivered up by God.

Thus also Esa. 19. 11 -- 14. He begins verse. 11. Surely the Princes Esa. 19.
14.
of Zoan are fools, etc. Thence he procedes to give the reason of it verse. 14.
The Lord has mingled a perverse spirit in the midst thereof, etc. The Lord
has mingled, (...), poured out, or given them to drink. Gods judicial
excecation and induration is here, as elsewhere, compared to a cup of
intoxicating liquor, which being very strong and heady distempers men, and
makes them to reel and stagger: so much the following phrase imports, (...) a
spirit of perversities. The Hebrew word, not elsewhere to be found in the O. T.
is derived from a Verb that signifies to pervert, turn away, or make crooked:
it is here plural of a duplicate form, and notes al manner of perversities both
extensive and intensive. They boasted of their wisdom, verse. 11. but God made
them drunk with a spirit of error and perversities. The Chaldee and LXX. render
it, with a spirit of error or seduction; the Latin, with a spirit of
giddiness. The sense is the same.

We may add hereto, Esa. 44. 18. They have not known nor Esa. 44. 18, 19.
understood; for he has shut their eyes, that they cannot see, and their
hearts, that they cannot understand. He has shut, Heb. (...) he has daubed;
Shindler renders it, crustavit, aut obduxit parietem. God did as it were
plaster their eyes with a spirit of slumber: whence it follows, verse. 19. and
none considers in his heart, etc. Those profane Idolaters did shut their
eyes, that they might not see, and the righteous God comes and as it were
daubes or plasters them over, that they shall not see.

This judicial excecation is also lively expressed, Esa. 60. 2. Esa. 60. 2.
For behold darkness shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the people.
The Prophet having exhorted the elect among the Jews, verse. 1. Arise and shine,
for they light is come, etc. i. e. the Messiah is come and shines on thee with
the gloriose beams of Evangelic light; in this verse. 2. he gives us the
dreadful curse of those that should wilfully shut their eyes against this
light. For behold -- thick darkness. Heb. (...), which seems compounded of a
word that signifies to drop or destil, and another that signifies a mist or
fog: so that the compound notion here properly notes a mist or fog so thick,
that it even drops again; such as the Egyptian mist was, that filled the earth
with darkness, Exodus 10. 22, 23. When men wilfully shut their eyes against
Evangelic light, God judicially leaves them to wander up and down in the thick
mist of their own darkness, so that they stumble at noon day.

Thus God dealt with the Gentiles, even the wisest of them, for the abuse of
natures light, as Romans 1. 28. And even as they did Romans 1. 28.
not like to retain God in their knowledge, God gave them over to a reprobate
mind, to do those things that are not convenient. They did not approve of or
acknowledge God in their practic judgments or consciences, and therefore God
did not approve of or own their practic notions, but delivered them up to a
reprobate, spurious, drossie, vain, adulterine, rejectaneous mind; so much
(...) notes. A Divine of note among us says to this Text, Here is nothing at
al but a penal desertion and permission, etc. So that by this Tradition he
understands only a negation of Grace, and mere permission of men to sin; but
Strangius, lib. 4. cap. 7. page 813. is more ingenuous, and grants, that this
Tradition importes something positive: though what that positive is he does
not, neither indeed can by his Hypothesis, explicate.

The like Tradition or delivering up to a reprobate mind we find foretold
touching the Sons of Antichrist, 2 These. 2. 11. And 2 These. 2. 11.
for this cause God shall send them strong delusion, that they should believe a
lie. When secure Professors will not receive the Truth in the love thereof, that
they may be saved, it is just with God to send them strong delusions, that they
should believe a lie; that they might al be damned, etc. as verse. 12. The
forementioned reverend Divine answers to this Text thus: Here is nothing
signified, but (1) That God will permit Magicians and false Teachers to vent
deceits. (2) And permit wicked men to believe them: which is mentioned as a
permitted consequent, and not as an end intended by God. And the word sending
is mentioned, because the permission was penal for their sin, etc. But this
response is too slender and jejune for so great a Text: For (1) whereas that
reverend Divine makes mention of Gods permitting Magicians, etc. this savors
too much* of a Grotian and Cassandrian spirit, which I presume, he has no
kindness for, whereby al those prophetic predictions about Antichrist are
fixed on Simon Magus, or some other false Teacher in the Primitive Churches:
whereas it is most evident, that this sending them strong delusion is ascribed
immediately to God, as a righteous Judge. (2) Neither is this only a mere
permitted consequent, as he phraseth it; but the term sending importes active
efficacious influence on Gods part that sends, not on the sin formally
considered, but on the substrate matter, or act entitatively considered. But
Strangius, lib. 4. cap. 10. page 853. is here also more candid, granting, Gods
sending the efficace of error, to be the same with Gods pouring out a spirit of
slumber, Esa. 19. 14. and Jerome thinks, that Paul took his words from Esa.
And page 855. Strangius adds, That this sending strong delusions may be
ascribed to God, as a punishment of their former sin, in not receiving the
truth in the love thereof: which sufficiently proves our Hypothesis, That the
substrate matter of sin is from God, as hereafter.

But let us a little more fully examine the general solutions The false
comments of Adversaries refuted.
which our Adversaries give to these Texts touching Gods active excecation and
induration. 1. A Divine among our selves, whom I love and honor, thinks, that
those Texts in the O. T. which speak of Gods hardening men, etc. might,
according to the Hebrew Idiome, have a softer sense; so (as I suppose he must
mean) as a mere permission is intended thereby. But to answer hereto in the
words of Strangius, lib. 4. cap. 9. page 839. The Hebraic form is often in
Hiphil, which denotes a double action, to make a man to do a thing; yea
sometimes this induration is expressed by Verbes in Piel, of an active import,
as Exodus 4. 21. and 9. 12. and 10. 20, 27. and 11. 10. and 14. 4, 8. Deuteronomy. 2.
30. Josh. 11. 20. Whence Strangius concludes, That this phrase of Scripture often
occurring denotes much more than a mere naked permission. Though what this
should be he is at a great loss.

2. Baronius, Metaphys. Sect. 8. Disp. 3.. 99. page 159, 160. answers, That
there are four actions of God in induration; (1) He punishes former sins by
permitting men to fall into greater. (2) He offers to them an occasion of
repentance, etc. (3) He gives them not grace to improve the occasion; whence
they are said to be blinded and hardened. (4) He offers to them occasions of
greater sins, by such things as objectively move them to sin. But all this,
which Baronius allows God in judicial execation and Induration, comes far short
of what the forecited Scriptures mention. For besides the mere permission of
Sin, privation of Grace, and offering occasions and objects, the Scripture
mentions a Tradition and delivering up to the very act of sin, yea, Gods
immediate efficacious hand in the very act of sin, considered entitatively and
materially.

3. But we come to Strangius, who, in his concessions goes beyond the former
Divines, yet comes short of the genuine mind and spirit of those Texts, which
speak of Gods judicial Excecation and Induration. (1) He grants, (contrary to
the sentiment of a reverend Divine among us) that active excecation is ascribed
unto God. So l. 4. c. 8. p. 819. Active excecation, says he, is ascribed to
God, Satan, and the Sinner himself. Satan and the Sinner in that action do
greatly sin, but God acts most justly. God can as justly punish Sinners with
excecation of mind, as he punished Elymas the sorcerer with corporal
excecation, Act. 13. 11. (2) Thence p. 822. he adds: Herein the whole
difficulty lies, that in this action we rightly distinguish that which is sin,
and the cause of sin, whereof God is not the cause, from the punishment, which
God in just judgment inflicts. So p. 829. In all vitiose action, the action
substrate to the vice, or whatever there is of entitie and positive therein,
must be reduced to God as the first cause, who does concur therewith, as
considered separate from the vice or defect annexed thereto; and therefore
whatever entitative or positive is found in any obduration, in like manner it
must be referred to God, albeit he has no commerce with the vice of the
action. This ingenuous concession of Strangius, did he not overthrow it by
other positions, were sufficient to period our controversy: for what do, or
need we desire more than what he here grants? If whatever be entitative or
positive in obduration be from God, then surely the substrate matter or
entitative act of that whereto sin is annexed, is from God. But here lies the
point of our Controversy with Strangius, he holds that there be some acts so
intrinsecally evil, as that you cannot separate the entitative act from the
sinful reference it has to its object. But, (3) Strangius adds, p. 831. That
in the same Indutation the sin and punishment are conjunct, etc. This indeed is
a great concession, that which overthrows Strangius's Antithesis; for, if in
the same Act the sin and punishment be conjunct, then how can God concur to the
act as a punishment, and not concur to the substrate matter or entitative act
which has sin annexed to it? This Knot the acutest of Strangius's Sectators will
never untie. Again, (4) He adds, p. 831. That the very Permission of God is
the act and effect of the will of God. -- For to will to permit, and advisedly to
permit is also to act. What is done by God negatively in regard of his
transient act, is done also positively, in regard of his interne immanent act.
Herein also he lays before us a pregnant Truth, which is directly contradictory
to his own Hypothesis: for, [1] If Gods permissive Will as to sin be not only
negative but also positive, then it must be efficacious. Again, [2] If Gods
permission of sin be positive and efficacious, then also his Decree of
Reprobation to permit sin must be positive and absolute, which directly
impugneth Strangius's Opinion. (5) He adds, p. 832. That other actions also
concur with Gods Permission, because he also rules, moderates and ordains what
he permits, and concurs to the actions substrate to the sin it self. Is it so
indeed? What then do we contend so vehemently for? what made Strangius write
such a voluminous discourse, and oppose Rutherford, Twisse, and other
Calvinists with so much violence, when as here he grants whatever they contend
for? But to speak the truth, there yet lies a Snake under the herb; albeit
Strangius seems to grant so liberally Gods efficacious concurse to the
substrate act of sin, yet indeed, when he comes elsewhere to state this
concurse, he makes it be only a remote concurse to the act considered in
genere, in its generic nature, not to the individual particular act as so or so
circumstantiated. And herein he is followed by Gods Concurse to the individual
act which is sinful.
a Divine of Name among us: wherein lies the spirit of al their solutions and
oppositions. But how inept and evanid this subterfuge is, will be very evident,
if we consider the nature of al physic or natural acts. Is not every natural or
entitative act individual or singular? Are not al natural Acts the effluxes of
singular Supposites or persons? and if the subject be singular, must not the
Action be also singular? To talk of a natural action in genere, or specie, what
a wild conceit is this, that which al true Logic and Philosophy both new and
old contradicts? It Is true, human acts, as to their moral consideration, may be
distinguished into generic, specific, or individual: but if we consider human
acts in their natural entitative Being, so there neither is nor can be any such
thing as actio in genere, action in general; but al are singular and
individual. So that if God concur to the act of sin, it must be to the act in
its individual singular nature, not morally but physically and entitatively
considered; of which more hereafter, Chap. 6.. 1.

But to give a distinct and Theologic Idea of Gods Judicial How God judicially
hardens men without being the cause of sin.
Excecation and Induration, with the Vindication of his Sacred Majesty from
being the Author of Sin, the following Distinctions and Determinations may be
of use to us. (1) We are to distinguish Gods concurse in Judicial Induration or
Hardness, from that of the Sinner. (2) Gods Concurse in Judicial Hardness may
be considered either in regard of his Decree, or in regard of his Providence
and actual execution. (3) Induration may be distinguished into Moral and
Natural: or into sinful and penal. These things being premissed, the true
nature of Gods judicial excecation and Induration will appear in the following
Propositions.

1. Prop. Gods Decree is not properly the cause of man's Hardness of heart or
Damnation, but only of the Negation or withdrawment of preventing Grace, which
God is no way bound to give. The Decree of Reprobation is not the proper
efficient or formal cause of the Sinners Induration or Condemnation, but his
own wilful obstinacy. This sufficiently clears the Sanctity and Justice of
God.

2. Prop. Yet supposing the Decree of Reprobation, the sinners Induration or
Hardness follows infallibly, and in some sense necessarily; i. e. by a modal
hypothetic necessity, not brutish or coactive, such as should destroy
Liberty. The holy God does not infuse hardness, or by any compulsion hurrie
men into it, but leaves them to the swinge of their own lusts, which violently
hurrie them into such courses as necessarily harden. This also clears Gods
Justice from the imputation of sin.

3. Prop. Gods Providence in Judicial excecation and Induration is very
efficacious and illustrious. (1) God leaves men to the Blandishments,
Allurements, and Ensnarements of an heart-bewitching world, which insensibly
harden. (2) He delivers up men to the power of Satan, the God of this world,
whose subjects and vassals they willingly become, 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4. and so are
taken alive captive at his will, 2 Timothy 2. 26. (3) God so disposes and orders
al his Providence, as that they do al accidentally, by reason of men's lusts,
conspire to harden them: Mercies become Curses to them, Romans 11. 9, 10, 11.
Yea, (4) The very means of Grace, become the means of their hardening, their
Food and Physic become Poison to them, 2 Cor. 2. 16. Esa. 28. 12, 13, 14, 15.
(5) Christ himself, the chief Cornerstone of salvation becomes to them a stone
of stumbling and offense, Esa. 8. 14. a stone of stumbling, (...) of smiting,
such as lying in the way the foot may smite against, and thence stumble and
receive hurt. It answers to (...), scandal in the New Testament: Thence it
follows, and for a rock of offense. Heb. (...), not a bare Stumbling-stone, or
block, such as a man may make a shift to avoid or get over, or if he stumble,
yet recover himself again; but he is a rock of offense, which notes, [1] The
Offense to be inevitable and unavoidable, as the removing of a rock: [2] The
ruin to be certain, as that of a Ship falling on a rock. Whence he adds: for
a gin and for a snare, such as men should neither by power, wit, or craft
escape. Whence it follows, v. 15. And many among them shall stumble and fall, and
be broken, and be snared, and be taken. The like Romans 9. 33. (6) God puts a
period to the day of Grace, and leaves men to the plague of their own heart,
Esa. 22. 14. Surely this iniquity shall not be purged from you til you die.
Hebr. (...), If this iniquity be purged. It is the concise form of an Oath,
frequently used in Scripture, as Chap. 5. 18. whereby God swears, that their
iniquity should not be purged. So Luke 19. 41, 42. Heb. 3. 7. (7) God does
positively, yea efficaciously concur to all that is positive, material,
entitative, and natural in judicial hardness, without the least hand in the
obliquitie or vitiositie.

4. Prop. The suspension of restraining Grace in Judicial excecation is not
properly a privation of any Grace due to the Creature, but a negation or
withdrawment of undeserved and abused Grace. For the clearing whereof we are to
consider, the difference between Man and God in this particular: No mere man
may or ought to permit or deliver up another to sin or hardness, if it be in
his power to hinder: (1) Because al men are under a Law and obligation of
subjection to their Creator, whereby they are obliged to promove his Glory,
and prevent sin and rebellion against him the most they can. (2) Because al men
are under a communion of Natures, and therefore bound to afford assistance each
to other, so far as they may for their natural and moral good. But now the
soverain Creator of man is under no such obligation, and therefore may as he
please dispose of his own grace, or suspend it, specially when abused by
sinners.

5. Prop. God does not deliver up men to judicial hardness simply as
hardness, under that reduplication, but penally, as it conduces to the
vindication of his Justice. For the explication and demonstration of this
Proposition we are to remember, that there is nothing in the world of itself,
purely, and simply evil: for if there were any pure and chiefest evil in the
world, then God, who is the chiefest good, could not will it: but the greatest
evil has something of good mixed with it; and this God wills. Thus in judicial
hardness there is a penal vindictive good, which God wills for the illustration
of his Justice.

6. Prop. In judicial hardness, that which is morally evil in regard of man
and his transgression, is naturally good in regard of God and his Providence.
For albeit God does concur with the sinner, who is deficient as to his duty,
yet God is no way deficient. (1) Al moral evil of sin is only such to him whose
it is, or to whom it does belong, as the Author thereof, by virtue of some Law
he offends against: But now this judicial hardness or sin does not belong to
God as the proper Owner or Author of it, but only to the sinner; neither does
the holy God offend against any Law. (2) The specific quality of an effect is
not to be ascribed to the universal first cause, but to the second particular
cause, from which it receives specification. (3) The sinner is only the moral
cause of his own hardness; because he is the meritorious cause thereof, and
also a voluntary, yea wilful Agent therein. Al his hardness is voluntarily
contracted, albeit judicially inflicted by God: he suffers his heart
voluntarily to be defloured by sinful objects: God threatens to suspend his
Divine influence, and the obstinate sinner cries, Content: Satan comes and
blinds his eyes, and he hugges him for it. So that the whole deficience or
moral causalitie is on the sinners part, not on Gods. The sinner wants Divine
influence and is willing, yea glad to want it: therefore his depraved will is
the sole formal, vital, subjective and moral efficient cause of his own
hardness and sin.

. 7. We come in the last place to such Scriptures as mention Gods efficacious
ordering men's sins for his own glory.
Gods efficacious ordering, disposing, and directing the sins of men unto his
own glory, which evidently demonstrates his immediate concurse and
predetermination to the substrate matter or entitative act thereof. Thus Exodus
9. 14, 15, 16. God threatens Pharaoh, Exodus 9. 14, 15, 16.
verse. 14. to send al his plagues on his heart, i. e. in a way of judicial
excecation and induration. And why? That thou may know there is none like me
in all the earth: i. e. that I may magnify my Vitiorum nostrorum non est auctor
Deus, sed tamen ordinator, August.
vindictive Justice and Power on thee. Whence he adds, v. 15. For now I will
stretch out mine hand, that I may smite thee, and thy people with pestilence,
and thou shall be cut off from the earth. It runs in the Hebrew in the time
past, (...), I sent out mine hand, i. e. by the pestilence or murrain among the
bestes, as v. 3, 6. and so it follows: and I had smitten thee, with the same
pestilence; and thou had been cut off, deservedly; but for another cause
(which is mentioned verse. 16.) I have spared thee. This seems the genuine
meaning, namely, that God spared Pharaoh in this plague, thereby to magnify
his vindictive Justice and Power the more in his final ruin. God let him alone
to run on in full career in his way of sin, yea, concurred to the substrate
matter of al his sins, and caused al his plagues to meet on his heart, in order
to his final obduration, thereby to render his vindictive Justice more
illustrious in his ruin. And so verse. 16. And in very deed for this cause have
I raised thee up, for to show in thee my power, and that my name may be
declared thorowout all the earth. (...), in very deed, or verily: it notes a
great asseveration, such as with God amounts almost to an oath. For this. The
Apostle Paul, Romans 9. 17. adds a Pronoun of intention, (...), for this very
same, i. e. cause or purpose, as the Greeks expound it, for this cause have I
raised thee up. The LXX. render it, thou have been preserved or kept alive; but
Paul more emphaticly, Romans 9. 17. (...), Romans 9. 17.
I have made thee stand up, or, have constituted, or set thee up, as on a
Theater before all the world, to be a vessel of wrath, and an exemple of Divine
vengeance. The Syriac renders it thus: (...), I have made thee to stand up;
which emphaticly paints forth Gods absolute will in his Reprobation. So in the
Hebraic Verb, (...), I have made thee stand up, as a monument of vindictive
Justice. This making to stand up, notes the constitution and being of a thing,
as elsewhere in Scripture: the righteous God gave being and constitution to
Pharaoh for this very end, to magnify the glory of his vindictive Justice on
him. So it follows: (...), for to show, or that I may show in thee, or show
thee. But the LXX. add the Particle In: so Paul, Romans 9. 17. (...), That I may
give a specimen, or demonstration of my power in thee. Hebr. (...), my power,
or my force, my omnipotent severitie. Thence it follows: (...), for to declare,
or tell my name. The righteous God suffered Pharaoh to run on with a vehement
impetuositie in his sinful rebellion, that so the world might ring of Gods
vindictive Justice in his ruin. From all this the Apostle strongly demonstrates
our conclusion, Romans 9. 18. Therefore God has mercy on whom he will, and whom
he Romans 9. 18.
will he hardens. Observe here, (1) the Apostle ushers in this inference with
the conclusive note, (...), therefore. He lays the premises in Gods judicial
procedings with Pharaoh for the manifestation of his vindictive punitive glory
in Pharaohs ruin: whence he infers this universal conclusion. Therefore God,
etc. (2) He resolves Gods hardening men into his absolute will or decree of
Reprobation, which he in this regard, makes parallel to his absolute decree of
Election: for as God has mercy on whom he will, i. e. according to his
absolute purpose or decree; so in like manner, he hardens whom he will, i. e.
according to his absolute decree of Reprobation. And it is most certain,
according to the Scripture, no man can maintain absolute Election, but he must
also maintain absolute Reprobation: and if Reprobation be absolute, then also
Gods concurse to the entitative act of that which is sinful must be efficacious
and predeterminative, as hereafter, Chap. 5.. 3.

There are other Texts that make express mention of Gods efficacious ordering
and disposing of wicked men and their sins for his own glory. So Prove. 16. 4.
The Lord has made althings Prove. 16. 4.
for himself; yea even the wicked for the day of evil. Note here (1) the end of
Gods making althings, which is for himself, (...), i. e. for the manifestation
of his own glory. (2) The manner of Gods making althings for himself, included
in the Verb (...), has made, which signifies [1] Gods active efficience, or
his energetic, architectonic Decree, whereby althings are made. [2] Gods
passive creation, or his efficience in time. [3] Gods conservation of althings
in their beings and wel-beings. [4] Gods efficacious actuating and governing
althings to their ends. Thus Psalm. 46. 9. Eccles. 11. 5. Esa. 5. 12. The LXX.
generally render it by (...), which Joh. 5. 17. our Lord uses to express Gods
efficacious concurse and predeterminative influence. And Strangius, page 804.
grants, that whether we understand (...) here of Gods production in time, or of
his eternal Decree to produce man, or of his ordination and constitution of man
to punishment, the difference is not material. I would therefore take it in the
largest notion as comprehensive of al its significates before specified. (3)
Whence follows the particular object, even the wicked, i. e. considered not
only in their substance as men, but also in all their Modes, Adjuncts,
Accidents, and Operations. There is not the most minute accident or action of a
wicked man but God makes it, i. e. decrees, influenceth, and orders it for
himself. Whence (4) the wicked are said to be made by God, for the day of evil,
(...), i. e. for the day of vindictive wrath, or punishment inflicted for the
illustration of Divine Justice: which includes also their being left to sin;
for the forest piece of Divine vengeance is men's being given up to their own
hearts lusts.

Add hereto Romans 9. 21, 22. Has not the potter power over the Romans 9. 21, 22.
clay, etc? Here Paul refutes the proud Pelagian blasphemies by an argument
taken from Gods absolute Dominion and Soveraintie over his creature. As if he
had said: Has not the Potter an absolute dominion over the clay, to form it
into what shape he please? and shall we not allow the great Creator of althings
the same absolute dominion? Did he not make althings? and therefore may he not
assume the Prerogative of ordering althings to the ends for which they were
made? As he gives to every creature what shape he please, so cannot he appoint
them to what end he please, and direct them infallibly to that end? Is it not
an end sufficient for the being of any creature, to be the glory of any
Attribute? and therefore if God make a creature to be a vessel of wrath fitted
to destruction, is there any injury done to the creature? The Pythagoreans
have an effate, That (...), the worse is made for the service of the better,
which holds most true here of the vessels of wrath or wicked men, who are made
for the better, i. e. their Makers glory, as Prove. 16. 4. Thus Paul concludes,
verse. 22. Vessels of wrath fitted to destruction, (...), signifies primarily
aptly to fit, frame, or set together: thence, to ordain, decree, or constitute.
Whence among the LXX. it answers to (...), to found, as Psalm. 8. 2. Out of the
mouths of babes he has founded or ordained praise: also to (...), to ordain,
decree, establish, as Psalm. 67. 10. and 73. 17. Thus it signifies here, namely
Gods eternal ordination or absolute Decree of Reprobation founded on his
absolute Soveraintie. Observe here the difference between the vessels of
mercy, and the vessels of wrath: of the former he speaks actively, verse. 23.
That he might make known the riches of his glory on the vessels of mercy,
which he had prepared unto glory; but of the later he speaks only passively,
verse. 22. fitted to destruction. The reason of this difference seems this: The
vessels of mercy are wholly from God, both as vessels, and as vessels of
mercy; they receive from God both their natural good of being, and their moral
good of grace, wel-being, and happiness: but now the vessels of wrath are such
partly from God, and partly from themselves: That they are vessels, and vessels
of wrath ordained to destruction, they are from God; but that they are vessels
deserving wrath, this they are from themselves: their sins and punishment
morally considered are from themselves; but consider them entitatively and
penally, and so they are from God. I am not ignorant of the many false and
Pelagian glosses which are affixed to this Text, without shadow of reason.

Another Text that evidently demonstrates Gods efficacious predeterminative
concurse in ordering men's sins for his own glory is, 1 Pet. 2. 8. And a stone
of stumbling, and a rock of offense, 1 Pet. 2. 8.
even to them that stumble at the word, being disobedient, whereunto also they
were appointed. This Text is taken partly from Esa. 8. 14. Here Christ the
chief Cornerstone of the Church, is said to be a stone of stumbling and rock
of offense to wilful unbelievers. The Greek (...) are synonymous, and of the
same import here; though (...) be in its general notion more extensive: It
notes originally any thing that may offend the foot, or other part, from (...),
to halt, or from (...), distorted: more particularly, it signifies (1) that
tigillum, or cross piece of wood in your traps for Mice, Foxes, or the like:
(2) a sharp stake, whereby the foot is hurt: and so it is the same with (...),
interpreted by Hesychius (...) and so (...) is by him made to be the same with
(...), an impediment: it was called also by the Greeks (...), denoting a
military instrument, like a sharp stake, whereby they annoyed their enemies: in
which sense the word (...) is used in that Apocryphous book, Judith 5. 1.
(...). (4) A stone that offends the foot: and so it answers with the LXX. to
(...), Lev. 19. 14. in which regard it is made synonymous to (...), both by
Peter; and Romans 14. 13. by Paul: and this they both denote here, 1 Pet. 2. 8.
the great offense which sinners took at Christ, to their own ruin. Whence it is
added: Whereunto also they were appointed, (...). What does this note? why take
Grotius's Note on this Text, who was no friend to Calvinists: Unto this, says
he, Unbelievers were destined by God, that they might most grievously fall --
For (...), which answers to (...), often signifies to ordain, destine, or decree,
as Joh. 15. 16. So (...), 1 These. 5. 9. The Syriac in this place renders it
(...), they were designed; the Arabic (...), they were constituted, namely by
the Divine Decree. Thus Grotius, who here speaks like a Calvinist, though
generally no friend to the sentiments of Calvin. The like 2 Pet. 2. 11. As
natural brute bestes, made to be taken and destroyed. Is not absolute
Reprobation here, and that by the concession of Grotius, no friend thereto,
clearly and fully asserted? And if Reprobation be absolute, must not also Gods
concurse to the substrate matter of sin be efficacious and predeterminative? The
immutable connection between absolute Reprobation and predetermination to the
substrate matter of that which is sinful we intend to demonstrate hereafter,
Chap. 5.. 3.

But a reverend Divine of name among us answers to this Text thus: Resp. 1.
This [1 Pet. 2. 8. whereunto also they were appointed] has respect to Luke 2.
34 -- And no more can be hence gathered, but that God has decreed, that as a
punishing Judge, (1) he will leave the rejecters of Christ to go on in their own
sinful way; (2) and that their opposition to him shall be their ruin: So that
[1] he does not speak this of any but the rejecters of Christ, that deserved
it. [2] He speaks not at al as willing their sin, but only as one that
penally denies them further grace. [3] But the thing that he is said to ordain
them to, is not sin, but ruin the consequent of their sin: The word [
stumbling and falling] signifying their destruction. Thus that reverend Divine.

And now let us a little examine this his Response to our Argument from this
Text, which will serve for a reply to most of his subterfuges. (1) In answer to
his first particular, we assert, that more may be gathered from this Text, than
what he allows, namely, That God has decreed, that, as a punishing Judge, he
will leave the rejecters of Christ to go on in their own sinful way. For he
himself grants, (which cannot be denied) That they were appointed to stumble on
the rock of offense: And if so, then surely they were destined or appointed to
the entitative act of sin: for stumbling does not only implie their
destruction, as he insinuates, but also their sin. Whence, (2) there is
something more also implied, than that their opposition to him shall be their
ruin. For it is expressly said, That they were appointed, not only to their
ruin, but also to their stumbling at the word, and being disobedient, which
notes the Decree of Reprobation to be absolute and positive; yea
predeterminative of the substrate matter of sin. (3) Whereas he says, That he
speaks not at al as willing their sin, but only as one that penally denies
them further grace, this seems also against the express mind of the Text,
which says, They were appointed, (...), i. e. according to Grotius, they were
ordained, destined, or decreed to stumble at the word, etc. This certainly
denotes more than Gods penal denial of further grace. (4) Whereas he says,
That the thing that he is said to ordain them unto, is not sin, but ruin, the
consequent of their sin, the word [stumbling and falling] signifying their
destruction, it seems contradictory to the letter and mind of the words: for
both (...) and (...) signify, according to our precedent explication of them,
primarily their sin, and then their ruin or destruction, as the consequent of
their sin. This also is evident from that parallel Text, Jude 4. For there are
Jude 4.
certain men crept in unawares, who were of old ordained to this condemnation,
ungodly men turning the grace of God into lasciviousness, and denying the only
Lord God. These ungodly men are said to be (...), designed, and as it were
before written in the book of Gods predetermination, to be given up to this
condemnation, of turning the grace of God into lasciviousness, etc. So that it
is evident, that God foreordained and decreed, not only their destruction, but
to leave them to those sins, which should cause the same.

But to sum up the whole of this Head, we grant, (1) That absolute Reprobation
is not the cause either of men's sins, or damnation. It Is true, elective Grace
is the cause of faith and salvation, but the Decree of Reprobation is not the
cause of sin or damnation. (2) That Reprobation withdraws not any power from
the person reprobated. Yet we deny, [1] That it is injust for God, by an
absolute, efficacious Decree, to reprobate some, for the glorifying of his own
Justice: For albeit the Decree of Reprobation be not an act of justice, yet it
is not injust for God to reprobate any. [2] We deny also, that there is any
motive, cause, or condition of Reprobation, as it regards the act of the Divine
will. Whence also [3] we deny, that the act of Reprobation is merely negative;
but affirm, that it is positive and absolute; of which see Davenant Dissert.
de Elect. and Reprobat. p. 113. Hence, [4] It necessarily follows, that when
God predestines and preordains any unto Damnation, he predestines and
preordains in like manner, by an efficacious act of his own soverain Will, to
leave men to their own sinful courses, and efficaciously to concur to the
substrate matter of those sins. See more Chap. 5.. 3.

CHAP. IV. An Historic Idea of Predeterminants and Antipredeterminants.
The Assertors of Gods predeterminative Concurse to the substrate matter of Sin;
(1) Fathers, Augustine, Prosper, Fulgentius. (2) Such as succeeded in the Roman
Church, Hugo de Sancto Victore, Aquinas, Scotus, Ariminensis, Holcot,
Altissiodorensis: Bradwardine, his Conversion, Parts, both natural and
acquired, zele for Efficacious Predeterminative Concurse, particularly as to
the substrate matter of Sin: How God wills Sin: How the entitative act is from
Gods predeterminative Concurse: How God spontaneously impels or necessitates
men to the entitative act of Sin. The Dominicans, and particularly Alvarez's
sentiments conform to our Hypothesis. The concurrent persuasions of Jansenius
and his Sectators: also of the Tridentine Catechism. (3) The Sentiments of
Reformed Divines, Wiclef, Calvin, Zuinglius, Beza, Chamier, Lud. Crocius, the
Synod of Dort, and Church of England, Davenant, Sam. Ward, etc. (4) Such as
deny Gods Concurse to the substrate matter of Sin, more ancient: Durandus, his
proper Hypothesis, and who may be accounted his Sectators; Lud. a dola his
proper Sentiments and design: Arminius, and his Adherents, the Remonstrants
and Anabaptists. The New Methodistes, Camero, Amyraldus, Placeus, Le Blanc,
Baronius, Strangius. How these New Methodistes fell into these Sentiments, and
who may be estimed such.

. 1. HAving given a Scriptural Demonstration of our Hypothesis, The Assertors
of Gods predeterminative Concurse to the substrate matter of Sin.
touching the efficacious, predeterminative Concurse of God to the substrate
matter or entitative act of that which is sinful; we now proceed to lay down the
concurrent sentiments of Antipelagians in all Ages of the Church; and withal to
show who have in all Ages defended the Antithesis of our Adversaries. First,
among the Patrons of our Hypothesis none deserves a more illustrious name and
mention than Augustine, that great Propugnator Augustine.
or Champion of efficacious Concurse. I am not ignorant that some of our
Adversaries, as Strangius by name, are so confident as to cite Augustin's
testimony in defense of their Antithesis; but this is too palpable an abuse to
find place among the indifferent or impartial Sectators of Augustine; whose
sentiments touching this subject are sufficiently evident in his Works. Thus,
de Great. and Lib. Arbitr. cap. 20. If the Scripture, says he, be diligently
inspected, it will appear, that not only the good wills of men, but also the bad,
are so in Gods power, that he can incline them where and when he will, to
perform his benefices, or to inflict his punishments, by his most secret, yet
most just judgment. Again, in the same book, he says, That God works in the
hearts of men, to incline them which way he please, either to Good, out of his
Mercy, or to evil according to their deserts, by his Judgment, sometimes
open, sometimes secret, but always just. So De Praedestinat. Sanct. c. 16. It
is (says he) in the power of wicked men to sin; but that by sinning
malitiosely they do this or that, is not in their power, but of God dividing
the darkness, and ordering it; that so hence what they do against the will of
God, might not be fulfilled but by the will of God. Again, De Genesis ad literam
lib. imperfecto, c. 5. Some things, says he, God makes and orders, other
things he only orders; righteous men he makes and orders, but sinners, as
sinners, he makes not, but only orders, i. e. In good actions he is both the
cause of the good, and of the action, but in sinful acts he is not the cause of
the sin, but only of the act ordering it for his glory. Again, De Civitate
Dei, l. 13. c. 22. he says, That Sin as it is justly permitted by God, falls
under the Eternal Law, that is, the Divine Will or Decree. Moreover, Augustine
frequently asserts, that God punishes one sin by giving men up to another: So
Contra Julian. l. 5. c. 3. and de Civitate Dei, l. 15. c. 6. and libro de
Natura and Gratia, from cap. 20. to the end. To these Testimonies we may add
several Hypotheses of Augustine, which demonstratively evince Gods
Predeterminative Concurse to the substrate matter of sin. As, (1) He asserted,
that Reprobation was the act of Gods absolute Will, and so in it self positive
and absolute (2) He held, That Excecation and Obduration is the consequent of
Reprobation: of which see Jansenius, August. de G^t. Christ. l. 10. c. 3, 4.
(3) He maintained, That al sins in lapsed Nature are necessary, because
punishments, as Jansen. de Not. Lap. c. 22. p. 264. Lastly, that Augustine held
Gods Efficacious predeterminative Concurse to the substrate matter of sin, is
evident from the false Imputations charged on him by the Pelagians, who imputed
to him the same odiose and forged consequences, which have been ever since
imputed to the Assertors of Predeterminative Concurse. As, [1] They falsely
charged on him, that he asserted a fatal Necessity, and said, that God
compelled mon to sin. Whereas Augustine, l. 1. q. 2. ad Simpl. answers (in the
same manner as we now adays) That God is said to harden some Sinners, in that
he has not mercy on them, not that he impels them to sin, etc. [2] The
Pelagians charged on Augustine, That he denied to sinners the Liberty of their
Will, etc. It Is true, when he Si ergo servi sunt peccati, quid se jactant de
libero arbitrio? August. libr. de Spirit. and lit. c. 30.
discourses of Moral Liberty, consisting in Adherence unto God, he denies,
that sinners have any such Liberty; but yet he fully asserts a Natural
Liberty, that which is essential to the will, to belong to al sinners, of which
see Jansenius, August. Tom. 3. l. 7. c. 12. p. 330. To conclude, there is
scarce any imputation falsely charged on those that assert predeterminative
Concurse to the substrate matter of sin now adays, but it was also imputed to
Augustine by the Pelagians of old, and wiped off by him, as by us, which
sufficiently demonstrates, that his Sentiments were as to this Hypothesis the
same with ours. He that will see more of Augustins mind about this matter, may
consult Rutherford, de Providentia, cap. 30. Chamier, Panstrat. Tom. 2. Lib. 3.
c. 8.

Next to Augustine follow his Sectators and Disciples, Prosper and Prosper and
Fulgentius.
Fulgentius, whom our Adversaries would fain make to be of their persuasion,
but without shadow of Truth or Reason. As for the sentiments of Prosper
touching our Hypothesis, they are to be seen, ad capitula Gallorum, where,
following Augustine, he makes God to will sin as the punishment of sin. So
Fulgentius, l. 1. ad Monimum, c. 26. God, albeit he be not the Author of evil
cogitations, yet he is the Ordinator of evil Wills: neither does he cease to
work good out of the evil work of every evil man: neither in the very injust
works of the Will, does he relinquish the just order of his own works; because
this he has in that very order, that he does justly desert the evil Will -- and
in the very injust will of the sinner, he fulfills his own Justice, etc. What
could be said more evidently to demonstrate our Hypothesis? Is God the
Ordinator of evil Wills? does he not then efficaciously, yea predeterminatively
move and order them in their very evil acts? And does he not cease to work
good out of their evil works? Must he not then apply their wills to the
entitative act of those evil works? And what is this but to predetermine their
wills to the substrate matter of those evil works? Again, if God, in the very
injust works of the Will does not relinquish the just order of his works, then
surely he must of necessity apply and predetermine the will of the Sinner to
the entitative act of the work, thereby to maintain his own just order.

. 2. We now pass on to such as succeeded the Fathers, and Such as succeeded the
Fathers.
albeit they lived in the bosom of the Roman Church, yet they still defended
the Doctrine of Augustine and our Hypothesis, as to Gods efficacious
predeterminative Concurse to the substrate matter of sin. I shall begin with
Anselme, Bishop of Canterbury, who flourished Anselme.
about the year 1095, an Italian by Nation, Monk by profession, of a most
acute Ingenie, devotional Sanctity, conjoined with great Prudence and
Humility, according to the character given him by Baronius. This Anselme, de
Concord. Praescientiae, Praedestinationis, Gratiae and Liberi Arbitrii, c. 1.
thus speaks: God works althings, which are wrought by a just or unjust Will,
i. e. both good and evil works; In good works truly he causes both that
they are, and that they are good; but in evil works he causes that they are,
but not that they are evil. Herein he gives us the difference between Gods
Concurse to good and evil acts, as also the demonstration of our Hypothesis;
for if God causes evil acts that they are, then certainly he efficaciously
moves and applies the will to the act, which is all that we mean by
Predetermination.

Next follows Hugo de Sancto Victore, by Nation a Saxon, (and Hugo de Sancto
Victore.
so allied to us,) by profession a Monk, contemporary with Bernard, who
flourished about the year 1130. This Hugo, de Sacr. Fid. l. 1. c. 13. faith,
Malum esse vult Deus, and tamen malum non vult: vult esse malum, quia bonum est
malum esse; non vult ipsum malum, quia bonum non est ipsum malum.
That God wills there should be evil, and yet he does not will evil: He wills
there should be evil, because it is good there should be evil; but he wills not
evil, because evil it self is not good. An excellent description of Gods
predeterminative will and concurse to the substrate matter of sin, so as to
vindicate his Sacred Majesty from any hand in the moral vitiositie thereof:
(1) God wills there should be evil, i. e. he does, by an omnipotent efficacious
decree, will the existence of evil, in willing the substrate matter thereof: and
yet (2) He does not will evil, i. e. he does not with a will of approbation or
any way morally will evil as to its moral vitiositie or formal reason. (3) It Is
good there should be evil, i. e. as it conduces to the illustration of Gods
glory; and so God wills it. But (4) evil itself, [morally considered as evil]
is not good, and therefore not willed by God as such. The same Hugo, de
Sacramentis, par. 5. cap. 29. affirms, That God by presiding Deum malas
voluntates praesidendo, occulta and invisibili operatione ad suum arbitrium
temperare and inclinare.
over evil wills, does, by an occult and invisible operation, temper and incline
them to his own will. What could more expressly be said for the asserting Gods
efficacious predeterminative concurse to the substrate matter of sin? Does God
indeed preside over the evil wills of men, and so, by an occult and invisible
operation, temper and incline them to his own will? how is it possible then, but
that he apply and determine them to the entitative act of their sinful works?
And whereas Hugo foresaw many would be then, as now also, scandalized at this
doctrine, touching Gods efficacious concurse to the substrate matter of sin, he
adds this as the reason of the offense: Not because that which is spoken is
not well spoken, but because that which is well spoken is not well understood. I
wish our Adversaries would well consider this prophetic reflection of Hugo; of
which more hereafter in Bradwardines sentiments.

We pass on to Thomas Aquinas, whom some of our Adversaries Aquinas.
would fain conjure into their Camp, and make a Patron of their Antithesis:
but this is so great an imposition on the intelligent world, that I cannot but
admire at the confidence of those who make use of it. Yet this has been the
attempt not only of some less conversant in Aquinas's Works, but even of
learned Strangius, who is often more candid and ingenuous than others of his
persuasion. Thus Strangius, lib. 2. cap. 14. from page 313. to 317. endeavors
to demonstrate, That Thomas does not admit that physic predetermination of God
to al and singular actions of the will: The like a reverend Divine of estime
among our selves would fain persuade us, namely, That albeit the Dominicans are
for such an universal predetermination, yet Aquinas is not, etc. But let us a
little examine the reason of this subterfuge: (1) Was not Thomas Aquinas
himself a Dominican, of the Order of Dominic? And are not all the Dominicans
sworn Thomists? Albeit they are in regard of their Order Dominicans, yet are
they not al in regard of their Doctrine Thomists? How comes it to pass then
that they should contend so hotly for physic predetermination of the will by God
in all its natural actions, even such as are sinful, and yet Thomas their Master
against it? (2) Take the character of impartial Writers, and who ever denied
this to be Aquinas's sentiment? See learned and acute Dr. Samuel Ward,
Professor of Theology at Cambridge, his Determinations, page 117, 118. where
he proves Gods predeterminative Concurse to al actions of the will out of
Thomas. But because Dr. Ward seems to be our friend, we shall appele unto our
Adversaries for the decision of this Controversy, namely to Le Blanc and
Baronius. Le Blanc, Council. Arbitr. Hum. par. 3. these. 10. page 430. assures
us, That Thomas and his sectators the Dominicans, teach, for the explication of
Divine Concurse -- That God does premove and apply the very second causes to
their work: for this the dependence of the second causes on God their first
Mover does require. For, according to their mind, God is therefore said to be
the first Mover, because he does antecedently move and apply al other causes
to their operations, etc. What could be said more evidently to explicate
Aquinas's mind herein? Thus also Baronius, who, in his Metaphysics, Sect. 8.
Disp. 3.. 78. page 146. imputes this celebrious Opinion of Gods previous
predeterminative concurse to al actions unto Thomas Aquinas, as the principal
Founder thereof. So. 79. page 147. And. 82. page 149. he urges, That from the
opinion of Thomas it follows, that God is the Author of sin. The like. 85. page
151. But (3) to let pass the testimonies of others, if we may be allowed the
privilege of believing our own senses, and the reflections of our own reason
thereon, it is to me most evident, that Aquinas has copiosely and nervosely
defended our Hypothesis, and impugned the Antithesis of our Adversaries. Thus,
1. 2. Quaest. 79. Art. 2. The act of sin is both Ens and Act, and in both
regards it is from God: for it is necessary that every Ens or Being be derived
from the first Being, etc. And whereas Strangius and a reverend Divine among
our selves pretend, that this includes immediate concurse, but not
predeterminative, it is most evident, that Aquinas owned no concurse but what
was predeterminative: For what is predetermination of the will, but the
application Praedeterminare voluntatem est applicare voluntatem ad agendum, and
facere ut faciat, Strange. l. 2. c. 11. p. 244.
of it to its act, as Strangius, page 244. grants? And is not this the proper
notion whereby Aquinas describes the Concurse of God to al acts of the will?
What more commun with him, than this grand Effate, That God applies al second
causes to their act? Thus in his sums, par. 1. Quaest. 105. Art. 5. he lays
down this conclusion, That God acts in every Agent finally, effectively, and
formally, yet so as they also act. And then in the explication hereof he says,
(3) That it is to be considered, that God does not only move things to work, as
by applying the forms and virtues of things to their operations, (as also the
Artificer applies the axe to cut, who yet sometimes gives not the form to the
axe) but also gives forms to creatures acting, and preserves them in being --
and because the form is in the thing, -- and God is properly the cause of the
universal Being in althings, which among althings is more intime, it follows,
that God works intimely in althings; and for this reason in sacred Scripture,
the operations of nature are ascribed unto God, as working in nature, according
to that, Job 10. 11. With skin and with flesh have thou clothed me, etc. What
could have been said more evidently to demonstrate our Hypothesis? He says,
(1) That God acts in every Agent, not only finally and effectively, but also
formally. (2) That God moves things to work, by APPLYING (i. e.
predetermining) the forms and virtues of things to their operations. Yea, (3)
That God applies the second cause to act, as the Artificer applies the
instrument to work. Whereby he makes al second causes, the will not excepted,
but a kind of instrument of Gods principal efficience: For the will, albeit it
may be termed a principal cause of most of its acts, yet in regard of the
Divine concurse, which it receives, and in virtue whereof it acts, it may
safely be termed a vital Instrument. (4) That God acting most intimely in
althings, the very operations of nature are ascribed unto him, which notes
predetermination in the highest point. So also Aquinas, Quaest. Disp. q. 3. de
Potentia, art. 7. speaks fully of this predeterminative application of al
second causes by God. And indeed how frequently is this Hypothesis demonstrated
by him? So that I cannot but wonder, that any learned man should urge Aquinas's
testimony against us.

We descend now to Scotus, (the Head of a Sect opposite to the Scotus.
Thomists, yet) who has given evident and strong confirmation and
demonstration to our Hypothesis. I am not ignorant, that a learned and pious
Divine makes use also of Scotus's name to patronise his Antithesis: and I shall
not deny, but that Scotus has in many points too much favored the Pelagian
interest, which has inclined the Jesuits to follow him rather than Thomas; yet
this I no way dout but to make good, that as to our Hypothesis, touching Gods
predeterminative concurse to the substrate matter of sin, Scotus is fully of our
persuasion. This will appear evident, (1) if we consider his notion of Divine
Prescience of things future, which he makes to arise from the Divine Decree
giving futurition to them, as Le Blanc, de Praescient. these. 33. page 443.
confesses. And certainly such as hold Gods prescience of sins future to be
from his own Decree efficaciously determining their futurition, cannot with any
shadow of reason deny Gods predeterminative concurse to the substrate matter of
sin. (2) Scotus and his sectators generally Scotistae nihil hujusmodi physicum
and intrinsecum creaturae inditum esse volunt, sed eam dicunt per decretum Dei
extrinsecum, absolutum, and efficax ad agendum applicari, ac determinari,
Carleton. Philos. Disp. 30. sect. 1. page 327.
hold, That God efficaciously concurs to al second causes and their acts, not
by any influence or impression on the second cause, (which the Thomists assert)
but by his absolute and efficacious Decree applying and determining the second
cause to act. Which we judge to be the very truth, as it has been demonstrated
by us, Court Gent. P. 4. B. 2. c. 7.. 3. So that the Thomists and Scotists
differ not really as to the point of predetermination, but only as to its
origin and principe; the Thomists making it to consiste in a physic intrinsec
influxe impressed on the creature, and the Scotists placing the whole of it in
the volition of God, without any force impressed on the second cause, as our
Countryman Count. Carleton, in his Philosophy, Disp. 30. Sect. 1. page 327.
has incomparably well stated it. But (3) Scotus, in 4. Sentent. Distinct. 49.
Quaest. 6.. 14. page 522. (edit. 1620.) has these very words: Est contra
naturam ejus, [scil. voluntatis] determinari a causa inferiori, quia tunc ipsa
non esset superior: non est autem contra naturam ejus determinari a causa
superiori, quia cum hoc stat, quod sit causa in suo ordine, It Is against its
nature, [namely the wils] to be determined by an inferior cause, because then
it should not be superior; but it is not against its nature to be determined by
a superior cause, because it is consistent herewith, that it be a cause in its
own order. Wherein Scotus does most acutely, though briefly, state the
Controversy about Predetermination both negatively and positively. (1)
Negatively, That the will cannot be determined, or predetermined, by any
inferior cause; because then it were not superior: for whatever cause
predetermines another to act, is so far superior to it: it being impossible,
yea a contradiction, that the inferior should predetermine the superior. (2)
Positively, That it is not against the nature of the will to be predetermined by
a superior cause, i. e. by God the first cause, who gave it being, and
therefore may without violence to its liberty determine or predetermine it in
its operation: and Scotus's reason is invincible; because to be predetermined
by a superior cause, is very well consistent with the wills being a cause in its
own order: Yea, we may raise this reason to a greater height, therefore the will
is a cause in its own order, i. e. a particular, proper, principal, or less
principal cause, according to the nature of its causalitie and effect, because
it is predetermined to act by God the superior first Cause: so that Gods
predeterminative concurse to the actions of the will, even such as have sin
appendent to them, is, according to Scotus's sentiments, so far from infringing
or diminishing the wills natural order and liberty in acting, as that it
corroborates and confirms the same. (4) Lastly, Scotus in 2. Sent. Did. 37.
q. 2. says expressly, That [albeit God determine the will to the material act
which is sinful, yet] the vitiositie of sin is not to be attributed to God, but
to the create will, because the create will is under an essential obligation to
give rectitude to the action; but God is not bound by any such obligation, etc.
Which is the same with the sentiments of Zuinglius and our reformed Divines,
albeit opposed by the new Methodists, as well as Arminians and Molinists.

Having laid down the concurrent testimonies of the two principal Gregorius
Ariminensis.
Heads of the Schools, Thomas and Scotus, we now pass on to their sectators,
whereof we shall give the mention but of a few more illustrious. To begin with
Gregorius Ariminensis, who was by profession a Dominican, and great defendent
of Augustin's Doctrine; whom Bishop Usher valued as the soundest of the
Schole-men, and Dr. Barlow, as the acutest: His invict demonstration of our
Hypothesis we find, in Sent. 2. Distinct. 34. Art. 3. where he demonstrates
Gods* immediate efficience in producing the entitative act of sin thus: (1)
Every evil act when produced is conserved by God. Ergo. The antecedent he
proves thus: because otherwise every evil act should not in its existence
immediately depend on God, but be independent; and so by stronger reason, the
will itself, which is more perfect than its act, should be independent. Again,
if it be not repugnant to the Divine Bonitie to conserve the evil act, neither
is it repugnant to it to produce the same. (2) The will is of itself indifferent
to any act, therefore it must be determined to every act by God. (3) If God be
not the immediate cause of the act, which is evil, he is not the Maker of al
Beings. (4) Al good that is not God, is from God as the Efficient thereof; but
the act morally evil is yet naturally good. Ergo. Hence he procedes to answer
the Objections of his and our Adversaries thus: (1) If God produce Object 1.
the same evil act, which man produces, then he sins as man sins. Whereto he
answers, by denying the consequence, and that on this reason; because man does
not therefore precisely sin, because he does an evil act, as it is Ens or act;
but therefore he sins, because he does it evilly, i. e. against right reason;
[or the Law of God] but now God produces the same act according to right
reason, and therefore well. So the same man borne in fornication, is produced by
God well, but by the fornicator evilly. But (2) it is farther objected by his
Adversaries then, as by ours now, thus: Thou will say, that those things that
are, per Object. 2.
se, in themselves [or intrinsecally] evil, as the hatred of God, or the like,
can never be well done: therefore neither by God. I responde, says he, (as we)
that there is or can be no entitie which may not be well done, albeit not by
every Agent: e. g. man envieth; but God, although he produce the same act of
envy with man, yet he does not envy. For all such acts, beyond the simple
production or motion of such or such a thing, do connote something on the part
of the Author, who is so denominated, which agrees not to God: So to steal,
besides the simple translation of the thing from place to place, connotes the
thing stolen not to belong to him that translated it: but God translating the
same thing, does not translate what is not his own; and therefore is not said
to be the thief, etc. But here we are to note, that whereas Gregorius
Ariminensis makes God to be a partial cause of sin, it is not to be understood,
as if God were the partial cause of the entitative act, for so he makes God to
be a total cause; but he calls God a partial cause of sin, as he produces only
the entitative act, not the vitiositie, whereof man only is the moral cause.
Thus also Holcot, our Countryman, super Sentent. lib. 2. Did. 1. q. 1. Holcot.
makes God to be a partial cause of sin, yet not the Author of it: whereby he
plainly means, as he explicates himself, that God is the physical cause of the
substrate matter, or entitative act only, but man the moral cause of the
vitiositie also. This I mention, because a reverend Divine of name among us
from these expressions of Ariminensis and Holcot, would persuade us, that they
make God the partial cause of the entitative act. We might add to these the
testimonies of Altissiodorensis, in Sent. 2. where he proves Altissiodorensis
by strong arguments, namely from the Passion of Christ, etc. That the evil
action is from God operating and cooperating with the human will; of which more
in what follows touching Bradwardine.

I now come to Thomas Bradwardine, our pious, learned and profound Thomas
Bradwardine his character and zele for efficacious Grace.
Bradwardine, whom, might I be allowed my liberty, I should rather reckon
among our first Reformers, than among the Sons of Antichrist; for indeed he was
a zelose Patron of, and stout Champion for the fundamental points of the
Reformed Religion, specially efficacious free Grace, which he with so much
courage, strength of argument, and flaming zele defended against the Pelagians
of those days. This Thomas Bradwardine, borne at Hartfield in Sussex,
flourished about the year 1350. He was a person of prodigiose natural ingenie,
which he greatly polisht by all manner of acquired Sciences, specially the
Mathematics and scholastic Theology. He was a great Affecter and Admirer of
metaphysic Contemplations, which in his first studies he greedily drank in,
even to the neglect of the holy Scriptures, because they favored not of a
metaphysic style, as he himself informs us, in his Book de Causa Dei. When,
says he, in the state of my unregeneracie, I came into the Schools, and heard
Lectures on Paul's Epistles of free Grace, etc. it did no way relish with me,
quia non sapit stylum metaphysicum, because it savored not of a metaphysic
style. It was with me, as it was with Augustine of old, nothing would please but
scholastic discourses for free will, etc. But after his Conversion he was, as
another Augustine, the greatest Champion for free efficacious Grace. Balaeus, de
Script. Brit. cent. 5. cap. 87. tells us, That John Baconthorp, that famous
Divine and Englishman, returning from Paris had a great contest with
Bradwardine about the points of Gods Prescience and Predestination; to whom at
last Bradwardine assents in all those points; as the same Baconthorp declares,
in Sent. lib. 4. Did. 1. q. 4. Afterward he was called to be Confessor to
King Edward III. and thence made Archbishop of Canterbury, without any desire
of his own thereto. He was indeed a good Mathematician, a great Philosopher,
and excellent Divine, being communly styled Doctor profundus, the profound
Doctor.

Neither was he less renowned for his Piety and Zele in the His zele for
efficacious Concurse to the substrate matter of sin.
Cause of God, against the Pelagians, which he defended with great fervor, as
well as acumen of spirit; which also is greatly illustrious in his defense of
Gods efficacious Concurse and Providence about the substrate matter of sinful
acts. This he frequently inculcates in his most excellent Book de Causa Dei,
specially lib. 1. c. 30, 31, 32, 33, 34. He demonstrates (1) That al voluntary
actions are governed by the Laws of Divine Providence, cap. 30, 31. p. 271,
etc. (2) That althings which have any natural Entitie or Being, proceed from
Gods Providence actually and efficaciously disposing them, and not merely
permitting. Which he demonstrates many ways: as [1] Because there is no act
simply evil and inordinate, by any inordination precedent to the divine will.
[2] Because otherwise the whole Universe would not be disposed in the best
manner. [3] Because the Scriptures both of Old and New Testments, ascribe to
God in his Providence about Sin active Names. Thus cap. 32. p. 288. (3) That
about whatever Gods Permission is, his actual Volition is also employed about
the same. And he gives this demonstrative reason hereof: For albeit those
things that are evil as evil are not good, yet it is good that there should be
not only good things, but also evil. For unless it were good that evils be, the
Omnipotent good would not suffer them to be, as Cap. 33.

Hence, (4) He comes l. 34. to the state of the controversy, How God wills Sin.
How God wills sin, and how he wills it not. [1] He proves, p. 294, 295. That God
must necessarily will the existence of Sin, because he permits it: also God does
voluntarily provide for, yea act all the voluntary acts of the will both good and
evil, with all their positive circumstances, which necessarily import sin.
Again, This Proposition, Sin is, is true; and therefore there must be some
cause of its truth, which can be no other than the divine will, from which al
complexe beings as well as incomplexe have their origination. Again, `Whatever
is good must proceed from the first good: but that Sin existe, is good,
according to Augustine. So Hugo says, That God wills that sins existe, because
this is good. Moreover, he brings in Hugo speaking thus; (which deserves a
great remarque) If it be said, God wills sin, this seems harsh and scandalous to
the ear; and therefore some pious mind does refute this, not because that which
is spoken, is il spoken, but because that which is well spoken is il understood.
[2] Thence Bradwardine procedes to refute Lombard, who asserts, That God wills
sin as a punishment, not under this reason, as it is sin; [i. e. materially or
entitatively considered] which Hypothesis of Lombard he refutes, by showing,
That the punishment of sin is necessarily conjoined with the Sin: so that if
God wills sin as a punishment, he must necessarily will the existence of sin.
Also whoever knows two things to be necessarily and inseparably conjoined, and
wills that they should be so conjoined, and knowingly and rationally wills one;
the same person wills also the other; specially if about both he employ an act
of his will: But now God knows and wills that those two, Sin and Punishment be
conjoined together, and rationally wills the one, namely the punishment of sin,
therefore also the sin. Again, he that wills an Antecedent, wills also the
Consequent, at least in an universal, albeit not in a particular: for he that
wills a whole, wills all the parts necessary thereto. [3] Thence he procedes, p.
300. to show, how God wills sin: God, says he, does no way will Sin simply, but
only in some limited respect: For, to say that God wills something simply, is,
according to the commun manner of speech, to say, that he loves it and approves
of it as good. Yea, adds he, may it not be said, that in the whole Universe
there is no such thing as Inordination, Deformity, or Sin simply considered,
but only Sin in some respect? Because in regard of the prime and supreme Cause,
al Beings both positive and privative are sweetly disposed with the highest
wisdom, beauty, and justice. Whence [4] He gives us the difference between
Gods Concurse to sinful acts, and to such as are good, p. 302. God, says he,
is not the Author of sin, as of that which is done well: For of this he is the
Author so, as that he alone does supernaturally create, and give to the
wel-doer, Faith, Hope and Love, etc. But it is not so as to sin. i. e. As to
good, God produces not only the natural act, but also the moral Bonitie, but
as to Sin, he produces only the natural entitative Act. [5] He thence p. 302.
explicates, how the Apostle Paul and the Fathers denied, that God wills Sin:
When, says he, Augustine and the other holy men deny that God wills Sin, the
cause of this negation seems this: Because the Apostle and Augustine, and other
holy men placed Predestination, Prescience, and the like on Gods part, the
Pelagians and other Heretics would excuse Sinners from their sins, and retort
the cause and blame on God, who so predestined or foreknew: therefore these
holy men would say, that God by his Predestination, Prescience or such like,
does not compel them against their will to sin, but that they sin freely and by
their own will; and that God by predestinating, foreknowing, or willing sins,
does not sin, nor do unjustly, neither is he the first imputable, or culpable
cause of sins; but the first, imputable, and culpable cause is the proper will
of the Sinner. This indeed is the proper state of our controversy at this day.
Then he adds, page 303. But if it yet be said, that it always hears il with
many to say, That God does any wise will sin, it is certainly true, and that
peradventure according to Hugo before cited, not because that which is said is
not well said, but Non quia quod dicitur non been dicitur, sed quia quod been
dicitur, non been intelligi^tur. Hugo.
because that which is well said, is not well understood. I would to God
therefore that they would take the Salt of Divine wisdom, and savor and
understand the truth which is savory to a sane taste; and that they would know,
that there is no evil in the world, which is not for some great good: why
therefore should we substract from the World, and from God the Author of the
World, this way of doing good, or of benefaction, which is so admirable and
great? Yea it seems more miraculose and great, to work good out of evils than
out of goods, or to work good only. And without peradventure it seems so
disgustful to many, if it be said, that God wills and produces the act of
Incest of the Father with the Daughter, of the Son with the Mother, of
Parricide, Sedition, Blasphemy, and other like sins: and yet not only the
Saints, but also the Philosophers speak thus: For who in such an incest
prepares the seed, and moves, creates, and infuseth the soul into the foetus,
but God? and however it may sound, thus the Saints of God speak, yea the Spirit
of God, who speaks in them. What could be said more acutely, demonstratively
and divinely for the deciding our controversy, would men but receive it?

(5) Again, Bradwardine, l. 2. c. 20. p. 542, etc. proves out How the
entitative act is from Gods Predeterminative Concurse.
of Altissiodorensis, super 2. sent. That the evil action is from God operating
and cooperating with the human will. Altissiodorensis's arguments are these, [1]
From the Passion of Christ, which was good, and proceeded from a good cause,
namely the Will of God. [2] From the act of Fornication, whereby an holy Prophet
is begotten: which act is the cause of good, and therefore good; and yet it is
also evil: and therefore an evil action as it is an action is good and from
God. Thence he adds the Testimony of Thomas, in Quaest. de malo, q. 19. where
he demands, Whether the act of sin be from God? and he answers thus: It must be
said, that among the Ancients there was a double opinion concerning this matter:
some said more anciently, that the action of Sin was not from God; attending to
the very Deformity of Sin, which is not from God: but some said, that the
action of Sin is from God; attending to the very Essence of the Act, which must
be granted to be from God, and that on a double reason; [1] Commun, because God
being Ens or Being by his own Essence, and his very Essence his Being, it must
thence necessarily follow, that whatever does participate of Being, must be
derived from him who is Being by Essence. [2] Special: for it is necessary that
al motions of second Causes be produced by the first Mover, who is God, as p.
554.

(6) Bradwardine, l. 2. c. 22. p. 559. rises higher, and proves strongly, That
it implies a contradiction for any Nature to act or move without God, of
himself, properly, actually, and specially applying it to act, and moving of
it. Which he demonstrates many ways: as [1] Because no natural virtue or form
can operate without Gods cooperating therewith. [2] Because al natural things
or causes are but as Instruments in regard of God the first Cause. [3] Because
the create will cannot subsist of it self; therefore neither can it act of it
self, as c. 24. p. 563. [4] Because God, by reason of his infinite Actualitie,
permits nothing but what he wills.

(8) Bradwardine, l. 3. c. 29. p. 739. ascends yet higher, and How God
spontaneously impels men to the entitative act of Sin.
demonstrates, That God, albeit he impel no man violently against his will, yet
he impels al men's wills spontaneously, and draws them to al their free acts,
even such as have sin annexed to them. But further, adds he, it may be
probably said, that God does in some sense necessitate to the very act of sin,
as to the substance of the act; yet it does not thence follow that he does
necessitate to sin, or to the deformity of sin, as it is sin, or the
deformity of sin: for the omnipotent God may, as it appears, separate the very
substance of the act and whatever is positive in it from the Deformity of sin,
and can produce and conserve such an effect really positive and good, without
such a defect and privative malice: Specially, sithat Sin, Deformity,
Vitiositie, or defect is not essentially the very act, nor of the essence of
the act, nor necessarily a consequent of the substance of the act. Therefore
the good God acting rightly, pre-acting and in some sense necessitating to such
an act, according to its substance and nature good, the vitiositie or sin does
not thence necessarily follow: whence therefore does it follow, but from the
free will of the Creature freely deficient, and from the will of the Sinner? What
could be said more acutely, more judiciously, more demonstratively, and more
piously, to put a period to this controversy, had not men a strong impulse to
oppose the Truth? I have been the more prolixe in rehearsing these illustrious
and demonstrative Sentiments of Bradwardine, because I find nothing newly
started by our Adversaries, but what I find rationally, solidly, and
convictively solved by him, above three hundred years since. As for his
solutions to the particular Objections made by his Opponents then, and ours
now, we shall produce them in what follows in answer to the Objections against
our Hypothesis, Chapter 6.. 1, 2.

Having produced the concurrent Sentiments of the ancient The Dominicans
sentiments.
Fathers and Scholemen for the confirmation of our Hypothesis, we might now
descend to the later Scholemen, specially the Thomists; but these lie under the
same criminal accusation and imputation with our Adversaries, as the orthodoxe
Calvinist; and it deserves a particular remarque, that look as the Pelagian
Jesuits oppose the Dominicans in this point under the Bears skin of being
Calvinists; so the Arminians and New Methodists oppose the Calvinists in the
same point, under the Bears skin of being Dominicans: and indeed no wonder,
sithat the Dominicans and Calvinists in this point about Gods predeterminative
Concurse to the substrate matter of sin do greatly accord. And let our
Adversaries say what they list against the Dominicans, it is certain, that in
this matter they have done great service to the cause and interest of Truth: and
particularly Alvarez, who is Alvarez.
principally struck at by the adverse party, deserves great honor and diligent
inspection by those who have any kindness for our Hypothesis, or any part of
the Doctrine of Efficacious Grace. I am not ignorant what an heavy load of
Imputations, Strangius, and a Reverend Divine of Name among our selves, have
laid upon him in their Oppositions to what he has writ in the defense of our
Hypothesis; but the Jesuits themselves, who are his most puissant Impugnators,
give him a more candid and favorable treatment: For in the treaty between them
and the Jansenists begun Feb. 18. 1663. the Jesuits rejecting the Arbitrament
of Gregory Ariminensis and Estius, whom they judged more severe, they pitched
upon Alvarez as the more moderate, to whom they required the Jansenists to
conform in those points controverted, in order to an accommodement: and the
reasons they allege are of moment: For, say they, Alvarez having assisted at
the Congregations de Auxiliis, there is a grand appearance, that he and those
others who writ at the same time and since, took up this mode of speech to
salve Liberty, according to the movements and sentiments which the Popes,
Clement 8th, and Paul 5th had; albeit they made no Decree on this matter; of
which see Refutat. de Pere Ferrier, Chap. 6. and Idea of Jansenisme, p. 82.
wherein remarque, (1) That the Jesuits, Alvarez's sworn enemies, give him a
more favorable character, as one, who for his moderation was employed by the
Popes to assist at the Congregations de Auxiliis, for the composing the
differences in those points in controversy between the Dominicans and Jesuits
about Predetermination. Yea, (2) That the Popes themselves, Clement 8th, and
Paul 5th, had the same sentiments with Alvarez. Is it not strange then, that
the Jesuits, who are professed enemies to Predetermination, and the Popes
themselves, who have been generally favorers of Pelagianisme, should have a
greater kindness for Alvarez's sentiments about Predetermination, than
Protestant Divines, whose Doctrine against the Pelagians and Jesuits can never
be defended but by those principes on which Alvarez bottomes his
Predetermination? For mine own part, I cannot but confess, that in those
Notions about Efficacious Grace and Predetermination, I read Alvarez with all
possible diligence and exactitude of spirit, and found therein so penetrant an
acumen, so profound soliditie, and such masculine Demonstrations, as that I
never met with his equal, excepting Bradwardine and Ariminensis. This Justice I
conceive my self under an essential obligation to do him, to wipe off those
undeserved clamors and aspersions which Strangius and another Divine of note
among us, have loaded him with. His own Sentiments in the defense of our
Hypothesis are laid down in his excellent Disputations de Auxil. l. 3. Disput.
24. where he does with a great deal of moderation and yet invincible force of
argument demonstrate, That God does by a previous motion, truly and
efficiently, or according to the mode of a physical cause, premove free will to
the act of sin, as it is an Act or Being. His Arguments for the demonstration
of this Thesis are weighty and invincible, namely from the Participation,
Limitation, and Dependence of every Second cause, etc. Of which hereafter, c.
5. Lastly, that the Scholemen generally, besides such as are Pelagian, assert
divine Predetermination to the material entitie of Sin, see Twisse, Vind. Great.
l. 2. Digress. 2.

I now pass on to Jansenius and his Sectators, who are brought The Doctrine of
Jansenius concordant with our Hypothesis.
upon the Theater by our Adversaries as Patrons of their Antithesis: but this
is so great a mistake in matter of fact, that I cannot but admire any learned
man should take refuge under it. Yet thus Strangius l. 2. c. 14. p. 318. brings
in Jansenius opposing Augustine both to the Dominicans and Jesuits as to the
point of Predetermination. The like is urged by a Reverend Divine of C. T. p.
3. p. 93.
repute among us. But this mistake is too obvious and great to take place among
diligent and impartial Inquirers: For (1) It Is evident, that Jansenius rejected
the term Predetermination as maintained by the Dominicans, not the thing it
self as asserted by Augustine: Thus in his August. Tom. 3. l. 2. c. 22. page 77,
etc. he proves, That there is no manner of speech among the Scholemen so
efficacious and pregnant to express Predetermination by, but Augustine uses
the same to illustrate Gods efficacious concurse. And Tom. 3. l. 8. c. 1. p.
343. he acknowledges, That those learned men the Dominicans have reached the
Marrow of Divine Adjutorie, and thence the true opinion of Augustine. Again,
cap. 3. p. 346. he says expressly, that herein Medicinal Adjutorie agrees
with physic Predetermination, that the office of physically predetermining the
will does truly belong unto it, and it may be termed by that name taken not
only in the abstract, but also in the concrete. Whence in the same Chapter he
uses the very term of physic Predetermination to express efficacious
Concurse by, albeit not in the same manner as it is used by the Scholemen. So
that it is evident, he was not averse from the thing, albeit he but seldom used
the term to avoid the cavils of Scholastic Theologues, as also to confine
himself to the terms used by Augustine. (2) That reverend Divine among us, who
makes use of Jansenius's name against physic Predetermination, does yet grant,
that Jansenius held, the existence of sin to be necessary as a Punishment.
Wherein he opposes Jansenius, and also Augustine, who held, that sin as a
punishment, was willed and caused by God, as before. (3) Jansenius August. de
Statu Not. Laps. l. 4. c. 21. p. 264. assures us, That men in their lapsed
state, before Faith be introduced, are under the captivity of lust, and can do
nothing but sin; which captivity is the same with that foresaid necessity and
coaction, whereby sins committed by unbelievers are said to be necessary, and
therefore they have no power to abstain from sin. And Tom. 3. de Great. Christi,
l. 10. he stoutly maintains these following assertions about Reprobation, which
clearly evince Gods efficacious predeterminative concurse to the substrate
matter of sin. [1] He proves, cap. 2. page 420. That Gods negative Reprobation
is* also positive. [2] He demonstrates, cap. 4. page 423. That the cause of
Reprobation, according to its comparative consideration, is the absolute will of
God. This is owned by reverend Mr. Baxter, Cathol. Theol. part. 3. Sect. 7..
22. page 93. in these words: [ Jansenius's Doctrine is that] the Reprobation of
men was by Gods positive absolute will, of men in original sin, and the effect
of it excecation and obduration. This being his proper opinion, it necessarily
follows, that he asserted Gods predeterminative concurse to the entitative act
of sin: for, as it is granted by Strangius, and others, efficacious
predetermination always follows as a necessary consequent of absolute
predefinition: if God absolutely decrees to leave men to sin, it necessarily
follows, that he efficaciously determine men to the entitative act of sin. [3]
He goes higher than most of our Divines dare do in this point, in asserting,
cap. 5. page 424. That damnation, excecation, obduration are the effects of
Reprobation. But yet cap. 7. page 427. he answers the objection of such, that
argue hence, That God lies in wait to destroy such as are reprobated; assuring
us, that the sinner only is the culpable criminal cause of his own damnation.
And cap. 10. page 433. he demonstrates, That Reprobates are not created unto
damnation, i. e. damnation as such is not the end of their creation: which
sufficiently vindicates the holy God from being the cause of their sin or
damnation.

As for the Jansenists, that they are of the same persuasion with The
Jansenists sentiments.
the Dominicans as touching our Hypothesis, is evident from their concessions
to the Jesuits in their Treaty begun Febr. 18. 1663. mentioned in the
Refutation of Pere Ferrier, Chap. 6. also Idea of Jansenisme, page 82. The sum
was this: The Bishop of Comenge, a friend of the Jansenists, proposed this as
an expedient to reconcile the two Parties, That the Jansenists declare, that
they had no other sentiment about this matter, but what was taught by the
Thomists. And because some of the Thomists fly higher than others, the
Jesuits demanded, That the Jansenists should reduce themselves to the form of
speech used by Alvarez. So that it seems the Jansenists in the point of
efficacious Concurse are looked on by the Jesuits (as indeed they are) as
those that went beyond the very Dominicans. The Jansenists replied, That the
doctrine of Jansenius was not different from that of the Thomists, albeit it
was not his design to render himself conform to them, but to Augustine. And
the true reason why the Jansenists do not maintain greater correspondence with
the Dominicans, is, not their difference in doctrine, but because many of the
Dominicans have by a Spirit of Cabal, or of Faction joined with the Jesuits.

Lastly, that our Hypothesis, touching Gods efficacious Concurse to The Roman
Catechism.
al actions, even to such as have sin appendent to them, was generally owned,
not only by single Sects or Parties, but by the generality of the Roman
Church, before the rise of the Jesuits, is evident from the Doctrine of the
Roman Catechism, published by the command of the Council of Trent; where in
the explication of Non solum Deus universa quae sunt providentia sua tuetur
atque administrat, verum etiam quae moventur and agunt aliquid, intima virtute
ad motum atque actionem ita impellit, ut quamvis secundarum causarum
efficientiam non impediat, praeveniat tamen, cum ejus occultissima vis ad
singula pertinear, Sapient. 8. 1. Act. 17.
the Apostles Creed, about the end of the first Article, par. 1. cap. 2.. 20.
page 23. (edit. 1619.) we find this great testimony to confirm our
Hypothesis: God does not only preserve and administrate althings that are by
his providence, but also does by an intime virtue, impel those things that are
moved and do act any thing, to motion and action; so that albeit he does not
impede the efficience of second causes, yet he prevents them, in as much as his
most secret force reaches unto althings; and as the Wiseman testifies, Wisd.
8. 1. He reaches from one end to another mightily, and sweetly does order
althings. Wherefore it is said by the Apostle, Act. 17. 21. For in him we live,
and move, and have our being* What could have been said more clearly and fully
for the asserting a predeterminative Concurse to al actions and motions of the
creature, even such as have sin annexed to them? And by whom is this Doctrine
taught? By the Council of Trent, which is the standard and measure of the Roman
Faith, and no great friend to the Doctrine of Christ. Is it not strange then,
that Reformed Divines, yea such as would be accounted Calvinists, cannot allow
the efficacious Concurse of God so much as Trent-Papists allow?

. 3. We have seen how far the Latin Fathers and those who lived The sentiments
of Reformed Divines.
in Communion with the Roman Church have openly espoused our Hypothesis; let us
now descend to Reformed Theologues, and examine what their sentiments have been
hereof. And here indeed we have an ample field to exspatiate in, albeit our
Adversaries the new Methodists would confine us to a small number of Adherents.
We shall begin with John Wiclef, our first English Apostolic Wiclef.
Reformer, who following Bradwardine his Colleague in this, as in many other
points about Grace, asserted, That as God necessitates the futuritions of
instants, so also he necessitates all the events which in those instants are
futures, Art. Constant. damnat. 278. Again, he held, That God necessitates al
active creatures to each of their acts; as Walden, tom. 1. cap. 21. page 35.
and cap. 23. page 37. also Wideford, page 240, 248. Again he asserted, That to
whatever Gods permission reached, to that also his actual volition reached; as
Walden, tom. 1. page 39. which clearly demonstrates our Hypothesis.

But we pass on to John Calvin, whom some new Methodists, Calvin.
particularly Strangius, would force into their Camp. Thus Strange. page 384,
554. where he endeavors to take off Calvin from our Party: but he that looks
into Calvin's Institutions, l. 1. c. 18. will find our assertion not only nakedly
owned, but fully explicated and demonstrated, and that by a multitude of
scriptural instances. Particularly he proves, (1) That God wills the existence
Interdum bona voluntate hominem velle aliquid, quod Deus non vult. Rursus fieri
posse, ut idem velit homo voluntate mala, quod Deus vult bona, Calv. ix August.
of men's sins; so that things repugnant to Gods will of precept, are yet brought
about by his efficacious will of Decree and Providence. (2) That Gods permission
of sin is not otiose, but active and energetic. (3) That Gods providence
moderates and orders the sins of men. And he concludes the Chapter with this
seasonable caution: As for those to whom this Doctrine of Gods judicial
induration may seem rigid, let them but a little think, how tolerable their
morositie may be, who reject a thing attested by such clear testimonies of
Scripture, because it excedes their capacity, and count it a crime to bring to
light things, which if God did not know to be profitable for our knowledge, he
would never have reveled them by his Prophets and Apostles. So in other parts
of his Works, as Resp. contra Pighium, de Libr. Arbitr. page 225. also Tractat.
de occulta Dei providentia, he clearly asserts and demonstrates our Hypothesis.
This is well taken notice of by judicious Davenant, in his Animadversions on
Gods love, etc. p. 322. It is, says he, Calvin's opinion, de occult. Dei
provident. resp. ad 2. Lapsum Adae non fortuitum esse, sed occulto Dei decreto
ordinatum. God foresaw Adams fall; he had power to have hindered it, but he would
not, because himself had decreed otherwise. This is the effect of Calvin's
doctrine. But as for the involving of men in sin and damnation out of his only
will and pleasure, these are consequents falsely inferred upon Calvin's Doctrine,
by himself disclaimed, etc.

How much Zuinglius favored this opinion of Gods efficacious Zuinglius.
Concurse to the entitative act of sin, is sufficiently evident from those
great reproaches which the Papists lode him with for it; which he wiped off with
this answer, That the same action, which is sinful in regard of man, is not so
in regard of God, because he is not under the same Law with man. Thus Baronius,
Metaphys. Sect. 8. Disput. 3.. 87. page 152. The third mode, says he, is
peculiar to Zuinglius, who teaches, that God exciting the will to an evil
object does not sin, because God has no Law set to him, but man has. To which
Baronius answers, That albeit God has no Law set to him by any Superior, yet
he has a Law set to him by his own nature, not to deal injustly or cruelly
with men. This reply, although borrowed from Bellarmine, is now become commun
with our Adversaries, yet without the least shadow of reason: for they do but
beg the question, in saying, That God hereby deals injustly or cruelly with his
creature. As for Zuinglius's proper sentiments about Gods exciting and applying
the wills of men to the entitative acts of sin, they are fully and clearly laid
down in his Book de Providentia Dei, cap. 6. tom. 1. of his Works, page 365.
Seeing a Law is given to man, he always sins, when he acts against the Law,
albeit he neither be, nor live, nor operate, but in God, and from God, and by
God: But what God works by man is turned to man for sin, but not in like
manner to God: for man is under a law, but God is free -- Therefore one and the
same wickedness, suppose adultery or homicide, Umim igitur atque idem
facinus, quantum Dei est Authoris, Motoris, ac Impulsoris, opus est, crimen non
est; quantum autem hominis est, crimen ac scelus est. Ille enim* lege non
tenetur, hic autem lege etiam damnatur, Zuing. prove. cap. 2. page 365.
as from God the Author, Motor, and Impulsor, it is a work, not a crime; but as
it is from man, so it is a crime and wickedness: for God is not bound up by
law, but man is condemned by law. Thus he procedes to illustrate by many
exemples, of David, etc. Thence, page 367. he instanceth in the induration of
Pharaoh, etc. wherein note, (1) That he calls God the Author, Motor, and
Impulsor of the act; which must be understood, not morally, but physically, as
he excites and applies the will to its act. (2) That he frees God from being the
Author or moral cause of the sin, because he acts not against any law: a
distinction which was valid in his time, albeit scoffed at nowadays even by
Reformed Divines, yea Calvinists. Neither was this distinction coined by
Zuinglius, as Bellarmine and others would fain persuade, but in use long before
Zuinglius, by Scotus, Ariminensis, and other scholastic Theologues, who
followed Augustine herein. Thus Scotus, in Sent. 2. Did. 37. Quaest. 2. says,
The same action is sinful in regard of the create will, but not as to Gods
concurse, quia voluntas creata debet rectitudinem actioni tribuere, Deus autem
non debet, because the create will is under an essential obligation or law, to
give rectitude to the action, but God is not, as before.

How deeply Beza was engaged in the defense of our Hypothesis Beza.
is sufficiently evident by his Controversies in this point: as Tractat.
Theolog. vol. 1. page 313, etc. in answer to the calumnies of Heshusius about
the Providence of God, he says, (1) That no event ever happens otherwise than
God decrees: which he demonstrates from the Omnipotence of God. Thence he
procedes, (2) to demonstrate, That albeit God will, and know, and decree
althings in the world, yet that he is not the Author of sin. So page 315. (3)
He proves, That Gods permission of sin is not idle or merely negative. This he
demonstrates, page 317. from the vendition of Joseph; the robbing of Job; the
ravishing of David's wives by Absolon; David's numbering the people and Gods
inciting his heart thereto; Shimei's cursing of David; the defection of the ten
Tribes from Rehoboam, etc. (4) He procedes, page 319. to the fall of Adam, which
he assertes to be from the decree and ordination of God, etc. The same
Controversy he manageth against Castellio, de aeterna Dei praedestinatione, p.
360. where he proves, That Adams fall was decreed and determined by God. The
like, page 401. where he proves, That God does not compel men to sin, or infuse
sin into them, but justly and rightly incite their wills to the entitative act
which is good. This he confirms by the induration of Pharaoh, and Gods making
use of wicked instruments for the punishment of men. That Calvin and Beza did
fully espouse our Hypothesis is evident not only by the opposition of
Bellarmine and his sectators, but also by that of Arminius, who objectes the
very same things against them, as are objected against us, namely, That God
ordained that man should fall and become vitiose: by which opinion, says he,
God is made the Author of Adams fall and sin: of which see Strangius, lib. 3.
cap. 2. page 554. And indeed all the Helvetian Churches to this very day
continue very orthodox and zelose against all the Arminian Dogmes, in this as in
other points; which sufficiently appears by their new Articles lately added to
their Confession, and signed by their Ministers and Professors, for the
condemning the new method of Amyraldus, and others in the French Churches.

That not only the German and Helvetian, but also the French Chamiers Difence
of our Hypothesis.
Churches in their first Reformation fully maintained our Hypothesis, is most
evident by the most elaborate, acute, and demonstrative determinations of great
Chamier, the greatest light that ever France Reformed had, Calvin only
excepted, who in his Panstrat. Cathol. tom. 2. lib. 3. gives us a copiose,
distinct, and convictive decision of this Controversy as then agitated by the
Calvinists and Jesuits; which answers exactly to our present Controversy with
the new Methodists. He titles this Book, Of the Author of sin: and proves, cap.
1. That the Reformed Divines do not make God the Author of sin, albeit the
Jesuits accuse Calvin, Martyr, and Beza therewith. Thence, cap. 2. he lays
down the opinion of the Reformed Divines, namely, That al actions both sinful
and good are to be referred to the actuose providence of God. Which he
demonstrates by Shimei's cursing David, Absoloms incest, etc. Whence, cap. 3.
he passes on to the Papists opinion touching the Providence of God about sin,
which they make to be only by speculative, idle permission, as some new
Methodists. Cap. 4. he procedes to prove, That God wills the existence of sin.
Wherein he answers Bellarmines Objections against Calvin and Beza as to this
point. Cap. 5. he passes on to the second Argument of the Calvinists, namely,
that men are in their sinful acts the instruments of God. Thence, cap. 6. he
descends to their third Argument, from Gods excecation and induration of men's
hearts: wherein he distinctly opens the Scriptures about induration. Whence,
cap. 7. he comes to their fourth Argument, from Gods energie in sinful acts;
which he demonstrates both rationally and scripturally. And thence, cap. 8. he
gives us Augustins opinion consonant to Calvin's herein. Whence in the following
Chapters, 9, 10, 11, 12. he answers the Objections and Arguments of the
Papists, whereby they endeavor to prove, That the Calvinists make God the
Author of sin: which imputations are still fastened on us by the Arminians and
new Methodists.

We may add hereto the sentiments of Ludovicus Crocius, Professor The
Testimony of Lud. Crocius.
at Breme, and a Member of the Synod of Dort, who in many points, specially
that of middle Science and universal Grace, follows the new method, yet in this
of Gods concurse to the substrate matter of sin, seems orthodox and concurrent
to Calvin's Doctrine. So in his Duodecas Dissertat. Exegetic. De voluntate Dei,
Dissert. Illam [ scil. actionem] non vero hanc, [ scil. malitiam] Deus vult ac
decernit: hanc, non illam, permittit.
8. these. 74. page 415. where he tells us, That the fundamen of clearing God
from being the Author of sin is the distinction of the material and formal part
of sin, namely of the action and the vitiositie, which is in the action: for
that, not this, he wills and decrees; and this, not that, he permits. And his
reason is invincible: for otherwise there should be an action independent as to
God, and the efficacious providence of God should be denied, which is
Epicurean. And then, these. 99. page 426. he tells us, That as to the act of the
Divine will about sin, the Scriptures seem to contradict themselves, in that
some Scriptures assure us, that God does not will sin, but hate it, with those
that commit it, as Psalm. 5. 5, 6, 7. Zach. 8. 17. and yet other Scriptures say,
that God wills, creates, and effects sins, as Esa. 45. 7. Lam. 3. 37, 38. Amos
3. 6. Then he solves these seeming contradictions, by distinguishing between
the act and the vitiositie of the act: also between the act as it procedes from
God, and as from the Creature: lastly between the decreeing will of God, and the
preceptive will of God. Whence he concludes, these. 100. thus: `For God both wills
and produces the act, as an act, of it self indifferent to moral bonitie and
evil, etc. And he adds, these. 101. `That this act in itself essentially good,
even as it is contaminated by the creature, God wills it as a punishment, and
uses it as an ordained convenient means for the best ends. The like these. 112.
p. 430. where he shows, how God wills sin, not as sin, but as a punishment, etc.
of which more fully hereafter, Chap. 5.. 5. These sentiments of Lud. Crocius I
rather choose to cite, because he, in other points, follows the new method, and
is cried up by some of that party.

As for the Judgment of the Synod of Dort touching our Hypothesis, The Synod
of Dort.
it is sufficiently evident by their Determinations, as also by the oppositions
the Arminians made against them in this point, both whiles they sat, and
afterward. I am not ignorant, that some of our Adversaries are so confident as
to cite the Synods testimony in favor of their Antithesis; but this is so
false an imputation, as that I judge no intelligent impartial Reader can give
credit to it. There needs no more to evince the Synods concurrence with us in
this point, than their stout defense of absolute Reprobation; of which see
Davenants Animadversions on Gods love, page 242.

We might add almost an infinitude of Testimonies from Reformed The Church of*
England.
Divines, Churches, and Synods for the confirmation of our Hypothesis: but in
what remains we shall confine our selves to the Doctrine and Testimony of the
Church of England, and those renowned Professors of Theology who have
maintained and vindicated our Hypothesis. The Church of England as to Doctrine
imbibed, even in her first Reformation, the sentiments of Calvin and the
Reformed Churches in France, Holland, Helvetia, and Germany; albeit as to
Discipline she stuck unto Episcopal Jurisdiction. This is evident by that noble
design of Cranmer and our first Reformers, to reduce the Doctrine of all the
Reformed Churches unto one Confession. I shall here only cul out a few
Testimonies of some great Professors of Theology both in Oxford and Cambridge,
who were of an Episcopal Judgment as to Discipline, yet stout Champions for
our Hypothesis.

We shall begin with Davenant, a great Master of Reason, and Davenant.
one that went as far as he could, and I think, as far as any ought, in
compliance with those of the New Method; yet he still asserted, and with great
strength of reason defended absolute Reprobation and Gods predeterminative
concurse to the substrate matter of sin. Thus in his Determinations, when
Professor of Theology at Cambridge, Quaest. 22. In evil acts, says he, God
has decreed to permit the event, to concur with the Agent as an universal
Motor, and lastly to order the event itself according to that of Hugo, de sacr.
fid. lib. 1. cap. 13. God wills that sin be, and yet he wills not sin, i. e. with
a will of approbation. So Quaest. 25. page 118. he grants, That Gods decree to
permit sin is efficacious, so as to extract good out of it. But he speaks more
fully for the defense of our Hypothesis, in his Animadversions on Gods love to
mankind, page 72. But those who derive the evil actions of men from their own
free will as the proper efficient cause, and the existing or coming of such
actions in eventum a Decreto Dei permittente and ordinante, are in no error at
al. But if any shall go about to set man's will at liberty, and to tie up short
the decreeing and determining will of God, as if this had not the determining
stroke amongst al possible evil actions or events, which shall infallibly be,
and which shall infallibly not be, he may avoid the suspicion of Stoicisme and
Manicheisme, but he will hardly avoid the suspicion of Atheism. For the greater
number of men's actions being wicked and evil, if these come into act without
Gods determinate counsel and decree, human affairs are more overruled by man's
will, than by Gods. What could be said more acutely and distinctly for the
demonstration of our Hypothesis? He here alsertes, (1) That the existence of
evil actions is from Gods decree permitting and ordering of them. (2) That Gods
decreeing will does determine [or predetermine] al possible evil actions or
events, which shall infallibly be. And do or need we assert more than this? And
frequently in that Book Davenant assertes and demonstrates, That the decree of
Reprobation is absolute, determining sinful acts and events, yet so as that it
leaves no man under a compulsion to sin. So page 253. he says, Gods decrees
carry with them a necessity of infallibility as to the event, but not a
necessity of compulsion as to the manner of acting. And elsewhere he
frequently inculcates, That let Reprobation be absolute or conditional, it
leaves the same possibility and the same liberty to the Agent. So page 333,
340, 341, 351, 360. Yea, he proves, That the Arminians must, and do grant
immutable absolute decrees, which admit the same objections and difficulties,
as those of the Antiarminians. So page 354, 400, 418, 419. Lastly he proves,
That infallible prescience granted by the Arminians infers as much a necessity
on the will, as absolute Reprobation, asserted by the Calvinists. So p 418, 419,
442, 462.

Davenant was succeeded by Samuel Ward, Doctor of Divinity, Ward.
and Margaret Professor of Cambridge; a person of great natural acumen, and
deep insight into the main points in Controversy between us and the Papists,
as it appears by his acute and learned Determinations and Prelections published
by Dr. Seth Ward. With what clear lights and heats he defended our Hypothesis
is fully manifest by his 24. Determination, page 115. where he stoutly
demonstrates this Thesis, That the concurse of God does not take away from
things their proper mode of operation; according to that great saying (though
in an apocryphous Book) Wisd. 8. 1. Wisdom [i. e. the wise Providence of God]
reaches from one end to the other mightily, and yet orders althings sweetly.
He first states the Controversy, showing how the Remonstrants fall in with the
Jesuits, Bellarmine, Molina, Lessius, etc. in asserting only a simultaneous
immediate concurse of God with the second cause upon its action and effect, yet
so, that all the modification and determination of the act, specially in free
actions, be from the second cause, as page 116. Contrary whereto he assertes,
(1) That the concurse of God with second causes, even such as are free, is an
antecedaneous influxe upon the very second causes themselves, moving and
applying them to their work. This he demonstrates both by Scripture and Reason.
The Scriptures he cites are Esa. 26. 12. 1 Cor. 12. 5, 6. Ephesians. 1. 11. Romans 11.
36. His Reasons are cogent, namely from Gods prime causalitie, the instrumental
concurse of al second causes, the dependence of the human will, etc. (2) He
assertes, page 117. That this previous concurse of God the first cause does,
according to its mode, modifie and determine all the actions of the second
causes. This, which is fully coincident with our Hypothesis, he invictly
demonstrates, [1] because the Divine will determines itself for the production
of every the most special and singular effect; therefore it is not determinable
by any inferior cause, as the influence of the Sun is. [2] Because as man's free
will determines althings subject to it, so much more efficaciously does the
Divine will determine al create things subject to it. [3] He demonstrates the
same from the supreme Perfection of Divine Providence, whereunto it belongs
determinatively to will and predefine al and singular things which are done in
time, and to destine the same to those ends intended by itself, as also to move
and apply al second causes to their determinate effects. [4] Because otherwise
the concurse and determination of free will should be exemted from the
modification of Divine Providence; and so God should not have a Providence over
althings in particular, but only in commun: for, as Thomas, page 1. q. 22.
teaches, The Divine providence extendes only to those things, unto which the
Divine causalitie extendes: wherefore if God does not determine the concurse of
free will, he will not have a providence, but only a prescience thereof in
particular, as page 118. Thence (3) he assertes and demonstrates, That this
antecedaneous concurse of God on second causes modifying their actions, takes
not away from them their proper mode of operating. This he adds to clear up
the conciliation of efficacious predeterminative concurse with human liberty,
and he does it with a mavelous dexterity and sagacitie, withal showing, that
the Molinists and Remonstrants, with Cicero, make man sacrilegious, whiles they
endeavor to make him free. And Determinat. 26. page 132. touching absolute
Reprobation he says, that it is the antecedent, but not the cause of men's sin.
Lastly, what his sentiments were touching efficacious predeterminative
concurse, is to be seen in his most acute Clerum, de Gratia discriminante.

From Cambridge we might pass on to Oxford, and without much difficulty
demonstrate, that all the principal Professors of Theology ever since the
Reformation have cheerfully espoused and strongly defended our Hypothesis
against the Jesuits and Remonstrants. Our learned and famous George Abbot, in
his Quaestiones George Abbot.
sex, Praelect. etc. cap. 6. discusseth this very Question, An Deus sit Author
peccati, Whether God be the Author of sin? And page 207. he gives us this
distinct decision of the whole: 4. In the very actions, which on man's part are
vitiose, the divine finger plainly shines forth; but so that God be the motor
and impulsor [marque that term which notes the highest Predetermination] of
the action and work; but not of the obliquitie or curvitie in acting: For God
excites [i. e. predetermines] the spirits of wicked men to attemt some things,
etc. And he cites for it that great Effate of Augustine, de Praedest. Sanctor.
Quod mali peccant ipsorum est; quod vero peccando hoc vel illud agunt, ex
virtute Dei tenebras, prout visum est, dividentis, etc. What the Sentiments of
pious and learned Dr. Holland, Regius Professor of Divinity, and Dr. Prideaux
Dr. Holland, Prideaux, Barlow.
his Successor, were, is sufficiently evident by their warm zele against the
Arminians. As for Dr. Barlow late Margaret Professor, he has sufficiently
declared his assent and consent to our Hypothesis, in his Exercitatio 2^, de
Malo, Conclus. 7. Rat. 3. where he proves, That it is impossible there should
be any finite create Entitie which is not from God the Author of al Entitie.
And to conclude this Head, it is very evident, that not only the Professors of
Theology, but also the Bishops and Convocation, together with King James, were
greatly opposite to Arminianisme, and so friends to our Hypothesis: Yea in
Bishop Laud's time, when Arminianisme began to flourish, there were but five
Arminian Bishops, Laud, Neale, Buckeridge, Corbet, Howson, and Montague, who
espoused that Interest, as Dr. Heylin, in the Life of Bishop Laud assures us.
By all which it appears most evident, that not only Rutherford, Twisse, and
Dominicans, but the main body of Antipelagian and Reformed Divines have given
their full assent and consent to our Hypothesis, for God's predeterminative
Concurse to the substrate matter of Sin.

. 4. Having examined the Testimonies of ancient and later Such as deny Gods
Concurse to the substrate matter of sin.
Theologues that concur with us, let us now a little inquire into the origin
of the Antithesis, and who they are by whom it has been defended. The
Antithesis to our Thesis, namely, That God concurs not to the substrate matter
of Sin, is generally ascribed to Durandus, as the principal founder thereof,
who denied Gods immediate concurse to actions, under this pretext, that hereby
we make God the Author of men's Sins. But to speak the truth, this Antithesis is
much more ancient than Durandus. Capreolus in 4. d. 12. q. 1. ad 1. asserts,
That this was the Opinion of the Manichees: and Aquinas in 2. d. 37. q. 2. a.
2. says, That it it is next to the error of the Manichees, who held two
Principes, one of Good, and the other of Evil. And the reason why this
Antithesis is fathered on the Manichees is this, because whoever denies God to
be the cause of the substrate matter or entitative act whereto sin is annexed,
must hold, That there is some real positive entitie in sin whereof God is not
the cause: whence by consequence such must assert, That there are two first
Causes, one of Good, and the other of Evil; which was the error of Marcion and
Manes, who held, there were two first Principes, the one (...), the supreme
good, who was the cause of al good; the other (...), the supreme evil God, who
was the cause of al evil. And certainly, they that maintain sin to be according
to its formal reason something positive or real, or that God is not the cause
of the substrate matter of sin, will necessarily fall into the sentiments of
Marcion and Manes. Again, Hieronymus, Epist. ad Ctesiphontem, makes this
Antithesis of Durandus Dicebat [Pelagius] Deum, collato semel libero arbitrio,
ulterius nobis ad operandum: non esse necessarium. Hieronym. ad Ctesiph.
to be the Doctrine of Pelagius, who, says he, held, That God having once
conferred free will, it is not necessary that he further operate with us: and he
speaks of natural operations, as of the motion of the hand, etc. which was
Durandus's opinion. Though I cannot but confess, Jansenius, August. Tom. 1. l.
5. c. 20. p. 119. tells us, the Pelagians granted, That God concurs to all the
operations of the Will. But the Conciliation of these two opposite Testimonies
is not difficult, in that the Pelagians granted Gods concurse to al operations
in terms, but denied it in effect and consequences, as our Adversaries
nowadays. Compton Carleton, in his Philosoph. Universe. Disput. 28. Sect. 1..
3. assures us, that the opinion of Durandus was asserted and defended before
him, by Nicolaus Bonetus, lib. 7. Theol. c. 7. and it is not improbable but it
was also by some others.

But yet it cannot be denied, but that the principal Author of Durandus against
Gods immediate Concurse.
this Antithesis was Durandus; whence among the Scholastic Theologues it
receives the Denomination of Durandisme, which they call a rash, erroneous,
dangerous error, little better than Arianisme. Bellarm. l. 4. de Great. and lib.
Arb. says, it is repugnant to the Scriptures, Testimonies of the Fathers, and
manifest Reason. Suarez Metaph. Disput. 22. Sect. 1. n. 7. says, It is
erroneous in Faith: and de Concursu, l. 1. he assertes, That the opinion of
Durandus is not only reprehended, but also rejected by all approved Theologues,
as an error in Faith. Is it not strange then, that Reformed Divines, yea some
of great vogue for Piety and Learning should espouse an error so gross, and
so much decried by Papists themselves? But to give a convictive demonstration,
that those who deny Gods Efficacious Concurse to the substrate matter of sin
really fall under the Imputation of Durandisme, we are first to examine what
Durandus's opinion as to Gods Concurse is, and then who they are who may be
reputed his Sectators.

Durandus proposes his opinion, in sentent. l. 2. Did. 1. Q. 5. in these
words, Vtrum Deus agat immediate in omni action Creaturae, Whether God acts
immediately in every action of the Creature? which he denies; and the principal
reasons of his negation are these: (1) Because then God should be the author of
Sin. (2) Because such an immediate Concurse destroys human liberty, in that
it determines the will, and so puts an end to its Indifference: of which see
Strangius, p. 142. So that indeed the very same arguments, which were used by
Durandus against immediate Concurse, are used by our Adversaries the New
Methodists against predeterminative Concurse as to the substrate matter of Sin.
And albeit the most of them profess a great displeasure against the Hypothesis
of Durandus, yet, I must freely declare my mind, I cannot conceive how they
can, without apparent contradiction, defend their own, but by espousing that of
Durandus, which a reverend Divine of great name among us professedly does; And
that the most of our Adversaries, even among the New Methodists, who in
profession disown it, fall under the imputation of Durandisme, we shall anon make
evident, when we come to treat of their particular sentiments: at present take
these Criteria or distinctive notes of Durandisme. (1) Al such as assert a
Divine Concurse to the principe or subject only, and not immediate unto the
Act, fall under the imputation of Durandisme. This is well observed by Strangius,
l. 1. c. 10. p. 57. where he tells us, That those who allow only a Concurse to
the second Cause, moving it to act, without a continued concurse to the action,
fall into the error of Durandus. Herein Durandus is followed by Aureolus, a
professed abettor of Durandisme. Thus also Amyraldus, and a Divine of name
among our selves. (2) Al those who hold only a general immediate concurse to
the act, such as is determinable by the matter it works on, as the Influence of
the Sun is by its matter, are deservedly branded with the black note of
Durandisme. Thus Baronius, together with the Remonstrants and Molinists. (3) Al
such as deny every real Being or Entitie to be from God by an immediate
efficience, justly fall under the marque of Durandisme. Thus Camero, and our
Adversaries generally, who deny that God does efficaciously concur to the
substrate matter of Acts intrinsecally evil. (4) Al those who affirm, That it
implies no contradiction for God to make a creature which shall act without
immediate concurse, must necessarily symbolise with Durandus. This is
acknowledged by Baronius, Metaph. Sect. 8. Disp. 3. S. 61. p. 131. where he
brings in this as the Second argument for Durandus, That God can give to the
creature a power to act without his concurse, sithat this involves no
contradiction. To which he answers well, in the Negative, that for God to make
such creatures as should not depend on him in operation as well as in essence,
involves a flat contradiction, because dependence in Essence and Operation is
essential to the creature. This piece of Durandisme Strangius and others seem
chargeable with, as hereafter, in our account of Strangius.

But we descend to the particular Sects, who oppose our Thesis, The Jesuits
and Molinists.
with endeavors to evince how far they fall in with the Hypothesis of Durandus.
And we shall begin with the Jesuits, who now generally pass under the name of
Molinists, from Ludov. Molina their chief Captain, who in his Concordia Lib.
Arbitr. cum Gratiae donis, etc. Quaest. 14. Disp. 26. assertes, (1) That Gods
immediate concurse terminates not on the human will by applying it to act, but
only on the act it self and effect. Whence, (2) That this Concurse is not
antecedent or previous as to the act, but only simultaneous; i. e. That God
immediately concurs together with the will to the same act, and conserves the
same. Thence, (3) That this immediate concurse of God is not predeterminative,
at least as to human acts, but only indifferent and determinable, like that of
the Sun. Whence, (4) That as to the substrate matter of Sin, immediate Concurse
does no way determine the will, or apply it to its act, but only influence the
act in a general indifferent manner, so as the will still retains its innate
indifference, and liberty of acting or not acting. Such are the Sentiments of
the Molinists or Jesuits, wherein they are greatly opposed both by Dominicans
and Jansenists: Thus Jansenius, August. Tom. 2. lib. 6. singul. c. 14. p. 58.
where he proves, That this simultaneous Concurse confers no forces or aid to
second Agents, but only accommodates it self to the forces of the create power,
etc. which sufficiently demonstrates the identitie of this opinion with
Durandisme, albeit the avouchers of it oppose Durandus with great vehemence.

But of late there started up Ludovicus a Dola, a Capucine Lud. a Dola his
following Durandus.
Friar, yet learned and acute, who espoused the Hypothesis of Durandus, as the
only Medium for the reconciling those two opposite parties, the Dominicans and
Jesuits. His book he terms, A Quadripartite Disputation, touching the mode
how the Concurse of God and the Creature stand in conjunction for the
production of free Acts, of a natural order, specially such as are wicked: He
bends his Disputation both against the Predeterminants, as also against the
Assertors of Middle Science. His first part is general, stating the
controversy between the Jesuits, who assert a Middle Science, and the
Dominicans, the Assertors of Predetermination; and withal explicating the
origin of the Controversy from the presupposed Immediation and real Identitie
of the Divine and creatural Concurse. His Second Part is against the Jesuits,
to demonstrate, That a next, immediate and identific concurse of God to al acts
both good and bad cannot be defended by the artifice of their Middle Science.
In his third part he disputes against the Dominicans, proving, That God does
not concur with us to acts of a natural order, specially such as are wicked, by
a physic Predetermination, and moreover by an identific and simultaneous
concurse. In his fourth and last part he stablisheth and demonstrateth, (with all the force of Arguments such a ruinous foundation will admit) the Hypothesis
of Durandus, That the general Concurse of God to acts of a natural order,
specially such as are wicked, is not proxime, immediate and identific, but
remote, mediate, and really distinct from the act of the creature. This
Hypothesis he defends as the only expedient for the conciliation of Divine
Concurse with human Liberty, the vindication of Gods Sacred Majesty from the
imputation of being the Author of Sin, and the putting an end to those endless
controversies about Divine Concurse. And I cannot but conceive my self under an
essential obligation freely to deliver my mind in this point, that it is
impossible for our Adversaries, the New Methodists, or any others, to defend
their Antithesis against us from apparent contradictions and inconsistences
with it self, or to free themselves from those blasphemous Imputations they
charge upon us, unless they betake themselves to this stratageme and subterfuge
of Durandus and Lud. a Dola: and therefore I do no way wonder, that a Divine of
great name and Head of that party among us, does openly declare his assent and
consent to this Hypothesis of Durandus, it being the only refuge to preserve
him and his Adherents from self-contradiction and condemnation.

Among the Reformed Churches, the first Impugnators of Arminius's Sentiments.
our Hypothesis were the Remonstrants, communly styled Arminians, from
Arminius, their first Founder, Professor of Theology at Leyden, who began to
diffuse his Pelagian Infusions about the year 1610. His Sentiments about Gods
Concurse to the substrate matter of sinful acts he lays down Disputat.
publica, These. 7.. 8, 9, 10. p. 193. but more fully, These. 9. de justitia and
efficacia Providentiae Dei in malo, p. 198. where he distinguishes Gods
efficience about the act of sin from that about its vitiositie. This efficience
of God about sin he makes to be both about the beginning, progress and
consummation of Sin. (1) As for Gods efficience about the beginning of sin he
distinguishes it into [1] Impedition, both sufficient and efficacious, whereby
God puts an impediment to sin; and [2] Permission, which is contrary to
Impedition, the suspension of al impediments, which might hinder the execution
of Sin. The fundamen of this Permission he makes to be man's Liberty, and Gods
infinite Wisdom and Power to bring good out of evil. (2) Gods Efficience about
the progress of Sin he places in Direction and Determination. [1] Direction
of Sin he makes to be an act of Divine Providence, whereby God does most wisely
and potently direct sin to what end he pleases, passing on from one extreme to
the other mightily, and yet disposing althings sweetly, according to that great
effate of apocryphous Wisdom, c. 8. v. 1. [2] Determination he takes to be an
act of Divine Providence, whereby God puts measures to his Permission, and
terms to sin, that it run not into infinite, according to the pleasure of the
creature. (3) Gods Efficience about the consummation and term of Sin he
places in Punition, and Remission. As for Gods Concurse to the Act of Sin as
naturally good, he does craftily, according to his wonted mode in such cases,
wave that difficult point: Yet in his Articles, De Peccati Causa Universe, p.
779. he Scepticly urges the Arguments of our Antagonists, to prove, That we
make God the Author of Sin. But to sum up Arminius's Sentiments in this point,
Albeit he places Gods Permission about Sin in a mere suspension of
Impediments, which is no way influential on the Act, yet in that he allows also
a providential Direction and Determination of the Act to its end and due
measures, we may thence evidently demonstrate our Hypothesis, that God
predetermines the Will to the entitative act of Sin, of which hereafter, Chap. 5.

Arminius's Sectators usually styled Remonstrants, (from their The Remonstrants
and their Sectators.
Remonstrances in the Synod of Dort) Grevincovius, Vorstius, Episcopius,
Corvinus, etc. who being animated by many of the Civil Magistrates of Holland,
gave themselves the confidence, but those poor Churches the peste, of divulging
their Pelagian Poison; which, by the interposure of King James, (who was a
professed enemy to that faction) occasioned the Synod of Dort, An. 1618. where
Divines out of England, France, and Germany resorted, to put a period to those
Pelagian Dogmes. The Remonstrants in opposition to that Synod, writ their Acta
and Scripta Synodalia Dordracena, wherein they greatly impugn the Synods
Determinations for Absolute Reprobation, and Gods Providence in sinful Acts,
falsely charging on our Divines, (1) That they held, the Reprobate were
destined to Incredulity, Impiety, and Sins, as the Means and Causes of
Damnation. (2) That they made God the Author of Sin, and the like, of which see
Acta Synodalia, Scripta Remonstrantium Dogmatica, p. 40, 41. I shall here only
add, what is well remarqued by Le Blanc, Conciliat Arbit. Humani, These. 32. p.
434. That these Arminians and Remonstrants directly follow the Jesuits and
Molinists in asserting a general simultaneous indifferent Concurse, such as is
determinable by the cooperation of the human will.

These Remonstrants, from a spirit of Cabal, to fortify themselves The
Anabaptists of Germany that fell in with the Remonstrants.
against the Calvinists, who overpowered them in the Synod, fell into a league
offensive and defensive with many German Anabaptists, who thereupon drank in
many Pelagian and Arminian Dogmes, particularly that of Free Will; which
Infusions have been since diffused throughout some, yea whole Churches of that
Persuasion in England. I am not ignorant, that a great number not only of
Professors but also Churches, who are for Rebaptizing, do yet keep themselves
unspotted and untainted as to these Arminian Notions; and with these I have no
controversy, but particular love and kindness for many of them, albeit I
differ from them in the point of Pedobaptisem. But as for those of that
persuasion, who fight under Arminius's banner, they seemed most forward, after
the breaking up of the Synod of Dort, to oppose the Calvinists in their
sentiments about Gods Concurse to the substrate matter of Sin. And (that which
deserves a particular remarque) the very arguments that are now urged against
us by the New Methodists, were urged against the Synod of Dorts determinations
in this point by them, and that in the same form. Which is to be seen in a
Dialogue of the Anabaptists, entitled, A Description of what God has
predestined concerning man, etc. wherein page 16. they have this very
expression, which they impute to the Calvinists, (as our Adversaries impute the
same to us) namely, that they say, That God punishes man with Hel-torments for
doing those things, which he himself has predestined, ordained, decreed,
determined, appointed, willed and compelled him to do; and that which a man
cannot choose, but must needs do by the force and compulsion of his
predestination. Are not the very same forged calumnies charged on us now-adays?
See an excellent reply hereto, as to the rest of their false imputations, by
pious and learned Ainsworth in his Censure upon this Dialogue, page 2, 4, 5,
etc.

But we descend now to our principal Antagonists, such as The New Methodists.
would pass under the name of Calvinists, and yet are professed, yea vehement
oppugnators of our Hypothesis. Thus Le Blanc, Council. Arbitr. Hum. These. 34.
page 434. But of those Reformed Divines, which subscribe to the Synod of Dort,
some in this part agree with the Molinists and Remonstrants, neither do they
acknowledge any other general concurse of God with second causes, than what is
simultaneous and indifferent, whereby God does not influence the cause itself,
but its act, etc. He instanceth in Baronius, Strangius, Amyraldus, etc. And
what term or title to give this new Sect of Adversaries more proper than New
Methodists I know not, this being the softest title, and that which they seem
to recreate themselves in: some term them downright Arminians; and albeit I
conceive their Principes directly issue from and tend to Ariminianisme, yet I
dare not lode them with this reprocheful style, because they generally assert
efficacious Grace. I think we might term them without injustice Semiarminians,
(as the Semipelagians of old, who refined Pelagianisme) because they assert
conditionate Reprobation and all the consequents thereof: But yet because
nothing more becomes an opponent than candor and ingenuitie, therefore to let
pass al Titles that may carry any thing of reproach, I give them only this of
New Methodists, because they affect and attemt to give us a new Method or
Scheme of Predestination, efficacious Grace, Divine Concurse, etc.

The first that opened the way to this New Method, was John John Camero.
Camero, a person of excellent naturals, and those well improved by acquired
literature, but too much addicted to innovation in the doctrine of the Gospel,
which he could not dissemble, but too often made profession thereof; as in a
Letter to Ludovicus Capellus, where he says, That many things occurred to him,
which neither his own mind nor the reason of the times would permit him to
publish. He too much abounded in his own sense and words, with too great
contemt of such as differed from him, though more deserving than himself, as
Chamier. There were few Theologic Questions professedly handled by him,
specially such as belong to the Doctrine of Grace and Free Will, but he divulged
something of Novitie therein: among which novel opinions this was one, That he
denied every real positive Being to be from God immediately as the prime Quod
negem, omne ens est a Deo tanquam a causa efficiente immediata, Ep. ad Jac.
Gallovaeum.
efficient cause, as Epist. ad Thom. Rhaedam, (oper. edit. 1642.) p. 526. and
Epist. ad Jac. Gallovaeum, page 528. Which sentiment of Camero laid the
foundation, which Baronius and Strangius his Countrymen afterward built their
Antithesis on. Camero had for his intime Camrade Milleterius, who after his
death turned Roman Catholic, and published many Antichristian Errors, which he
professed to have received from Camero.

But Camero's principal Sectator was Moses Amyraldus, who succeeded Moses
Amyraldus.
him in the profession of Theology at Saumur, and indeed much out-went him in
his propensions and closures with Durandisme and the Arminian Dogmes;
particularly with this about Gods concurse to the substrate matter of sin. And
that I may not be thought falsely to accuse so learned a man, one that passed
under the name of a Calvinist, I shall faithfully relate the Character given him
in this particular by one of his own friends and adherents, Le Blanc, Council.
Arbitr. Hum. par. 3. these. 48. page 436. There are not wanting, says he, among
the Doctors of the Reformed Schole some who touching the general Concurse of
God necessary to all the acts of creatures, seem to have the same sentiments
with Durandus, and Ludovicus a Dola, Doctors of the Roman Schole. For that
illustrious man Moses Amyraldus seems not to acknowledge any other general
Concurse of God, by which he concurs with all second causes, besides that
continued efficace, whereby he does preserve and sustain the nature of every
thing, and the forces given by nature. Whence he gathers, that such a concurse
belongs not to liberty. So Amyrald. de Lib. Arbitr. sect. 4. page 246. Make,
says he, nature and its abilities able to consiste without the aid of such a
concurse, and they will truly act freely. Therefore let there be granted a
concurse, which performs nothing else, but that these abilities, which would
otherwise flag and vanish, consiste and be preserved in their natural state,
Liberty will thence receive no detriment. He had been speaking of Gods concurse
to sinful acts, and as Le Blanc well observes, by these words sufficiently
indicates, that in this part he has the same sentiments with Durandus. Wherein
note, (1) that Amyraldus grants, that sometimes it is sufficient for God to
preserve the subject, and render its faculties habile or capable of acting,
without immediate concurse to the act: which is also the opinion of some among
us. (2) That this opinion, according to Le Blanc, falls in with that of
Durandus, etc. So These. 50. page 437. Le Blanc adds, That Amyraldus held a
double act of providence about evil acts, one externe, and the other interne:
as for the externe act, he places it in two things, (1) in proposing objects,
(2) in permitting Satan to set home those objects with efficace. The interne
act of God consistes, according to him, in that God does of many objects
inducing to evil, obscure, or remove the one, or cause some other object to be
offered, which is most taking. In all which there is no violence offered to
human liberty, nor indeed any efficacious immediate concurse asserted. Yea in
his Speciminis special. p. 468. he says in downright terms, That the will of
God dependes on us, not we on the will of God: which is rank Durandisme and
Molinisme. More of his wild sentiments in this as in other Arminian points, see
Pet. Molinaei, de M. Amyraldi adversus Spanhemium libro, Judicium, praesat.

Placeus, another Salmurian Professor, albeit in other points he Placeus.
stiffely defendes the New Method, yea, in that of original sin is greatly
Pelagian, yet in this point touching Gods concurse to the substrate matter of
sin, he seems pendulous and in suspense. Thus, De libero Hom. Arbitr. p. 174.
(edit. 1656.) What the dependence of the second causes on the first in causing
is, the Papists sharply dispute. It is truly confessed by all, that God does
concur with every cause, so as to operate conveniently with its faculties: but
this concurse some make immediate, proxime, and altogether the same with the
very action of second causes; but others deny it -- But we, according to that
reverence we bear to the infinite Majesty of God, dare not determine how great
the dependence of the second cause on the first is: it suffices us, that,
provided the least spot of sin be not imputed to God, too much cannot be
ascribed unto God, etc.

Le Blanc also, Professor of Theology at Sedan, though he seems Le Blanc.
to affect the like suspensive modesty, Council. Arbitr. these. 55. yet these.
56. page 438. he inclines to the opinion of Strangius, and others, That God
cannot physically premove and predetermine to acts intrinsecally evil, without
being the Author of sin. But yet these. 57. he recals himself, and says, That
provided God be not constituted the Author of sin, the dependence of the second
causes on the first cannot be too much asserted. And these. 58. he adds this as
most certain, That the aid and efficace of Divine providence, even about
sinful acts, may no way be restrained to a certain general indifferent
concurse, etc.

But from the French Professors we pass on to those of Scotland, Baronius.
Baronius and Strangius, who have been stiff and tenacious Adherents to this
New Method, about Gods concurse to the substrate matter of sin. As for Baronius,
he is accused of rank Arminianisme; and that which has given just ground for
such an imputation is his denying al kind of predetermination as well to good as
to evil acts. Thus in his Metaphys. Sect. 8. Disput. 3.. 78. page 146, etc. he
endeavors to prove, That God does not by a previous motion excite second causes
to act. And his arguments to prove his Antithesis are no other than what time
out of mind have been urged by Pelagians, Jesuits, and Arminians: namely that
this previous motion and predetermination (1) destroys human liberty, page
147. (2) That it takes away the power of the will to opposite acts, page 148.
(3) That it makes God the Author of sin, page 149. which he endeavors to prove
many ways: [1] Because the entitative act of sin as being determined by God
cannot be separated from the obliquitie, page 150. [2] Because the action then
as of such a species must be from God. [3] Because this opinion makes God to be
injust and cruel, as page 151. [4] That hereby God is made the Author of sin
more than the sinner. Al which are but trite and threadbare arguments, urged
by Pelagians and Arminians, to which we shall answer more fully hereafter, chap.
6.. 1, etc. Thence he procedes page 153. to answer our principal argument, That
the second cause does not act, but as moved by the first, and therein agrees
with Suarez and other Jesuits in asserting a previous indifferent concurse.
It Is true,. 58. p. 129. he argues strongly against Durandus, yet in fine page
153. falls in very far with him, but more fully with the Molinists and
Remonstrants; which is well observed by Le Blanc, Council. Arbitr. Hum. these. 35.
page 434. This at least, without al dout, is the opinion of Robert Baronius, in
his Metaphysic, where touching the Concurse of God, and so of its concord with
human liberty, he professes to have altogether the same sentiments with
Fonseca and Suarez, namely that this concurse is of itself indifferent, and
determined by the second cause to a certain species of action: neither is it
needful, that God premove second causes, but it is sufficient, that together
with them he influence their actions and effects. And indeed Baronius's own
illustration, Metaph. Sect. 8. Disput. 3. page 143. sufficiently clears this to
be his proper opinion; where he compares the Concurse of God to that of the
Sun, which is the same in the production of perfect animals and monsters, in
itself indifferent, but modified and determined by the matter it works upon:
which is the very instance given both by Jesuits and Arminians. Lastly, page
159. he gives us four actions of God in the induration of sinners, which are no
more than what Molinists and Remonstrants acknowledge. Whence it is to me
apparent, that it would not be an act of injustice, should we reckon him among
the Arminians, whose sentiments and cause he has espoused; yet by reason of his
nominal repute among the Calvinists, I rather incline to the more favorable
censure of ranging him among the new Methodists.

But yet our principal Antagonist is John Strangius, Professor at Strangius.
Glascow, who (as they say) having had his spirit chafed and exasperated by the
opposition of Rutherford, writ a great Volume in four Books, Of Gods Will and
Actions about sin: wherein he bends his forces principally against the
Dominicans, Twisse and Rutherford, (who in his influences of the life of Grace,
both Preface and Book, often animadvertes thereon) as if these al, by asserting
predetermination to the matter of sinful acts, made God the Author of sin. I
must confess, he discovers a natural acumen and a nervose vene of Reason in
his Book, yet mixed with so great incongruities and self-inconsistences, yea
contradictions, that I cannot but marvel how such a Master of Reason could
satisfy himself with such poor subterfuges and evasions: But this I impute not
to any defect in naturals, but in his cause, which admits not any solid reason
for its defense. And that which yet seems more strange to me is this, that he
who opposes with much vehemence Durandus, Molina, Bellarmine, and the
Remonstrants in this point of Gods concurse to the substrate matter of sin, yet
at long-run falls in with each of these parties in some one, if not al their
sentiments about this matter. (1) That he comes very near Durandisme is evident,
in that he holds the Concurse of God not to be necessary to al acts of the
creature, particularly to such as are intrinsecally evil: For to suppose any
real positive Being, that falls not under Gods efficacious concurse, is to me no
less than Durandisme. It Is true, Strangius in words appears against Durandus,
in owning an immediate Concurse of God to al actions of the creatures, as lib.
2. cap. 5. page 163. But when he comes to explicate this immediate Concurse as
to actions intrinsecally evil, he places it only (as some now adays among us)
in Gods conserving the nature and innate disposition of natural Agents, and
giving them a self-determining power, whereby they are rendered apt and habile
for any congenerous action, as they now phrase it. Thus page 164. Ergo si una
Dei determinatio sufficiat, qua Deus Agentium naturalium naturam ac indolem a
se insitam ac conservatam determinavit, quid opus est multiplicibus imo
innumeris determinationibus ad eundem effectum, etc. So lib. 3. cap. 5. page
584. he lays down this as his Hypothesis, That God does not in althings
determine the will, but sometimes permit it a free election, to choose this or
that, to do this or that; and therefore in such acts he has not decreed, that
man should precisely choose this or that, etc. And he proves it by this
argument, That it is not impossible for God, who has made man a free Agent,
and conserves his nature and forces, to permit something to man's free will, it a
ut per Deum non stet quin homo possit eligere alterutrum, agere aliquid, aut
non agere, etc. Wherein he proves, that it is not impossible for God to leave
some things to man's indifference, without determining him to either extreme:
and he proves this is not impossible, because it implies not any contradiction;
which is Durandus's very argument against immediate Concurse. (2) That
Strangius conspires with and espouseth the sentiments of the Molinists and
Arminians about indifferent simultaneous Concurse is partly acknowleged by his
friend Le Blanc, Council. Arbitr. Hum. these. 36. page 434. having shown the
agreament of Baronius with the Molinists and Remonstrants, he adds: Neither
does John Strangius seem to differ much from this opinion: for albeit he
thinks, lib. 1. cap. 11. That the action whereunto God and the creature
concur, is in order of nature first from God, before from the creature; -- and
moreover, l. 2. p. 3. denies, That God concurs only by a general concurse; as
the Sun concurs in the same manner to the generation of a man and horse; but
determines, that the influxe of God is special to special effects, as they are
specifically distinguished, not morally but physically; yet he does by many
arguments contend and prove, that the premotion and predetermination of God,
which the Schole of Thomas defendes, to al and singular acts of the creature is
not necessary. Note here, that albeit Strangius seems to differ from the
Molinists, Remonstrants, and Baronius in asserting Gods Concurse to be
previous, particular, and special; yet in that he denies Divine
predetermination to al creatural acts, Le Blanc makes him not to differ much
from the Molinists and Remonstrants: which to me indeed is a great observation;
for I am under a very strong, and I am apt to persuade my self, rational
presumtion, that predetermination to good acts can never be rationally defended
by these New Methodists, who deny predetermination to the substrate matter of
al evil acts; as Strangius does, page 167, 584. of which more hereafter, chap.
5.. 4, 5.

Here it were worthy of some labor to inquire How these New How these New
Methodists fell into their new Model.
Methodists fell into those novel sentiments about Divine Concurse, and on what
reasons or grounds? As it was with the Semipelagians of old, so it has befell
these New Methodists or Semiarminians: when the Pelagians were by Augustine
driven from their (...), or Diana of Free Will and the potence of corrupt
nature, the Semipelagians come with fresh forces and assault him in the point
of Reprobation, and pretend, that he asserted, That God by a fatal necessity
compelled men to sin, and then damned them for what he had compelled them to:
Just so the Arminians having been suppressed by the Synod of Dort, these New
Methodists owning absolute particular Election and efficacious Grace with the
Calvinists, thought they might more securely fall in with the Arminians in the
points of universal Grace, conditional Reprobation, and that of denying
Predetermination as to the entitative act of sin. Thus they divide the battle
between the Calvinist and Arminian. But as Jansenius has well observed out of
Augustine, If there be the least point granted to Pelagius, al will be at last
granted; so I am very apt to fear, that these New Methodists, by going so far
in symbolising with the Arminians, will at last be wholly drawn over into their
Camp. Thus much I am very confident of, they can never rationally defend
absolute Election and efficacious Grace against Jesuits and Arminians, so long
as they deny absolute Reprobation and Predetermination to the entitative act
of al sins. As for the principal grounds, which induce these New Methodists to
take up those sentiments, we shall endeavor to lay them down, when we come to
treat of their proper Opinions and the consequents that attend them, Chap. 7.

But whiles we are thus characterising the Authors of this new Who of the new
Methodists may be estimed orthodox.
Method, we must do such Calvinists, who incline to them in some points, that
justice, as to free them from al imputation or suspicion of Arminianisme: It Is
well known, that some of great worth and truly orthodox in point of Grace, have
yet somewhat inclined toward the new Method in point of universal objective
Grace, as pious and learned Usher, Davenant, and others both in our and the
French Churches, who hold, Christ's death to be an universal remedy applicable
to al, but yet are far from asserting an universal subjective Grace, or any
velleitie in God of saving al men, which Amyraldus and others assert. As for
those who hold absolute and particular Election and Reprobation, Original sin
in its full extent, men's natural impotence and being dead in sin, efficacious
Grace in the conversion of sinners, with Gods absolute, efficacious, immediate,
total and predeterminative concurse to al natural as well as supernatural
actions, as Davenant, and some others, who incline to an objective universal
Grace, do, I have no controversy with them, but can own them as friends of
Grace, albeit in some modes of explicating it, they differ from us.

CHAP. V. Rational Demonstration of Gods predeterminative Concurse to the
substrate matter of Sin.
Arguments for Divine predetermination of the Will to the entitative act of sin.
(1) From the Futurition of althings in the Divine Decree: the objections
against this argument solved. (2) From the certitude of Divine Prescience; with
the solution of objections. (3) From the Decree of Reprobation. Davenants
Hypothesis touching absolute Reprobation and Decrees. (4) From Divine Concurse,
[1] Its Principe and Origin. [2] Its Nature; Totalitie, Universality,
Particularitie, Immediation, Prioritie, and Independence. [3] Its Efficace, as
to al natural and supernatural Acts and Effects. All the Arguments urged against
Predetermination to the entitative act of sin, strike as much against
Predetermination to what is good. (5) From the nature of sin, its substrate
matter and formal reason. (6) From Gods permission of sin; which is natural,
negative, and positive. (7) From Divine providence about sin, both
conservative, restrictive, gubernative. (8) From the absolute, immediate,
essential dependence of al creatures on God, as the first cause.

. 1. HAving given a scriptural Demonstration, as also the unanimous Arguments
for Predetermination to the substrate matter of al sin.
testimony of such as undertook to defend efficacious Concurse in all Ages of
the Church, for the confirmation of our Hypothesis, we now proceed to
demonstrate the same by rational Arguments grounded on scriptural principes and
evidence; which we shall reduce to the following Heads.

1. Arg. From the Futurition of althings in and by the Divine Decree; 1. Arg.
from the futurition of althings.
which we thus form: That which dependes on the Divine Decree for its
futurition, necessarily falls under Divine predetermination as to its existence:
But the substrate matter of al sin dependes on the Divine Decree as to its
futurition: therefore it necessarily falls under Divine predetermination as to
its existence. The major is granted by our Adversaries, particularly by
Strangius, who often assertes, That Divine Predetermination is exactly adequate
and commensurate to Divine Predefinition; so that whatever is predefined by God
in his Decree, must necessarily be predetermined by him in the execution and
event. And what more rational than this assertion? Yea, what is
predetermination of the event, but predefinition in the Decree? The difference
between Gods eternal predefinition in the Decree, and predetermination as to
actual concurse and execution in time differ only as active and passive
Creation: as active Creation gives futurition to things, and passive, actual
existence; so predefinition and predetermination; and therefore among the
Greeks one and the same Verb (...) signifies both to predefine and
predetermine. So that our major seems so clear as to carry with it its own
evidence. Wherefore we pass on to demonstrate the minor, which our Adversaries
principally strike at, and therefore needs our strongest forces: This we shall
endeavor to make good in and by the following Propositions. (1) Prop. Nothing
is or can be future in its own nature, without some cause of its futurition.
How is it possible that any thing should pass from a state of mere
possibility, contingence, and indifference, but by some cause? Do not
possible, and future differ? and must there not be some cause of this
difference? (2) Prop. Whatever is the cause of futurition to any thing must be
eternal. This is most evident; because whatever is future was so from
Eternity; for God foreknew it to be so: otherwise, how could his knowledge be
certain? Hence, (3) Prop. Nothing can give futurition to things but God. For is
there any thing but God eternal? (4) Prop. Nothing in God gives futurition to
things but his will. His Essence simply considered cannot give futurition to
things; because possible and future are the same as to the Divine Essence:
neither does the Prescience of God give futurition to things; for things are
not future because God foreknows them, but he therefore foreknows them because
future. Hence it follows, that nothing but the Divine will can give futurition
to things, as Court Gent. P. 4. B. 2. C. 11.. 9. whence also it necessarily
follows, (5) That the futurition of the substrate matter of al sin is from the
Divine will and decree. For what can make sinful acts future and so the object
of Divine foreknowlege, but the will of God, which gives futurition to althings?
And if Gods predefining decreeing will give futurition to the substrate matter of
sin, must not his predeterminative will also give existence to it?

But let us examine what assaults our Adversaries make against Objections
against this Argument solved.
this Argument by Responses and Objections. (1) They reply to our minor, That
the futurition of the substrate matter or entitative act of sin is not from the
will of God, but from the will of man, that gives existence to it. Thus
Strangius, lib. 3. cap. 5. page 585. where he endeavors to prove, That it is
not repugnant that something should be future, which God has not absolutely
predefined, but left to the will of man to effect. So cap. 9. page 628. he
peremtorily assertes, That God has not decreed al futures, namely, the Fall of
Adam, or the sin against the Holy Ghost, etc. So page 631. he says, Nothing
hinders, but that there may be some cause of the futurition of a thing besides
the Decree of God, namely the create will. The like Le Blanc, Concord. Libert.
Hum. p. 1. these. 55 -- 57. where he endeavors to prove, That what is the cause
why things existe in time, the same is the cause of their futurition from
Eternity: but man's will only is the cause why sin existes in time, ergo, etc. A
poor Response indeed, or rather begging of the Question! For is it possible
that the second cause loged in time should give futurition to a thing from
Eternity? Is it not an approved Maxim in Philosophy, yea in Nature, that the
cause is ever, at least in order of nature, before the effect? and is the
second cause confined by time, before the eternal futurition of its effect? (2)
But Le Blanc answers hereto, these. 56. page 454. That Futurition is nothing
else but a respect of reason, and an extrinsec denomination of the thing, which
is said to be future, not something really distinct from the thing future, etc.
But the vanity of this subterfuge is most evident; for hereby it follows, that
the thing is not future before it is existent: can a modal extrinsec
denomination of a thing existe before the thing that gives it existence? How
many absurdities would follow hereon?

But our Adversaries have one grand Objection, which they lay much weight on,
against our minor, and that is this: If the will of God gives futurition to sin,
then sin as future has one and the same Idea with the will of God: and so the
futurition of sin must be God. This objection is urged and adorned with many
Trophies by Strangius, Le Blanc, and a Divine of name among us. So Strangius,
lib. 3. cap. 9. page 631, 632. having page 626, etc. recited Twisses argument
from the eternal futurition of sin, he replies thus: Herein, says he, lies the
whole force of the argument, that there can be no other cause of a futurition
made from Eternity, but what is eternal. To which he answers with a scoff
thus: A pretty argumentation indeed! why may we not by the same reason prove,
that the futurition of sin is God? The same is urged by Le Blanc, de Concord.
Libert. par. 1. these. 55, 56. page 454. where he endeavors to prove against
Twisse, That if the futurition of sin be from the will of God, it is God; which
makes God manifestly the Author of sin. The same is urged by a Divine of some
note among us. But in answer hereto, I must confess, I cannot but marvel at
the confidence of persons so learned, and in other points judicious, on such
infirm and rotten grounds: For when we speak of the futurition of sin, which
is a complexe aggregate thing, we must distinguish its material from its formal
part. (1) If we speak of the material entitative part of sin, which is in
itself a natural good, so we may without the least violation of Gods sacred
Majesty affirm, that its futurition is the same, or not really distinct from
Gods will the cause thereof: and why not? is not the futurition of al natural
Beings good? And whence procedes al good but from the immense Ocean of good?
Yea, was not al good from Eternity loged in the bosom of God, and sonot
really distinct from him? So that indeed this objection of Strangius and Le
Blanc against the futurition of the material entitative act of sin from the will
of God strikes at the futurition of althings, even the most gratiose acts from
the same will: for if the futurition of any one natural act may be resolved into
the will of man as its first cause, why may not the futurition of al grace be as
well resolved into the same human will, specially in Adams innocent state, who
had then perfect free will? But yet (2) if we speak of the futurition of sin in
regard of its formal nature, consisting in its vitiositie and obliquitie, so we
utterly deny, that its futurition is the same with God: for the futurition of
sin as to its vitiositie is not from the effective will of God, but permissive;
God decrees to effect the entitative act, but only to permit the vitiositie
appendent thereto, which follows on the act, as other privations do on the
absence of their habit. To make this evident by a parallel instance; God
decrees the diurnal motion of the Sun, and that at night it shall retire into
the other Hemisphere, whence darkness necessarily follows: may we thence
argue, that the futurition of darkness, or darkness itself is the same with
God? Would not any Fresh-man in Logic hiss such a consequence out of the
Schools? And yet who dares deny, but that the retirement of the Sun out of
this Hemisphere into the other is from God, as also its futurition? The like
may be instanced in all other privations, which have no real being, and
therefore no real efficient of their existence or futurition: for nothing can
admit a real efficient cause of its futurition, but what has a real efficient
cause of its existence: what is the first efficient of the existence of things?
Is it not the will of God? and is it not also the same Divine will that gives
futurition to things? Yea does not the very same act or decree of the Divine
will that gives real Beings their futurition, give them also, in their appointed
periods of time, their existence? So that in this regard the Rule of Strangius
and Le Blanc is most true, That the same cause that gives things their
existence, gives them also their futurition: this I say holds true of the first
cause, but not of second causes, as they would needs persuade us. So that, to
conclude this argument, in as much as the will of God gives futurition to al
sin, the effective will of God to the entitative act or substrate matter of sin,
and the permissive will of God to the formal reason, or vitiositie of sin, hence
it necessarily follows, that the predeterminative Concurse of God, (whereby I
understand nothing else but the Efficacious Divine Will as operative) gives
existence to the substrate matter of Sin.

. 2. Our second Argument shall be taken from the certitude 2 Arg. from the
Certitude of Divine Prescience.
of Gods Prescience; and we may form it thus: God can certainly foreknow
nothing, but what he certainly decrees, predefines, and predetermines to be:
But God certainly foreknows al sin. Ergo. The Minor is granted by our
Adversaries and denied by none, that I know, except Atheists and Socinians:
Thus Job 34. 21. For his eyes are upon the ways of man and he sees al his
goings. Our principal work therefore will be to make good our Major; which we
dout not but to perform in and by the following Propositions: (1) Prop.
Nothing can be certainly foreknown by God, but what has some certain Reasons,
Principes, and Causes of such a foreknowledge. Now there are three causes that
give certitude to al Science and Prescience: [1] A certitude of the Object: for
if the object be uncertain, the Science can never be certain: can the Structure
or Edifice be firm, if the foundation be infirm? [2] A certain Medium, which
is the principal fundamen of al Science. [3]* A certitude of the Subject: for
be the Object and Medium never so certain, yet there can be no certain Science,
unless the Subject apprehend the same. And does not the Prescience of God
include al these degrees of Certitude? Must there not be a certitude of the
Object, Medium, and Subject? (2) Prop. The Divine Prescience as to future sins
admits not any of these degrees of certitude, but as originated from the Divine
Will and Decree. [1] How can Sin as the Object of Divine Prescience be certainly
future, but by the efficacious Will of God making it so? [2] What certain Medium
can there be of Divine Prescience, but the divine Will and Decree? [3] And
thence, how can God have a subjective Certitude of sin but in and by his own
Will? Hence, (3) Prop. Gods certain Prescience of Sin infers also a certain
predefinition and predetermination of the substrate matter of Sin. That God
knows nothing future but by his decree making it future, has been the
persuasion not only of Calvinists, but also of the most sober Scholemen in all
Ages, Scotus, Ricardus, Hervaeus, Bradwardine, Johannes Major, and others not a
few, as Le Blanc, de Concord. Libert. Par. 3. These. 33. p. 443. confesses.
Yea, Strangius himself grants the futurition of Sin in Gods Prescience, as l.
3. c. 9. p. 640. Yea, Le Blanc, De Concord. Libert. Hum. Par. 1. These. 59. etc.
p. 455. proves strongly, That according to Strangius's opinion, there can no
contingent [i. e. sinful act] be foreknown by God as absolutely future, but
what God first decreed to be absolutely future. His words are these: But some
also of those who hold some free acts of God to be absolutely future, and as
such to be foreknown by God, without any Decree predetermining the free causes
to those acts, as Learned Strangius, yet deny, that free future contingents
may be known by God according to any Hypothesis, which does not include an
absolute Decree concerning their futurition: as Strange. de Volunt. l. 3. c. 11.
His reason is, because nothing can be certainly known, but what is certainly
true: but nothing is certainly true, but what is necessary either absolutely or
conditionally. Whence he collects, that future conditionates cannot be the
Object of divine Science, which is infallible and most certain, unless there
be included the condition, whence that which is said to be future may be
certainly inferred. But if this reason prevails, God can foreknow nothing
contingent as absolutely future, but what he before decreed as absolutely
future; which yet Strangius admits not, who confesses, that men act many
things freely to which they are not predetermined by God. Thus Le Blanc of
Strangius's self-contradicting Hypothesis. And indeed, to speak the truth
nakedly, there seems so much force in Strangius's reason, whereby he proves,
That al Gods Prescience of free future Contingents includes an absolute Decree
of their futurition, namely from the certainty of divine Prescience, that I no
way wonder that he urges the same, albeit to the subversion of his own
Phenomenon. And I am very bold, yea confident in asserting, and demonstrating
these following Propositions. (1) Prop. That God can have no certain Prescience
of things future, but from his own decree, the only certain determinate cause
of their futurition. And therefore the Socinians denying a certain determinate
Cause of things contingent, deny also Gods Prescience to be certain, as Le
Blanc, De Concord. P. 3. These. 1. p. 438. and I cannot see how any can
rationally avoid the Socinian objection, who do not resolve the certitude of
the divine Prescience into the divine Decree. Hence, (2) Prop. There is an
hypothetic or consequential necessity that arises from Gods certain
Prescience. This is well urged, though in the defense of an hellbred Hypothesis,
by the Socinians, and cited by Le Blanc (as a knot not easily untied) de
Concord. Par. 3. These. 22. page 441. There is, says he, much of difficulty
here, which in times past has exercised the ingenies of Doctors. For seeing it
is impossible, that the Prescience of God may be deceived, it cannot be but
that those things must happen, which God foresees will happen; and therefore
that althings happen necessarily: and it is impossible, but that the very will
of man must produce those acts, which God from eternity foreknew it would
produce. This Objection I despair ever to see rationally answered by our
Adversaries without contradicting their own Hypothesis. See more of this Chap.
6.. 5. Hence (3) Prop. The same arguments that are urged by our Opponents
against Gods predetermining the Will to the substrate matter of sin, may be, as
they are by the Socinians, urged with as great force against Gods certain
Prescience of Sin. For our Adversaries, Strangius, Le Blanc, etc. granting the
certain futurition of sin in the eternal Prescience of God, fall under al those
Imputations and black Consequences which they charge on us, who assert the
predefinition, futurition, and predetermination of the substrate matter of Sin
in the divine Decree. This Proposition is incomparably well demonstrated by
judicious Davenant, in his Animadversions on Gods Love to Mankind, p. 418, 419,
442, 462. where he proves, That Infallible Prescience granted by the Arminians,
infers as much necessity on the Will, as absolute Predestination and
Reprobation. Of which more in our next Argument; also c. 6.. 5.

Let us now a little inquire into the Subterfuges which our Adversaries take
Sanctuary in to secure themselves from the force of this Argument taken from
Divine Prescience. And here at what a miserable loss and confusion are they
among themselves? How few of them agree on any one Principe or Medium for the
solving this argument? Some fly for refuge to the Molinists Middle Science,
telling us, That God foresaw that men being placed under such hypotheses, and
circumstances, would sin against him, etc. Thus Baronius, Metaphys. Sect. 12.
Disp. 2. n. 55, 56. p. 326. where he professedly defendes Fonseca's
conditionate Science, making God to have a conditionate Science of the first
sin, if Eve seduced by the Serpent should temt Adam, etc. Thus also one and
another Divine of good note among us. But this subterfuge is greatly disliked
by the more fober of this new Method, particularly by Strangius; who, l. 3. c.
11. p. 651. proves nervo^. That there can be no such thing as a Middle or
conditionate Science in God, because its Object is not certainly Cognoscible,
or Knowable: and this he proves; because an object cannot be certainly known,
unless it be certainly true: which the object of this conditionate Middle
Science is not. Thus also Le Blanc, De Concord. Libert. Par. 1. p. 452, etc.
Others therefore perceiving the infirmitude of this evasion, have recourse to
the Dominicans real presence of things future in Eternity; whereby they make
God, by his Science of Vision, to behold the sins of men. Thus Strangius, l. 3.
c. 10. p. 646. If it be demanded, says he, to what Science Gods Knowledge of
Sins must be referred, I easily grant that it is to be referred to his Science
of Vision, etc. But more fully, l. 3. c. 7. p. 594. Among all the modes which
are wont to be explicated, there is none more probable than that which is taken
from the presence of althings in Eternity; because the Eternity of God is
Insuccessive and Indivisible. The same he inculcates, p. 595, 596, 597. But
this mode also of solving the difficulty, is greatly opposed, by some of his
own party, the New Methodists, who take some pains to show the invaliditie
thereof. So Le Blanc, De Concord. Libert. Par. 3. These. 37. p. 443. First,
says he, as for that real presence of futures in Eternity, namely as they are
supposed to coexiste from eternity to eternity it self, it appears to be a
mere figment; for that one thing coexiste to another, it is necessary that both
existe, etc. Thus also a learned and pious Divine among our selves, who has
espoused Strangius's Hypothesis, falls soul on the Thomists for asserting,
Althings to be eternally present to the divine Intellect in esse reali, etc.
Lastly, others therefore to evade the forementioned inconveniences, take up
their refuge under the Infinity of Gods Prescience. Thus Le Blanc, De Concord.
Par. 1. These. 40. p. 444. As for the fourth opinion, which seeks the certitude
of the divine Prescience in the infinity of the divine Intellect, and in the
determinate truth of those things which are contingently future, it
establishes nothing but what is certain and indubitable, etc. Yet he grants,
These. 41. That albeit this opinion contains in it nothing but truth, yet it
does not satisfy the Question, nor remove the main difficulty, namely, How
things pass from a state of possibility to a state of futurition, etc. Whence
he concludes, These. 43. Sithat there is so much darkness on every side, there
is nothing more safe than to profess our Ignorance in this particular. And
this indeed is the best refuge these New Methodists have, when they see
themselves involved in so many self-contradictions, and absurdities, to
profess their Ignorance as to the Mode of Divine Prescience. Yea, some of them
proceed so far in this pretended modesty, as to profess, That the mode of
Divine Prescience is not determined in Scripture. Thus Strangius, l. 3. c. 5.
p. 576. That God is omniscient is put out of dout, but touching the mode and
manner of Prescience nothing is expressly delivered in Scripture. The like
others. But is it so indeed? Does not the Scripture declare expressly the mode
of Prescience? Why then (1) are our Adversaries so dogmatic and positive in
their new modes and measures of Divine Prescience, contrary to the received
Sentiments of the Church in all Ages? How comes it to pass, that they contend
with so much heat and passion, for that which they confess is not expressly
delivered in Scripture? Were not a modest (...) or suspension of assent more
agreeable to such a Confession? But (2) We easily grant them, that the mode of
Divine Prescience is unsearchable and past finding out, as indeed al Divine
Perfections are, but yet must we thence necessarily conclude, that nothing of
the mode of Divine Prescience is expressly delivered in Scripture? [1] Does
not the Scripture evidently declare, That the mode of Gods Prescience is far
above yea opposite to that of Man's science, as much as Heaven is above the
Earth, yea infinitely more? [2] Does not the Scripture also remove from the
mode of Divine Prescience al manner of Imperfections, much more Contradictions?
And is not the mode of Gods Prescience in his own Essence and Decrees, much
more perfect than that which makes his Infallible immutable Prescience
dependent on the mutable fallible Will of Man? But see more hereof, Court Gent.
P. 4. B. 2. c. 5.. 2.

. 3. We pass on to our third Argument, which shall be taken 3 Arg. from the
Decree of Reprobation*
from the Divine Will and Decrees; and more particularly from the Decree of
Reprobation. And here we shall lay down this Principe, which is granted by
Strangius, and others of the New Method, That Divine Predetermination is
adequate and commensurate to Divine Predefinition or Predestination. So
Strangius, l. 3. c. 2. p. 547. We easily grant, says he, that the
predefinition of God from eternity, and the predetermination of the create will
in time, mutually follow each other, so that if God does absolutely predefine
any particular and singular act to be brought about by us, he must also
determine our Will to the same. This he inculcates, c. 5. p. 584. Now this
ingenuous Concession is as much as we desire to build our Demonstration on: for
we no way dout but to demonstrate, That God does absolutely predefine the
material entitative act of Sin: Which we shall endeavor to make good in the
following Propositions. (1) Prop. Reprobation admits no formal motive, proper
condition or cause. This Proposition is generally denied by the New Methodists,
who grant, That God decrees al good absolutely, but as for Sin, say they, God
decrees that only respectively and conditionally. So Strangius, l. 3. c. 2. p.
546-548. But we no way dout, but, before we have finished this Demonstration, to
make it evident, that Gods Decree of Reprobation, whereby he determines to
leave men to sin, is absolute, as well as the Decree of Election: Yea, it is to
me a thing altogether impossible, to defend an absolute Decree of Election, and
yet to make the Decree of Reprobation conditional and respective: for if the
absolute good pleasure of God be the only cause why some are elected, must it
not also be the only cause why others are rejected? Does not the Election of
the one necessarily implie the Reprobation of the other? It Is true, our
Divines, that follow the Sublapsarian mode, as Davenant, etc. speak of Sin as a
commun condition belonging to the whole mass of corrupt nature, yet they allow
not of any distinctive condition or formal cause or motive, which should
incline the divine will to reprobate one rather than another: for nothing can
move the divine Will, but what is some way antecedent to it: Now the
consideration of al sin is subsequent to some act of Gods Will. (2) Prop. The
act of Reprobation is not merely negative, but positive and efficacious. It Is
granted, that some of our Divines make mention of a negative act of
Reprobation, which they term Non-election, or Preterition, yet hereby they
intend not a suspense act of the Divine will, but include also a positive
efficacious act. Thus Jansenius, August. de Great. Christi, l. 10. c. 2. page
420. proves out of Augustine, That Gods negative Reprobation is positive. So
Davenant, Dissert. de Elect. and Reprob. p. 113. But we must take heed, says
he, lest with Scotus we think, that the Will of God in regard of Reprobates,
which he electes not but passes by, is merely negative: for in this very act,
which we express by a Negation, is contained an express and affirmate Will of
God. So in his Determinations, Quaest. 25. p. 117. he tells us, That it is most
certain, there can be no Decree permitting sin, to which there does not adhere
some efficacious Decree. And p. 118. he instructs us, That this Decree of
permitting sin is efficacious, not in a way of efficience, but by directing and
ordaining to extract good out of evil. (3) Prop. In the matter of Reprobation
God is considered as a soverain Absolute Lord, not as a Righteous Judge. The
Pelagians, Molinists, Arminians, and New Methodists consider God in the act of
Reprobation as a just Judge, not as a supreme absolute Lord: whence they
conclude, that it is unjust with God to reprobate any but on the prevision of
their sins; not considering, that Reprobation is not an act inflicting
punishment, but of denying Benefits, wherein the Liberty and Dominion of God
is only to be attended; according to that of the Apostle, Romans 9. 21. Has not
the Potter power over the clay, etc? What is soverain Dominion, but an absolute
right to dispose of what is our own? And shall we not allow the same Dominion to
God, which is allowed to the Potter over his Clay? Is the soverain Lord tied to
his Creature by any Law, more than what is in his own nature and will? Hence it
follows, (4) That the Decree of Reprobation is most absolute and Independent as
to al distinctive conditions or causes in man. Thus Jansenius, August. de Great.
Christi, l. 10. c. 4. p. 423. proves out of Augustine, That the absolute Will of
God is the alone cause of Reprobation. And Augustine complains, That it is a
great injury to God, when men search for causes of things superior to his
soverain Will: for his Will is such a supreme Rule of Justice, as that whatever
he wills is for that very reason, because he wills it, to be accounted just. So
Bradwardine, de Causa Dei, l. 1. c. 47. proves strongly, That albeit God
punishes no man eternally without sin committed in time; yet he does not
eternally reprobate any for sin as a Cause antecedently moving his divine Will.
So Alvarez, de Auxil. Disput. 109. 3a Conclus. The positive act, whereby God
from eternity would not admit some into his Kingdom, was not conditionate,
but absolute, antecedent, in a moment of Reason, to the il use of Free Will. And
it is proved, [1] Because there can be no cause of Reprobation. [2] Because
supernatural Beatitude is not due to any upon the account of natural
improvements: Therefore God could from al eternity without any Injury, before
the Prescience of the good or il use of free will, elect some to life eternal,
and by a positive act will not to admit others. And our Divines generally grant,
That there can be no other cause assigned of Reprobation, than the absolute
(...) or good pleasure of God.

But none is more categoric and positive in this, than judicious Davenant's
Hypotheses about absolute Reprobation.
Davenant, (who yet in some points came nigh the new Methodists) in his
incomparable Animadversions on Gods love to mankind. Wherein he does puissantly
defend the following particulars greatly conducing to the establishment of our
Hypothesis. [1] That Gods secret will of good pleasure is very different from
his reveled, preceptive, complacential will, as page 221, 349, 376. [2] That
Gods reveled, complacential, approbative will is the measure of our duty, but
not of Gods decrees or operations, page 222, 356, 391, 399. [3] That Gods
beneplacite will or good pleasure is only properly his will, page 392. [4] That
Gods beneplacite will or good pleasure is moved by nothing but itself, page 375,
376. [5] That the absolute Decrees of God contradict not general conditional
promises of life and threats of death, page 241, 332, 375, 387, 398. [6] That
God may be said, according to his will of complacence and approbation, to intend
the salvation of sinners, yea Reprobates, by providing the means of grace
conducing thereto, page 271, 376, 394. [7] That the externe means and offers of
grace must be measured and interpreted according to the known nature of the
means, not the unknowen will of God, page 353. [8] That God, by his approbative
complacential will unfeignedly wills what he commands, page 329, 393, 394, 401.
[9] That al under the means of grace are under some remote conditional
possibility of salvation, page 256, 257. [10] That Gods evangelic,
providential intention of saving sinners is often frustrated as to its events by
man's sin, although his decretive beneplacite intention is never frustrated, p.
377, 381, 387, 388, 395. [11] That absolute Election and Reprobation may stand
with a possibility to contrary events, though not with contrary events, page
240, 333, 341, 360, 402, 253. [12] That absolute Decrees oppose not the Justice
of God; with its difference from that of men, page 232, 321, 336, 339, 342.
[13] That absolute Decrees oppose not Gods Holiness, page 240-272. [14] That
absolute Decrees oppose not the Mercy of God, page 277-310. [15] That mere
conditional Decrees are inconsistent with Gods soverain Being and Independence,
page 226. [16] That absolute Reprobation is not repugnant to Gods Truth, page
349-362. [17] That absolute Reprobation takes not away the end and use of Gods
gifts, page 374-404. [18] That absolute Reprobation leaves no man under an
absolute necessity or compulsion to sin, page 253. [19] Let Reprobation be
absolute or conditional it leaves the same possibility and liberty to the
Agents, page 333, 340, 341, 351, 360. [20] That the Arminians grant an
absolute, immutable, fixed Decree of Reprobation, which admits the same
objections that they urge against the Calvinists, p. 302, 332, 333, 340, 351,
354, 400, 418, 419. [21] Infallible Prescience granted by the Arminians infers
as much necessity on the will, and compulsion to sin as absolute Reprobation,
page 418, 419, 442, 462. [22] Lastly, he shows us, What is the right use and
abuse of absolute Decrees, page 454-526. These Propositions clearly and fully
explicated by our judicious Davenant give great evidence and demonstration to
our Hypothesis, as also distinct solution to the objections of our Opponents,
of which hereafter, Chap. 6.

. 4. Our next Argument shall be taken from Divine Concurse, 4. Arg. from Divine
Concurse.
its Principe, Nature, and Efficace; the explication whereof will give us a full
demonstration of our Hypothesis; which we shall endeavor to lay down in the
following Particulars.

1. That God predetermines the will to the substrate matter or 1. Its Principe.
entitative act of that which is sinful, may be demonstrated from the Principe
of al Divine Concurse. What is the active principe of al Divine Concurse, but
the Divine will? Does not sacred Pagine expressly speak so much? So Ephesians. 1. 11.
Who works althings after the counsel of his own will. And more particularly as
to the substrate matter of sin it is said, Act. 4. 28. that those who crucified
our Lord, did act but what Gods hand, or will and counsel predetermined to be
done, of which before. And Strangius himself grants us, lib. 1. cap. 11. page
63. That concurse, as to its prime act is in God, and the same with God. Now
such is the Omnipotence of Cum voluntas Divina sit efficacissima, non solum
sequitur, quod fiant ea quae Deus fieri vult, sed quod eo modo fiant, quo Deus
ea fieri velit, Aquin. part. 1.
the Divine will, that althings must necessarily be done, which he wills to be
done, and in that manner as he wills them, as Aquinas well determines. How then
is it possible, but that if God will that the substrate matter of sin existe, it
must necessarily existe, and in that manner as he wills it? Can any person or
thing resist the Divine efficacious will? And what is al active concurse but
the determination of the same efficacious will? See more of Gods will being the
spring and principe of Divine concurse, Court Gent. P. 4. B. 2. C. 7.. 3.

2. That God predetermines the will to the substrate matter of 2. Its Nature.
sin may be demonstrated from the nature of Divine concurse as to its
Totalitie, Universality as to effects, Particularitie as to manner of working,
Immediation, Antecedence, and soverain absolute Independence. (1) The Totalitie
of Divine concurse sufficiently demonstrates 1. Totalitie.
its predetermination as to the substrate matter of sin. That Gods concurse to
al second causes, acts, and effects is total we have sufficiently demonstrated,
Court Gent. P. 4. B. 2. C. 7. page 417. Thus much is also granted by Strangius,
lib. 1. cap. 10. page 55. Adeo ut tota actio pendeat a Deo, and tota a Creatura.
where he assertes, That the whole action dependes on God, as also on the
creature; otherwise God should not concur immediately: Though I am not ignorant
that a Divine of name among us, as also of the same party with Strangius,
denies Gods concurse to the substrate matter of sin to be total; yet because he
is singular therein, and different from his own party, I shall take it for
granted, that Gods concurse is total, and thence endeavor to prove its
predetermining the will to the substrate matter of sin. For if God totally concur
to the substrate act of sin, must he not also concur to the will that puts forth
that act? And if God concur to the will in the production of the act, must he
not also necessarily determine the will to that act? That Gods total concurse
does not only reach the act and effect, but also the will itself is granted by
Strangius, lib. 2. cap. 6. page 171. Neither, faith he, do we say, that the
Concurse of God does reach only the effect, but not the efficient cause, sithat
the very (...), Energie of the second cause must be from God; and the action is
not less an effect than the work, etc.

(2) The Universality of Divine concurse as to al effects whatsoever 2.
Universality.
gives us a further demonstration of its efficacious predetermination as to the
entitative act of sin. That Divine concurse is universally extensive to al acts
of the will, as well as to al other objects, by giving forces and assistances to
faculties, exciting and appling them to their acts, and ordering them so as
that they may in the best manner reach their ends, we have copiosely
demonstrated, Court Gent. Part 4. Book 2. Chap. 7.. 2. page 296, 297. And does
not this sufficiently demonstrate Gods concurse to the substrate matter of sin
to be predeterminative? Yea, to speak properly, is there, or can there be any
real efficience, influxe, or concurse sent forth by God as the prime universal
cause of althings, which is not predeterminative? To talk of an universal
general concurse of God, which immediately influenceth the will and al its
natural acts, and yet does not predetermine, i. e. excite and apply the will to
its act, what is it but pure nonsense and virtual contradiction?

(3) The Particularitie of Gods concurse as to its manner of 3. Particularitie.
working does also invictly demonstrate its predetermination as to the
entitative act of sin. Divine concurse, albeit it be universal as to the extent
of its object, yet it is most particular and proper as to its manner of working.
Our Adversaries generally, both Pelagians, Molinists, Arminians, and New
Methodists talk much of a general indifferent concurse, alike commun to al
effects, and determinable by its substrate matter; as the general influence of
the Sun is determinable by the matter it works on. But, alas! how unbecoming
and incongruous to the Divine perfections is such a general indifferent
concurse? Does not this make the first cause to be second, because dependent;
and the second cause first, because independent? And does it not hence also
necessarily follow, that the first cause may, by the indisposition of the matter
or resistance of second Agents, be frustrated of its intended effect? What more
expressly overthrows the soverain Dominion and universal Concurse of God, than
such a general indifferent Concurse? And yet is not this one of the most
plausible subterfuges our Adversaries have to shelter themselves under? They
object, If God should by a particular predeterminative concurse determine the
will to act in sins intrinsecally evil, as the hatred of God, or the like, then
the specification of the act and moral determination of it to its particular
object would be from God; and so God inevitably should be the Author of sin.
This is their principal and indeed their only objection worth a naming against
our Hypothesis; to which we intend a more full answer in the next Chapter,. 1.
at present let this suffice, [1] We say not, that God is a particular cause,
but universal, working in and by a particular concurse suitable to the
indigence of the matter it works on. [2] We say not, that this particular
Concurse of God does morally specify, or determine the sinful act to its
object, but only physically individuate or naturally modifie the substrate
matter of the sinful act. This is incomparably well explicated by Dr. Samuel
Ward, that great Professor of Theology, in his Determination of Gods Concurse,
page 117. where he strongly demonstrates, That the previous Concurse of God, as
the first cause, does in its way modifie and determine all the actions of second
causes: and if so, then surely the substrate entitative act of sin, as
hereafter. [3] That general indifferent concurse, which our Adversaries so
warmly contend for, sithat they grant it to be causative and influential on the
sinful act, does equally infer God to be the Author of sin, as our predeter
minative concurse. For if it be causative and effective of the act, then surely
of that individual act, as determined to such an object: for to talk of its
concurrence to the act in genere, in the general, and not in individuo, in its
individual determination to its object, is such an absurdity in Philosophy,
that al awakened Philosophers will decrie it: for what Tyro cannot inform us,
that al physical acts are suppositorum, of individual singular substances, and
so without al peradventure individual and singular: and if so, then must not
their general concurse reach not only the action in general, but also
individually considered, as relating to its object, not morally, but
physically? And will it not hence follow, that their general concurse is
causative of the entitative act, as determined to its object, and so makes God
the Author of sin, as much, at least as well as our predeterminative concurse,
as more fully Chap. 6.. 1. Of the particularitie of Divine Concurse see Court
Gent. P. 4. B. 2. C. 7.. 4.

(4) The Immediation of Divine Concurse strongly demonstrates 4. Immediation.
the predetermination of the will as to the entitative act of sin thereby. Our
Adversaries generally, both Jesuits, Arminians, and new Methodists, excepting
some very few that adhere to Durandus, grant an immediate concurse to the
entitative act of sin; which if well followed will necessarily infer
predeterminative concurse, specially according to the concessions of the new
Methodists; who say, That this immediate concurse reaches not only the effect
and act, (which the Jesuits and Arminians grant) but also the very will itself,
as the immediate efficient of the act. Touching this immediate Concurse see
Strangius, lib. 1. cap. 10. page 54, etc. and lib. 2. cap. 5. page 163. And
among the Jesuits none has more acutely demonstrated this, than Suarez,
Metaphys. Disp. 22. Sect. 1. and our Countryman Campton Carleton, in his
Philos. Universe. Disp. 28. Sect. 2, 3. page and Disput. 29. Sect. 1, 2. page
323, 324. where he demonstrates strongly, against Lud. a Dola, That God
immediately together with the creature produces the very act of sin. Now hence
we thus argue: If God, together with the human will, immediately produces the
very act of sin, then certainly he must of necessity predetermine the will to
that entitative act: For suppose the sinful act be motus primo primus, as they
phrase it, or a mere simple volition of the will, how is it possible, that God
should immediately produce this act of the will, without applying the will to the
act? Do not the very Jesuits, Suarez, Carleton, with others grant, That one
and the same sinful act is produced by God and the human will? And does not
Strangius with others of the New Methodists also acknowledge further, That Gods
Concurse to this sinful act of the will is previous to that of the will, not only
simultaneous, as Strange. lib. 1. cap. 10. page 56? Yea Strangius and those of
his persuasion grant yet more, That Gods immediate concurse reaches not only
the act and effect, but also the will itself, as Strange. page 171. And is it not
most evident, from these ingenuous concessions of our Adversaries, touching
immediate concurse, that God does predetermine the will to the entitative act of
sin? Can we imagine, that one and the same sinful act should be produced
immediately by God and the human will, and yet God not apply the will to its
act, which is all that is meant by predetermination? Yea, does God not only
concur with the will to one and the same act, but also influence the will in the
production of that act, as Strangius and others grant, and yet not apply it to
act? How is it possible, that God should influence the will in the production of
any act, without actuating or drawing forth the will to act? And if God actuate
or draw forth the will to act, does he not apply it to the act, and so
predetermine the same? Again, does God by an immediate concurse not only
influence the will and its act, but also antecedently and in a moment of reason
and causalitie before the will concurs to its own act, as Strangius also grants?
and does not this give us a more abundant demonstration, that God predetermines
the will to that act? Can there be any previous concurse immediately actuating
and influencing the will in its act, but what is predeterminative? Does not the
will necessarily depend on the previous concurse of the first cause? and if so,
must it not be applied and predetermined to its act thereby? But more of this
previous concurse in our next Argument. Lastly, if we allow (with the Jesuits)
unto God only an immediate concurse to the act of the will, al those black
consequences which our Adversaries cast on the Assertors of predetermination,
may with the same facility be reflected on them: for if they make God, by an
immediate concurse to concur to the act of sin, do they not make him the cause
and so the Author of sin as well as we? More of immediate Concurse, see Court
Gent. P. 4. B. 2. C. 7. 4.

(5) The Prioritie and Antecedence of Divine Concurse does invictly 5.
Prioritie.
demonstrate its predetermining the will as to the substrate matter of sinful
acts. We shall here reassume a Principe already established, and granted by
Jesuits and New Methodists, namely, That the action of the first cause
concurring with the second, is not, as to passive attingence, distinct from the
action of the second cause. This is generally granted by the Molinists, as Le
Blanc, Council. Arbitr. par. 3. these. 28. page 433. and by Jansenius, August.
tom. 1. lib. 5. cap. 20. page 119. It Is true, the Concurse of God the first
cause is really different from that of the second, as to active attingence or
principe, because Gods concurse, actively considered, is the same with his will;
yet as to passive attingence, the action and effect produced by God differ not
from the action and effect produced by the second cause. This being premissed,
we proceed to demonstrate Divine predetermination to the substrate matter of sin
from the prioritie and antecedence of Divine concurse, and that in and by the
following Propositions. (1) Prop. The first cause does in order of nature or
causalitie concur before the second. This Proposition is potently demonstrated
by the acute Dr. Sam. Ward, Determinat. de Concurs. Dei, page 116, etc. And the
arguments for it are invict: for [1] where there is subordination and
dependence in causalitie, which is proper to every second cause, there
posterioritie is essentially appendent. Again, [2] al second causes in regard
of God are but instruments, as Aquinas proves: yea the will of man as dependent
on God is but a vital instrument, albeit in regard of the effect it may
sometimes be termed a principal Agent: Now does not every instrument subserve
the principal Efficient? And does not that which is subservient in order of
causalitie move after that which is the principal Agent? But here we are to
remember, that when we assert Gods Concurse to be previous in regard of its
principe and independence, we deny not, but that it is also simultaneous in
regard of the action and effect produced by the second cause, as Alvarez, lib.
3. de Auxil. Disput. 19. number. 4. and Twisse, Vind. Great. lib. 2. de Criminat.
part. 3. page 56. But that which we deny is, That Gods Concurse is solely
concomitant and simultaneous; and that [3] because this simultaneous concurse
makes God only a partial cause, and dependent on the second cause in the
production of its effect. Yea, some of the Jesuits grant, That if we consider
the concurse of God absolutely, without respect to this or that second cause,
so it is in order of nature before the influxe of the second cause. So Fonseca,
Metaphys. lib. 6. cap. 2. quaest. 5. sect. 13. The like Strangius, lib. 1. cap.
11. page 60, 61. Thus also Burgersdicius, Metaphys. lib. 2. cap. 11. grants,
Gods concurse in supernaturals to be previous, albeit in naturals he would have
it to be only simultaneous: which is most absurd: for the active concurse of
God, being nothing else but the immanent act of his will, must necessarily be
the same in naturals as in supernaturals. More of the prioritie and Antecedence
of the Divine Concurse, see Court Gent. P. 4. B. 2. c. 7.. 4. p. 416. Hence,
(2) Prop. This previous Concurse of God as the first Cause must necessarily
move and apply every second cause to its act and effect. For how is it
possible, that the second cause should act, unless the first move and apply
it to its act? Can a second cause move it self to an act, unless it be first
moved thereto by the first cause? Whence, (3) Prop. This previous Concurse of
God in applying and moving the Will of man to the substrate matter of sin
predetermines the same. For if one and the same sinful action be produced by
God and the human Will, and God concurs in order of nature before the will, yea
premove and apply it to the act, must he not necessarily predetermine the
same? All the wit and subtilitie of our Adversaries will never extricate
themselves or satisfy any awakened mind in this point, How God does by a
previous concurse move and actuate the Will, and yet not predetermine it to the
act. Indeed to speak the truth, the Sentiments not only of the Arminians, but
also of the new Methodists, Baronius, Strangius and others about Concurse, fall
in with those of the Jesuits for a simultaneous Concurse only, albeit some of
them in terms disown it.

(6) Lastly, the soverain and absolute Independence of Gods Concurse 6.
Absolute Independence.
gives us further demonstration of his predetermining the will as to the
substrate matter of sin. That Gods Concurse is not Conditionate but absolute and
independent, we have copiosely proved, Court Gent. P. 4. B. 2. c. 7.. 4. p.
412, etc. And indeed, what more absurd, yea impossible, than such a
conditionate Concurse, whereby the Molinists and Arminians suppose Gods
concurrence to depend on man's? Is there not hereby an effectual door opened to
a progress into infinite? For if God concur on condition that man concur, does
God concur to that condition, or not? If not, is there not then some act of the
creature produced without Gods concurse? If God concur to the working of that
condition, then absolutely, or conditionally: if absolutely, then his former
Concurse is not conditional: if conditionally, then what an infinitude of
Conditions will follow hence? We take it then for granted, that Gods Concurse
is not conditional, but absolute and independent. And hence we thus argue: If
God concur absolutely and independently to the substrate matter of sin, then he
does predetermine the will thereto: the consequence is rational and clear: For
where two Agents concur totally and immediately to one and the same action and
effect, the one must necessarily depend on the other; and that which depends on
another must be determined by that other: for every cause that is dependent on
another, is so far as it depends thereon determinable thereby. It Is true,
natural corporeous effects have some dependence on the Sun, without being
determined thereby, because the Sun is a limited cause, and has not efficace
sufficient to determine the matter is works on, but is rather determined
thereby, and so in that respect dependent thereon: But as for God the first
cause whose will, the principe of his concurse, is omnipotent and most
efficacious, it is impossible, that he should have any dependence on, or be any
way determinable in his concurse by the matter he works on: he being the most
universal cause, infinitely perfect, and void of al potentialitie or passive
power must necessarily predetermine al second causes to their acts, but be
determined by none. But more of this in what immediately follows of the
efficace of Gods Concurse.

3. Having demonstrated Divine predetermination to the substrate 3. The
efficace of Divine Concurse proves predetermination. Nos autem eo nomine, [sc.
influxus communis] non determinationem seu praedeterminationem intelligimus,
sed vim, (...), and efficaciam Dei, qua causas secundas sibi subordinat, etc.
Strange. l. 1. c. 11. 1. Efficacious Concurse as to natural acts.
matter of sin from the Principe and Nature of Divine concurse, we now proceed
to demonstrate the same from the Efficace thereof. Strangius, lib. 1. cap. 11.
page 61. albeit he denies Gods general Concurse, whereby he concurs to the
matter of sin, to be predeterminative, yet he grants it is efficacious, calling
it (...), the force and efficace of God, whereby he subordinates second causes
to himself; so that whatever they are or act, they essentially depend on him in
both respects. And this ingenuous concession touching the efficace of Divine
concurse, is all that we require to build our present Demonstration on, which we
shall distribute into two branches, (1) Gods efficacious concurse unto al
natural acts and effects. (2) Gods efficacious concurse to al supernatural acts
and effects.

1. We shall demonstrate Divine predetermination to the substrate matter of sin
from the efficacitie of Divine concurse as to al natural acts and effects;
which evidently appears in the following particulars. (1) Gods concurse to al
physic or natural causes, motions, and effects is most efficacious. This
Proposition the sacred Scriptures do abundantly confirm, as Esa. 26. 12. Romans
11. 36. Ephesians. 1. 11. Act. 17. 28. of which before Chap. 3.. 1. Thus much
Strangius and those of his persuasion grant us, as before, c. 2.. 1. (2) The
efficace of Divine concurse dependes on the efficace and determination of the
Divine will. For what is efficacious concurse, considered actively, but the
efficacitie of the Divine will predetermining to act so or so? To presume that
active concurse is any thing else but an immanent efficacious act of the Divine
will is to cross the mind of sacred Scriptures and the most awakened Divines,
as we have copiosely demonstrated, Court Gent. P. 4. B. 2. C. 7.. 3. (3) Gods
will being efficacious and determinate determines al second causes to al their
natural actions and effects. Is it not impossible, but that the will of God
being omnipotent and determined for the production of such an action of man's
will, the said action or effect must necessarily follow? Is not the will of God
sufficiently potent to determine the will of man in all its natural acts? Is not
the efficacitie of the Divine will so great, that not only those things are
done, which God wills shall be done, but in that manner as he wills Non solum sunt
ea quae Deus vult fieri, sed etiam eo modo fiunt quo Deus vult fieri, Strange.
l. 2. c. 11. p. 266.
them? Does not Strangius confess so much lib. 1. cap. 10. page 55. and lib.
2. cap. 11. page 266.? Whence if God in his own will purpose and determine, that
the human will should produce such or such an action, suppose that whereto sin
is necessarily annexed, is not the human will necessarily in regard of the
Divine will, and yet freely in regard of its own manner of working predetermined
thereto? This is most evident in the crucifixion of our Lord, expressed, Act.
2. 23. By the determinate counsel, (...), i. e. Act. 2. 23.
by the decreed, fixed, determined will of God. The like Act. 4. 28. of which
places before, Chap. 3.. 2. Hence (4) The efficacious concurse of God modifies,
and according to its mode determines al actions of second causes, not only
necessarily but freely. Does the Divine will determine itself to the production
of every singular individual effect? and may it not, yea must it not then
determine the human will to al its natural acts? Has man's infirm ambulatorie
will power to determine al such faculties, acts and effects as are subject to
its Empire? and has not the Divine will, which is infinitely more efficacious,
power to determine al inferior powers, acts and effects subject to its
universal Dominion? And does it not hence follow, that the soverain Divine will
does by its efficacious concurse predetermine all the free acts of the human
will, which necessarily fall under its Empire and modification? See this well
demonstrated by that judicious Professor Sam. Ward, Determinat. de Concursu
Dei, page 118, etc. Whence (5) The efficacious predeterminative concurse of God
equally extendes itself to al natural good, even to the substrate matter of
sinful acts. Strangius and others of our Opponents grant, That Gods efficacious
predetermining Concurse extendes it self not only to al supernatural good, but
also to al natural good, that has not sin intrinsecally annexed to it: whence
we may, by a paritie of reason demonstrate divine Predetermination to the
substrate matter of al actions, though never so intrinsecally evil: for the
substrate matter of al actions though intrinsecally evil, is naturally good.
Take the Hatred of God, which is reckoned to be an act most intrinsecally evil,
and if we consider it in its substrate matter or entitative act, so it is
naturally good, and if it were exerted against sin, its proper object, it would
be also morally good: So that indeed the substrate matter of bad and good
actions is the same, namely some natural good, and Gods Concurse to the one and
other is the same. Yea this indeed is acknowledged by Strangius, l. 2. c. 3. p.
154. Al natural acts are good by the bonitie of Being, i. e. entitatively and
naturally -- whence he concludes, and so as to Concurse we say, that God
concurs Et sic quantum ad concursum attinet dicimus, Deum concurrere eodem modo
ad generationem ex legitimo matrimonio and adulterio, quia physice eadem est
specie utrobique actio. Strange. l. 2. c. ^. p. 254.
in the same manner to generation from lawful Matrimony and that from
adultery; because the action on both sides is physically of the same kind. A
great concession indeed, which would our Adversaries fully come up unto, how
soon and how easily might we put a period to this Controversy? For if the same
action may be, as to its substrate matter naturally good and sinful, and both
physically of the same kind, and so Gods Concurse to both the same, why then
may not God be allowed to predetermine the will to the substrate matter of that
which is sinful, as well as to the substrate matter of that which is good? Surely
if the action be, as to its substrate matter, in one and the other naturally good,
and physically of one and the same kind, there can be no rational account
given, why God should not predetermine the will to the substrate matter of that
which is evil, as well as to that which is good. In short, as there is no moral
act so perfect in this imperfect state, but has some vitiositie adherent to it,
so there is no natural act so sinful, but it has for its substrate matter some
natural good: and as God by predetermining the will to the moral good is no way
the Author of the vitiositie appendent to the act; so by predetermining it to
the natural substrate matter of the sinful act, he is as much exemted from being
the Author of the sin. The substrate matter of the one and the other being the
2. Efficacious Concurse as to supernatural Acts and Effects,
same, of which more. 5.

2. We proceed to demonstrate Divine Predetermination to the substrate matter of
Sin from the Efficacitie of Divine Concurse as to supernatural Acts and
Effects. Our Adversaries the New Methodists, Baronius only excepted, grant that
efficacious Concurse as to supernatural good is predeterminative; from which we
no way dout, but to draw an invict Demonstration, that Divine Concurse is also
predeterminative as to the substrate matter of sinful acts, even such as are
intrinsecally evil. This Province we shall endeavor to make good by several
Arguments, (1) From the Principe of al Predetermination: what is the principe
of al Predetermination, but the omnipotent efficacious will of God? And how are
al Acts and Effects predetermined by the Divine Will, but by an immutable
predeterminative Decree, termed his Determinate Counsel, Act. 2. 23? which is
said, Act. 4. 28. to predetermine the Crucifixion of Christ? Does not therefore
the same determinate Counsel or will of God predetermine the substrate matter of
sin, as well as any act morally good? Is not then predetermination as to its
active Attingence or principe one and the same, both as to natural and
supernatural good, albeit as to its passive Attingence and effect it be greatly
different? For albeit there be a double Concurse required to supernatural good,
one to the substrate matter, which is a natural good, and the other to the moral
good, which is supernatural, but only a single concurse to the substrate matter
of sin; yet in point of efficace the predetermination to the later is equal to
the former, as to Divine efficience: For there is as much power and efficace
required to predetermine or premove the will to the substrate matter, or natural
entitative act of sin, as there is to any supernatural good: both are alike
facile to the divine omnipotent will: and surely no reason can be given, why
predetermination is necessary for the production of any gracious act, and not
as necessary for the production of the entitative act of sin: for the Will of
Man is equally incapable of acting at al, as of acting graciously without
Predetermination, whatever some may imagine to the contrary.

(2) From the substrate matter of al natural and supernatural good. Are not al
gracious acts and habits loged in human nature? What is supernatural good but a
ray of the divine Nature irradiated into human Nature, and seated therein as
its proper subject? Is not al grace a supernatural mode implanted in human
nature? whence, if God by efficacious Grace predetermine the will to receive any
habitual infusion, or act of Grace, must he not also necessarily predetermine
the will to the natural act which is the substrate matter of that supernatural
mode? And if God predetermine the will to the natural act of that which is good,
must he not also predetermine it to the natural act of that which is evil? What
difference can there be assigned between the natural act of Crucifying our
Lord, which was intrinsecally evil, and that of crucifying the Thieves, which
was a piece of Justice? Did not God then as much predetermine the former as the
later? Yea, to raise this Argument higher, has not the same substrate matter,
which is supernaturally good and gracious as to its substance, some modal
vitiositie and obliquitie appendent thereto in this imperfect state? If then
God predetermine the Will to the substrate matter of that which is supernaturally
good, must he not also necessarily predetermine it to the substrate matter of
that which is also evil? I am not ignorant what is replied hereto, which we no
way dout but will prove invalid, and no better than smoke or vapor, when we come
to enlarge more fully on this Argument,. 5.

(3) We demonstrate the necessity of Divine Predetermination to the substrate
matter of what is sinful, from the Invaliditie yea vanity of those reasons
which are urged by our Adversaries against it, which do with as much force
strike at Predetermination to what is supernaturally good. [1] One principal
Objection that our Adversaries urge against predetermination to the substrate
matter of sin, specially such sins as are intrinsecally evil, is That it
destroys the liberty of the Will, etc. We shall not now attemt any answer to
the Objection, but reserve it for its proper place, Chap. 6.. 5. only we are to
show, that the whole of this Objection, and the reasons urged to enforce it, do
with as much force strike against al Predetermination, even that which is
granted to supernatural good: For does not Predetermination to gracious acts,
lay as much compulsion on the will, and thence as much destroy its liberty, as
predetermination to the substrate matter of sin? And is not the same objection
with its reasons as much urged, and that with as great color of Reason, by the
Molinists and Arminians, against al Predetermination to gracious acts? I must
confess, I could never, neither do I think any else can maintain and defend
our ground against the Jesuits and Arminians, if those reasons and grounds
which our Adversaries urge against Predetermination to the substrate matter of
sin, be admitted as valid. [2] The like may be said of that other objection or
reason, why our Adversaries reject Predetermination to the substrate matter of
sin, namely, That it makes al Gods Laws naturally and absolutely impossible,
etc. Is not this very objection, and the reason urged to enforce it, as much
urged by Molinists and Arminians, against al Predetermination even to gracious
Acts? And are not the reasons as valid on the later as on the former side? What
reason do the new Methodists give, that Predetermination to the entitative act
of sin makes Gods Laws impossible, but that it takes away the Wills
Indifference, and destroys the natural power that the will is invested with to
act or not to act? And does not Predetermination to good as much destroy the
wills indifference, and its power to act or not to act? [3] Our Adversaries
urge, That this Predetermination takes away the use of Promises, Invitations,
and al evangelic offers of Grace, and supposes God not to deal sincerely with
Sinners, in making offers of Grace, and yet irresistibly determining their Wills
against the acceptance of these offers? Is not this very objection, with its
reason urged, and that with as much force of reason by Jesuits and Arminians
against Predetermination to gracious Acts? For if no man can entertain those
offers of Grace by his own freewil, without a predeterminative Concurse, are
not al gracious Promises, Invitations, and offers of Grace to Sinners, who fall
not under this Predetermination, vain and useless? Our Adversaries the new
Methodists generally, (some few excepted) deny any sufficient Grace or
Free Will in corrupt Nature for the reception of evangelic offers and Grace: and
is not then the vicious will of corrupt Nature as well determined by its own
vitiositie against the offers of Grace, as by the predeterminative Concurse of
God? [4] Our Adversaries object, That this Predetermination to the entitative
act of sin, supposes God to compel and force men to sin, and so makes him to
be the real Author of Sin, yea more than the Sinner that is under a violent
compulsion, etc. and is not this very argument urged by Jesuits and Arminians
against al Predetermination even to what is good, and that with as much color
of reason? For say they, If God predetermine the will to what is good, then he
compels and forces the will to be good; so that the will being under a
compulsion cannot be said to be the Author of its own act, but is as a Stock or
Stone in the exercice of that act, which destroys al moral good, etc. Which
objection is as valid as that of our Adversaries, and can never be solidly
answered if their objection be good; though according to our Principes neither
the one or the other objection has any force in it, as we shall demonstrate, c.
6.. 5. To conclude this argument, I am very confident, our Opponents the new
Methodists will never be able to defend an efficacious determinative Concurse to
what is morally or supernaturally good, so long as they deny the same to the
substrate matter of sin, which is naturally good: for all, or at least the most
of those arguments they urge against the later, may, and are urged by the
Molinists and Arminians against the former, and that with equal force. And this
Baronius did by his natural acumen foresee, and therefore he took a course more
seemingly rational according to his Principes, though less friendly to divine
Concurse, to deny al Predetermination as well to supernatural as natural good;
of which see his Metaph. Sect. 8. Disput. 3. n. 66. etc. p. 136.

. 5. Our fifth Argument shall be taken from the Nature of Sin, 5. Arg. from the
Nature of Sin.
its substrate matter and formal reason. 1. As to the general Idea and substrate
matter of sin, we have demonstrated, Chapter 1.. 2. (1) That al human acts
considered in their natural entitie, abstracted 1. Its matter.
from their moral constitution, are neither good nor evil. (2) That al moral
acts whether good or evil receive their formal Constitution and Determination
from the Moral Law. (3) That no human Act considered physically, or according
to its natural entitative substance, is intrinsecally evil, but only morally,
in regard of its moral specification or determination to such or such an
object. Hence, (4) That sin has for its substrate matter some natural good. Now
these Propositions being laid as so many Principes, we hence argue, That God
must necessarily concur to, yea predetermine the substrate matter of actions
intrinsecally evil: For, if al sinful acts, even such as are intrinsecally evil
morally, are, according to their substrate matter physically good, does it not
necessarily follow, that God the first cause must concur thereto, yea
predetermine the same? Must not every second Cause as such be actuated and so
determined by its first Cause and his efficacious Concurse? Does not the
subordination of the second Cause to the first, necessarily demonstrate, not
only its dependence on, but also Predetermination by the same in all its natural
operations and effects? Is not every Being by participation necessarily
limited, defined, and predetermined in all its natural entitative motions by the
first Being, which is such by Essence? May not this also be demonstrated from
the very concessions of our Adversaries, who grant, that vitiositie follows not
any Act as a natural Act? So Strangius, l. 2. c. 11. p. 243. We confess, says
he, that Vitiositie does not follow the Fatemur quidem, malitiam non sequi
actum peccati ut est actus, alioqui omnis actus esset peccatum, etc. Strange.
act of sin as an act; for then every act would be sin; also that it does not
follow, as the act procedes from God, for then every act that procedes from
God, would have sin. Now if sin follows not the act of sin as an act, what
reason can there be why God should not efficaciously concur to, yea
predetermine the entitative act of Sin? This is well explicated by Lud. Crocius,
(that Breme Professor, who was a member of the Synod of Dort, and there began
the New Method) Duodecas, Dissert. de Volunt. Dei, Dissert* 8. These. 99. p.
426. As to the Act, says he, of the Divine Will about sin, the effates of
Scripture seem to contradict themselves, whiles that some expressly affirm,
That God nils and hates sins, and those that commit them, Psalm. 5. 5, 6, 7.
Zach. 8. 17. but others seem to say, That God wills, creates, effects them,
Esa. 45. 7. Lam. 3. 37, 38. Amos 3. 6. But these things do well agree, if the
distinction be rightly observed, (1) Between the Act, and the Vitiositie of the
Act. (2) Between the Act as it is from God, and as it is from the Creature. (3)
Between the will of God decreeing, and the will of God commanding. Whence he
concludes, These. 100. p. 427. For God wills and produces, by the Creature as
the first Cause by the second, the Act, as an Act, of it self indifferent to
moral Bonitie, and Vitiositie; and wills and effects the same, albeit depraved
by the Creature, as invested with his moral rectitude, because he produces it
by his own power, from his immaculate Sanctity and Justice, which can never be
made crooked or corrupted by any second Cause. Whence he adds, These. 101. And
this act essentially good, even as defiled by the Creature, God justly and
holily uses either as an Instrument of punishment, or of exploration or
exercice, and as an ordinate convenient Medium, according to his Justice for
the best ends. These. 102. In this sense God is said, To create evil, to produce
it out of his mouth, to send Joseph into Egypt by the Vendition of his
Brethren, to rob Job of his goods, to command Shimei to curse David, to use
Absolon for the defiling his Fathers Concubines, to deliver Christ into the
hands of Jews and Gentiles. These. 103. For God decreed to produce those acts,
as acts, and to permit the depravation of them by the Sinners, and to use them
albeit depraved, wisely and justly to ends holily ordained by him.

2. Divine Predetermination to the substrate matter of sin may 2. From the
formal reason of sin.
be also demonstrated from the formal nature of Sin, which consistes in the
privation of that moral rectitude due to actions, as Chapter 1.. 2. we have more
fully explicated. Whence we thus argue: If every deflexion from the Law of God
be sin, then certainly God necessarily predetermines to the substrate matter of
some sins: and if of some, why not of al, even such as are intrinsecally evil?
That God predetermines to the substrate matter of some sins is evident, and that
from the concessions of our Adversaries, who grant, That God does predetermine
the Will to actions imperfectly good, which also, according to their own
confessions are modally sinful: Whence we thus argue; The substrate matter of
the same action as good and as sinful is the same: wherefore, if God
predetermine the will to the substrate matter of the action as good, must he not
also predetermine it to the substrate matter of the same action as sinful? When
we say, That God predetermines to the substrate matter of the same action as
sinfil, As here, may not be taken reduplicatively, but only specificatively, i.
e. as it specifies and distributes the same action into good, and sinful; which
are different modes of one and the same substrate matter or entitative act: so
that our Opponents granting, that God does predetermine the will to the
substrate matter of the action as imperfectly good, how can they possibly deny,
that God predetermines it also to the same substrate matter which is modally
sinful? When I can see a rational solution given to this argument, (which I
despair of) I shall think our Adversaries have done much service to their Cause.
But they reply, If God concur by determinative influence to imperfectly good
actions, it does not thence follow, that he concurs to actions intrinsecally,
and in the substance of them evil. But I conceive this evasion will soon vanish
into smoke and vapor, if we consider well, (1) That the least sin may not be
imputed unto God as the Author of it, any more than the greatest: the
difference between sins modally and intrinsecally evil finds no place here:
dare our Adversaries say, that God is the Author of that modal sin which
adheres to actions imperfectly good, but not of that intrinsecal evil which is
in the hatred of God, or the like? Whence, (2) The force of our Argument
arises from this paritie of reason, If God does concur, yea predetermine the
will to an act only modally sinful, without falling under the imputation of
being the Author of sin, why may he not also predetermine the will to the
substrate matter of that which is intrinsecally evil, without the like
imputation? Albeit there be a disparitie in the sins, yet is not the paritie of
reason for the one and the other the same? Ought we not to be as cautelous in
exemting the Sacred Majesty of God from having any hand in the least sin, as
in the greatest? And if we allow our selves the liberty of making him the
author of the least sin, will not that open a wide gate for atheistic
blasphemous wits to impute to him the greatest sins? Whence, if we can prove,
what our Adversaries will never be able to disprove, yea what they approve of,
namely, that God does predetermine the will to the substrate matter or entitative
act, which is imperfectly good, but modally sinful, it thence follows by
necessary consequence and inevitable paritie of reason, that he can and does
predetermine the will to the substrate matter of that which is intrinsecally
evil, without the least imputation of being the Author of sin annexed thereto.
I would fain have our Opponents weigh impartially the force of this Argument.

. 6. Our next Argument for Gods Predetermination to the 6. Arg. from Gods
Permission of Sin.
substrate matter of sin shall be drawn from his Permission of Sin. And to make
way to this demonstration we must distinguish of Permission; which is either
legal or natural: Natural Permission is either divine or human; and both either
negative or positive. (1) God gives no legal Permission or Indulgence to sin,
but on the contrary severely prohibites it, and that on pain of death. (2) Gods
natural Permission as Rector of the World is not of sin simply as sin, but as
conducible to the principal ends of his divine Gubernation. It Is true, Divine
Permission regardes not only the substrate matter of sin, but also sin formally
considered, and so sin under that reduplication, as sin, yet not simply
considered, but as it has a tendence or conducibilitie to the advance of Divine
Glory: and so much is confessed by Strangius, l. 2. c. 22. p. 399. If the
Reduplication be joined to the term sin, it is true, that sin as sin is
permitted by God, physically not morally. Yet I add, not simply, but
respectively, as conducible to Gods supreme ends of Government. And Lud.
Crocius, Duodec. Dissert. 8. These. 74. page 415. assertes, That God, albeit he
wills and decrees only the material of sin, yet unbelieving and disobedient,
both Jews and Cananites, etc. 2. Whereas he tells us, that the Mythologists say,
Mars was the first that invented military weapons and affairs, etc. This may
as well refer to Joshua, as to Nimrod. For albeit Nimrod began wars in Asia the
greater, or Babylon; yet we find no considerable wars amongst the Cananites, or
Phenicians, till Joshua's time; who by reason of his great military Exploits
and victories, might well be reputed the God of War, Mars, or Hercules. 3. That
which may add to this parallelizing of Mars with Joshua is, that the
Mythologists (whom Diodorus here brings in as the Authors of this description)
found abundant more matter and reason to reduce the stories they had received
by Tradition touching Joshua, unto Mars, than those of Nimrod. For the stories
of Joshua were then, when Mythologie began to creep into the world, very fresh
and pregnant, etc. 4. We have proved before, out of the concessions of Vossius
himself, that Mars was the same with Hercules, and therefore with Joshua.

3. Yet we need not reject, but may also allow, without any contradiction, a
parallel betwixt Mars and Nimrod: as 1. Nimrod Mars's his parallel with Nimrod.
was called by his subjects, Belus. So Servius on Virg. Aen. 1. says, that
Belus was the first that reigned in the Assyrian Monarchy. Mars also had the
same title given to him; whence some derive bellum war, from Belus, Mars's
name. 2. Nimrod is said to be a mighty hunter, i. e. Warrier, Gen 10. 8. so
Mars. See more of this parallel betwixt Nimrod and Mars, in Vossius, de
Idololatr. lib. 1. cap. 16.

CHAP. VI. The Theogonie of Vulcan, Silenus, Pan, Prometheus, Neptune, Janus,
Aeolus, Rhea, Minerva, Ceres, Niobe, and the Sirenes.
Vulcan the same with Tubal cain, Genesis 4. 22. Silenus's parallel with, Silo,
Genesis 40. 10. etc. Silenus the same with Silas and Silo. Silenus is said to be
without Father and Mother; as Silo and Melchisedek his Type Heb. 7. 3. Silenus
is said to be the greatest Doctor of his Age, from Silo's Character Genesis 49.
10. Silenus's riding on an Ass, from Silo's Genesis 49. 11. Silenus's being
filled with Wine, from Silo's Genesis 49. 12. Silenus's meat Cows milk, from
Silo's Character Genesis 49. 12. Silenus's Parallel with Balaam. The Theogonie of
Pan and his Parallel with the Hebrew Messiah. Pan the same with Silenus,
Faunus, and Satyrus. Pan's parallel with Abel, Israel, and Cham. Prometheus's
Theogonie and Parallel with Noah: as also with Magog. Neptunes Theogonie and
Parallel with Japhet. Janus's Parallel with Noah, and Javan. The Theogonie of
Aeolus, Rhea, Minerva, Ceres, Niobe, and the Sirenes, Hebraick.

. 1. FRom Mars we pass to Vulcan, who was exactly parallel Vulcan the same
with Tubalcain Genesis 4. 22.
unto, and derived from Tubalcain, as both their Names and Attributes prove.
First, as to the name Vulcan, Vossius de Idolatr. lib. 1. cap. 16. shows us
that Vulcanus is the same with Tubalcanus Genesis 4. 22. only by a wonted and easy
mutation of B into V. and casting away a syllable: as from Vade nisi a
Tubalcain Vulcanus. Sandf* de Desc. l. 1.. 21.
(...) lacte and from (...) rura:

2. As for the main Art or Office attributed to Vulcan, we have it mentioned by
Diodorus lib. 5. (...) etc. By Vulcan, as they say, was invented the
fabrication of Iron, Brass, Gold, Silver, and all other metals, which receive
the operation of fire; as also the universal use of fire, as employed by
Artificers and others. Whence the Masters of these Arts offer up their prayers
and sacreds to this God chiefly: and by these, as by all others, Vulcan is
called (...) fire, and having by this means given a great benefit to the common
life of men, he is consecrated to immortal memory and honor. Thus Diodorus:
wherein he gives us an exact account why the Mythologists consecrated Vulcan,
and made him the God of Fire, and all Arts perfected by fire. Which exactly
answers to the character given to Tubalcain Genesis 4. 22. Tubalcain an instructor
of every Artificer Genesis 4. 22.
in iron and brass, etc. Thence Bochart in his Preface to Phaleg speaks thus:
The Grecians, when they write of the first Inventors of things, to Tubalcain,
who first invented the conflature of Metals, they substitute the Curetes, or
the Cyclopes, or Vulcanus Lemnius, etc. This also exactly answers to
Sanchoniathons character of Vulcan, whom (according to Philo Byblius's Version)
he calls (...) in the Phenician Tongue (...) Chores ur, i. e. (...) one, who by
the operation of fire, fabricates metals into any form: whence Lucian calls
Vulcan (...) and the Poets feign him to be the chief fabricator of all Jupiters
thunderbolts, etc. So Bochart Can. lib: 2. cap. 2.

. 2. We now come to Silenus, so famous amongst the Silenus the same with Silo.
Genesis 49. 10.
Poets, whom they place in the order of their Gods; whose Names, Genealogy,
and Attributes, apparently prove him to have been, by a monstrous Satanick
imitation, of sacred origination. 1. As for his Greek name, which is variously
written either (...), or (...), or (...), or (...) Bochart (Can. lib. 1. cap.
18. fol. 482.) makes it to be an evident derivative from the Hebrew (...) Silo,
the Messias's name Genesis 49. 10. for from (...) Silo comes (...) Silan, whence
(...) Silenus.

2. Neither does Silenus agree with Silo, the Jewish Messiah, in Name only, but
also in Genealogy, according to that of Diodorus lib. 3. (...) The first that
ruled at Nysa was Silenus; whose Genealogy is unknown by all, by reason of his
antiquity. Nysa where Silenus reigned the same with Sina, or Nissi.


1. As for Nysa, where Silenus reigned, it seems either the same with Mount
Sina (by the transposition of S. and N.) the place where God delivered the law
to Moses, who therefore was said to reign there, as Vossius; or else Nysa is
the same with the place where Moses, Exodus 17. 15. built an Altar, and called
the name of it Jehovah Nissi. as C. 5. 3. Whence Nysa according to Bochart, as
before. And that which makes this more evident is, that this Nysa, where
Silenus reigned, is the same with that of Bacchus, who is called (...) the God
of Nysa from that of Moses, Exodus 17. 15. Jehovah Nissi. For Bacchus and
Silenus are made by the Poets to be inseparable companions as C. 3.. 3.

2. As for Silenus's Genealogy, Diodorus also tells us, that it Silenus's
Genealogy, as Silo's unknown. Heb. 7. 3.
was unknown to all by reason of its Antiquity or Eternity: which answers to
the Hebrews account of their Messiah, Hebr. 7. 3. without father, without
mother, having neither beginning of days, etc. the character of Melchisedek,
the type of Christ.

3. There is yet a more exact Parallel betwixt Silenus and Silenus and Silo
agrees in offices. Genesis 49. 10.
the Hebrew Silo or Shiloh, as to Attributes, and Offices: for 1. Of Silo it is
said Genesis 49. 10. and to him shall be (...) the Doctrine of the people, or the
Congregation of the people, to be endoctrinated. Thus Silenus is also made by
the Poets to be the greatest Doctor of his Age: for he is called (...)
Bacchus's Praeceptor, i. e. according to Vossius's account, Bacchus was Moses,
and Silenus was Silo or Christ, who instructed Moses on Mount Sina or Nysa, the
place where Bacchus and Silenus were said to be. Again Tertullian, de Anima
cap. 2. makes Silenus the great Doctor; as Silo is styled.
Silenus to be a Phrygian, who being brought by the Pastors to Midas the King,
he lent him his great Asses ears. Vossius (de Idololat. lib. 1. cap. 21.) thus
deciphers this fable. It is no wonder that Midas is said to lend Silenus his
Asses ears; because he was the most intelligent of his Age both in nature and
Antiquity. The import is; that Midas listened greatly to him as his
Instructor. I suppose Silenus is said to be a Phrygian, because the Phrygians
were some of the first great Mythologists, who traduced fables into Greece,
particularly this of Silenus, from the Phenicians and Hebrews.

2. Another Attribute given to Silenus is (...) Silenus's riding on an Ass,
from Silo's Genesis 49. 11.
carried for the most part on an Ass: and hence Silenus had a particular
remarque for riding on an Ass: which Bochart refers to that prophecy of Silo
Genesis 49. 11. binding his Asses colt to the choice Vine. 3. The Mythologists
fable Silenus, camrade of Bacchus, to be employed in treading out the Grapes.
This Bochart refers to Genesis 49. 11. he washed his garments in wine, and his
cloths in the blood of Grapes, which is explicated Esa. 5. of such as tread out
the grapes.

4. They characterize Silenus, as one that was always drunk; Silenus's being
filled with wine, from Genesis 49. 12.
as it is supposed from what follows Genesis 49. 12. His eyes shall be red with
wine: which Solomon makes the character of one overcome with wine, Prove. 23.
29, 30. to whom rednes of eyes, etc. 5. They ascribe to Silenus for his meat,
Cows Milk: which Bochart Silenus's meat Cows milk, from Genesis 49. 12.
makes to be traduced from Genesis 49. 12. and his teeth white with Milk. Whence
he concludes thus: The Devil could have imagined nothing more abominable
whereby to profane the most holy mysteries of our Religion, and to expose it to
the cavils of most wicked men, etc.

6. That Silenus had his original traduction from Silo the Jewish Messiah will
farther appear from that of Pausanius Eliacon. 2. (...) The monument of Silenus
remains in the Country of the Hebrews, i. e. all the Traditions of Silenus
came from the Hebrews, whose Messiah he was. I know, that Sandfordus de
Descensu Christi l. 1.. 21. Silenus's parallel with Balaam.
supposes Balaam to be Silenus. Nothing, says he, hinders, but that Balaam
should be Silenus; namely, he who was so famous for his Ass, and Prophecy.
The Ancients fable, that Bacchus gave a reward to a certain Ass that he should
speak with human voice, with which the Giants, which were Bacchus's enemies,
were terrified. Whence came these things but from the sacred Scriptures? Numb.
22. 28. the Lord opened Number. 22. 28.
the mouth of the Ass, etc. which being divulged far and near, we need not
doubt but that the Moabites were terrified thereat. So Stilling fleet, Origin.
S. Book. 3. cap. 5. sect. 11. makes this whole fable of Silenus to be taken
from the story of Balaam, to whom he seems parallel; in that both were noted
for their skill in Divination; both taken by the water, Numb. 22. 5. both Number.
22. 5.
noted for riding on an Asle, etc. Though it is possible, that many Branches of
Silenus's story may be referred to that of Balaam, yet I should rather refer
the main of it to Silo, Genesis 49. 10. according to that of Bochart (Can. lib. 1.
cap. 18. fol. 482.) The first of Bacchus's companions is Silenus, whose fable
took its original from the prophecy of Silo, Genesis 49. 10. in a monstrous
manner detorted etc. This may be farther evinced by what follows, of Pan, which
some make the same with Silenus.

. 3. That Pan, whom the Poets feign to be the God of The Theogonie of Pan, and
his parallel with the Jewish Messiah.
Shepherds, was parallel to, and, as it is presumed, originally traduced from the
Jewish Messiah, styled the Shepherd of Israel, may be evinced from their
parallel Names, Attributes, and Offices. 1. As for the origination of Pan,
Bochart (Can. lib. 1. cap. 18. fol. 483.) groundedly draws it from the Heb.
(...) Pan, which signifies such an one as is struck, or strikes with
astonishing fears, and stupifying terrors, as Psalm. 88. 16. and the reason of
this notation is considerable: for Pan being supposed to be one of Bacchus's
Commanders, is said to have sent astonishing fears on all their enemies; whence
that proverbial speech, of Pannick fears. This seems to allude to the story of
Israel's being conducted in the wilderness by Christ, the Shepherd of Israel,
who cast Pannick fears on all their Enemies: according to that confession of
Rahab, Joshua 2. 9. Your terror is fallen upon us, etc. so v. 24. Josh. 2. 9,
24.
The inhabitants of the country do faint because of us. The like Joshua 5. 1.
Their heart melted, neither was their spirit in them Josh. 5. 1.
any more, because of the children of Israel. 2. Pan is called also by the
Latins, Sylvanus: which some derive from Sylvis; but other, on more probable
conjecture, make it the same with the Pan the same with Silenus.
Greek Silenus, or Silas: and so in Scripture the same person, who is called
Sylvanus, 1 These. 1. 1. is styled Silas, Act. 17. 4. as Grotius, and Deodati.
Now Silas is the same with Silenus, from (...) Silo, or (...) Silan. 3. That
which makes this farther evident, Pan the same with Faunus.
is the identitie betwixt Pan and Faunus; which Bochart Can. lib. 1. cap. 18.
asserts in these words. Faunus, amongst the Latins, is the same God, and of
the same original with Pan: for (...) with some sounds Fun. Thence Ovid, in
Phaedra; -- Faunique Bicornes
Numine contactas attonuere --


And Bochart (can. lib. 1. cap. 33.) affirms, that many make Faunus to be the
same God with Sylvanus, and both the same with Pan: and then he adds, And
truly, Evander Arcas was the first that brought the worship of Faunus into
Latium, out of Arcadia, where Pan was worshipped. 4. Yea Vossius de Idololatr.
lib. 1. cap. 8. seems to make Satyrus the same with Pan, Satyrus the same with
Pan and Silenus.
Faunus, and Silenus: and the main difference he makes between them is only
this; That whereas Pan, Faunus, Silenus, and Satyrus, are all wood Deities, the
name Satyrus is more general, and usually attributed to the younger; whereas
that of Silenus was given to the more ancient. That which makes for this
affirmation is, that Pan, Faunus, Satyrus, and Silenus are all reckoned as
companions of Bacchus in his expedition. Bochart (Can. lib: 1. cap. 18. fol.
483.) derives Satyr from (...) Sair, which amongst the Hebrews signifies both a
Goat and Devil; (as Maimonides) because the Devil often presents himself in the
form of a Goat etc. But

2. To pass from names to the thing it self. Pan is said to be an Egyptian
God, who came up with Bacchus to fight against the Giants. So Diodorus Sic.
Bibl. 1. Unto this God Pan the natives not only erect (...) Images in every
Temple; but also they have a city in Thebais, which they call (...) [i. e.
Cham's city,] but interpret it, (...) the city of Pan. By which it is
evident, that Pan was an Egyptian God, and, as we may presume, the same with
the Hebrew Messiah, who conducted Moses (the Egyptian Bacchus) and the
Israelites out of Egypt, unto Canaan, striking terrors into the Cananites, as
before. That Pan, the Pan a fall of the Messiah.
God of Shepherds, and those many fabulous Attributes and Offices given unto
him, were originally borrowed from the Jewish Messiah, held forth in the old
Testament under the Emblem of a Shepherd, is proved at large by Jackson, in
his discourse of the Divine Authority of sacred Scripture, fol. 31. where he
cites a relation out of Plutarch, touching the mourning of the Demoniack
Spirits, for the death of their great God Pan, and the ceasing of all their
Oracles thereupon: which was truly and only verified in Christ, whose death
put a period to all Heathen Oracles, as both sacred and pagan stories relate.
But to finish this Genealogy of Pan, Bochart (in the Preface to his Phaleg
fol. 2.) reduces his original to Abel. The Greeks (says he) when they Pan
Abel.
write of the first Inventors of things, substitute Pan the Arcadian unto Abel,
the Prince of Pastors, etc. Sandford, de descensu Christi l. 1.. 19. supposes
Pan to be the same with the Pan Israel.
Patriarch Israel, or Jacob. His words are these: for Joseph is that Israel
Patriartha verus sorte^ Pan Gentilium. Park. ex Sandf. Pan Cham.
old Osyris, nourished by Pan, whom I conceive to be Israel. Dickinson, Delph,
Phoenciz. cap. 4. makes Pan the same with Cham: which he endeavors to prove
from that of Diodor. Sicul. l. 1. where the same city in Egypt, which is
called (...) i. e. the city of Cham, is interpreted by the Natives, the city
of Pan. We need not exclude either of these Parallels with Pan; because we find
that the Mythologists were, according to their different humors, very difforme
and different in the application of their Fables. Only, I suppose, the great
Pan, so much idolized by the Poets as the God of Shepherds, refers chiefly to
the Jewish Messiah, the great Shepherd of Israel, as before.

. 4. We now proceed to Prometheus, and his Genealogy, Prometheus his Theogonie
and parallel with Noah.
Names, and Attributes, with their parallel in sacred story and persons. There
is some difference among Philologists about the Traduction of Prometheus; some
reducing him to Noah, others to Magog, Japhet's son: which controversy may be,
with much ease, reconciled, by taking in both reductions. For its certain that
the old Mythologists were no way uniforme or conform in the application of
those fables, they gleaned up in the Oriental parts. Therefore to begin with
those who make Prometheus the same with Noah: as Vossius de Idololatr: lib. 1.
cap. 18. page 141. The Patriarch Noah (says he) is adumbrated to us, not only
in Saturn, but also in Prometheus, whose Feast is called at Athens (...) in
which there is a contest of Lamps; also an Altar in the Academie, on which the
Lamps are wont to be kindled in this Contest; as it is attested by Harpocration,
etc. Thus Vossius. This Rite, consecrated to Prometheus, I presume, had its
original Idea from the Lamps which burned in the Temple at Jerusalem, and from
the fire on the Altar: whence also that fable of Prometheus's stealing fire
from Heaven: (which may allude to Elijah's praying for fire, which descended
from Heaven, etc.) But as to the parallel betwixt Prometheus and Noah, take
these particulars. 1. As under Noah, so also under Prometheus, the great Flood
was supposed to happen. So Diodorus, lib. 1. (...) etc. They say that Nilus
having broken down its bounds, overwhelmed a great part of Egypt, especially
that part where Prometheus reigned, which destroyed the greatest part of men in
his Territory. Whereas some may object, that this is meant only of a
particular Deluge in Egypt, under Prometheus etc. It Is replied, that as the
Grecians attributed the general Flood to Deucalion, so the Egyptians attributed
the same to Prometheus, or, as Eusebius, to Ogyges; whereas all these fabulous
Deluges, were but broken Traditions of the real universal Deluge under Noah.
And particularly, that this under Prometheus was the same with that of Noah,
Vossius endeavors to prove from the notation of the name: for (says he) (...)
signifies one who is so wise, as to foresee evil; whereas on the contrary,
(...) is one, who is too late, or after-wise: which agrees to Noah, who being
divinely taught, foresaw the flood, and so preserved himself and his. 2.
Prometheus is said to rebuild and restore human kind after the flood: which
exactly answers to Noah, the father of Mankind, etc. 3. Herodot: lib. 4. tells
us, that Prometheus's wife was called Asia. And indeed, Noah's wife was no
other than Asia, or Asiatica, an Asiatick. But whereas it may be objected, that
Prometheus is made to be the son of Iapetus, and therefore cannot be Noah, but
must be his Grandchild; Vossius replies, that it is no wonder, if in Ages so
remote, posterity miscalled the Father and the son, and so confounded one with
the other.

2. Bochart, to avoid this contradiction, makes Prometheus to 2. Prometheus's
parallel with Magog.
be Magog the son of Iapetus, or Japhet. So Bochart Phaleg lib. 1. cap. 2. fol.
11. also lib. 3. cap. 13. where he proves, that Prometheus is the same with
Magog. 1. In that he is styled the son of Iapetus; as Magog was the son of
Japhet. 2. From the eating of Prometheus's heart; which fable sprang from the
name (...) Magog; which, being applied to the heart, implies its consumtion, or
wasting away. 3. Prometheus is said to have his seat, and to lie in Caucasus;
because Magog, and his posterity seated themselves there. 4. They fable, that
fire and metals were invented by Prometheus, (as formerly by Vulcan:) because
there are many subterraneous fires and metals in these places. Stillingfleet;
Orig. S. book 3. cap. 5. 9. etc. follows Bochart herein.

. 5. From Prometheus we pass to Neptune; which is indeed Neptune the same with
Japhet.
a name rather appellative and common, than proper. For as in ancient times,
especially before the Trojan wars, they styled all illustrious Kings, Jupiter,
and all renowned Captains, Mars, or Hercules; so also they called every Insular
Prince by the name of Neptune: whence multitudes partook of one and the same
name; which made their characters and stories the more fabulous and ambiguous:
yet are we not without evident ideas and notices of their Traduction,
originally, from some sacred person or story, as has been already demonstrated
by a large enumeration of particulars; which will farther appear by the
genealogy and story of Neptune, who according to the general consent of the
Learned, was originally Japhet the son of Noah. For look, as the memory of
Noah was preserved in Saturn; and of Shem (whose posterity possessed the
septentrional and oriental Asia) Unde etiam Japetus nisi a Japhet. Sandf. Desc.
l. 1.. 22.
in Pluto; and also of Cham (whose progeny seated in the Meridional, Asia, and
Africa) in Jupiter Hammon: so also the memory and story of Japhet was
continued in Neptune, as Philologists generally accord, and that one these
rational conjectures: 1. From the very name Neptune; which Bochart derives from
The parallel 'twixt Japhet and Neptune.
(...) Niphtha, which belongs to Niphal, or the Passive Conjugation of (...)
Patha to enlarge; whence (...) Japhet, according to the allusion of Noah Genesis
9. 27. (...) Japht Genesis 9. 27.
Elohim lejaphet, i. e. God shall enlarge Japhet. Proportionable whereto
Neptune was called by the Greeks (...); which (...) of the same origination
with Japh. ^.
Grammarians in vain attempt to deduce from the Greek tongue; seeing, as
Herodotus in Euterpe assures us; the name (...), was at first used by none, but
the Libyans or Africans, who always honored this God. Namely (...) or (...) is
the same with the Punick (...) Pesitan; which signifies Expanse or broad; from
(...) Pesat to dilate, or expand. Whence it appears, that (...) and Japhet are
Synonymous; and both derived from Radix's, signifying latitude: which well
suits with Neptune's Character; who is styled (...) late imperans and
latifonans; as also (...) one that has a large breast, etc. See more of this
Bochart, Phaleg. lib. 3. cap. 1. 2. From the Genealogy of Neptune; whom the
Mythologists make to be Saturnes son; as Japhet was son to Noah, who passed for
Saturn.

3. Neptune was fabled to be the God of the Sea, and Instructor Neptune the God
of the Sea, from Japhets possessing the Islands.
of Navigation; So Diodorus lib. 5. (...) etc. The Cretenses say, that amongst
other Gods borne of Saturn and Rhea, Neptune first began to manage the
Affairs of the Sea, and to instruct for Navigation; he having obtained this
prefecture from Saturn, whence it came to pass, that in after time the common
Vogue so far obtained, that whatever was done at Sea, was said to have been in
the power of Neptune, and therefore the Mariners sacrificed unto him. Thus
Diodorus. All which seems to have been taken up from the real story of Japhet,
and his Posterity, their possessing the Islands in the midland Sea, Greece,
etc. So Bochart Phaleg lib. 1. cap. 2. Japhet (says he) passed for Neptune the
God of the Sea; because his portion was in the Islands and Peninsules. In the
Islands are Britannie, Ireland, Thule, Crete, Sicilie, Sardinia, Corsica,
Baleares, etc. In the peninsules are Spain, Italy, Greece, Asia minor, etc. So
Lactantius de falsa Relig. l. 1. c. 11. All the maritime places, with the
Islands, belonged unto Neptune, etc. This suits with Plato's origination of
Neptunes Greek name; who (in his Cratylus) deriveth (...), from his giving
drink, i. e. the Sea and Water unto all: which argues thus much, that they
looked on Neptune as the God of the Sea, and that in allusion to Japhets
possessing the maritime parts of Europe, etc.

4. Neptune was also called (...) Equestris: which is thus explicated by
Diodorus lib. 5. where having spoken of Neptune as God of the Sea, he adds.
(...) They add also this of Neptune, that he was the first that tamed horses;
and that the Science of Horsemanship was first delivered by him; whence he was
styled (...) a good horseman. This also Vossius applies to Japhet: (Vossius de
Idolol lib. 1. cap. 15. page 118.) his words are these: Japhet had for his
portion the Mediterranean Islands, and the European continent: wherefore his
posterity had need of a twofold Science, 1. Of Nautick, to direct them in
their Navigation, 2. Of Horsemanship to conduct themselves in those rude and
wild countries, through which they were to pass into the Northern and Western
parts of Europe. This I conjecture was the cause why Neptune, whom I interpret
Japhet, was made to be the God of Nautick Science and sea Affairs, as also of
Horsemanship, etc. But touching the Parallel 'twixt Japhet and Neptune, see
more Bochart Phaleg. lib. 3. cap. 1.

6. As for the Theogonie of Janus and his parallel; if Janus's Theogonie and
Parallel 1. With Noah.
we consider him historically, and according to the Mythologie of the Poets, so
he refers to the story of Noah, or Javan. That which inclines some to make him
Parallel with Noah, is 1. The cognation of his Name, with the Hebrew (...) jain
wine; whereof Noah was the first Inventor, according to Vossius. Again, 2.
Janus was pictured with a double forhead; because he saw a double world, that
before and after the Flood: as Noah. 3. As the beginning and propagation of
mankind, after the Flood, was from Noah; so also they ascribe the beginnings of
all things unto Janus: whence the entrance to an house is called by the Romans,
Janua; and the entrance to the year Januarie. Whence some make the name
Xisythrus, given by the Assyrians to Noah, (as in the story of the Flood Book.
3. chap. 6.. 4.) to signify an entrance or door, from (...) ziz a post or
threshold of a door; as Vossius. 4. Latium, where Janus's seat was, (whence
part of old Rome was called Janicule) was called Oenotria. Now (...) comes from
(...) Wine. Thus much for Janus's parallel with Noah. Others refer the
origination 2. With Javan.
(both name and person) of Janus to Javan the son of Japhet, the parent of the
Europeans. For 1. (...) Javan is much the same with Janus. 2. Thence that of
Horat. l. 1. 3. Japeti Genus. So Voss. Idol. l. 2. c. 16. Janus's name taken
historically is the contract of Javan.

. 7. To Janus we might subjoin Aeolus, the God of the winds Of Aeolus his
Origination.
and King of the Aeoliar Islands, with notices of his Traduction from the
Phenicians and Hebrews. But we shall touch only on his name, which seems to be
a good key or Index to decipher his fabulous Office. This fable of Aeolus, the
God of the winds, is supposed to have been first brought into Greece by Homer;
who had it from the Phenicians; with whom (...) aol (as the Greek (...))
signifies a storm or tempest: which the Chaldee Paraphrase more fully
expresses by (...) alol: and the King Aeolus is thought, by the Phenicians, to
be the King (...) aolin of Tempests: as Bochart Can lib. 1. cap. 33. fol. 658.

. 8. Having discoursed, at large, touching the chief of the Grecian Goddesses
of Phenician and Hebrew extract. 1. Rhea from Genesis 29. 20.
Grecian Gods, and their Traduction from the sacred Oracles; we shall briefly
touch on sundry of their Goddesses, and their derivation from the same sacred
fountain, 1. Noah is called Genesis 29. 20. (...) a husband of the earth, i. e. a
husband man. Whence the Mythologists made Saturn, i. e. Noah, the husband of
Rhea, i. e. the Earth. Some derive Rea, by an easy anagrammatisme, from Era. So
Sandford Descens. l. 1.. 26. The Greeks refer Era. (Heb. (...) eres.) i. e. the
Earth, unto the number of their Gods: by what ceremony? Namely according to
the old Grammarian rule, changing Era into Rea. After the same manner Aer began
to be Hera: for this origination (...) we have from Plato. I should rather
derive (...) from the Chaldee (...) Hera, Libera, which was Juno her name;
whence also (...) Cora, or Hora, and Ceres as before, C. 2.. 1. and C. 5.. 1.
etc.

2. As for Minerva; Vossius (de Idololatr. lib. 1. cap. 17.) 2. Minerva.
makes her to be the same with Naamah, Tubalcains sister, Genesis 4. 22. Her name
(...) Stephanus makes to be Phenician; (...): which Bochart derives from (...)
to move war; whence the Oncean Gates at Thebes. The fable of Minerva her being
borne out of Jupiters head, they generally refer to the generation of Christ,
the Divine wisdom.

3. Ceres is by Bochart substituted, and made parallel to Adam, 3. Ceres.
or Cain, the first tillers of ground. 4. Niobe is by some made 4. Niobe.
the same with Lots wife, who was turned into a pillar of Salt, i. e. of
Sulphurous, bitumenous, and salty matter; wherein she was partaker of Sodoms
judgment, which overtook her: whence the fable of Niobe, her being turned into
a pillar of stone, etc. 5. As for the Sirenes, (which according to the fable
were in number three, partly Virgins, partly Birds, whereof one 5. Sirenes.
sung with voice, the other by pipe; and the other by Harp) Bochart (Can. lib. 1.
cap. 28.) makes the name to be purely Phenician, or Hebrew; in which tongue
(...) Sir, signifies a song, (whence Solomon's Song of songs,) thence (...)
Siren, a singing monster, etc. 6. As for Juno, and Jana, from (...), thence
also Diana, Astarte, Venus, etc. we have fully handled them before, chap. 2.

. 9. Thus much for the Theogonie of the Grecian and Roman Gods, and Goddesses,
which will receive farther evidence from what follows touching the Genealogy
of the Phenician and Egyptian Gods. For that the former were but the product of
the later, is evident. Thus Sandford de descensu l. 1.. 6. We may not fetch the
names of the Gods from the Grecians, but from the Phenicians or Egyptians. It
remains therefore that we treat of the Apotheosis of the Barbarian names, which
among those Ancients had not one and the same origination. For either some
thing was coined out of foreign letters, the name being relinquisht: or the
name, together with the thing, was traduced unto some mysteries of Religion.
This again was accomplished two manner of ways; either when a foreign Name, (so
far as the nature of the Tongue would admit it) the right order of the Letters
being relinquisht, was referred unto the Gods; or else the Letters being
transposed or changed, a new name was composed out of the old; which thence,
according to the same laws of Tongues, was invested with the Rite of some
Deity. Thus all those appellations of the Gods, which Greece borrowed from the
Barbarians, may be digested into 3 ranks. 1. Either they flow from the sole
explication of Nature; as from Abaddon sprang Apollon; or if you will rather,
according to the sacred Phraseologie, Apolluon: or 2. from the pronunciation of
the name; thus from Japhet was made Iapetos: or lastly from an Enallaxis of the
Letters; according to which for me it is as clear as the light, that from
Adamah first sprang Hadam, and hence Hadan. Thus Sandford of the origination of
the Grecian Gods from the Egyptian, Phenician, or Hebrew names. See more of
this Chap. 7.. 12.

CHAP. VII. The Theogonie of the Phenician and Egyptian Gods, with their Hebrew
origination.
Baal from (...), and Bell from (...) El. Beelsamen from (...) Beelzebub, 2
King. 1. 2. (...). Baal Peor, Pf. 106. 28. Numb. 25. 1, 2, 3. Moloch the same
with Baal. Adramelech and Anamelech. 2 King. 17. 31. Esa. 30. 33. Tophet and
Gehinnom, whence (...). The Samothracian Cabiri, Phenician Gods. (...) from
(...) God's name, Ps. 119. 137. Cabiri from (...). Axieros (...). Axiokersos
from (...). Cadmilus from (...), the minister of God. Eliun from (...), God's
name. (...) from (...), Jud. 8. 33. Plautus's Paenulus: Alonim etc. from Genesis
14. 19. Ilus from (...); whence also (...), and Heliogabalus. (...) from (...)
Elohim. (...) from (...), Genesis 28. 18. The Egyptian Gods, their original
Hebrew. Apis, a symbol of Joseph; so Serapis, from (...), Genesis 45. 8. Osiris
the same with Moses or Adam, as Isis with Eve, from Ischa. Mnevis the same with
Joseph. Of Orus, Remphan, etc. The Metamorphoses of the Gods in Egypt. The
causes of Mythologick Theology*

. 1. HAving gone through Hellenisme, or the Grecian (...), The Theogonie of the
Phenician Gods Hebraick.
we now pass on to the Oriental Gods, with endeavors to demonstrate how their
Genealogy, Names, and Attributes, received their derivation from the sacred
Language and Oracles: We shall begin with the Phenician Gods, which were the
first, if not as to time, yet as to dignity; whence the Grecians traduced Of
Baal from (...), and Bell from (...).
the chiefest of their Gods. And amongst the Phenician Gods, the chief was
Baal, Bell, or Belus; concerning which there is some difference amongst
Philologists; yet all unanimously concur in this, that its origination was from
some Hebrew and sacred name; which will evidently appear from the notation
thereof. Damascius, in the life of Isidore, mentioned by Photius, tells us,
(...) The Phenicians and Syrians call Saturn El, Bell, and Bolathen. Vossius
makes Bell the contract of Beel, from (...) Baal, the Lord, which name belonged
originally to God, as it appears from Hosea 2. 16, 17. But Servius, on Virgil,
supposes Bell to come of (...) El, Hos. 2. 16, 17.
Gods name; whence the Greek (...) El, and the Digamma being added, (...) Bell,
and so Belus. Bochart, in a personal conference he favored me with, gave me a
good conciliation of these two opinions, by affirming, that there was
originally a twofold Belus, the one Assyrian, from (...), Heb. (...),
originally (...), the Assyrian God; whence Nimrod, the first of the Assyrian
Monarchy, was called Belus: the other Belus was a Phenician, from (...) Baal,
the Phenician God; whence Ithobaal, King of Tire, and Jezabel his daughter; as
also many of the Phenician Kings, who were called Belus. It Is true; Bochart
makes the Phenician (...) Baal, to have had its original from the first
Phenician King of that name; but yet I conceive it not improbable, but that the
first Phenician King, might be so called from their Gods name (...) Baal; which
was the title they gave the Sun, from his office, Genesis 1. 16. as he was reputed
the Lord of Heaven: or else, which seems most probable, we may suppose the
Phenicians to have had various (...) Baalim; some supreme, which they styled
(...), natural and immortal Gods; such were the Sun and Moon: others, which
they styled (...), mortal Gods, viz. the souls of their great Heroes and Kings.
As for the former supreme natural Gods,* they called the Sun Baal, and the Moon
Baaltis or Beltis, that is, in the Scripture language, the Queen of Heaven. As
for the mortal or made Baalim, they were no other than the Souls of their chief
Heroes, or Princes, which after their death received an (...), or Deification;
and so became a kind of midling Gods, or Mediators betwixt the supreme Gods and
men, (which the Greeks called (...) Demons) whereof we find frequent mention in
Scripture as Jud. 10. 6. The Supreme Baal styled Beelsamen.
13. The Phenicians styled their supreme Baal (...) Baal Samen. So
Sanchoniathon, according to the Version of Philo Byblius, in Eusebius praepar.
lib. 1. cap. 7. (...) A drought happening, they lift up their hands to heaven,
to the Sun. For this (says Sanchoniathon) they account the only God; calling
him Belsamen, the Lord of Heaven. Beelsamen here, according to Philo Byblius's
explication, is in the Phenician Tongue (...) beelsamen i. e. the Lord of
Heaven: whence Philo Byblius immediately subjoins. (...) which is in the
Phenician Tongue, Lord of heaven. To which he adds: (...), but in the Greek
tongue, he is zeus Jupiter. So that Belsamen is the same with (...) Jupiter
Olympius. So Vossius, de Idolol. lib. 2. cap. 4. This (says he) we may
confirm from the Hebrew Tongue, which differs in dialect only from the
Phenician. For what the Phenicians pronounce Beelsamen, the Hebrews write (...)
baal Schamaim, i. e. Lord of heaven etc. Thus also Bochart (Can. lib. 1. cap.
42.) And indeed all this touching Belsamen, Sanchoniathon seems to have
evidently traduced from that function or Office, which God had laid on the Sun,
mentioned Genesis 1. 16. the greater light to rule the day as Psalm. 136. 8.

. 2. This Phenician God Beelsamen, the Jews called Beelzebub, The Theogonie of
Baalzebub. 2 King. 1. 2.
as 2 King. 1. 2. Baalzebub the God of Ekron. Concerning the Etymon of
Baalzebub, various are the conjectures of the Learned. The additament (...)
zebub signifies a fly: whence some think it was added by the Jews in a way of
opprobium, or scorn; as if one should say, the Lord of a fly. It is most
probable, that this name Beelzebub was given this Idol God, not by the
Accaronites or Phenicians, but by the Jews; and that from a great contempt and
just hatred of the Accaronitick Idolatry. Yea Vossius (de Idolol. lib. 2. cap.
4.) following the conjecture of learned Jos. Scaliger herein, thinks that this
name Beelzebub was curtaild by the Jews; who, by an easy mutation, turned the
Accaronitick name (according to Scaliger) (...) baal zebahim, the Lord of
Sacrifices, into the contemptuous Title of (...) Baal zebub, the Lord of flies,
i. e. a God that regarded only flies; or that could not drive away the flies,
by reason of their multitude, from the Sacrifices. This name Beelzebub is, in
the New Testament, changedinto (...) Beelzebul. (...) being made (...) zebul,
for greater contempt sake: for (...) signifies dung or abominable, by which
name the Gentile Gods are characterized, 2 King. 23. 24. whence this name (...)
is in the New Testament 2 Kings 23. 24.
applied to the Prince of the Devils: as indeed this Accaronitick Beelzebub was
the chief of their Idols. Hence also Hell was by the Greeks called Accaron,
according to that of the poet, Acheronta movebo; because Beelzebub the Prince
of those Demon Idols, was God of Accaron, as M^de and Bochart. The like
Glassius (lib. 4. Grammat. S. Tract. 3. observe. 4.) The name Baalzebub 2. Kin.
1. 2. which in the New Testament is written (...), 2 Kings 1. 2.
B being changed into L. Mat. 12. 24. Luke 11. 15. refers Mat. 12. 24.
to the Idol of Ekron, and signifies the Lord of a fly or flies: peradventure
because it was thought to drive away those pernicious flies which infested the
Ekronitish country, as Hercules was styled (...), from his driving away
Locusts, and Apollo (...), from dispersing the Phrygian mice. -- The Jews
traduced the name of this Idol to express the Devil by, and moreover changed
Beelzebub into Beelzebul, which signifies the Lord of dung. See more of this in
Seldom de Diis. Syrum Syntag. 2. p. 211. That Beelzebub was the same with
Beelsamen etc. See Owen de Idolol. lib. 5. c. 5.

. 3. This Phenician Baal passed amongst the Moabites and The Theogonie of Baal
Peor Hebraick. Number. 25. 2, 3, 6. Hos. 9. 10.
Midianites under the Name of Baal Peor. So Numb. 25. 2, 3, 6. Psalm. 106. 28.
Hos. 9. 10. (...) Baal peor, which the LXX render (...). He was called Baalpeor
from the mountain Peor, where he was worshipped as Number. 23. 28. So Apollinaris
Psalm. 106. 28.
(Catena patrum Graecorum) on Psa. 106. 28. And they were joined to Baal peor]
(...): The Idol of Baal is in the place of Peor; but the Greeks call Baal
Belus, whom they affirm also to be Saturn. Joseph Scaliger makes Baal Peor to
signify the same with (...) Thundering Jupiter. Jerome on Hos. 9. lib. 2. tells
us, that Baal peor the Idol of the Moabites, is the same with Priapus. So
Isidorus Orig. lib. 8. cap. 11. Baal peor (says he) is interpreted an image of
ignominy; for it was an Idol of Moab, surnamed Baal, on the mount of Peor,
which the Latins call Priapus, the God of Gardens, etc. That this Baal peor was
the same with the Grecian Priapus, seems evident by their parallel sacrifices
and worship. For, as fornication was a main piece of worship, they performed to
their lascivious God Priapus, so we find the same performed to Baal peor, even
by the Israelites. So Numb. 25. 1. Israel is said to commit whoredom Number. 25.
1, 2, 3.
with the daughters of Moab: which is explicated v. 2. by bowing down to their
Gods]. i. e. in a way of fornication: whence it is said verse. 3. Israel joined
himself to Baal peor] i. e. worshipped him by fornication. We have it expressed
in the same manner, Psalm. 106. 28. By, joining themselves to Baal peor, is meant
their Psalm. 106. 28.
worshipping him by fornication: and by eating the sacrifices of the dead we
must understand (with Austin on this place) their sacrificing to dead men, as
to Gods or Baalim. They worshipped Baal peor, their chief God, (which Vossius
makes to be the Sun) by fornication and sacrifices: or else we may refer these
sacrifices of the dead to those they performed to their inferior Baalim, which
were but some noble Heroes or Princes; who after their death were deifyed, and
so became midling Gods or Mediators; as elsewhere. But thus much for Baal peor,
concerning whom, see more Vossius de Idololatr. lib. 2. c. 7.

. 4. The Phenician Baal passed amongst the Ammonites Moloch amongst the
Ammonites the same with Baal.
under the name of Moloch, from (...) Melek, the King. So 1 King. 11. 7. Moloch
is styled the Abomination of Ammon, 1 King. 11. 7. Lev. 18. 21. Lev. 20. 2, 3,
4, 5. 2 Kings 23. 10. Amos 5. 26. Act. 7. 43.
which v. 5. is styled Milcom, etc. So Lev. 18. 21. Lev. 20. 2, 3, 4, 5. 2
Kings 23. 10. Thus Amos 5. 26. with the parallel, Act. 7. 43. we find mention
of the Tabernacle of Moloch; where Iunius and Tremelius subjoin this exegetick
Note: You have ministered in show in the Tabernacle of the Living God; but you
have worshipped really Moloch, the God of the Ammonites, (which by your
impiety you have made yours) and other Gods of the Heathens, Synecdochically.
This God of the Ammonites the Prophet, in this place only, mentions, because
the Ammonites being their neighbors, he would more sharply strike at their
Idolatry. Tarnovius says, that the Affixe in (...) notes, that the Israelites
framed an Idol proper to themselves, according to the form of the Ammonitick
Idol. See more Glassius Gram. S. lib. 4. Tract. 3. observe. 17. (page 867. edit.
22.) That Moloch is the same with Baal or Belus, appears 1. from the parallel
import of the names: for as Baal signifies Lord, so Moloch King. 2. We find
them also both joined in one word, Malech Belus, i. e. Lord King. 3. Their
identitie is farther evident from the image of Moloch; which consisted of 7
conclaves, relating to the Sun, Moon, and 5. Planets; answerable to that of
Baal. 4. Baal and Moloch had also the same reference: for as Baal passed for
the Sun and Saturn, so Moloch. 5. Their Identitie is farther apparent from the
samenes of their worship. So Owen (de Idololatr. lib. cap. 7.) That Moloch
(says he) is the same with Baal, seems to be evident from the samenes of their
worship: for they sacrificed also their sons to Baal and that in the valley of
Hinnom, as Jer. 7. 31. etc. As for the worship performed to Moloch, we have a
general account thereof in the Scriptures above named; namely, that the Parents
in honor of this Idol God, were wont to traduce their children through the
fire. This Traduction, as Vossius (de Idolo. lib. 2. cap. 5.) will have it, was
not a burning of them, but februation, i. e. purgation of them; or a certain
kind of expiation, wherein the children were led or drawn by the Priests, or
parents, through a space between two great fires, etc. This he conceives is the
meaning of all these Scriptures which mention their passing through the fire,
not their combustion. Though he denies not, but that, besides this kind of
Februation, there were also expiations made by burning of persons in times of
calamity, etc. This explication of that Learned man seems not to answer fully
the mind and import of those Scriptures, which mention the sacrificing their
children to Moloch: for Psalm. 106. 37, 38. it is said, they sacrificed Ps. 106.
37. 38.
their sons and daughters to Devils, and shed innocent blood, the blood of
their sons etc. Unto Moloch we may refer the Gods of Sepharvajim, Adramelech,
and Anamelech; to whom also Adramelech and Anamelech. 2 King. 17. 31.
they burned their sons, as 2 King. 17. 31. Adramelech, from (...), signifies
the great and valiant Moloch, or King. (...) Addir is an attribute given unto
God, which signifies properly potent, valiant, great, excellent, as Psalm. 93 4.
Anamelech imports the oracle, or answer of Moloch: for (...) implies an answer.
Or else it may be derived from the Arabic (...), which signifies rich, as
Voss. lib. 2. c. 5. Bochart (Can. lib. 1. cap. 28. fol. 584.) tells us, that
Adranus is the name of a Syrian or Phenician God, as the Compound Adra-melech,
2 King. 17. 31. which Idol, some of the Hebrews make to have the effigies of a
Mule, others of a Peacock. This Adramelech signifies a magnifick King, etc. I
shall conclude this of Moloch, with that account I find of him in Bochart,
(Can. lib. 1. cap. 28. fol. 528.) Tophet, amongst the Hebrews, is (...) the
fire of Gehinnom, i. e. the valley of Job. 17. 6. Esa. 30. 33.
Hinnom, or Hell, as they take it Job. 17. 6. and Esa. 30. 33. the translation
being taken from the valley of Tophet, which is also Gehinnom; in which they
were wont to cast their children alive into the fire, in honor of their Idol
Moloch, as 2 King. 23. 2 King. 23. 10. Jer. 7. 31, 32.
10. and Jer. 7. 31. 32. which custom the Phenicians usurped before Moses's
time; as it appears Levit. 18. 21. Deuteronomy. 18. 10. and the Carthaginians retained
this impious superstition even unto Hannibal's time. Thus Bochart. The
Samothracian Cabiri, Phenician Gods.


. 5. Amongst the Phenician Gods we may reckon the fourseth the Sincerity and
Fidelity of God, in giving Laws with severe Prohibitions against sin, Promises
and Invitations unto Sinners to repent, etc. To this first branch of their
Objection we shall answer more distinctly and in its parts in what follows,. 3,
4, 5. at present let this general Response suffice, that the Sincerity and
Faithfulness of God is sufficiently vindicated, in that Gods Commands,
Promises, and Invitations unto Sinners, flow from his complacential,
legislative Will, which is the Measure, Rule, and Reason of our duty and
actings toward God; but his Predeterminative Concurse flows from his
Beneplacite Decretive Will, the Rule and Measure of his own actings toward his
Creature: Now these two wills, albeit they are not repugnant each to other,
because they are not ad idem, yet they are disparate and diverse: the things
commanded by God may be repugnant to the things predetermined by him, yet his
will commanding is not repugnant to his will predetermining. Indeed Gods
preceptive will is only in an analogic, figurative improper sense termed the will
of God, as significative of his soverain pleasure for the Government of his
Creature; and therefore Gods predetermining men to the material act of what is
sinful, implies not the least shadow of repugnance to his Sincerity and
Fidelity in giving Laws and Prohibitions against Sin, or Promises to penitent
Sinners. Yea, there is nothing that our Adversaries can urge against us for
asserting a predeterminative Concurse, but may be retorted against them for
asserting an immediate previous Concurse to the substrate matter of Sin: Yea,
let them but grant, as they do, Gods certain prescience of sin, and the same
black Imputations which they lode us with, will al fall with as much weight on
themselves, as before Chap. 5.. 2.

2. As for what they urge from the Justice of God, that our 2. From Divine
Justice.
Hypothesis is contradictory thereto, in that he cannot in Justice punish that
Sin, which he predetermines men unto, we answer, (1) That Gods Predetermination
lays no violent force or compulsion on the will to sin: he does only as the
first cause and God of Nature sweetly though potently apply the will to its
act. (2) The will does in the very same moment, wherein it is predetermined by
God, voluntarily and freely, as a deficient depraved faculty, elect the very
act it is predetermined unto; so that it does as freely, deliberately, and
fully espouse the act, as if there were no Predetermination on Gods part: and
what more just than that the Sinner should be severely punished for that sinful
act which he does deliberately and voluntarily exert? (3) Here is in this
objection a poor Sophisme, which they call No-cause for a cause: For Gods
predeterminative Concurse is not the cause of men's sins, albeit men's sins be a
necessary consequent thereof. (4) The same difficulties, which our Adversaries
urge us with in point of Divine Justice, return on them, who assert an
immediate previous Concurse to the Matter of Sin; neither can they without
apparent violence to their own Reason impute this objection to us, which their
own Hypothesis is as much obnoxious unto.

3. They urge us with an Imputation on the Clemence and Mercy 3. From Gods
Clemence and Mercy.
of God, in that predeterminative Concurse to the entitative Act of Sin, makes
the blessed God to be cruel toward his poor Creature; and this two ways: As
(1) In that it makes God absolutely to predestine or reprobate men to eternal
Punishment, without regard to their Sins. (2) In that it supposes the blessed
God to threaten and punish Sin with eternal Torments, and yet irresistibly to
predetermine yea impel men thereto, as Baron. Metaph. p. 151. This Objection
our Adversaries adorn and exaggerate with many specious and plausible
pretextes for the Vindication of Divine Clemence and Mercy, as they pretend,
and for our confusion; Yet we no way dout but to make it appear, that al is but
as emty vapor before the Meridian Sun. Therefore to answer, (1) to the first
branch of the Objection, That our Hypothesis makes God absolutely to predestine
or reprobate men to eternal Punishment, without regard to their sins, [1] We
grant, that the Decree of Reprobation is, and must be according to our
Hypothesis, absolute, because there is an adequate commensuration between
absolute Predefinition and Predetermination, as our Adversaries also maintain;
of which before Chap. 5.. 3. [2] Yet we peremtorily deny, that God reprobates
or predestines men to eternal punishment without any regard to their sins.
Divines say, that albeit sin be not the motive or ground moving God to
reprobate men, yet it is considered in the Decree of Reprobation as that for
which God will at last condemn men. It Is true, the Supralapsarian Divines, who
make man as labile the object of Reprobation, differ somewhat from those of the
sublapsarian persuasion, who make the corrupt mass, or lapsed man the object
of Election and Reprobation; yet they both take in the consideration of sin in
the Decree of Reprobation; and they both make the Decree of Reprobation in it
self absolute: for the Sublapsarians make sin only a commun condition of the
corrupt Mass, not distinctive or discriminative of Reprobates from the Elect;
as Davenant, Animadvers. on Gods Love, p. 84. proves, That the Supralapsarians
charge not Gods Reprobation with man's destruction; Though he himself goes the
Sublapsarian way. But, [3] Here lies the bitter root of this forged Imputation
affixed on us by our Adversaries, that they consider the Decree of Reprobation
as an act of Divine Justice, which regards the object as already constituted,
and not the constitution thereof. This is incomparably well observed by
judicious Davenant in his answer to Hoard, Animadvers. p. 229. For those
Inferences therefore, That if absolute Reprobation be granted, God may be
properly called a Father of Cruelty, (...), I marvel how he trembled to think
of them, and how he never trembled to utter them. That wherein he perpetually
is mistaken, is, the making of Non-election or Negative Reprobation a
Vindicative act, the confounding it with the judicial Sentence of Damnation,
the conceiving it to work in the Non-elect an invincible necessity of
committing Sin, with such like monstrous fancies, which he takes for Principles
needing no proof, whereas they are such gross errors as need no confutation.
(2) The second part of the Objection, which supposes the blessed God to
threaten and punish Sin with eternal torments, and yet irresistibly to
predetermine and impel men thereunto, has been sufficiently refuted in what
precedes,. 1. and indeed throughout this whole Discourse, and will also come
under consideration in what follows.

4. Our Adversaries charge also our Hypothesis with a Repugnance 4. From Divine
Sanctitis.
to the Sanctity and Purity of the Divine Nature, in that, by asserting Gods
predeterminative Concurse to the substrate matter of Sin, we make the act of sin
to be wel-pleasing to God. This objection is greatly aggravated by a Reverend
Divine among our selves, who in the confutation of Twisse, argues thus: If God
wills that sin existe by his Permission, (1) He wills Sin. Yea, (2) God
wills sin as much as man. Yea, (3) This makes God equally to will Sin and
Holiness. Yea, (4) Then God takes complacence in Sin. Answer. These are high
charges indeed, and if they could be made good against us, we should not
deserve protection from any wel-governed Kingdom or State: for what more
inconsistent with civil Government, than to make the Supreme Rector and
Governor of Mankind equally to will Sin and Holiness? But these Calumnies and
Reproaches are not of yesterday, but have been time out of mind imputed to the
assertors of Efficacious Concurse, and therefore we have been more large in the
refuting of them,. 1. of this Chapter. Thus Bradwardine, De Cause. l. 2. c. 28.
p. 572. When it is argued, says he, that the sinful act does please God Well,
(1) The Adverbe Well may determine the Verb to please God, in regard of the
Divine complacence, and so there is no dout, but that as the evil Act
[entitatively considered] does please him, so it is highly wel-pleasing to him:
or (2) in regard of the Act that is wel-pleasing; and that either in regard of
the substance of the act, or in regard of its vitiositie: [1] If we regard the
act naturally, so it is true, that it is wel-pleasing to God, but if we regard
it morally, so it is false. [2] If we regard the vitiositie of the act, so it is
not properly effected by man, nor yet by God, it being not properly an effect,
but pure Privation only. An acute and excellent Decision of this Controversy,
were not the minds of men eaten out with Prejudices; the sum whereof is this,
The Act of sin entitatively and substantially considered is naturally good, and
so wel-pleasing unto God, the Author of Nature; yet if we consider it morally
in regard of its Vitiositie, so it is infinitely displeasing to God. This is as
a Key to open the door to a more full solution to al objections against us: so
that at present we need say no more than this, that our Hypothesis is no more
obnoxious to these aspersions, than that of our Adversaries. Is not the Divine
Sanctity as illustrious in Gods predetermining to the substrate matter of Sin,
as if we held only with our Adversaries an immediate previous concurse thereto?
Are not those very Acts, which are morally evil as to the Sinner, both
naturally and morally good as to God? Suppose he predetermine to the entitative
act of sin, yet must we thence necessarily conclude, that he predetermines men
to sin formally considered? Must not the sinful qualities of al moral effects
be imputed to the second particular cause, and not to the first universal
cause? It Is true, the Sinner comes short of the Divine Law, and therefore sins,
but does God come short of any Law? Has not his Will the same Rectitude which
his Nature is invested with, and therefore whatever he wills must be right and
holy, even because he wills it? The sin which he governs, is it not only sin in
regard of the Creatures will, not in regard of his will? It is confessed, that God
and the Sinner concur to the same sinful act materially considered; but yet is
their Concurse the same? Yea is there not morally an infinite distance between
the one and the other? Does Sin as to Gods Concurse, include any more than a
natural act, which is in regard of God and the conducibilitie it has to his
glory morally good? but does it not, as to man's Concurse, speak moral
vitiositie? Again, what does Gods permission of sin implie, but a natural or
judiciary Negation of that Grace he is no way obliged to give? But does not sin
as to the sinner denote a moral privation or deficience of that rectitude which
ought to be in his act? Is there any thing in the world purely, simply, and of
it self sinful, without some substrate matter naturally good? What reason
therefore can our Adversaries allege, why God may not predetermine the will to
the said substrate matter, without prejudice to his Sanctity?

. 3. We descend now to a third objection taken from the Object. 3. From Gods
word.
Word of God, both Preceptive and Promissive, which divine Predetermination of
the will to the substrate matter of sin, does, according to the Antithesis of our
Adversaries, render useless, impossible, yea collusive and unsincere. For say
they, Gods Precepts, Promises and Comminations, whereof man's Nature is capable,
should be al made Impertinences, through his constant overpowering those that
should neglect them.

1. As to Gods Laws and Prohibitions they urge, That our ^. Preceptive.
Hypothesis renders them altogether useless, yea naturally and simply
impossible. This they exaggerate with many fine words and rhetoric flourishes,
which are the best arms they have to defend their declining cause with. But
having God and Truth, though naked and simple, on our side, we no way dout but
to stand our ground against al their fiery, or venomous darts. And in answer to
the first part of their Objection from the Impossibility of divine Precepts
and Prohibitions, we answer, (1) That our Adversaries greatly please themselves
in their false sophistic Ideas and Notions of what is possible, or impossible;
which we have endeavored to clear from that ambiguitie and confusion, Chap.
1.. 4. with endeavors to explicate what is possible and what impossible to
corrupt Nature, as to divine Commands. (2) We are to know, that the Laws of God
in their Second Edition were primarily intended to subserve the ends of the
Gospel as to the heirs of Salvation, to whom they are by Grace in an Evangelic
way made possible. The Law is said to be given in and by the hands of the
Mediator, i. e. to subserve his ends, which principally regard the Elect. (3)
Yet we grant, that the Law is also of great use even unto Reprobates, [1] In
that it lays a great restraint on them, not only as to wicked actions, but also
as to lusts in some measure, as Exodus 34. 24. The Authority and Majesty of
Divine Precepts, backed with many severe Curses, leaves a great awe and
restraint sometimes on the most debaucht spirits, and so keeps their lusts from
open violences. [2] The Precepts are so far useful to Reprobates, albeit they
have no power to observe them, in that they are thereby instructed, how much
obedience is wel-pleasing to God, and how ungrateful they are in not performing
of it: whereby they are left without al Apology or Excuse. The Precept shows
us what we ought to do, not what we can do: it is always imperative, albeit not
always operative: and may not the Soverain Lord require of man the payment of
his debts, although by reason of his profligate bankrupt humor he has disabled
himself from the payment of them? What excuse is it for the Sinner to say, it
is impossible for him to obey the Precept, whenas the impossibility lies in
his own will, not in any force or defect on Gods part? Does he not in that very
moment, wherein he is predetermined by God to the entitative act of Sin,
voluntarily espouse and will that act? And does not this leave him without al
shadow of Excuse? Where can he loge the blame of his Sin but on his own crooked
depraved will, which electively and freely determines it self to the Sin, in the
same moment of time, though not of nature, that it is predetermined by God to
the entitative act? (4) We affirm, that Gods certain Prescience of Men's sins,
with the conditional Decree of Reprobation, Gods immediate previous Concurse to
the entitative act of sin, and man's universal impotence to perform what is
spiritually good, which are al granted by our Adversaries, bring sinners under
as great impossibility of obeying Gods Commands, as absolute Reprobation and
predeterminative Concurse to the matter of Sin asserted by us. This is well
demonstrated by a judicious and awakened Author in his late Letter touching
Gods Providence about sinful Acts, etc. from p. 67. to 74. But because he is a
party, I shall mention only the Response of Davenant, Animadv. p. 341. As for
Gods Law, which cannot be kept without supernatural Grace, we say, that men are
as capable of any supernatural Grace, considered under the absolute Decrees
maintained by S. Augustine, and by the Church of England, as considered under
the conditional Decrees of late framed by Arminius. And p. 418. he strongly
proves, That Divine eternal Prescience of future Actions or Events infers as
absolute a necessity of such events and impossibility of the contrary, as the
Decrees of absolute Predestination and Reprobation do* of which hereafter,. 8.

2. As for the later part of our Opponents Objection, From 2. From Gods
Promises and Invitations.
the Promises and Invitations of God, which are made useless and collusive by
our supposed divine Predetermination to the substrate matter of Sin, we answer,

(1) That al Gods Promises and evangelic Invitations, which (1) Al Promises
primarily intended for the Elect.
are but branches of the Covenant of Grace, are primarily intended for the
elect Heirs of Salvation, to whom they are many ways useful, notwithstanding
Divine Predetermination: For the blessed God promises life and happiness on
the condition of Repentance and Believing, not as if there were any potence or
ability in corrupt nature, by its own free will, to accept of these offers, or
perform the Condition on which the offers depend, but thereby convincing the
Soul of its extreme impotence, he does together with the offer and invitation
made conveigh Grace into the elect Soul, for the inabling of it to perform the
Condition: So that these general and conditional Promises are in reference to
the Elect, for whom they are primarily designed, operative of Grace, albeit as
to others they are only exactive of duty: whence the impossibility which
attends corrupt Nature is taken off as to the Elect by Divine Grace.

(2) Neither are those general evangelic Promises and Invitations (2) The use
of evangelic Promises as to Reprobates.
useless as to Reprobates: for, [1] They declare the infallible and essential
connection which there is between the condition and the thing promised therein,
namely, Life and Salvation. And to make this more clear, we are to remember,
that both Logic and rectified Reason assures us, that a conditional enunciation
does not always note a possibility of the Antecedent, and Consequent, but only
their necessary connection: that in all conditional Propositions, on which
evangelic Exhortations and Invitations are founded, there cannot be supposed an
indifferent and indeterminate possibility of the Antecedent and Consequent,
but only the connection of the Antecedent with the Consequent, is evident from
that of our Lord, John 15 6. If a man abide not in me he is cast forth, etc.
Whence it is apparent, that a solid and serious Invitation unto Sinners may be
built on a Condition in some mode impossible: The God of al grace has, by his
evangelic Constitution and Covenant, established an inviolable connection
between Faith and Salvation, so that this Proposition is infallibly true, If
thou believe, thou shall be saved: and the holy God has given his Ministers
Commission to preach it to al Mankind, neither is there the least collusion or
fraudulent intention on Gods part, albeit he does predetermine the Most of men
to the substrate matter of Unbelief: for the sincerity of Gods intention
appears in the realitie of the offer, which consistes in the infallible
connection of the Consequent with the Antecedent, grounded on the evangelic
Pactum or Ordination, as Davenant well observes, Animadvers. on Gods Love, p.
377. where he shows, That the Decree of God, permitting Pharaoh to abuse the
gifts of God to his own destruction, was not contrary unto the end or use
whereunto those gifts and actions of God had a fitting ordination in their own
nature. So p. 387, 388. he demonstrates, That Divine eternal Decrees, whereupon
may infallibly be inferred the abuse of Grace temporally offered, do not cross
the end for which such Grace is administered to persons not elected. And he
gives this reason for it, p. 352. God meaning must be always interpreted
according to the known nature of the Means, and not according to the unknown
Will of God concerning the infallible event or success of the Means. Gods
meaning, when he offers any Grace unto men, is that they should perform such
actions whereunto such grace conduces: and his meaning when he promises glory
unto any man, if he believe and persevere, is truly to perform it if he so
do. But it is not always Gods absolute will to cause men to use his Grace to
their own good. -- If the Remonstrants will have nothing termed Gods meaning but
his absolute Will, in their opinion as well as in ours it will follow, that God
had no meaning to give Cain or Judas saving Grace or Glory. Lastly, p. 392,
393, 394. he proves, That God does by his will of Approbation and Complacence
unfeignedly will what he commands and exhorts men to, albeit he decree the
contrary event. Hence, [2] These general Promises and Invitations have this
use also as to Reprobates, that it leaves them without the least shadow of
pretense or Excuse for their unbelief: for if God does by such Promises and
Invitations declare his real intention to save men if they believe, and withal
an expectation that they accept his offers, yea, his complacence in such an
acceptance in order to life, with a provision of al means necessary thereto,
what excuse can men have for unbelief? Will they say, that Gods predetermining
men to the entitative act of unbelief contradicts such a real intention? Take
the Reply of Davenant, Animadv. p. 271. We answer, that God is no otherwise
said to intend outward events, than by providing orderly means for the
producing such events. Non-election provideth no means of making men sin, and
therefore it includes no intention of God to make men sin, though it include a
prevision of sinful Events, and a Decree to permit them, etc.

(3) The Hypothesis of our Adversaries in granting Predetermination (3) The
Antithesis of Antipredeterminants destroys the use of Promises, etc. as much
as our Hypothesis.
to what is good, and Divine Prescience of sinful acts, does as much dispirit
and destroy the use of Divine Promises and Invitations as ours. For, [1] In
that they assert none can perform the condition required, and so embrace the
evangelic offer made, without efficacious predeterminative grace, do they not
leave al Reprobates under as great an impossibility of Believing as we do? Are
not al offers, for want of this predeterminative Grace, altogether useless to
them, for whom it never was intended? [2] So also as to Gods certain Prescience
of their Sins, did not God, according to their Concessions, certainly foreknow,
that they would never, yea never could accept of the offers made to them,
without predeterminative Grace, which he decreed never to give them? Hence does
not this certain Prescience infer as natural and absolute impossibility, as
our predeterminative Concurse to the entitative act of Sin? This is well argued
by Davenant, Animadv. p. 242. His [ Hoard's] nibbling at the Synod of Dort, and
charging them with mantaining a fatal Decree, is to little purpose. If he call
that fatal, which is certain and immutable, we are not afraid to affirm, that
al Gods eternal Decrees are certain and immutable; and that very eternal Decree
of Reprobation, which he imagines to follow upon the foresight of men's final
impenitence, is as absolute and immutable, and in this sense as fatal as that
which we defend. Thus also p. 332. The Remonstrants (we add also the New
Methodists) dare not promise Salvation to any persons reprobated, according to
their decree founded upon the prevision of their final Infidelity and
Impenitence, but under these Conditions, Si crediderint and poenituerint, if
they shall believe and repent: we assure them of Salvation under the same
conditions, notwithstanding the absolute Decree of their Non-election, we add,
and Gods Predetermination to the entitative act of Sin.

(4) To put a period to the vain Cavils of our Adversaries, 4. What Power we
allow to Reprobates.
we grant, that even Reprobates, notwithstanding Gods absolute Reprobation, and
Predetermination unto the entitative act of sin, still retain a remote radical
power and Indifference of will to embrace the good things offered in the Gospel.
For neither does the natural corruption of the will, nor yet Divine
Predetermination to the substrate matter of sin take away the radical
Indifference or Flexibilitie of the Will, or the passive, natural remote power
it is naturally invested with, as a rational elective faculty, to embrace
whatever good, whether natural or spiritual, that is absolutely or
conditionally tendered to it: and this suffices to ground divine Exhortations
and Invitations on; for the Propositions and Offers being made to rational
Creatures, they might, were they but willing, embrace the things that belong to
their peace tendered to them; but here lies the Plague of their hearts, Joh. 5.
40. They will not, etc. So that the blessed God making such gracious offers, so
suitable to the needs of a rational creature, and having given him a remote,
passive, natural power of understanding and will suited thereto, does not this
suffice to leave him without al excuse for his wilful Impenitence and
Infidelity, notwithstanding the predeterminative Concurse of God to the
entitative act of his Sin? And that this is the Doctrine of the Calvinists and
Church of England, we are assured by Davenant, Animadv. p. 257: They confess,
that under the Evangelical Covenant, Si credideris, salvus eris, If thou
believe, thou shall be saved, every man has a true claim to Eternal Life: They
confess, that wheresoever is Christ's Church, there is such a sufficient
administration of Grace as would have saved the Non-elect, had they not opposed
a malignant voluntary act of their own will against the motions and operations
of Divine Grace; according to those words of our Savior, Joh. 3. 17. and 12.
47, 48. and Act. 13. 46. Calvin says as much, in Joh. 3. Mundi nomen iterum
iterumque repetit, ne quis omnino arceri se putet, modo fidei viam teneat. He
therefore, as well as the Remonstrants, grants a conditional possibility of
Grace and Salvation to al men; but we say, the non-elect are always permitted
to fail in the performance of the condition. And does not this sufficiently
vindicate the sincerity of God in all his Evangelic promises, invitations, and
tenders of grace and happiness, yea every way as much as the new Method of our
Adversaries, who grant certain prescience and predetermination to what is good?

. 4. Another Objection urged by our Opponents against predetermination Object.
4. From the overthrow of Religion.
to the substrate matter of sin, is, that is overthrows al Religion, and makes
men's faculties, whereby they are capable of moral government, remiss,
sluggish, useless and vain; yea they stick not to avouch, that this our
Hypothesis opens the door to Familisme, Enthusiasme, and the most prodigiose
impieties and enormities: This they aggravate with many rhetoric aggravations.
Answer, This Objection is grounded on the same false Hypothesis with the
precedent, namely, that the will predetermined by God is moved only by an inward
violent impulse, which makes al Gods precepts, promises, and comminations mere
impertinencies, and men's faculties useless and vain. What a gross Sophisme
this is, and how much the Hypothesis of our Adversaries falls under the force of
it, as well as ours, we have already, in what precedes, sufficiently
demonstrated, and shall do again in what follows. We shall only add at present
an excellent demonstration and solution given by judicious Davenant, Animadv.
page 418. For the second branch of this reason, whereby he goes about to prove
that absolute predestination and reprobation destroy both Hope and Fear; it is
grounded upon an error confuted and rejected by the commun consent of al
Divines, namely that the eternal Decrees of God concerning future events make
the contrary events impossible, do make the temporal and immediate Agents to do
al they do out of an absolute necessity, having no liberty in modo agendi to
abstain from so doing, or to do the contrary. Were this true, the Remonstrants,
who acknowledge eternal and absolute Decrees, upon a presupposal of an eternal
absolute prescience, should by their Doctrine destroy hope and fear (the nerves
of Religion) as well as we. But more of this in answer to the next Objection.

. 5. The last Objection we shall mention, (which is indeed first Object. 5. From
the liberty of the Will.
in order of nature) is, that our Hypothesis overthrows the liberty of the
will, introduces a fatal necessity, and is the darling of Hobbes, with the
like unjust and scandalous reproaches. This is much urged by Strangius,
Baronius, and some of name among our selves. Answer, (1) In this I confess the
spirits and principal forces of The injustice of the New Methodists in urging
this objection, and its inconsistence with their own sentiments.
al their Objections center, and that which the Defendents of efficacious
concurse have been in all Ages urged with by the Pelagians and Patrones of free
will. Thus Augustine was ever and anon upbraided by the Pelagians with a design
to introduce a fatal necessity: the like the Synod of Dort has been reproched
with by the Arminians: and now, because the name of Hobbes sounds very harsh in
Christians ears, therefore that is fastened on us. But this is no new method,
but long since invented by the Accuser of the Brethren, for the oppressing of
this suffering truth. (2) What the true Idea and notion of Liberty includes,
and thence how little our Hypothesis does infringe the same, we have
sufficiently demonstrated in the explication of the liberty of the will, Chap.
1.. 3. (3) We answer with Bradwardine, lib. 3. cap. 29. page 739. that God
violently impels no man to sin, albeit he spontaneously impels or draws the will
voluntarily to the substance of that act which has sin annexed to it; of which
see what precedes Chap. 4.. 2. (4) Our Adversaries seem herein very unjust, in
that they fasten their false Ideas of predeterminative concurse and liberty on
us, and so make us to hold what follows upon their sentiments. For they placing
the wills liberty in an actual indifference and indetermination; as also making
al predeterminative concurse to act by violent impulses on the will, which
being so impelled remains no longer free, but is acted as a machine, etc. it is
no wonder, if from such false principes their forged consequence and conclusion
follows naturally. Thus Strangius, lib. 2. cap. 11. p. 243. makes Gods
predetermination to the entitative act of sin, to be an impulsion to sin. The
like is urged by one and another Divine of name among us, who will allow no
predetermination to the entitative act of sin, but what is violent impulsion.
It Is true Bradwardine, lib. 9. cap. 29. page 739. uses the word impel for Gods
predetermining concurse, and the like Twisse; but then they limit it to such a
spontaneous voluntary impulsion, as is no way prejudicial to the wills liberty:
But our Adversaries make al predeterminative concurse, even in the supernatural
acts of Grace, to be by violent impulses, such as leave the will no more power
to act in a contrary way, than a mere Machine, which is impelled by a vis
impressa, a force impressed from some extrinsec efficient: for thus they
express themselves, that to be predetermined even in the supernatural acts of
Grace, is to be constantly managed as mere Machines that know not their own
use. I must confess had we such Ideas of predeterminative concurse, it would
necessarily follow, that the human will is thereby divested of al its liberty;
neither can I see how our Adversaries will be ever able to defend themselves
against the Pelagians and Arminians on their principes, which suppose al
predetermination to be a violent impulsion like that of Machines. I ever
disliked the Cartesian Hypothesis, which makes the souls of Brutes to be but
Machines; but to make the human soul and will of man to be but a Machine in the
reception of predeterminative grace or concurse introduces that fatal
necessity the darling of Hobbes, which is injustly fathered on us. We say,
that predeterminative concurse is as to its principe and mode of working the
same as to natural and supernatural acts; neither does it in the one or the other
at al infringe the liberty of the will, but fortify and confirm the same, in
that it works sweetly according to the indigence of the will. And this I shall
with much confidence assert, that we can with as much reason defend the
conciliation of human liberty with Divine predetermination of the will to the
substrate matter of sin, as our Adversaries the New Methodists can defend the
conciliation of human liberty with Divine predetermination to the supernatural
acts of Grace: for albeit the terms produced be different, the one a
supernatural, the other only natural good; yet predetermination as to its
principe the Divine will, as also as to its manner of working, which is agreeable
to the condition and liberty of the will, admits no difference. And this
Baronius was sufficiently apprehensive of, and therefore denied al
predetermination; and I no way dout but that in the issue our Adversaries will
be forced to deny al predetermination, or to grant us what we contend for as
to the substrate matter of sin. Yea, (5) we shall yet ascend a degree higher and
affirm, That Gods certain prescience of sin, which our Adversaries generally
allow, infers as much a necessity on the will, as predeterminative concurse to
the entitative act of sin. This we have sufficiently demonstrated, Chap. 5.. 2.
and therefore shall here only superadde an excellent demonstration of judicious
Davenant, Animadv. page 418, 419. For the Divine eternal prescience of future
actions or events infers as absolute a certainty, immutabilitie, necessity
of such events, as the Decrees of absolute Predestination and Reprobation do;
(we may add, by a paritie of reason, predetermination which is adequate to
absolute Decrees) And therefore the Schole-men are as much troubled in
answering the Question, Whether the Divine prescience, or providence brings a
necessity to the things foreknowen? as in the other, Whether Divine
predestination imposes a necessity on things? And the Philosophers, who never
dreamed of Predestination or Reprobation, were yet much troubled to show, how
any thing could be fortuitous or contingent, admitting an eternal and
infallible prescience of al future events in God -- So that if this Author, or
any other Remonstrant, will but take the pains to consider, how the
Schole-Divines clear the eternal and infallible prescience, will, and providence
of God from imposing fatal necessity upon events foreseen, willed, provided,
he may with the same facility know how to clear the eternal absolute Decrees
of Predestination and Reprobation from imposing on men's actions any fatal
irresistible necessity. As Gods absolute prescience does not take away the
possibility of the contrary action or event, no more does his absolute Decree.
Thus our judicious Davenant, in vindication of the absolute Decree of
Reprobation, which holds most true also of Divine predetermination as to the
substrate matter of sin: for according to the confession of our Adversaries,
Strangius and others, absolute Reprobation necessarily infers Divine
predetermination as to the entitative act of sin.

CHAP. VII. The genuine Hypotheses of the Predeterminants, with the Antitheses
of their Adversaries, particularly the New Methodists.
(1) The genuine Hypotheses of the Predeterminants, with the false Hypotheses
and consequents imposed on them by the Molinists, Arminians, and New
Methodists. (2) The Antitheses of the New Methodists, with their dangerous
consequents.

. 1. IT has been the practice of our Adversaries in all Ages to clothe our
Hypothesis of efficacious predeterminative Concurse with the Bears skin of many
false Ideas and black ugly consequences, but their own Antithesis with the
sheeps clothing of many fair and colorable pretextes; wherefore to vindicate
our selves and unmasque them, we shall add, as a Coronis to this Discourse, the
genuine sentiments of such as defend Divine predetermination, etc. as also the
proper Antitheses of their Adversaries. The genuine Hypotheses of of the
Predeterminants.
1. THere is nothing future but dependently on some absolute Decree of God,
either effective or permissive.

2. The Futurition of the entitative act of that which is sinful, is from the
effective will of God.

3. The Futurition of sin is from the permissive will of God, efficaciously
decreeing to leave men unto sin.

4. The actual existence of sin is the consequent, but not the effect of
Reprobation.

5. God absolutely decreed to permit Adams Fall, Strange. 858. Davenant, Animadv.
p. 322, 323.

6. Gods Decree to permit sin is not otiose, but efficacious.

7. God efficaciously decrees to permit sin for the manifestation of his own
Glory.

8. Gods absolute Decree of Reprobation impels no man to sin, Ward, page 132.

9. There is no act so substantially and intrinsecally evil, but the vitiositie
thereof may be separated from the entitative act.

10. God does not predetermine, much less impel any man to the least sin.

11. God does not predetermine the will to any sinful act, as it morally refers
to its object, but only physically, Alvarez, refer. Strange. 240 -- 242.

12. Gods predetermining the will to the material entitative act, whereunto sin
is annexed, does not bespeak him the Author of Sin.

13. God, by his efficacious will and actuose providence permits the will to sin,
but is no moral efficient thereof.

14. God, by predetermining the will to the entitative act of sin, does not temt
men to sin, Jam. 1. 13.

15. In sinful acts God predetermines the will only to the entitative act, not
to its sinfulness; but in good acts, God predetermines the will not only to the
act, but also to the goodness thereof.

16. Sin is committed against Gods will of complacence and approbation, but not
against his will of natural permission.

17. Predetermination to the natural entitative act of sin is very well
consistent with the natural liberty of the will, and its natural, passive,
remote power of receiving Laws, and obeying the same.

18. Gods predetermination to the natural entitative act of sin may very well be
reconciled with his wisdom, veracitie, and sincerity in the prohibition and
punishment of sin.

19. God punishes one sin by leaving men to another, yet without being guilty
of the least sin.

20. Sin by Divine wisdom is made a means accidentally utile and subservient
to Divine glory, albeit it has no moral bonitie in it.

21. Al Gods invitations, comminations, exhortations, and promises argue in
God a real will of approbation, and Evangelic intention that Sinners repent and
live, albeit they never repent.

22. Gods physic complacence is toward the entitative natural act of sin, and
yet his moral displicence is against its obliquitie and vitiositie.

The false Hypotheses and Consequents imposed on the Predeterminants, by
Molinists, Arminians, and New Methodists.
1. GOds absolute Decrees, which give futurition to things, take away al power
from the creature of acting contrarily, yea make the contrary naturally, and
simply impossible.

2. The futurition of sin is from the effective will of God, yea very God, Str.
631, 632, 635. Le Bl. Concord. Libert. par. 1. These. 55, etc. p. 454. as
before, c. 5.. 1.

3. The Decree of God giving futurition to sin necessitates men to sin.

4. The existence of sin is from Reprobation as the proper cause thereof.

5. God impelled and necessiated Adam to fall, Baron. Metaphys. 150, 151.

6. Gods efficacious Decree to permit sin makes him the Author of sin.

7. God wills and decrees sin as sin, yea simply wills and intendes the damnation
of Sinners.

8. Gods absolute Decree of Reprobation impels men to sin.

9. In acts intrinsecally evil the vitiositie cannot be separated from the
entitative act considered in its individual nature.

10. Predeterminative concurse brings men under a fatal and Hobbian necessity
of sinning.

11. In acts intrinsecally evil God predetermines the will to the act as
sinfully relating to its object, Strangius, page 206, 234, 240, etc.

12. Gods predetermining the will to the material entitative act of sin makes
him the cause of sin, Strange. page 341, 342. Baron. Metaph. 150, 151.

13. The Sinner does not determine himself to any sinful act any other way than
God, Strange. page 242, 243.

14. God does more than temt men to sin, in that he predetermines the will
thereto, Strange. page 269.

15. Predeterminative concurse to the entitative act of sin makes God to
afford as much influence and concurrence to the worst of actions as to the
best, Strange. page 277.

16. God does not only permit sin, but approve of it, yea take complacence in
it.

17. Predetermination to the natural entitative act of sin, destroys the
liberty of the will, introduces a fatal necessity, and makes the matter of al
Gods Laws to Adam and his posterity, a natural, simple, and absolute
impossibility, Strange. 567. Bar. Metaph. 150.

18. Gods predetermination to the entivative act of sin is irreconcilable with
his wisdom and sincerity in prohibiting and punishing sin, Baron. Metaphys.
page 151.

19. God, in punishing sin by efficacious dereliction or leaving men to sin,
becomes guilty of sin.

20. God wills sin and approves of it as a means naturally and morally conducing
to his glory.

21. That Gods predeterminative Concurse to the substrate matter of sin makes
him not really to intend what he pretends to by all his invitations, promises,
comminations, and exbortations to repent:

22. God takes not only physic complacence in the entitative act, but moral
complacence in sin, by predetermining the will to the entitative act thereof.



. 2. Having given the proper Hypotheses of the Predeterminants, The Antitheses
of the New Methodists and Antipredeterminants, with their consiquents.
with the false Hypotheses and consequences imposed on them by their
Adversaries, we now proceed to lay down the proper Antitheses of the
Antipredeterminants, and more particularly of the New Methodists, and the
dangerous consequences which naturally result therefrom. The Antitheses of the
New Methodists and Antipredeterminants.
1. THE Futurition of althings is not from the Divine will and decree, Strange.
628, 631.

2. The futurition of althings is not simple, but complexe, Strange. 640.

3. The futurition of althings is not eternal.

4. The same particular cause that gives existence to any thing gives
futurition to it.

5. The futurition of the entitative act of sin is not from the will of God, but
the will of man, Strange. 585, 628, 631, 632. Le Blanc, 454.

6. Whatever God wills he approves: or complacence is essential to al acts of
Gods will, Strange. 546, 548.

7. God decrees not the entitative act unto which sin is intrinsecally
appendent, Strange. 562, 587.

8. There is a twofold Decree in God, one absolute, the other respective,
conditionate, and consequent, Strange. 546.

9. Al Gods Decrees are not particular, but some general only, Strange. 558.

10. Reprobation is not absolute, but conditional, dependent on the prevision
of men's actual sins.

11. Gods prescience of men's sins is conditional, and dependent on men's
free will, not on the Decree of God, Strange. 642, 647.

12. Gods permission of sin is only privative and inefficacious, Baron.
Metaphys. 157, 158.

13. God wills only his own permission of sin, not the existence of sin by his
permission, Arminius.

14. There is a twofold Concurse of God, the one predeterminative, the other
only general.

15. It does not belong to the perfection of Gods Providence absolutely to
predefine and predetermine al free acts of the human will, Baron. Metaphys. 147.
Strange. 568, 584.

16. Al positive real Beings and acts are not from God as the first cause of
Nature, Strange. 584, 630.

17. God predetermines to what is good, but not to the material entitative act
of that which is intrinsecally evil.

18. What is predetermined is naturally and simply impossible.

19. Man in his lapsed state has a moral power to close with Divine
exhortations and offers.

20. Unregenerate men may prepare themselves for the entertainment of Grace.

21. To predetermine the will to the entitative act of sin is to impel men to
sin.

22. Divine predetermination to the entitative act of sin puts an end to human
liberty.

23. Some human acts are indifferent in individu^, and so neither good nor evil.

24. Some human acts are so intrinsecally evil, that the vitiositie cannot be
separated from the entitative act.

The dangerous Consequents of those Antitheses.
1. NOthing is certainly and infiallibly future.

2. Complexe Propositions are in order of Nature before their simple terms.

3. God did not from al Eternity foresee althings future.

4. Nothing is future before it is existent, at least in its particular causes.

5. The futurition of sinful acts is a mere contingence to God.

6. There is in God a velleitie, or imperfect conditional volition which never
takes effect.

7. There is something in Nature which was never decreed by the God of Nature.

8. God has a general antecedent conditional love and desire of the Salvation
of al men.

9. Some Decrees of God may be frustrated and never come to pass.

10. The reason why God hated Esau and loved Jacob must not be resolved into
the (...) or good pleasure of God, but into his prescience of Esau's actual and
final disobedience and Jacobs obedience.

11. There is Scientia media, or middle Science in God, dependent on man's
ambulatory will, and so only conjectural and uncertain.

12. God as an idle Spectator looks on the wicked world, but does not, neither
can omnipotently rule, dispose and order their sinful acts for his glory.

13. When it is said, that God wills the permission of sin, it must be understood
only of the effect.

14. Al Divine Concurse is not particular, total, immediate and efficacious.

15. The creature is in some natural acts independent and the first cause of
its own acts: or, the second cause can act without being applied and actuated
by the first cause.

16. God can make a creature, which by having its capacity preserved and made
habile, can of itself act without immediate efficacious concurse, Baron. 131.

17. Supernatural good is from God, but not al natural good.

18. Efficacious grace in Conversion destroys human liberty.

19. Gods efficacious Concurse is in the power of men's natural free will, either
to use or refuse the same.

20. God vouchsafes to al men sufficient grace, which if well improved, he will
reward with efficacious grace, Strange. 229.

21. Al Predetermination impels the will, and acts it as a mere Machine.

22. There is a twofold liberty, one essential to the will, but less proper,
the other accidental, consisting in indifference, which is most proper.

23. Alhuman acts ought not to be performed for Gods glory.

24. The vitiositie of sin is essential to some human natural acts, as natural.



We do not produce the consequents here drawn from the Antitheses of
Antipredeterminants, as their proper sentiments, at least not of all that
espouse those Antitheses, but only as such as may be naturally and logically
deduced from their Antitheses, albeit they do not formally assent to al of them.

FINIS.
ERRATES.
BOOK II.
PAge 489. l. 31. for God read us.

BOOK III.
Page 10. l. 33. for drive r. deny.

p. 22. l. 26. after elsewhere put a period.

Item l. 36. dele by.

p. 23. l. 32. r. (...).

p. 24. l. 39. dele and.

p. 28. l. 1. dele and stating.

p. 42. l. 36. r. that God only.

p. 76. l. 19. r. same.

p. 79. l. 38. r. to Gods.

p. 80. l. 31. for like, r. agreeable.

p. 86. l. 7. r. Tarnovius.

p. 89. l. 3. for is he, r. he is.

p. 111. l. 18. for Baronius r. Bellarmine.

p. 119. l. 16. r. c. 34.

p. 129. l. 23. r. This he.

p. 142. l. 5. dele who.

p. 145. l. 2. r. so not.

p. 166. l. 26. r. Compton.

p. 170. l. 9. r. it works.


