The Laureat.
Jack Squabbs History in a little drawn,
Down to his Evening, from his early dawn.
APpear, thou mighty Bard, to open view;
Which yet we must confess you need not do:
The labor to expose thee we may save,
Thou stand'st upon thy own Records, a Knave;
Condemned to Live in thy Apostate Rhimes,
The Curse of Ours, and Scoff of Future Times.
Still tacking round with every turn of State,
Reverse to Shaftsbury! thy Cursed Fate
Is always at a change to come to late:
To keep his Plots from Coxcombs was his Care;
His Villainy was masked, and Thine is bare:
Wise Men alone could guess at his Design,
And could but guess, the Thread was spun so fine;
But every purblind Fool may see through thine.
Had Dick still kept the Regal Diadem,
Thou had been Poet Laureat to him,
And, long e're now, in Lofty Verse proclaimed
His high Extraction, among Princes famed;
Diffused his Glorious Deed from Pole to Pole,
Where Winds can carry, and where Waves can roll.
Nay, had our Charles, by Heavens severe Decree,
Been found, and Murdered in the Royal Tree,
Even thou had praised the Fact; his Father Slain,
Thou call'st but gently breathing of a Vein:
Impious, and Villainous! to bless the blow
That laid at once three Lofty Nations low,
And gave the Royal Cause a Fatal Overthrow.
What after this could we expect from thee?
What could we hope for, but just what we see?
Scandal to all Religions, New and Old;
Scandal to thine, where Pardon's bought and sold,
And Mortgaged Happiness Redeemed for Gold:
Tell me, for it is a Truth you must allow,
Whoever changed more in one Moon, than thou:
Even thy own Zimri was more steadfast known;
He had but one Religion, or had none:
What Sect of Christians is it thou have not known,
And, at one time or other, made thy own?
A Bristled Baptist bred; and then thy strain
Immaculate, was free from sinful stain.
No Songs in those blessed times thou did produce
To brand, and sham good manners out of use:
The Ladies then had not one Bawdy Bob,
Nor thou the Courtly Name of Poet Squab.
Next, thy dull Muse, an Independent Jade,
On Sacred Tyranny five Stanza's made;
Praised Noll, who even to both extremes did run,
To kill the Father, and dethrone the Son.
When Charles came in, thou did a Convert grow,
More by thy Interest, than thy Nature so.
Under his Liv'ning Beams thy Laurels spread;
He first did place that wreath about thy Head;
Kindly relieved thy wants, and gave thee Bread.
Here 'twas thou made'st the Bells of Fancy chime,
And choked the Town with suffocating Rhyme.
Till Heroes, formed by thy Creating Pen,
Were grown as Cheap, and Dull, as other men.
Flushed with Success, full Gallery, and Pit,
Thou bravest all Mankind with want of Wit.
Nay, in short time, were grown so proud a Ninny,
As scarce to allow that Been himself had any.
But when the men of Sense thy Error saw,
They Checked thy Muse, and kept the Termagant in awe.
To Satyr next thy Talent was Addressed,
Fell foul on all, thy Friends among the rest:
Those who the oft'nest did thy wants supply,
Abused, Traduced, without a Reason why.
Nay, even thy Royal Patron was not spared,
But an obscene, a Santring wretch declared.
Thy Loyal Libel we can still produce,
Beyond Example, and beyond Excuse.
O strange return, to a forgiving King,
But the warmed Viper wears the greatest Sting.
Thy Pension lost, and justly without doubt,
When Servants snarl, we ought to kick 'em out;
They that disdain their Benefactors Bread,
No longer ought by Bounty to be fed.
That lost, the Visor changed, you turn about,
And strait a True Blue Protestant crept out;
The Friar now was writ: and some will say
They smell a Malcontent through all the Play.
The Papist too was damned, unfit for Trust,
Called Treacherous, Shameless, Profligate, Unjust,
And Kingly Power thought Arbitrary Lust.
This lasted till thou did thy Pension gain,
And that changed both thy Morals, and thy strain.
If to write Contradictions, Nonsense be,
Who has more Nonsense in their works than thee?
We'll mention but thy Lay-mans Faith, and Hind,
Who'd think both these (such Clashing do we find)
Could be the product of one single mind:
Here, thou would Charitable fain appear,
Find'st fault that Athanasius was severe;
Thy Pity strait to Cruelty is raised,
And even the Pious Inquisition praised,
And recommended to the present Reign:
"O happy Countries, Italy and Spain!
Have we not cause, in thy own words, to say,
Let none believe what varies every day,
That never was, nor will be at a stay.
Once, Heathens might be saved, you did allow;
But not, it seems, we greater Heathens now:
The Loyal Church, that buoys the Kingly Line,
Damned with a breath, but it is such breath as thine:
What Credit to thy party can it be,
To Have gained so lewd a Profligate as thee?
Strayed from our fold, makes us but laugh, not weep:
We have but lost what was disgrace to keep:
By them Mistrusted, and to us a scorn;
For it is weakness, at the best, to Turn.
True, had thou left us in the former Reign,
T'had proved, it was not wholly done for Gain;
Now, the Meridian Sun is not so plain.
Gold is thy God, for a substantial sum,
Thou to the Turk, would run away from Rome,
And Sing his Holy Expedition against Christendom.
But, to conclude, blush with a lasting Red,
(If you are not moved with what is already said)
To see thy Boars, Bears, Buzards, Wolves and Owls;
And all thy other Beasts, and other Fowls,
Routed by two poor Mice: (Unequal fight)
But easy it is to Conquer in the Right.
See there a Youth (a shame to thy gray hairs)
Make a mere Dunce of all thy threescore years.
What in that Tedious Poem have thou done,
But crammed all AEsops Fables into one.
But why do I the precious minutes spend
On him, that would much rather hang, than mend.
No, Wretch, continue still just as thou art,
You Are now in this last Scene, that Crowns thy Part;
To purchase Favor, veer with every Gale,
And, against Interest, never cease to rail;
Tho you are the only proof how Interest can prevail.
FINIS.

